Plant Techniques: 
Theory and Practice  
Plant Techniques: 
Theory and Practice 
S.M. Khasim 
Department of Botany and Microbiology 
Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur, India 
K. Thammasiri 
Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden 
Chinese Academy of Sciences (P.R. China) 
S. Rama Rao 
Department of Life Science 
Sharda University, Greater Noida, Delhi 
M. Rahamtulla 
Department of Botany and Microbiology 
Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur, India 
Capital Publishing Company 
NEW DELHI KOLKATA First published 2025 
by CRC Press 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
and by CRC Press 
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431 
© 2025 Capital Publishing Company 
CRC Press is an imprint of Informa UK Limited 
The right of S.M. Khasim, K. Thammasiri, S. Rama Rao and M. Rahamtulla to be identified as 
author(s) of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or 
by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright. 
com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 
01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact 
mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are 
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
Print edition not for sale in South Asia (India, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan or Bhutan). 
ISBN13: 9781032805139 (hbk) 
ISBN13: 9781032822556 (pbk) 
ISBN13: 9781003503682 (ebk) 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003503682 
Typeset in Times New Roman 
by Innovative Processors, New Delhi Dedicated and presented to 
Our illustrious teacher 
Professor J.J. Shah, FNA 
(On the occasion of his 100th birthday celebrations on September 10, 2023) 
Sardar Patel University 
Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat, India Preface 
The laboratory manual on Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice is the 
outcome of several decades of research and teaching in plant biology to 
undergraduate and postgraduate students of Plant Science, Horticulture, 
Microbiology, and Biotechnology. We the team of plant scientists always 
feel that there should be a comprehensive book that deals with principles 
and selected procedures together, so that the beginner, as well as the expert 
technician, could understand the basic concepts of Plant Science including 
botanical microtechnique and microtomy, staining techniques, molecular 
techniques, plant tissue culture, electron microscopy, and cryopreservation 
and germplasm storage, etc.; and it is very easy for them to pick-up and 
choose suitable procedure for studying plant material. To inculcate the basic 
knowledge among graduate and research students, the broad spectrum of plant 
science has been dealt with in this treatise. 
We strongly believe that this manual is incomplete and additional chapters 
may be incorporated in due course. We would appreciate hearing from fellow 
plant scientists and technicians for suggestions and modifcations.
One of the authors of the book, Professor S.M. Khasim is especially 
indebted to his illustrious teacher, Professor J.J. Shah, FNA (Sardar Patel 
University, India) to whom this book is dedicated with great respect. Prof. 
Khasim expresses his profound gratitude to his research supervisor, and 
mentor, Professor P.R. Mohana Rao (UGC: Emeritus Professor, Acharya 
Nagarjuna University; Sydney Sussex Fellow, UK), who is the source of 
inspiration throughout his academic career, for permitting to access his rich 
botanical library. 
Prof. Khasim is highly grateful to the Honorable Vice-chancellor of 
Acharya Nagarjuna University, Prof. Rajasekhar Patteti, for allowing him to 
work as an Honorary Professor in the Department of Botany and Microbiology. 
He further expresses his gratitude to his colleagues, Prof. Vishnu Vardhan, Prof. 
M. Vijaya Lakshmi, Prof. K. Ammani, Prof. G. Rosaiah, Dr. M. Raghuram 
(late), Prof. V. Uma Maheswara Rao, Prof. K. Mallikarjuna, Dr. A. Amrutha 
Valli (presently heading the Department of Botany and Microbiology), Dr. J. 
Madhavi, Dr. P.S. Raju, and Dr. Y.R.K.V. Tirupati Rao for their moral support 
and encouragement in his academic pursuit. Further, it is our pleasure to 
acknowledge all help received from all our colleagues and friends at Guntur viii Preface 
(India), Bangkok (Thailand), Xishuangbanna prefecture (P.R. China), and 
Shillong and Delhi (India). 
We appreciate the outstanding works of Dr. G. Stefano (Michigan State 
University, USA), Dr. F. Xu (Beijing Forestry University, Beijing), and Dr. 
M.S. Otegui (University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA) and we accessed 
some of their microphotographs and incorporated them in this book. We are 
especially thankful to doctoral students, Amrita Choudhury, Sohini Deb, and 
Banridor Kharbyngar from North-Eastern Hill University, Shillong, India for 
fnalizing chapter 13 ‘Molecular Techniques’ under the supervision of Prof. 
S. Rama Rao. 
We are thankful to Prof. D. Ramachandran, Department of Chemistry, 
Acharya Nagarjuna University for drawing the chemical structure on 
ChemDraw software. 
Sincere thanks are also due to Mr. K. Omkar Murthy and Mr. K. Srinivasa 
Rao for word processing this original manuscript and providing the printouts 
very patiently and efectively. 
We are very much grateful to Mr. Raj D. Mirchandani and his team 
(Capital Publishing Company, New Delhi, India) and also to Taylor & Francis 
Group for their unstinted support and their efective execution of this project.
S.M. Khasim 
K. Thammasiri 
S. Rama Rao 
M. Rahamtulla  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface vii 
About the Authors xiii 
Part A: Theory and Basic Techniques 
1. Introduction 3 
2. Microscopy 7 
2.1 Light Microscopy 9 
2.2 Electron Microscopy 18 
3. Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 27 
3.1 Killing and Fixation 27 
3.2 Dehydration and Infltration 39
3.3 Embedding and Sectioning 45 
4. Stains (Dyes) 59 
4.1 Natural Dyes 62 
4.2 Coal-Tar Dyes 66 
4.3 Other Substances Acting as Stains 80 
5. Staining Techniques 83 
5.1 Types of Staining 83 
5.2 Diferentiation 84 
5.3 Mordants 84 
5.4 Clearing (Bleaching) 85 
5.5 Staining Schedules 87 
6. Centrifugation 99 
6.1 Basic Principle of Sedimentation 99 
6.2 Instrumentation 100 
Contents  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.3 Mechanism of Centrifugation 102 
6.4 Sedimentation Co-efcient 104
6.5 Classifcation of Centrifuges and their Uses 104
7. Colorimetry and Spectrophotometry 107 
7.1 Colorimetry 108 
7.2 Spectrophotometry 115 
8. Common Adhesives and Mounting Media 121 
8.1 Common Adhesives 121 
8.2 Mounting Media 122 
8.3 Substitute for Immersion Oil in Microscopy 126 
9. Plant Collection and Herbarium Techniques 127 
9.1 Plant Collection and Preservation 127 
9.2 Herbarium 133 
10. Biostatistics 137 
10.1 Basic Statistics (Descriptive Statistics) 138 
10.2 Analysis of Variance (ANOVA; Components of Mean) 161 
10.3 Null Hypothesis 163 
10.4 T-test 163 
10.5 Coefcient of Variation 164
10.6 Heritability 167 
10.7 Genetic Advance 167 
10.8 Correlation 167 
10.9 Path Analysis 168 
10.10 Residual Efect 169
Part B: Recent Advances in Plant Techniques 
11. Histochemical Methods 175 
11.1 Preparation of Sections for Histochemical Studies 175 
11.2 Carbohydrates 175 
11.3 Proteins 185 
11.4 Detection of Ions in Plant/Animal Tissues 193 
11.5 Nucleic Acids 195 
11.6 Lignin, Suberin and Cutin 199 
11.7 Cytokinins and Auxins 203 
11.8 Latex and Rubber 206 
 
 
x Contents  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. Electrophoresis 209 
12.1 Modes of Electrophoresis 210 
12.2 Detection and Quantitative Assay 213 
12.3 Discontinuous (Disc) Gel Electrophoresis 215 
12.4 Protocols 217 
13. Molecular Techniques 225 
13.1 Genomic DNA Extraction 226 
13.2 Quantifcation of DNA Samples Isolated 227
13.3 Quality of the DNA Samples Isolated 227 
13.4 Agarose Gel Electrophoresis 228 
13.5 Polymerase Chain Reaction 228 
13.6 Types of PCR 230 
13.7 Molecular Markers 235 
13.8 Other Approaches 244 
13.9 Protocols 249 
14. Plant Tissue Culture 261 
14.1 History 261 
14.2 Setup a Tissue Culture Laboratory 261 
14.3 Media Components and Preparation 263 
14.4 Explant Preparation 264 
14.5 Aseptic Technique 267 
14.6 Pathways of Culture Cells and Tissues 269 
14.7 Acclimatisation 270 
14.8 Commercial Production 270 
14.9 Culture Guide to Selected Plants 270 
14.10 Meristem Cultures and Production of Disease 
Free Plants 271 
14.11 Protoplast Fusion and Somatic Hybridisation 276 
14.12 Anther and Pollen Culture 286 
14.13 Micropropagation 293 
14.14 Experimental Protocols 299 
15. Chromatography 309 
15.1 Paper Chromatography 310 
15.2 Thin Layer (planar) Chromatography (TLC) 311 
15.3 Column Chromatography 314 
15.4 High Pressure Liquid Chromatography (or) High 
Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) 316 
15.5 Adsorption Chromatography 319 
 
 
 
Contents xi  15.6 Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS) 319 
 15.7 Protocols 320 
16. Phytochemical Methods 329 
 16.1 Basic Equipment for Phytochemical Studies 329 
 16.2 Steps Involved in Plant Collection 330 
 16.3 Choice of Solvent 331 
 16.4 Extraction Methods 333 
 16.5 Preparation and Analysis of Plant Extracts 336 
 16.6 Case Studies 339 
17. Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 341 
17.1 Cytological Techniques 341 
 17.2 Vital Staining 366 
18. Electron Microscopic Studies 373 
 18.1 Specimen Preparation for EM Studies 373 
 18.2 Electron Tomography in Plant Cell Studies 383 
 18.3 Scanning Electron Microscopic (SEM) Studies 385 
19. Autoradiography 395 
19.1 Protocols 397 
 19.2 Radiography of Botanical Material by Means of Low-energy 
X-rays (O’Brien and McCully, 1981) 401
20. Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 403 
 20.1 Principles of Cryopreservation 403 
 20.2 Steps in Plant Cryopreservation 411 
 20.3 Methods in Plant Cryopreservation 413 
21. Microbiological Techniques 427 
 21.1 Isolation Methods 427 
 21.2 Media 429 
 21.3 Maintenance and Preservation of Cultures 430 
 21.4 Preparation and Staining of Specimens 431 
References 453 
Subject Index 477 
 
 
 
 
xii Contents About the Authors 
Professor Dr. S.M. Khasim is currently an Honorary Professor in the 
Department of Botany and Microbiology at Acharya Nagarjuna University, 
Guntur (India). Prof. Khasim was formerly the Head of the Department of 
Botany and Microbiology, as well as the Chairman of the Board of Studies 
in Biotechnology at the same university. He has been working for the last 
four decades teaching Plant Techniques, Plant Reproductive Biology, 
and Biotechnology at the post-graduate level, and he has made signifcant 
contributions to Orchid Biology and Conservation. He has collaboration 
with Mahidol University (Thailand) in the feld of orchid biotechnology. The 
Orchid Society of India (TOSI), Chandigarh, has awarded him the Usha Vij 
Memorial Award 2018 for his outstanding contribution to orchid biology. He 
is the Fellow of the Indian Botanical Society (IBS), and member of the Indian 
Science Congress Association (Kolkata), and the International Society for 
Horticultural Science (ISHS) in Belgium. 
Professor Dr. K. Thammasiri is currently Professor at the Department of 
Gardening and Horticulture, Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences in the Xishuangbanna prefecture (P.R. 
China). Prof. Thammasiri was formerly the Head of the Department of Plant 
Science, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University (Thailand). For the last 
three decades, he has been teaching and conducting research on Plant Tissue 
Culture, Orchidology, Plant Breeding, and Plant Ecology. He has written 
numerous orchid books, as well as the Plant Cryopreservation textbook. He 
was the convener for four International Symposia under the auspices of the 
International Society for Horticultural Science (ISHS), namely TSO 2016, 
Cryosymp 2018, BGL 2019 and Biotech 2021. Kasetsart University honoured 
him with a Distinguished Alumni award in research. He is a member of the 
Science Society of Thailand, the Society for Cryobiology, and the ISHS in 
Belgium. 
Professor Dr. S. Rama Rao is currently working as Professor and Head 
of the Department of Life Sciences at Sharda University in Delhi (India). 
Prof. Rao previously served as Head of the Department of Biotechnology 
and Bioinformatics at North Eastern Hill University in Shillong. He has been 
an active researcher in the feld(s) of Plant Biotechnology and Conservation xiv About the Authors 
Biology, as well as a post-graduate teacher of Plant Cytogenetics and Plant 
Molecular Biology. He has actively collaborated with the National Bureau 
of Plant Genetic Resources in their exploration activities and has assisted in 
the collection of signifcant germplasm of many horticultural plants. For the 
frst time, three new Vigna species and one Abelmoschus species have been 
collected from the Indian subcontinent. He is a member of the 7th Research 
Advisory Committee NRC Orchids, Pakyong, Sikkim, and the Fellow of the 
Association of Biotechnology and Pharmacy (India). Recently, he has been 
appointed as Ombudsperson of Central University of Andhra Pradesh at 
Anantapuram, India. 
Dr. M. Rahamtulla received his Ph.D. in Orchid Biology in 2022 from the 
Department of Botany and Microbiology at Acharya Nagarjuna University, 
Guntur (India). For the past seven years, he has been teaching Botany and 
Biotechnology at the undergraduate and postgraduate levels. He has published 
a good number of research articles in National and International journals. He 
is the Life Member of the Orchid Society of India (TOSI), Chandigarh. Part A: 
Theory and Basic Techniques 1
 Introduction 
The advancement of Plant Science has been correlated to the available 
technology. For studying the structure and function of plants and animals, it 
is necessary to learn and be trained in various techniques. There have been 
phenomenal achievements over the last 70 years in the feld of instrumentation 
and methodology. In the recent past, there has been tremendous development 
in the feld of molecular biology and biotechnology. In the course of time, new 
techniques have been coming up and old techniques have been improving 
in plant biology in general, and molecular biology in particular. Apart from 
that, various basic aspects such as fxation of the plant material, fxative 
mixtures, embedding of the plant material, embedding media, sectioning, and 
staining procedures have made it possible to study the structure and function 
of the plants. The invention of several pre-treatment chemicals for fxation 
has considerably aided the study of chromosome structure. The principle of 
pre-treatment is mostly to bring about physical changes in the cytoplasm and 
nucleus which would help in studying the details of chromosome morphology 
(Sharma and Sharma, 1972). 
In plant techniques, enormous new knowledge and techniques are 
being generated. This information is scattered mostly in research journals 
and some standard textbooks. Hence, the authors feel that there should be 
a comprehensive book needed containing an up-to-date account of plant 
techniques, their principles, and their biological signifcance. 
For the last four decades, authors have been working on angiosperms’
structure, function, conservation, and reproductive biology. Obviously, the 
book is confned to dealing with some techniques related to these aspects. 
Although it appears to be a broad spectrum of Botany, we tried to highlight 
some of the fundamental techniques to study plant structure and function, and 
other aspects of plant biology. 
In fact, this manual reviewed the above aspects of plant biology by 
considering the past literature. Every chapter has been written with a theory 
and principle of a particular aspect. The book is divided into two parts: 
Part A deals with the theory and principles of plant biology and some general 
techniques that have been carried out for undergraduate students; Part B with 
special techniques being employed to study the plant structure, development,  
4 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
function, and conservation of germplasm. These chapters are briefy mentioned 
below:
In Part A: Theory and Basic Techniques, Chapter 2 deals with 
Microscopy in which various types of light microscopes and electron 
microscopes and their working principles have been explained. In chapter 
3, Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy, various aspects related to this 
have been elaborately written; killing and fxative agents (coagulants and non￾coagulants), dehydration and infltration procedures, embedding and sectioning 
of plant materials are vividly explained. Chapter 4 is on Stains (Dyes), in 
which the chemistry of dyes and their mode of action on plant tissues have 
been discussed; various anionic and cationic dyes, and mordants being used 
to enhance staining are elaborately discussed in this chapter; some selected 
procedures are uniformly formatted, and biochemical explanation of staining 
reaction has been briefy explained. Chapter 5 is on Staining Techniques, 
in which diferent types of staining and some staining schedules are given; 
basic techniques such as Safranin (or Dalafeld’s) hematoxylin technique 
(Johansen, 1940) and Tannic acid-ferric chloride-safranin triple staining, that 
is relevant to the budding scientists, have been given; an overview is provided 
related to staining techniques since the time of the Johansen (1940). Basic 
principles are explained with respect to Centrifugation and Colorimetry and 
Spectrophotometry in chapters 6 and 7 respectively. Chapter 8 gives a detailed 
account of Common Adhesives and Mounting Media. It is followed by the 
Plant Collection and Herbarium Techniques of chapter 9; preservation and 
pressing of the plant material and a list of world-class herbaria are provided in 
this chapter. Chapter 10 deals with Biostatistics; in which various statistical 
tools such as descriptive statistics, analysis of variance (ANOVA), T-test and 
coefcient of variation are given.
In Part B: Recent Advances in Plant Techniques, experimental 
protocols, their biological signifcance, and results are elaborately given. As a 
part of this, chapter 11 deals with Histochemical Methods, in which detailed 
protocols have been provided to identify the various biological substances such 
as carbohydrates including callose, proteins, growth regulators (cytokinins, 
auxins), and detection of ions; besides that, histochemical identifcation of 
DNA and RNA has been done by Azure B method and Toluidine blue ‘O’
method respectively. The working principle of Electrophoresis has been given 
in chapter 12; the protocol for SDS-PAGE is elaborately provided here. Then, 
the latest account of Molecular Techniques has been provided in chapter 13; in 
this chapter, recent advances in molecular techniques such as FISH, blotting 
methods and fow cytometry, chromosome microdissection, and microcloning 
are precisely documented. Chapter 14 is on Plant Tissue Culture, in which 
very clear protocols on meristem cultures, protoplast isolation and somatic 
hybridisation, anther culture, and micropropagation of an epiphytic orchid, 
Dendrobium aphyllum (Rahamtulla and Khasim, 2022), Grammatophyllum 
speciosum (Sopalan et al., 2010) and Vanda coerulea (Wasiksiri et al., 2010)  
 
Introduction 5 
have been included. The basic principle of Chromatography is given in chapter 
15; a brief account of HPLC and the latest protocol on GC-MS screening 
of solvent extract of Cymbidium aloifolium has been added (Venkatesh and 
Khasim, 2020). In chapter 16, Phytochemical Methods, extraction of alkaloids 
and favonoids from orchid species is provided. Chapter 17 is on Cytological 
and Vital Staining Techniques; in addition to basic techniques, the recent 
protocol for staining plant cell vacuoles (Stefano, 2017) has been incorporated 
in this chapter. Chapter 18 deals with Electron Microscopic Studies, in 
which specimen preparation for EM and SEM studies is included; further 
a detailed protocol for orchid seed study with SEM (Ramudu et al., 2020) 
is incorporated. A brief account and general protocol of Autoradiography is 
given in Chapter 19. A succinct account of Cryopreservation Development for 
Germplasm Storage is provided in chapter 20; it also highlights the principles 
of cryopreservation and protocols for V-cryoplate and D-cryoplate methods. 
Finally, Microbiological Techniques have been provided in chapter 21; further, 
isolation methods of microbial strains and maintenance and preservation of 
microbial cultures are incorporated. 
This book covers the broad spectrum of plant techniques, in which 
basic principles and biological signifcance of various plant structures and 
natural products are dealt with; so that the beginner, as well as an expert 
plant technician, could understand the subject, and it is very easy for them 
to pick-up and choose suitable procedure for studying the plant material. All 
the experimental protocols given here have been uniformly formatted and the 
principle involved in the technique is briefy explained. However, the elaborate 
discussion has been omitted with brevity since it is outside this book’s scope. 
We hope both beginners and plant researchers could enjoy reading this book 
as much as we have enjoyed writing it in a tireless manner.2
 Microscopy 
Although the use of lenses for magnifcation has been known for centuries, 
modern microscopy began when Holland’s eyeglass maker, Z. Jannsen, lined 
up two lenses to multiply their magnifcations efectively. Subsequently, Robert 
Hooke in 1665 and Leeuwenhoek in 1674 published the initial microscopic 
examinations of biological tissues (quoted in Prescot et al., 1999).
A Microscope can be compared with a human eye since both have lens 
systems and, in both cases, images of the objects are formed. The most 
important principle involved in microscopy is to get a magnifed image, in 
which structures may be resolved that otherwise cannot be resolved with the 
unaided eye.
Resolving power: The ability of the lens system to distinguish two 
adjacent points as distinct and separate, in other words, the ability of the 
microscope to produce separate images of closely placed objects known as 
resolving power. This depends upon the wavelength of light and numerical 
aperture (NA).
The Swiss physicist E. Abbe developed the theory of microscope 
resolution and expressed the Resolution Limit (RL) in the following formula:
0.61 λ RL =
NA
where λ = Wavelength of light [400-750 nm for visible light used in the 
compound microscope; blue light (400 nm) is better for resolution 
than redlight (700 nm)]
 NA = n sin θ (Numerical aperture)
n = Refractive index of the medium present between the specimen 
and lens. Generally, immersion oil (n = 1.5) is better than air (n =
1.0) (Table 2.1) 
θ = Half of the angular width of the cone by the objective lens from 
the typical point of the specimen (Fig. 2.1)
So, the numerical aperture is nothing but the light-collecting ability of the 
lens system. The higher the numerical aperture, the higher will be the degree 
of resolution, whereas, the lower the wavelength of the light, the higher will 
be the resolution.
 
 
 8 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Table 2.1. Refractive indices of some mounting media
Medium Refractive index (n) 
Distilled water
Glycerol
Cedarwood (immersion oil)
Eucalyptus oil
Carbon tetrachloride
Olive oil
*Euparal
Sandalwood oil
*Canada balsam
*Polystyrene
1.33
1.47
1.51
1.46
1.46
1.47
1.48
1.51
1.54
1.59
* Permanent mounting media
Fig. 2.1. Determination of the angle.
Lowering RL can be achieved in three ways: (1) lowering the wavelength 
(A), (2) raising the refractive index, and (3) raising sin θ as lenses of shorter 
focal length are used, the distance between the object and the lens decreases 
(Table 2.2).
*Table 2.2. Optical Properties of Objective Lenses
Magnifcation Focal length (mm) Lens-specimen Distance (mm) NA 
10 16 5.5 0.2
40 4 0.6 0.65
95 2 0.1 1.32
* Adopted from Alberts et al. (1994)
If λ = 400 nm, n = l.5, sin θ = 0.99, and an optical lens of maximal NA, it 
gives a theoretical maximum resolution of the objective lens of about 0.2 µm 
which is 1000 times greater than that of the unaided human eye. 
 
 
 
Microscopy 9 
A wide variety of microscopes are currently available for studying plant 
structure, these are mainly categorised into two: (i) Light Microscope, and 
(ii) Electron Microscope. In the former one, magnifcation is achieved with 
the help of an optical lens system. Bright feld, dark feld, phase contrast, 
polarisation, and fuorescence microscopes come under this category. 
Whereas, in the latter category a beam of electrons is used in place of light to 
obtain higher magnifcation; transmission and scanning electron microscopes 
belong to this category.
The resolution of various biological components is given below (adopted 
from Lewis and John, 1963):
Structure Atoms, Macro Genes, Bacteria, Chromo- Tissues 
molecules molecules viruses cytoplasmic somes, cells
organelles
Scale 1A0 10A0 100A0 1000A0 1µ 10µ 100µ
Electron microscope Light Microscope
Means 
of 
Resolu- X-ray difraction
tion 
2.1 Light Microscopy 
2.1.1 The Stereo Microscope (Dissecting Microscope) 
The stereo microscope, also known as a dissecting microscope, is an optical 
microscope, designed for low-magnifcation observation of a sample, typically 
using light refected from the surface of an object rather than transmitted 
through it. It has two optical paths at slightly diferent angles, allowing the 
image to be viewed three-dimensionally. Stereo microscopes are the majority 
at low power, typically, between 10x and 200x, mostly below 100x.
Stereo microscopes can be used to visualise surface features of objects, 
microsurgery, watchmaking, etc. It further allows students to observe 
photosynthesis in action as well as forensic engineering. It is also an essential 
tool in entomology. The stereo microscope should not be confused with a 
compound microscope equipped with double eyepieces and a binoviewer. In 
compound microscope, both eyes see the same image, with two eyepieces 
serving to provide greater viewing comfort. The image in such a microscope 
is no diferent from that obtained with a single monocular eyepiece.
Stereo microscope has three key parts, these are: body/viewing head, 
focus block and stand. ‘Body/viewing head’ houses the optical parts in the 
upper position of the microscope; the ‘Focus block’ attracts the head of the 
microscope to the stand and focuses it; ‘Stand’ supports the microscope and 
consists of integrated illumination. Just like other microscopes, it has eyepiece 
lenses and objective lenses (Fig. 2.2).10 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Fig. 2.2. The Stereo Microscope (Dissecting Microscope).
Stereo Microscopes are of three basic types: (1) Stereo Fixed Microscope 
(2) Stereo Turset Microscope, and (3) Stereo Zoom Microscope. A stereo 
fxed microscope has fxed magnifcation using two objective lenses. The 
magnifcation has a fxed degree and is limited by the lens capability. To 
increase the magnifcation, changing the eyepiece is needed.
Stereo tunet microscope comes with various mountings and one of which 
is the turset style. This type of mounting indicates an additional objective lens 
that you can rotate to your viewing position. The viewer can easily change the 
magnifcation by rotating the mounting of a turret. This type of microscope is 
cost-efective and more afordable than any other stereo microscope.
2.1.2 Compound microscope 
2.1.2.1 Bright-Field Microscope 
Bright-feld microscope is indispensable to biologists. It provides magnifcation 
of the objects which are not visible to the naked eye. In this commonly used 
compound microscope, a dark image of the object appears against a bright 
background. This is accomplished by the condenser, a series of lenses, and 
diaphragms below the stage, on which the object is located.
Lens Systems 
A Compound microscope consists of three lens systems: (1) objective, (2) 
eyepiece or ocular, and (3) condenser (Figs 2.3, 2.4).
Objective: Objective is the most important component of the light 
microscope since it afects the quality of image formation. Based on the 
degree of correction for chromatic aberration, objectives are of two types: 
(i) achromatic objectives that are corrected for two regions of the spectrum, 
and (ii) apochromatic objectives that are corrected for three regions of the 
spectrum (for details see Desai and Desai, 1980; O’Brien and McCully, 1981).Microscopy 11 
Fig. 2.3. The Compound Microscope.
Fig. 2.4. The path of light through Bright-feld Microscope.
Light focused on the specimen is either diferentially transmitted 
(absorbed) or, for the background, fully transmitted to the objective. This 
lens resolves the specimen to produce a magnifed image and focus on the 
microscope tube. Generally, compound microscopes are ftted with three 
objectives with diferent magnifying powers. They are low power, high power, 
and oil immersion objectives. These are easily recognised by their length and 
NA value engraved on the barrel. Low power objective is the shortest and oil 
immersion is the longest.
In a bright-feld microscope, both direct (rays not hitting the specimen) 
and indirect rays (rays difracted or scattered from the specimen) enter the 
objective, hence the dark image is seen against a bright background.
Eyepiece (ocular): The main purpose of the ocular is to magnify the 
intermediate image and to correct certain aberrations produced by the 
objective. The ocular is composed of mainly two lenses; the upper component 
or eye lens is the magnifer, whereas the lower component is known as the 
feld lens.
Condenser: The quality and method of use of the condenser are important 
factors for good microscopy. The primary function of the condenser is to 
supply a sufcient cone of light to the objective to gain maximum resolution. 12 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
So, it should be properly positioned during the microscopy. The Abbe 
condenser, aplanatic condenser and achromatic condensers are available for 
general purposes. Condensers are also ftted with an iris diaphragm and flter 
holder to control the light intensity.
All four optical components (lamp, condenser, objectives and eyepiece) 
are installed in the common axis in the Microscope. The following steps 
should be carefully taken for the efective use of a research microscope (see 
also Desai and Desai, 1980; O’Brien and Mccully, 1981):
(i) Turn on the lamp; adjust it to a considerable intensity.
(ii) Adjust the mirror in such a way that the light travels up the body tube 
of the microscope.
(iii) Take out the eyepiece and examine the back focal plane of the objective. 
Close the condenser iris until about 3/4 of the feld of vision is left 
clear. In some binocular microscopes, it is difcult to see the image of 
the condenser iris in the back focal plane of the objective. In this case, 
close the iris, then open it slowly and watch the ‘Circle of light’ as it 
increases. It comes to a certain position after which further increase in 
iris diameter does not increase the ‘Circle of light’. Close the iris a little 
from that position.
(iv) Place the specimen on the stage.
(v) Now keep the low power objective in position. Lower the body tube 
with the help of a coarse adjustment knob until the distance between 
the specimen and low power objective becomes just about 5-7 mm.
(vi) Bring the specimen in focus with the help of a coarse adjustment knob 
by looking through the eyepiece.
(vii) Sharpen the image with a fne adjustment knob.
(viii) When higher magnifcation is needed, change the objective by shifting 
the nosepiece in the appropriate direction till it clicks into place. Care 
should be taken not to touch the objective lens without fngers.
(ix) Focus the specimen again with the help of coarse and fnal adjustments. 
Adjustment of the iris is necessary again since diferent power 
objectives have diferent feld areas. 
(x) To set up the oil-immersion objective, especially 90x or 100x, frst rack 
the body tube up and place a drop of immersion oil (free of bubbles).
(xi) By observing from the sides of the instrument, rack the objective down 
to touch the oil almost near the specimen. Care should be taken to see 
that the objective does not touch the specimen.
(xii) By looking through the eyepiece, slowly focus upwards with a fne 
adjustment until a clear image appears. It comes quickly since the 
working distance of the oil-immersion objective is about 0.1-0.15 mm.
(xiii) Remove and clean the oil from both objective lenses and slide with 
lens paper immediately after the use of the instrument.Microscopy 13 
2.1.2.2 Dark-Field Microscope 
In a dark-feld microscope, a bright image of the specimen is seen against 
the dark background. A specially devised condenser with a star diaphragm 
is used in this microscope. It blocks the light rays (direct rays) that would 
normally enter the objective lens. Instead, it supplies a hollow cone of light 
and illuminates the specimen. Only indirect rays scattered from the specimen 
would enter the objective. As a result, a bright image against the dark 
background is seen (Fig 2.5). In this microscope, special condensers of very 
high NA, such as cardoid and paraboloid, are employed with an oil immersion 
objective.
Fig. 2.5. Dark-feld Microscope.
Since the contrast is quite vivid (just like stars against a dark sky), 
organelles such as mitochondria and lysosomes are easily detected by this 
microscope. It is also useful for the observation of plant structures and 
microbes in an unstained condition. It has diagnostic signifcance, especially 
in the case of syphilis (Desai and Desai, 1980).
2.1.2.3 Phase-Contrast Microscope 
The phase-contrast microscope is based on phase-contrast principles, 
propounded by Fritz Zernike. He got the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1953 for 
his phase-contrast principles. According to him, light waves have a variable 
character for frequency and amplitude. The human eye cannot notice a 
phenomenon when two light rays have similar amplitude and frequency, but 
diferent phases (Fig. 2.6). This can be achieved by a phase contrast microscope 
(Fig. 2.7). When the light rays are passing through the vacuum, they travel at 
high speed. When they pass through the transparent cells, light rays become 
slow due to changes in velocity. When a beam of light changes speed, it is 
refracted at an angle depending on the magnitude of the velocity change. So, 
the light rays are refracted and alter their phase. This phase change may not 
be noticed by the human eye. In the phase-contrast microscope, both refracted 
rays (indirect rays) and direct rays are undergoing interference. As a result, a 
clear image of the specimen is seen.14 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Depending on the type of phase-shifting element employed, the specimen 
appears darker against a light background (positive contrast) or lighter against 
a dark background (negative contrast) (see also O’Brien and McCully, 1981). 
The phase-contrast microscope is widely used to observe living cells and 
organelles.
Fig. 2.6. Properties of Light (a) Both rays are in phase (rays go up at the same 
time and down at the same time), (b) Constructive interference in which amplitude 
becomes doubled (2A°), brightness increased, (c) Rays are in & out of phase, and 
(d) Destructive interference, rays that are out of phase partially cancelled, brightness 
decreased and fnally becomes dark.
Fig. 2.7. Phase-Contrast Microscope.
2.1.2.4 Polarisation Microscope 
Apolarisation microscope is used to visualise birefringents. Various biological 
structures like microtubules, microfbrils and crystals show birefringence 
properties because they refract polarised light in diferent ways depending on 
the direction from which the light strikes the specimen. Anisotropic materials 
are birefringents because they show double refractions. The principle of the 
polarising microscope is to deduce and measure the structural anisotropy of 
the specimen from the optical anisotropy. That it displays (see also Bennett, 
1961; Bartels, 1966; James, 1976; O’Brien and McCully, 1981). 
 
 
 
Microscopy 15 
When a beam of polarised light passes through the birefringent object, 
the ray splits into two rays polarised in mutually perpendicular lines; the one 
which follows the ordinary laws of refraction is known as the ‘ordinary’ ray 
and the other, whose velocity through the object is diferent, is known as the 
‘extraordinary’ ray. The diference in refractive indices (ne-no) is the value 
of birefringence (B). The two polarised rays, after emerging from the object, 
recombine but, because of diferent velocities through the object, one shows 
retardation when compared to the other. The value of ‘retardation’ (T) which 
is based on the birefringent property, is measured in the following manner:
T = B × t 
Where T = Value of retardation
B = birefringence, i.e., (ne-no) and
t = thickness of the object
Finally, T = (ne - no) t; it is expressed in terms of wavelength in Angstrom 
units (Sharma and Sharma, 1972).
The polarisation microscope is ftted with two additional optical lenses: 
(1) a vertical polariser placed between the light source and substage condenser 
to produce polarised light, and (2) an analyser horizontally placed above the 
objective lens (Fig. 2.8). In this, a bright image of specimen against dark 
background appears. The polarising microscope is also useful for studying the 
optical properties of cell walls and starch grains.
Fig. 2.8. Polarisation Microscope.
2.1.2.5 Fluorescence Microscope 
A fuorescence microscope is based on the principle ‘Fluorescence’. In this 
microscope, dyes are used that absorb light energy of one wavelength and emit 
light energy of longer wavelength; for example, the dye fuoresces in absorbs 
at 490 nm and emits at 520 nm appearing yellow-green and rhodamine has a 
characteristic absorption and emission spectrum (see also Pringsheim, 1963; 
Udenfriend, 1964, 1969).
A fuorescence microscope is ftted with two flters, these are (1) a 
primary or exciter flter placed between the light source and specimen, which 
allows only the excitation wavelength, and (2) a secondary or barrier flter 16 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
placed between the specimen and viewer, and it ideally transmits only the 
wavelengths emitted by the fuorescing compounds (Fig. 2.9).
Fluorescence in histological specimens is induced either in compounds 
inherent in the tissue known as autofuorescence or in compounds 
(fuorochromes) that have been added to the tissue. Freehand sections, peels, 
and whole mounts are enough to study the autofuorescence of lignins and 
chlorophylls present in higher plants. Plant cuticles (van Gijzel, 1975) and 
suberised walls of cork (Mader, 1954) are also autofuorescent. The compounds 
of biological origin like berberine sulphate (from Berberis) and Primulin 
(Primula) and other compounds are still widely used as fuorochromes. 
Peirson and Dumbrof (1969) used an extract from Chelidonium roots to show 
efectively Casparian strips in roots. The other fuorochromes are acridine 
orange for DNA (Bertalanfy, 1963; Pearse, 1972; Kasten, 1967), ethidium 
bromide for DNA and lignifed walls, and aniline blue for callose of sieve 
elements (Currier and Strugger, 1956; Eschrich and Currier, 1964; Smith and 
McCully, 1978; O’Brien and McCully, 1981).
Fig. 2.9. Fluorescence Microscope.
The major use of fuorescence microscopes in microbiology is in 
immunofuorescence studies. The antibody is made fuorescent by conjugating 
it with a fuorescent dye. With the help of a fuorescence microscope, it is 
possible to detect specifc types of antigens using an antibody tagged with a 
fuorescent dye. 
2.1.2.6 Confocal Microscope 
A confocal microscope is often called a Confocal laser scanning microscope
(CLSM) or Laser confocal scanning microscope (LCSM). Like fuorescence 
microscopes, fuorescence optics have been used in the confocal microscope. 
Instead of illuminating the whole sample at once, laser light is focused on a 
specifc spot (defned spot) at a specifc depth within the sample. This leads 
to the emission of fuorescent light at exactly this point. A pinhole inside 
the optical pathway cuts of signals, that are out of focus allowing only the 
fuorescence signals from the illuminated spot to enter the light detector 
(Fig. 2.10). The term ‘confocal’ denotes the presence of a diaphragm in 
the conjugated focal plane (confocal). This diaphragm is usually absent in 
multiphoton microscopes.Microscopy 17 
By scanning the specimen in a raster pattern, images of one single optical 
plane are created. 3D images can be visualised by scanning several optical 
planes and stacking them using a suitable microscope deconvolution software 
(Z-stack). It is also possible to analyse multicolour immunofuorescence 
staining using state-of-the-art confocal microscopes which contain lasers and 
emission/excitation flters. 
Fig. 2.10. Confocal Microscope. 
Some of the important features of various light microscopes are given in 
Table 2.3.
Table 2.3. Characteristic diferences between electron and light microscopes
Electron microscope Light microscope
1 Best resolution 0.0005 µm 0.02 µm
(0.5 nm)
2 High vacuum Necessary Not necessary
3 Specimen Dead; Ultrathin sections Living and non-living 
material. Sections of 
2-10 µm thickness
4 Radiation source Electron beam Visible light
5 Lenses Electromagnetic lenses Glass lenses
6 Source of contrast Scattering of electrons Diferential light 
absorption
7 Staining Heavy metals Dyes
8 Focusing Adjacent current to the Adjacent lens position 
mechanism magnetic lens Mechanically
9 Specimen mount Metal grid (copper) Glass slide18 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
2.2 Electron Microscopy 
In an electron microscope, instead of light, a high-speed electron beam is used 
(Table 2.4) visualisation of minute structures like ribosomes, mitochondria 
and membranes are possible with this microscope. In 1924, F. de Broglie 
(quoted in Prescot et al., 1999) opined that electrons could behave as waves 
with the wavelength inversely proportional to the square root of the voltage 
used to generate the electrons:
λ = 12.3/[(√V) (0.1)] nm
2.2.1 Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) 
In TEM, the commonly used voltage is 100,000, so the wavelength of the 
electrons is 0.004 nm. Aberrations inherent in the lenses of the instrument 
require its operation at very low numerical apertures (0.001). So, the resolution 
limit, according to Abbe’s formula, is approximately 0.2 nm. Compared to the 
unaided human eye (200 µmor 200,000 nm), this represents the magnifcation 
upto 1,00,000 X (see also Alberts et al., 1994).
Although the source of illumination is an electron beam and not light, 
in general, the TEM is quite similar to the bright-feld light microscope (Fig. 
2.11). There are some diferences between these two (Table 2.4). In TEM, 
high-speed electron beam generated from an electron gun is used. Electrons 
are focused by electromagnetic lenses since air molecules interfere with the 
movement of electrons, high vacuum is created within the microscope. Also 
due to the very poor penetrating capacity of electrons, sections should be 
ultrathin. These conditions do not allow the observation of living material 
through an electron microscope.
There are three electromagnetic lenses in the electron microscope. The 
condenser lens, placed between the source of illumination and the specimen, 
collimates the electron beam on the specimen and an enlarged image is 
produced by two other lenses similar to the objective and ocular of a light 
microscope. Since the electrons are not visible to the human eye, the fnal 
image is projected on the fuorescent screen.
Since most of the constituent elements in biological matter are of low 
mass, the contrast of these materials is very poor. This can be enhanced by 
staining with salts of heavy metals like uranyl acetate, lead citrate, etc. These 
metals may be either fxed on the specimen (positive staining) or used to 
increase the opacity of the surrounding area (negative staining). The latter is 
useful for the observation of particles and bacteria.
2.2.2 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) 
The Scanning electron microscope (SEM) is mainly used to study the surface 
features of seeds, plant cells, tissues and microorganisms. The specimen Microscopy 19 
Table 2.4. Characteristic features of some important microscopes
Type of 
microscope
Image formation Magnifcation Applications
Bright-feld 
microscope
Dark image of the 
object against a 
bright background
1000-2000x To study anatomy, 
embryology of plants 
and gross morphology 
of yeast, moulds, algae, 
protozoa, bacteria etc.
Dark-feld 
microscope
Bright image of the 
object against a dark 
background
-do- To study the gross 
morphology of the 
living specimen
Phase contrast 
microscope
Based on phase 
contrast principles; 
Darker against the 
light background 
(positive contrast or 
Lighter against the 
dark background 
(negative contrast)
-do- To study the gross 
morphology of living 
specimens and cell 
organelles 
Polarisation 
microscope
Bright image of the 
object against a dark 
background
-do- To study the 
birefringents, viz., 
microtubules, 
microfbrils, crystals 
and to study the optical 
properties of cell walls.
Fluorescent 
microscope
Based on the 
fuorescent principle
-do- To study the plant 
cuticles, suberised 
walls, lignins,
chlorophylls, 
DNA, callose of 
sieve elements; 
immunofuorescence
studies in 
microbiology.
Electron 
microscope
Viewed on 
a fuorescent screen
Up to 
10,00,000x
To study the 
ultrastructure of cell 
organelles, microbial 
cells, viruses etc.
is surface coated with a thin layer of heavy metal and is then scanned by 
a narrow electron beam. The intensity of various radiations released from a 
portion of the specimen depends on the shape and chemical composition of 
the irradiated object. The image is obtained by scanning the specimen surface 
with a narrow electron beam, collecting and amplifying the generated signals 
and feeding them to the cathode ray tube for display. The fnal image can be 20 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
viewed from the fuorescent screen. So, the topology of the object can be 
studied with SEM.
Fig. 2.11. Transmission Electron Microscope.
SEM consists of two main parts, viz., the probing system and the display 
system. In the probing system, the electron beam is generated by an electron 
gun (or electron probe) which consists of a V-shaped hairpin tungsten 
flament. When the flament is heated, electrons are emitted and accelerated 
through the anode. The diameter of the initially focused spot of electrons, 
called the spot size, is 50 µm. To increase resolution at higher magnifcations, 
the electron source is demagnifed (i.e., the spot size is decreased) to 2 mm by 
using electromagnetic condenser lenses.
In the display system, when the electron beam strikes the specimen, 
many signals are generated, such as secondary electrons, backscattered 
electrons, and Auger electrons. These diferent signals provide diferent 
concentrations about the specimens; secondary electrons provide information 
on surface morphology, whereas X-rays are useful for elemental analysis and 
backscattered electrons for surface topology. Separate detectors have been 
used to collect each signal.
2.2.2.1 Surface Morphology 
Secondary electrons are emitted by the sample and attracted by a grid (at 
positive potential) positioned in front of the detector. The detector collects 
all the electrons coming towards it. These electrons are accelerated towards  
 
 
 
Microscopy 21 
a scintillator by applying a strong positive voltage (10-12.5 Kv). When 
electrons hit the scintillator, they generate photons, which are guided by the 
light pipe to the photomultiplier where photoelectrons are amplifed and fed to 
the cathode ray tube (display screen). The probe scans the specimen in a roster 
pattern synchronous to the electron beam of the cathode ray tube. A point-to￾point correspondence between the specimen and the displayed image is thus 
achieved. Variations in secondary electron yield are then used to modulate the 
intensity of the electron beam in the cathode ray tube thus forming an image.
The probe scans line-to-line on the specimen surface. The number of 
lines producing the image can be varied from 100-2000, thus giving diferent 
resolving power. To obtain a good picture, a slow scan rate is important so that 
the probe can stay at one spot for a longer time, thus increasing the number 
of secondary electrons. For viewing, a fast TV scan rate can be used. As the 
angle between the probe and the specimen surface varies, the signal strength 
and contrast of the image are engaged. The detector is placed on one side 
of the specimen; this enhances the specimen area and prevents signals from 
another area from reaching the detector. 
Specimen Preparation for SEM 
The surface of an object to be studied by SEM must have the following 
characteristics:
• It must be free from foreign particles or cell debris.
• It must be stable when put under a high vacuum.
• It should remain stable after exposure to the electron beam. It should 
develop as few surface charges as possible.
• It must emit a sufcient number of secondary electrons.
The biological specimen needs special attention because most of them are 
soft, full of extracellular fuids and have poor conductors. There are several 
preparative techniques depending on the nature of the tissue and the type 
of studies to be carried out. The preparation of specimens for SEM studies 
involves the following steps.
Specimen Selection: Specimen size depends on (a) the stage capacity (x-y 
movement) of the SEM, (b) the type of fxation and, (c) the drying process 
used. It should be the smallest in size possible, to reduce the preparation 
artifacts. Tissue culture, single cells, or microorganisms can be processed in 
suspension on attached to a suitable base (coverslips) before going through 
preparative procedures.
As extracellular products such as mucus, blood, other body fuids and tissue 
fragments may obscure the surface to be examined, they must be removed by 
gentle washing with cold isotonic bufer.
Microorganisms and cell suspensions can be separated from their liquid 
environment by centrifugation. 
 
 
 
22 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Sterilisation of specimen 
Apart from hard objects such as teeth, bone and wood, all other biological 
materials must be stabilised to prevent it from undergoing structural changes, 
which is done by chemical fxation or physical fxation (cryo-fxation). The 
fxative and the fxation protocol are the same as in the case of TEM specimen 
preparation.
Washing and dehydration 
To remove the unreacted fxative, the specimen is washed in bufer (which 
was used for preparing the fxative), especially after secondary fxation with 
OSO4. The latter may be reduced by dehydrating agents, causing precipitates 
to form on the specimen thus obscuring the surface morphology.
Chemically fxed objects must be dehydrated before drying. The purpose 
of dehydration is to remove the water before drying. The most commonly 
dehydrating is ethanol and acetone. To avoid initial osmotic damage to the 
specimen, starting solvent (acetone or ethanol) should be low (30% or lower). 
Then specimens are dehydrated using an increasing concentration of the 
dehydration agent up to the dry absolute acetone stage.
Drying 
After dehydration, specimens are dried and there are diferent approaches to 
drying.
Air drying
Critical point drying
Air drying
It is the simplest method of drying, through it creates maximum distortion. It 
causes fattening of the specimen surface because of compressive forces of 
surface tension of the liquid-gas interface. Critical point drying.
This is the commonly used technique to dry biological samples. This sample 
is transferred from an organic dehydration medium (acetone) to a drying 
medium (liquid CO2 or freon 13) in a chamber that is cooled and put under 
pressure.
When the dehydrating agent (acetone) has been completely removed and 
impregnated with the coating can be done in two ways:
Thermal evaporation 
Many metals, when heated in a vacuum, evaporate readily into a mono-atomic 
state. The high temperature required to start the evaporation of the materials 
can be achieved by resistive heating:
• The specimen is mounted on a rotating specimen stage to get an even 
coating.
• Thin wire of metal to be evaporated is wrapped around a tungsten flament.
• The chamber is evacuated. 
 
 
 
 
 
Microscopy 23 
• The tungsten flament is heated by supplying voltage.
• Metal will start evaporating and a thin layer will deposit on a rotating 
specimen. 
Under best conditions, the coating may be relatively uneven, and the changes 
of surfaces change accumulation or higher, hence most people prefer sputter 
coating.
Sputter coating allows uniform coating on the specimen even on the parts 
that are not directly facing the metal to be evaporated. Hence, it is the most 
acceptable technique.
Specimens are placed on a cooled base plate which functions as an anode.
The cathode, which is the metal (e.g., gold) to be evaporated, is positioned 
above the specimen.
The chamber, in which the cathode and anode are located, is evacuated.
An inert gas such as argon is fooded into the chamber and is again evacuated.
The negative high voltage is applied to the cathode. This result in glow 
discharge and argon gas molecules gets ionised.
The positively charged ions move toward the cathode and strike it, thereby 
releasing atoms.
The dislodged metal atom due to numerous collisions with the gas molecules 
gets defected several times and hit the specimens at diferent angles. Thus, a 
uniform thin layer is deposited on the specimens.
The thickness of the coating depends upon: 
• Current applied
• Anode to cathode distance
• Sputtering time
With Balzer SCD 020 sputter coater, using gold as the target (cathode), a 
coating of about 35 nm thickness can be obtained under the following 
conditions:
Current - 21.5 mA
Pressure - 0.05 mbar
Gas - Argon
Cathode to anode distance - 30 nm
Sputtering time - 1 minute
After the metal coating specimen are ready for observation in SEM.
2.2.2.2 Protocol for the specimen processing for SEM 
Standard protocol for biological samples 
Primary fxation: 2.5% glutaraldehyde is Karnovsky’s fxative X 2-6 hours 
at 4º C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Washing: 0.1 M phosphate bufer (3 changes, each of 15 minutes at 4º C)
Postfxation (optional): 1% OsO4 for 2 hours at 4º C
Washing: 0.1 M phosphate bufer (3 changes, each of 15 minutes at 4º C)
Dehydration: All steps are to be carried out at 4º C
30% acetone - 15 min
50% acetone - 15 min
70% acetone - 15 min
80% acetone - 15 min
90% acetone - 15 min
95% acetone - 15 min
100% acetone - 15 min
(Dry acetone) - 15 min × 2
Critical point drying 
Critical point drying with liquid CO2 at its critical point, i.e., 31.5º C at 1100 
p.s.i.
Mounting 
Mounting the samples onto the aluminium stubs.
Sputter coating 
Using silver or gold, coat the samples with 20-30 nm thick flm.
Preparation of blood cells for SEM 
• Fix a drop of blood in 2% glutaraldehyde for 30 min
• Centrifuge for 5 min, at 1500 rpm
• Decent of the fxative and wash the blood cells with phosphate bufer
• Centrifuge and decant 
• Resuspend in distilled water and repeat washing in distilled water (5 x 
times)
• Decent and apply a thin flm on a clean coverslip after resuspending in 
distilled water
• Air dry 
• Coat with silver or gold
Preparation of sperm sample for SEM 
• Fix 1 or 2 drops of sperm in 2% glutaraldehyde for 10 min
• Centrifuge for 5 min at 1500 rpm, decant the supernatant
• Wash the pallet with 0.1 M phosphate bufer and resuspend it
• Centrifuge and decant the supernatant
• Wash with distilled water, then centrifuge and decant
• Resuspend the pallet in distilled water
• Apply a thin flm on a clean cover slip 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microscopy 25 
• Air dry
• Sputter coat with silver or gold
Image interpretation and magnifcation 
Details obtained from ultra-thin sections are hard to interpret because 
the section thickness acceptable for TEM is about 50 nm. i.e., above 
1/10-wavelength of light. 1 mm size tissue can yield 10,000-20,000 ultra-thin 
sections and it is hard to translate the 2-dimensional image into 3-dimensional 
reality. Therefore, it is desirable to look at many sections before interpreting 
the results. So, a sound knowledge of tissue at the LM level is essential.
Magnifcations on EM images
• Organelles are measured in micrometers (µm) and nanometers (nm):
1 mm equals 1000 µm
1 µm equals 1000 nm
1 nm equals 10 Å
• The true size of objects in micrographs can be calculated by using the 
simple and useful rule of thumb.
• There are 1000 µm in one mm, therefore, a 1 µm object will appear to be 
1 mm in size when the magnifcation is 1000x.
• To put a scale mark representing one µm on a micrograph, simply draw a 
line as many mm long as there are thousands in the magnifcations.
Example: Magnifcation 50,000x
i.e., 1 µm magnifed by 50,000 times
since 1 mm equals 1000 µm, one µm equals 50 mm or 5 cm
i.e. 1 µm
5 cm
Precise measurement of objects in micrographs:
The original size of the organelle seen from the ultra-micrograph can be 
measured either in micrometers or nanometers by using the following 
calculation:
Size of Micrograph (mm) × 1000 = true size in µm Magnifcation
OR
Size of Micrograph (mm) × 1,000,000 = true size in nm Magnifcation
Calculating the total magnifcation of a picture from Bar Magnifcation
2 µ Ex: 10 cm26 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
2 µm equals 10 cm
1 µm 0 = 5 cm 00000 = 50 mm
Since 1 mm + 1000 µm
1 µm + 50,000 µm, i.e., 50,000 x
2.2.3 Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope (STEM) 
In a conventional transmission electron microscope (CTEM), images are 
formed by the electrons passing through the ultrathin specimen whereas in 
a Scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) the electron beam is 
focused on a fne spot (spot size 0.05-0.2 nm) which is then scanned over 
the sample in a roster illumination system constructed so that the sample 
is illuminated at each point with the beam parallel to the optical axis (Fig. 
2.12). The rostering of the beam across the sample makes STEM suitable 
for analytical techniques such as Z-Contrast annular dark-feld imaging and 
spectroscopic mapping by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy 
or electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). These signals are obtained 
simultaneously, allowing direct correction of images and spectroscopic data.
Fig. 2.12. Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope Carl Zeiss Libra 200 MC 
(Courtesy: University of Waterloo).
A typical STEM is a conventional transmission electron microscope 
equipped with additional scanning coils, detectors and necessary circuitry. 
The frst application of STEM for biological molecules was demonstrated in 
1971 (Walls, 1971). 3
 Botanical Microtechnique 
and Microtomy 
The branch of plant science dealing with the preparation of plant material to 
observe under the microscope is known as Botanical Microtechnique (Berlyn 
and Miksche, 1976; Khasim, 2002). The development of our knowledge about 
plant and animal tissues has been possible with the steady advancement in 
the feld of microtechnique and it is a fact that even Robert Hooke could 
not discover the cell until he prepared thin sections of plant tissues. In this 
chapter, a thorough discussion has been done on various aspects, viz., Killing 
and Fixation, Dehydration and Infltration, and Embedding and Sectioning.
3.1 Killing and Fixation 
The killing and fxation of the materials are the two important processes for 
permanent slide preparation. Both killing and fxing are achieved by means of 
a single fuid consisting of various chemical reagents.
The term ‘killing’ means the sudden and permanent termination of the 
life processes. As soon as we collect the material, it should be put in a killing 
reagent, so that permanent retardation of life processes takes place. Any 
reagent used for killing should reach each cell of the organism or a piece of 
tissue and it works completely and efectively.
Killing invariably proceeds fxation which is said to be the preservation 
and keeping intact of all cellular and structural elements as they are in living 
conditions. 
It is well-known that the fundamental structure of protoplasm is colloidal. 
Every protoplasmic structure, such as the nucleus, plastids and cytoplasm, is 
an intricate colloidal system. Boundary membranes like nuclear membrane 
and tonoplast around vacuole are still another colloidal system. All these 
colloidal systems belong to the hydrophilous colloid group. When fxative 
reagents encounter the protoplasm, the colloidal system undergoes an 
irreversible change of state. 
Some reagents used for killing purposes penetrate rapidly and others 
penetrate slowly. Those reagents which penetrate rapidly may damage the 
tissue if materials are kept in for a prolonged time. For example, fumes of 28 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
osmium tetroxide kill the tissue within a few minutes; when the material is 
allowed to react in this reagent for more than 30 mins, tissue damage occurs. 
3.1.1 Physical Fixation 
In the physical fxation, the tissue is cut into very small (1-2 mm) pieces and 
their cellular details are well-preserved by freezing at a very low temperature. 
Tissue is wrapped in aluminium foil and immersed with great rapidity into 
the freezing solvent at -160°C (in a liquid nitrogen trough), for not less than 
a minute. The freezing solvents commonly used are Freon 22, isopentane, 
propane, nitrogen, and a mixture of methyl cyclohexane: isopentane or methyl 
cyclohexane: 2 methyl butane. The physical fxation process has been used 
extensively to study the histochemical localisation of many enzymes and 
lipids at the optical microscopic level. 
3.1.2 Chemical Fixation 
Generally, both killing and fxation are done in a single fuid which consists 
of various combinations of reagents. The general principle involved in 
combining substances to form killing and fxative fuid (fxative mixture) is 
to secure a balance between all the properties of the reagents involved. A 
substance that tends to shrink cytoplasm should be combined with a substance 
that swells the protoplasm. In other words, the disadvantages of one reagent 
are counterbalanced by another reagent directly opposite in nature. Two 
reagents having identical disadvantages should not be combined in the killing 
and fxative fuid. Also, reagents that oxidise easily should not be combined 
with the reagents which are powerful reducers. 
3.1.2.1 Fixation Images 
Fixation images are of two types. 
A. Acid fxation image: Chromatin, nucleoli and spindle fbres are well￾preserved; cytoplasm is fxed as a stringy network and, nucleoplasm and 
mitochondria are dissolved. 
B. Basic fxation image: Chromatin and spindle fbres are dissolved. 
Nucleoli, nucleoplasm and mitochondria are well-preserved. The 
cytoplasm is fxed as hyaloplasm, and vacuoles are also preserved.
The correct procedure for describing the fnal image should include both 
the killing and fxative fuid, as well as dehydrating reagent and infltrating 
medium. The fnal image, given by Bouin’s fuid with absolute ethyl alcohol 
and xylol as the dehydrating agents, is quite diferent from that of tertiary 
butyl alcohol used as dehydrating agent (Johansen, 1940). 
There are some overlapping images with certain reagents. For example, 
copper bichromate used in a solution at pH 4.8 preserves both chromatin and 
mitochondria (Zirkle, 1928).Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 29 
If the fxing fuid contains two or more chemical reagents, the resulting 
fxation image is determined primarily by the reagent which penetrates more 
rapidly (Zirkle, 1933). The various reagents penetrate at diferent rates and 
according to their respective concentrations. 
According to Baker (1958), all fxatives are classifed into two groups: 
coagulants and non-coagulants depending on their reactions to solutions of 
albumen and albumen-gelatin gels. Coagulants denature albumen and form 
precipitation. In other words, protoplasm is transformed into a microscopical 
network. Non-coagulants do not precipitate the proteins, but they alter the 
properties of albumen and gelatin. Gelatin is rendered insoluble in hot water 
and albumen becomes non-coagulable. Clearly, non-coagulants cross-link 
proteins without causing extensive denaturation that leads to precipitation. 
Coagulants 
Various coagulants reagents are given below: 
A. Ethanol (C2H5OH): Ethanol (absolute ethyl alcohol) is a fair killing and 
fxing reagent when immediate results are needed. Plant materials should 
not be kept in ethanol for more than one hour, after which the reagent 
is poured of. Then the dehydration and infltration of the material are 
followed. Proteins and nucleic acids are precipitated by alcohol, but 
it destroys mitochondria. Fats and phospholipids are dissolved. Plant 
materials that are killed and fxed by standard fuids should be kept 
indefnitely in 70% alcohol for further studies.
B. Mercuric chloride (HgCl2): Mercuric chloride, which is highly 
poisonous, is soluble in water, ethanol and benzene. It is a rapid fxer and a 
powerful precipitant of proteins and nucleic acids, and it tends to 
shrink tissues. Plant material becomes opaque as soon as fxed. After 
fxation, mercuric chloride is removed by iodine in an alcoholic solution 
(1 g iodine and 2 g potassium iodide in 100 cc of 70% alcohol). Iodine 
colours the tissues but it may be removed by soaking in 70% ethanol or 
in 0.2% sodium thiosulphate.
C. Chromium Trioxide (CrO3): Chromium trioxide forms chromic acid 
(H2CrO4) in water. Chromic acid tends to shrink tissues. To counteract 
this, it is mixed with other reagents. It is a powerful coagulant of albumen 
and many other proteins including nucleoproteins. Fats are not afected; 
the nucleus and chromosomes are well-preserved. 
In parafn sections, cell aggregates are well fxed. Nuclear sap is changed 
into a coagulum. Nucleus, nucleolus and chromosomes are well shown. 
Mitochondria and lipid bodies are not seen. 
The cytoplasm is well-preserved by chromium trioxide since the 
cytoplasm has a strong afnity for acid dyes. 
30 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Non-Coagulants 
Non-coagulants fx protoplasm without forming a microscopic network. 
Formaldehyde, osmium tetroxide and glutaraldehyde are of outstanding 
importance in modern microtechnique. These are useful in histochemical 
studies and in electron microscopy. 
A. Formaldehyde (HCHO): Formaldehyde is soluble in water, and it 
penetrates rapidly into the tissues (Baker, 1969). It is one of the hardening 
agents. It gives a basic fxation image. It reacts with amino groups of 
proteins, but it will not form precipitation with proteins. Nucleus, 
mitochondria and lipid bodies are well-preserved in this fxative. The 
fumes of formaldehyde are extremely irritating to mucous membranes. 
The action of formaldehyde is chiefy on proteins. It reacts with amino 
groups of proteins, with the production of water, or simply attaches itself 
to the amino acid without the liberation of water (Fig. 3.1 A, B; see also 
Woodrofe, 1941; Baker, 1969). Levey (1933 quoted in Sharma and Sharma, 
1972) suggested that two molecules of formaldehyde may react with one of 
the amino acids (Fig. 3.1C). 
Fig. 3.1. A-C Formaldehyde Reaction with Amino Group.
Tissues fxed in the fxative containing formaldehyde often show well￾scattered chromosomes, especially after sectioning from parafn blocks. 
The cell volume increases considerably, resulting in the spreading of the 
chromosomes over a larger area. The constriction regions appear slightly 
exaggerated due to the contraction of the euchromatic segments. This efect is 
possibly due to the action of formaldehyde on chromosome proteins (Sharma 
and Sharma, 1972).
Formaldehyde is widely used as a fxative in electron microscopic studies. 
Tissues fxed in formaldehyde are very transparent to electrons. It is necessary Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 31 
to stain the sections with dyes that can defect electrons. Generally, electron 
stains like uranyl acetate and potassium permanganate are widely used in 
electron microscopic studies. 
Many marine algae including Cyanophycean members are successfully 
fxed in 6-10% formaldehyde dissolved in seawater.
B. Osmium tetroxide (OsO4): Osmium tetroxide also known as osmic 
acid and highly expensive, is widely used for electron microscopic 
(EM) studies. It is soluble in water. It gives no coagulum with albumen 
solution, but it is believed to form cross-links in proteins by reacting 
with the double bonds of tryptophane and histidine and by complexing 
with sulphydryl groups (Baker, 1969; O’Brien and McCully, 1981). It 
does not coagulate nucleoproteins. OsO4 blackens unsaturated lipids but 
does not attack saturated ones. So, it reacts with double bonds (Baker, 
1969). However, some lipid-rich structures are destroyed by OsO4 (Zee 
and O’Brien, 1970). 
For EM studies, now-a-days OsO4 is used as a post-fxative for tissues that 
are initially fxed in glutaraldehyde or acrolein, or formaldehyde. Under these 
conditions, it gives positive electron contrast to membranes and preserves 
unsaturated lipids. 
Osmium tetroxide penetrates very slowly. After glutaraldehyde fxation 
in root tips of 1-2 mm thick, OsO4 appears to penetrate more quickly and 
develops good membrane contrasts (Newcomb, 1967). 
The main advantage of OsO4 is that it does not cause much shrinkage, 
but on the other hand, there is a slight swelling. The texture of the osmium￾fxed tissue, though not very soft, allows smooth cutting for observation 
under a light microscope. Osmium tetroxide does not allow ethanol to cause 
precipitation during dehydration. 
A serious limitation of OsO4 fxation is the blackening of the tissue. 
Bleaching with hydrogen peroxide is an essential step after fxation by OsO4, 
but it afects the chromosome stainability (Sharma and Sharma, 1972).
C. Potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7): Potassium dichromate is a superb 
hardening agent and is best for studying mitochondria (Johansen, 1940). 
It is a non-coagulant of proteins including nucleoproteins. Unacidifed 
potassium dichromate dissolves DNA; cytoplasm is homogeneously fxed 
and mitochondria well fxed. With acidifed potassium dichromate, the 
image is similar to chromic acid. In acidifed conditions, chromosomes are 
well fxed; cytoplasm and chromatin are precipitated, and mitochondria 
are dissolved. It fxes lipids efectively.
D. Acetic acid (CH3COOH): Since it is easily frozen, undiluted acetic acid 
is also known as glacial acetic acid. One of the primary advantages of 
using acetic acid in a fxative mixture is that it can be combined with any 
of the other fxatives so far studied. It can be mixed in all proportions 
with water and alcohol. It is commonly used in many fxative mixtures  
32 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
since it tends to swell with cytoplasm which counteracts the shrinkage 
efects of other reagents in the fxative mixtures. However, it shrinks 
tissues (Zirkle, 1928b). Its importance lies in its fat-soluble nature, 
which penetrates rapidly and produces the acid fxation image. It has 
got importance in the pickling industry as a preservative rather than a 
fxative. It is a non-coagulant for proteins and precipitates DNA.
Acetic acid is also a good solvent for aniline dyes. Due to this property, 
it is an important component of staining-cum-fxing mixtures, viz., acetic 
carmine, acetic-orcein, acetic-lacmoid, etc. 
E. Glutaraldehyde [CHO(CH2)3CHO]: Glutaraldehyde is a non-coagulant, 
and it probably gives the most faithful preservation of any known fxative 
(O’Brien and McCully, 1981). Glutaraldehyde penetrates slowly, but 
reacts rapidly, especially compared to formaldehyde (Flitney, 1966). It 
does not penetrate a thick cuticle (Mersey and McCully, 1978). It rapidly 
forms cross-links in proteins. It is widely used for EM studies as a pre￾fxative of the specimen.
The biological grade of glutaraldehyde supplied by Polysciences (8% 
glutaraldehyde) and J. B. EM services (25% glutaraldehyde) is the most 
reliable one for EM studies.
F. Acrolein (H2C=CHCHO): Acrolein is a highly reactive aldehyde, and it 
gives excellent preservation of various structures for light microscopy. It 
penetrates a thick cuticle and reacts relatively rapidly with the cytoplasm 
(Mersey and McCully, 1978).
Unfortunately, commercial samples of acrolein available in the market are 
usually impure and acidic. Distillation is needed to remove these impurities. If 
it is available in pure form, acrolein is an excellent additive to glutaraldehyde. 
Acrolein can be used to fx bulky objects intact and other specimens where 
rapid penetration is required. Mersey and McCully (1978) reported that a 
mixture of glutaraldehyde and acrolein produced good fxation of tomato hair 
cells and immobilise cytoplasm at a faster rate than all other fxatives studied 
(including glutaraldehyde and acrolein separately). 
Unbufered acrolein can be used successfully for the fxation of large 
brown and red algae (McCully, 1966; Evans and Holligan, 1972).
Ice-cold acrolein should be used. Since it is potent tear gas, acrolein 
should be used in a well-ventilated hood. 
3.1.2.2 Fixative Mixtures 
Baker (1969) divided the fxative mixtures into four groups. These are given 
below: 
Group A Coagulant + acetic acid: These are useful for anatomical 
and histological studies, e.g., Clarke, Zenker, etc. Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 33 
Group B Coagulant + non-coagulant + acetic acid: These are used 
for detailed histology and cytology, e.g., Flemming’s strong 
mixture, FAA, etc. 
Group C Coagulant + non-coagulant: These are common fxatives 
for cytoplasmic inclusions, e.g., Helly.
Group D Non-coagulants only: These fxatives are used to study the 
cytoplasmic inclusions, e.g., Altmann, Regaud, etc.
Fixative Mixtures giving Acid Fixation Images 
A. Formalin-Acetic Acid-Alcohol: This fxative mixture is familiarly known 
as FAA (Table 3.1). It is a coagulant fxative widely used to study the 
anatomical and morphological aspects and is unsuitable for chromosome 
studies. Specimens are kept indefnitely in FAA without any damage. 
The minimum time required for fxation is 18 hrs. Later specimens are 
transferred to 70% ethyl alcohol for permanent preservation.
70% ethyl alcohol 90 ml
Glacial acetic acid 5 ml 
Formalin 5 ml 
Sass (1967) stated that the fxative need not be washed out prior to 
dehydration. However, woody specimens should be washed with running 
water and softened for 3-6 weeks in a 50% aqueous solution of hydrofuoric 
acid. 
Detailed analysis of the mode of action of the FAA is not known (O’Brien 
et al., 1973). It is likely that acetic acid kills the tissue frst, later this image 
is modifed by formalin and ethyl alcohol. FAA gives an acid fxation image.
B. Formalin-Propionic-Alcohol (FPA): This is similar to FAA; instead of 
acetic acid, propionic acid is used in this fxative. It is good for bryophytes 
and pteridophytes. 
50% or 70% ethyl alcohol 90 ml
Propionic acid 5 ml 
Formalin 5 ml 
C. Chromic Acid-Acetic Acid-Formalin (CRAF): CRAF is widely used as a 
coagulant fxative. It is not suitable for cytoplasmic studies. Fix the plant 
material in this mixture at room temperature for 12-24 hrs. Specimens 
can be stored indefnitely in this fxative and dehydrated without washing.
Baker (1958) has discussed in detail the action of its individual reagents, 
but the action of this mixture is not known. It is likely that the tissue is killed 
by acetic acid and that the image is modifed by formaldehyde (reducing 
agent) / chromic acid (oxidising agent) products (O’Brien et al., 1973; Mersey 
and McCully, 1978). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Sass (1967) has given fve recipes for increasing the strength of CRAF:
Final fxatives in ml
I II III IV V 
Chromic acid 20 20 30 40 50 
(1% chromium trioxide)
Acetic acid (1%) 75 -- -- -- --
Acetic acid (10%) -- 10 20 30 35 
Formalin (37-40%) 5 5 10 10 15 
Water -- 65 40 20 --
Formalin is added just before use.
D. Carnoy’s Fluids: These are of two types. The penetrating capacity of 
these two fuids is very high:
(1) Absolute ethyl alcohol 15 ml 
Glacial acetic acid 5 ml 
(2) Absolute ethyl alcohol 30 ml 
Glacial acetic acid 5 ml 
Chloroform 15 ml 
The frst one is commonly used for cytological studies. The root tips are 
kept for 15 minutes and anthers for an hour in this fxative. Fixed material 
should be washed twice with 95% ethyl alcohol before proceeding to parafn 
infltration and embedding. Since it penetrates rapidly into the tissues, alcohol 
acetic fxative is more useful for large specimens and thick sections. 
E. Gilson’s Fluid: Gilson’s mixture consists of the following reagents: 
60% ethyl alcohol 50 ml
Distilled water 440 ml 
Glacial acetic acid 2 ml 
80% nitric acid, 46° strength 7.5 ml
Mercuric chloride 10 g 
This fxative is recommended for softer and gelatinous fungi. Specimens 
are kept in it for 18 to 20 hrs. Later specimens should be washed with 50% 
ethyl alcohol to remove mercuric deposits. 
F. Petrunkevitsch‘s Fluid: It is a good fxative for angiospermic 
megagametophytes which need deep penetration. Specimens are kept in 
this fxative, not more than 20 hrs. Wash specimens thoroughly with 50% 
ethyl alcohol for further processing: 
40% ethyl alcohol 125 ml
Glacial acetic acid 27.5 ml Conc. nitric acid 2.5 ml 
Mercuric chloride up to saturation 
G. Chamberlain‘s Chrom-Osmo-Acetic: This fxative consists of the 
following reagents: 
Chromic acid 1 g 
Glacial acetic acid 1 ml 
1% aqueous osmic acid 1 ml
Distilled water make up to 100 ml 
This mixture is used to fx freshwater algae and fungi. It is not suitable for 
root tips, stem tips or any other morphological material. 
H. Taylor’s Chrom-Osmo-Acetic for Smears: This fxative mixture is used to 
preserve chromosomes efectively. In this mixture, maltose is also added 
to preserve the identity of trabante (satellite) and to avoid the obliteration 
of constrictions: 
10% aqueous chromic acid 0.20 ml
10% aqueous acetic acid 2 ml
2% osmic acid in 2% aqueous chromic acid 1.50 ml 
Distilled water 8.30 ml
Maltose 0.15 g 
I. Sass Modifed Bouins Fluid: This mixture gives good results in the case 
of fower buds and anthers of Liliaceae:
1% aqueous chromic acid 50 ml
Saturated aqueous picric acid 35 ml
Formalin 10 ml 
Glacial acetic acid 5 ml 
J. Fleming’s Chrom-Osmo-Acetic Mixture: This fxative is used for 
cytological studies: 
1% chromic acid 50 ml
10% acetic acid 10 ml
2% osmic acid 10 ml
Distilled water 30 ml 
The acetic acid in the mixture prevents excessive damage. Osmic acid 
preserves the chromosome structures and blackens the tissues. So, it is 
necessary to bleach the fxed material before staining.
K. Weak Chrom-Acetic (Johansen, 1940): This fxative is used to preserve 
algae, fungi, bryophytes, prothalli of pteridophytes, and moss capsules 
which are easily penetrated: 
10% aqueous chromic acid 2.5 ml
10% aqueous acetic acid 5 ml
Distilled water make up to 100 ml 
Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
L. Strong Chrom-Acetic: This mixture is used for woody materials and 
tough, leathery leaves: 
10% aqueous chronic acid 1 ml
10% aqueous acetic acid 10 ml
Distilled water make up to 100 ml 
Fixative Mixtures Giving Basic Fixation Images 
A. Zirkle-Erliki Fixative (Zirkle, 1934): This mixture preserves 
mitochondria, but dissolves all chromatin. The specimen is fxed for 48 
hrs and then washed with water: 
Potassium dichromate 1.25 g 
Ammonium dichromate 1.25 g 
Cupric sulphate 1.00 g 
Distilled water 200 ml 
B. Marengo-S Fixative (Marengo, 1952): It is used to fx cytoplasm. The 
material is fxed for 24 hrs and washed thoroughly in running water 
before dehydration: 
10% formalin 100 ml
Normal sodium hydroxide 1 ml 
Pyrogallol 7 g 
C. Zirkle’s reduced Chromic Acid: It is used for mitochondria and vacuoles 
(Zirkle, 1932). The specimen is fxed in this mixture for 48 hrs and later 
the fxed material is washed with running tap water:
Chromium sulphate 5 g 
Cupric oxide slight excess 
Formalin 10-50 ml 
Distilled water 90-50 ml 
The total amount of mixture should be 100 ml 
Table 3.1. Fixative mixtures used for specifc purposes
Fixatives Specifc purpose 
of the fxative
Pre-fxation Post-fxation
1 Glutaraldehyde 1.6% + 
ruthenium red in 0.08 M 
cacodylate bufer (pH 7.3), 
fx for 8 hrs at 2o
C 
2 *Formalin-acetic acid￾alcohol (FAA) for 18 hrs 
and 
1.67% osmium 
tetroxide + 0.066% 
ruthenium red in 
0.066 M cacodylate 
bufer (pH 7.3) for 2 
hrs at 20o
C 
_ 
Good preservative for 
most of the organelles 
including microtubules 
(Cass et al., 1985). 
For anatomical and 
morphological studies. 
For anatomical and 
morphological studies Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 37 
later transferred to 
70% ethyl alcohol for 
permanent preservation 
3 *Formalin-propionic￾alcohol (FPA) for 18 hrs
4 3% glutaraldehyde and 
3% acrolein (1:1) bufered 
in 0.3 M cacodylate (pH 
7.2) for 2 hrs at 4o
C, later 
wash in bufer
5 2% glutaraldehyde in 0.14 
M sodium chloride, 0.005 
M sodium acetate and 
0.005 M calcium chloride 
at pH 7 or 2% acrolein 
without stabiliser 
6 4% aqueous potassium 
permanganate for 2-4 hrs 
7 *Carnoy’s fuids for 15 
minutes to 1 hr, later 
washed twice with 9% 
ethyl alcohol 
8 2% acrolein and 2% 
glutaraldehyde in 50% 
aqueous dimethyl 
sulfoxide (DM 50) 
bufered with 0.02 M 
3-collidine (pH 7.4) for 
7 hrs. in cold, later wash 
with bufer
9 *Gilson’s fuid for 18-20 
hrs. later washed with 
50% ethyl alcohol
10 0.6% bufered potassium 
permanganate (pH 7.4-7.6) 
for 15 minutes -12 hrs 
0o
C, later wash in cold 
ethanol 25% and bring to 
room temperature 
11 3% Glutaraldehyde, 1.5-
3% paraformaldehyde and 
1.5% acroleinin
_ 
Aqueous 6% 
potassium 
permanganate for 20 
minutes at 4o
C, later 
wash in bufer
_ 
1% osmium 
tetraoxide aqueous or 
bufered solution for 
2-12 hrs. 
_ 
3% osmium tetroxide 
in veronal acetate 
bufer (pH 40)
_ 
_ 
Potassium 
permanganate 1-2% 
for 15-30 min at 0o
C 
Good for bryophytes 
and pteridophytes 
Cell organelles are 
well-preserved and 
show high contrast of 
membrane system 
Membrane systems 
are well-preserved 
(Carstenson et al., 
1971) 
Both membrane 
systems and lipid 
deposits are well￾preserved. 
For cytological studies 
General structure and 
lipids are well fxed in 
yeast (Schwab et al., 
1970) 
Good for gelatinous 
fungi 
Preserves well and 
improves the contrast 
of membrane systems 
(Luft, 1956)
Excellent preservation 
for protein bodies, 
vacuoles and 
(Contd.)38 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Table 3.1. (Contd.)
Fixatives Specifc purpose 
of the fxative
Pre-fxation Post-fxation
5-collidine bufer for 1-2 
hrs. 
12 *Petrunkevitsch’s fuid for 
not more than 20 hrs and 
wash in 50% ethyl alcohol
13 6 ml of 10% 
glutaraldehyde + 3 ml of 
10% acrolein + 5 ml of 
6% paraformaldehyde + 5 
ml of 0.2 M bufer + 1 ml 
distilled water 
14 *Taylor's chromosmo￾acetic fuid
15 1% (w/v) solution of 
malachite green in 
a standard solution 
containing 2% 
glutaraldehyde in 75 
ml sodium dihydrogen 
phosphate bufer at 7.3 
pH with 0.25 mM calcium 
chloride; fx for 90 min 
at 4o
C, later wash in the 
same bufer
16 *Fleming’s chromosmo￾acetic mixture; since it 
blackens the tissue, it is 
necessary to bleach the 
fxed material
17 50% aqueous solution 
of glutaraldehyde, 4% 
aqueous osmium tetroxide, 
and 0.1 M collidine bufer 
are mixed in the ratio of 
1:2:5 respectively at pH 
7-7.1; fx for 1 hr at 0-4o
C 
_ 
2% osmium tetroxide
_ 
1% osmium tetroxide 
in veronal acetate 
bufer (pH 6.0) for 90 
min at 4o
C 
_ 
_ 
membranes in seeds 
(Millenhauer and 
Totten, 1971) 
Good fxative 
for angiospermic 
megagametophytes 
Seeds rich in protein 
bodies and lipids are 
well-preserved 
Preserves 
chromosomes 
efectively
Bacterial ultrastructure 
including lipid bodies 
are well-preserved 
Chromosomes well￾preserved 
Reduces cell shrinkage, 
lipid extraction, and 
chromatin clumping 
which usually 
happens by routine 
glutaraldehyde and 
osmium tetroxide 
procedures (Trump and 
Bulger, 1966) 	 	
Table 3.2. Dehydrating Schedules and Types of Embedding Media
Embedding media Appropriate dehydrating schedules 
Parafn wax Ethanol series; butanol/ethanol/water series; methyl
cellosolve series; TBA series; diaxon (diethylene dioxide); 
tetrahydrofuran 
Polyester wax Methyl cellosolve series up to n-propanol 
Glycol methacrylate Methyl cellosolve series; ethanol series; GMA itself can 
(GMA) also be used but it is expensive 
Epoxy resins Methyl cellosolve series; ethanol or acetone series; 
propylene oxide series are recommended for all epoxy 
resins after ethanol or acetone except for Spurr’s resin
Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 39 
18 Zirkle-Erliki fxative for _ Preserves mitochondria 
48 hrs later wash with 
water 
efectively but 
dissolves all chromatin 
19 *Marengo-S fxative for 
24 hrs later wash with 
_ Fix the cytoplasm 
water 
20 *Strong chrom-acetic 
mixture 
_ Used for woody 
materials and tough, 
leathery leaves 
(also refer to Bhandari, 1997) 
* See text for the composition of various ingredients
3.2	 Dehydration and Infltration
After washing the fxed plant material, it is necessary to remove the water 
from the tissues since water is not miscible in parafn wax in which tissues 
are embedded for smooth cutting. The removal of water from tissues is 
known as dehydration. Dehydration is also necessary for making permanent 
preparations, so that sections may not be infected and stored for quite a long 
time. Various dehydrating agents in diferent concentrations are used here. It 
is a gradual process and utmost care should be taken at this stage. Otherwise, 
plasmolysis takes place and leads to damage to tissues. Dehydration should be 
done in lower temperatures, so that mechanical distortion of specimens may 
be minimised. 
Some of the dehydrating schedules are given in Table 3.2 and these are 
based on the medium employed here (also refer to O’Brien and McCully, 
1981; Bhandari, 1997).
In general, the material to be infltrated in parafn is dehydrated through 
either ethanol-xylene series or ethanol-tertiary butylalcohol series. For resin- 
 
 
 
 
40 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
embedded tissues, a closely graded ascending series (25% onwards) of ethanol 
or acetone is used for dehydration. 
3.2.1 Dehydration 
The following procedures are generally employed for dehydration: 
A. Ethanol Series (Chamberlain, 1932) 
Tissues are passed through the following ethanol/water mixture. If the plant 
specimen is washed with water, tissues should pass through from 2%, 5, 7, 
10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 70, 85, 95 to 100% ethanol. If the specimen is fxed in 
70% ethanol, commence the dehydration at the same ethanol concentration. 
Sass (1967) proposed the following ethanol series for dehydration: from 
5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60, 70, 80, 95 to 100% ethanol.
Sass further suggested that acetone or isopropyl alcohol can also 
be substituted for ethanol. Acetone is superior to ethanol, especially for 
specimens infltrated in epoxy resins because neither it reacts with osmium 
tetroxide which might have been left after washing the specimen nor with 
epoxy monomers. Chayen and Gahan (1959) recommended rapid acetone 
dehydration and infltration in ester wax for retention of lipids in plant tissues.
All the above steps may not be necessary for delicate specimens. Two 
hours of immersion of the specimen in each grade is enough. In the case of 
woody specimens, several hours of immersion are required. 
There are some disadvantages to using ethyl alcohol as a dehydrating 
agent. These are (a) the schedule is time-consuming, (b) if the fxed schedule 
is not suited to the tissue, excessive hardening and shrinkage of the tissue 
takes place and (c) as alcohol does not mix with parafn or celloidin, an 
intermediate ‘clearing’ agent is needed which unduly lengthens the process 
(Sharma and Sharma, 1972). So, several alternative dehydrating agents have 
been used from time to time, some of which are miscible with the embedding 
material, so that using the clearing agent is not necessary. 
B. Ethanol-xylene Series 
It is commonly employed for parafn embedding tissues. Fixed material is 
passed through the following grades: 
(i) 25% ethanol (vii) 3:1 ethanol and xylene
(ii) 50% ethanol (viii) 1:1 ethanol and xylene
(iii) 70% ethanol (ix) 1:3 ethanol and xylene
(iv) 90% ethanol (x) Xylene I
(v) 95% ethanol (xi) Xylene II
(vi) 100% ethanol (xii) Xylene III
In each grade, the specimen is kept for 6-24 hrs depending on the hardness 
of the material. Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 41 
C. Ethanol-Tertiary Butyl Alcohol (TBA) - Water Series 
It is also employed for parafn embedding tissues. Johansen (1940) claimed 
that it was the least drastic of all dehydrating agents. Materials are kept in the 
following grades: 
(i) 25% ethanol
(ii) 50% ethanol
(iii) 5:4:1 ethanol (95%): TBA: water for 2-4 hrs at room temperature
(iv) 5:2:3 ethanol (95%): TBA: water
(v) 5:3.5:3 ethanol (95%): TBA: water
(vi) 1:1 ethanol (95%): TBA for 2-4 hrs at room temperature
(vii) 1:3 ethyl alcohol: TBA 
(viii) 100% anhydrous: TBA I
(ix) ,, II 
(x) ,, III 
Material is kept for 12-24 hrs in each grade. According to Johansen 
(1940), this treatment removes every trace of unbound water. 
D. Butanol-ethanol - Water Series 
The following series of dehydration has been recommended for wax 
embedding tissue (Sass, 1967):
(i) 1: 2: 7 butanol: ethanol (95%): water
(ii) 1.5:2.5:6 ,, ,, ,, 
(iii) 2.5:3:4.5 ,, ,, ,, 
(iv) 4:3:3 ,, ,, ,, 
(v) 5.5:2.5:2 ,, ,, ,, 
(vi) 7:2:1 ,, ,, ,, 
(vii) 8.5:1.5 ,, ,, ,,
(viii) 100% butanol
E. Dioxane (Diethyl Dioxide) - Water Series 
Dioxane mixes with water, alcohol and xylene and dissolves parafn wax and 
balsam. Hence, it may be used as a substitute at any stage of the usual ethyl 
alcohol-xylene dehydrating and clearing schedule. Direct treatment is also 
possible. Later it was also used by LaCour and Maheswari (quoted in Sharma 
and Sharma, 1972) and Johansen (1940).
The specimen is directly transferred from water to 60% dioxane in 
distilled water and subsequently as follows: 
(i) 60 ml dioxane + 40 ml distilled water 
(ii) 70 ml dioxane + 30 ml distilled water 
(iii) 95 ml dioxane + 5 ml distilled water 
(iv) Pure dioxane I 
(v) Pure dioxane II 42 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Since it does not need any clearing agent, this can be followed immediately 
by embedding in parafn wax. Though dioxane is very efective in short-term 
schedules, particularly for animal tissues, it should be used very cautiously 
because it has a markedly toxic and cumulative action and is an injurious one 
that should be handled with extreme care. It is also non-specifc in its action 
and heavier than melted parafn; therefore, it is very difcult to remove from 
tissue during infltration (Sharma and Sharma, 1972).
F. Methyl Cellosolve (2-Methoxy Ethanol) Series 
(Feder and O’Brien, 1968)
This series is recommended for the plant material embedding in parafn 
wax as well as epoxy resins: 
(i) Methyl cellosolve (v) n-propanol 
(ii) Methyl cellosolve (vi) n-propanol 
(iii) Ethanol (vii) n-butanol 
(iv) Ethanol (viii) n-butanol 
Tissues may be stored in the refrigerator. If the material is fragile, 
dehydration should be done in four concentrations of methyl cellosolve: 25%, 
50, 75 and 100%.
Generally, cellosolve has got remarkable power of dissolving diverse 
substances including cellulose nitrate and acetone; hence it is called cellosolve. 
It causes less shrinkage and hardening than ethanol. Since cellosolve is a less 
violent dehydrating agent than ethanol, there is no need to pass the plant 
material through graded series of a mixture of cellosolve and water. 
3.2.1.1 Clearing with Chloroform and Xylene 
Since parafn does not mix with many dehydrating agents, an intermediate 
medium also known as ‘ante-medium’ which is miscible with both the 
dehydrating agent and parafn is generally necessary. Most of these reagents 
render the tissue translucent because their refractive indices are close to that 
of the proteins of the tissue and, light rays can pass through without refraction. 
Hence, they are called ‘clearing’ agents and the process ‘clearing the tissue’.
The ideal ante-medium should have rapid penetrating power and 
should mix equally well both with the dehydrating and embedding agents. 
The clearing is also as gradual as dehydration. Chloroform and xylene are 
working as clearing agents. After passing through the methanol series and 
butanol-ethanol-water series, the specimen should also be passed through the 
following series of a mixture of chloroform and absolute alcohol. 
(i) 2:1 absolute alcohol: chloroform 
(ii) 1:1 ,, ,, 
(iii) 1:2 ,, ,, 
(iv) 100% chloroform I
(v) ,, II  
 
 
 
 
Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 43 
In each grade, the specimen should be kept for one hour in a corked 
specimen tube. Xylene hardens the tissue, sometimes it causes plasmolysis. 
Instead, chloroform is used since it has a slight hardening efect. Johansen 
(1940) also suggested Bergamot oil and cedar wood oil as a clearing agent 
for bulkier pieces of tissue. With cedarwood oil, 2-3 hrs of treatment in each 
grade is quite enough. The only limitation of these two oils is that they are not 
good solvents for parafn and, therefore, they are not easily replaced from the 
tissue by parafn.
3.2.1.2 Chemical Dehydration 
Chemical dehydration is an alternative approach in the botanical 
microtechnique. The DMP (2, 2 dimethoxypropane) has also been used as a 
dehydrating agent for plastic embedding tissue. The specimen is dehydrated 
in acidifed DMP, and the process is completed when no further cooling is 
evident (endothermic reaction). Later two changes of acetone are given, and 
the material is infltrated in the usual manner. Lin et al. (1977) also employed 
acidifed DMP and DEP (2, 2- diethoxypropane) as dehydrating agents. Three 
drops of 0.1N HCl are added to 25 ml DMP or DEP. After dehydration for 15 
minutes, three changes of dry acetone are given, 15 minutes each. Complete 
dehydration of plant material is accomplished in a single step with these 
reagents. DEP and DMP react with water and produce acetone and methanol 
(Bhandari, 1997). 
Inorganic dehydrants such as HCl, CaCl2, anhydrous Na2SO4 and 
molecular sieves are also being used (O’Brien and McCully, 1981).
3.2.2	 Infltration
After dehydration and clearing, the material becomes transparent. Now the 
material is ready for infltration-either in parafn wax or any resin. Infltration 
is the process of replacing the dehydrating agent from the dehydrated tissues 
with an embedding medium. It is also a gradual process. During this process, 
intercellular spaces are flled with parafn wax, so that it helps in getting the 
smooth cutting of tissue without any damage to the microtome. 
A. Parafn Wax Method
The parafn wax method is widely followed for anatomical, embryological 
and cytological studies: 
(i) The dehydrated material is given two changes in chloroform or xylene 
or tertiary butyl alcohol (according to the method employed). In each 
change, the material is kept for 12 hrs. 
(ii) Add shavings of parafn wax (M.P. 52°C) to the specimen tube 
containing the material and solvent. 
(iii) Specimen tubes are placed on the upper shelf of the oven in which the 
temperature should not be more than 56°C. (iv) Go on adding the shavings of wax gradually in the specimen tube till 
some wax remains undissolved. It may take 3 hrs to saturate. 
(v) Pour of the mixture of solvent and wax and replace it with fresh molten 
wax. 
(vi) Give two changes of pure molten wax at an interval of 6 hrs. 
(vii) The process is continuously repeated till the traces of smell of solvent 
are not found. If any traces are unremoved, it leads to the crystallisation 
of parafn wax after embedding.
(viii) If it is a delicate specimen, do not keep it in the oven for more than 2 
hrs during the entire process of infltration.
(ix) Pour of the parafn and replace it with a 56-58°C tissue mat (a 
commercial formulation with excellent cutting properties). It is allowed 
to stand for three days (O’Brien and McCully, 1981). Now the tissue is 
ready for embedding. 
Other waxes such as ester and polyester wax are also used for the 
infltration of plant tissues; these tissues can be embedded in tissue mats 
(Chayen and Gahan, 1959; Steedman, 1960; Bonnet and Torrey, 1965).
B. Parowax Method 
This method is employed for the materials dehydrated in dioxane. With 
dioxane as dehydrating agent, little chips of parowax are added gradually to 
the dehydrated material, contained in pure dioxane. The mixture is kept in a 
warm bath till dioxane (not a good parafn solvent) is saturated with parowax. 
The latter steps are similar to the parafn wax method.
C. Glycol Methacrylate (GMA) Method 
(Feder and O’Brien 1968; Bhandari, 1997)
Monomer mixture
Purifed GMA 92.2 ml 
(Purifed by adding 4 g activated charcoal to 100 ml of 
the monomer mixture to eliminate certain inhibitors of 
polymerisation) 
Polyethylene Glycol (plasticizer) 7.5 ml 
2, 2’-Azobis (2-methyl propionitrile) (catalyst) 0.3 g 
Bring the specimen into n-butanol to which a complete GMA monomer 
mixture is added. Keep it for 12 hrs for infltration. Pour of the solution and 
replace it with the pure monomer mixture. Give two changes in 24 hrs. If 
it is necessary, infltrate the material with mild agitation at 6°C or at room 
temperature for 1-4 weeks (Jurand and Ireland, 1965; Steinbrecht and Ernst, 
1967; Kajtar et al., 1970). Keep these vials in the dark to reduce premature 
polymerisation. 
Proper infltration is necessary to get thin sections of 0.5-2.0 µm thick for 
light microscopy and 0.05-0.1 µm thick for electron microscopy. Inadequate 
infltration of the cell wall is one of the factors for unsatisfactory sections.
44 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 45 
3.3 Embedding and Sectioning 
3.3.1 Embedding 
Medium which converts liquid to solid form easily can be used as an 
embedding medium. The liquid penetrates the tissue and converts it into a 
solid. This conversion may involve hydrogen bonding, covalent linkage, and 
crystallisation or polymerisation (Baker, 1969). 
Baker (1969) suggested that embedding media may be divided into two 
groups: those that penetrate the cells and those that merely surround them. 
Those fxatives which coagulate the proteins in the form of a network leave 
the tissue in a state that favours the entry of the embedding medium. Those 
which fx homogeneously, without coagulation, do not favour the entry of 
the embedding medium into internal parts. The embedding medium enters 
intercellular spaces and gives considerable mechanical support during 
sectioning. 
Steedman (1960) divided the embedding media into two groups: 
ribboning and non-ribboning depending upon whether the successive sections 
are adhered to one another to form a ribbon. Flemming (1873) and Wilcox 
(1898) used soap as a ribboning medium, but its adhering capacity is very 
poor. Later it was replaced by parafn wax.
3.3.1.1 Waxes 
A. Parafn Wax
After infltration, embedding is done with parafn wax. Embedding involves 
the pouring of the molten wax into the paper tray, properly arranging the 
infltrated plant material in it, cooling the entire mass quickly and solidifying 
within the paper tray. 
Parafn wax certainly has some advantages. The process of embedding is 
quick and simple; embedded material can be stored for quite a long time in dry 
conditions, and it forms ribbons in which sections are present while cutting 
with a microtome. Due to these qualities, parafn embedding is widely used 
for embryological, anatomical and cytological studies. The chief drawback 
of parafn embedding is that despite all precautions, the lengthy procedure 
of dehydration, clearing and embedding in molten parafn wax causes some 
amount of shrinkage and distortion. The same thing is also encountered in the 
celloidin method. The plant material should be dehydrated thoroughly and 
soaked in fuids that are easily miscible with an embedding medium. Ethanol 
and cello solve are particularly suitable for parafn embedding.
Parafn wax is a derivative of crude petroleum. It is a saturated and 
long-chain hydrocarbon of the methane series (Baker, 1969). Commercially, 
parafn wax is available at three melting points, 45°C, 52°C and 60°C. 
Parafn wax with a melting point of 52°C is widely used. Hard waxes are 
more suitable for taking thin sections. Some of the waxes and their properties 
are given in Table 3.3. 46 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Table 3.3. Types of Waxes 
Name of Wax Melting point Properties
1 Fibro wax 57-58o
C Consists of parafn wax and plastic 
polymers 
Difcult plant parts can be cut with 
this wax 
Its compression is less while 
sectioning 
2 Ester Wax 47-48o
C Low melting point
Harder than parafn wax
Its compression is less than the 
parafn wax during cutting
Sections with less than 5 µ can be 
achieved 
It should be kept in the molten 
stage longer than 12 hrs because it 
gets damaged 
3 Paraplast 56-57o
C Similar to fbro wax
4 Polyester wax 38o
C Soluble in ethyl alcohol
Used for embedding delicate 
specimens 
5 Carbowax 56o
C Wax-like substance soluble in water 
(Polyethylene glycol) 
Embedding receptacle (or Tray): Several types of embedding receptacles 
are being used for block making. Generally, stif paper trays and L-shaped 
trays are used. With the help of two L-shaped metal pieces (Fig. 3.2), molten 
wax is poured into the paper boat and the required size of blocks is prepared. 
Fig. 3.2. Embedding Receptacle.
For preparing paper boats, the below-given procedure is followed: 
(i) Required size of a rectangular piece of paper is taken. Stif and glazed 
paper is used here (porous is avoided as parafn penetrates in it). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 47 
(ii) As is shown in Fig. 3.2, the frst fold is made over CC’ and DD’.
Fig. 3.3. Making Paper Tray. 
and the width of the fold is decided by the thickness of the material to be 
embedded. The width should be a few mm more than actual need. 
(iii) Next fold along AA’ and BB’, which is double the width of CC’ and 
DD’. Now fold back along the middle of each of these two faps as 
indicated by EE’ and FF’.
(iv) Make short diagonal creases along EG, E’G’ and FH, F’H’.
(v) Bring one end and one side perpendicular with fold at short diagonal 
crease and turn the resulting fap at the back of the end wall.
(vi) Bring up the opposite side wall and fold its fap back.
(vii) Now fold down upper fap of end wall backward, thus securely locking 
the entire end. 
(viii) Follow the same procedure for opposite end also. 
Trays may also be prepared from thick cellophane (Johansen, 1940). One 
may use small porcelain trays or even solid watch glasses for preparing wax 
blocks. 
Wax-block preparation: Quick work and skillful manipulations are 
required for wax-block preparation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
(i) Smear the glycerine on the inner side of the paper tray or L-shaped metal 
pieces to avoid sticking wax to it. 
(ii) Slightly wet the bottom surface of the paper tray with water and place it 
on a glass sheet. 
(iii) Pour molten wax from a beaker into the paper tray about 3/4 full. Wait till 
the wax forms a thin congealed layer at the bottom of the tray. 
(iv) Transfer the specimens from the infltration bath and arrange them 
by giving proper spacing in congealing wax. Warm spatula and warm 
needles are used here to transfer the specimens. One must work quickly 
at this stage. 
(v) To avoid air bubbles and cracks in the specimen area, melt the thin skin 
of wax that forms at the top surface of the block with a warm spatula 
and carefully pour the molten wax in the region containing the specimen 
which is cooling quickly. Keep the upper surface molten till the area 
around the specimen should be solidifed.
(vi) Sometimes a crust of solid wax may be carried down along with the 
specimen. It is essential to melt this wax with a warm spatula otherwise, 
it creates problems during section cutting. 
(vii) Now the paper tray is allowed to foat on the water surface for cooling till 
the surface of wax becomes sufciently solidifed.
After complete solidifcation of parafn wax, the paper tray is peeled of
and taken out of the wax block which contains sufciently spaced specimens. 
Now, these blocks are kept in the air for some time. If the blocks have been 
kept dry for longer periods, it is necessary to soak the blocks in the mixture 
of glycerol and alcohol for atleast 24 hrs before section cutting. It is not 
advisable to cut the freshly prepared blocks immediately. The blocks should 
be left atleast for 24 hrs to get the temperature stabilised and proceed with 
section cutting. 
Inspite of its advantages, parafn wax has three major faults, these are 
crystalline nature, hydrophobic and relatively high melting point (50°-60°C). 
Numerous attempts have been made to overcome these problems, such as heat 
treatment of wax or additives like asphalt, rubber, ceresin and other waxes are 
used to reduce crystallinity, and stearic acid or glycols are added to decrease 
hydrophobicity (O’Brien and McCully, 1981).
B. Carbowax 
Carbowaxes are polyethylene glycols and these are soluble in water. These 
can be used for both dehydration and infltration. The procedure followed by 
Riopel and Spur (1962) in potato tissues is given below:
(i) The fxed tissues are passed through the 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 and 
70% carbowax400 in water. Keep them for 12 hrs in every step.
(ii) Fill 2/3 of the vial by adding enough pieces of carbowax 1540 to the 70% 
carbowax400. Allow it to stand overnight.  
 
 
 
Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 49 
(iii) Remove the vial caps and put all vials in an oven at 56°C for 24 hrs. 
Gently shake the contents twice during 24 hrs period. 
(iv) Transfer the tissues to the mixture of carbowax1540 and carbowax 400 
(19:1) and keep them in an oven at 56°C for 12 hrs. Give two changes 
with this mixture. 
(v) Maintain the supply of carbowax 1540/400 (19:1) mixture in an oven 
at 50-51°C. Transfer the tissues in this infltration mixture at 56°C in an 
oven for 5-10 mins. 
(vi) Embed the material in a 51°C mixture at room temperature. Allow it to 
cool on a pan of ice water. Since it is soluble, embedded material should 
not be submerged in water (Wade, 1952). 
Riopel and Spurr (1962) used porcelain dishes or plastic boxes for 
embedding. 
C. Celloidin 
Celloidin embedding is adopted for woody material which is not possible to cut 
in parafn embedding. Celloidin causes minimum shrinkage and distortion. It 
is a nitrocellulose substance alternatively known as a soluble gun-cotton or 
pyroxylin (Clayden, 1962). It is highly infammable but non-explosive.
Celloidin is available in the form of tablets or as shreds. The shredded 
form is stored in water. A very good alternative for shred celloidin is the 
Necol celloidin solution formulated by Imperial Chemical Industries Limited, 
Dorset. 
Celloidin embedding is done in the following manner (Johansen, 1940; 
Clayden, 1962): 
(i) As usual, after killing, the plant material should be dehydrated in the 
ethanol series or in the TBA series. In the TBA series, the material 
is transferred to the mixture of 75% tertiary butyl alcohol and 25% 
absolute ethyl alcohol. From this mixture, it is again transferred to a 
mixture of equal parts of tertiary butyl alcohol, absolute alcohol and 
ether. Now the specimen is ready for infltration.
(ii) Mixture of equal parts of ether and absolute alcohol is taken. Celloidin 
solutions of 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10% are prepared in this mixture and kept 
separately in tightly stoppered bottles. 
(iii) Dehydrated material is taken in a mixture of equal parts of ether and 
absolute alcohol, and then transferred to a wide-mouth bottle containing 
2% celloidin. Later the specimen is passed through the diferent grades 
of celloidin up to 10%, allowing one too many days in each grade 
depending on the nature of the material. It requires several weeks for 
proper impregnation and embedding of the material. Some technicians 
apply heat to hasten the impregnation process. 
(iv) Now celloidin blocks are prepared with the help of thick paper. Fold 
the paper along dotted lines and prepare a mould or container (Fig. 
3.3).  
 
 
 
 
50 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
(v) Place the tissue in this mould, with the surface to be cut facing upwards. 
(vi) Fill the mould with 10% celloidin. Care should be taken to see that a 
sufcient margin of celloidin is allowed all around the specimen, so 
that there may not be any problem while cutting the celloidin blocks. 
(vii) Place the mould on a fat surface and then transfer it to a moderately 
deep glass bowl with a well-ftted lid.
(viii) Expose the mould to ether vapours for about three days. Ether vapours 
disperse any bubbles in the celloidin solution. 
(ix) Later replace the ether with chloroform and leave for 1 to 2 days until 
celloidin becomes thickened and hardened. 
(x) Trim of the excess celloidin leaving a good margin around the 
specimen. 
Now celloidin blocks are ready for cutting. These blocks can be stored 
in 70-80% alcohol or in a mixture of glycerine-95% alcohol (equal parts) 
indefnitely without damage to the specimen. Various types of microtomes are 
made for cutting celloidin sections. Leitz base sledge is a heavier microtome, 
and it is better for cutting hard tissue. In this microtome, the knife is fxed 
at an angle, whereas the tissue on the holder moves (Fig. 3.4). Reichert 
sledge microtome is a lighter machine, and it is good for soft tissues. In this 
microtome, the tissue remains stationary whereas the knife moves until the 
tissue is cut. 
Celloidin sections are stained directly without removal of the celloidin 
matrix, which does not interfere with staining. The slides with the sections 
or the individual sections themselves are brought down to water from 70% 
alcohol and then stained. If necessary, the matrix may be removed before fnal 
mounting in Canada balsam. 
3.3.1.2 Plastics 
Embedding in plastics gives good results when compared to parafn wax 
(Steedman, 1960; Sidman et al., 1961; Feder and O’Brien, 1968).
Glycol Methacrylate (GMA) 
Glycol methacrylate (2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate), a monomer mixture, is a 
stable and slightly viscous liquid miscible with almost all organic solvents and 
water. GMA infltrated specimen is embedded in the same medium and this 
can be sectioned conveniently at 4 µm with an ultramicrotome. The sections 
are quickly and easily stuck to glass slides and staining is done in a simple 
pattern. Since the embedding matrix is hydrophilic, it is quite permeable 
to aqueous stains. Without removing the plastic, sections are conveniently 
stained and examined under a microscope. 
Embedding is done in the following manner:
(i) Place the infltrated specimen in a gelatin capsule (no. 00).
(ii) Fill the capsule with GMA monomer mixture (see section 3.2.2C Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 51 
for ingredients). Capsules are tightly capped (oxygen inhibits 
polymerisation). 
(iii) Place the ftted capsules in an oven at 40°C for 1-2 days; the monomer 
mixture starts polymerisation and gives a hard block; place the block in 
an oven at 60°C for an additional day to complete hardening (this step 
may not always be necessary). 
(iv) GMA blocks are trimmed and sectioned with a dry glass knife on an 
ultramicrotome. Sections of 0.5-4 µ thickness are generally the most 
useful. 
(v) Place the section on a drop of distilled water on a microslide. Allow the 
water to evaporate and stain the section the next day. 
For certain enzymological investigations, where polymerisation at 
higher temperatures is unwanted, another plastic JB-4 (Polysciences Inc., 
Washington, PA) is used. Namba et al. (1983) proposed the cold temperature 
glycol methacrylate embedding medium available under the trade name JB-4. 
The procedure is as follows: 
(i) Infltrate the specimen overnight in non-polymerising solution A with a 
catalyzer. 
(ii) Transfer into embedding moulds flled with polymerising plastic 
consisting of: 
(a) Solution A 100 ml
(b) Catalyzer 0.90 g 
(c) Solution B (Polymeriser) 4.0 ml
Polymerization is carried out overnight at 2°C or at room temperature 
(23°C). Cold embedding gives good results since temperature afects enzyme 
localisation quantitatively. 
3.3.1.3 Resins 
Epon mixture is the commonly used resin as it penetrates faster than araldite 
of its low viscosity. The other resins which are being used are given below: 
A. Durcupan (Staubli, 1960; Kushida, 1964) 
Since Durcupan is soluble in water, dehydration is carried out in an ascending 
series of the resin. 
Embedding medium:
Mixture A 
Durcupan 100 ml 
Dodecenyl succinic anhydride 
(DDSA) 234 ml
Mixture B 
Durcupan 100 ml 52 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Nadic methyl anhydride (NMA) 124 ml 
Mixtures A and B are combined in the ratio of 8.2:7.3 at 20°C (Kushida,
1964). 
B. Vestopal W (Ryter and Kellenberger, 1958) 
Vestopal W is employed for preparing very hard blocks (harder than epon 
blocks). It is characterised by rapid penetration and polymerisation. 
The mixture consists of: 
Vestopal W 100 ml 
Benzoyl peroxide (initiator) 1 ml 
Cobalt naphthenate (activator) 0.5 ml 
The initiator and activator must be stored in a cold and dark place to 
prevent decomposition, but they should be replaced after every few months. 
Vestopal ‘N remains good for several months at 4°C. 
Vestopal W is not miscible in ethanol but readily mixed with acetone and 
styrene. For dehydration and embedding, use 30, 70, 95 and 100% acetone, 
again 100% acetone (5-10 mins in each grade) and Vestopal mixture: acetone 
(1:3,1:1,3:1,30 mins in each) and fnally in Vestopal mixture for 1 hr. The 
polymerisation is completed in 12 hrs at 60°C. 
C. Polystyrene (Frangioni and Borgioli, 1979) 
Polystyrene is employed for both light and electron microscopy. 
Polystyrene solution:
Polystyrene 200 g 
Toluene 800 cc
Benzyl alcohol 50 cc 
Dibutyl phthalate 5-10 cc 
First, take the toluene and then add polystyrene (BDH Chemicals Ltd.) in a 
one-liter bottle, seal this hermetically and shake vigorously at regular intervals 
until the solution becomes homogeneous. To this, add benzyl alcohol and 
dibutyl phthalate, and shake again until the solution becomes homogeneous. 
The solution which should be free from air bubbles, transparent and colourless 
is now ready for use. The entire process takes two days. The hardness of the 
polystyrene block depends on the percentage of dibutyl phthalate added to the 
solution. 
Procedure 
(i) After fxation and dehydration, tissues are placed in toluene for 0.5-1 hr.
(ii) Transfer the tissues to the polystyrene solution, spacing them out with a 
needle as soon as they sink to the bottom of the container. Polyethylene 
ice trays are suitable containers for forming the blocks since they are 
toluene permeable for speedier evaporation and fexible for easy removal  
 
 
 
Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 53 
of the hardened blocks. 
(iii) Keep the containers in the oven at 58°C for 48-72 hrs; toluene evaporates, 
and blocks become solid but not completely dry. Blocks should be 
transparent and colourless, and the embedded tissue translucent. 
(iv) Remove the containers from the oven and cool them, and store them in 
the refrigerator, if desired. 
(v) Remove the block from the container and cut it into pyramidal pieces 
containing tissue fragments with a razor blade. 
(vi) With the help of a drop of polystyrene solution or with Plexiglass afx 
each pyramid to a rigid support. 
Frangioni and Borgioli (1979) found that toluene is the most suitable 
solvent for embedding solution when compared to others such as benzene 
which shows high toxicity while xylene, chloroform, amyl acetate, ethyl 
acetate, and other solvents have a slow rate of evaporation. Benzyl alcohol 
increases the penetration of polystyrene into the tissues and dibutyl phthalate 
renders the block plastic which facilitates smooth cutting. 
3.3.1.4 Frozen Section Technique 
The frozen section technique is based on the principle of freezing the tissue 
directly to harden it, and cutting the sections while the tissue is frozen. This 
technique has several advantages. These are: (a) it is a time-saving method 
as compared to parafn and celloidin methods; (b) since the tissue is not 
dehydrated, the cells retain a life-like appearance with little shrinkage; and (c) 
tissues can be -sectioned directly without any fxation. However, this technique 
has some drawbacks such as the serial sections cannot be taken and there is no 
satisfactory process of holding loose tissues before freezing. Special models 
of microtome are available to cut the frozen sections. In older models, ether 
was used for freezing and the tissue was usually soaked for some hours in 
gum, dextrin or sugar solutions to prevent ice crystal formation. In the modern 
technique, CO2 jets are used on the microtome knife for cooling. The sections 
are afxed to the slide by using some glue. 
A freeze-drying apparatus, devised with liquid nitrogen, permitted section 
cutting within 5 hrs after the fresh tissue was obtained (Sharma and Sharma, 
1972). Another microtome is designed for cutting frozen sections in which the 
knife moves across the tissue, in contrast to the sledge type in which the tissue 
is moved while the knife is stationary. In a modifcation for obtaining thin 
sections from unfxed (fresh) tissues for histochemical staining, a microtome 
with an apparatus for simultaneous cooling of the knife with the freezing stage 
is used. For cutting frozen sections on a parafn microtome, the specimen is 
fxed on the object holder in a drop of water by freezing it in dry ice in a box. 
Chips of dry ice are wedged between the metal disc and the object clamp of 
the microtome. 54 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
3.3.2 Sectioning and Microtomy 
For section cutting, rocking microtome for celloidin sections and rotary 
microtome for parafn sections are recommended. Generally, modern 
microtomes are precision instruments that have been designed to cut 
the sections uniformly for detailed examination under the microscope. 
Microtomes can be classifed into manual microtomes, semi-automatic 
microtomes and automatic microtomes (Mohammad and Mohamed, 2012). 
Manual microtomes, such as rocking microtome, rotatory microtome, 
sledge microtome, freezing microtome, vibrating microtome, cryostat, saw 
microtome, and hand microtome whereas automatic microtomes including 
laser microtome, computer microtomes and ultra-thin computer microtome 
are all commercially available. Since the variety of microtomes available 
in the market selecting the right instrument is very important for producing 
the best results we expected. Some of the commonly used microtomes are 
described below: 
3.3.2.1 Rotary Microtomes 
The rotary microtome was originally designed by Late Professor Minot and is 
sometimes called the Minot microtome. These microtomes are manufactured 
by various companies, viz., Leitz, Reichert, Spencer, Measuring and Scientifc 
Equipment (M.S.E.), Baird & Tatlock, etc. Rotary microtome is made with 
stationary knife holders and a moving block holder clamp. The adjustment 
which controls the thickness of sections is usually situated on the front panel 
of the microtome (Fig. 3.4). These machines are heavy and ideal for cutting 
hard tissues and taking serial sections. The section thickness of 0.5 to 0.6 µm 
can be taken with the rotary microtomes. Sectioning of parafn wax embedded 
tissues is normally cut within the range from 3-5 µm whereas resin sections 
are attained between 0.5 to 1 µm (George and James, 2004).
Fig. 3.4. Rotary Microtome.Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 55 
3.3.2.2 Sledge Microtome 
Sledge microtome is used for cutting celloidin sections and routine parafn 
sections. The two most popular machines of this type are manufactured 
by Leitz Ltd. (London) and M.S.E. (London). These microtomes are also 
known as base sledge microtomes. They are heavier and ftted with a heavy 
sledge carriage carrying block holder which is movable whereas the knife 
is stationary, held by two clamps. The block-holder is mounted on a steel 
carriage that slides backward and forward against a fxed horizontal knife. The 
knife-holding clamps are adjustable and allow the tilt and the angle (slant) of 
the knife of the block to be adjusted easily (Ellis, 2000).
While cutting on a Leitz microtome the block is raised automatically 
when the carriage is moved forward and moves a short lever ftted on one side 
of the base (Fig. 3.5). In the MSE model, the block is lifted when a handwheel 
is turned manually. The thickness of sections can be set at 1-2 µ. Since the 
sledge micro tomes are heavy and rigid, these are good for cutting the hard 
tissues. 
Fig. 3.5. Leitz Base Sledge Microtome.
3.3.2.3 Ultramicrotome 
For ultrathin sectioning (0.1-0.01 µm), several models of ultramicrotome 
are currently available. The earliest attempt was made in ultrathin sectioning 
by Von Ardenne dating back to 1939 (Sharma and Sharma, 1972). Wachtel 
et al. (1966) gave a detailed historical account and principles of various 
ultramicrotomes. The frst suitable model was manufactured by Ivan Sorvall 
Inc. in 1953 commonly known as the Porter-Blum microtome (Sorvell-MT56 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
-1). The principle of its operation was based on a system of screw thread, 
lever arm and proper bearings. Due to its simplicity of working, it did not 
require a complicated maintenance process. In the slightly improved model, 
the specimen holder, which is of a collet type screwed at the free end of the 
aluminium rod, is moved vertically across a glass or diamond knife. On the 
return stroke, the specimen end of the aluminium rod is allowed to follow the 
trajectory of a parallelogram. Coarse and fne adjustments are provided for 
thick sectioning whereas for ultrathin sections, a mechanical device is arranged 
to advance the block towards the knife. To induce thermal expansion of the 
aluminium rod, an electric lamp is used. In the latter model viz., Sorvall-MT-2, 
the whole operation is much more compact; the knife stage allows controlled 
motion of the knife, permitting the proper cutting of ultrathin sections. Two 
controls are provided to adjust the thickness of sections between 100A to 4 
I-1m. 
In the Huxley model (1959, Cambridge Instrument Co.), steel leaves are 
employed for hinging the arm. It is based on a mechanical advance with a 
double-leaf spring suspension system. In this, though the gravitational pull 
is responsible for section cutting, one oil-flled dashpot controls the rate of 
downward movement of the cutting arm (Watchtel et al., 1966). 
In the ultramicrotome of LKB-Producter AB-Stockholm, fuctuation in 
thickness of sections is eliminated to a signifcant extent; a thermal advance 
system is operating in this instrument. A cantilever arm is the principal 
moving part, one end of the arm holds the specimen block, and the other end 
is attached to a leaf spring joined to the base of the microtome. This spring 
causes the up and down motion of the bar. Thermal control of the cutting 
arm guides the advance of the block against the knife. The gravitational force 
controls the cutting stroke, and a motor regulates the motion and the upward 
movement. An electromagnetic force, which acts during the return stroke, 
causes the fexing of the base below the knife holder necessary to ensure the 
by-pass of the cutting surface and knife-edge during the stroke. Sections can 
be cut as thin as 10 nm with the help of DuPont Sorvall JB-4 microtome, USA.
3.3.2.4 Cryostat Microtome 
Cryostat microtome is a device used to maintain low cryogenic temperatures, 
under which samples can be put and taken into the sections (Fig. 3.6). A deep 
freeze cabinet in which microtome (rotary type) is ftted. The cabinet is also 
equipped with a fuorescent light and a fan to ensure the circulation of cool air. 
The temperature is regulated between -10o
C to -40o
C. This can be used as an 
alternative to a freezing microtome for rapid sectioning of 2-16 µm thickness 
of sections. Block holders, on which tissue is frozen, are transferred to the 
microtome where the cutting is performed. After sectioning, sections are 
taken onto the warm microslide, then staining and mounting are performed 
more rapidly. Cryostat microtome has been used mostly for animal tissues Botanical Microtechnique and Microtomy 57 
and plant tissues as well. The microtome may be adjusted to cut sections at the 
range of 2-16µm (Bancroft and Gamble, 2008).
Fig. 3.6. Cryostat Microtome. 
3.3.2.5 Computerised Microtome 
The computerised microtome is equipped with an advanced rapid thermostatic 
switch, semiconductor freezing, cryoscalpel and cryoplate (Fig. 3.7). This 
microtome can perform the rapid freezing sectioning or routine parafn 
sections (dual purpose). The temperature of cryoscalpel and cryoplate 
is ranging from 0ºC to -18ºC and -10 ºC to -45ºC respectively. It can take 
sections of 1-25 µm thickness.
Fig. 3.7. Computerised Microtome. 
A variety of microtomes and knives are commercially available in the market 
and choosing the appropriate microtome is of prime importance to achieve 
good results without distortion of tissue of the biological samples. 4
 Stains (Dyes) 
Stain is a chemically defned substance that is used to colour biological 
specimens, whereas dyes are crude preparations. In other words, stains are 
specifed dyes used to make the structural details of cells and tissues more 
precise and accurate. In biochemistry, a variety of stains has been used to stain 
the DNA, Proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates.
Classifcation of stains: Stains are classifed based on their source and 
nature. Some stains are derived from mineral sources. For example, Ruthenium 
red (for Pectin stain) is an ammoniated oxychloride of ruthenium. Organic 
stains are divided depending on whether they are artifcially synthesised or 
obtained from some natural sources. Most of the synthetic dyes are coal-tar 
dyes and these are again divided based on the molecular confguration of their 
chromophores which are responsible for giving colouration. Major kinds of 
stains are given below:
1. Nitroso stains: In these stains’ nitroso group (-NO) attaches to benzene 
ring [(C6H6); Fig. 4.1A], e.g., Fast green O, Naphthol green B, etc.
2. Nitro stains: The nitro group (-NO2) is a chromophore, attached to 
benzene ring (Fig. 4.1B), e.g., Picric acid, Aurantia, Naphthol yellow, 
etc.
3. Azo stains: The azo group (-N = N-) is found in these dyes (Fig. 4.1C). 
All the dyes of this group are the derivatives of azobenzene.
4. Quinone-imine stains: In the quinone (C6H4O2), two bivalent oxygen 
atoms may replace two monovalent hydrogen atoms (Fig. 4.1D). In these 
stains, quinoid benzene ring is attached to nitrogen atom.
i. Indamines: In the indamine group (-N=), two benzene rings are 
attached to the nitrogen atom; one of these being in the quinoid form 
(Fig. 4.1E), e.g., Bindschedler’s green, Toluylene blue, etc.
ii. Indophenols: Two benzene rings are attached to nitrogen atom; one of 
these benzene rings is phenolic and the other is in quinoid form (Fig. 
4.1F).
iii. Thiazins: In these, two benzene rings are further joined together by a 
sulfur atom, forming three closed rings of atoms (Fig. 4.1G). 
iv. Oxazins: (Fig. 4.2A) – e.g., Gallocyanin, Nile blue sulphate, Celestian 
blue B. 
 
 
 
 
60 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
A. Nitroso phenol B. Nitro phenol C. Azobenzene
D. Quinoid benzene E. Indamine
F. Indophenol G. Thiazin
Fig. 4.1. A-F. Molecular confguration of stains.
5. Azins: A typical molecular confguration is given in Fig. 4.2B.
v. Amino azins, e.g., Neutral red, Neutral violet, etc.
vi. Safranins, e.g., Safranin O, Azocarmine O, etc.
vii. Indulins, e.g., Fast blue and Nigrosin W.
6. Phenyl methane stains: In these, methyl group is attached to benzene 
ring. 
i. Diphenyl methanes (Fig. 4.2C), e.g., Auramine O.
ii. Diamino triphenyl methanes, e.g., Fast green FCF.
iii. Triamino triphenyl methanes - e.g., Acid fuchsins, basic fuchsins, 
aniline blue, methyl green, etc.
iv. Hydroxy triphenyl methanes - e.g., Aurin.
v. Diphenyl naphthyl methanes - e.g., Victoria blue R and nile blue.
7. Methane stains
i. Pyronins (Fig. 4.2D) - e.g., Acridine red 3B, pyronin Y and pyronin
ii. Rhodamines - e.g., Rhodamine B and rhodamine 6G.
iii. Fluorescein derivatives - e.g., Fluorescein isothio-cynate, Cosin and 
erythrosin.iv. Phthalein derivatives (Phenolphthaleins and sulpho-naphthaleins) -
e.g., phenolphthalein, bromothymol blue and bromophenol blue.
v. Acridines - e.g., Acridine orange, acrifavine and phosphine 3R.
8. Anthraquinone stains: The anthraquinone dyes include derivatives of 
anthracene, through its oxidation product anthraquinone (Fig. 4.2E).
9. Thiazole stains: A small group of dyes of rather complex formula contain 
the thiazole ring (Fig. 4.2F).
10. Quinoline stains (Fig. 4.2G) Quinoline yellow, pynacynol, etc.
11. Phthalocyanine: These are complex chemical compounds, similar in 
structure to chlorophyll with C6H4C2N2 surrounding a central metal 
atom, usually copper.
 
Stains (Dyes) 61 
A. Oxazin B. Azin
C. Diphenyl methane D. Pyronin 
E. Anthraquinone F. Thiazole
G. Quinoline group
Fig. 4.2. A-G. Molecular confguration of stains. 
 
 
 
 
62 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Based on the type of study of the plant material, there are large number 
of stains under use. For example, a combination of safranin and fast green 
(double staining) is prepared to study the anatomical and embryological 
aspects, crystal violet for chromosomal studies, methylene blue for bacteria 
and delafeld’s haematoxylin with counterstain of eosin for zoological and 
clinical works. Most of the dyes used nowadays in biological techniques are 
prepared from coal tar.
4.1 Natural Dyes 
Natural dyes are still used by botanists. These are derived from plants 
belonging to Caesalpiniaceae and from cochineal insects. 
4.1.1 Natural Dyes from Plant Origin 
A. Brazllin: This dye is obtained from ‘brazil wood’ especially from 
Caesalpinia crista and C. echiniata (Johansen, 1940). Chemically it is 
closely related to haematoxylin (Fig. 4.3A). It is neither so active nor so 
strong. It reacts only after mordanting with ferric ammonium sulfate. It 
is used to stain smears.
A B 
Fig. 4.3. A. Brazilin (C16H14O5), B. Brazilein (C16H12O5).
Brazilin 0.5 g
70% ethyl alcohol 100 ml
Allow the above stain to ripen for a week. Keep the container well 
stoppered and it should be away from light and air. Brazilin solution is 
colourless, but it becomes red when it is exposed to air and oxidised into the 
dye brazilein (Fig. 4.3B, Lillie, 1977).
B. Haematoxylin: It is obtained from the heart woods of Haematoxylon 
campechianum Linn. In fact, it is a colourless solid extract, but it is 
readily oxidised by atmospheric oxygen and forms reddish acidic dye 
haematein (Baker, 1969; Lillie, 1977; O’Brien and McCully, 1981).  
 
 
 
Stains (Dyes) 63 
Haematoxylin is sold in a partially oxidised form as a brown powder 
and it is a mixture of haematoxylin and haematein. It is homologous 
to brazilin, but it contains additional hydroxyl group (Fig. 4.4A, B). 
Haematein is one of the most important stains in plant microtechnique 
since it forms complexes (chelates) with the complex cations formed 
when salts of iron or aluminium are dissolved in water. The chelates bind 
to acidic sites in the tissues so that chelates behave like a basic dye. These 
salts of iron and aluminium are known as mordants because they provide 
sites for dye attachment. The stained sites are most resistant to ethanol 
during post-staining dehydration. So, it is necessary to prepare the stain 
with salts like iron (in ferric form), aluminium and copper. Based on type 
of salts used, haematoxylin solutions are of the following fve types.
A B 
Fig. 4.4. A. Haematoxylin (C16H14O6), B. Haematein (C16H12O6).
(i) Heidenhain’s iron haematoxylin: It is prepared in three ways:
(a) Simply a solution of 0.5 g of haematoxylin dissolved in 100 ml of 
distilled water.
(b) A stock solution is prepared by dissolving 10 g of haematoxylin in 100 
ml of absolute alcohol. From this, 5% of solution in distilled water 
is prepared for staining. The solution is kept for few days to oxidise 
(ripe) into haematein. The ripening process may be hastened by placing 
the solution in very wide evaporating petridishes and exposing to a 
powerful quartz mercury-vapour arc for about 45 minutes. Petridishes 
are placed 2 ft away from arc and the solution is stirred frequently 
during exposure. This stock solution may be spoiled at higher 
temperatures. Metallic flm is formed on the surface of the solution as, 
it indicates spoilage of solution. It should be discarded when it turns to 
brown in colour.
(c) The following solution is prepared which is more stable than above 
two:64 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Haematoxylin 0.5 g
10% absolute alcohol 5 ml
Methyl cellosolve 100 ml
Distilled water 50 ml
Tap water containing calcium compounds 50 ml
The solution is shaken to get rich wine-red colour. If the colour does not 
appear, add a pinch of sodium bicarbonate and shake vigorously. Ripening 
occurs immediately in this solution. It does not spoil at high temperature and 
may be stored for quite a long period. 
In Heidenhain’s iron haematoxylin, ferric ammonium sulphate is used 
as mordant. This stain is commercially available and gives good results in 
morphological studies.
(ii) Delafeld’s haematoxylin: In this, dye and mordant are combined. It is 
prepared in the following manner:
Solution A 100 ml of saturated aqueous solution of
 aluminium ammonium sulphate.
Solution B 1 g haematoxylin crystals added in 6 ml
 of 95% ethyl alcohol.
Now solution B is added to solution A drop by drop. It is exposed to 
light and air for four days and fltered afterwards. Later, 25 ml methyl alcohol 
and 25 ml glycerol are added. The solution is exposed to air for at least two 
months till the colour is sufciently dark. It is fltered and stored in tightly 
stoppered bottle.
(iii) Harris’ haematoxylin: It resembles the Delafelds in its colour efects, 
but its preparation is entirely diferent:
Haematoxylin crystals 5 g
Aluminium ammonium sulphate 3 g
50% ethyl alcohol 1000 ml
Both dye and aluminium ammonium sulphate are dissolved in ethyl 
alcohol by heating. Later 6 g of mercuric oxide (red powder) is added and 
boiled for 30 minutes. It is cooled and fltered. Now it is brought to original 
volume of 1 liter by adding 50% ethyl alcohol. Later 10 drops of hydrochloric 
acid are added to acidify the solution.
(iv) Mayer’s haematoxylin: It is recommended for nuclei of flamentous 
algae and fungi:
Haematoxylin crystals 1 g
Distilled water 1000 ml
Sodium iodide 2 g
Aluminium potassium sulphate 50 g
Thymol (to prevent growth of mould) 1 crystal 
 
 
 
 
 
Stains (Dyes) 65 
The above ingredients are mixed thoroughly. Excellent results are 
obtained by diluting the stain 10 times with distilled water. This diluted stain 
is allowed to stand overnight and later it is used.
(v) Ehrlich’s haematoxylin: It has been extensively used along with safranin 
for woody stems:
Haematoxylin 1 g
Aluminium Potassium sulphate excess amount
Glacial acetic acid 5 ml
Glycerine 50 ml
Absolute ethyl alcohol 50 ml
Distilled water 50 ml
The solution is prepared and kept in dark place until the colour becomes 
deep red or it may be ripened by exposing to quartz mercury lamp for 3 or 
4 hours. Wood sections are initially stained with safranin (counterstain). 
Later these are washed with acid water and tap water. Now the sections are 
transferred to Ehrlich’s haematoxylin and allowed to remain for 5-30 minutes. 
Later sections are washed with 35% alcohol and passed through alcoholic 
series for dehydration.
4.1.2 Dyes from Animal Origin 
Cochineal and its derivatives: Cochineal is a yellowish-red powder obtained 
by grinding the dried bodies of female cochineal insects (Coccus cacti), a 
tropical American Homoptera living on the plant Opuntia coccinellifera. 
Carmine is bright red in colour, and it is obtained by adding alum to cochineal. 
It is commonly used in cytological studies. The oxidised form of carmine is 
known as carmein. Another derivative of cochineal is carminic acid. It is used 
as an indicator, yellow in acid, red-purple in alkali (Long, 1961).
Carminic acid (Michrome no. 214) is obtained by extracting cochineal 
with boiling water followed by treatment with lead acetate and decomposition 
of lead carminate with sulphuric acid (Gatenby and Beans, 1950). This dye 
belongs to the anthraquinone group and has the formula C22H20O13, the 
molecular weight being 492.38 (Fig. 4.5).
Fig. 4.5. Carminic Acid (C22H20O13). 
66 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
The chromophoric property is attributed to its quinonoid linkage 
and auxochromes are also present. It is soluble in water in all proportions 
(Gurr, 1960), and is a dibasic acid and claims to be nearly insoluble at its 
isoelectric point, pH 4-4.5 (Baker, 1950). If it is dissolved on the acid side of 
its isoelectric point, it acquires a positive charge, behaves like a basic dye and 
stains chromatin. But if it is dissolved in alkaline solution, it behaves as an 
acid dye (see also Sharma and Sharma, 1972).
4.2 Coal-Tar Dyes 
Some of the important coal-tar dyes are given below alphabetically by 
mentioning their chemical nature, acidic and basic nature of dye, and solubility 
in water and 95% ethyl alcohol. 
4.2.1 Acid Fuchsin 
Acid fuchsin is a acidic stain. It is a sulfonated derivative of basic fuchsin 
and belongs to triamino-triphenyl methane group (rosanilins). The generally 
accepted formula of one of the homologs present in acid fuchsin, namely the 
disodium salt of rosanillin trisulfonic acid, is C20H17N3O9S3Na2 (Fig. 4.6). A
1% solution in 70% alcohol is preferable and 0.5% to 1% solution in distilled 
water is equally good. It is used to stain the cortex, pith parenchyma, cell 
walls (cellulose), mitochondria, etc. If the stain is prepared in 70% alcohol, it 
is essential to diferentiate (removal of excess stain) the tissue in a saturated 
solution of picric acid in 70% alcohol for a minute and then rinse in 70% 
alcohol until a bright red colour is obtained (Johansen, 1940). Post-staining 
dehydration is done very quickly because colour of stain vanishes in higher 
grades of alcohols.
Fig. 4.6. Acid Fuchsin (C20H17N3O9S3Na2).Stains (Dyes) 67 
4.2.2 Aniline Blue WS 
Aniline Blue is a acidic stain (Fig. 4.7A, B). It belongs to triamino-triphenyl 
methane group (Lillie, 1969). In fact, the commercially available Aniline blue 
WS is a mixture of water blue and methyl blue (cotton blue). A 1% solution 
in 90% ethyl alcohol is preferred. Another method of its preparation is to 
dissolve enough stain in methyl alcohol followed by addition of clove oil and 
absolute alcohol as diluents. Then clear the material with clove oil and wash it 
with xylol and mount it in Canada balsam (Johansen, 1940).
A 
B 
Fig. 4.7. A. Aniline Blue (C32H2N3O3S3), B. Methyl Blue (C37H27N3O9S3Na2).
It is served as a good counterstain with safranin for plant tissues. It is 
good for staining flamentous algae and mycorrhizal fungi.
4.2.3 Basic Fuchsin (Pararosanilin) 
Basic fuchsin is a basic stain and belongs to triamino-triphenyl methane 
group. Its solubility in water is 0.26% and 5.93% in ethyl alcohol (see Table 
4.1). A saturated aqueous solution is prepared for staining.68 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
It is a powerful nuclear dye and stains mucin (mucopolysaccharides) and 
bacteria.
4.2.4 Chlorazol Black E 
Chlorazol black is an acidic dye of the trisazo group and has a molecular 
weight of 781.738 (Michrome no. 92). Its formula is C34H25N9O7S2Na2 (Fig. 
4.8). It is highly soluble in water and sparingly in alcohol. Being an acidic dye, 
the basis of its stainability with chromosomes is not clear, but it is probable 
that it stains the protein component (Sharma and Sharma, 1972).
A solution of chlorazol black E in alcohol has been applied by Nebel 
(cited in Sharma and Sharma, 1972) as an auxilliary stain for chromosomes, 
along with acetic-carmine, this dye was applied after fxation prior to acetic￾carmine staining and proved efective for Rosaceae members where ordinary 
acetic-carmine stain was inefective. It is employed singly and is efective for 
the study of root-tip chromosomes of plants.
Fig. 4.8. Chlorazol Black E (C34H25N9O7S2Na2).
4.2.5 Congo Red 
Congo red is an acidic stain and belongs to azo group (Fig. 4.9). It is not soluble 
in water and its solubility in ethyl alcohol is 0.19%. A solution of congo red 
is prepared in weak alcohol. It should be used last when it is employed in 
combination with other stains. The post-staining dehydration of tissue is done 
as rapidly as possible.
Fig. 4.9. Congo Red.Stains (Dyes) 69 
Congo red is a cytoplasmic stain in plant technique. It also stains cellulose 
and mucin.
4.2.6 Crystal Violet (Gentian Violet) 
Crystal violet is a basic stain (Fig. 4.10). This dye is a hexamethyl 
pararosanilin. Its solubility in water is 1.68% and in ethyl alcohol 13.87%. 
It serves as an indicator in the pH range 0.0 to 1.8 changing from yellow in 
the acid to the usual violet-blue of aqueous solutions (Eastman, 1966). A 1% 
solution in distilled water is prepared. It is better to use freshly prepared stain. 
Since the crystal violet is quickly washed out in dehydrating alcohols, one 
should either mordant the stain or dissolve the stain in clove oil. The clove 
oil solution is kept in a dropping bottle. Another method of preparation is to 
make a saturated solution in clove oil and add a few drops of this solution to 
a staining dish which is full of xylene. This mixture is very unstable; hence it 
needs addition of more drops of stain to maintain the strength of stain.
Fig. 4.10. Crystal Violet (C25N30N3Cl).
It is the best stain for cytological studies and widely used in bacteriology.
4.2.7 Erythrosin Bluish 
Erythrosin B is an acidic dye (Fig. 4.11). It is a tetraiodo compound 
corresponding to the tetrabromo compound of typical eosin (Conn, 1936). Its 
solubility in water is upto 11.10% and in ethyl alcohol 1.87%. Botanist used 
this dye in place of eosin. Like eosin, it serves as a fuorescent indicator. It is 
also employed as a contrast stain for haernatoxylin and certain blue and violet 
nuclear stains. It is a good counterstain to crystal violet in certain cytological 
methods (Johansen, 1932). 
Use 1% solution in 95% alcohol or clove oil. It stains very quickly – 10 
in clove oil and 3 mins in alcohol. It is an excellent stain for gelatinous sheath 
of Nostoc.70 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Fig. 4.11. Erythrosin (C20H6O5I4Na2).
4.2.8 Fast Green FCF 
Fast green FCF is an acidic stain and belongs to diarnino-triphenyl group (Fig. 
4.12). Its solubility is 16.04% in water and 0.33% in ethyl alcohol. A 0.5% fast 
green is prepared in a mixture of equal parts of methyl cellosolve, absolute 
alcohol and clove oil (Johansen, 1940). A 0.5% fast green is also prepared 
in 95% ethyl alcohol (Sass, 1967) or in 90% ethyl alcohol. It is a dark-green 
solution and used in diferential staining in combination with safranin.
Fig. 4.12. Fast Green FCF (C37H34N2O16S3Na2).
4.2.9 Fluorone Black 
Fluorone black was previously used in acid alcoholic solution by Turchini 
et al. (1944) as a specifc reagent for deoxyribonucleic acid. It was also used 
in ammonical solution by Lipp and Ratzenbock (1963) as a specifc stain for  
 
 
Stains (Dyes) 71 
haemoglobin and erythrocytes. It serves as an excellent nuclear stain which 
reacts with basic nucleoprotein (see also Lillie et al., 1975).
4.2.10 Lacmoid 
Lacmoid (also known as resorcin blue) is a blue acidic dye of the oxazine 
seties (Fig. 4.13). Its empirical formula is C12H6NO3Na, the molecular weight 
being 235.173. It can be obtained by heating resorcinol with sodium nitrate 
until the smell of ammonia is no longer present. Like carmine, it can be used 
as an acid-base indicator and, when dissolved in acetic acid, it behaves as a 
basic dye. Unlike carmine, it is soluble in water and alcohol.
Fig. 4.13. Lacmoid (C12H6NO3Na).
Darlington and La Cour (1968) used it in place of carmine and 
acetic lacmoid solution, and it has been found to be very efective for the 
chromosomes of root-tips, embryo sacs and pollen grains. For comparatively 
compact tissues like root-tips, heating in acetic lacmoid-HCl mixture is 
needed prior to squashing for dissolution of the middle lamella.
4.2.11 Light Green SF 
Light green SF is a derivative of brilliant green, which is sulfonated; hence it 
is an acidic dye. It belongs to diamino-triphenyl methane group. Its solubility 
in water is 20.35% and in alcohol 0.82%. A 0.2% solution is strong enough 
to stain the tissue. Staining is rapid and, therefore, it should not be allowed to 
react for long time. In diferential staining, this stain reduces safranin. Hence 
it should not be allowed to react for too long. 
There are many methods of Light green SF preparation (Johansen, 1940): 
i. Light green SF solution is prepared in 95% ethyl alcohol.
ii. The stain is dissolved in absolute alcohol and diluted with clove oil.
iii. A saturated solution of light green SF is prepared either in water or 
alcohol and later it is acidulated with hydrochloric or acetic acid. It 
works as good diferential stain for lignifed cell walls.
Light green SF is a good cytoplasmic stain, extensively employed for 
cellulose walls and some flamentous algae. By combining this stain with 
alcoholic Sudan IV, suberised and cutinised tissues are diferentiated from 
lignifed tissues.72 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
4.2.12 Malachite Green (Emerald Green or Light Green E) 
Malachite green is a weak basic stain, and it belongs to diamino-triphenyl 
methane group. A 0.5% solution is prepared in distilled water or ethyl alcohol. 
Its chemical formula is C23H252Cl2 and molecular weight 364.926 (Fig. 4.14). 
It is used singly or in combination with 1% aqueous safranin. If it is used 
singly, the specimen is kept in this stain for one minute. If double, stain is 
used, the specimen is kept in this stain for 20 seconds followed by 20 minutes 
in safranin.
Fig. 4.14. Malachite Green (C23H25N2Cl2).
Malachite green stains all histological elements such as cell walls, 
endodermis, cytoplasm, nuclei and chloroplasts. Double staining is used to 
study the pathological specimens.
4.2.13 Methyl Green (Light Green) 
Methyl green is a basic dye. Its chemical formula is C26H33N3Cl2 and 
molecular weight 458.488 (Fig. 4.15). Combining with acid fuchsin, it is
Fig. 4.15. Methyl Green (C26H33N3Cl2).	 	 	 	
 
 
 
Stains (Dyes) 73 
useful for staining the xylem. Generally, 1% aqueous solution is prepared for 
staining. It stains chromatin, nuclei and lignifed tissues.
4.2.14	 Methylene Blue (Loefer’s Methylene Blue)
Methylene blue is a basic dye and theoretically it is a tetramethyl thionin (Fig. 
4.16). Its solubility in water is 3.55% and in alcohol 1.48%. The methylene 
blue of commerce is generally a double salt, the chloride of zinc and methylene 
blue (Lillie, 1977). However, zinc salt is toxic, so zinc-free methylene blue 
chloride is recommended for medicinal purposes. The zinc double salt is less 
soluble, particularly in alcohol, so it is less desirable:
Methylene blue 0.5 g
1% Potassium hydroxide solution 1 ml
Alcohol 30 ml
Distilled water 100 ml
Fig. 4.16. Methylene Blue (C16H18N3SCl).
Slightly warm water is taken to which add methylene blue and stir it. 
Other ingredients are added later, and solution is fltered for use.
Methylene blue is an important bacteriological stain and nuclear stain. It 
also stains yeast (Clayden, 1962).Table 4.1. Properties of Some Common Stains
Dye Acidic/
Basic
Molecular 
Weight
Solubility Alsborption 
maxima
(nano-meters)
Diachrome (or) 
Fluorochrome
Metachromatic Important 
Biological 
substances stained 
by the dye
Acid fushsin Acidic 585.560 Soluble in water and in 546 Fluorochrome Metachromatic Cell walls 
ethanol giving red 
fuorescence
(cellulose), 
mitochondria
Acridine Basic 302 Soluble in water (5%) 
and glycerol (4%) at 
15oC
497 Fluorochrome Metachromatic DNA, RNA
Aniline blue Acidic 737.756 Water soluble 600 Giving yellow 
fuorescence
-- Callose
Auramine O Basic 303.844 Soluble in ethanol at 
26oC
434 Fluorochrome 
giving yellow 
green fuorescence
-- Cutin, waxes
Azure B Basic 305.840 Soluble in water, 648 Diachrome Metachromatic Nucleic acids, 
sparingly in ethanol lignin, chitin, etc.
Basic fuchsin Basic 323.834 Soluble in water 545 -- -- --
Pararosanilin (0.26%) and in absolute 
alcohol (5.93%) at 
26oC
Magenta I Basic 337.861 Soluble in water 
(0.39%) and in absolute 
alcohol (8.16%)
550 Diachrome -- Polysaccharides, 
nucleic acids, lignin
74 Plant Techniques: Theory and PracticeMagenta II Basic 351.888 -- 554
Bromophenol 
blue
Acidic 581.101 Soluble in water, 
methanol, ethanol and 
benzene
585-590 Diachrome -- Proteins
Chlorazol 
black E
Acidic 782 Soluble in methyl 
cellosolve
598-602 Diachrome -- Cellulose, 
hemicelluloses
Congo red Acidic 696.696 Soluble in ethyl 
alcohol, insoluble in 
497 Diachrome -- Cytoplasm, 
cellulose, mucin
water
Crystal violet Basic 407.996 Soluble in ethyl alcohol 
(8.75%), water (9%) 
and methyl cellosolve 
(7.5%)
590 Diachrome -- Cytological studies
Eosin B Acidic 624.098 Water soluble at 15oC 516-519 Diachrome -- Used as counter￾stain for 
haematoxylin
Erythrosin B Acidic 879.890 Soluble in water 
(11.10%), glycerol 
(12%) and ethyl 
alcohol (1.875)
15-520 Diachrome -- Gelatines sheath of 
Nostoc
Fast green 
FCF
Acidic 808.87 Water soluble, 
sparingly soluble in 
ethanol
622-228 Diachrome -- Proteins, cellulose, 
histones
(Contd.)
Stains (Dyes) 75 Table 4.1. (Contd.)
Dye Acidic/Basic Molecular 
Weight
Solubility Alsborption 
maxima
(nano-meters)
Diachrome (or) 
Fluorochrome
Metachromatic Important 
Biological 
substances stained 
by the dye
Haematoxylin Basic 356.336 Soluble in water 
(10%) ethanol 
(10%), glycerol 
(20%)
440 Diachrome -- DNA, 
Phospholipids
I acmoid 
(Resorcin 
blue)
Acidic 235.173 Soluble in organic 
solvents and in water
611 Diachrome -- Callose
Malachite Basic 364.926 Soluble in water 617-619 Diachrome -- DNA 
green (105, clove Oil 
(10%), alcohol 
(8.5%) and 
cellosolve (8.5%)
Methyl green Basic -- Water soluble 629 Giving and 
fuorescence
-- DNA 
Rhodamine B Basic 479.029 Soluble in ethanol 
(1.5%) and water 
(0.8%) at 26oC
543-556.5 Giving pink 
fuorescence
-- Lipids
Safranin O Basic 350.861 Soluble in ethyl 
alcohol (3%), 
cellosolve (5%) and 
glycerol (3.5%)
520 Diachrome Metachromatic 
(orange)
Lignin, suberin, 
chromosomes, 
nucleoli, 
centrosomes, etc.
76 Plant Techniques: Theory and PracticeSudan dyes 522-529 Diachrome -- Fats
Sudan IV Acidic 380.456 Soluble in ethyl, 
alcohol (0.09%); 
insoluble in water)
Acetyl sudan Acidic 422.492 -- -- Diachrome -- Myelin, lipofuscins, 
IV ceroid, chromate 
retinal lipids and 
frozen sections 
of adrenal, cortex 
lipids 
Oil and EGN Acidic 394.483 Soluble in acetone, -- Diachrome -- Histological stain
benzene and toluene, 
ethyl alcohol, linseed 
oil; sparingly soluble 
in ethanol, insoluble 
in water 
Thrinine Basic 263.759 Soluble in both 610 Diachrome Metachromatic Chromosomes of 
water and alcohol animal cells 
(1%), and cellosolve 
(10%)
Toluidine Basic 305.840 Soluble in water and 626 Diachrome Metachromatic Nucleic acids, 
blue O ethanol lignin, phenolics, 
sulphonated and 
carboxylated 
polysaccharides
Stains (Dyes) 77  
 
78 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
4.2.15 Rhodamine B 
Rhodamine B is a basic dye. It is similar to pyronins (characterised by presence 
of two alkylated amino groups parallel to the central methane carbon on the 
two benzene rings) except that there is a third benzene ring attached to the 
third carbon atom and attached to this ring is a carboxyl group in the ortho 
position (Fig. 4.17). Its solubility in alcohol is 1.47% and in water 0.78% 
(Table 4.1). It is used to stain glandular tissue, epidermis and golgi apparatus 
(Lille, 1969).
Fig. 4.17. Rhodamine B.
4.2.16 Ruthenium Red 
Ruthenium red is an ammoniated ruthenium oxychloride prepared by 
making an ammonical solution of ruthenic chloride, RuCl3 (Lillie, 1977). It 
is employed with or without addition of acetic acid to stain the pectin. It is 
thought to be specifc for this purpose. But Jensen (1962) opined that the 
method is rather insensitive and less specifc than the hydroxylamine-FeCl2 
reaction. It is formulated as (NH3)n.Ru-o-Ru-o-Ru(NH3)n and as Ru2(OH)2 
Cl4·7NH3·3H2O.
4.2.17 Safranin O 
The common safranins of commerce are mixtures of dimethyl and trimethyl 
phenosafranin. The type safranin O proves to be the best biological dye. It is a 
basic stain and dissolves easily in strong alcohol than in water. The chemical 
confguration of safranin O is given in Fig. 4.18. Various preparations of 
safranin solution have been followed by diferent workers. 
i. A common preparation is to dissolve 1 g safranin in 70% ethyl alcohol. 
It is widely used by botanists.
ii. A stock solution is prepared by dissolving 2.25 g safranin in 225 ml 
95% ethyl alcohol. A part of this solution is diluted with equal volume  
Stains (Dyes) 79 
of distilled water and used for staining. If it is still concentrated, again 
dilute it with 50% alcohol.
iii. Johansen (1940) prepared safranin stain in the following manner. 4 g 
safranin is dissolved in 200 ml methyl cellosolve. Later 100 ml 95% 
ethyl alcohol and 100 ml distilled water are added. Then it is followed by 
an addition of 4 g sodium acetate and 8 ml formalin. 
Here acetate intensifes the stain and formalin works as a mordant. Slides 
are kept in the stain for 24-48 hours to get good contrast.
Invariably safranin overstains the tissue and therefore it requires 
destaining (diferentiation). It is destained by HCI dissolved in 70% ethanol. 
After tissues are stained with safranin, the excess stain should be washed 
away with tap water.
Fig. 4.18. Safranin O.
Safranin is an excellent stain for morphological and cytological studies. 
It stains lignin, cutin and suberin as well as chromosomes, nucleoli and 
centrosomes. It is also used as a protein stain and can be used to stain spore 
coats (Lillie, 1977).
4.2.18 Sudan Dyes 
Sudan IV is a weak acidic dye and belongs to the azo group. It is insoluble 
in water but its solubility in ethyl alcohol is 0.09%. It is a specifc fat stain. 
Specimen is stained in saturated alcoholic dye solution for about 10 mins. 
Since alcohol is fat solvent, specimen should be washed very rapidly in 
alcohol. Lecithin, resins, latex, wax and cuticles are stained by Sudan IV; 
chloroplasts are stained a dull red (Johansen, 1940).
Acetyl Sudan IV is made in the laboratory by acetylation in 40% acetic 
anhydride pyridine mixture, precipitation in water and collection by fltration. 
Its chemical formula is C26H22N4O2 and molecular weight 422.494. It is 
an excellent dye for myelin, lipofuscins, ceroid, chromated retinal lipids 
and frozen sections of adrenal cortex lipids, but failed to stain neutrophil 
leucocytes (Lillie, 1977).80 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Oil Red EGN is also a close relative of Sudan IV. Oil red OB and oil 
red N-1700 are coming under oil red EGN. The dye oil red N-1700 is now 
formulated as o-tolylazo-2,5-xylylazo-2-naphthol. The chemical formula of 
oil red EGN is C25H22N4O and molecular weight 394.483. Oil red EGN is 
insoluble in water, slightly soluble in ethanol and in parafm, soluble in ethyl 
acetate, linseed oil, oleic and stearic acids and turpentine, and very soluble in 
acetone, benzene and toluene (Lillie, 1977).
4.2.19 Thionin 
Thionin consists of two amino groups; hence it is a strongly basic dye and 
belongs to thiazin group (two benzene rings joined by a sulfur atom) (Lillie, 
1977). Its chemical formula is C12H10N3SCl and molecular weight 263.759. 
Its solubility in both water and alcohol is 0.25%. Due to its metachromatic 
properties (the ability to impart diferent colours to diferent histological and 
cytological structures), it is widely used to stain animal tissues. Saturated 
aqueous solution or weak alcohol solution is employed to stain chromosomes 
(Johansen, 1940).
4.2.20 Toluidine Blue O 
Toluidine blue O is closely related to thionin and to methylene blue in 
structure, and to azure A (Lillie, 1969). Its chemical formula is C15H16N2S2Cl 
and molecular weight 305.840 (Fig. 4.19). Its solubility at 26°C water is 
3.82% and in alcohol 0.57%. It is a valuable nuclear stain and employed in 
0.3 to 1 per cent aqueous solutions. It is used as a chemical reagent in the 
standardisation of heparin and as histochemical reagent in determining DNA. 
It is also used for staining the cells, cartilage and certain acid mucins. 
Fig. 4.19. Toluldine Blue O (C15H16N2S2Cl).
4.3 Other Substances Acting as Stains 
4.3.1 Iodine 
Iodine in combination with potassium iodide gives blue colour to starch. The 
colour reactions of iodine on fresh sections are as follows (see also Johansen, 
1940): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4.2. Biological Materials and various Dyes
Biological materials Dyes
Bacterial cell wall Graim stain; positive-Staphylococcus, Streptococcus 
Bacillus subtilis (Crystal violet – Negative E. coli,
Nisseria
Cutin Acid fuchsin, Auramina O, Crystal or Methyl violet, 
Erythrosin, Methyl green, Methylene blue, Safranin 
(specifc)
Cellulose Acid fushcin, Aniline blue, Bismarck brown Y. 
Calcofuor MZR, Chlorzol black E, Congo red, 
Delafeld’s haematoxylin, Fast green FCF, Light green
Lignin Crystal violet, Iodine green, Methyl green, Methylene 
green, Phloroglucinol, Safranin
Suberised cell walls Safrinin, Sudan III or IV (specifc)
Middle lamellae Iron haematoxylin, Ruthenium red (specifc)
Collogen and Methyl blue
connective tissue
Cutin Safranin
Plant mucin Bismarck brown Y, Congo red, Pararosanilin
Stains (Dyes) 81 
Biological material Colour
Alkaloids Brown
Callose Yellow
Cellulose Brown
Cork Yellow
Cutin Yellow
Inulin deposits Brown
Pectin Yellow
Proteins Brown
Saponin Blue
Starch Blue 
4.3.2 Phloroglucinol 
Phloroglucinol is not a dye. It is a trihydric phenol isomeric with pyrogallol 
and hyodoxyquinonol (Gurr, 1965). Aqueous phloroglucinol solution with 
few drops of conc. HCl gives pink colour to xylem but this colour fades soon.
In plant science, various biological stains have been employed to study the 
structure of plant cell and to detect the secondary metabolites, such as proteins, 
fats, mucilage, etc. As diferent stains react to diferent parts cell tissue, they 
are useful in the identifcation of specifc areas within the biological material 
which needs focus (Table 4.2).82 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Cytoplasm Acid fuchsin, Aniline blue, Eorsin Y, Erythrosin B, Fast 
green FCF, Indigocarmin, Light green, Malachite green, 
Methyl orange, Nigrosin, Orange G, Phloxine
Nuclear material Acridine orange, Carmine, Cresyl violet, Crystal and 
Methyl violets, Haematoxylin, Iodine green, Methyl 
green, Methylene blue, Pararosanilin, Safranin, Thionin, 
Toluidine blue O
Chromosome Brazilin, Carmine, Carminic acid, Haematoxylin, Iodine 
green, Methyl green, Safranin
Callose Aniline blue, Azure B, Resorcinol blue (specifc)
Mitochondria Acid fuchsin, Aurantia, Crystal violet, Iron 
haematoxylin, Janus green B9vital)
Plastids Crystal or methyl violet, Iron haematoxylin
Fats Sudan III or IV (specifc)
Proteins Acid fuchsin, Aniline blue-black, Comasie blue R, 
Safranin
Laticifers Dansyl choride, Oil red O5
 Staining Techniques 
When a specimen is stained with a particular dye, its constituents react 
diferently with various structures of the specimen. There is a diferential 
uptake and varying intensities of colouration that serve to distinguish the 
various structures of the specimen. This can be achieved by selecting a 
proper dye or combination of dyes. A dye is an unsaturated aromatic organic 
molecule that possesses one or more chromophores which are responsible 
for giving colouration when the specimen is observed under a microscope. 
Venkataraman (1952) introduced the term ‘Colligator’ to avoid confusion 
about auxochrome and chromophore. Both auxochrome and chromophore are 
responsible for giving colouration. Colligator is a special kind of auxochrome 
which is able to unite chemically with tissues or with certain other dyes (Gurr, 
1965). Based on the type of colligators present, dyes are of two types:
(A) Anionic dyes contain acidic colligators (negatively charged) such as OH, 
COOH, SO3, etc. These are also known as acidic dyes, e.g., fast green 
FCF, aniline blue. Acid dyes are attracted by positively charged objects 
in the specimen. Such objects are known as acidophil because they are 
easily stained by acid dyes (Baker, 1958). In other words, the objects of 
basic nature are stained by acid dyes. Dyes having both acidic and basic 
colligators may be regarded asamphoteric, that is, capable of combining 
with both acidic or basic elements, of the tissues. Certain acid dyes 
are amphoteric and stain the acidic as well as basic elements of tissues 
without the aid of mordants. Gurr (1965) called these acidic dyes pseudo￾amphoteric, with respect to their reaction towards tissue elements.
(B) Cationic dyes contain basic colligators (positively charged) such as NH2, 
NH, N+
, e.g., safranin, crystal violet, haematoxylin, methyleneblue, etc. 
These are also known as basic dyes which are attracted by negatively 
charged objects in the specimen. Such objects are called ‘basiphil’ which 
means objects that are acidic in nature and stained by basic dyes (Baker, 
1958).
5.1 Types of Staining 
There are mainly three types of staining viz., Progressive staining, Regressive 
staining and Vital staining.84 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
5.1.1 Progressive Staining 
When a specimen is stained with a dye, the intensity of staining progressively 
increases from time to time. This can be noticed under a microscope. After 
reaching the desired intensity, the dyeing is arrested. This is known as 
progressive staining. Phloroglucinolin combination with 5% conc. HN03 is 
the best example for progressive staining which is used to stain lignifed cell 
walls.
5.1.2 Regressive Staining 
The tissue is over-stained and later it is destained or diferentiated with some 
other reagent until a satisfactory intensity is reached. It is called regressing 
staining and is a common practice in most of the staining schedules.
5.1.3 Vital Staining 
When some non-toxic dyes are used in dilute concentration to stain living 
tissues, it is called vital staining.
5.2 Diferentiation
Diferentiation of tissue should be done when the stain is used regressively. 
This means, if the tissue is over-stained, its excess stain is removed (destained) 
by other reagents. This process is referred to as diferentiation. Acidifed 
alcohol (2% HCl dissolved in 70% ethyl alcohol) is used as diferentiating 
agent after staining with alcoholic safranin. Crystal violet and Heidenhain’s 
haematoxylin are diferentiated with clove oil and iron alum respectively.
5.3 Mordants 
A mordant is a substance that brings about a particular staining reaction. 
Mordant comes from the Latin word “mordere” which means “to bite”. 
Mordant is used to make a dye to ‘bite’the tissue or stain the tissue. There are 
salts of diferent metals which help the tissues to retain the stain. The use of 
mordants is called mordanting. The greatest advantage of mordanting is that 
the colour is not removable by neutral fuids, whether aqueous or alcoholic 
(Baker, 1969).
The chief mordants used with carminic acid and haematein are the salts 
of aluminium and of ferric iron. Some of the mordants which are commonly 
used are acetic acid, barium chloride (2-4% solution) and silicotungstic acid 
(4% aqueous solution). Barium chloride is used as a mordant for acid dyes and 
silicotungstic acid for basic dyes. Other mordants are aluminium hydroxide 
(upto 3% solution), aluminium potassium sulphate (potash alum) (upto 4%  
 
Staining Techniques 85 
solution), ammonium chromate (upto 4%), ammonium dichromate (upto 3%) 
and Potassium permanganate (1%).
Keep the tissue in these mordants on the slide for about 5-10 minutes. 
Later the mordants should be washed thoroughly in water before staining. It 
has been found that the addition of lithium is responsible for improving the 
action of basic dyes; iodine and picric acid are used as mordants for violet 
dyes viz. crystal violet and methyl violet (Johansen, 1940).
Generally, mordants are used in three ways. These are as follows:
i. Before staining: Ferric ammonium sulphate is used as mordant before 
staining the tissue with Heidenhain’s haematoxylin.
ii. After staining: Picric acid and iodine are used after staining the tissue 
with violet dyes.
iii. Along with staining: Mordant mixed with dye is employed to stain the 
tissues, e.g., aluminium ammonium sulphate mixed with Delafeld’s 
haematoxylin and Harris’ haematoxylin; aluminium potassium sulphate 
in Mayer’s haematoxylin and Ehrlich’shaematoxylin.
The selective retention of stain is infuenced by the pH of washing fuids 
used for diferentiation. In general, the basic dyes should be washed with 
acidifed solutions and most of the acid dyes used for counterstaining should 
be washed with alkaline solution (Johansen, 1940).
5.4 Clearing (Bleaching) 
The sections cut from the plant material may be excessively blackened by 
the fxatives. For example, prolonged treatment of osmic acid (OsO4) turns 
the plant material into black. Some of the stems and roots of woody plants 
may contain resins and gums. These specimens should be bleached by 
some bleaching agents before staining. When xylene or benzene are used as 
clearing agents, the tissues become transparent. Hence this efect is called 
clearing. There are some tissues which are originally darkened, for example 
sclerenchyma and fbres do not need bleaching and these can be stained nicely 
by selecting a proper dye.
One should take care about the action of bleaching agents. Sometimes 
it may damage the tissue. After reaching the desirable level of bleaching, 
the tissue should be thoroughly washed with water. Some of the bleaching 
solutions are given below:
Hydrogen Peroxide 
Full strength or diluted hydrogen peroxide may be used. Dilute and prepare 
50% hydrogen peroxide dissolving either in water or in 50% or 70% ethyl 
alcohol. It washes out blackening caused by osmic acid. 
 
 
 
 
 
86 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Peroxide Ammonia 
Ammonia water accelerates the bleaching action of hydrogen peroxide 
(Johansen, 1940):
Hydrogen peroxide (10% strength) 10 ml
Water 200 ml
Ammonia water 1 ml
After bleaching is completed, the sections should be thoroughly washed 
with water.
Sodium Hypochlorite 
A weak aqueous sodium hypochlorite solution is used to bleach the sections 
containing gums and resins.
Potassium Permanganate 
If the sections are too blackened, these may be treated with 1% aqueous 
solution of potassium permanganate for a minute. Later, these sections are 
washed with 1% aqueous solution of oxalic acid and fnally in water before 
staining.
Chlorine Gas 
Chlorine gas fumes bleach the tissue excellently (Johansen, 1940). Enough 
crystals of potassium chlorate are taken in a coplin jar and a little dilute 
dhydrochloric acid is poured on it. As soon as greenish vapours appear, fll the 
jar with 50% ethyl alcohol. Then immerse the slides in the jar for 20 minutes 
to accomplish bleaching efect. Later the slides are thoroughly washed before 
staining.
Stockwell’s Variation 
Stockwell’s procedure is employed for bleaching the sections which are too 
dark and contain too much phlobaphene. For example, root tips of Quercus, 
buds of Dudleya and other Crassulaceae members contain much phlobaphene. 
These sections should be frst run down to water and bleached overnight in the 
following solution:
Potassium bichromate 1 g
Chromic acid 1 g
Glacial acetic acid 10 ml
Water 90 ml
The principle involved in this procedure is that the chromic acid dissolves 
the tannin, the acetic acid removes them, and the dichromate thereupon 
catalyses the tissues (Johansen, 1940). Now these sections are ready for sharp 
staining which is done in triple combination (safranin, crystal violet and 
orange G).Staining Techniques 87 
Xylene 
Xylene is cheap and rapid in action. Sections become transparent and it 
removes the alcohol (de-alcoholisation) in the dehydrated tissues. However, 
it causes excessive shrinkage of delicate tissues. Since it does not dissolve the 
celloidin, xylene is also employed in celloidin sections (Clayden, 1962).
Benzene 
Benzene has less hardening efect on tissues when compared to xylene 
(Clayden, 1962). Tissue becomes transparent with benzene treatment. It is 
highly infammable and toxic. Other aspects are similar to xylene.
Boric acid and ammonium persulphate are also used as bleaching agents. 
Chloral hydrate is also employed to clear the leaves.
5.5 Staining Schedules 
5.5.1 Freehand Sections 
5.5.1.1 Temporary Preparation 
i. Before cutting the freehand sections, the material should be kept in 70% 
ethyl alcohol for fve minutes and then the sections should be cut. If the 
material is already preserved in 70% ethyl alcohol, there is no need to 
keep it in 70% alcohol again; the sections can be directly taken.
ii. Thin sections are stained with safranin (1 g safranin in 100 ml of 70% 
ethyl alcohol).
iii. Destain the sections in acid water (3% HCl).
iv. Then wash the stained sections with tap water to remove traces of acid.
v. Mount in a drop of glycerine and observe under a light microscope.
Fig. 5.1. Water storage cell with multispiral cellulosic thickenings in 
Dendrobium bicameratum stem maceration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Macerations are made from the small pieces of stem sections (free hand 
sections). These small pieces of stem with 10% Potassium hydroxide are 
slightly boiled, and fnally stained with only safranin. Cellulose thickenings 
in water storage cells found in the Dendrobium bicameratum are clearly seen 
with safranin staining (Fig. 5.1).
5.5.1.2 Permanent Preparations 
Double staining is done for permanent preparation of freehand sections. This 
can be carried out in the following manner.
A. Safranin-fast Green: This combination is widely used by botanists. It is 
suitable for all plant materials except algae (Johansen, 1940):
i. Wash the plant material thoroughly to remove fxative and take thin 
and uniform sections.
ii. Keep the sections in a watch glass and stain them with 1% safranin for 
3-5 min.
iii. Excess stain is removed by keeping the sections in acid water.
iv. Then wash the sections with tap water to remove the acid traces.
v. Pass the sections through graded series of alcohol from 30, 50, 75 to 
90%.
vi. Counter stain the sections in 0.5% fast green for 15 sec. It is a powerful 
stain and sections should not be kept in this stain for more than 15 sec.
vii. Wash excess stain in a mixture of equal parts of absolute alcohol and 
xylene.
viii. Clear the stained sections for few seconds in a mixture consisting of 50 
parts of clove oil, 25 parts absolute alcohol and 25 parts xylene.
ix. Transfer the stained sections in pure xylene. Give two changes in pure 
xylene. After becoming free from moisture, the sections are mounted 
in DPX or Canada balsam.
Transverse section of leaf of Bulbophyllum khasyanum is taken and 
stained with safranin-fast-green, and fnally made it as permanent slide. In 
this section, the adaxial epidermal cells that are 3 times larger than abaxial 
ones are clearly appeared with this double stain (Fig. 5.2)
Fig. 5.2. Upper Epidermal Cells (Hyaline) of Leaf in Bulbophyllum 
khasyanum(ade= adaxial; abe = abaxial). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Staining Techniques 89 
Frequently, milky foam appears when sections are transferred to xylene. 
It indicates that the sections are incompletely dehydrated or are so due to 
xylene exposed to air. If this happens, sections are transferred to absolute 
alcohol again and allowed to undergo complete dehydration. Care should be 
taken that xylene bottles are tightly screwed, and it should not be exposed to 
air.
The safranin appears in brilliant red colour in nuclei, chromosomes, 
lignifed and cutinised walls whereas fast green appears green in cytoplasm 
and cellulose cell walls.
B. Safranin and Delafeld’s Haematoxylin or Harris’ Haematoxylin: This 
combination is useful for semi-woody tissues (Johansen, 1940):Keep the 
material in 70% alcohol for 5-10 minutes, so that the material is smoothly 
cut. Later take uniform sections.
i. Sections are over-stained with safranin. Excess stain is washed with 
tap water.
ii. Destain the sections carefully in 50% alcohol slightly acidulated with 
hydrochloric acid and see that xylem appears bright red and cellulose 
walls deep pinkish in colour.
iii. Wash thoroughly in water for 5 min.
iv. Transfer the sections in haematoxylin and allow them to remain in it 
for 15 min till the sections turn deep purple in colour.
v. Later treat the sections with acid water for few seconds. When the 
sections turn reddish, transfer to tap water.
vi. Sections are thoroughly washed with tap water for about 20 min to 
remove traces of acid. If haematoxylin is not sufciently blued by 
the tap water, the sections are dipped in the water which contains few 
drops of ammonia.
vii. Then the stained sections are passed through the graded series of 
tertiary butyl alcohol i.e., 30, 50, 75, 85 and 90%, keeping them in 
each grade for 3-5 min. Later the sections are kept in absolute alcohol 
for 10 min.
viii. Then transfer the sections in the mixture of alcohol and xylene (1:1) 
and keep them in this mixture for few minutes.
ix. Later keep the sections in pure xylene. Give two changes in pure 
xylene and fnally mount with Canada balsam.
C. Zimmerman’s Stain: Zimmerman’s stain can be used to stain lignifed 
tissues, it contains the following ingredients:
Iodine green 0.1% aqueous solution 9 parts
Acid fuchsin saturated aqueous solution 1 part
The uniform sections are kept in this stain for 10 mins. Later destain the 
sections in absolute alcohol containing 1.0% acetic acid and 0.l% iodine. Later 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
sections are washed with absolute alcohol. Finally, these are rinsed twice with 
xylene and mounted in Canada balsam.
5.5.2 Microtome Sections 
5.5.2.1	 Parafn Wax-embedded Tissues
Serial parafn sections are taken on slides and staining is performed on staining 
dishes or coplin jars. Coplin jars are provided with grooves in which slides 
are kept. After the staining is completed, the slides are transferred to another 
container with enough graded alcohol or liquid for removal of excess stain, 
dehydration and clearing. During this entire process, the container should be 
kept closed with a lid so that the moisture of the atmosphere is not absorbed 
by the solution kept in the container and the solution may not be evaporated.
A. Safranin-fast Green 
Safranin-fast green schedule is more preferred for all types of plant 
material except algae. The authors prefer to pass the sections through 
down and up series of diferent grades of alcohol. It is performed in the 
following manner:
i. By using glue, parafn sections are mounted on microslides and these 
slides are kept in the coplin jars containing xylene for 5 mins or until 
parafn is dissolved (dewaxing). Here, do not keep slides back-to￾back in coplin jars; use a staggered arrangement which allows fuids to 
spread on both surfaces of slide.
ii. Later parafn dissolved slides are transferred to another coplin jar 
containing equal parts of xylene and alcohol (1:1) and keep them for 5 
mins.
iii. Keep slides in pure alcohol for 5-10 mins.
iv. Now pass the slides through downward series of diferent grades of 
alcohol i.e., 90, 80, 70 and 50% for anatomical and embryological 
sections.
v. Stain the sections in safranin (1 g in 70% alcohol) for 1-12 hr (depending 
on specimen) or in safranin prepared with methylcello solve and ethyl 
alcohol combination for 24-48 hr to get good contrast.
vi. Wash excess of stain in water.
vii. Now diferentiate in 50 and 70% acidulated alcohol, and then transfer 
to 90% alcohol, 10 seconds in each grade; if slides have been left in 
stain for long period, it is necessary to wash in picroalcohol (90% 
alcohol containing 0.5% picric acid) for more than 10 seconds.
viii. Counter-stain the sections in fast green (0.5 g in 90% alcohol) for 10 
seconds.
ix. Transfer the slides to 90% and then pure alcohol. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Staining Techniques 91 
x. Later keep the sections in a mixture containing equal parts of xylene 
and alcohol (1:1).
xi. Give two changes of pure xylene and mount in DPX or Canada balsam.
Result: Single layered velamen in root transverse section of Bulbophyllum 
trimulum is lignifed and clearly seen with safranin stain (Fig. 5.3A). Similarly 
fbrous mats, exodermis, and cortical cells in Dendrobium nobile are stained 
red with safranin (Fig. 5.3B). Fast-green is equally important in staining the 
cytoplasm and cellulosic cell walls. Both safranin and fast green are durable 
and show no signs of fading even after six years. Crystal violet and aniline 
blue can also be used as alternatives to fast green.
Fig. 5.3. Transverse section of root. (a) Bulbophyllum trimulum showing single 
layered velamen and vascular cylinder; (b) Dendrobium nobile indicating the fbrous 
mats, exodermis, and cortical cells, all are lignifed and stained with safranin 
(exo= exodermis; fm= fbrous mat; pc= passage cell; v= velamen).
B. Safranin and Harris’(or Delafeld’s) Haematoxylin (Johansen, 1940)
i. Follow 1-7 steps as described in Safranin-Fast Green method.
ii. Stain in haematoxylin for 15-20 mins till the sections appear deep 
purple in colour.
iii. Later transfer into acidulated water for few seconds.
iv. As soon as the sections appear reddish, transfer to tap water. Here itis 
essentially important to remove every trace of acid and it takes atleast 
20 mins. If haematoxylin is not sufciently blued by the tap water, dip 
sections in water containing few drops of ammonia.
v. Pass the slides through upward series of graded alcohol, i.e., 50, 70, 
90% and pure alcohol, 3-5 mins in each grade.
vi. Later keep sections in a mixture containing equal parts of xylene and 
alcohol (1:1).
vii. Give two changes in pure xylene and mount in DPX or Canada balsam. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
C. Tannic Acid-Ferric Chloride-Safranin Triple Staining (Jensen, 1962; 
Lutman, 1946)
i. After dewaxing, hydrate the sections by passing through 90, 70, 50 and 
30% ethanol to distilled water, 5 mins in each step.
ii. Place hydrated sections into 1% aqueous tannic acid for 10 mins.
iii. Wash thoroughly in running tap water for 5 mins.
iv. Transfer the sections to 3% aqueous ferric chloride for 5 mins. Rewash 
with tap water and examine. If the colour is not dark enough, repeat 
2-4 steps.
v. Stain with safranin for 1-24 hrs (stock solution of 1% safranin in 95% 
ethanol is prepared, dilute stock with equal volume of water before 
use).
vi. Later pass the sections through 90 and 100% alcohol, and then to 
mixture containing equal parts of ethanol and xylene.
vii. Finally, three changes of xylene are given and mount in resin-based 
mountant.
Result: Lignifed walls, chromatin and nucleoli become red and remaining 
blue-black to grey.
D. Heidenhain’s Iron Haematoxylin and Orange G Staining (Jensen, 
1962)
i. After dewaxing, hydrate the sections by passing through 90, 70, 50and 
30% ethanol to distilled water, 5 mins in each step.
ii. Transfer hydrated sections to mordant solution (5% ferric ammonium 
sulfate) for 30 mins to 2 hrs.
iii. Wash thoroughly in running tap water for 5 mins.
iv. Stain sections in ripened haematoxylin (0.5 g haematoxylin dissolved 
in 10 ml absolute alcohol, makes up to 100 ml with distilled water and 
allow it to ripen for 2-3 weeks).
v. Wash thoroughly with running tap water for 5 mins.
vi. Destain in mordant solution. Observe under microscope periodically 
for colour development of chromatin.
vii. Again, wash in running water for 5 mins.
viii. Dehydrate sections by passing through 30, 50, 70, 90% ethanol and 
100% ethanol.
ix. Stain with Orange G for 1-5 mins (0.5% Orange G in clove oil, dissolve 
by shaking for 4 hr and flter it before use; counterstain may not be 
always necessary).
x. Diferentiate in a mixture containing equal parts of clove oil, xylene 
and ethanol for 5-15 mins and observe under microscope.
xi. Give three changes in xylene and mount with DPX or Canada balsam.
Result: Chromatin, nucleoli, mitochondria and plastids appear dark blue 
whereas cytoplasm and cell walls appear orange.	 	
 
 
 
	 	
 
Staining Techniques 93 
5.5.2.2	 Glycol Methacrylate Embedded Tissue
Working with xylene for dewaxing, hydration and dehydration of parafn 
sections are tedious and time-consuming method. Besides xylene causes 
respiratory problems and irritation to eyes. Alternatively, staining of glycol 
methacrylate (GMA) sections is very easy and speedy, and it is proved to be 
particularly attractive. The plastic, GMAis freely permeable to aqueous stains, 
so there is no need to remove plastic before staining. Artifacts associated 
with the removal of the embedding medium from parafn sections, and time 
lost in dewaxing and hydrating the sections are avoided in sections of GMA
embedded tissue (O’Brien & McCully, 1981). In addition to following recipes, 
various other staining methods for GMA sections have been described in the 
chapter “Histochemical Methods”.
Staining with Acid Fuchsin (O’Brien & McCully, 1981)
i. Stain the sections in 1% aqueous acid fuchsin for 1-5 mins.
ii. Rinse in water for 5 mins or till the plastic is free from stain.
iii. Allow to air dry and mount with DPX or Canada balsam.
Result: Mitochondria, plastids and nucleoli are usually stained very strongly 
when warm dye solution is used. But starch, polysaccharides of cell wall and 
lignin are unstained.
A variant diferential staining procedure for mitochondria, plastids and 
nucleolus is based on the mixture recommended for staining yeast cells 
(Robinow and Marak, 1966). Stain the section in 0.005% acid fuchsin in 1% 
acetic acid. Later rinse in 1% acetic acid, air dry and mount (see also O’Brien 
and Thimann, 1965).
5.5.2.3	 Epoxy Embedded Tissues
Due to the impermeable nature of plastic, the conventional staining 
methods are almost useless with epoxy sections. However, so far, the point 
of impermeability of this plastic has never been established (O’Brien and 
McCully, 1981). The frst successful procedures for staining epoxy sections 
were those of Richardson et al. (1960) and Trump et al. (1961).Their works 
indicate that the use of cationic dyes like azure II, methylene nblue or 
toluidine blue, at high pH is more successful for epoxy sections. However, 
Fisher (1968) recommends aniline blue black (anionic dye). When O’Brien 
and McCully (1981) worked with the sodium methoxide method of Mayor et 
al. (1961) and the ethanolic NaOH method of Lane and Europa (1965) which 
removes the plastic, they found that the plastic removed sections stain better 
with acid fuchsin and fast green, and give beautiful fuorescent staining with 
aniline blue. However, such sections show very poor staining with basic dyes.
A. Staining with Azure II/Methylene Blue (Richardson et al., 1960)
i. Epoxy sections are treated with 1% periodic acid for 5 mins.ii. Rinse in water.
iii. Stain sections in freshly prepared mixture consists of equal volumes 
of 1% aqueous azure II and 1% methylene blue in 1% sodium borate. 
Staining is performed on hot plate at 60°C for 1-5 mins. Staining is 
usually adequate when the edges of stain solution just begin to dry. Do 
not allow to dry further.
iv. Rinse in water and dry with hair dryer.
v. Mount with immersion oil or some other mountant.
Result: Lignifed walls and tannins appear green. Some cell walls may stain 
meta-chromatically, i.e., reddish purple. All other components show various 
shades of blue.
B. Del Rio Hortega’s Silver Stain (Goldblatt and Trump, 1965)
Stock Solutions 
(1) 10% silver nitrate (AgNO3) 
(2) 5% aqueous sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) 
(3) 0.88% ammonia (NH4OH)
(4) Silver amino carbonate 
(A) 10% AgNO3 5 ml 
(B) 5% Na2CO3 20 ml
Combine A and B to which add NH4OH drop-wise till the precipitate 
disappears. Dilute to 45 ml and flter. This mixture can be stored for several 
weeks in a brown bottle.
Procedure 
i. Stain the sections (glutaraldehyde/OsO4 fxation) in silver amino 
carbonate for 0.5-2 hrs or until you get walnut colour at 60°C.
ii. Rinse the sections for 2 mins in distilled water and dry them on hotplate 
at 60°C.
iii. Reduce in 0.4% HCHO for 30-60 secs. This step may be omitted ifthe 
tissue shows sufcient diferentiation.
iv. Wash in distilled water for 1-2 mins.
v. Fix in 5% Na2S2O3 for 5 mins. This step may be omitted for epon sections 
but it is essential to prevent fading with araldite sections.
vi. Wash in distilled water for 2 mins.
vii. Dry and mount in DPX or other synthetic resin.
Result: Tracheary elements are very intensely stained, and nuclei and plastids 
are also stained.
C. Coomassie Brilliant Blue for Plasmodesmata (Fisher, 1968; O’Brien 
& McCully, 1981)
Stock solution: 0.25% Coomassie brilliant blue in 7% acetic acid.
94 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Staining Techniques 95 
Procedure 
i. Stain the sections (glutaraldehyde/OsO4 fxation) with 0.25% coomassie 
brilliant blue (an anionic dye) in 7% acetic acid for 10 mins at 50°C.
ii. Rinse in 7% acetic acid and dry with hair dryer.
iii. Counterstain (if necessary) with 1% safranin O for 1 min at 60°C.
iv. Rinse with water, air dry and mount.
Coomassie brilliant blue is an excellent stain for plasmadermata.
D. Haematoxylin-Safranin Staining for Semi-thin Epoxy Sections 
(Johansen, 1940; Warmke and Lee, 1976)
Following are the staining solutions:
(a) Oxidant (5% H2O2) 
30% Hydrogen peroxide 5 ml
Distilled water 25 ml
(b) Mordant (3% ferric ammonium sulfate, acidifed)
2-Methoxy ethanol (Methyl cellosolve) 50 ml
Distilled water 50 ml
Glacial acetic acid 1 ml
Sulfuric acid 0.12 ml
Ferric ammonium sulfate 3 g
(c) Haematoxylin 
2-Methoxyethanol (Methyl cellosolve) 50 ml
Tap water 25 ml
Distilled water 25 ml
10% haematoxylin in absolute ethanol 10 ml
Allow to ripen at room temperature for about two weeks.
(d) Safranin O
Safranin 1 g
0.2 M Tris bufer (pH 9.0) 100 ml
Procedure 
i. Plant materials like anthers, leaves and roots are killed and fxed in 
glutaraldehyde or glutaraldehyde-paraformaldehyde, post-fxed in 
osmium tetroxide.
ii. Dehydrate the tissues in alcohol and acetone and embed in various epoxy 
resins like Epon, Epon-Araldite, Spurr, Maraglass-cardolite, etc.
iii. Sections of 1 µ thick are cut with diamond knife on ultramicrotome. 
Later sections are transferred to adhesive coated slides.
iv. Now immerse slides in solution A at room temperature for 10 mins. 
Rinse thoroughly with tap water.v. Slides are transferred to solution B in screw-capped coplin jars and 
placed in oven at 60°C for 30-60 mins depending on the resin, material 
and section thickness.
vi. After-rinsing, the slides are transferred to solution C in coplin jar and 
placed in an oven at 60°C for 30-60 mins.
vii. Again, rinsing sections, these are stained with solution D (preheated to 
60°C) for 5 mins.
viii. After rinsing again with tap water and distilled water, slides are dried on 
a warming table at 60°C.
ix. Clear by fooding sections in a 1:1 mixture of clove oil and xylene for 30 
secs.
x. Finally, slides are passed through the pure xylene. Three changes are 
given in pure xylene. Later slides are mounted in permount or similar 
resin.
Staining is performed here without removing the plastic matrix. The 
haematoxylin requires prestain oxidation and later it is used as a stain. It binds 
to the typically basophilic tissue constituents and stains them light grey to 
black. Safranin stains cellulose walls and secondarily deposited materials 
such as cutin, lignin, callose and sporopollenin. Use of methyl cello solve in 
mordant and in haematoxylin stain improves penetration and prolonged life 
of solution. This is one of the excellent procedures for plastic embedded plant 
tissues. Haematoxylin which is used here has the advantage of being stable, 
insoluble in common counterstaining, dehydrating and mounting fuids, and 
is not likely to form precipitates.
E. Methylene Blue-Azure A-Safranin for Semi-thin Epoxy Sections 
(Humphrey and Pittman, 1974; Warmke and Lee, 1976)
 Staining solutions
(a) Methylene blue-azure A
 Methylene blue 0.13 g
 Azure A 0.02 g
 Glycerol 10 ml
 Methanol 10 ml
 0.1 M phosphate bufer (pH 6.9) 30 ml
 Distilled water 50 ml
(b) Safranin O
 Safranin O 0.1 g
 0.2 M Tris bufer (pH 9.0) 100 ml
Procedure 
Follow (i)-(iii) steps described in Haernatoxylin-safranin for semi-thin epoxy 
sections method.
96 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Staining Techniques 97 
i. Immerse slides in solution A (preheated) in coplin jars at 60°C for 30 
mins.
ii. After rinsing, transfer the slides to solution B in coplin jars and keep 
them at 60°C for 2 mins.
iii. After rinsing once again with tap water and distilled water, dry the slides 
on a warming table at 60°C.
iv. Finally, the slides are given three changes in pure xylene. Later these are 
mounted in permount or similar resin. Clearing is not required in this 
procedure.
In both procedures (Haematoxylin-safranin and methylene blue-azure 
A-safranin methods), staining is progressive, that is without over staining 
in any of the solutions and without requiring diferentiation (destaining). 
Probably the most striking feature of this combination is the bright blue colour 
imparted to the exine and Ubisch bodies of older anthers. Safranin generally 
stains cellulose walls and secondarily deposited materials.
The methylene blue-azure A combination tends to be metachromatic and 
shows more colour variety and sharper contrast than haematoxylin. It does not 
form precipitations.
F. Diferential Staining for Tannin in Epoxy-embedded Plant Tissue 
(Parham and Kaustinen, 1976)
Diferential staining for tannin localisation is done in the following 
manner:
i. Small pieces of callus or cell clusters from suspension cultures of 
Pseudotsuga menziesii and Pinus taeda are fxed in the mixture of 2% 
glutaraldehyde: 2% acrolein in sodium cacodylate bufer (0.05 Mat pH 
7.0) for 12 hrs at 4°C.
ii. After several rinses and gentle centrifugation in bufer, the samples are 
post-fxed in bufered 1% OsO4 for 12 hrs at 4°C.
iii. After several rinses in bufer, the specimen is passed through the graded 
acetone series at room temperature.
iv. Later the specimen is embedded with low-viscosity epoxy resin (Spurr, 
1969).
v. For light microscopy, semi-thin sections (0.5 µm thick) are taken; ultra￾thin sections are cut for electron microscopy.
vi. Semi-thin sections are stained with sudan black B (Bronner, 1975) and 
mounted with Karo syrup; ultra-thin sections are sequentially stained 
with uranyl acetate and lead citrate for TEM studies.
Result: Tannin deposits are stained brownish-orange colour and these are 
distinguished from lipid bodies of similar size which stain dark blue or 
black colour. Tannin deposits are also demarcated from starch grains which 
are unstained. Since tannins are strongly osmiophilic, they appear black in 
electron micrographs.6
 Centrifugation 
The centrifugation technique involves the sedimentation of particles present 
in the solution. If the particle density is higher than the solvent, then the 
particles will sink (sediment); where particles are higher than the solvent, then 
they will foat to the top. When a solution of particles is allowed to stand, 
the particles will tend to sediment according to various parameters such as 
molecular mass, shape and density, under the infuence of gravity. The greater 
the diference in density, the faster they move. If there is no diference in 
density (isopycnic condition), the particles stay steady. To take advantage of 
diferences in density to separate various particles in a solution, gravity can be 
replaced with powerful centrifugal force applied by a centrifuge.
Svedberg and Nicols in 1929 employed a centrifuge for the frst time 
to increase the gravitational force to speed up the rate of sedimentation for 
the purpose of measuring particle sizes. Since then, a variety of centrifuges, 
including ultracentrifuges have been developed. The basic components of a 
centrifuge are a metal rotor with holes in which test tubes are placed and a 
motor that can spin the rotor at a selected speed. 
During centrifugation, force is applied to sediment the particles more 
rapidly. This force (centrifugal force) is greater than the gravitational force 
of the earth thus increasing the rate of sedimentation. Particles of diferent 
sizes, shapes, density are separated as they are sedimented at diferent rates 
(sedimentation rate) in a centrifugal force. The sedimentation rate is directly 
proportional to the applied centrifugal force. 
6.1 Basic Principle of Sedimentation 
The rate of sedimentation is dependent on the applied centrifugal force (G) 
which exerts radially outwards. It is determined by the square of the angular 
velocity of the rotor (ω, in radians s-1) and radial distance (r, in centimeters) 
of the particle from the axis of rotation. G is expressed with the following 
equation: 
G = ω2
r 
Since one revolution of the rotor is equal to 2π radians, its angular velocity, 
in radians S-1, can be readily expressed in terms of revolution per minute (rev 
min-1), the common way of expressing rotor speed is: 100 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
2π rev min-1
ω = 60 
The centrifugal feld (G) in terms of rev min-1 is then: 
4π2
 (rev min-1)
2 r G = 3600 
It is generally expressed as the multiple of the earth’s gravitational feld 
(g = 981 cm-2), i.e., the ratio of the weight of the particle in the centrifugal 
feld to the weight of the same particle when acted on by gravity alone, and 
it is then referred to as the relative centrifugal feld or more commonly as the 
‘number times g’. Hence, RCF is as follows: 
4π2
 (rev min-1)
2 r RCF = 3600 × 981
The above is shortened as RCF = (1.118 x 10-5) rev min-1)
2 r 
6.2 Instrumentation 
As we mentioned earlier that the metal rotor and motor are the basic components 
of the centrifuge. The centrifugal force created by a spinning rotor faces a lot 
of stress on rotor material. In low-speed centrifuges, rotors are made up of 
brass, steel, or perspex. Whereas in high-speed centrifuges in which higher 
stress forces are generated, rotors are made up of aluminium alloy or titanium 
alloy. Rotors made of titanium alloy have a greater strength-to-weight ratio 
and are therefore capable of withstanding nearly twice the centrifugal force 
of rotors made from aluminium alloy. They are more resistant to chemical 
corrosion (Wilson and Walker, 2010; Hofmann and Clockie, 2018). All rotors 
are given a durable protective coating to the metal surface either by applying 
the epoxy paint or by anodising in the case of aluminium rotors. Some of the 
preparative rotors and their design are given below:
6.2.1 Swinging Bucket Rotors 
The swinging buckets rotor has buckets that start of in a vertical position but 
during acceleration of the rotor they swing out to a horizontal position; in this 
process during centrifugation, the solution in the tube is perpendicular to the 
axis of rotation, and parallel to applied centrifugal free. During deceleration, 
the tube returns to its original position. Since the centrifugal feld is axial, 
particles in a centrifugal feld fan out radially from the centre of rotation rather 
than sedimenting in parallel lines (Fig. 6.1).Centrifugation 101 
Fig. 6.1. Centrifuge with swinging bucket rotors.
Fixed-angle rotors – In these rotors, the test tubes are located in holes 
of the rotor body set at a fxed angle of between 14° and 40° to the vertical. 
Centrifugal force is exerted at an angle to the tube well, particles move 
radially and have a short distance to travel before precipitating on the outer 
wall of the centrifuge tube. A region of high concentration is formed that has 
a density greater than that of the surrounding medium, with the result that the 
precipitates inks and collects as a small compact pellet at the outermost point 
of the tube. It is proved to be valuable for diferential centrifugation separating 
the particles difering signifcantly in their sedimentation rates.
6.2.2 Vertical Tube Rotors 
These are regarded as a zero-angle fxed rotor in the tubes aligned vertically 
in the body of the rotor. During the operation of the rotor, the solution in the
Fig. 6.2. Vertical tube rotor: (a) cross-sectional image of vertical tube rotor. 
(b) The centrifuge tube is flled with a gradient; the sample is layered on top and 
then placed in the rotor. (c) As the rotor accelerates, the sample and gradient begin to 
reorient. (d) The sample and medium reorientation are complete. (e) Sedimentation 
and separation of particles occur during centrifugation. (f) Reorientation of separated 
particles and gradient occurs during the rotor deceleration. (g) Finally,the rotor is at 
rest; bands of separated particles and gradient are fully reoriented 
(Redrawn from Wilson & Walker, 2002).102 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
tube reorients through 90° during rotor acceleration to lie perpendicular 
to the axis of rotation and parallel to the applied centrifugal feld and 
return to its original position during deceleration of the rotor. Since 
sedimentation of a particle occurs across the diameter of the tube, 
the vertical rotor presents the shortest possible path length (Fig. 6.2). 
This sedimentation is quicker than any other types described earlier.
6.2.3 Zonal Rotors 
Zonal rotors may be batch or continuous fow types. The former one is 
extensively used, and it is designed to minimise the wall efect encountered in 
swinging-bucket and fxed-angle rotors and to increase the sample size. Low￾speed batch rotors with 5000 rpm are made up of aluminium, having a thick 
transparent Perspex top and bottom to permit direct examination of particle 
sedimentation during the course of centrifugation. High-speed batch rotors 
with 60,000 rpm are made up of aluminium or titanium alloy. 
The body of typical batch-type rotors is either a large cylindrical container 
or a hollow bowl, in which rotor volume varies with the square of the radial 
distance from the centre of rotation. The centre of the rotor has a core to 
which attached a vane (broad blade) assembly that divides the rotor internally 
into four sector-shaped compartments and minimises swirling of the rotor 
contents. 
The rotor core may be of two main types. The commonly used standard 
core permits the loading and unloading of the rotor while it is spinning 
(dynamic method) whereas the second core type (the reorienting gradient core) 
is designed to allow the motor to be loaded and unloaded with a reorienting 
gradient while it is at rest (static method). 
6.3 Mechanism of Centrifugation 
There is two type of centrifugation; these are diferential centrifugation and 
density gradient centrifugation 
6.3.1	 Diferential Centrifugation
In diferential centrifugation, various cell components are separated at diferent 
speeds at diferent times. The cellular components of rat liver cells can be 
isolated by diferential centrifugation (Fig. 6.3). The liver is homogenised by 
adding sucrose solution. The homogenate is subjected to a low speed of 700 G 
for 10 minutes in a centrifuge. The sediment is formed (pellet). As it is the frst 
sediment, it is called pellet-1 or nuclear fraction. It contains nuclei, unbroken 
cells, and large fractions of the plasma membrane. The solution is called 
supernatant-1. Now, supernatant-1 is transferred to another tube, and it is 
centrifuged at 10,000 G for 20 minutes. The pellet-II (mitochondrial fraction)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Liver homogenate
Centrifugation 700 G for 10 minutes
Pellet-I Supernatant-I 
(Nuclear fraction) Centrifugation 10,000 G for 20 minutes
Pellet-II Supernatant-II 
(Mitochondrial fraction) Centrifugation 1,00,000 G for 1 hr
Pellet-III Supernatant-III 
(Microsome fraction) (Cytosol consists of proteins 
Lipids, carbohydrates)
Fig. 6.3. Liver homogenate - diferential centrifugation.
(Adopted from Wilson and Walker, 2010).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Centrifugation 103 
is formed. This fraction contains mitochondria, lysosomes, and peroxisomes. 
Here supernatant-II is in the centrifuge tube.
Repeat the above step; the supernatant-II is transferred to another tube 
and centrifuged at 1,00,000 G for one hour. Now pellet III or microsome 
fraction is formed. This fraction contains ribosomes and small fragments of 
the Golgi complex, endoplasmic reticulum, etc. The solution remaining in the 
tube is supernatant-III.
The supernatant-III is also called cytosol which contains proteins, soluble 
nucleic acids, soluble polysaccharides, lipid droplets, etc. These are separated 
by electrophoresis or chromatographic techniques.
6.3.2 Density Gradient Centrifugation 
In density gradient centrifugation, components are separated based on density 
gradients. In the density gradient column, the homogenate, say sucrose, is 
poured on the top of the column for centrifugation. During centrifugation, 
the highest-density sucrose is settled at the bottom, medium-density sucrose 
solution in the middle whereas the lowest density is at the top. 
The higher the concentration of sucrose, the greater the density of the 
solution. The materials are collected at their static positions in bands according 
to their isodensities in the gradient and each band is isolated separately and 
carefully. This technique is useful to separate particles of same size with 
diferent densities, for example, RNA can be separated from DNA, and 
similarly, fragments of rough endoplasmic reticulum are separated from the 
smooth endoplasmic reticulum.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	 	
104 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
6.4	 Sedimentation Co-efcient
A solution is a mixture of one or more solutes and solvents when the solution 
is allowed to stand, the solutes settle at the bottom and sedimentation takes 
place. Sedimentation is accelerated by the movement of the solution in a 
centrifuge. 
The speed at which solute sediments depend on the mass of the molecule, 
the speed of rotation, density, viscosity, and temperature of the medium, and 
the shape of the solute. 
The sedimentation rate or velocity of a particle can be expressed in terms 
of its sedimentation rate per unit of the centrifugal feld; it is commonly 
referred to as its sedimentation coefcient, s. 
V = sω2
r 
(or) 
V dr/dt
s = = 
ω2
r ω2
r 
Here, V = Velocity of the particle 
ω = Angular velocity of the centrifuge 
r = radial distance of the particle from the axis of rotation 
dr = density of the particle 
dt = density of the medium 
According to the above equation, the sedimentation coefcient, s, is the 
ratio of the velocity of the particle to the centrifugal acceleration. 
6.5	 Classifcation of Centrifuges and their Uses
Centrifuges are classifed into four major groups, such as small bench 
centrifuges, large capacity refrigerated centrifuges, high-speed refrigerated 
centrifuges, and ultra-centrifuges (preparative and analytical ones). 
6.5.1 Small Bench Centrifuges (Portable Centrifuges or 
Table-Top Centrifuges) 
Small bench centrifuges are the simplest and least expensive ones. Generally, 
they have a maximum speed of 4000 to 6000 revolutions per minute (rpm), 
with maximum relative centrifugal felds of 3000 to 7000 G. Mostly operate at 
ambient and room temperature. Some of the modern designs have refrigerator 
systems to keep the rotor cool. Some microfuges are available, having instant 
acceleration to a maximum speed of 8000 to 13000 rpm and developing 
felds of approximately 10,000 G. These instruments are extremely useful for 
sedimenting small volumes of material (250 mm3 to 1.5 cm3
) very quickly (1 Centrifugation 105 
or 2 min). These centrifuges have been useful for the rapid sedimentation of 
blood samples and synaptosomes (isolated synapticterminals from neurons).
6.5.2 Large-Capacity Refrigerated Centrifuges 
Large-capacity refrigerated centrifuges have a maximum speed of 6000 
rpm and a maximum relative centrifugal feld of about 6500 G. They have 
a refrigerated rotor chamber and vary only in their maximum carrying 
capacity; they have a variety of interchangeable swinging-bucket and fxed￾angle rotors enabling separation to be achieved in 10, 50 and 100 cm3 tubes. 
Larger capacity (4-6 dm3
) centrifuges are also available, and their rotors can 
accommodate bottles of large capacity. In these centrifuges, the rotors are 
mounted on a rigid shaft. Therefore, it is very important that the contents of 
the centrifuge tubes are balanced accurately, and they should not be loaded 
with an odd number of tubes.
6.5.3 High-Speed Centrifuges 
High-speed centrifuges with refrigerated rotors are available with a maximum 
speed of 25,000 rpm,generating a relative centrifugal feld of about 60,000 G. 
They have a total capacity of up to 1.5 dm3 and a range of interchangeable 
fxed angle and swinging-bucket rotors. These centrifuges are commonly used 
in biotechnology laboratories to collect cell debris, large cellular organelles 
(nuclei, mitochondria, lysosomes, etc.), precipitates of chemical reactions, 
and immunoprecipitates. 
6.5.4	 Ultra Centrifuges
There are two types of ultracentrifuges, these are preparatory centrifuges and 
analytical centrifuges. Centrifugation for the isolation of and purifcation of 
components is known as preparatory centrifugation, whereas centrifugation for 
the characterisation of these components is known as analytical centrifugation. 
6.5.4.1 Preparatory Ultracentrifuges 
In preparatory ultracentrifuges, the rotor spinning is at the maximum speed 
of 80,000 rpm and relative centrifuged feld up to 6,00,000 G. At such speed 
the friction between air and spinning rotor generates an excess amount of 
heat. To minimise the heat, the rotor chamber is refrigerated (0°-4°C) sealed 
and evacuated by two pumps working in tandem. Apart from that, an infrared 
temperature sensor has been employed to monitor continuously the rotor 
temperature and control the refrigeration system. The drive shaft (made up 
of aluminium or titanium alloy of high tensile strength) on which the rotor is 
mounted is merely 1/16 inch in diameter. This small diameter allows the shaft 
to fex during rotation accommodating a certain degree of rotor imbalance 
without spindle damage. 106 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
All centrifuges have an over-speed device to prevent the rotor from 
operating at maximum high speed. Operation of the rotor at excessive speed 
can result in an explosion of the rotor. To contain such damage, the rotor 
chamber is always enclosed in a heavy armour plate.
Table-top, an air-drives preparatory centrifuge, known as airfuge, is also 
available; it can accelerate a magnetically suspended 37 cm diameter rotor, 
accommodating 6 x 175 mm3 tubes on a vertical friction-free cushion of air in 
a non-evacuated chamber, with a maximum speed of 1,00,000 rpm (1,60,000 
G). An airfuge is very useful in biochemical and chemical research where 
the small number of samples available require high centrifugal forces; for 
example, steroid hormone receptor assays separation of the major lipoprotein 
fractions from plasma deproteinisation of physiological fuids for amino acid 
analysis and macromolecules ligand binding-kinetic studies.
6.5.4.2 Analytical Centrifuges 
Analytical centrifuge is almost similar to that of the preparative centrifuge. 
It also has a refrigerated and evacuated chamber. However, it difers from 
the others in having a diferent type of rotor and in possessing a specialised 
optical system to monitor the progress of centrifugation. The rotor is elliptical, 
and it has two holes for holding two centrifuge cells. One cell is known as the 
analytical cell and the other is the counterbalance or the counterpoise cell. 
The rotor holds these cells vertically, while it is at rest or rotating position. 
The analytical cell is sector-shaped and can hold a liquid column about 14 mm 
high. It has the capacity to accommodate about 1 cm3
 of the sample. The upper 
and lower planes of analytical cells are transparent having synthetic sapphire 
windows. The windows are provided for the passage of light to monitor the 
progress of centrifugation. 
The optics used here are either Schlieren optics or Rayleigh interference 
optics. A portion of the solution in the analytical cell that contains 
micromolecules will have a refractive index that is higher than the rest of 
the solution, which is the basis on which the Rayleigh interference functions. 
At the beginning of sedimentation, the peak of refraction would be at the 
meniscus. As the sedimentation progresses, the macromolecules move down 
the cell, the peak also shifts giving direct information about the sedimentation 
characteristics of the macromolecules. The entire optical information is 
continuously photographed. 
Analytical centrifugation has been useful to measure the sedimentation 
coefcient and molecular weights of macromolecules. Molecular weights of 
various biological molecules, when they are in a gross mixture, have been 
measured by this technique.7
 Colorimetry and Spectrophotometry 
Colorimetry deals with the measurement of light absorption by coloured 
compounds in solutions. The instrument that measures the intensity of colour is 
known as Colorimeter. The instrument has been used to test the concentration 
of coloured substances by measuring its absorbance of a specifc wavelength 
of light. Colorimeters are relatively simple instruments designed to function 
only in the visible range (400-700 nm) whereas spectrometers are equipped to 
operate both in the visible and UV range.
Visible Light and Electromagnetic Radiation 
Light is a form of energy and made of particles called photons. The normal 
light is only a collection of waves whose wavelengths are in the narrow range 
between 4000-8000 A (1 Angstrom = 10-8 cm) or 400-800 nm, whereas the 
energy spectrum or electromagnetic spectrum covers wavelengths of the order 
of meters (radio waves) to less than angstrom (e.g., gamma rays). It is well 
known fact that energy increases as the wavelength decreases.
An atom consists of electrons, protons and neutrons, and orderly 
arrangement of atom forms molecules. In all these cases, the movement or 
motion of the particles is intrinsically involved. When the energy is supplied 
to an atom or molecule, the various movements are afected to varying extent, 
depending on the level of energy input. For instance, if a molecule is subjected 
to infrared radiation (0.8-2.0), only the vibrations of the atoms in the chemical 
bonds are afected whereas, ultraviolet radiation with, a greater energy (2000 
– 4000 A) afects the electrons in the atoms.
Interaction with Matter 
Electromagnetic phenomenon exhibits energy, frequency, wavelength and 
intensity. All these are interrelated and explained in terms of wave forms 
of particles (photons or quanta). This phenomenon can be explained by 
considering the electronic spectra. Electrons in either atoms or molecules 
may be distributed in several energy levels. When an electron is promoted to 
higher level (excited state) from the ground state, some energy is put into the 
system, and this gives rise to absorption spectrum. Only the exact amount of 
energy equivalent to the diference in energy level will be absorbed. This is 
termed one quantum of energy for a single electron transition, and the absolute 	 	 	 	
108 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
magnitude of each quantum will difer according to the diference in energy 
levels involved. When an electron falls from a higher to lower energy level, 
then exactly one quantum of energy is emitted from the system giving rise to 
an emission spectrum. 
7.1 Colorimetry 
As already stated earlier, colorimetry is a form of photometry, measuring the 
intensity of colour of the substances in solutions. It is a known fact that the 
visible light (white light) is consisting of seven colours, such as violet, indigo, 
blue, green, yellow, orange and red (VIBGYOR). The colour of the substance 
depends primarily on its light absorption properties. A red colour object, for 
example, absorbs all colours of the white light except the red region. So, the 
object looks red. This is universal phenomenon for other colours as well. 
Interestingly white coloured objects consist of all the colours whereas black 
coloured objects have none of the colours of the spectrum. The intensity 
of such coloured substances can be measured with colorimeter. The white 
coloured substances which do not show any signifcant absorption properties 
could be reacted signifcantly with some other reagents to form coloured 
product. This coloured product can be measured colorimetrically. 
The principle involved in colorimetry is that when a beam of incident 
light passes through a coloured solution, the coloured substances in the 
solution absorb a part of light and, remaining part of radiation comes out; the 
intensity of this transmitted light is measured by colorimeter. The intensity of 
transmitted light is always less than the incident radiation. As the number of 
light absorbing molecules increases, the intensity of light coming out of the 
medium decreases exponentially, and vice-versa. The diference in intensities 
between the incident and transmitted light refects the number of absorbing 
molecules or in other words, the concentration of the absorbing molecules in 
that solution. The light absorbing molecules are called chromophores and this 
property is attributed to the chemical structure of these molecules. Some of 
colorimetry assays are showed in Table 7.1.
7.1.1	 Quantifcation of Absorbing of Light
The absorption of light by biological molecules/chemical substance can be 
quantifed based on two basic laws propounded by Beer and Lambert, also 
known as Beer-Lambert law.
7.1.1.1 Beer-Lambert Law 
As already stated that Beer-Lambert law is a combination of two laws, viz., 
Beer law and Lambert law, each dealing separately with absorption of light, 
related to the concentration of the absorber (the substance responsible for 
‘absorbing the light’) and the path length or the thickness of the layer (related Table 7.1. Some colorimetric assays*
Substance Reagent Wavelength (nm) 
Inorganic 
phosphate 
Protein 
Aminoacids
Peptide bonds 
Carbohydrates 
Reducing 
sugars 
Pentoses 
Hexoses
Glucose
Ketohexose
Kexosamines
DNA
RNA
Sterols
Cholesterol 
Ammonium molybdate; H2SO4; 
1,2,4-amino-nephthol; NaHSO4, Na2SO4
Folin
Biuret
BCA reagent (bicinchoninic acid)
Coomassie brilliant of blue 
Ninhydrin
Cupric salts 
Biuret (alkaline tartarate bufer, cupric 
salt)
Phenol, H2SO4
Anthrone (anthrone, H2SO4)
Dinitrosalicylate, alkaline tartrate bufer
Bial (Orcinol, ethanol, FeCl3, HCl)
Crysteine, H2SO4
Carbazole, ethanol, H2SO4
Cysteine H2SO4
Arsynomolybdate
Glucose oxidase, Peroxidase,
O-dianisidine, phoshphate bufer
Resorcinol, thiourea, ethanoic acid, HCl, 
Carbazole, ethanol, Cystcine, H2SO4
Diphenylamine, ethanol, ethanoic acid, 
HCl
Ehrlich (dimethylaminobenzaldehyde,etha
nol, HCl)
Diphenylaine 
Bial (Orcinol, ethanol, FeCl3, HCl)
Libermann—Burchardt reagent 
(Acetic anhydride, H2SO4, chloroform)
Cholesterol oxidase, peroxidase, 4-amino￾antipyrine, phenol
600
660
540
562
595 
570
620
540
Varies, e.g., 
glucose 490, 
xylose 480,
620 or 625
540
665 
380-415
540 or 440
380-415
Usually 500-570
420
520
560
635 
530
595 
665 
425
500
*(Courtesy: Wilson and Walker, 2010)
Colorimetry and Spectrophotometry 109 
to the absolute amount of the absorber); provided an absorbing substance is 
partially transparent and it will transmit a portion of the incident radiation. 
Beer’s law propounds that when a parallel beam of monochromatic light 
passes through an isotropic, light absorbing medium, the amount of light that  
 
 
110 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
is absorbed is directly proportion to the number of light absorbing molecules 
in that medium, nothing but the concentration of the chemical substance in 
that medium. This is indicated as follows:
A ∝ C; here ‘A’ is the absorbance or optical density, and ‘C’ is the 
concentration of light absorbing chemical substance in the medium. 
Lambert’s law states that when a parallel beam of monochromatic 
light passes through the isotropic, the amount of light absorbed is directly 
proportional to the length of the medium through which light passes, nothing 
but the amount of chemical substance in that medium. This is indicated as 
follows:
A ∝ L; here ‘A’is absorbance of light and ‘L’ is the length of the medium 
(or thickness).
Hence the measurement of light absorption depends on both the laws 
(Beer-Lambert law); comprehensive equation is given below: 
A ∝ C × L (or) A= eCL; here ‘e’ is known as Extinction co-efcient.
also 
Ii 100 A = log = log = log 100 − log T = 2 − log T It T 
Here, ‘Ii ’ is the intensity of incident light and ‘It
’ is the intensity of 
transmitted light. 
Molar-absorbance	Coefcient	(or	Molar	Extinction	Coefcient)
In the above equation, if the concentration is l M i.e., one mole per litre, and 
path length of light is l cm, then ‘e’ is known as molar extinction coefcient 
(ΣM). ΣM is constant for a particular compound at a particular wavelength and 
has a maximal value when the compound is in purest state.
Specifc	extinction	coefcient
If the molecular weight of compounds such as nucleic acids, proteins, etc., is 
not known, then the term “Specifc extinction coefcient” can be conveniently 
used. This is nothing but the extinction of a 1% (W/V) solution of the 
compound when the light path is 1 cm. 
Limitations	of	Beer-Lamberts	Law
Beer-Lamberts law has some limitations. It holds true for parallel, 
monochromatic light in an isotropic medium i.e., the light absorbing 
molecules are randomly oriented in the solution. If these conditions are not 
met, it deviates from the law. This deviation may be due to the instrument or 
due to sample as well. Colorimetry and Spectrophotometry 111 
Beer-Lambert’s law deviates due to the instrument. The law holds only 
for the monochromatic light, i.e., light of single wavelength. But it is not 
realised in practice. In colorimeters, flters of broad band of light have been 
used. Red flter of 640 nm, for example, passes light ranges from 625 nm, i.e., 
640 ± 15 nm. Same is the case in other flters also. Therefore, deviation takes 
place. 
Further, the Beer-Lambert’s law deviates due to the sample. This is as 
follows: 1. According to law, the relationship between concentration and 
absorbency is linear. But in practice, such linearity is observed up to certain 
concentration, i.e., threshold concentration. After the threshold concentration, 
the ionic species are close enough to interact one another and absorb less 
light. Therefore, light absorption does not follow the linearity of the law. 2. 
When the absorbing species contain acidic or basic groups, they dissociate 
or associate in solution to form ‘acidic-base’ pair with various absorption 
properties. In such case pH varies, hence deviation takes place. Even if 
absorbing species are in equilibrium, change of temperatures could cause 
deviation in the absorption of light. 3. Deviation could be possible due to 
polymerisation of absorbing molecules at high concentration leading to turbid 
suspension, which might increase or decrease the apparent extinction. 4. 
In some cases, the absorbing molecules may be physically absorbed on the 
walls of cuvette and thus decrease their efective concentration in solution. 
5. Deviation could also arise due to sample fuorescence. That means, the 
absorbed light is emitted as fuorescent radiation of longer wavelength in 
all directions. But only the small portion of emitted radiation which passes 
through the direction of the detector is measured. This results into low or even 
negative absorbance values. Finally, 6. Deviation may arise due to dilution of 
coloured solutions. For instance, potassium dichromate, when it changes its 
colour from orange to red upon dilution with water can cause deviation with 
two absorption maxima.
Cr2O7+H2O-
→ 2CrO4+2 H+ 
dichromate chromate 
(Orange) (Yellow)
~ 340 nm ~ 770 nm
Therefore, it is not at all possible to eliminate every factor that causes 
deviation from Beer-Lambert’s law. Hence, a calibration curve (standard 
graph) is plotted and from which the concentration of unknown is determined 
from its absorbancy value (in the linear range) and taking into consideration 
proper controls, if necessary, apart from blank.
7.1.2 Colorimeter 
Colorimeter is the simplest instrument to measure the intensity and wavelength 
of light after it passes through an absorbing medium (coloured solution). 
Instrument consists of light source, a condensing lens to render the light  
112 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
rays parallel, a flter to regenerate monochromatic light, a sample holder, a 
photocell with a detector to measure the light intensities and a digital display 
galvanometer to measure the electrical energy generated.
The light from a light source (tungsten lamp composed of wavelengths 
400-900 nm) passes through a slit, a condensed lens, a flter and fnally 
emerges as a parallel beam of monochromatic light. The monochromatic 
light passing through the sample solution is projected on to photocell. 
The photocell converts the transmitted light into electrical energy and it is 
amplifed and measured by galvanometer. The galvanometer is calibrated to 
read the absorbance/transmittancy directly. 
7.1.2.1 Complimentary	Colours	and	Complimentary	Wavelengths
The coloured substance absorbs the light from a particular colour of the flter 
to a maximum extent, that colour is called complimentary colour to the colour 
of the solution (Table 7.2).
Table 7.2. Complementary colour for some coloured solutions 
Colour of the solution Range of the wavelength (nm) Complementary or 
subtraction colour 
Violet 400-465 Greenish colour
Blue 465-482 Yellow
Green 498-530 Red purple (magenta)
Yellow 576-580 Blue
Orange 587-610 Greenish blue
Red 617-660 Bluish green
Purple red 670-720 Green
When a coloured solution absorbs light maximally at a particular 
wavelength, then the wavelength is called complimentary wavelength 
(λ max) of the solution. Complimentary colour and complimentary wavelength 
have been used to estimate the concentration of the substances. The given 
substance absorbs maximally at a particular wavelength and contributes to 
high intensity to the estimations and less interference from other substances. 
7.1.3	 Protocols
The following has been taken up to determine the complementary colour 
(wavelength) of a test solution and to verify Beer-Lambert’s law, and to carry 
out NADH analysis as well.
7.1.3.1 To	fnd	out	the	Complementary	Colour/Wavelength	
(Palanivelu,	2016)
(i) Prepare 0.01% of potassium dichromate and 1% copper sulphate 
solutions in distilled water. (ii) Now, switch on the colorimeter and warm up for 15-20 minutes, with 
one of the flters in position or set the spectromic-20 at minimum 
wavelength of 340 nm. 
(iii) Place the cuvette containing the blank (distilled water) in the cuvette 
holder and adjust the readings to 100% transmittance and switch of
the galvanometer.
(iv) Take the test solution in the cuvette and place it in the cuvette holder.
(v) Switch on the galvanometer and record the absorbancy and 
transmittance of the test solution, viz., potassium dichromate or copper 
sulphate. 
(vi) Repeat steps (iii) and (v) for each flter or for every 5 or 10 nm 
wavelength.
(vii) Find out the colour of the flter, which absorbs maximally. This colour 
is the complimentary colour to the colour of the solution. 
(viii) To determine the complementary wavelength plot the graph absorbancy 
vs wavelength. The peak gives the λ max of the solution.
Note: Switch of the galvanometer whenever changing the sample and flters.
7.1.3.2 Verifcation	of	Beer–	Lamberts	Law	(Palanivelu,	2016)
(i) Prepare 0.05% Potassium dichromate and 5% copper sulphate solutions 
in distilled water. 
(ii) Now switch on the colorimeter and warm it up for 15-20 minutes.
(iii) Take clean, dry test tubes and number them 0 to 10 in triplicates.
(iv) Pipette 0.5 ml up to 5.0 ml with a gradual increase of 0.5 ml and keep 
a blank as well. 
(v) Add distilled water to make a fnal volume of 5 ml and mix thoroughly.
(vi) Using the complementary coloured flter or complementary wavelength 
(from the previous experiment) adjust the blank to 100% transmittance 
and then read each tube and record the absorbance and transmittance. 
(vii) Plot absorbancy (transmittance) against concentration and fnd out up 
to what concentration, the concentration obeys the Beer – Lambert’s 
law. The standard graph can also be plotted to fnd out unknown 
concentrations of Potassium dichromate solution. 
7.1.3.3 Nicotinamide	Adenine	Dinucleotide	
(reduced	form	-	NADH)	Analysis 
(i) Turn on the colorimeter and set the wavelength 340 nm. After 
1-2 minutes, switch on the UV (or deuterium) lamp and allow the 
instrument to warm up for 15-20 minutes (follow the Manual supplied 
by the manufacture company). 
(ii) By taking blank (bufer alone i.e., 3 ml of 0.05 M Tris-HCl) in the 
silica cuvette, adjust the instrument to ‘zero’ absorbance (or 100% 
transmission).
Colorimetry and Spectrophotometry 113  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
(iii) In another cuvette take 0.1 ml of 1 mM solution of NADH and 2.9 
ml of 0.05 M Tris – HCl bufer, so that the total volume in the cuvette 
is 3 ml. Mix thoroughly and record the absorbance of test sample 
(equivalent to 33 µM NADH or 0.1 µ moles in 3 ml).
(iv) Discard the solution from the sample cuvette, rinse it with distilled 
water. Add 0.2 ml of NADH and make the fnal volume to 2.8 ml with 
0.05 M Tris-HCl bufer, and then record its absorbance.
(v) Repeat step (iv) by taking 0.40 ml of NADH solution and 2.6 ml of 
0.05 M Tris-HCl and note down its OD.
(vi) Repeat step (iv) by taking 0.6 ml of NADH solution and make the 
volume to 3 ml with 0.05 M Tris-HCl bufer and record the absorbance.
(vii) The above results are given in Table 7.3.
Table 7.3. Results of NADH analysis
Sample No. NADH Conc. of Fold Conc. A340 Ratio* 
solution NADH of NADH 
(in ml) (µM) 
1 0.10 33.3 1.0 - 1.0
2 0.20 66.6 2.0 - -
3 0.40 133.3 4.0 - -
4 0.60 200.0 6.0 - -
A 340 of sample 2 * Calculate the ratios for samples 2, 3 and 4. A 340 of sample 1
(viii) Check whether the calculated values of the ratio for samples 2, 3 and 
4 correspond with the increase in concentration of NADH in these 
samples as compared to sample 1. If the ratio increases with the 
concentration of NADH in the samples, it indicates that the absorbance 
of light by the sample is directly proportional to the concentration of 
NADH.
(ix) Prepare a standard graph of A340 against concentration of NADH in 
the sample. A straight line indicates proportional increase in the A340
with increasing concentration of NADH in the sample. By using this 
standard graph one can determine the unknown concentration of 
NADH present in the test sample.
(x) Calculate the molar extinction coefcient (ɛ340 nm) for NADH; it is as 
follows:
For example, 133.3µM solution of NADH gives A340 of x1µM. NADH 
corresponds to (x/133.3) absorbance, 1M solution NADH gives A340 values of 
(x/133.3) × 106
; this value is ɛ340 for NADH. In this way, the concentration 
of NADH in unknown test sample can be directly calculated from its A340 by 
using the molar extinction coefcient of NADH.Colorimetry and Spectrophotometry 115 
7.2 Spectrophotometry 
Spectrophotometer measures light absorption as a function of wavelength in 
the UV as well as visible regions. It is possible to make quantitative analysis of 
molecules depending on how much light is absorbed by coloured compounds. 
Spectrophotometer with photometer can measure light beam intensity as 
a function of its colour. The absorption of light is due to interaction of light 
with the electronic and vibrational mode of molecules. Each molecule has its 
own individual set of energy levels associated with the makeup of its chemical 
bonds and nuclei, and thus will absorb the light of specifc wavelength, 
resulting in unique spectral properties.
7.2.1	 Spectrophotometer Components
Spectrophotometer has various parts such as light source, conducting lens, 
monochromater, sample holder, detector and recorder.
Spectrophotometer has two light sources, such as tungsten lamp for visible 
light and deuterium lamp for UV light. The light from light source has wide 
range of wavelengths. This is known as Polychromatic or Heterochromatic. 
This polychromatic light refected using a plane mirror, passes through 
an entrance slit, a condensing lens and falls on a monochromater. The 
monochromater disperses the light and desired wavelength is focused on the 
exit slit using the wavelength selector.
Monochromaters that produce radiation of single wavelength, are based 
either on refraction by a prism or difraction by a grating. Prism is made 
up of glass for visible light and of quartz or silica for UV light, whereas 
grating has ruled lines (about 2000 lines per millimetre) on a transparent or 
refecting base. Resolving the power of the grating is directly proportional 
to the closeness of these lines. Gratings are more superior to prisms as they 
yield linear resolution of the spectrum for the entire range of wavelengths. 
The efcacy of monochromation is enhanced by double monochromaters, in 
which a selected part of the spectrum from the frst grating is further resolved 
by a second grating, resulting in the bandwidth of as low as 0.1 mm.
The standard cuvettes are made up of quartz and have an optical path of 1 
cm and hold a volume of 1-3 ml. Quarts does not absorb UV light and hence 
they are used for both UV and visible light measurements.
A photocell (photoelectric device) converts the light energy into electrical 
energy, and then it is amplifed, detected and recorded (Fig. 7.1). In photocell 
cathode and anode are present. When photons strike the semi-cylindrical 
photo-emissive cathode in vacuum, it causes the emission of electrons, which 
is proportional to the intensity of radiation. When a potential diference is 
applied across the electrodes, the emitted electrons, fows to the anode wire 
generating a photocurrent. This current is amplifed and measured.	 	
116 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Fig. 7.1. A schematic representation of photocell.
A photomultiplier tube is similar to that of photocell. It also has a 
cathode with photo emissive surface (a selenium layer) and a wire anode. 
Besides that, photo cathode contains a circular array of 9 additional cathodes 
called dynodes. Dynode I with potential of 90 V is more positive than that 
of photo-emissive cathode and hence, the emitted electrons from photo￾emissive cathode are accelerated towards it. Upon striking the dynode 1, each 
photoelectron causes emission of several additional electrons within turn 
accelerated towards dynode 2, which is 90 Volts more positive than dynode 
1. Again, several electrons are emitted from each electron. This process is 
repeated for 4 times and therefore each photon produces 106
-107
electrons. 
These amplifed electrons fow to the anode generating a much larger electric 
current than the photocell. 
7.2.2	 Types of Spectrophotometers
A variety of spectrophotometers are available; these are single-beam, 
double-beam, recording and multi brand instruments. In a single-beam 
spectrophotometer, the variations in source intensities are not compensated 
whereas in double-beam, these are connected automatically by equally 
dividing the monochromatic light between reference and sample at a given 
time. 
7.2.2.1 Single-beam	Spectrophotometer
As already mentioned in earlier section, the spectrophotometer has two light 
sources; an UV light (to measure light absorption from ~200 to ~400 nm) and 
a white light (to measure from ~400 to ~900 nm). With the help of a shutter 
only one of the lights is allowed to fall on a silver mirror (SM). The refected 
light from the mirror passes through an entrance slit and a condensing lens. 
The lens projects the parallel beam of light on to monochromater (grating). Colorimetry and Spectrophotometry 117 
The monochromater disperses the light into its component wavelength using 
the wavelength selector, the desired wavelength is selected. Now this selected 
beam (single beam) of light again passes through the lens and falling on to the 
cuvette in which sample is kept. In turn, this transmitted light falls on a photo 
multiplier (PMT). This PMT converts the light energy into electrical energy, 
which is amplifed and measured and recorded on the digital reader (Fig. 7.2).
Fig. 7.2. Single beam spectrophotometer.
7.2.2.2 Double-beam	spectrophotometer
In Double-beam spectrophotometer, the monochromatic light, after passing 
through the lens, splits into two halves by half-silvered mirror (HSM) which 
is placed on its path. Now 50% of the light passes through the mirror and 
falls on the reference cuvette; remaining 50% of the light is allowed to fall 
on the simple cuvette. The diference in intensities of the transmitted lights 
of reference and sample are computed, measured, amplifed and sent to the 
digital reader (Fig. 7.3).
Fig. 7.3. Double-beam spectrophotometer.118 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
7.2.2.3 Ultraviolet	-	Visible	(UV-Vis)	Spectrometer
Ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectrophotometry is primarily a quantitative 
analytical technique concerned with the absorption of near ultraviolet (180-
390 nm) or visible (390-780 nm) radiation by chemical compounds in 
a solution or in the gas phase. The near-ultraviolet and the visible regions 
of electromagnetic spectrum provide energy that give rise to electronic 
transitions. The various colours of visible light and the complimentary colours 
of solutions absorbing a particular colour are given in Table 7.2. Because of 
the superimposition of vibrational and rotational transitions, UV-Vis spectra 
of analytes in a solution show little fne structure, however, it has been widely 
used for quantitative analysis. UV-Vis spectrophotometer could also be used to 
study the environmental impact of the treated wastewater, especially presence 
or absence of chlorides. 
7.2.2.4 Infrared	Spectrometer	(IR	Spectrometer)
Infrared spectrometer involves the interaction of infrared radiation with the 
sample, mostly based on absorption spectroscopy. Sample may be solid, 
liquid or gas. It has been used for identifcation of functional group and 
structural elucidation of chemical compounds. Entire region is divided into 
two, known as group frequency region and fngerprint region. Range of group 
frequency is 4000-1500 cm-1 while that of fngerprint 1500-400 cm-1. In group 
frequency region, the peaks corresponding to diferent functional groups can 
be observed. According to corresponding peaks, functional group could be 
determined. Then each atom of the molecule is connected by bond and each 
bond requires diferent IR region, so characteristic peaks are observed. This 
region of spectrum is known as fngerprint region of the molecule. It can be 
determined by characteristic peaks. As usually IR spectrum can be visualised 
in a graph of infrared light absorbance (transmittance) on the vertical axis 
versus frequency (wavelength) on the horizontal axis.
Infrared spectrophotometer has broad range of industrial applications, 
especially in pharmaceutical industry for identifcation of raw materials and 
fnal product release as well. It has been employed in forensic analysis.
7.2.3	 Applications
Spectrometric methods are useful for quantitative analysis of a variety of 
biological compounds. For example, the presence of colourless substances 
such as proteins, nucleic acids, NADPH, etc., can rapidly be examined by 
measuring the absorbance at a chosen wavelength which is characteristic and 
unique for that substance. Most of the analytical methods for quantitative 
estimation of coloured biomolecules such as chlorophylls, carotenoids, 
anthocyanins, haemoglobin, etc., are colourimetric or spectrophotometric and 
are based on measurement at a specifc wavelength. 
Colorimetry and Spectrophotometry 119 
Another important application is the study of enzyme activity in the test 
sample. The method can be employed for any enzymatic reaction in which the 
product, substrate or cofactor shows absorbance at a unique wavelength. By 
simply monitoring the change in absorbance at a particular wavelength, the 
rate of utilisation of the substrate, formation of the product or changes in the 
concentration of the coenzyme can be followed spectrophotometrically. For 
example, nicotinamide adenine nucleotides undergo reduction or oxidation 
during enzymatic reaction. Though both forms of these nucleotides show 
intense absorbance at 260 nm but, only the reduced form exhibits specifc 
absorbance at 340 nm. This provides a convenient system for monitoring 
activities of NADPH-linked oxido-reductases.
7.2.3.1 Nucleic	Acid	Applications
Spectrophotometer has been used to estimate DNA and RNA, and to analyse 
the purity of these preparations. Typical wavelength for measurement is 260 
nm and 280 nm; besides, measurements at 230 nm and 320 nm can provide 
further information. Purines and pyrimidines in nucleic acids naturally absorb 
light at 260 nm. For pure samples, it is well established that for a path length 
of 10 mm, absorption of 1A unit is equal to a concentration of 50 µg/ml DNA
and 40 µg/ml for RNA. For oligonucleotides the concentration is around 33 
µg/ml, but this may vary with length and base sequence.
So, for DNA, concentration (µg/ml) = Abs260 × 50; these values are 
known as conversion factors.
Several other substances which also absorbs light at 260 nm could 
interface with DNA values, artifcially increasing the result calculated from 
the absorption readings. To compensate for this a selection of ratios and 
background corrections have been developed to help eliminate false readings.
There is a wide absorbance peak at 260 nm preceeded by a dip at 230 nm. 
Therefore, to measure the DNA absorption, the 260 nm DNA peak must be 
distinguishable from the 230 nm reading. If the reading at 230 nm is similar 
to 260 nm, then DNA cannot be measured accurately; there must be some 
contaminations in the sample. There should also be a rapid Tail-of from 
260 nm down to 320 nm. In this case, 320 nm is often used to measure the 
background. 
7.2.3.2 Direct	UV	Measurement
A260/A280 ratio 
The most common purity check for DNA and RNA is A260/A280 ratio. Any 
protein contamination will have maximum absorption at 280 nm. So, the ratio 
of these two is taken to check the purity. For DNA, the ratio would be greater 
or equal to 1.8 that indicates good in terms of purity in the sample, whereas 
for RNA, this reading should be 2.0 or above. Results lower than this value 
indicates the impurities of samples.  
120 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
A260/A230 ratio 
An increase in absorbance at 230 nm can also indicate contamination, 
which in turn afects the reading at 260 for DNA and RNA sample. Many 
substances absorb at 230 nm, as this is the region of absorbance of peptide 
bonds and aromatic side chains. Many bufer components (EDTA) exhibit 
strong absorbance at 260 nm and therefore, alter the results of samples. Other 
contaminations in the sample, such as proteins, phenols or urea, absorbing at 
230 nm, cause the altered results. Phenol concentration also increases sample 
absorption at 280 nm and therefore can be identifed through a lower A260/ 
A280ratio. An A260/A230ratio of 2 or above is an indicative of pure sample.
A320 Background correction 
Background correction is a process whereby the absorption at a point on the 
spectrum unrelated to the sample being analysed is also measured and the 
reading subtracted from the peaks. Absorption at A320 could be due to light 
scattered caused by particles or precipitation in the sample. Damaged and dirty 
cuvettes can cause absorption at 320 nm. Contamination with chaotropic salts, 
such as NaCl, can also cause increased light scattering. Therefore, measuring 
and correcting for the reading at 320 nm removes any interference from light 
scattering from cuvettes or other particles present in the samples. Background 
correction is particularly important, using the small volume cuvette cells and 
specialist small volume spectrophotometers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Common Adhesives and 
Mounting Media 
8.1 Common Adhesives 
Adhesives are used for afxing the parafn ribbons to the microslides. Some 
of the common adhesives used in plant microtechnique are described below:
8.1.1 Haupt’s Fluid 
Haupt’s fuid is the best adhesive for the parafn ribbons and is also used for 
afxing unicellular and many colonial algae to the microslide:
Plain gelatin 1 g
Distilled water 100 ml
Phenol crystals 2 g
Glycerine 15 ml
Dissolve gelatin in distilled water at 300 e and then add phenol crystals 
and glycerine. Stir well and flter it.
8.1.2 Mayer’s Adhesive 
It is prepared from the white part of the egg as follows:
White of egg 20 ml
Glycerine 20 ml
Sodium salicylate or crushed Thymol crystals 1 g
To the white part of the fresh egg, add glycerine and sodium salicylate. 
Shake well and flter through sterile cotton or cheesecloth. It is the older 
standard adhesive. When the solution is kept for more than a month, it loses 
its adhesive quality. Mayer’s adhesive has less holding quality than Haupt’s 
fuid and it has got the annoying property of absorbing coal-tar dyes.
8.1.3 Gum Solution 
Gum solution is very commonly used by Indian plant technicians:122 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gum arabic 1 g
Potassium dichromate 1 g
Water 98 ml
Dissolve gum in water and add potassium dichromate crystals. Depending 
on the thickness of the sections the concentration of gum in the solution may 
be increased.
8.1.4 Egg-albumin 
Mix equal parts of the white yolk of an egg, water, and glycerine; then add 
0.5% sodium benzoate and 1% sodium salicylate. Homogenise the mixture in 
a blender, flter, and store it in a dropping bottle by keeping it in a refrigerator. 
Place a drop of the mixture on the slide and smear it into a thin flm. Flood the 
slide with water before foating the sections.
8.1.5 Celloidin 
For harder materials (woody sections and sections of certain marine algae) 
a spray of celloidin is used. Celloidin of 1 or 2% (in equal parts of absolute 
alcohol and ether) is used to coat the slides after the sections are afxed with 
Haupt’s adhesive and fnally the slides are dried.
8.2 Mounting Media 
Mounting media preserve the sections in a sufciently transparent condition 
for microscopic investigations. A good mounting medium should have the 
following characteristics as ascertained by Bhandari (1997):
i. It should have the correct refractive index (1.48-1.5 or high; see also 
Table 8.1).
ii. It has to be transparent; should not be turned yellow or any other colour 
when exposed to light or stored for quite a long time.
iii. It has to be dissolved in media like xylene or toluene.
iv. It should not take too long to harden.
v. It should remain amorphous.
vi. It should possess good adhesive properties to the glass slide.
vii. It should be free from acidity.
viii. It should not have a too low melting point (especially when slides are 
projected).
ix. It should be easily available in the market and not too expensive.Table 8.1. Refractive indices of mounting media*
Resins Solvents Water-soluble 
Media 
Balsam (dry)
Balsam 
(in xylol)
Balsam 
(60:40 in xylol)
Clarite X 
(60:40 in xylol)
Dammar resin 
(60:40 in xylol)
Diaphane 
(colourless)
Euparal
Harleco resin 
(in xylol)
Lucite 
(in xylol)
Mahady
Micromount 
(solid resin)
Permount 
(solid resin)
Polystyrene 
(in xylol 1:1)
Polystyrene 
(solid resin)
1.535
1.5322
1.5300
1.5352
1.5317
1.4777
1.483
1.5202
1.4962
1.4879
1.5376
1.5378
1.6279
Absolute ethyl 
alcohol
Aniline oil
Castor oil 
Cedarwood oil 
(thickened)
Cinnamon oil
Clove oil
Creosote
Glycerol
Liquid parafn
Methyl alcohol
Methyl benzoate
Oil of aniseed 
Oil of bergamot
Oil of turpentine
Olive oil 
polyvinyl alcohol
Terpinol 
Toluene 
Xylol
1.367
1.580
1.490 
1.520
1.567
1.533
1.538
1.4674
1.471
1.323
1.517
1.557 
1.473
1.473
1.473 
1.386
1.484 
1.4956
1.4982
Abopon
Apathy-Lille
Distilled Water 
Farrant’s glycerol 
gum Arabic
Fructose syrup
Glycerol jelly
Glycerine 
(50% aq. sol.)
Sea water
solution of 
white of egg
1.4372
1.4189
1.3360
1.4417
1.4362
1.4353
1.397
1.343
1.350
* Refractive index of crown glass 1.518.
 
 
 
Common Adhesives and Mounting Media 123 
8.2.1 Mounting Media for Temporary Preparations 
8.2.1.1 Glycerine Jelly 
Glycerine Jelly is commonly used for temporary preparations:
Gelatin 1 part
Glycerine 7 parts
Water 6 parts124 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Warm gelatin in water for 2 hrs and pour glycerine, stir it for 15 mins. 
To this mixture add 1% phenol as a preservative. Glycerine Jelly’s refractive 
index is 1.47.
8.2.1.2 Lactophenol 
Lactic acid 100 ml
Phenol 100 g
Glycerine 100 ml
Water 100 ml
Dissolve phenol in water without heating to prevent oxidation. Later 
add glycerine and lactic acid. For special purposes, other ingredients are 
also added such as dyes to stain the colourless tissues and copper acetate to 
preserve green pigments.
8.2.1.3 Calcium Chloride (Herr, 1992) 
Herr (1992) has used 20% calcium chloride as a mountant for a specifc 
purpose. The procedure is as follows:
1. Cut fresh sections (120 µm thick) on microtome from stems of Psilotum 
nudum, Coleus blumoi, and Pelargonium peltatum, and roots of 
Setereasea purpurea. 
2. Fix the sections in FPA (formalin: propionic acid: 50% alcohol in a ratio 
of 5:5:90 v/v) for 24 hrs and store in 70% ethanol.
3. Transfer the sections to water directly or through the ethanol series.
4. Later sections are put in a mixture containing 1% phloroglucin (250 mg 
in 25 ml of 20% aqueous calcium chloride) + 4 ml cone. HCl. Lignin 
stains instantly.
5. Now each section is transferred to the microslide with a few drops of 
phloroglucin-calcium chloride solution or fresh 20% calcium chloride 
solution with HCl.
6. Other weak and strong acids may be substituted for HCI.
8.2.2 Mounting Media for Permanent Preparations 
8.2.2.1 Natural Resins 
Natural resins are mixtures of terpenes, carboxylic acids, and their esters. Their 
acid number is high (usually above 50), so they difuse cationic stains. Among 
several media composed of natural resins, dammar balsam has been reported 
to cause the least fading of haematoxylin (Vijayaraghavan and Shukla, 1990). 
While xylene and toluene are the usual solvents for resinous media, benzene 
has been suggested to be a better solvent for Canada balsam as it ofers lesser 
oxidation sites in its molecule than xylene. Chloroform and ethanol have also 
been used as solvents for Canada balsam. The addition of 2,6-di-tert-butyl-p- 
 
 
 
 
Common Adhesives and Mounting Media 125 
cresol (to 1% concentration) into the mountant has been found to inhibit the 
oxidation and the consequent acidifcation of the media.
A. Canada Balsam 
It is extracted from the bark of Abies balsamea. It is a viscid yellowish or 
greenish substance and soluble in xylene, dioxane or trichloroethylene. Its 
refractive index is 1.54.
B. Dammar Balsam or Gum Dammar 
It is obtained from Shorea viesnerii of Dipterocarpaceae. It is a vivid yellowish 
substance prepared by dissolving 100 g gum dammar in 100 ml xylene. 
Dammar balsam is completely soluble in alcohol and terpentine; refractive 
index 1.52.
Other natural resins like Oregon fr balsam (from the red fr, Pseudotsuga 
menziesii of Pinaceae), Styrax (Liquidamber orientalis and L. styracifolia 
of Hamamelidaceae), Tolu balsam (from Myrospermum toluiferum of 
Leguminosae) and Yucatan gum elemi (from the gumbo limbo, Bursera 
simaruba of Burseraceae) are dissolved in suitable organic solvents and used 
as mountants. Tolu balsam (RI = 1.64) and styrax are preferred when fne 
details of diatoms are needed.
8.2.2.2 Synthetic Resins 
A. Euparal 
This mixture is commonly used and consists of the following ingredients:
Camsal 10 ml
Gum sandarac 40 g
Eucalyptol 20 rnl
Dioxane 20 ml
Paraldehyde 10 ml
Camsal is obtained by mixing equal quantities of camphor and phenyl 
salicylate. This mountant has the property of intensifying haematoxylin stain. 
It is employed in 95% alcohol, refractive index 1.48.
B. Styrax, Hyrax and Naphrax 
These are commonly used for mounting diatoms. Their refractive indices are 
1.6, 1.8 and 1.8, respectively.
C. Clarite X 
It is a naphthalene polymer, colourless, strictly neutral, homogeneous and 
dries quickly. It is usually employed in 60-70% toluene; refractive index 1.56. 
However, it cannot be used for acetic-carmine preparations and becomes milky 
with ethanol (Sharma and Sharma, 1972). The tissues have to be thoroughly 
washed and passed through ethanol-xylol grades before mounting in clarite X. 
126 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
D. Noel’s Staining cum Mounting Medium 
Solution A 0.5% Aniline blue in lactophenol
Solution B 0.5% Basic fuchsin in lactophenol
Solution C Iodine 3 g, potassium iodide 6 g, lactophenol 1 L.
Prepare the medium by mixing four parts of solution A, one part of 
solution B and fve parts of solution C.
E. Dibutylphthalate Polystyrene Xylene (DPX) Mixture 
This mixture is also known as Kirkpatrick and Lendrum’s DPX and it is 
prepared by mixing 7.5 cm3 of tricresylphosphate with 40 cm3 of xylol to 
which add 10 g of distrene. Since the DPX mixture is completely colourless, 
it preserves the colour of basic dyes and also medium, so that it provides clear 
visibility. The pH of the mixture does not change upon long storage.
8.2.2.3 Light-polymerising Plastics 
Light-polymerising plastics were tested by Silverman (1986). These plastics 
harden quickly when exposed to UV light and they do not require solvent 
evaporation for hardening.
Methacrylate-based ultraviolet polymerising plastics, namely Impruv 
Potting Compound 363 and Impruv Sealant/Adhesive 365, tested by Silverman 
(1986) are superior to ordinary mounting media because they harden very 
rapidly and eliminate the formation of air bubbles under the coverslip. The 
optical features of the plastics were found to be useful for both light and 
fuorescence microscopy,
8.3 Substitute for Immersion Oil in Microscopy 
Immersion oils of commercial importance are recommended for microscopy 
since their refractive index, i.e., 1.515 matches the oil immersion objectives. 
Thickened cedarwood oil is prone to drying and it is difcult to remove from 
the slide. In some cases, commercial, immersion oils contain polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCB’s) which are highly toxic (Nashel and Fischmann, 1983).
An immersion medium should have a refractive index of 1.515 to 1.520 
and it should be non-drying and sufciently viscous. Methyl salicylate is 
one of the substitutes for immersion oil. Synthetic methyl salicylate has got 
a refractive index of 1.522 (Weast, 1970). It is viscous, non-volatile, non￾drying, and less expensive.
Other organic compound substitutes for cedar oil are mineral oil, mineral 
oil and bromonaphthalene, methyl benzoate, glycerine oil of resin, linseed oil, 
oleum recini, or diferent combinations of these oils. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Plant Collection and 
Herbarium Techniques 
The herbarium (plural: herbaria) is an anglicised term, herbar, that refers to 
the collection of dried, pressed, and preserved specimens mounted on sheets, 
and these are arranged based on accepted classifcation, further, these are a 
ready reference to plant taxonomists (Narayana et al., 2016). 
The collection of plants and feld preparation of specimens are the 
fundamental aspects of plant systematics. The collection of live plant 
specimens from the wild, sometimes referred to as plant hunting, is an activity 
that has been happening over the centuries. Similarly, Herbarium specimens 
and permanent records of plant species of a particular locality at a given time 
are playing a greater role in plant identifcation.
Therefore, the plant specimens should be carefully collected and 
herbarium specimens properly prepared and preserved for future generation 
studies. 
9.1 Plant Collection and Preservation 
The following points should be taken into consideration while collecting plant 
specimens: 
i. Collect entire, vigorously growing typical specimens. 
ii. Select such plant individuals that represent all phases of natural 
population. 
iii. Avoid collecting insect damaged and infected specimens. 
iv. For herbaceous perennials, collect underground parts such as roots, 
tubers, rhizomes, bulbs, etc. 
v. Collect those specimens of fowering plants that contain fowers, buds, 
fruits and seeds, as the taxonomic key is constructed based on these plant 
parts. 
vi. If the specimen is larger than the size of the herbarium sheet, then it 
should be cut into 2 or 3 parts and pressed on the series of sheets. 
vii. Collect plant individuals with leaves in-tact, as diferent kind of foliage 
prove helpful in identifcation of species.
viii. For woody plant, collect bark and wood samples.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
128 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
ix. For palms, several herbarium sheets are necessary to show the various 
portions of leaf, inforescence, and fruit. Photographs of the tree and of 
each part are essential for the palm tree. 
x. Spiny plants must be placed under a board frst and stood on before 
pressing to prevent tearing the paper. 
xi. Succulent plants need to be killed frst by soaking in methylated spirit for 
15-20 minutes and later mounted on aherbarium sheet. 
xii. Aquatic plants must be foated onto the dish of water, and later taken 
onto the blatters, excess water is drained of; then press the plants on the 
piece of waxed paper. 
xiii. Tall rosette plants and grasses may be pressed completely by bending 
them once or more into the shape of V. N or M (Australian Natural 
Herbarium, 2016). 
Avoid collecting rare or uncommon plants; if necessary, collect only seeds 
and grow them in the botanical garden, fnally preserved on the herbarium 
sheet. 
9.1.1 Field Equipment 
The following are some commonly used feld equipment for plant collection 
and preparation of herbarium specimens: 
i. Field plant press typically consists of hardwood frames (for rigidity, Fig. 
9.1), corrugated cardboard ventilators (to allow air to fow through the 
press), a blotter paper (to absorb moisture), and a folded old newspaper 
(to contain the plant material). The plant press is tightened using straps 
with buckles or bolts with wing nuts. The objective of plant pressing is 
to remove moisture in a shortest period of time, while preserving the 
morphological characters of plant intact, whereby it is readily mounted 
on herbarium sheet (an acid-free cardstock for long storage). The standard 
herbarium sheet should be not more than 48 cm long x 28 cm width. 
ii. Field notebook with ruled pages should be carried by plant collector, to 
record the feld data such as date, place, locality, habitat, elevation, local 
name, collector number (numerical series starting with 01 and continuing 
through out the lifetime of the collector), collector name, etc. 
iii. Collecting bags are plastic bags and close them with rubber bands; 
small brown paper bags should be used for collecting fruits, seeds and 
bryophytes. 
iv. Tie-on tags should be made of water-proof material and are large enough 
to take your name and feld number. They may also be used to label 
collecting bags. 
v. Digging and clipping tools such as trowel, diggers, hammers, pruning 
shears, garden clippers, geological pick, heavy sheath knife, etc., are all 
used for digging and clipping of plants (Fig. 9.1).  
 
 
 
 
Plant Collection and Herbarium Techniques 129 
Fig. 9.1. Plant press. 
vi. Vasculum made up of aluminium sheet with a hinged light lid, should 
be carried away by the plant collector. Plants that are not pressed in the 
feld, should be placed in the vasculum to preserve their freshness for 
some time. 
vii. Liquid preservative such as Formalin-acetic-alcohol (FAA) is used 
to preserve the fower buds and vegetative parts such as roots, tubers, 
leaves, stems, etc., for anatomical and embryological studies. A mixture 
of chloroform, 95% ethyl alcohol and glacial acetic acid (6:3:1) has been 
used for cytological studies. 
viii. Collection bottles (glass or plastic bottles) with leak-proof screw cap 
are used to collect small-sized materials to be preserved in liquid 
preservatives. 
ix. Topographic maps are necessary for locating position and determining 
the altitude. A GPS (Global Positioning System) unit is equally important 
for fxing accurate latitude and longitude of the locality.
x. A safety gear with long-sleeved shirt and long trousers to keep sun of, a 
jumper and waterproof raincoat to keep the cold and rain of, and frst aid 
kit are necessary during feld trip.
Apart from above, other tool, such as waxed paper (used for pressing 
viscid or weak-looking plants), felt-tipped pens (for numbering the bryophyte 
collections), Hand lens of 10× (for feld observation and identifcation) card 
board storage boxes (to store dry materials) and camera should be carried 
during plant collection from wild. 130 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
9.1.2 Field Notes 
During the time of collection, a numbered tag should be tied on the specimen. 
The best system of giving number is to provide the consecutive numbers, 
right from 01 and then go up. All duplicates of a collection should bear 
same numbers. The collection is recorded in the feld notebook along with 
the information about the collection, such as exact locality including latitude 
and longitude, altitude, nature of the habitat (soil type, topography, slope), 
vegetation type and associated species, date of collection, collectors name, 
etc. Apart from this, record other features which would not be evident from 
the pressed specimens, e.g., whether it is herb, shrub or tree, height, branching, 
root system, colour of the stem and fower, colour and odour. Some ecological 
data should be collected; it includes insect damage, weather damage/lightning 
strike, visits by insects/animals (pollination), usage by local people, common 
name or other forms of cultural knowledge with respect to that particular plant 
specimen. 
9.1.3 Pressing and Preserving the Specimens 
After collection, specimens should be pressed as quickly as possible. If 
not possible, they may be stored in plastic bags, preferably wrapped in old 
newspapers (dry paper). Bags should be packed tightly and should be kept cool 
and moist. Make sure that each bag correctly labelled its place of collection 
(locality) and name of plant (if known). 
The specimen can be placed carefully in a fold of several sheets of 
newspaper and put it in the press with numbered tie-on tag attached. If 
necessary, occasionally insert a sheet of corrugated cardboard in between 
the newspapers as ventilator. All specimens are placed for pressing in such a 
way, so that the entire bundle is ultimately of almost uniform thickness in the 
middle and sideways. Once the plant specimens are arranged, close the press 
and tightly bind the press with the straps or ropes to prevent wrinkling of the 
specimens; now the press with specimen is ready for drying (Fig. 9.1). Inspect 
the presser daily and change the newspaper during frst few days, until plants 
get dried. Delicate plants and petals may be lost during changing and these 
should be kept in tissue-paper folders throughout changes. Properly dried 
plant specimens are brittle and fragile; therefore, all plant parts are carefully 
preserved. 
9.1.4 Drying of Specimens 
Usually during drying, the presser containing the specimens should be kept 
in the sunlight for about 24 hours. After that, the presser is opened, and 
specimens are placed in fresh blotters. Now presser is again tightly roped. 
The wet blotters are dried in the sun for reuse. For three to fve days wet 
blotters or driers are changed daily as mentioned above, until the specimens 
are completely dried. Artifcial heat may also be used for the drying press. Plant Collection and Herbarium Techniques 131 
But specimens should not be dried in an oven. In humid regions, or in rainy 
season, the plants may be dried in a drier. A drier in the form of wooden 
box, 5 feet length, 18 inches in breadth, is made up of 1
/10-inch-thick boards. 
Light bulbs of 60 watts are ftted inside for producing heat. Small openings 
should be made at the bottom of the box for the entry of air which gets heated 
and dries the plants. In the process, it is possible to dry some 100 specimens 
bundled in a presser within a short time about 8-12 hours. 
An excellent drying chamber may also be made by using wooden 
or mental box with an open top that accommodates a presser. This drying 
chamber is equipped with an electric heater with a fan. 
9.1.5	 Plant Identifcation
For plant identifcation, fora books from various regions across the globe 
are available. Besides, world-class herbaria such as Royal Botanic Gardens 
(Kew), Missouri Botanical Garden (Saint Louis), Singapore Botanic Gardens, 
Hortus Botanicus Leiden (Netherlands), Botanical Research Institute of Texas 
(BRIT, USA). Botanical Survey of India (BSI, Calcutta) among others are 
rendering yeomen service for the identifcation and characterisation of plants. 
Try to fnd a book that contains an illustrated glossary to assist in defning 
terms that encounter when using the dichotomous key to identify the plant 
collection. Make sure that the text botanist is using, should be relevant to 
that particular geographical area from where plant has been collected. Some 
expert botanists are needed for identifcation of particular group of plants. For 
example, orchid plant collected from North-Eastern Himalayas (India); for 
this, expert orchidologist of that region is needed for identifcation. Botanical 
experts, sometimes, receive email photographs (plant images), based on 
which plant identifcation is made. However, physical specimen is usually 
required for defnitive identifcation of plants. The common practice is to send 
the plant specimen as a gift to herbarium with which the botanist is associated 
and get the defnitive identifcation, if he wishes to confrm it. Local herbaria 
can be particularly useful in providing connections to local botanists who can 
also assist with identifcation (Franklin Rahman, 2015).
9.1.6 Mounting and Labelling of Plant Specimen 
Before mounting, dry plant specimen is dipped in a saturated solution of 
mercuric chloride dissolved in ethyl alcohol to prevent infection of fungi, 
insects and others. Then mounting is performed. The process through which 
a dry specimen and a label are glued on to the hard board paper (herbarium 
sheet) is called mounting. The standard size of herbarium sheet is 28.75 × 
41.25 cm. The sheet should be long lasting and durable; use of acid-free paper 
of good quality (100% cotton rag) is advisable for it. Mounting is performed 
with help of glue (Fevicol or Elmer’s glue). The label is always glued down at 
the right-hand corner of the sheet. The excess glue may be removed by placing 132 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
a newsprint paper/blotter by gently pressing it over the specimen. Place a 
sheet of wax paper over the entire specimen, and then place weights or heavy 
books on the top of the specimen until the glue dries. Fruits and seeds are 
collected in polythene pockets, properly sealed and mounted at one corner of 
the herbarium sheet. During drying specimen becomes very brittle, sometime 
parts may be detached from the main stem, all these parts should be collected 
and preserved in the polythene pockets and mounted in the herbarium sheet. 
It is also suggested the use of quick drying liquid plastic as a good medium 
for mounting of specimens. The combination of ethyl cellulose and resin is 
dissolved in a solvent (methyl/alcohol and toluene) to give a thick syrup used 
for mounting. This liquid is sprayed on the lower surface of the dry specimen 
with the help of sprayer and paste on the sheet which dries very quickly. This 
is the quick method of gluing the specimen on to the herbarium sheet. 
9.1.7 Labelling of Plant Specimens 
A label, usually of 10.5 × 6.5 cm dimension, is pasted on to the lower 
right-hand corner of the herbarium sheet; label should contain the defnite 
information about the plant specimen (Table 9.1). These herbarium sheets are 
carefully preserved in wooden or steel cabinets/almirahs is a separate room 
(Fig. 9.2). Finally, identifcation of pressed, dried and labelled specimens 
has been performed with the help of various foras as mentioned in previous 
section. 
Table 9.1. Specimen label 
Scientifc name of the plant:
Name of the family: 
Local/common/vernacular name (in English):
Locality of the specimen: 
-Plant name (village) 
-Country 
-State 
-Altitude 
-Latitude 
-Longitude 
Habit & Habitat: 
Diameter at breast height (DBT), 1.3 m above soil line: 
Flower Colour & Odour: 
Additional information: 
-Colour of leaves and stems, associated plants, economic importance 
Collector’s name: 
Date of collection: 
Collection number: Plant Collection and Herbarium Techniques 133 
Fig. 9.2. Herbarium cabinet with herbarium sheets 
(Courtesy: Botany collections - The National Herbarium of Canada). 
9.2 Herbarium 
An herbarium (Herbaria in plural) is a collection of dried and pressed plant 
specimens arranged according to a classifcation system, and associated data 
used for scientifc and taxonomic studies. While most of the early herbaria 
were prepared with sheets bound into books, Carl Linnaeus came up with 
the idea of mounting the plant specimens on free sheets that allowed their 
easy reordering with the cabinets. Plant specimens are usually mounted on a 
sheet to hard board as described in earlier section. Properly dried, pressed and 
identifed plant specimens are placed in thin paper folders (species covers) 
which are kept together in thicker paper folders (genus covers) and in turn all 
these are kept in the herbarium cabinets. Succulents are preserved in liquid 
preservatives instead of being pressed and dried. Bulky plant parts, such as 
fruits, cones of several gymnosperms, etc., are dried without pressing and 
stored in special boxes. A herbarium containing specimens collected locally and 
from diferent parts of the world, is housed in a big building. These herbarium 
sheets are kept in the herbarium cabinets forever. However, periodically we 
have to check herbarium specimens and ensure that they should be free from 
pathogens. Herbaria in diferent countries remain associated with universities, 
scientifc societies, research in states, botanical gardens, arboretas, colleges 
and some well-funded government organisations. 
In addition to their taxonomic importance, herbaria are commonly used 
in the felds of plant anatomy, morphology, ecology, conservation biology, 
biogeography, ethnobotany and palaeobotany. The herbarium sheets provide 
biogeographic information, which in turn is useful in locating the rare and  
 
 
 
 
 
134 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
endangered species and to trace the expeditions of explorers and plant 
collectors. In fact, specimens are the best sources of genetic material for DNA 
analyses and pollen for palynological studies. 
9.2.1 History of Herbarium 
The concept of herbarium was developed by Italian plant taxonomist, Luca 
Ghini during 1490-1556 as he had collected plants, dried and afxed them on 
paper in the form of herbarium specimen. Later Gherardocibo and Falconer 
learnt the art of herbarium development from their teacher, Ghini, and 
collected and preserved the specimens in 1553. According to Holmgren et 
al. (1981), the great herbarium of the museum of Natural History, Paris was 
established in 1653. 
In olden days, during 17th and early 18th centuries, there was a usual 
practice of preparing a herbarium by mounting the specimens and binding 
them into volumes. The plants were usually sewn by thread. Later Linnaeus 
during 1707-1778 started the current practice of mounting the specimens on 
a single sheet of hard paper and preserving them carefully in the herbarium 
boxes. From that simple beginning of Linnaeus, various herbaria have been 
developed and housing millions of specimens in steel boxes across the globe. 
The herbarium of the Indian Botanical Gardens, Calcutta, known as Central 
National Herbarium,was established in 1832. In USA, the oldest herbarium 
was started at Salem College in 1772. The Herbarium of Academy of Sciences, 
Philadelphia was started in 1812, University of Michigan in 1838, Missouri 
Botanical Garden in 1857, and US National Herbarium in 1868. 
In early days, herbaria were confned with plant specimens of local or 
regional signifcance. In the course of time, they have been preserving the 
specimens of tropics and subtropics across the globe. Now herbarium have 
become the centres of advanced research in the feld of plant taxonomy. 
Herbaria of Paris, Kew, Leningrad (St. Petersburg, Russia) and Calcutta are 
big centres of taxonomic research. 
9.2.2 Role and Functions of Herbaria 
i. Preserved specimens in herbaria are useful for scientifc and taxonomic 
research. 
ii. Herbaria should be useful for student education and impart training to 
students in herbarium practices. 
iii. Herbaria should have the specimens of regional and global scale. 
iv. A complete information about the species of genus/genera of the family 
would get from the herbarium only. 
v. List of endangered species of any region is prepared only by herbarium 
specimens. 
vi. Herbaria are useful in preparing the monograph of the particular genus or 
family.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plant Collection and Herbarium Techniques 135 
vii. Unknown plant collection could be identifed by the preserved specimens 
in herbaria. 
viii. The present knowledge of the distribution of plants and evolution is 
based mainly on the herbarium specimens available across the globe. 
ix. Herbarium specimens are useful in resolving the several taxonomic 
disputes of the species. 
x. Information regarding the exact area, region or location of the plant may 
be collected from herbarium. 
xi. Herbaria preserve type specimens, and thus serve as a repository of 
experimental voucher specimens and more helpful in chemotaxonomic 
and chromosomal studies. 
xii. Herbaria should publish the catalogues periodically. 
xiii. Herbaria should have the responsibility to report the adverse efects of 
plants (any poisonous plants) on livestock and sensitise the public on 
disease epidemics. 
xiv. Herbaria preserve the national plant wealth and provide the scientifc 
information to the public with respect to the plant that are useful to 
mankind. 
xv. Herbarium material is used to study the anatomy, embryology, palynology 
and chemical aspects of plants. 
xvi. Herbaria should provide the specimen as a loan to other institutions for 
scientifc research but not for commercial propose.
9.2.3 Precautions While Using the Herbarium 
Certain precautions should be taken while using the herbarium sheet. These 
are as follows: 
i. As the dry specimens are brittle and easily damaged, utmost care should 
be taken while handling the plant specimens. 
ii. Support the specimens with a ventilator when carrying them over short 
distances. 
iii. If the specimen is damaged due to pests and insects, please inform 
immediately to the curator and he will disinfect the herbarium sheet to 
prevent further damage. 
iv. Specimen borrowed from other institutions, should be carefully handled, 
and kept in fre-proof, dust-free and pest-free mental boxes.
v. Specimen taken on loan from other institution should be returned before 
the loan period is over. 
9.2.4 Major Herbaria in the World 
Some of the largest herbaria in the world are Royal Botanic Gardens (K) Kew, 
England (65 million collections), National d’HistoireNaturelle (Pl), Paris, 
France (65 million), Komarov Botanical Institute (LE), St. Petersburg, Russia 136 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
(5 million), New York Botanical Garden (NY), Bronx, New York, USA (4.3 
million), Missouri Botanical Garden (MO), St. Louis, USA (2.9 million), 
University of Tokyo Herbarium (1.7 million), etc. 
Further, some of the major Indian herbaria with the number of their 
specimens deposited are given below (Sharma, 1993): 
1. Central National Herbarium, Botanical Survey 
 of India, Calcutta .. 25,00,000 
2. Herbarium of Forest Research Institute, Dehradun .. 3,00,000 
3. Botanical Survey of India (BSI) 
i. Indian Botanical Garden (CAL), Howrah, Calcutta .. 12,000 
ii. Northern Circle, Dehradun .. 1,11,188 
iii. Southern Circle, Coimbatore .. 2,33,000 
iv. Western Circle, Pune .. 1,50,000
v. Eastern Circle, Shillong .. 2,50,000 
vi. Central Circle, Allahabad .. 48,000 
vii. Andaman & Nicobar circle .. 20,000 
viii. Arid zone circle, Jodhpur .. 16,500 
ix. Sikkim Himalayan circle .. 10,000 
x. Arunachal Field station .. 10,000 
xi. Herbarium of Industrial Section, Indian Museum .. 50,000 
xii. Deccan Circle, Hyderabad (started in 2006) .. 300 
4. Blatter Herbarium, Bombay .. 1,00,000 
5. National Botanical Research Institute (NBRI) Herbarium .. 80,000 
6. Herbarium of Rajasthan University, Jaipur 30,000 
7. Herbarium of Delhi University .. 15,000 
8. Herbarium of Jiwaji University, Gwalior .. 15,000 
9. Herbarium of School of Plant Morphology, 
 Meerut College, Meerut .. 25,000 
In addition to above, BSI also maintains the Orchidaria (to protect and 
preserve the orchids) such as National Orchidarium, Yercaud (Tamil Nadu) 
and another one at Shillong (Meghalaya). 
Some other well-known herbaria in India are Herbarium of the 
Division of Botany, Indian Agricultural research Institute (IARI), New 
Delhi; Regional Research Institute (Ayurveda), Medicinal Plant Herbarium, 
Bangalore (Karnataka); Fischer Herbarium, Institute of Forest Genetics and 
Tree Breeding (ICFRE), Coimbatore (Tamil Nadu); Herbarium of Calicut 
University, Calicut (Kerala); Delhi University Botany Herbarium; New Delhi; 
National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources (NBPGR), National Herbarium 
of Cultivated plants, New Delhi; Herbarium, French Institute of Pondicherry, 
Pondicherry; Rapinat Herbarium, St. Joseph’s College, Tiruchirapalli 
(Kerala); JNTBGRI Herbarium, Trivandrum (Kerala); Lloyd Botanic Garden 
Herbarium, Darjeeling (West Bengal), among others.10 
Biostatistics 
Introduction 
Plant biology encompasses diverse areas of research using plant materials that 
include, study and analysis of various phenotypic and biochemical parameters. 
It helps in understanding the range and quantum of genetic diversity among 
plants and plant groups. The measurements of diversity may vary signifcantly 
and considerably at both inter- and intraspecifc levels, resulting in challenges 
of identifcation and resolving them into distinct plant groups. Both continuous 
and discontinuous variations are noticeable in many of the metric traits in 
plants. Seed numbers, crop yield and fruit size are just only a few characters to 
mention wherein diversity can be signifcantly observed. Often, most of such 
research-based investigations are designed, keeping the objectives of plant 
breeding and crop improvement, which generate a vast amount of information. 
Irrespective of the type of study undertaken, a meaningful and concrete 
conclusion is extremely difcult to deduce from raw data, unless certain 
appropriate biostatistical analysis are adopted for meaningful interpretations. 
Thus, bio-statistical tools have become an indispensable part for accurate 
analysis and precise interpretation of data (Peace and Cannon, 1988; 
Compton, 2006). The basic framework of any biostatistical study involves 
determination of appropriate measurable parameters to be considered, after 
which, a population of interest is to be selected for observations and data 
collection. Four types of basic studies can be undertaken, such as: survey, 
observations, experiments, and meta-analytical treatise. Experimental studies 
are of maximum relevance wherein whole or part of the samples is measured 
for various traits and comparative observations are made, both before and 
after the experimental procedures (Compton, 2012). 
Conventionally, statistical parameters like measures of central tendency, 
dispersion, standard deviation, variance, correlation coefcients, bivariate, 
partial and multiple regression, etc., are methods in-vogue (Steel and Torrie, 
1980; Gomez and Gomez, 1984). In addition, several other statistical methods 
such as ANOVA (Analysis of Variance), Regression and path analysis, etc. 
are also used for understanding the diversity among plant genotypes and 
populations. 138 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
10.1 Basic Statistics (Descriptive Statistics) 
The experimental data are often classifed into four major types: (a) Categorial 
Data, (b) Nominal Data, (c) Ordinal Data, (d) Numerical Data. Specifc 
characteristic traits such as “fower colour”, “fruit colour”, “seed shape (round/
wrinkled)”, etc. are some examples of categorial data. Although typically, 
these characters are represented by non-mathematical parameters, however, 
sometimes, a mathematical value maybe assigned to depict each variation of 
the trait being examined. On the other hand, nominal data represent discrete 
values or labels used for denoting variables. However, these variables have 
no quantitative value and can be depicted in any order. Examples of such 
variables can be “fower colour”, “pod shape/colour”, etc. 
10.1.1 Experimental Designs 
Any experiment, particularly in plant biology, is designed keeping in mind, the 
type of sample(s) to be analysed, its distribution and frequency of occurrence 
in its natural habitat and the principal objective of the study, which impact the 
outcome and will yield results. Depending upon all the parameters, and type 
of experiments, the samples being investigated can be grouped into categories. 
Experimental designs can typically be of the following kinds: 
10.1.1.1 Completely Randomised Block Design 
Completely Randomised Block design (CRD), assigns treatments following 
no distinct pattern, rather randomly, to the experimental samples (Fig. 10.1). 
Each sample gets equal chance of receiving a particular treatment and the 
outcome will have no selection bias. 
Fig. 10.1. Illustration of completely randomised block design: Six experimental 
samples were assigned random treatments (1-6). Biostatistics 139 
Randomised Block design 
It is widely used in agricultural research experiments. Such designs categorise 
similar experimental units together into blocks. However, the experimental 
subjects are selected randomly for a treatment (Fig. 10.2). 
Fig. 10.2. Illustration of randomised block design: Six experimental samples were 
assigned into specifc blocks (blue or green); however, treatments are assigned to the 
samples randomly. 
10.1.1.2 Latin Square Design 
Latin Square Designs assign Latin symbols to each experimental treatment. 
Each of such treatment when assigned to a particular sample should be of 
equal duration and all the experimental subjects should receive the treatment 
for the same number of times (Fig. 10.3). 
Fig. 10.3. Illustration of Latin square design. Treatment α signifes treating the 
plantlets with Hormone A while Treatment ß signifes treatment with Hormone B. 
The plant samples in each group are treated for the same time duration. 
10.1.1.3 Factorial Design 
Factorial experiments are favoured when an experimental design involves 
simultaneous analysis of more than one factor, each of which may result in 
multiple observations. 140 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
10.1.1.4 Split Plot Design 
It is a statistical experimental design, wherein, the several key factors that 
may impact the outcome are dependent on each other and cannot be replaced 
(Fig. 10.4). 
Fig. 10.4. Example of split plot design to study the efects of irrigation pattern and 
fertilisers on plant growth. Four experimental plots were chosen to grow either 
paddy and wheat. Each of these felds were subjected to either manual irrigation (I1) 
or drip irrigation (I2). All the plots were further split into two, to test whether 
organic fertilizer (F1) or chemical fertiliser (F2) were suitable for 
healthy growth of the crops. 
Average 
In statistical terms, average maybe defned as the value that is central in a 
particular data set. It is typically obtained by dividing the total of the values 
of all the data in a set by the total number of observations. Average has great 
signifcance in analysis of biological data, as it gives an idea about the central 
value occurring in each set of observations, which represents that particular 
trait. Mean and average are statistical terms, often used interchangeably, 
and refers to the value representative of a set of data. Mean, Median and 
Mode are commonly used measures of central tendencies in data analysis. 
Median, on the other hand, is the value that occurs in the middle, when a 
set of observations are arranged either in ascending or descending order. The 
value occurring most frequently in a dataset is referred to as Mode. Use of all 
the three tools yields clear and accurate information from the raw data. Mean 
can be applied to all the numerical data obtained for investigating a particular 
trait/ characteristic of plant samples. Mathematically, it is represented as:
∑ n Mean (µ) = —— n 
where, n: number of observations  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biostatistics 141 
Arithmetic Mean 
The mean is a measurement of unit most frequently used to describe a 
frequency distribution of same type. The arithmetic mean or average is 
calculated by dividing them sum (total) of all the individual values of data 
series by the total number of items. 
X1 + X2 + X3 + X4 + X5 — ........ + Xn Arithmetic Mean or X = 
n 
— ∑x 
or X = —— n 
where ΣX is sum of all Xs from 1 to n and n = number of items.
Example: The heights of 10 plants are found to be 15, 21, 17, 19, 21, 16, 14, 
17, 15 and 13 cm. Calculate the arithmetic mean of the plant height. 
Solution: 
— ∑x Sum of the values of all items i.e., Arithmetic Mean X = —— n Number of items 
ΣX = X1 + X2 + X3 + X4 + X5+X6 + X7 + X8 + X9 + X10 
= 15 + 21 + 17 + 19 + 21 + 16 + 14 + 17 + 15 + 13 
= 168 cm 
n = 10 
— 168 X = —— = 16.8 10 
So, the arithmetic mean of the plant height is 16.8 cm or the average plant 
height is 16.8 cm. 
In case of many observations, i.e., more than 10, the arithmetic mean can 
be calculated by preparing a frequency distribution table. Frequency is the 
number of individuals representing a class. 
1. When the data are discrete and unclassifed but tabulated, the arithmetic 
mean can be calculated in the following way: 
Item X1 X2 X3 X4 ------- Xn 
Frequency f1 f2 f3 f4 ------- fn 
_ f1x1 + f2x2 + f3x3 + f4x4 ....... fnxn Arithmetic Mean (x) = fn 
∑fx ∑fx or x = —— = —— ∑f n 
Example: The seed yield (in grams) per plant for 30 maize plants was found 
to be 110, 115, 112, 108, 110, 120, 115, 1128, 108, 115, 121, 115, 110, 112,  
142 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
108, 121, 110, 110, 115, 110, 115, 112, 110, 115, 112, 112, 115, 110, 112 and 
110. Calculate the average yield per plant from the given data. 
Solution: From the given data, there are some fgures which appear more than _ once, for example seed yield 110 g/plant has been recorded in nine plants. So, 
the frequency of plants with 110 g. seed yield in this case is 9. The frequencies 
of other values can also be calculated in the same way and the data can be 
tabulated as follows: 
Class 
Seed yield per plant x 
Frequency (f) 
No. of plants representing f x X 
108 
110 
112 
115 
120 
121 
3 
9 
7 
8 
1 
2 
324 
990 
784 
920 
120 
242 
Total 30 Σfx = 3380
_ ∑fx 3380 Arithmetic Mean (x) = —— = —— = 112.66 gm/plant n 30 
So, the average yield per plant is 112.66 grams. 
II. When the data of continuous series are classifed, then only the frequency 
of individuals falling in the class appears. In such cases, for calculating the 
arithmetic mean, the mid value of each class is taken into consideration 
and the subsequent steps of computation are like those of discontinuous 
series. 
Example 1: Calculate the arithmetic mean from the following data: 
Class 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 
Frequency 6 10 12 18 4 
Solution: 
Class Mid value of class (x) Frequency (f) fx 
10-20 15 6 90 
20-30 25 10 250 
30-40 35 12 420 
40-50 45 18 810 
50-60 55 4 220 
Total Σf = 50 Σfx = 1790
_ ∑fx 1790 Arithmetic Mean (x) = —— = —— = 35.8 ∑f 50 Biostatistics 143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example 2: Calculate the arithmetic mean of fowers per plant from the 
following data: 
Class (fowers/Plant) 0-10 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 
Frequency (No. of plants) 3 10 15 12 8 
Solution: 
Class Mid value of class (x) Frequency (f) fx 
0-10 5 3 15 
10-20 15 10 150 
20-30 25 15 375 
30-40 35 12 420 
40-50 45 8 360 
Total Σf = 48 Σfx = 1320
_ ∑fx 1320 Arithmetic Mean (x) = —— = —— = 27.5 ∑f 48 
So, the average number of lowers per plant is 27.5 or 28. 
Merits of Arithmetic Mean 
1. It is a mathematical mean. 
2. It is easy to calculate. 
3. It is always defnite.
4. It establishes a simple relation among the values of data series. 
Demerits of Arithmetic Mean 
1. It cannot be determined by simple visual observation of data. 
2. It cannot be presented by chart or graph. 
3. It is not suitable for qualitative studies. 
4. Sometimes it does not show representation of series. 
10.1.2 Median 
When the values of all items of a series are arranged in increasing (ascending) 
or decreasing (descending) order it is usually called an array and the middle 
item of an array is called median. The median divides the series into two 
groups; one group in which the values of items are less than the middle value 
and the other group in which the values of the items are greater than the middle 
item. Mean is denoted by Me or Mdn. 
The methods of calculating the median are comparatively simple. The 
value of median is not afected by change in extreme values. If the amount of 
data in a series is odd, the median is the middle value. But if the amount of 
data in a series is even, the median is the average of the two middle values.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
144 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
10.1.2.1 Methods of Determining Median 
1. For unclassifed and untabulated data: To calculate the median, the data 
are frst arranged in increasing or decreasing order and then the following 
formula is used: 
i. For odd number of data in the series 
n+1
Me = —— , where n = number of items or data. 2 
Example: The heights (in cm) for 9 plants are given below. Find out the 
Median Height 67, 65, 70, 68, 62, 63, 64, 63, 66. 
Solution: The height measurements can be arranged in ascending order as 
follows: 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70. 
The number of the data in the above array n = 9, 
n+1 9+1 Media (Me) = —— = —— = 5 (i.e., value of the 5th data in the array) 2 2 
= 66 
ii. For even number of data in the series. 
The median is calculated as follows: 
_ 
n _ th item + n + 1
2 2
Me = 
2 
Suppose, for example, there are 10 data in a series 
10 10 ( 2 )+ ( 2 + 1) 5 + (5 + 1) 5 + 6 So, Me = = = 2 2 2 
Value of 5th data + Value of 6th data of the array
= 
2 
Example: The number of fowers recorded on plants are: 15, 10, 8, 12, 13,7, 
11, 14, 9, 16. Find out the median value of fowers per plant.
Solution: The given numbers of fowers on 10 plants can be arranged in 
ascending order as under: 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 
Total amount of data in the above array n = 10 (even number) 
_ 
n _ 
n + + 1
2 2
Me = 
2 
10_ 10_ + + 1 2 2 5th value + 5 + 1 value
 = = 
2 2 
11 + 12 23
 = = = 11.5 fowers 2 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biostatistics 145 
Example: Calculate the median of the following series of data obtained by 
measuring the height or 16 plants: 9, 10, 10, 8, 9, 7, 8, 11, 7, 12, 14, 12, 11, 
14, 15, 13. 
Solution: The given data of plant heights are arranged in ascending order as 
follows: 
n = 16 (even number) 
_ 
n + + _ 
n 16_ _ 1 + 16+ 1 2 2 2 2 Value of 8th item + Value of 9th item 
Me = = = 2 2 2 
10 + 11 
= = 10.5 2 
So the media height = 10.5 cm 
For grouped data 
(i) Discontinuous or Discrete series of data. To calculate the median for _ 
n _ 
n discrete grouped data, frst of all + + 1th the cumulative frequency of 2 2 
whole series is obtained. The value of data against n + 1 th cumulative 2 
frequency will be the median for odd number of data and the mean 
of values against cumulative frequencies will be the median for series 
containing even number of data. 
Example: Calculate the median of the following data obtained by counting 
the number of fowers on 19 plants:
Class (No. of fowers/Plant) 1 2 3 4 5 
Frequency (No. of plants) 3 4 6 3 3 
Calculation: 
Class (No. of fowers/plant) Frequency Cumulative frequency 
1 3 3 
2 4 7 
3 6 13 
4 3 16 
5 3 19 
n = 19 (odd number) 
Media (Me) = Value of data against ——
n + 1 cumulative frequency 2 
= Value against 19 + 1 
—— cumulative frequency 2 
19 + 1 20 = = = 10
2 20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
146 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Since cumulative frequency 10 is included in 13 which represent the 
class value 3, therefore, for cumulative frequency 10, the class value will be 
3 which is the median. 
Example: Calculate the median for the following data recorded for heights 
(in cm) of 80 plants: 
Class (Plant height) 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 
No. of plants 4 9 14 18 15 13 7 
Solution: 
Class [Plant height (in cm)] Frequency Cumulative frequency 
(No. of plants) (Cf) 
119 
120 
121 
122 
123 
124 
125 
4 
9 
14 
18 
15 
13 
7 
4 
13 
27 
45 
60 
73 
80 
n = 80 (even number) 
Class value against _ 
n th + _ 
n + 1th cumulative frequency
Media (Me) = 2 2
2 
80 80 th + + 1 cumulative frequency 2 2 
= 
2 
The class values for cumulative frequencies 40 and 41 are included in the 
class value of cumulative frequency 45 which is 122. Therefore, Mean (Me) 
122 + 122 = = 122 2 
For classifed grouped data. The median is determined in the following 
way: 
(a) frst, the cumulative frequency of all the classes is obtained from the 
given frequencies. 
(b) median class value is determined which is class. 
(c) then that class is ascertained whose cumulative frequency precedes that 
of median class (c.f.) 
(d) the median is calculated by the following formula:  
 
Biostatistics 147 
N + 1− F 2 Media (Me) = L + × i 
f 
N − CF 2 Media (Me) = L + × i f 
Where, L = lower limit of median class 
N = sum of all the frequencies (N = Σf) 
Cf = cumulative frequency of class preceding that of median class 
F = frequency of median class 
i = class interval of the median class (i.e., upper limit - lower limit 
or L2 - L1). 
Example: The number of seeds produced by 55 plants of plot are given in the 
following table. Calculate the median seed number of a plant. 
Class interval 40-50 50-60 60-70 70-80 80-90 90- 100- 110-
100 110 120 
No. of plants 5 8 8 15 7 4 3 2 
Solution: 
Class Frequency (f) Cumulative frequency (Cf) 
40-50 5 5 
50-60 9 14 
60-70 9 23 = c.f. of the class preceding that of median class 
70-80 15(f) 38 
80-90 8 46 
90-100 4 50 
100-110 3 53 
110-120 2 55 
Σf = 55
n To fnd out median class we use formula 2 
So, Median class = 55 
2 = 27.5 
Now, the median class value falls within the cumulative frequency of 
class interval 70-80, therefore, the median class is 70-80. 
The width or class interval (i) = L2-L1 
= 80 - 70 = 10 
Now the median is calculated by the following formula:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
148 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
n − cf 2 Me = L + × i f 
27.5 − 23 = 70 + × 10
15 
45 45 = 70 + 15 × 10 = 70 + 15 
= 70 + 3 = 73. 
Merits of Median 
1. It is calculated easily and located exactly. 
2. It is not afected by abnormally large or small values.
3. Its size cannot be changed much by adding a few more items. 
4. Median can be used in quantitative measurements. 
Demerits of Median 
1. The median of two or more series cannot be calculated by using the 
median of the component series. 
2. It may not be represented in central data. 
3. It cannot be used where weightage is given to some items. 
10.1.3 Mode 
Mode is another unit of measurement of central tendency which is used to 
obtain a quick estimate of central tendency. Mode is defned as the value 
which appears again and again for maximum number of times in a set of 
observations. In other words, mode is that variety or item in the series which 
shows highest frequency. It is denoted by Mo or Z. Sometimes, in a series of 
data all the varieties have equal frequency. In such a series there is no mode. 
In some series more than one data have equal frequency. In such series there 
may be more than one mode. Such a series is said to be multimodal series. 
That series is analysed properly to get the genuine mode. 
10.1.3.1 Method of Determining Mode 
For diferent types of data, the methods of computation of Mode are diferent.
i. For Non-grouped data. If the values of all the items are given separately 
then the mode is the value of that item which shows largest frequency. 
Example: Find out the mode size of shoe from the following numbers of 
shoes 2, 7, 4, 1, 7, 7, 6, 7, 7, 6, 5, 3, 2, 2, 7, 7, 5 Mode = 7. 
ii. For discrete series of data. Mode of discrete series of data is determined 
easily because the fgure with highest frequency is mode of the series. 
 
 
Biostatistics 149 
Example: Determine the mode from the following data regarding the number 
of fowers per plant:
Number of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
fowers/plants
No. of plants 4 7 10 19 3 25 20 5 3 1 
Solution: The above Table of data distribution indicates that 5 fowers per 
plant is represented 35 times out of 129 plants which is the largest frequency. 
Therefore, the value of Mode is 5 fowers per plant.
For grouped data, the mode can be calculated by identifying the class with 
highest frequency by grouping method which is detailed as under: 
i. Grouping Method: When in a given series two or more classes show 
same frequency, mode cannot be determined by inspection method. 
Sometimes, the frequencies of neighbouring classes afect the mode 
determination in such a way that a class other than the true mode 
class with highest frequency is treated as mode. In order to avoid such 
mistakes, grouping method is used to determine mode which is the best 
method. Grouping method is outlined below: 
Grouping Table: For this, table is made in which frst column is meant 
for observed items or classes and the next 6 columns are meant for frequency. 
In the frst frequency column, the frequency of each item or class is mentioned. 
In the second frequency column, the given frequencies are grouped in 
pairs starting from frst and the combined values of paired frequencies are 
mentioned. 
In the third frequency column, the groups of two frequencies each are 
made starting from the frequency of the second item or class and the combined 
values are noted against diferent groups.
In the fourth frequency column groups of three frequencies each are made 
starting from the frst frequency and the combined values of three frequencies 
in diferent groups are recorded.
In the ffth frequency column, the frequencies of frst column are made 
into groups of three each starting from the second frequency and combined 
values of 3 frequencies of diferent groups are recorded.
In the sixth frequency column, the frequencies of frst column are 
bracketed into groups of three each starting from the third frequency and the 
combined value of three frequencies is noted against each group. 
ii. Analysis Table: This is made to record the items or classes represented 
by highest frequency of diferent columns.
iii. Determination of Mode: The value of item or class which is represented 
by highest in the analysis table is mode. 
The grouping method for determining mode is illustrated by taking the 
example of the following data:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
150 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Example: Find out the mode of the following series: 
No. of fruits per plant 
No. of plates 
(i) Grouping Table 
Number of fruits 
per plant 1 
30 3 
31 9 
32 5 
33 4 
34 8 
35 7 
36 6 
37 2 
(ii) Analysis Table 
Frequency 
column 30 31 
30 31 32 33 34 35 
3 9 5 4 8 7 
Frequency column 
2 3 4 
] ] 12 17 ] ] 14 ] 9 ] ] 12 19 ] ] 15 ]13 ] 8 
Items or class with highest frequency
32 33 34 35 
5 
18 
21 
36 
36 
6 
37 
2 
6 
]
17 
]
15 
37 
1 31 
2 
3 31 
4 
5 
6 
Total 2 
34 35 
32 
33 34 
34 35 
32 33 34 35 
2 2 4 3 
36 
2 
From the above analysis table, 34 fruits/plant appeared four times which 
has the highest frequency. Therefore, the mode (Mo) = 34. 
(iii) For Classifed Data. Firstly, the class with highest frequency, i.e., Mode 
class is identifed either by inspection method or grouping method and 
then the mode is calculated with the help of the following formula: 
fm- f1
Mode (Mo) = Lt
 + × (L2 – L1) 2fm – f1 – f2 
Since L2 – L1 = i 
fm- f1 Mo = L1 + × i 
2fm – f1 – f2 
Where, L1 = Lower limit of mode class 
fm = Frequency of mode class 
f1 = Frequency of class preceding the mode class  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biostatistics 151 
f2 = frequency of the class succeeding mode class 
i = Width of the mode class (i.e., upper limit – lower limit or 
L2 - L1 of mode class) 
Let us take the following classifed data table for calculation of mode 
here: 
Class 40-50 50-60 60-70 70-80 80-90 90-100 100-110 110-120 
Frequency 5 9 9 15 8 4 3 2 
From the above data table, it is apparent that the class 70-80 has highest 
frequency, i.e., 15. Therefore, 70-80 is the mode class. The mode can now be 
calculated with the help of the following formula: 
fm- f1
Mo = L1 + × i 2fm – f1 – f2 
Here, L1 = 70, fm = 15, f1 = 9, f2 = 8 and i = 10 
15 - 9
∴ Mo = 70 + × 10 2× 15 – 9 – 8 
6 = 70 + × 10 
30 – 9 – 8 
= 70 + 6 × 10 = 70 + 6 × 10 30 – 17 13 
60 Mo = 70 + = 70 + 4.61 13 
Mo = 74.61 
Merits of Mode 
1. It is based on all values and can be subjected to further algebraic 
treatments. 
2. It represents group as well as extreme items and is not afected unless 
they are in modal class. 
Demerits 
1. It requires intricate calculation. 
2. It cannot be used for further calculations and interpretations. 
10.1.4 Range 
Statistical range is the diference between the highest and lowest values in a 
data set. It is a standard measure of dispersion or variability among samples. 
The value of range can never be negative; however, it can be positive or equal 
to zero. In terms of signifcance, range is often considered to be unreliable as 
its value is dependent on two extreme observations, and not the entire data set  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
152 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
as a whole. However, it is a rather convenient way to express the quantum of 
variations existing among diferent samples for a particular parameter under 
study. Typical parameters that make use of range in depicting data pertaining 
to plant samples are, chromosome numbers of a particular genus, plant height, 
length of seedling, etc. Mathematically, range of a given set of data is obtained 
by the following formula: 
Range = Highest Observation – Lowest Observation
This is the simple measure of dispersion. The image of distribution is the 
diference between the largest and the smallest data or items of a series. The 
range of data provides certain amount of variability. 
Suppose that the heights (in cm) of ten individual wheat plants in a plot 
are: 70, 50, 60, 90, 80, 65, 40, 75, 55 and 85. 
The range of plant height (R) = Highest value – Lowest value
 or R = H – L
 = 90 – 40 = 50 
i.e., plant height ranges from 40 cm to 90 cm 
Highest value – Lowest value Co-efcient of Range = Highest value + Lowest value
Example: Find out the range and co-efcient of range for the following series 
of data of plant heights (in cm): 17, 15, 12, 16, 10, 18, 20, 14, 11. 
Solution: 
Range (R) = Higher value – Lowest value 
R = H – L 
Here, H = 20, L = 10 
So, R = 20 –10 = 10 cm 
H – L 20 – 10 10 1 Co-efcient of Range = H + L = = = 20 + 10 30 3 
Co-efcient of R = 3 
1 
Example: Calculate the range and co-efcient of range of plant height from 
the following data: 
Plant height 10-15 15-20 20-25 25-30 30-35 35-40 40-45 45-50 
(in cm) 
Number of plants 5 10 20 40 35 30 25 15 
Solution: 
Range (R) = H – L 
Here, H = 50 and L = 10 
∴ Range = 50 – 10 = 40 cm 
H – L 50 – 10 40 2 Co-efcient of R = H + L = = = = 0.66 50 + 10 60 3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biostatistics 153 
Merits of Range 
1. It represents the two extremes of observations. 
2. Very easy to calculate.
3. It indicates two extremes between which the data or items of the series 
are dispersed or spread. 
Demerits 
1. Range cannot be considered as reliable measure of variability because 
it is based on only two extremes of observation, i.e., highest and lowest 
values. 
2. It is extremely infuenced by the variation in sampling.
3. Range is much sensitive to size of sample or population.
4. It is not based on frequency of data. 
10.1.5 Standard Deviation 
Mean Deviation 
Deviation refers to the diference between the calculated means (arithmetic 
mean, median and mode) and the value of individual data. Mean deviation 
is the mean of the deviations of all data of a series from the real mean value. 
Theoretically, the mean deviation is a true measure of dispersion. In the 
calculation of mean deviation all the values (+ and –) of deviation are taken 
as positive. When the mean deviation is divided by the mean of the series, the 
value so obtained is called co-efcient of mean deviation.
Computation of Mean Deviation 
1. When the data are unclassifed and untabulated
∑(dx) (i) Mean deviation (ox) from arithmetic mean = n 
δx (ii) Co-efcient of Mean deviation or Co-efcient of δx = 
x 
∑(dm) (iii) Mean deviation from Median or δM = n 
(iv) Co-efcient of Mean deviation from Median (Co-efcient of δM) 
δM
= M ∑(dZ) (v) Mean deviation from Mode (M⸰
 or Z) or δZ = and n 
∑(dZ) (vi) Co-efcient of deviation from Mode (δZ) = Z 
Where, d͞x = deviation from arithmetic mean 
dM = deviation from Median 
dZ = deviation from Mode 
n = number of items or data in a series  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
154 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
 ͞x = Arithmetic mean 
M = Median 
Mo or Z = Mode 
Example: Calculate the mean deviation and co-efcient of mean deviation 
from the arithmetic mean from the following data on seed weight: 4.8, 5.5, 
6.5, 7.1, 7.3, 7.5, 8.0 and 8.5. 
Solution: 
S.No. Seed Weight (x) Arithmetic (Mean(x) Deviation from the 
Arithmetic Mean (all in +) 
d = x-x 
1 4.8 4.8 – 6.9 = 2.1 
2 5.5 55.2 5.5 – 6.9 = 1.4 
3 
4 
6.5 
7.1 
x = 8 6.5 – 6.9 = 0.4 
7.1 – 6.9 = 0.2 
5 7.3 = 6.9 7.3 – 6.9 = 0.4 
6 7.5 7.5 – 6.9 = 0.6 
7 8.0 8.0 – 6.9 = 1.1 
8 8.5 8.5 – 6.9 = 1.6 
X=8 55.2 ∑ dx = 7.8 
∑(dx) 7.8 Mean deviation from Arithmetic Mean dx = n = = 0.975 8 
Co-efcient of mean deviation from Arithmetic Mean = dx = 
0.975 = 0.141 x 6.9 
2. When the data are ungrouped and tabulated 
The mean deviation of ungrouped data is calculated with the help of the 
following formulae: 
∑ fdx (i) δx = n 
∑ fdM (ii) δM = , and n 
∑ fdZ (iii) δZ = 
n 
Where, f = frequency 
3. When Data are Classifed and Tabulated
The mean deviation of tabulated and cdata is also calculated with the 
help of same formulae as are used for ungrouped data. 
Example: 100-seed weight of maize recorded for 100 plants are presented in 
the following Table. Calculate the mean deviation and co-efcient of mean 
deviation from the data table. Biostatistics 155 
100-Seed weight (in gm) 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 
Number of plants 10 25 42 15 8 
100-seed Mid-value Frequency fx ∑ Deviation fd͞x fx 
Weight of the (f) of the ͞X= d
͞=x-͞x n 
class class (x) class 
10-20 15 10 150 3360 15-33.6 = 18.6 186 
20-30 25 25 625 — 25-33.6 = 8.6 215.0 
30-40 35 42 1470 100 35-33.6 = 2.6 109.2 
40-50 45 15 675 =33.60 45-33.6 = 12.6 189.0 
50-60 55 8 440 55-33.6 = 22.6 180.8 
n =100 Σfx = 3360 Σ͞fx = 65.0 Σfdx ͞ = 880 
∑ fdx 880 δx = = = 8.8 n 100 
δx 8.8 Co-efcient of δx = x = = 0.261 33.6 
The statistical parameter, Standard Deviation (S.D.), as the name 
suggests, is a measure of the extent of dispersion of a particular set of data 
from its mean. The mean or average of a dataset refects the central value, but 
does not provide any information on the outliers, which may have signifcant 
bearing on information analysed from the dataset. Mathematically, Standard 
Deviation is depicted by the symbol “σ” (Lee et al., 2015). For a given set 
of data, if the value of S.D. is low, it refects that all the values are clustered 
around the mean, while a higher S.D. indicates how far a particular value is 
spread out from the mean. Mathematically, Standard Deviation is deduced by: 
∑
n 
(xi – µ)
2 
Standard Deviation (σ) = √ i = 1 
n – 1 
Standard deviation is routinely used for statistical analysis of biological 
data as it yields information on whether a dataset is far apart/closely scattered 
from the mean. It basically accounts for the frequency of variations occurring 
in the data, which helps in predicting consistency of a particular parameter/
trait being investigated among various plant samples assessed. The value of 
standard deviation also gives an idea of the extent of heterogeneity in the 
samples. 
It is the positive square root of mean of deviations of individual values of 
a data series from the arithmetic mean of the series. In other words, the square 
of standard deviation is equal to mean of the square of deviations of individual 
observations from the arithmetic mean. It is also called mean square deviation 
from the mean and is denoted by a Greek symbol σ.
Let us suppose that n is the total number of observations (Say, X1, X2, X3, 
X4 ....... Xn) and the sum of the values of all observations is S.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
S Thus, the mean ( ͞x ) = n 
The deviations of individual observations can now be expressed as 
follows: 
X1 – ͞x,X2 – ͞x,X3 – ͞x,X4 – ͞x ……Xn – ͞x 
The square of standard deviation SD2
 or σ2 
(x1 – ͞x )
2 + (x2 – ͞x )
2 + (x3 – ͞x )
2 + (x4 – ͞x )
2
..... (xn – ͞x )
2
 = 
n 
(x1 – ͞x )
2
+(x2 – ͞x )
2
+(x3 – ͞x )
2
+(x4 – ͞x )
2
.......(xn – ͞x )
2 
∴S.D. or σ = √ n 
If the values of observed data are equal, the mean deviation will be zero 
which represents its lowest value. The value of standard deviation will increase 
with the increase in deviations of individual data from their arithmetic mean. 
To make the standard deviation comparable, co-efcient of standard deviation 
is calculated which is the ratio between standard deviation of observation 
∑ d2 
series and its mean, i.e.., standard deviation (S.D. or σ) = √ n 
Standard Deviation 
Co-efcient of SD = Arithmetic Mean 
σ = 
x 
10.1.5.1 Methods of Calculating Standard Deviation 
Generally, the following three methods are used for calculating standard 
deviation: 
1. Direct Method. 
2. Short Cut Method. 
3. Step Deviation Method. 
i. Direct Method: In this method, frst the arithmetic mean (͞x) of the 
series is calculated. the deviations of individual values from the mean are 
calculated (d = X – ͞x) which may be either positive or negative number. 
The value of d2
is always a positive fgure. Then the standard deviation 
(S.D. or σ) is calculated as follows:
(i) When the data are unclassifed, the following formula is used to 
calculate the standard deviation: 
∑ d2 
S.D. or σ = √ n 
Where n = number of data  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biostatistics 157 
Example: Calculate S.D. from the given data collected on 10 plants: 55, 58, 
60, 62, 68, 65, 66, 72, 75, 69. 
650 Solution: Arithmetic mean = 10 = 65.0 
S. No. Data Mean x Deviation d = X-͞x d2 Σ d2 
1 55 650 55 – 65 = –10 100 358 
— 
2 58 10 58 – 65 = –7 49 
3 60 = 65.0 60 – 65 = –5 25 
4 2 62 – 65 = –3 9 
5 68 68 – 65 = +3 9 
6 65 65 – 65 = 0 0 
7 66 66 – 65 = +1 1 
8 72 72 – 65 = +7 49 
9 75 75 – 65 = +10 100 
10 69 69 – 65 = +4 16 
√ 358 S.D. or σ = = 6.0 10 
(ii) When the data are ungrouped and tabulated, the S.D. is calculated with 
the help of the following formula: 
∑ fd2 
S.D. or σ = √ , where f = frequency of data
n 
(iii) If the data are classifed and tabulated then also the same formula 
is used in the calculation of S.D. as is used for ungrouped data. But 
the diference here is that, in case of classifed data, the mid-values 
of diferent classes are used to calculate the mean (x) and then the 
deviation (d) of each class is calculated by subtracting the mean from 
mid-value of each class, i.e., d = (X – x). The deviation squares (d2
) 
are then multiplied by the frequency (f) of the respective classes to 
get (fd2
). The standard deviation is calculated with the help of the 
following formula: 
∑ fd2 
S.D. or σ = √ n 
ii. Short Cut Method for Calculating S.D. 
The method involves the following steps: 
1. Any value of an unclassifed series or mid-value of any class in case of 
classifed series is treated as assumed mean (A). 
2. The deviation (dx) of individual item or class is calculated by 
subtracting the assumed mean from the individual data (in case of 
unclassifed series) or mid-value (X) of each class (in case of classifed 
series) dX = X – A.  
 
 
 
 
 
158 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
3. The deviation values are squared to get dx2
 and then for ungrouped 
data and for classifed data separate formulae are used to calculate 
standard deviation: 
Formula for calculation of S.D. of ungrouped data 
∑ dx2 ∑ dx 2 
σ = – √ n n 
or σ = 1 
n ∑ dx2 – (∑ dx)
2 
n √
Formula for calculation of S.D. of tabulated classifed data
∑ fdx2 ∑ fdx 2 
σ = – √ n n 
or σ = 1 
n ∑ fdx2 – (∑ fdx)
2 
n √
Example: Find out the standard deviation of the following observations 
regarding the number of fowers per plant: 3, 2, 1, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15
Solution: Arithmetic mean = 10
80 = 8 
∴(x) = 8. 
S. No. No. of fowers Deviation (d) – (x-͞x) Square of deviation (d2
) 
per plant 
1 3 3 – 8 = –5 25 
2 2 2 – 8 = –6 35 
3 1 1 – 8 = –7 149 
4 5 5 – 8 = –3 9 
5 7 7 – 8 = –1 1 
6 9 9 – 8 = +1 1 
7 11 11 – 8 = +3 9 
8 13 13 – 8 = +5 25 
9 14 14 – 8 = +6 16 
10 15 15 – 8 = +7 49 
n =10 S = 8 Σ dx2 = 240 
240 SD2
 or σ2
 = = 24 10 
SD = √24= 4.889
Example: Calculate the S.D. of the following data on the heights (in cm) of 
10 plants: 73, 75, 80, 42, 57, 65, 52, 42, 47, 67. 
Solution: Suppose that the assumed mean of the given series is 57.  
 
 
 
 
 
Biostatistics 159 
S. No. Height in cm (x) Deviation dx = (X-A) dx2 
1 73 73 – 57 = 16 256 
2 75 75 – 57 = 18 324 
3 80 80 – 57 = 23 529 
4 42 42 – 57 = –15 225 
5 57 (A) 57 – 57 = 0 00 
6 65 65 – 57 = +8 64 
7 52 52 – 57 = –5 25 
8 42 42 – 57 = –15 225 
9 47 47 – 57 = –10 100 
10 67 67 – 57 = 10 100 
n =10 Σ dx = 30 Σ d2 = 1848 
S.D. (σ) = 1 
n ∑ dx2 – (∑ dx)
2 
n √
= 
1 10 × 1848 – (30)2 
10 √
= 10
1 √18480 – 900 
= 10
1 √17580 
1 
= (132.58) ∴S.D. = 13. 258 10 
Example: Calculate the standard deviation of data presented in the following 
table: 
Height of 
plants of 
mutant 
50-
60 
60-
70 
70-
80 
80-
90 
90-
100 
100-
110 
110-
120 
120-
130 
130-
140 
140-
150 
150-
160 
population 
(in cm) 
Frequency 5 7 18 26 35 25 40 20 16 6 2 
Solution: Suppose 105 is the assumed mean of plant height. 
Class (plant Mid- Frequency Deviation dx fdx dx2 Fdx2 
height in value of (f) = x-A 
cm) Clas (x) 
50-60 55 5 55 – 105 = –50 –250 2,500 12,500 
60-70 65 7 65 – 105 = –40 –280 1,600 11,200 
70-80 75 18 75 – 105 = –30 –540 900 16,200 
80-90 85 26 85 – 105 = –20 –520 400 10,400 
90-100 95 35 95 – 105 = –10 –350 100 3,500 
100-110 105=A 25 105 – 105 = 00 00 00 00 
110-120 115 40 115 – 105 = 10 400 100 4,000  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
160 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
120-130 
130-140 
140-150 
150-160 
125 
135 
145 
155 
20 
16 
6 
2 
n = 200 
125 – 105 = 20 
125 – 105 = 30 
145 – 105 = 40 
155 – 105 = 50 
400 
480 
240 
100 
Σ f dx 
= -320 
400 
900 
1,600 
2,500 
8,000 
14,400 
9,600 
5,000 
Σ f dx2 
= 94.800 
2 ∑ fdx2 2 (∑ fdx) S.D. (σ) = – √ n n 
94800 320 √= – – 200 200 
= √474 – 2.56 = √471.77 
σ = 21.71
Merits of Standard Deviation 
1. Standard deviation is mathematically computed and reliable. Therefore, 
it is used in quality research work. 
2. It is based on every individual data of a series. 
3. It is least afected by sudden deviation of any type.
4. It is a defnite measure of dispersion.
Demerits of Standard Deviation 
1. Method of its calculation is complicated and so inconvenient. 
2. In this measure, higher values are given more importance than the lower 
values which afect the S.D. value.
10.1.6 Standard Error of Mean 
Like Standard Deviation, Standard Error of Mean (SE) also refects the extent 
of variation in a set of data. However, a principal diference exists among the 
two (Lee et al., 2015). While standard deviation gives an idea about the extent 
of variation prevalent among individuals in a data set, standard error of mean 
refects the variation present in a population. 
A higher value of SE is expected with a lower value of n (where n = 
population size), and thereby a higher value of SD. Similarly, the value of SE 
decreases, with the higher value of n and thus a smaller SD. Mathematically, 
Standard Error of Mean is given by: 
σ
Standard Error of Mean (σx) = SE = 
̄ √n
Standard Error of Mean is another statistical parameter that is indispensable 
in accurately assessing variations in a given data set. It basically provides 
information among the extent of dispersion among the population mean. A 
lower SE is often associated with a bigger sample size which is representative  
 
 
 
Biostatistics 161 
of the entire population. On the contrary, a lower sample set will lead to 
observations with higher variations, thereby, a higher SE which may result in 
inaccuracies and lead to false conclusions. 
If instead of considering one sample, several samples are taken from the 
same population, the standard deviations of diferent samples may vary. This 
variation is measured by standard error or standard error of mean. Standard 
error is a measure of dispersion of diferent hypothetical means around the 
grand mean. It is a statistical constant which measures the dispersion of 
sample means around population mean. 
Standard error is calculated by the following formula: 
Standard deviation or S.D. or σ
Standard Error (S.E.) = ____________________________ 
√n 
Where S.D. or σ = Standard deviation of individual sample
 n = Total number of observations 
Standard error thus gives an idea as to how a mean of any sample difers 
from the true mean of population. Therefore, while making a statement on 
some measurements one should state the average + standard error, say for 
example, the height of plants of particular species measures 105 + 0.13 cm. 
Here, 105 cm is the average height and 0.13 is the standard error. 
Sometimes instead of standard error, probable error (P.E.) is used which 
is 2/3 or 0.6745 time the standard deviation
∴P.E. = 2/3 or 0.6745 or
Example: In a sample plot of 1 square metre, the height of 100 plants was 
measured and the standard deviation was calculated to be 5.0. What will be 
the standard error of the sample? 
Solution: 
σ
Since, S.E. = √n 
5.0
∴ S.E. = √100 
= 
5.0 = 0.50 10 
10.2 Analysis of Variance (ANOVA; Components 
of Mean) 
Variance 
It is a very useful measure of dispersion which is commonly used for 
population data. The arithmetic mean of the squares of deviations obtained 
from the mean is referred to as variance. It is based on standard deviation and 
the square of the standard deviation is termed as variance.  
 
 
 
162 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
∑(X– ͞x )
2 
V = σ 2 or (S.D.)2
 = 
n 
∑ d2 ∑ fd2 
or V = or
n n 
Most of the research experiments by biologists are designed on the basis 
of a key hypothesis, whose relevance is refected in the results obtained 
(Kaufmann and Schering, 2007). However, the dynamic nature of biological 
specimens, especially plant systems lead to a great deal of confusion as it is 
difcult to determine whether the variations obtained in the observations are 
a result of efect of experimental factors or due to random factors. In general, 
for any plant-based research experiment, the signifcance of the data obtained 
is enhanced if the sampling is broad and comprises of enough individuals 
representing a population. Sampling of individuals should be carried out 
with respect to their geographical location, characteristics and other relevant 
factors prior to setting up of research experiment. As described earlier, the 
raw experimental data often do not yield the true picture as multiple variables 
infuence the results. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), frst described by 
Fischer (1925), is one of the most widely used statistical tool, which has 
utility in a wide range of experiments conducted in biological science for 
assessing the range and quantum of variation present in them (Edwards, 2005; 
Lazic, 2008). ANOVA fnds applicability in a vast majority of experimental 
designs in plant biology and biotechnology. It relies on the basic methodology 
that the raw data obtained after experimental procedure is structured and the 
variabilities are accounted for, so that the homogeneity in data is regained 
in subsets of subjects and heterogeneity if any, is attributed to the relevant 
factors (Kaufmann and Schering, 2007). It basically makes use of the sum 
of squares of deviation observed from the means of respective samples (as 
component of mean). 
Analysis of variance of each trait for the randomised block design can 
be estimated with the following model equation (Panse and Sukhatme,1978): 
Yij = m + ai + bj + eij 
Efect of jth block 
Random error associated with the ith genotype under jth block 
General mean 
Observed for the ith genotype in jth block  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biostatistics 163 
Table 10.1. ANOVA forms assumed for data from randomised 
block design experiments 
Source of variation Degree of Sum of Mean sum Expected mean 
freedom squares of squares sum of squares 
Replication r-1 SSr MSr σ2 + g σ2 e r 
Genotype g-1 SSg MSg σ2 + g σ2 e g 
Error (r-1) (g-1) SSe MSe σ2 
e 
Where, r = number of replications 
g = number of genotypes 
σ2 = error variance e 
σ2 = genotype variance g
σ2 = replication variance r 
From ANOVA, standard error and critical diference between two means 
(Mean and Expected sum of squares) can be calculated as: 
Standard error (SE) = (MSe/r)1/2
Standard error of diferences (SEd) = (2 MSe/r)1/2
Critical diference (C.D.) = (2 MSe/r)1/2 * t 
10.3 Null Hypothesis 
In statistical terms, a null hypothesis conjectures that the data resulting 
from an experiment will have no signifcant bearing on variations from the 
control population. An alternative hypothesis that contradicts the claim is also 
accompanied with the null hypothesis. The null hypothesis assumes that any 
kind of diference between the chosen characteristics that is seen in a set of 
data is due to chance. Hypothesis testing provides a method to reject a null 
hypothesis within a certain confdence level only.
Null hypothesis may be estimated as: 
H01: the replication efect is null (replication homogeneity)
H02: the genotype efects are null (genotype homogeneity)
The two null hypotheses are mutually independent. 
Choice of signifcance level (α) = 0.05 and 0.01.
10.4 T-test 
When a set of data follows normal distribution pattern, it is referred to as 
parametric data (Hazra and Gogtay, 2016). Parametric tests are carried out 
based on certain criteria such as: (a) the data comprises of numerical values 
that follow normal distribution pattern and have homogeneity of variances, (b)  
 
 
 
 
 
	 	
 
164 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
the observations in a data set are drawn independent of each other, and (c) the 
samples under investigation are randomly selected from a larger population. 
T-test is a type of statistical analysis performed on parametric data, which 
compares two mean values that belongs to diferent groups and may even be 
unrelated (Kim, 2015). In analysis of biological data, such a test is applied 
when there are two distinct groups of observations, in response to a particular 
experiment. It is popularly termed as Student’s t-Test, and it has three variants, 
depending upon the type of analysis. Each of the three variants are described 
below: 
a. One sample t-Test 
This variant of t-Test is used when the sample mean difers signifcantly 
from the population mean. If the exact value of population mean is not 
known, its value is derived hypothetically. 
b. Two sample t-Test 
This variant of t-Test is also referred to as the independent sample test 
and is used to determine if the population means of two separate groups 
are equal or not. 
c. Paired t-Test 
It is also sometimes denoted as “dependent sample t-Test” and is 
a statistical measure to assess if the mean diference between pairs 
of measurements is zero. The data for each sample in paired t-Test is 
measured twice, resulting in two sets (paired) of observations. 
10.5	Coefcient of Variation
Co-efcient of variation is a relative term which measures the relative 
magnitudes of variations present in observations and is related to the magnitude 
of their arithmetic mean. Since the standard deviation is independent measure 
of dispersion obtained from a single series of data, the comparison of variability 
of two diferent series of data is not possible directly by standard deviations. 
To make it possible Karl Pearson used co-efcient of variation. Co-efcient of 
variation is defned as the ratio of standard deviation to arithmetic mean and 
is expressed in percentage. 
σ Co-efcient of variation or CV(%) = × 100, where σ = standard ͞x
deviation of a series ͞x = arithmetic mean of series.
Thus, when standard deviation of a series is compared to arithmetic 
mean of the series in terms of percentage, we get co-efcient of variation. 
It expresses the relative variability of each data series. The co-efcient of 
variation can be used to compare the homogeneity, consistency and stability 
of data of two or more series. The data series with high value of co-efcient of 
variation is said to be unstable and the series with low values of co-efcient of 
variation are stable and they show good degree of homogeneity of data.  
 
 
 
 
 
Biostatistics 165 
Example: Compare the relative variability of two samples with the following 
data: 
Sample A – Arithmetic mean (͞x) = 30 and S.D. = 1.5
Sample B – Arithmetic mean (͞x) = 20 and S.D. = 2.5
Solution: 
(i) For example A, co-efcient of variation (CV) = S.D. or σ × 100 
mean
 = 1.5 × 100 = 5.0% 
30 σ (ii) For sample B, CV = × 100
mean 
2.5
 = × 100 = 12.50% 
20 
Example: Calculate standard deviation, variance and co-efcient of variation 
from the following classifed data regarding number of pods per plant recorded 
on 50 plants in a plot: 
Number of pods/plant 1-3 3-5 5-7 7-9 9-11 11-13 13-15 
No. of Plants 2 6 7 16 11 5 3 
Solution: 
Class (No. Mid-value No. of Dx = (x-A) dx2 f.dx2 f.dx 
of pods per of class (x) Plants 
plant) (f) 
1-3 2 2 2 – 8 = –6 36 72 -12 
3-5 4 6 4 – 8 = –4 16 96 -24 
5-7 6 7 6 – 8 = –2 4 28 -14 
7-9 8 = A 16 8 – 8 = 0 00 00 00 
9-11 10 11 10 – 8 = 2 4 44 22 
11-13 12 5 12 – 8 = 4 16 80 20 
13-15 14 3 14 – 8 = 6 36 108 18 
Total n =50 Σ.fdx2 Σ f dx =10 
= 428 
Σ f.dx2 
Arithmetic mean (͞x) = A + n
 ͞x = 8 + = 8 + 0.2 = 8.2 10
50 
∑ fdx2 ∑ fdx 2 
S.D. – or σ = √ n n 
428 10 2
√= – = √8.56 – 0.04 50 50 
= √8.52 = 2.92  
 
 
 
 
166 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Variance = σ2 
)
2
 = (
√8.52 
σ Co-efcient of variance = x × 100 
2.92 or C.V. = 8.2 × 100 
or C.V. = 292 = 35.61% 8.2 
Meaningful comparison and quantifcation of various morphological and 
other metric traits can be achieved by using coefcient of variation (Pélabon 
et al., 2020), a very robust statistical tool. It is often used to decipher and 
critically analyse the variations of traits among plant samples. Mathematically, 
it is obtained by multiplying 100 with the ratio of average upon square root. 
The coefcient of variation (CV) is a statistical measure which shows the 
level of variability of data in a sample. It measures the dispersion of the data 
points in a data series, around the mean of the population. It is highly useful in 
understanding the degree of variation of one data series from the other, even 
if the arithmetic means difer greatly.
The genotypic coefcient of variation (GCV) and the phenotypic 
coefcient of variation (PCV) can be calculated by the formula given by 
Burton (1952): 
2
)
1/2 (σg GCV = × 100 or 
σg
 × 100
x x 
2
)
1/2 (σg 
σp PCV = × 100 or × 100 
where, x x 
x is the grand mean of the trait 
σg is the genotypic standard deviation of the trait 
σp is the phenotypic standard deviation of the trait 
10.5.1 Components of Variance: Genotypic-, Phenotypic- and 
Environmental Variance: 
Genotypic and / or phenotypic coefcient of variation can be determined 
using the formula of Burton (1952) by dividing the square root of genotypic 
variance and / or phenotypic variance by the population mean and multiplying 
the resultant with 100. Phenotypic variance was taken as the sum of error and 
genotypic variance, the later being calculated by subtracting the error mean 
square from the varietal mean square and dividing the remainder by number 
of replications, as follows: 
σ2 
e = MSSe
σ2 = MSSg – MSSe / r e 
σ2
p = σ2
g + σ2
e Biostatistics 167 
Where σ2
g, σ2
p and σ2
e are genotypic, phenotypic and environmental 
variances, respectively and r is the number of replications of the experiment. 
MSSg and MSSe are genotypic- and error- mean sum of squares, 
respectively. 
10.6 Heritability 
Heritability is used in plant breeding studies, to express the proportion of total 
phenotypic variance among individuals in a population, that can be attributed 
to the heritable genes, which also determines the degree of resemblance 
between relatives (Holand et al., 2003; Schmidt et al., 2019). It can be 
simply defned as the extent to which a phenotype is determined genetically. 
If genotypic values are considered, we refer to broad sense heritability (H2
) 
and if breeding/phenotypic values are considered, we refer to narrow sense 
heritability (h2
). 
Heritability in broad sense was calculated on percent basis by the formula 
suggested by Hanson (1956). 
h2 = σ2
g / σ2
p 
2 σg h2
 % = 2 = 100
σp 
10.7 Genetic Advance 
Genetic advance and heritability are usually considered together, as their 
combined estimate is more meaningful and reliable. Genetic advance (or 
response to selection) is a measurement of gain obtained from a phenotypic 
selection for a trait (Ogunniyan et al., 2014). In other words, it is the genetic 
improvement of the progeny through selection. High genetic advance with 
high values of heritability is the most preferred condition for selection. 
Genetic advance or genetic gain or genetic improvement per generation, 
denoted by G, was computed using the formula given by Johnson et al. (1955): 
G = i.h2
.σp 
where ‘i’ is the standardised selection diferential 
h2
 is the heritability in broad sense
 σpis the phenotypic standard deviation 
Expected genetic advance (E ∆ G) represented as genetic advance in 
percent of mean; 
Expected genetic advance (E ∆ G) = G× 100
x 
10.8 Correlation 
Genetic correlation is defned as the proportion of variance shared by two 
diferent traits, due to genetic causes. Genetic correlations can be either 168 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
positive or negative, which is denoted by a number in the range –1 to +1 
(Hill, 2013). The most common cause of correlation is pleiotropy and linkage 
disequilibrium among genes, each afecting one trait only. 
Bivariate correlations: Bivariate correlations is a statistical measurement 
to determine whether any relationships exist or not, between two diferent 
variables. It is computed using the following formula: 
Co Vij
rij = 
(Vi Vj
)
1/2
where, 
rij is the correlation coefcient between the traits i and j
Co Vij is the covariance between i and j 
Vi
is the variance of i 
Vj
 is the variance of j 
10.8.1 Genotypic, Environmental and Phenotypic Correlations 
Genotypic, environmental and phenotypic correlations were computed using 
the formulae suggested by Al-jiburi et al. (1958) and Falconer (1960, 1981): 
rg(ij) = σ2 (ij) / (σ2 ) (i) ×σ2 (j)1/2
g g g 
re(ij) = σ2 (ij) / (σ2 ) (i) ×σ2 (j)1/2
g e e 
rp(ij) = σ2 (ij) / (σ2 ) (i) ×σ2 (j)1/2
p p p 
where, 
rg(ij) = genetic correlation coefcient between ith and jth character 
re (ij) = environmental correlation coefcient between ith and jth character 
rp (ij) = phenotypic correlation coefcient between ith and jth character 
σ2
g (i), σ2
p (i) and σ2 (i) are genotypic, phenotypic and environmental e 
variances respectively for ith characters 
σ2 (j), σ2 (j) and σ2 (j) are genotypic, phenotypic and environmental g p e 
variances respectively for jth characters 
10.9 Path Analysis 
Path analysis is often used to determine the cause-and-efect relationships of a 
dependent variable, with two or more independent ones. It is a form of multiple 
regressional statistical analysis. In biological experimental models, it fnds 
wide usage in evaluating the efects of a set of variables on a pre-set outcome 
through several pathways. Statistically, it is represented by structured, linear 
equations. The exact inter-relationships among them can be depicted with the 
help of a path diagram, which is essentially a graphical presentation of the 
cause and efect of the variables involved in a particular pathway.
r (x1y) = a + r (x1x2)b + r (x1x2) b + r (x1x3)c ……… + r (x1xn)k  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biostatistics 169 
r (x2y) = a r (x2x1) + b + r (x2x3)c …………………+ r (x2xn)k 
r (x3y) = a r (x3x1) + r(x3x2)b + c …………………..+ r (x3xn)k 
r (xny) = a r (xnx1) + r (xnx2) b + r (xnx3)c………….+k 
where, 
x1, x2, x3 …………xn are plant traits studied 
y is seed yield per plant 
a, b, c ……. k are the direct efects of the traits 
x1, x2, x3………xn, respectively 
r(x1x2), r(x1 x3), r (x2 x3) and r (x3xn), etc. are the genotypic correlation 
coefcients of diferent pairs of plant traits.
These simulations equations are put in the form of matrix and values of 
direct efects were found as follows:
r (x1y) = r (x1x1) r (x1x2) r (x1x3) …. r (x1xn) a 
r (x2y) = r (x2x1) r (x2x2) r (x2x3) …. r (x2xn) b 
r (x3y) = r (x3x1) r (x3x2) r (x3x3) …. r (x3xn) c 
r (xny) = r (xnx1) r (xnx2) r (xnx3) …. r (xnxn) k 
a = r (x1y) r (x1x1) r (x1x2) r (x1x3) …. r (x1xn) -1 
b = r (x2y) r (x2x1) r (x2x2) r (x2x3) …. r (x2xn) 
c = r (x3y) r (x3x1) r (x3x2) r (x3x3) …. r (x3xn) 
k = r (xny) r (xnx1) r (xnx2) r (xnx3) …. r (xnxn) 
a = r (x1y) C11 C12 C13 ….C1n 
b = r (x2y) = C21 C22 C23 ….C2n 
c = r (x3y) C31 C32 C33 ….C3n 
k = r (xny) Cn1 Cn2 Cn3 ….Cnn 
where, C11, C12………Cnn are the respective elements of inverse matrix, then, 
a = C11 r (x1 y) + C12r(x2 y) + C13 r(x3 y) ………… C1nr(xn y) 
b = C21 r (x1 y) + C22r(x2 y) + C23 r(x3 y) ………… C2n r (xn y) 
c = C31 r (x1 y) + C32r(x2 y) + C33 r(x3 y) ………… C3n r (xn y) 
k = Cn1 r (x1 y) + Cn2r(x2 y) + Cn3 r(x3 y) ………… Cnn r (xn y) 
The indirect efects of the trait via diferent traits were obtained in the 
following way: 
The indirect efect of ith trait via jth trait = r (xi
yj
) × p 
where ‘p’ is the direct efect of jth trait. 
10.10	Residual Efect
The residual efect was obtained by the following formula:
h = (1 – ∑ Piy riy)
1/2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
170 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
where, 
h = residual efect 
Piy = path coefcient from x1 to y 
riy = correlation coefcient between x1 and y 
10.10.1 Regression Analysis 
ANOVA for dose-response data, simple linear regression and curvilinear 
regression using quadratic equation were computer by the method of Gomez 
and Gomez (1984). For the dependent variable (Y) the percentage values have 
been used. The following equations and formulae are used in the regression 
analyses: 
Simple linear regression analysis: 
i) Regression equation 
Yc = a + bX 
where, Yc = computed Y from the regression equation 
a = intercept/level of the line
b = linear regression coefcient/slope of the line
ii) Calculation of a and b 
a = y – b – bx 
∑ xy 
2 b = ∑ x2 × ∑ y 
iii) Correlation coefcient (r)
∑ xy
r = 2 ∑ x2 × ∑ y
where, 
X = X – X 
Y = Y – Y 
where, 
X = independent variable 
X = mean of X 
Y = dependent variable 
Y = mean value of Y 
iv) Standard error of estimate (Syx) 
∑ (Y – YC)
2
√ Sxy = N 
where, 
y = dependent variable  
 
Biostatistics 171 
YC = computed value of Y 
N = number of variables 
Curvilinear regression analysis: 
This was estimated using a quadratic regression equation as given below. 
Y= αD + βD2
 + C 
where Y= computed value of the dependent variable 
α = linear coefcient of dependent variable per unit of dose
β = quadratic coefcient of dependent variable per unit of (dose)2 
C = intercept constant 
D = dose point 
Conclusion 
These above-described statistical tools are of great importance and utility in 
analysing biological data obtained from various feld experiments related to 
genetics and plant breeding aimed at crop improvement. Incorporation of such 
tools for the analysis of data not only enhances the authenticity of observation, 
but also helps in arriving at reliable and meaningful conclusions. In addition, 
they also aid in minimising errors in the data and eliminate background noise, 
for enhanced accuracy and meaningful interpretation of biological data. Part B: 
Recent Advances in Plant Techniques 11 
Histochemical Methods 
Histochemistry is a combination of histology and analytical biochemistry. In 
histochemical methods, especially for plant material, various histochemical 
stains and qualitative reactions have been employed (Table 11.1). Here some 
important techniques to localise various chemical substances have been 
described. 
11.1 Preparation of Sections for 
Histochemical Studies 
Strictly fresh material should be employed for histochemical studies. 
Generally, slightly thick sections are best for microchemical tests. Sections 
can be cut with safety razor blades or sharp scalpels with thin blades. Clean 
the blades before the operation to avoid contamination. In most tests, sections 
are to be placed directly in the reagent, and in some cases, sections are placed 
in distilled water before keeping in the reagent. 
11.2 Carbohydrates 
Carbohydrates are classifed into Monosaccharides (simple sugars contain 
aldehyde or ketone groups, e.g., glucose, fructose, etc.), Disaccharides 
(combined product of two monosaccharides, e.g., sucrose) and Polysaccharides. 
Mono and Disaccharides are difcult to localise through histochemical 
methods. Therefore, the following text deals with mainly polysaccharides. 
The polysaccharides are high molecular weight molecules, and these are 
divided into homopolysaccharides which yield only one type of monomer 
upon hydrolysis and heteropolysaccharides which yield not only monomers 
containing C, H and O but also monomers containing N and S additionally. 
11.2.1 Cellulose 
Cellulose is a homopolysaccharide and occurs abundantly in plants. It is the 
main constituent of the cell wall and maintains the shape and structural rigidity 
of plant cells. Cellulose, on total hydrolysis, yields glucose. Numerous β-D￾glucose residues are linked together linearly by β-1-4 linkages in cellulose. Table 11.1. Some commonly used stains used in histochemical localisation of some 
plant chemical substances (Khasim, 2002; Badria and Aboelmaaty, 2019) 
Stains Chemical substances 
Calcofuor MZR It stains the cellulose and fuorescing 
intensely under a fuorescent microscope. 
Ruthenium red It stains acidic mucilages, pectin and nucleic 
acids and appears magenta or red in colour. 
Alcian blue Also stains acidic mucilages, pectin and 
nucleic acids and gives light blue colour. 
FASGA (Fucsina, Aldan blue, Under fuorescent microscope, starch granules 
Safranina, Glicerina, Agua) appear bright-greenish yellow.
complex stain 
Lugol’s reagent Starch granules appear dark blue to dark. 
Aniline blue Callose stains clear blue. 
Resorcinol blue Callose stains Cobalt blue. 
Lacmoid blue Callose stains greenish-blue.
Azure B Sieve plate callose stains reddish 
Mercuric bromophenol blue Proteins stain blue 
Aniline blue black Protein stain blue-black
Coomassie blue Protein stains blue and gives similar result of 
Aniline blue black 
Ferric chloride It highlights the phenolic compounds through 
iron precipitation producing a dark colour. 
Potassium dichromate Phenolic compounds appear in brown or red￾brown colour. 
Vanillin-Hydrochloric acid This stains tannins, giving red in colour. 
Phloroglucinol-Hydrochloric It gives red colouration to lignin. 
acid stain 
Dragendorf’s reagent It marks alkaloids in red colour. 
Wagner’s reagent It also stains alkaloids red or red-brown.
Sudan Black Lipids appear dark blue or black in colour. 
Nile blue Acidic lipids stain blue whereas neutral lipids 
pink in colour 
Azure B DNA stains blue-green whereas RNA dark 
blue 
Acidic orange DNA fuoresces bright-yellow and RNA fame 
red. 
Toluidine Blue O RNA stains purple while DNA blue or blue￾green. 
Cresyl violet RNA stains violet.
176 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 177 
The linear chains of the monomer form microfbrils or bundles of parallel 
chains that are held together by hydrogen bonds. 
11.2.1.1 Zinc-Chlor-iodide Method (Rawlins and Takashi, 1952) 
Stock Solution 
Zinc chloride 50 g
Potassium iodide 16 g 
Distilled water 17 ml 
The above three are mixed and iodine is added to them to make a 
saturated solution. Allow this solution to stand for several days. Collect only 
the supernatant in brown bottles and use it. 
The other procedure to prepare the staining solution is to dissolve 
commercial chloroiodide of zinc in an equal volume of water and add enough 
iodine crystals to give the solution a deep brown colour. Gahan (1984) 
prepared this solution by mixing 30 g zinc chloride, 5 g potassium iodide, 1 g 
iodine and 14 ml distilled water.
Procedure 
i. Generally fresh sections are taken. 
ii. Keep the sections in the chloroiodide of zinc solution for a few minutes 
and observe under the microscope. 
Result 
Cellulose turns blue to violet. 
Biological Reaction 
Iodine is said to be accumulated within the cellulose when the latter’s basic 
structure is disrupted. This happens when glucose strands are separated by 
the removal of hydrogen bonds by treating the specimen with acid or a strong 
ionic salt solution (Krishnamurthy, 1988). 
The test is non-specifc because hemicelluloses are also coloured blue; 
if lignin occurs, colour is not developed. So, the removal of lignin, cutin and 
suberin will enhance the specifcity of the reaction.
11.2.1.2 Chlorazol Black E and Lignin Pink Method 
(Robards and Purvis, 1964) 
i. Fresh or FAA fxed tissue is taken; section the tissue, deparafnise (for 
parafn-embedded tissue) and bring down to the water.
ii. Keep the sections in distilled water for 5 mins.
iii. Stain in 1% aqueous lignin pink for 5 mins.
iv. Wash the sections in 95% ethanol to fx the lignin pink.
v. Dehydrate twice in absolute ethanol, 2 mins each.  
 
	 	
 
 
 
 
 
178 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
vi. Stain the sections in 1% chlorazol black E in methyl cellosolve for 5 
mins. 
vii. Dehydrate in absolute alcohol, clear in xylene and mount in Canada 
balsam. 
Result 
The gelatinous layer which is stained by chlorazol black E becomes black to 
black grey in contrast to the pink colour taken up by the lignin. 
When the single stain is desired, then after deparafnising, sections are 
directly stained in chlorazol black E and observed under a microscope. 
11.2.1.3	Calcofuor MZR Method (Gahan, 1984) 
i. Fresh or frozen sections are taken. 
ii. Stain the sections in 0.1% aqueous solution of calcofuor MZR New for 
30 secs. 
iii. Examine under fuorescence microscopy using UV light.
Result 
Cellulose and extracellular mucilages are fuorescing intensely under a 
fuorescent microscope.
The above stain is also useful for staining the sections of parafn￾embedded and GMA-embedded tissues (Hughes and McCully, 1975).
11.2.2 Starch 
Starch is the most important reserve food for plants. It occurs as granules 
in membrane-bound cytoplasmic organelles, like plastids. It is a 
homopolysaccharide and yields only D-glucose upon hydrolysis. However, 
starch consists of two basic molecules, amylose and amylopectin. Amylose 
glucose units are linked in a simple chain α1→4 with a regular branching of 
the main chain by secondary α1→6 linkages. Starch difers from cellulose in 
possessing the linkage between glucose units α1→4 and not β1→4, and in 
possessing some random branching in the chain. 
11.2.2.1 Iodine-Potassium Iodide Test (Johansen, 1940; 
Krishnamurthy, 1988) 
Procedure 
i. Fresh, frozen, or chemically fxed and parafn-embedded tissues may be 
taken. 
ii. Section the material, deparafnise (for parafn-embedded tissue), and 
bring down to the water.  
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 179 
iii. Stain the section in iodine-potassium iodide solution (solution is prepared 
by dissolving 2 g potassium iodide in 100 ml water and adding 1 g iodine 
fakes to potassium iodide solution). 
Result 
Starch appears blue to black in a few minutes. Newly formed starch may 
appear red to purple. 
Biological Reaction 
The accumulation of iodine in the centre of the helical starch molecule 
gives colouration in this reaction. Shorter molecules appear red while longer 
molecules are blue. 
11.2.2.2	Periodic Acid-Schif (PAS) Stain (Feder and O’Brien, 1968)
For staining the tissues with PAS, it is necessary to perform the ‘aldehyde 
blockade’ which covers the Schif-positive groups (probably aldehyde 
groups). It is introduced especially for tissues fxed in acrolein. PAS stain is 
also useful for GMA sections (Bennet et al., 1976). 
Aldehyde blockade is performed by using blocking agents like dime 
done (5,5-dimethyl cyclohexane-1,3-dione) and DNPH (2,4-dinitrophenyl￾hydrazine). 
Saturation solution of dimedone 
Dimedone 5 g
Distilled water 100 ml 
Stir it at least for 5 hours and flter.
2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) Solution 
DNPH 
15% acetic acid in water 
Stir it for an hour and flter.
5 g
100 ml
Procedure 
i. Aldehyde blockade is done either in dime done or in DNPH solution. 
Slides are left in dimedone at room temperature for 16-24 hours or in 
DNPH solution for 10 mins. Dimedone treated sections do not show 
colour and the aldehyde blockade is not reversed by treating the section 
with acid. DNPH treated sections show a yellow colour, often useful as 
counterstain. 
ii. Oxidise the sections in 1% periodic acid for 5-10 mins.
iii. Wash the slide with running tap water for 5-10 mins.
iv. Keep in Schif’s reagent (Feulgeri’s fuchsin) for 10-30 mins. (Schif’s 
reagent is prepared in the following manner: add 0.5 g basic fuchsin to 
100 ml of boiling distilled water. It is followed by shaking for 5 min.  
 
 
180 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
After cooling to 25°C, flter the solution and add 30 ml. of HCl and 3 
g potassium metabisulphate. Later store the solution in dark for 24-48 
hrs. Now add 1 g decolourising charcoal to the solution and shake well. 
Allow the preparation to stand for about half an hour before fltering. 
Note that the red colour disappears, and a completely colourless solution 
is formed at the end; see also Gurr, 1965. 
v. Transfer the slides quickly and directly to three successive baths of 0.5% 
sodium metabisulphite, 2 mins each. 
vi. Rinse in running water for 5-10 mins. 
vii. Sections may be counterstained with haematoxylin or toluidine blue, or 
without counterstain sections are examined under a light microscope. 
Result 
Starch reacts very strongly and appears red. Some complex polysaccharides, 
especially in the compound middle lamella, stain a purplish red to magenta 
colour. In Carthamus tinctorius L., epidermal and endothecial cells of the 
mature anther, as well as pollen grains, are flled with PAS-positive substance 
(Fig. 11.1A, B). 
Fig. 11.1. A-B Transverse section of anther in Carthamus tinctorius L. 
(A) Pollen grains flled with carbohydrate reserves and endothecial cells possess 
PAS-Positive fbrous bands; (B) Epidermal cells possess distinct PAS-Positive outer 
and radial walls and these cells are covered by extracellular PAS- positive substance 
indicated by arrow mark. (c = connective; e = epidermis; Bar = 20 µm) 
(Courtesy: Dodappa, 2005)
Biological Reaction 
The oxidant, periodic acid, is acted upon the 1,2-glycol linkage within the 
sugar molecule of carbohydrate (Fig. 11.2). As a result, two free aldehyde 
groups are produced. These aldehydes react with leucofuchsin resulting in 
highly coloured complexes. 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 181 
Fig. 11.2. Schematic representation of PAS test for polysaccharides 
(Adopted from Vijayaraghavan and Shukla, 1990). 
11.2.2.3 FASGA (Fucsina, Aldan Blue, Safranina, Glicerina, Agua)
Staining for Starch Granules Using Fluorescence Microscopy
(Revila et al., 1986) 
Procedure 
F.A.S.G.A. staining technique is performed in the following manner: 
i. The cotyledons of lentil seeds (Lens culinarisi are soaked in distilled 
water for 4 hrs. This material is then processed in two diferent ways. 
a. After the material is fxed in 7% acrolein for 20-24 hours at 4o
C, the 
tissue is then washed thrice in distilled water at 30 mins. per wash. 
Sections of about 12-16 µm are cut with a freezing microtome. 
b. Fixation in FAA for 18-24 hrs. Fixed tissue is dehydrated in ethanol 
series. Then the dehydrated tissue is embedded in parafn and sections 
of about 10-12 µm thickness are cut.
ii. The sections are stained with FASGA complex stain for 10 mins. 
Stock solutions of stains are prepared in distilled water. These are:  
 
 
 
 
 
182 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Solution A: 1% safranin 4.5 ml
 B: 1% a1cian blue 
C: basic fuchsin 
9.0 ml
1.0 ml
 Glycerine
Distilled water up to
50.0 ml
250 ml
After mixing of above solutions, the resultant one is fltered and used for 
staining the sections. 
iii. Later the stained sections are dehydrated briefy by passing in 96% and 
100% ethanol, in xylene and mounted in Canada balsam, or simply 
by washing the stained sections in water and mounting with water. 
Specimens are observed under an epifuorescence microscope.
Result 
Under epifuorescence microscope, starch granules appear very bright 
greenish-yellow and the cytoplasm is full of dark spherical structures which 
are identifed as a protein with TEM (Revila et al., 1986). It is possible to 
observe both intact and degradative starch granules in this procedure. 
When sections are observed with visible light, the cellulosic cell walls are 
stained blue and, the nucleus and lignifed tissues are stained red. The starch 
granules are not stained under these conditions. 
FASGA staining procedure permits observing other cell structures along 
with intact as well as degradative starch granules. Sections stained with this 
complex stain are long-lasting and do not show loss of colour even after three 
years. 
11.2.3 Callose 
Callose is a homopolysaccharide and it has β-1, 3-Glucon subunits. It forms 
a major component of cell walls of pollen tubes, microspore and megaspore 
mother cells, intine of pollen grains, sieve elements, and cell walls which are 
immediately adjacent to the freshly formed wounds. Many botanists believe 
that callose is deposited in response to wounding. Callose can be localised 
by aniline blue which exhibits deep yellow fuorescence under a fuorescence 
microscope. It is also stained with lacmoid blue (resorcin) which is more 
specifc than aniline blue.
11.2.3.1 Aniline Blue Method (Johansen, 1940) 
Procedure 
i. Fresh tissues are preferred. If fxed in FAA, the material should be 
thoroughly washed with water. 
ii. Section the material, deparafnise (if necessary), and bring it down to the 
water.  
 
 
	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Histochemical Methods 183 
iii. Stain the sections in a dilute aqueous aniline blue (0.005%) for an hour 
or in 0.005% aniline blue in 50% ethanol for 4-24 hrs.
iv. Excess stain is removed by treatment with glycerine. 
v. Mount in gelatin; for parafn-embedded sections, dehydrate, clear and 
mount in DPX. 
Result 
Callose stains a clear blue. 
11.2.3.2 Aniline Blue Fluorescence Method (Smith and
McCully 1978a, 1978b) 
Sections of fresh tissues or aldehyde fxed, or GMAembedded tissues are used 
for this method. This method is also adopted for epoxy embedded material from 
which resin should be removed (Sutherland and McCully, 1976). Peterson and 
Fletcher (1973) used a modifed procedure to stain cleared whole mounts.
Procedure 
Section the material and mount the sections in 0.05% aqueous aniline blue. 
Use freshly made staining solution (in 0.067 M phosphate bufer, pH 8.5) 
or store in a brown bottle in the refrigerator. Discard when the blue colour 
changes to greenish. 
Stained sections of embedded material are permanently mounted by 
gently air drying the sections (do not wash out the stain before drying) and 
then mount in immersion oil of low fuorescence. The gentle air-drying 
ensures that some water molecules that remain present are essential for the 
formation of the fuorescing complex, especially in sieve plates and new cell 
walls (O’Brien and McCully, 1981). 
Result 
Sieve plate callose fuoresces in a yellow colour under a fuorescence 
microscope. The fuorescence fades during observation but this can be restored 
by thoroughly washing the section with tap water for 12 hours followed by 
restaining. 
11.2.3.3 Resorcinol Blue Method (Eschrich and Currier, 1964) 
Preparation of the Stain 
Resorcinol blue is prepared by dissolving 3 g pure white resorcinol in 200 ml 
distilled water, to which add 3 ml 0.88 NH3 and heat without boiling for 10 
mins on a steam bath. Store reddish-brown solution, stoppered with cotton till 
a dark, blueish colour appears. Heat on steam bath further for 30 mins, flter 
this hot solution, and heat again till no signifcant NH3 escapes (check with 
moistened red litmus paper). Store stock solution in dropping bottles. 
Fresh sections are mounted with three drops of stock solution freshly 
diluted with 10 ml of water. Callose stains cobalt blue. Other features, like  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
184 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
lignifed walls, also stain blue but it turns to red when the sections are mounted 
in bufer at pH 3.2 whereas the callose remains cobalt blue (see also O’Brien 
and McCully, 1981). 
11.2.3.4 Lacmoid Blue Method 
i. Fresh, frozen or aldehyde fxed, and parafn-embedded tissues are used 
here. Section the material, deparafnise (for parafn-embedded tissue), 
and bring down to the water. 
ii. Stain the sections for 15-72 hours in 0.17-0.25% lacmoid prepared in 
30% ethanol. 
iii. Wash the stained sections thoroughly with tap water. 
iv. Place the sections in 1% sodium bicarbonate in 50% ethanol for a few 
mins. 
v. Dehydrate, clear, and mount with DPX. 
Result 
Callose stains greenish-blue.
Control 
Callose is dissolved by treating the sections with 5% sodium hydroxide or 
saturated calcium chloride (Reynolds and Dashek, 1976) or stannous chloride 
or by treating with glycerine heated to 280°C (Johansen, 1940).
11.2.3.5 Azure B Method (Jensen, 1962) 
Procedure 
i. Plant material may be fxed in Carnoy’s fuid and embedded in parafn 
wax. 
ii. Section the material, deparafnise and bring down to the water.
iii. Stain the sections for 2 hours in azure B [0.25 mg/ml of stain in Mcllvaine 
bufer (24.6 ml of 0.1 M citric acid + 15.4 ml of 0.2 M disodium phosphate 
adjusted to pH4)] at 50°C. 
vi. Rinse in tertiary butanol for 30 mins.
v. Give two changes in xylene and mount in DPX. 
Result 
Sieve plate callose stains reddish. However, Krishnamurthy (1988) observed 
that callose present around the microspore mother cells and microspore 
tetrads was stained only green. This indicates three alternatives suggested 
by him. These are (1) The chemical composition of callose of microspore 
mother cells and microspore tetrads may be diferent and, therefore, it does 
not respond to this staining schedule; (2) The callose around the microspore 
mother cells and microspore tetrads is in a bound form with other substances 
such as glycoproteins; such type of callose was reported in some pollen tubes 
by Reynolds and Dashek (1976); The bound form may not respond to this 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 185 
staining procedure. (3) The procedure itself is non-specifc, therefore further 
studies are needed regarding the chemical nature of callose. 
11.2.3.6 Chlorantine Fast Green BLL for Callose (Pearce, 1986)
Procedure 
i. Bark includes all tissues from cambium whereas rhytidome is collected 
from mature oak trees (Quercus suber L.) and fxed in acrolein and 
embedded in polyethylene glycol (water-soluble wax).
ii. Transverse sections of about 15 µm are cut from oak bark. These are 
stained in a 0.25% aqueous solution of chlorantine fast green BLL for 
about 5 mins.
iii. Later stained sections are rinsed and mounted in water. 
iv. For comparison, adjacent sections are stained with resorcinol blue 
(Eschrich and Currier, 1964), or aniline blue WS as a fuorochrome 
(O’Brien and McCully, 1981). 
Control 
Sections are immersed in 0.75 ml aliquots of laminarinase (1 mg/ml in 0.05 
M citrate bufer, pH 5.0); or in zymolase 5000 (5 mg/ml in 0.05 M phosphate 
bufer, pH 6.5). Sections are incubated in these enzymes for 5 hrs at 35°C. 
The enzymes laminarinase and zymolase are known to remove callose 
(Shimomura and Dijkstra, 1975; Allen and Friend, 1983). After incubation 
sections are rinsed and stained with chlorantine fast green BLL, resorcinol 
blue, or acriline blue. Control sections are also incubated with bufer alone.
Result 
Sieve plates and cell wall appositions in the phloem tissues are stained deep 
green with chlorantine and fast green BLL in both fxed and fresh sections. 
The location of stained material corresponds exactly with the location of 
material stained with resorcinol blue or aniline blue. Treatment of sections 
with either laminarinase or zymolase-5000 (β-l,3-glucan callose degrading 
enzymes) removes all material staining with chlorantine fast green BLL. No 
change in staining properties is observed in sections incubated in bufer alone.
11.3 Proteins 
Proteins occur throughout the plant body in all types of tissues. They are 
high molecular weight biopolymers, composed of a-amino carboxylic acids, 
commonly known as amino acids. These amino acids are linked together 
with peptide bonds and form polypeptides. At a certain size, the polypeptide 
is, considered to be a protein. Generally, a polypeptide with 50 amino acid 
residues and a molecular weight of 6,000 is considered a protein. 
Proteins are classifed into simple and conjugated proteins. Simple proteins 
yield only amino acids upon hydrolysis, e.g., histones whereas conjugated 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
186 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
proteins yield not only amino acids but also non-protein substances, e.g., 
nucleo-proteins (proteins conjugated with nucleic acids), glycoproteins (with 
carbohydrates), metalloproteins (with metals), lipoproteins (with lipids), etc. 
11.3.1 Total Proteins 
Vijayaraghavan and Shukla (1990) briefy outlined some of the commonly 
used procedures for the localisation of total proteins. Later, Wilson (1992) 
reviewed the use of amido black, coomassie blue G, and coomassie blue R in 
protein staining. 
11.3.1.1 Ninhydrin/Alloxan-Schif’s Method (Yasuma and Ichikawa, 1953)
Preparation of Stains 
i. 0.5% w/v solution of ninhydrin in absolute alcohol.
ii. 1% w/v solution of alloxan in absolute alcohol.
iii. Schifs reagent (see 9.2.2B).
Staining Procedure 
Fresh or chemically fxed tissue is used here. Fixation in 10% formalin is 
found to be ideal (Krishnamurthy, 1988). The chemically fxed tissue may be 
embedded in parafn,
i. Deparafnise the sections and bring them down to the water.
ii. Place the sections in 0.5% ninhydrin or 1% alloxan solution for 20-24 hrs 
at 37°C.
iii. Rinse twice with absolute alcohol, later in distilled water.
iv. Now place the sections in Schifs reagent for 10-30 mins.
v. Rinse in water and place in 2% sodium bisulphate for 1-2 mins.
vi. Wash the sections in running tap water. 
vii. Dehydrate in TBA, clear in xylene, and fnally mounted in DPX.
Result 
Proteins appear reddish-purple.
Control 
Before treatment with ninhydrin or alloxan, the tissue should be deaminated 
or acetylated to prevent the formation of aldehydes from polysaccharides. 
Deamination 
Keep the tissue in a mixture containing 200 ml of 60% sodium nitrite and 60 
ml of 1% acetic acid for 2-24 hrs at room temperature.
Acetylation 
Keep the tissue in a 10% solution of acetic anhydride in pyridine for 2-20 hrs 
at room temperature. If colour appears in either of the controls, the reaction 
is localising some other compound other than proteins having α-amino and 
α-carboxyl groups in the constituent amino acids.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	 	
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 187 
Biological reaction 
On reacting with ninhydrin or alloxan, the proteins yield an aldehyde 
(produced by an α-amino, α-carboxyl amino acid) which in turn reacts with 
Schif’s reagent to produce a reddish-purple colour.
11.3.1.2 Mercuric Bromophenol Blue (Mazia et al., 1953; Ruthmann,
1970; Chapman, 1975; Dodappa, 2005)
The mercuric bromophenol blue method is employed for the localisation 
of total proteins in anthers of Carthamus tinctorius L. It is a very efective 
method in the localisation of even minute quantities of proteins. The dye binds 
to the basic protein even when mercury is present and with other proteins 
when mercury is absent (Dodappa, 2005).
Preparation of Stain 
Reagents 
Bromophenol blue 10 mg dissolved in 100 ml of 10 % mercuric chloride 
solution in 95 % alcohol.
Staining Procedure 
(i) Deparafnisined sections were brought to absolute alcohol and incubated 
for 15 minutes in mercuric bromophenol blue at room temperature.
(ii) Sections were rinsed in 0.5 % acetic acid for 5-10 minutes and 
diferentiated in tap water until sections were blue.
(iii) Sections were air-dried, cleaned in butanol, and then xylol and mounted 
with DPX. 
Result 
Proteins stain blue (Fig. 11.3A, B); in sites of protein concentration, reddish￾blue may appear resulting in metachromasia. 
Fig. 11.3. A-B. Transverse section of anther in Carthamus tinctorius L. (A) Prior to 
meiosis meiocytes and tapetum are rich in total proteins; (B) Pollen grains in fertile 
anther rich in total proteins. (Courtesy: Dodappa, 2005)	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
188 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
11.3.1.3 Dinitrofuorobenzene (DNFB) Test (Burstone, 1955)
Preparation of DNFB and other reagents 
i. Dissolve 0.5 g of DNFB in a mixture of 5 ml of 0.2 N sodium hydroxide 
and 95 ml of 95% alcohol.
ii. 5% w/v aqueous solution of sodium hyposulphite (or) 20% sodium 
dithionite (dissolve in water at 40°C).
iii. Nitrous acid is prepared by mixing 5 ml of 4N sulphuric acid (1.09 ml 
of H2SO4 in distilled water to make up to 10 ml) with 100 ml of freshly 
prepared cold 5% w/v sodium nitrite (at 4-5°C).
iv. Dissolve 2 g of H-acid (1-amino-8-naphthol-3,6-disulphonic acid) in 100 
ml of 0.1 barbitol/Hf.l bufer at 9.2 pH (or) dissolves 0.25 g of Hacid in 
1% aqueous solution of sodium bicarbonate. 
Staining Procedure 
Fresh or chemically fxed and parafn-embedded tissue may be used. 
i. Section the material, deparafnise and bring down to absolute ethanol.
ii. Place the slides in DNFB reagent for 20-24 hrs. The sections should 
become yellow. 
iii. Wash slides thoroughly in 95% ethanol for 2-3 mins give three changes 
in ethanol. Later rinse in distilled water. 
iv. Place the sections in a 5% solution of sodium hyposulphate for 40 mins. 
at 40-45°C. The sections should lose their yellow colour or almost 
completely fade. Later rinse in distilled water. 
v. Place the sections in freshly prepared cold nitrous acid for 5 mins at 
4-5°C.
vi. Rinse the slides in cold distilled water.
vii. Later place the slides in a cold H-acid for 15 mins.
viii. Rinse in distilled water, dehydrate in TBA.
ix. Finally clear in xylene and mount in DPX or any other mountant. 
Result 
The sites of proteins containing free a-amino groups-, E-amino groups of 
lysine, phenolic-OH groups of tyrosine, imidazole groups of histidine, and 
sulphahydryl groups appear a deep reddish-purple.
Control 
Deamination and acetylation are performed before placing the tissue in the 
DNFB reagent (see Ninhydrin/Alloxan Schif’s reagent procedure).
Biological Reaction 
2,4 Dinitofuorobenzene reacts with a-amino groups, ε-amino groups of 
lysine, phenolic-OH groups of tyrosine, imidazole groups of histidine, and 
sulphahydryl groups and produces the yellow colour. This colour is not intense 
enough and so this protein-DNFB complex is treated with the reducing agent  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 189 
to reduce the nitro groups of DNFB to amino groups. These amino groups 
are diazotised with nitrous acid. The diazotised product, when treated with 
H-acid, results in a deep reddish-purple colour (Krishnamurthy, 1988).
11.3.1.4 Aniline Blue Black Method (Vijayaraghavan and Shukla, 1990; 
Vijayaraghavan et al., 1972; Maze and Shu-Chang Lin, 1975). 
Preparation of Stain 
Aniline blue-black 1 g
7% aqueous acetic acid 100 ml 
Dissolve the dye in 100 ml of 7% aqueous acetic acid. 
Staining Procedure 
Chemically fxed tissue embedded in parafn may be used here.
i. Deparafnise the sections and bring them down to the water through 
xylene alcohol, alcohol-water graded series.
ii. Stain the sections in 1% dye solution for 10-15 mins at 50-60°C.
iii. Diferentiate by dipping the slides in 7% acetic acid.
iv. Mount the sections in glycerine containing 5% acetic acid.
Result 
Protein stains blue-black. 
11.3.1.5 Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB) Method 
(Fisher, 1968; Knox and Heslop-Harrison, 1970; Cawood et al., 1978; 
Eklavya, 1979) 
Preparation of Stain 
Dissolve 0.25 g coomassie brilliant blue (R 250) in 100 ml of 7% acetic acid.
Staining Procedure 
Fresh tissue or tissue fxed chemically in 2.5% glutaraldehyde and parafn￾embedded may be used here. 
i. Section the material, deparafnised, and hydrate through xylene-alcohol, 
alcohol-water graded series.
ii. Stain the sections in Coomassie brilliant blue (R250) for 3 mins at 30°C.
iii. Rinse in 7% acetic acid.
iv. Dehydrate in 98% and absolute ethanol, 5 mins in each grade, and fnally 
mount in glycerine containing 5% acetic acid.
Result 
Protein stains blue to bluish-black.
Control 
Protease treatment or pepsin digestion before staining in CBB. 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
190 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
11.3.1.6 Brilliant Sulfafavine-Fluorescence Method (Ruch, 1970)
Preparation of Stain 
i. Take 200 ml Mcllvaine citrate-phosphate bufer (pH 2.8).
ii. Dissolve 0.2 g Brilliant sulfafavine in the above bufer.
Staining Procedure 
Plant material fxed in acetic acid-alcohol and parafn-embedded is used here.
i. Sections are deparafnised and brought down to the water.
ii. Keep the slides in citrate-phosphate bufer (pH 2.8) for 2 mins. Later 
stain in Brilliant sulfafavine solution for 30 mins.
iii. Rinse in the same bufer for 5 mins.
iv. Dehydrate in TBA thrice. 
v. Clear in xylene (two changes) and mount in DPX (or) another suitable 
mountant. 
vi. Observe under a fuorescence microscope (UV excitation range 360-400 
nm). 
Result 
Proteins fuoresce yellow.
11.3.1.7 Biuret Reaction (Gahan, 1984) 
Fresh tissue or chemically fxed tissue embedded in parafn may be used:
i. Section the material, deparafnise and bring down to the water.
ii. Warm the sections on a slide in 10% aqueous potassium hydroxide. 
iii. Add a drop of 1% copper sulphate solution. 
iv. Mount the slide in water. 
Result 
Violet colour indicates peptide linkages in higher proteins whereas red colour 
indicates peptide linkages in lower protein forms. 
11.3.2 Basic Proteins 
11.3.2.1 Alkaline Fast Green Method (Prento and Lyon, 1973)
Preparation of Stain 
i. Take 100 ml of 5% w/v trichloroacetic acid.
ii. Dissolve 50 mg Fast Green FCF in 50 ml of 0.01 M Phosphate bufer (pH 
8.0). 
Staining Procedure 
Chemically fxed tissue in bufered neutral formalin and parafn-embedded 
may be used. i. Section the material, deparafnise and bring down to the water.
ii. Rinse in distilled water at 60o
C 
iii. Keep the sections in trichloroacetic acid and then in 0.01 M phosphate 
bufer (pH 8.0) for 90 mins at 60o
C. 
iv. Immerse in distilled water and then wash in 70% ethanol giving three 
changes of 10 mins each. 
v. Rinse in distilled water thoroughly and stain in Fast Green FCF for 30 
mins. 
vi. Rinse in 0.01 in phosphate bufer (pH 8.0) for 1 min.
vii. Dehydrate in 95% rectifed alcohol, later in 100% ethanol.
viii. Rinse in ethanol: xylene (1:1)
ix. Clear in xylene I and II, and mount in DPX 
Result 
Basic proteins, nuclei, and chromosomes stain green to bluish-green.
11.3.2.2 H/ydroxy-3-NaphthoicAcid Hydrazide Method forProteins
Containing α-acylamide Carboxyl Groups (Barrnett and
Saligman, 1958) 
Preparation of 0.1% 2-hydroxy-3-naphthoic acid hydrauzide
Hydrazide 50 m
Hot glacial acetic acid 2.5 ml
50% ethanol 47.5 ml
Hydraulic is dissolved in hot glacial acetic acid and added to 50% ethanol.
Staining Procedure 
Frozen tissue or chemically fxed tissue embedded in parafn may be used 
here: 
i. Section the material, deparafnise, and rehydrate.
ii. Keep the sections for one hour in a 1:1 mixture of acetic anhydride and 
anhydrous pyridine at 60o
C. 
iii. Wash in absolute ethanol (aldehyde free). 
iv. Later keep the sections for two hours in 0.15 2-hydroxy-3-naphthoic acid 
hydrazide at room temperature. 
v. Wash in four changes of 50% ethanol, 10 mins each.
vi. Keep the sections for 30 mins. in 0.5 N hydrochloric acids at room 
temperature. 
vii. Then rinse in distilled water. 
viii. Keep the sections for 2-5 mins in a solution of 0.006 M phosphate bufer 
(pH 7.6) mixed with an equal volume of absolute ethanol, and stir in 
diazo blue B (tetrazotizeddiorthoanisidine, 1 mg/ml).
ix. Wash in several changes of distilled water. 
x. Dehydrate and mount in DPX. 
Histochemical Methods 191 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
192 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Result 
Proteins containing α-acylamido carboxyl groups will appear red to blue. The 
red indicates widely spaced groups whereas blue indicates numerous closely 
spaced groups. 
Control 
Tissue is treated with 0.1 N HCl in methanol for 24 hrs at 60°C. This esterifes 
all carboxyl groups. 
Biological Reaction 
The α-acylamido carboxyl groups are converted to methyl ketones by 
acetic anhydride and absolute pyridine. The methyl ketones then react with 
2-hydroxy-3-naphthoic acid and a naphthol group is linked to the protein. 
These naphthol groups are coupled with diazo blue B, so that red to blue 
colour develops. 
11.3.2.3 DDD Test for Proteins Containing Sulphydryl-Disulphide Groups
like Cysteine, Cystine, and Methionine (Barrnett and Saligman, 
1952; Roberts, 1960). 
i. Dissolve 100 mg of 2,2’-dihydroxy-6-6’-dinaphthyl-disulphide (DDD) 
in 60 ml of absolute ethanol. Immediately before using take 15 ml of 
stock solution and add 35 ml of barbital bufer (pH 8.5).
ii. Dissolve 50 mg of diazo blue B (tetrazotizeddiorthoanisidine) in 50 ml 
of Sorensen phosphate bufer (pH 7.4).
Staining Procedure 
Frozen tissue or formalin-fxed tissue embedded in parafn may be used.
i. Section the material, deparafnise and bring down to the water.
ii. Keep the tissue in a fresh aqueous 0.2-0.5 M solution of thioglycolic acid 
adjusted to pH 8.0 with 0.1 N sodium hydroxide for 1-2 hrs at 50°C or 
keep the sections in a thioglycerol solution prepared by dissolving 3 m1 
of thioglycerol in 40 ml of water and adding 10 ml of 0.5 M borate bufer 
(pH 9.1-9.5) for 1-2 hrs at 50°C or overnight at room temperature.
iii. Wash in several changes of distilled water. 
iv. Keep the sections in DDD solution for one hour at 56°C and bring them 
to room temperature. 
v. Rinse the sections briefy in distilled water and wash for 5 mins. each in 
two changes of distilled water adjusted to pH 4.0 with acetic acid.
vi. Dehydrate, wash in absolute ether for 5 mins. and again hydrate.
vii. Keep the sections in a freshly prepared diazo blue B for 2-5 mins at room 
temperature. 
viii. Wash in running tap water. 
ix. Dehydrate in acetone and mount in DPX.  
Histochemical Methods 193 
Result 
Sites of sulphydryl groups appear blue. If diazo red RC is used instead of 
diazo blue B the localisation would appear red. 
Control 
Sulphydryl blocking agents are used here. Keep the sections in a 0.1 M 
N-ethyl maleimide solution in a phosphate bufer (pH 7.4) for 4 hrs at 37°C or 
keep sections in a 0.1 M iodoacetate solution adjusted to pH 8.0 with sodium 
hydroxide for 20 hrs at 37°C or keep sections in a 0.001 M solution of iodine 
in n-propanol for 4 hrs at 20°C.
Biological Reaction 
Sulphydryl groups undergo a reaction with naphthols present in DDD. The 
resultant product is colourless but when coupled with diazo dye it produces a 
visible colour. 
11.4 Detection of Ions in Plant/Animal Tissues 
There are some minerals, such as ferric and calcium, useful for the growth and 
development of plants. Their ion levels could be visualised by histochemical 
methods. 
11.4.1 Perls’s Reaction 
This method is particularly important for the detection of ferric ion levels in 
plant tissues and animal tissues like spleen and bone marrow. In this technique, 
ferric ions present in the tissue will combine with ferrocyanide resulting in the 
formation of a pigment called Prussian blue (ferric ferrocyanide). In plants, the 
technique is based on the conversion of ferrocyanide into insoluble crystals 
(Prussian blue) in the presence of ferric ions under acidic conditions. Prussian 
blue formed here, is bright blue which indicates the presence of ferric ions. 
Staining Procedure 
In Perls’s reaction technique, a known positive control tissue is used as control 
while 10 percent formalin is used as a fxative.
Requirements 
Microwave oven, Acid clean glassware, non-metallic forceps, 5% potassium 
ferrocyanide, 5% hydrochloric acid, and sample plant section (4 µ thickness 
of plant organ tissue). 
It is important to use gloves, goggles, and a lab coat because some of the 
chemicals used for this procedure can cause irritation. 
Procedure 
i. Deparafnise the section and hydrate with distilled water. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
194 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
ii. Microwave for about 50 seconds and allow the specimen to expose to 
acid ferrocyanide for about 5 minutes in the fumed wood. Then section 
can be treated with the same solution for about 10-30 minutes.
iii. Rinse the section with 0.5% aqueous neutral red or 0.1% nuclear fast red 
for nucleus staining. 
iv. Rapidly wash the section using distilled water.
v. Dehydrate the section, clear it, and mount it on the microslide for viewing 
under the microscope. 
Result 
When viewed under a microscope, blue parts are indicative of iron while red 
and pink indicate the nuclei and background respectively. 
11.4.2 Von Kossa’s Technique (1901) 
It is a more sensitive technique to detect calcium deposits on cyst fuids, 
ductal ectasia papillomatosis. Although this technique is used to demonstrate 
the presence of calcium, it demonstrates an anion rather than the calcium 
ion itself. The principle involved here is the section is treated with the silver 
nitrate solution and calcium (if present) is reduced by the strong light and 
replaced with deposits of silver. It is visualised as metallic silver. 
Requirements 
A central sample (a tissue with known calcium deposits, 10% formalin 
(fxative), glassware, 60-watt lamp, a mirror or a foil, 5% silver nitrate 
solution, and 5% hypo (sodium thiosulfate).
Procedure 
i. Deparafnise and hydrate the section using distilled water.
ii. Place the solution in the silver nitrate solution (in a glass jar) and place 
it in bright light. Then place on a mirror or a paper foil behind the jar to 
refect the light. Leave it for one hour or until the calcium turns black.
iii. Rinse the section in distilled water.
iv. Stain the section with hypo for about 5 minutes.
v. Wash the section and rinse in distilled water. 
vi. Stain the section with nuclear-fast red for a few minutes.
vii. Wash using distilled water. 
viii. Dehydrate and observe under the microscope. 
Results 
The black colour in the section indicates the presence of calcium; nuclei 
appear red in colour while the cytoplasm pink.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 195 
11.5 Nucleic Acids 
Nucleic acids are high-molecular-weight polymeric molecules and are 
composed of nucleotides. Nucleotides consist of purine (adenine and guanine) 
and pyrimidine (uracil, thymine, and cytosine) bases, both linked with a 
pentose sugar which is esterifed with phosphoric acid. The pentose sugar may 
be ribose or deoxyribose, depending on which the nucleic acids are known as 
ribonucleic acid (RNA) or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). The non-esterifed 
forms of the nucleotides are called nucleosides. 
The nucleotides of DNA are linked together and form polynucleotides 
whose general form is a double-stranded helix (Watson and Crick model). The 
two strands are connected by specifc hydrogen bonds always between adenine 
and thymine in DNA, adenine, and uracil in RNA, and between guanine and 
cytosine in both DNA and RNA. DNA is present in the chromatic material of 
the nucleus and, in chloroplasts and mitochondria of the cytoplasm. 
In the nucleus, heterogeneous RNA and messenger RNA are present. 
While in the cytoplasm, ribosomal RNA and transfer RNA are present. The 
former two types are essentially present in the nucleolus whereas the latter 
two are in the ribosomes. 
11.5.1 Azure B Method (Flax and Himes, 1952; Jacqward et 
al., 1972) 
Preparation of Stain and Enzymes 
i. Azure B: Take 0.25 mg/ml of stain in McIlvaine’s bufer (24.6 ml of 0.1 
M citric acid plus 15.4 ml of 0.2 M disodium phosphate adjusted to pH 
4).
ii. DNase enzyme: Take 0.25 mg/ml DNase in 0.03 M magnesium sulphate, 
pH 6.5.
iii. RNase enzyme: Take 0.25 mg/ml RNase in 0.03 M magnesium sulphate, 
pH 6.5.
Tissue fxed in Carnoy and embedded in parafn is used here.
i. Section the material, deparafnise and bring down to the water.
ii. Digest DNA by DNase enzyme to localise RNA alone. Sections are 
incubated in the enzyme solution for 4 hrs at 37°C. Later rinse the slides 
twice in distilled water, 5-10 mins for each rinse.
iii. Digest RNA by RNase enzyme to localise DNA alone. This is carried out 
by treating the slides in RNase solution for 3 hrs at 37°C (pH of 6.5 is 
adjusted with 0.1 N sodium hydroxide). 
iv. Stain the slides in Azure B for 2 hrs at 50°C. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
196 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
v. Rinse in tertiary butanol for 30 mins. to variable time depending on the 
type of material. 
vi. Later clear in two changes of xylol. 
vii. Mount in DPX or any other suitable mountant. 
Result 
RNA stains dark blue whereas DNA is blue-green.
Biological Reaction 
The reaction is based on metachromasia. The colour of the dye solution is 
called orthochromatic shade, while the second colour formed in the cells, 
when the dye is used, is called a metachromatic shade. Here metachromatic 
shade is blue-green while the orthochromatic shade is dark blue-green. RNA
is stained blue and DNA blue-green. The dye-binding site is probably the 
phosphates. Presumably, the arrangement of the phosphates is tighter in DNA 
than in RNA resulting in DNA becoming metachromatic. 
Control 
Both RNA and DNA are extracted and stained with Azure B.
11.5.2 Toluidine Blue O Method for RNA (Chayen et al., 
1973; Dodappa, 2005) 
Toluidine blue of 0.50 mg is dissolved in 100 ml of 0.05 M Citrate Phosphate 
bufer at pH 4.4.
Stock Solutions 
A. Citric acid solution 0.1M (19.21 g in 1000 ml) 
B. Disodium phosphate 0.2 M (53.65 g of Na2HPo4.7H20 or Na2HPo4
12H20 in 1000 ml) 
A and B solutions are mixed by taking the 27.8 ml of ‘A’ and 22.2 ml of 
‘B’ diluted with distilled water to a total volume of 100 ml. 
Staining Procedure 
(i) Deparafnised and hydrated sections were immersed in 0.05 % toluidine 
blue for 5 minutes.
(ii) Sections were rinsed in distilled water, air-dried, cleaned in xylol, and 
mounted with DPX. 
Result 
RNA stains purple while DNA blue or blue-green (Fig. 11.4 A-C). The pH 
should be very carefully maintained; otherwise, the ability of the dye to bind 
to nucleic acid diminishes (Khasim, 2002).  
 
 
Histochemical Methods 197 
Fig. 11.4. A-C. Transverse section of anther in Carthamus tinctorius L. 
(A) Putative spores and binucleate tapetal cells are rich in RNA; (B) Fibrous bands 
in endothecial cells stain green with toluidine blue (solid arrow). Similar stained 
layer lines the inner face of the endothecium (arrowhead). Pollen grains rich in 
RNA; (C) Plasmodium rich in RNA (m = microspore; t = tapetum; 
e = endothecium; Bar = 20 µm). (Courtesy: Dodappa, 2005)
11.5.3 Acridine Orange Method for DNA and RNA 
(Gahan, 1984) 
Preparation of Stain 
Prepare 0.05% acridine orange solution in hydrochloric acid-acetate bufer 
(pH 2.1). 
Staining Procedure 
Fresh, frozen, or chemically fxed tissue embedded in parafn may be taken 
here. 
i. Section the material, deparafnise and bring down to the water. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
198 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
ii. Immerse the sections in hydrochloric acid-acetate bufer (pH 2.1).
iii. Stain the sections in Acridine Orange solution for 30 mins. 
iv. Wash the sections in the veronal-acetate bufer for 15 mins.
v. Mount in the above bufer and examine with blue or ultraviolet light.
Result 
DNA fuoresces bright yellow and RNA fame red.
Control 
DNA and RNA extraction is performed according to the procedure given in 
the Azure B staining schedule. 
Biological Reaction 
The dye binds to DNA by intercalating between adjacent base pairs. When a 
sufcient number of dye sites become saturated in this way, the DNA-acridine 
complex shows fuorescence. It is important to note that the dye-binding and 
induced fuorescence are indicators of molecular size and shape only and 
not qualitative markers of two nucleic acids. In other words, acridine orange 
does not distinguish between DNA and RNA. DNA has a higher molecular 
weight and so fuoresces yellow, while RNA has low molecular weight and so 
fuoresces red (see Krishnamurthy, 1988).
11.5.4 Feulgen Reaction for DNA (Feder and O’Brien, 
1968; Krishnamurthy, 1988) 
Preparation of Stain 
Basic fuchsin 0.5 g
Boiled distilled water 100 ml 
Basic fuchsin is dissolved in boiled distilled water, cooled to 50°C, and 
fltered. To the fltrate add 10 ml of N hydrochloric acid and 0.5 g of potassium 
metabisulphite. Shake thoroughly, close tightly, and store in dark until use. 
Staining Procedure 
Fresh, frozen, or chemically fxed tissue with parafn embedding may be used 
here. 
i. Section the material, deparafnise and bring down to the water.
ii. Rinse in cold N hydrochloric acid.
iii. Hydrolyse in N hydrochloric acid for 4-5 mins at 60°C.
iv. Again, rinse in N hydrochloric acid. 
v. Keep the sections in Schifs reagent (Feulgen’s fuchsin).
vi. Drain and pass quickly through three closely arranged Coplin jars each 
containing 5 ml n HCl + 5 ml 10% potassium metabisulphite + 100 ml 
distilled water, 10 mins in each jar. 
vii. Dry and apply coverslip and observe under the microscope.  
 
 
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 199 
Result 
DNA stains purplish red. The nucleoli and most of the cytoplasm is stained 
green. 
Biological Reaction 
Treatment with warm HCl hydrolyses the purine-deoxyribose linkages and 
releases free aldehyde groups. These aldehydes form a coloured complex with 
fuchsin. 
Control 
Pearse (1968, 1972) suggested that before hydrolysis a blocking of aldehydes 
in a saturated solution of dimedone (5,5-dimethyl-cyclohexane-1,3-dione) for 
16-24 hrs should be performed. Later hydrolysis is to be carried out.
11.5.5 Cresyl Violet Method for RNA (Ritter et al., 
1961; Cecich et al., 1972) 
Preparation of Stain 
Prepare 0.1% aqueous cresyl violet solution adjusted to pH 4.2 with 0.1 N 
hydrochloric acid. 
Staining Procedure 
Tissue chemically fxed in Carnoymplex or other fxatives and embedded in 
parafn is taken.
i. Section the material, deparafnise and bring down to the water.
ii. Digest DNA by DNase treatment (see Azure B method) and wash. 
iii. Stain the sections in aqueous cresyl violet solution for 2 hrs. 
iv. Dip in absolute ethanol and remove the ethanol periodically until ethanol 
remains colourless. 
v. Dehydrate, clear, and mount. 
Result 
RNA stains violet.
11.6 Lignin, Suberin and Cutin 
11.6.1 Lignin 
Lignin is a phenolic polymer present in the cell walls of tracheary elements, 
xylem and phloem fbres, and sclerenchyma. Approximately 20% of the cell 
wall materials of the secondary xylem of dicotyledons and 35% of that of 
gymnosperms constitute the lignin. It has a molecular weight of Ca 11000. On 
oxidation, it yields three simple phenolic aldehydes: p-hydroxybenzaldehyde, 
vanillaldehyde, and syringaldehyde in various proportions. Because of the  
 
 
	 	
 
 
 
 
 
200 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
presence of double bonds, lignin strongly absorbs UV light, and it can be 
readily distinguishable from other cell wall components by its f1uorescence. 
11.6.1.1 Phloroglucinol Method (Gahan, 1984) 
A slightly modifed technique of Gahan (1984) is adopted here. The 
phloroglucinol method is suitable for studying the structure of nodes. Fresh 
material is preferred. 
Preparation of Stain 
Dissolve 10 g of phloroglucinol in 100 ml of distilled water. 
Take 10 ml of concentrated HNO3 in 90 ml of water. 
Staining Procedure 
i. Section the material and keep in 10% aqueous solution of phloroglucinol 
for 1 to 3 mins. 
ii. Drain the stain and add a few drops of 10% concentrated HNO3, wait for 
a few minutes till it develops colour. 
iii. Mount in 75% glycerine.
Result 
Lignin gives a red colouration. 
Biological Reaction 
The basis of reaction is not very clear. However, phloroglucinol appears to 
react with the coniferyl and cinnamaldehyde end group of lignin to yield a 
cationic chromatophore (Wardrop, 1981). 
Comment 
Phloroglucinol test is not specifc for lignin since it stains hemicellulose and 
suberin also (Reeve, 1974; Shah and Babu, 1986). It does not stain lignin in 
some monocots and protoxylem in certain dicots (Krishnamurthy, 1988). 
11.6.1.2 Maule’s Reaction (Johansen, 1940) 
Fresh tissue is preferred. However, chemically fxed and parafn-embedded 
tissue can also be used. Even herbarium specimens are used successfully after 
revival with warm water (with some detergents added) treatment. 
Staining Procedure 
i. Section the material and sections are put in 1% neutral potassium 
permanganate solution for 5-20 mins.
ii. Wash the sections in distilled water. 
iii. Decolourise with 2% hydrochloric acid. 
iv. Wash thoroughly in water. 
v. Treat with a few drops of ammonium hydroxide or sodium bicarbonate 
solutions.  
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 201 
vi. Observe under the light microscope. 
Result 
Lignin takes red colour due to syringyl type of lignin and brown colour due 
to guaiacyl type of lignin which is present in angiosperms and gymnosperms 
respectively. Krishnamurthy (1988) observed that in some plants lignin does 
not respond indicating the presence of a diferent type of lignin other than the 
two mentioned above. 
Biological Reaction 
Potassium permanganate is reduced to manganese dioxide deposited on the 
lignifed walls. The hydrochloric acid then reacts with manganese dioxide and 
a chlorination reaction causes the colouration of lignin. 
11.6.1.3 Toluidine Blue O Method (O’Brien et al., 1964; Fisher, 1985)
For Preparation of Stain 
(see Toluidine blue O method for Nucleic Acids see section 12.5.2).
Staining Procedure 
Fresh or frozen or chemically fxed and parafn-embedded tissue may be used.
i. Section the material, deparafnise and bring down to the water.
ii. Stain the sections in 0.05% aqueous toluidine blue O solution at pH 4.4.
iii. Wash in tap water, clear, and mount in DPX or another suitable mountant. 
Result 
Lignin stains green-blue.
Biological Reaction 
Though the biological reaction is not known clearly, this method is useful in 
diferentially staining the gelatinous cell layer of fbres of reaction wood. In 
these fbres, lignin stains green blue, whereas inner gelatinous layer stains 
reddish-purple. It is questionable whether the gelatinous layer is exclusively 
cellulosic as was claimed by several investigators. The reddish-purple colour 
shown by this layer with toluidine blue O indicates that this layer contains 
sulphated and carboxylated polysaccharides (Feder and Wolf, 1965; O’Brien 
et al., 1964).
11.6.2 Suberin 
Suberin is commonly present in cork tissue and root caps of some plants. 
It is composed of two-thirds aromatic phenols and one-third long-chain 
aliphatic acids. Due to the presence of aliphatic acids, suberin shows lipid￾like properties. It is resistant to strong acid treatment, but it is dissociated by 
strong alkali treatment. 	 	 	 	 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	 	
 
 
	 	 	 	 	 	 	
202 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
11.6.2.1 Cyanin and Potassium Hypochlorite Method
(Chamberlain, 1932) 
Preparation of Stain 
Cyanin 1% is prepared in a mixture of 50% ethanol and an equal volume of 
glycerine. 
Staining Procedure 
i. Fresh tissue is taken and sections the material. 
ii. Treat the sections in potassium hypochlorite to destroy tannins and to 
make lignifed walls lose their staining capacity.
iii. Stain in cyanin solution. 
11.6.2.2 Phosphate Bufer Method (Gahan, 1984)
i. Fresh or frozen tissue is taken and sections the material. 
ii. Mount the sections in phosphate bufer, 0.02 M (pH 9.1), and observe 
under the fuorescence microscope using UV light.
Result 
Yellow fuorescence indicates suberin.
Biological Reaction 
The mechanism is not very clear. The phenol component of suberin may be 
responsible for this optical property. 
Control 
Mount the sections in concentrated sulphuric acid. Resistance to this treatment 
is indicative of suberin. 
11.6.3 Cutin 
Cutin is not a true fat component but is closely related to it. Cutin forms 
the non-cellular cuticle which is present on aerial parts of higher plants. It 
strongly resists acid attack and decay, but readily dissolves in strong alkalis 
to produce a mixture of fatty acids and dihydroxyacids, mainly with C16-C18 
chains. 
11.6.3.1 Auramine O Method (Heslop-Harrison, 1977; Malti and
Shivanna, 1984) 
Preparation of Stain 
Prepare 0.01-0.2% auramine O in water or 0.05 M tris-HCl bufer (pH 7.2).
Staining Procedure 
Fresh or frozen tissue is taken.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 203 
i. Keep the tissue in chloroform for 5 mins. to remove lipids, later section 
the material. 
ii. Stain the sections in auramine O. 
iii. Mount in glycerine and observe under a fuorescence microscope.
Result 
The cuticle fuoresces under the microscope.
Control 
The material is pretreated with repeated washing in 1:1 ether-methanol before 
proceeding to the staining schedule. This treatment removes the cuticle. 
11.7 Cytokinins and Auxins 
Plant growth regulators such as cytokinins and auxins play an important role 
in plant growth and development. The accumulation of indole-3-acetic acid 
(IAA), an auxin, has been demonstrated in insect galls, using Ehrlich’s reagent 
(Bedetti et al., 2014). Gall-inducing insects manipulate host plant signals and 
redirect normal plant development toward gall morphogenesis (Giron et al., 
2016; Richardson et al., 2017). The development of galls commonly involves 
hyperplasia and cell hypertrophy, and it requires these growth regulators even 
at low concentrations (Yamaguchi et al., 2012; Azizi et al., 2015).
11.7.1 Histochemical Localisation of Cytokinins and IAA 
(Zhang et al., 2014; Bedetti et al., 2018) 
In this technique, histochemical localisation of cytokinins and IAA has been 
performed in plant tissues and it is validated by immunocytochemistry based 
on methodology developed by Bedetti et al. (2018) with slight modifcation.
Materials and reagents 
- Roots of Phaseolus vulgaris (Fabaceae). 
- Lenticular gall morphotypes (both lenticular concave–convex and 
lenticular plane-convex) induced on pinnulas of Piptadenia gonoachantha 
(Fabaceae). 
- Silica plates for Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC) for cytokinins 
(zeatin). 
- Rotatory microtome.
- Zeatin (80% trans form). 
- Silver nitrate 0.5% in Ethanol (solution A).
- Bromophenol 0.2% and 0.15% silver nitrate in 1:1 ethanol: ethyl acetate 
(solution B). 
- Solution C: EDAC (1-ethyl-3(3-dimethylaminopropil) carbodiimide 204 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
hydrochloride) /100 mM phosphate-bufered saline (PBS) at pH 7.0, 
91% + Paraformaldehyde 4% + Glutaraldehyde 5%.
- Alcohol: Xylene series.
- Parafn wax.
- Ehrlich’s reagent (1% p-dimethylaminobenzaldehyde in 1M HCl w/v).
- Tween-20.
- Glycine 15%, 50%.
- 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA).
- Blocking solution consists of 93.4% 10 mM PBS, 0.1% Tween-20, 1.5% 
glycine and 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA).
- Salt rinse solution (RSR) containing 99% 10 mM PBS, 0.1% Tween-20, 
0.9% BSA. 
- Primary rabbit anti-IAA polyclonal antibody (As09 445; Agrisera, 
Vännäs, Sweden). 
- Primary rabbit polyclonal antibody to trans zeotin riboside. 
- Secondary antibody anti-rabbit IgG (whole molecule)-FITC goat 
antibody (F9887; Sigma Aldrich). 
Protocol 
Thin layer chromatography (TLC) of cytokinins 
1. Load the zeatin on silica plates and 9:1 chloroform: methanol used as 
mobile phase. 
2. Upper separation, the plates are sprayed with 0.5% silver nitrate in 
ethanol (solution A). 
3. Heat at 100o
C for 5 min, sprayed with 0.2% bromophenol blue plus 0.15 
silver nitrate in 1:1 ethanol: ethyl acetate (solution B) and heat it at 100o
C 
for additional 10 mins. 
4. Chromatogram is photographed using digital camera.
Free-hand sections 
5. Free-hand sections (transverse and longitudinal) of roots of P. vulgaris 
and lenticular morphotypes of Piptadenia gonoachantha are taken. 
Histochemical localisation of cytokinins and IAA 
6. For cytokinins detection, take root section and stain with solution A and 
B and incubated at room temperature; in solution A for 5 min, followed 
by solution B for 5 min.
7. After incubation, sections are washed in absolute ethyl alcohol. 
8. Finally mount the sections on microslide. Colour appeared in root tissues 
as well as gall tissue should be compared with the coloured developed by 
the standard. 
9. For IAA, incubate sections in Ehrlich’s reagent at room temperature for 
5 min.
10. Stained sections are observed under the light microscope and 
photographed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 205 
IAA and Cytokines immunolocalisation 
11. Three samples each of root of P. vulgaris and galls of Piptadenia 
gonoachantha are taken and prefxed in EDAC/100 mM PBS.
12. Then the above samples are post-fxed in the solution C at 4o
C for 15 
h. However, to detect cytokines, the post-fxation is omitted because 
paraformaldehyde links to cytokines bases, N6
-isopentenyladenine, 
DHZ and Zeatin in plant tissues.
13. After post-fxation, above material is dehydrated in alcohol: xylene series 
and embedded in parafn wax (Johansen, 1940; Khasim, 2002).
14. Using Rotary microtome, longitudinal sections of roots and transverse 
section of galls are obtained. 
15. Above sections are deparafnised using alcohol and xylene series and 
washed in 10 mM PBS. 
16. Later the above sections are incubated in blocking solution for 45 min.
17. After incubation, these sections are washed in regular salt rinse solution 
for 5 min, then treated with 99.1% 10 mM PBS, 0.8% Triton X-100 and 
0.1% BSA. 
18. Sections then incubated separately in either the primary rabbit anti-IAA
polyclonal antibody (Agrisera, Vännäs, Sweden) diluted 1:40 in PBS or 
the primary rabbit polyclonal antibody to trans-zeatin riboside for 2h 
in the dark. See that control sections should not be treated with these 
antibodies. 
19. After the primary antibody treatment, sections are washed in salt￾rinse solution and PBS an incubated at room temperature for 2 h with 
the secondary antibody anti-rabbit IgG (whole molecule)-FITC goat 
antibody diluted 1:40 in PBS.
20. After washing thrice in salt-rinse solution and PBS the sections are 
mounted in 50% glycerin.
21. The analyses are performed using Confocal Zeiss 5 LIVE microscope 
(Oberkochen, Germany) at 488 nm excitation and 505-530 nm emission 
flter.
Results 
Cytokinins are detected as blue spots in both TLC plates as well as tissue 
sections stained with bromophenol blue/silver nitrate. The zeatin riboside 
antibody labeled the cytokinins in sites similar to those obtained by histological 
stains of root and gall tissues. In root tissue of P. vulgaris, xylem cell walls 
and nuclei are the main sites of cytokinins accumulation. In the gall sections, 
the cytokinins are detected in the central inner cortical cells. 
In case of IAA, Anti-IAA antibodies are weakly labelled accumulation in 
xylem of roots and Ehrlich’s reagent could not detect IAA. Whereas IAA is 
detected in gall tissue by the anti-IAA antibodies and by the Ehrlich’s reagent 
in the vacuoles and the cytoplasm of outer cortical cells. However, IAA is not 
detected in the central inner cortex of any galls.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
206 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
11.8 Latex and Rubber 
Latex is a colloidal substance consisting of various substances such as 
carbohydrates, organic acids, salts, alkaloids, sterol, fats, tannins, and 
mucilages. The dispersed particles commonly present are essential oils, 
balsams, resins, camphor, carotenoids, and rubber (Bonner and Galston, 1947). 
Among these substances, the resins and rubber (C5H8)n are the characteristic 
components in the latex of many plants. Latex may contain a large number 
of proteins (Ficuscallosa), sugars (Compositae), or tannins (Musa). The best￾known latex is produced by various rubber-yielding plants (Hevea braziliensis, 
Ficus elastica, etc.). When the latex is released from the plant, the rubber 
particles clump together, i.e., the latex coagulates. This property is useful in 
the commercial separation of rubber from latex (Esau, 1993). 
11.8.1 Staining Technique to Localise Rubber in Guayule 
(Parthenium Argentatum Gray) (Jayabalan and Shah, 
1986) 
Before staining, sections have to be deresinated and total lipid extraction 
should be performed in the following manner. 
Deresination 
Cross-sections of guayule stem about 20-40 µm thick are taken; sections are 
deresinated with a minimum of three changes of preheated acetone-water 
solvent (88:12) at 50°C for 45 mins (Kay et al., 1980). 
Extraction of Lipids 
Total extraction of lipids is carried out at room temperature in the following 
way: 
(a) Sections are kept either in a mixture of 1:1 chloroform and methanol for 
30 mins (Galanos and KaPoulas, 1962) or in a solution of 2% sodium 
methoxide in equal volumes of methanol and butanol. 
(b) Then lipids are completely removed by agitating the sections with 5% 
NaOH in 95% ethanol for 30 seconds.
Staining with Dansyl Chloride Alone 
i. Deresinated sections are treated with a proteolytic enzyme, Pepsin pH 
6.0 for 6 hrs to remove cellular proteins (Pearse, 1972). 
ii. To remove precipitated proteins, sections are briefy agitated in 10% 
trichloroacetic acid (TCA). 
iii. Treat with 70% ethanol for a minute. 
iv. Wash thoroughly with distilled water. 
v. Rinse sections with 1% sodium bicarbonate (pH. 8.0-9.0).
vi. Immerse in dansyl chloride stain (1 mg/4 ml acetone) for 2-3 mins. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Histochemical Methods 207 
vii. Now stained sections are washed in distilled water and mounted 
in 1% sodium bicarbonate solution to avoid background during 
photomicrography. 
Staining with both Oil Red O and Dansyl Chloride 
i. Deresinated and deproteinated sections are treated with oil red 0 for 3-5 
mins (Pearse, 1968). 
ii. Counterstain with dansyl chloride (1 mg in 4 ml 60% isopropanol).
iii. Rinse the sections in distilled water and mount in 1% sodium bicarbonate.
Result 
Stained sections are observed under a Zeiss epifuorescence microscope. White 
fuorescence is observed in the parenchyma cells treated with dansyl chloride. 
The combination of oil red O and dansyl chloride gives better fuorescence of 
rubber globules than using these stains separately (see Jayabalan and Shah, 
1986). 
Biological Reaction 
The rubber globules stained with oil red O or oil blue N are extracted by 
common fat solvents like acetone, diethylene glycol, or xylene (Lillie and 
Fullmer, 1976). This indicates that the stain is due to the dye molecule 
reacting with a hydrophobic matrix of the rubber. The fuorescence of rubber 
stained with dansyl chloride, auramine O, or neutral red is diferent from that 
of these substances in solution by themselves. These dye molecules may form 
chemical bonds through the residual double bond of rubber. 
11.8.2 Oil Red O-Dansyl Chloride Method for Laticifers 
(Inamdar et al., 1987) 
Procedure 
i. Fixation of plant material is done in FPA (formalin-propionic acid￾alcohol) (Johansen, 1940).
ii. Freehand sections are taken with the help of a razor blade. 
iii. Clear the sections in a 1:1 mixture of hydrogen peroxide (30%) and 
glacial acetic acid by keeping them in a hot air oven for 1-3 hrs.
iv. Later sections are taken out from the oven and washed with 70% ethanol 
followed by two or three changes of distilled water. 
v. Then sections are kept in 1% toluidine blue O for 2-3 minutes to reduce 
autofuorescence of lignifed walls (O’Brien and McCully, 1981).
vi. The sections are frst stained with Oil Red O and followed by dansyl 
chloride and mounted in 1% sodium bicarbonate (pH 7-9) to reduce 
background interference fuorescence.
vii. Later sections are thoroughly washed with deionised water and mounted 
in 60% glycerine and observed under a fuorescence microscope.208 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Comments 
When sections are stained with oil red 0 alone, faint red fuorescent and UV
illumination are observed. It is enhanced following treatment with dansyl 
chloride. Deproteinised sections used as controls here are shown as weak 
fuorescence. Also deresinated and lipid extracted controls show very faint 
staining with oil red O under a bright-feld microscope. Generally, oil red O 
is used as a fat stain (Lillie, 1977) and dansyl chloride for proteins (Ringertz, 
1968). The fuorescence is due to the high number of proteins, fats, and resins 
present in laticifers (Bruni et al., 1977).  
12 
Electrophoresis 
Histochemistry is a combination of histology and analytical biochemistry. In 
histoThe term electrophoresis defnes as the migration of charged particles 
in a medium under the infuence of an electric feld. Many biological 
molecules such as nucleic acids, nucleotides, amino acids, peptides, and 
proteins possess ionisable groups and at any given pH in a solution, they are 
electrically charged either as cations (+) or anions (−). Under the infuence 
of an applied electric feld these charged particles will migrate either to the 
cathode or to the anode, depending on the nature of their net charge. Even if 
two molecules have the same charge, they may not migrate together because 
there is a diference in their molecular weight, they will have diferent charge/
mass ratios. This diference is of more use in electrophoresis on gels. These 
diferences are brought about by the diferential migration when the ions in a 
solution are subjected to an electric feld. Modern scientists have been using 
this technique very widely to determine the molecular weight of proteins and 
DNA sequencing. 
Migration of an ion in an electric feld
When a spherical molecule of net charge ‘q’ is placed in an electric feld, 
the electric force ‘F’ that acts upon this particle will depend upon (i) the net 
charge density of the molecule, and (ii) the strength of the feld in which it is 
placed. This can be described mathematically as follows:
ΔE F = —— q d 
ΔE = Field strength applied (potential diference between two molecules)
d = Distance between two electrodes
q = Net electric charge on the molecule 
Since the particle is suspended in a solution, one has to consider the 
friction occurring between the accelerating molecule and the solution to 
obtain a valid relationship of electrophoretic migration. The extent of friction, 
as described by Stoke’s equation, will depend upon (i) the shape and size of 
the molecule, and (ii) the viscosity of the medium, it is as follows:
F = 6πrηv
F = Function exerted on the spherical molecule 210 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
r = radius of the molecule 
η = viscosity of the solution
v = velocity at which the molecule is migrating
The above frictional force will oppose the accelerating force generated 
by the electric feld. Equating the force of acceleration with Stoke’s equation, 
we get:
ΔE —— q = 6πrηv d 
If we rearrange the above relationship, we get the equation as follows:
ΔEq
q = 6πrηv 
In the above equation, the velocity (v) of the molecule is proportional to 
(i) the feld strength (ΔE/d) and (ii) charge (q) on the molecule but is inversely 
proportional to the feld strength, the particle size (r), and (iii) viscosity of the 
solution (η).
12.1 Modes of Electrophoresis 
The instrument required for electrophoresis has two components: a power 
pack and an electrophoresis unit. Electrophoresis units are available for 
running either vertical or horizontal gel systems.
12.1.1 Low Voltage Electrophoresis 
Paper electrophoresis is low-voltage electrophoresis; this could be 
demonstrated for undergraduate students. Filter paper has been used for the 
study of normal and abnormal plasma proteins. Paper of good quality will have 
95% cellulose and a very slight absorption capacity. In fact, chromatography 
paper is suitable for electrophoresis. 
Usually, the electrophoretic cell contains electrodes, bufer reservoirs, 
support for paper, and a transparent insulating cover; the electrodes are usually 
made up of platinum the low voltage power pack can be used here (Fig. 12.1).
The supporting medium, i.e., flter paper or cellulose acetate, must frst be 
saturated with bufer and held on a sheet of insulating material like Perspex. 
The sample is then applied in the form of a small spot by using a micropipette. 
The location of the spot depends on the nature of the molecular mixture present 
in the sample; for example, if there are molecules with opposite charges, then 
they will separate and move towards opposite electrodes and hence the sample 
is applied at the centre. The two reservoirs on either side of the supporting 
medium are isolated from the electrodes so that any change in pH does not 
afect the bufer. Then the power is switched on for a required amount of 
time after the sample is applied. At the end of the experiment, the migrated 
constituents may be analysed.  
Electrophoresis 211 
Fig. 12.1. Low voltage electrophoresis (Redrawn from Pattabhi and Gautham, 2004).
Once the run is complete, the electrophoretograms (electrophoretic 
papers) are dried in a vacuum oven at 100o
C. 
12.1.2 Vertical Slab Gel Electrophoresis 
Vertical slab gel unit type (Fig. 12.2) is commercially available and routinely 
used to separate proteins in acrylamide gels. The gel is formed between 
two glass plates that are clamped together but held apart by plastic spacers. 
Gel dimensions are typically 12 cm × 14 cm, with a thickness of 0.5 to 1 
mm. A plastic comb is placed in the gel solution, and it is removed after 
polymerisation to provide a loading well for samples. When the apparatus is 
assembled the lower electrophoresis tank bufer surrounds the gel plates and it 
causes some cooling to the gel plates. Since several wells formed side-by-side, 
a number of samples can be loaded simultaneously, and these samples can be 
compared. This is the great advantage of this technique over the column type. 
This technique is extremely popular in the feld of molecular biology.
Fig. 12.2. Vertical Slab Gel Electrophoresis
(Redrawn from Pattabhi and Gautham, 2004).212 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
12.1.3 Horizontal Gel Electrophoresis 
In this system, the gel is cast on a glass or plastic sheet and placed on a cooling 
plate (an insulated surface through which cooling water is passed to conduct 
away generated heat). The connection between the gel and electrode bufer is 
made using a thick wood of wetted flter paper (Fig. 12.3).
In all these systems, a power pack is used to supply a direct current 
between the electrodes. Electrophoresis is carried out in an appropriate bufer, 
which is essential to maintain a constant state of ionisation of the molecules 
being separated. Since pH determines the degree of ionisation of organic 
compounds, it can also afect the rate of migration of these compounds. An 
increase in pH increases the ionisation of organic acids and a decrease in pH 
increases the ionisation of organic bases. 
Fig. 12.3. Horizontal Gel Electrophoresis (Redrawn from Wilson & Walker, 2010).
Supporting Media
Electrophoresis is carried out on a porous mechanical support, which is wetted 
in electrophoresis bufer and in which electrophoresis of bufer ions and 
samples could occur. The supporting medium cuts down convection currents 
and difusion so that the separated components remain as sharp zones (Wilson 
and Walker, 2010). Now-a-days, agarose gels and polyacrylamide gels have 
been efectively used to analyse macromolecules such as proteins and nucleic 
acids. 
Agarose is a linear polysaccharide (average relative molecular mass 
12000) made up of the basic unit agarobiose, which comprises alternating 
units of galactose and 3,6-anhydrogalactose. Agarose is one of the compounds 
of agar and it is a mixture of polysaccharides isolated from certain seaweeds. 
Generally, 1% and 3% concentrations of agar have been used. Agarose gels 
are formed by suspending dry agarose in an aqueous bufer, then boiling the 
mixture until a clear solution is formed. Later, it is allowed to cool down to 
room temperature to form a solid gel. The pore size in the gel is controlled 
by the initial concentration of agarose; large pore sizes are formed from low  
Electrophoresis 213 
concentrations and smaller pore sizes are from higher concentrations. Agarose 
gels have been used for the electrophoresis of both proteins and nucleic acid. 
Polyacrylamide gels are also used in analysing proteins and nucleic 
acids. Electrophoresis in acrylamide gel is frequently referred to as PAGE 
(polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis). Cross-linked polyacrylamide gels are 
formed from the polymerisation of acrylamide monomer in the presence of 
smaller amounts of N, N’-methylenebisacrylomide (bis-acrylamide). In this, 
bis-acrylamide is essentially two acrylamide molecules linked by a methylene 
group and is used as a cross-linking agent. The polymerisation of acrylamide 
is an example of free-radical catalysis and it is initiated by the addition of 
ammonium persulphate and the base N,N,N’, N’-tetramethylenediomine 
(TEMED). TEMED catalyses the decomposition of the persulphate ion to 
give a free radical (a molecule with an unpaired electron).
S2O2‾ • 8 + e-- → SO2‾
4 + SO‾4
Here SO‾4
• is a free radical, represented as R• and M as an acrylamide 
monomer molecule; then the polymerisation is as follows:
R• + M → RM•
RM• + M → RMM•
RMM• + M → RMMM•
Acrylamide gels are defned in terms of the total percentage of acrylamide 
present and the pore size in the gel is dependent on the concentrations of both 
the acrylamide and bis-acrylamide. Acrylamide gels can be made with 3%-
30% acrylamide. Thus, low-percentage gels have larger pore sizes; this can be 
used to separate proteins and DNA molecules. 
12.2 Detection and Quantitative Assay 
To detect and identify unknown components in the resolved mixture, the 
electrophoretogram may be compared with another electrophoretogram on 
which standard components have been resolved under identical conditions. In 
this respect, it is similar to that of chromatography. 
Individual compounds are usually detected and identifed by their physical 
properties such as fuorescence and ultraviolet absorption have been used for 
detection. 
Staining – A variety of dyes have been used for detecting various 
components (Table 12.1). Usually, a fxative may be applied before staining; 
excess stain is eluted after staining. 214 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Table 12.1. Visual and fuorescent dyes to detect components separated by 
electrophoresis (adopted from Upadhyay et al., 2003)
Components Dyes Remarks 
Proteins Bromophenol blue in acetic 
acid 
Visual, quantitative 
Nigrosine in trichloroacetic 
acid/acetic acid
Visual, very sensitive 
Lissamine green in acetic 
acid 
Visual, quantitative 
Coomassie brilliant blue Visual, quantitative 
Dansyl chloride Fluorescent, quantitative 
Aqueous anilinonapthalene 
sulphonate (ANS) 
Fluorescent, very sensitive 
Nucleic acid Methyl green-pyronine DNA-blue, RNA-red 
sensitive 
Lanthanum acetate + 
acridine orange in acetic 
acid 
DNA, RNA-orange red
Toluidine blue Visual, sensitive 
Pyronine RNA, sensitive
Methylene blue RNA, sensitive
Ethidium bromide Fluorescent, very sensitive 
Lipoproteins Sudan black in 60% 
ethanol 
Visual, sensitive 
Glycoproteins PAS Visual, quantitative 
Alcian blue Visual, sensitive 
Polysaccharide Iodine Visual, sensitive 
Detection of enzymes in situ – If resolved components are enzymes, 
these can be detected by special staining techniques. A paper strip of the 
same size as the electrophoretogram is impregnated with the substrate for 
the enzyme desired to be separated. This paper strip is now juxtaposed with 
the electrophoretogram and placed in a suitable bufer. After some time, the 
sheets are separated. The substrata on the paper strip develop colour upon 
reaction with the enzyme. The position of the colour developed on the paper 
strip indicates the position of the enzyme on the electrophoretogram (Fig. 
12.4). 
Electrophoresis 215 
Fig. 12.4. Detection of enzyme in situ (Redrawn from Upadhyay et al., 2003).
12.3 Discontinuous (Disc) Gel Electrophoresis 
Disc gel electrophoresis (discontinuous bufer employed and discoid 
appearance of macromolecular zones) is a modifcation of conventional 
zone electrophoresis. This allows the sample to enter the gel as a sharp band, 
thereby helping further resolution (Fig. 12.5). In this, macromolecular mixture 
is subjected to an electric feld in a retarding gel support that is separated 
Fig. 12.5. Schematic diagram of Disc Gel Electrophoresis
(Redrawn from Upadhyay et al., 2003). 
216 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
into two sections difering in porosity and bufered at diferent pH. The 
macromolecular mixture migrates from the more porous into less porous gel, 
a process accompanied by change in pH. As a result, sample can be resolved 
into very thin, sharp bands (much higher resolution) that can be achieved in a 
continuous bufer.
Polyacrylamide gel has been preferred in the disc gel electrophoresis. The 
two diferent porosity gels used are known as the stacking gel (high porosity) 
and separating gel (low porosity).
Separating gel – The separating gel is prepared by using 5-10% 
acrylamide (the amount of acrylamide used depends upon the approximate 
molecular weight of the macromolecule being separated) (Table 12.2). Hence, 
the pores are numerous and of a smaller diameter imparting molecular sieving 
property to this gel. In this gel, the macromolecules subsequently separate. 
The bufer used in this gel is usually an amine such as Tris that is adjusted 
to the proper pH (i.e., 8.3) using hydrochloric acid.
Table 12.2. Percentage of separating gel depending upon the 
molecular weight of the macromolecules
Macromolecules Molecular weight of the 
macromolecule to be separated 
Acrylamide in 
separating gel (%) 
Proteins 10,000 - 40,000 15-20
40,000 - 100,000 10-15
100,000 - 300,000 5-10
300,000 - 500,000 5-7
>500,000 2-4
Nucleic acids Oligomes – 10,000
10,000 – 50,000
15-20
10
50,000 – 200,000 5 
200,000 – 2,000,000 2.2-3
Stacking gel – After the polymerisation of separating gel, the stacking 
gel is poured on top of it. Stacking gel is prepared by using 2.3% acrylamide, 
since highly porous, it is devoid of molecular sieving action. The bufer used 
here is also an amine, mostly Tris. The pH is 6.7 (less than the separating gel) 
and it is adjusted with hydrochloric acid.
The bufer used in the sample is identical to that of the stacking gel. The 
bufer used in the lower reserve is identical to that of the separating gel. The 
bufer used in the upper reservoir is also an amine. However, it difers from 
the rest of the bufers in that its pH is adjusted with glycine but not with 
hydrochloride acid. The pH of the upper reservoir is kept slightly above that 
of the running gel.  
Electrophoresis 217 
12.4 Protocols 
12.4.1 Agarose Gel Electrophoresis for DNA Analysis 
(Chawla, 2003; Lee et al., 2012) 
Agarose gel electrophoresis is a simple and rapid technique of resolving the 
fragments of DNA and further the localisation of DNA within the gel could be 
determined directly by staining with ethidium bromide dye under UV light. 
These bands of DNA can be recovered from the gel and used for variety of 
cloning purposes. 
Agarose gel is cast by melting the agarose in the presence of a designed 
bufer until a clear transparent solution is obtained. The melted agarose is 
poured into a mould of variety of sizes, shapes and porosity and allow them 
to harden. Upon hardening, this forms the matrix, the density of which is 
determined by the concentration of agarose. When the electric feld is applied 
across the gel the DNA, which is negatively charged at neutral pH due to 
phosphate along the backbone, migrates towards the anode.
DNA has a uniform size mass/charge ratio, it is separated by its size 
within the agarose gel in a pattern such that the distance travelled is inversely 
proportional to the log of its molecular weight. The rate of DNA migration 
is determined by the size of DNA molecule, agarose concentration, DNA
confrmation, voltage applied, presence of ethydium bromide, type of agarose 
and electrophoresis bufer (Lee et al., 2012).
Various bufers such as Tris-acetate (TAE), Tris-borate (TBE), Tris￾phosphate (TPE) and alkaline bufer at pH 7.5 – 7.8 are available in the market 
(Table 12.3). All these bufers contain EDTA (pH 8.0). Double stranded linear 
DNA fragments migrate approximately 10% faster through TAE than TBE or 
TPE bufers (Chawla, 2003).
Table 12.3. Electrophoresis bufers
Bufer (working solution) Stock solution concentration 
Tris-acetate 50x (TAE)
(1x = Tris-acetate 0.04 M + EDTA
0.01M)
Tris-borate (TBE)
(0.5x: Tris-borate 0.045 M + EDTA
0.001 M)
Tris-Phosphate 10x (TPE)
(1x = Tris-phosphate 0.09 M + EDTA
0.002 M)
Alkaline bufer
(1x = NaOH 50 mN+EDTA/mM)
50x: 242 g Tris base + 57.1 ml 
glacial acetic acid + 100 ml 0.5 M 
EDTA (pH 8.0)
5x: Tris base + 27.59 boric acid + 20 
ml 0.5 EDTA (pH 8.0)
10x = 108 g Tris base + 15.5 ml 
85% phosphoric acid + 40 ml 0.5 M 
EDTA (pH 8.0)
1x = 5ml 10N NaOH + 2 ml 0.05M 
EDTA (pH 8.0) 
 
 
 
 
218 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Equipment and reagents 
Agarose gel electrophoresis apparatus, UV transilluminator, gel documentation 
system, Eppendorf centrifuge, etc. 
Agarose, Ethidium bromide, Ethylenediamine tetracebate (EDTA), Tris 
base, glacial acetic acid, phosphoric acid (for TPE bufer), boric acid (for 
TBE bufer), bromophenol blue, xylene, glycerol, sucrose, molecular weight 
marker DNA ladder and sodium hydroxide. 
Stock solution of 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0) 
Dissolve 186.12 g Disodium ethylenediamine tetracelate-2H2O (Na2
EDTA.2H2O. MW = 372.24) in 800 ml water. Stir vigorously with magnetic 
stirrer. Adjust to pH 8.0 with NaOH and make upto 1 litre by adding water. 
Sterilise by autoclaving and store at room temperature. 
Ethidium bromide stain 
Dissolve 100 mg ethidium bromide in 10 ml distilled water and store at 4o
C. 
Procedure
1. The gel casting platform should be procured along with an electrophoretic 
apparatus. Seal the ends of a suitable plastic gel casting platform with an 
adhesive tape. Get the mould either on a horizontal to the bench or on a 
leveller supply with an apparatus. 
2. Now, prepare the 0.6-0.8% agarose gel mix, depending upon the 
experimental requirement, with 1xTAE or 0.5xTBE electrophoresis 
bufer and boil it, and stir gently till a homogeneous clear solution is 
formed. Then cool it to 55%. Agarose with required bufer can also be 
melted in a microwave oven.
3. By using the pipette, seal the edges of the mould with a small quantity 
of agarose and then pour it into the gel mould. Place the comb into the 
gel mould but the position of the comb should be 0.5-1.0 mm above the 
plate so that a complete well is formed when the agarose is placed. The 
gel should be 3-5 mm thick. Allow the gel to set for atleast 30 minutes at 
room temperature. 
4. Remove the tape from gel casting mould and keep this gel in an 
electrophoresis unit containing 1xTAE or 0.5xTBE bufer; see that gel 
should be completely submerged in the bufer while removing the comb.
5. Take the DNA sample in the desired gel loading bufer and mix them 
thoroughly. Gel loading bufers are of diferent types. Add 1/10th volume 
of gel loading bufer (6x stock) to the DNA sample. Gel loading bufer 
would serve to increase the density of DNA sample that ensures the 
DNA drops evenly into the wells, adding colour to the sample and being 
containing dye that migrates towards the anode at predictable rates in 
an electric feld. Bromophenol blue migrates approximately 2.2-fold  
 
 
 
Electrophoresis 219 
faster in agarose gel than xylene cyanol FF irrespective agarose gel 
concentration. 
6. Now load the DNA sample into the agarose gel. Generally, 100-500 ng 
of DNA should be loaded per 0.5 cm slot (a typical slot of 0.5 cm would 
hold about 37.5 µl). Also load a suitable molecular weight marker in 
the frst and last well along with the DNA sample (~3 µl). Then run the 
electrophoresis unit by attaching the electrodes. The DNA will migrate 
towards the anode end (red electrode).
7. Variety of DNA ladders (molecular weight markers) have been used, 
such as ladders of 1 kb DNA, 500 bp DNA, 100 bp DNA, DNA/EcoR 
1 digest, lambda DNA/Hind III digest, lambda DNA/EcoR 1 + Hind 
III double digest, etc. All these ladders produce fragments of diferent 
molecules sizes. 
8. After some time, disconnect the electrophoresis unit from the current and 
take out the gel from it. This gel should be stained with ethidium bromide 
stain for 20-30 min (always wear gloves while doing the experiment). 
These stains should be prepared from 20 µl ethidium bromide stock (10 
mg/ml) in 200 ml distilled water.
9. Transfer the gel to the UV transilluminator and take a photograph of the 
gel. 
After its use, ethidium bromide should be discarded carefully. As it is 
powerful mutagenic and toxic, handle the gel carefully by wearing gloves 
(Chawla, 2003).
12.4.2 SDS Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS Page) 
for the Separation of Proteins (Chawla, 2003; Ramudu 
and Khasim, 2022) 
Glassware and other equipment
Vertical gel electrophoresis apparatus 
Spacers (x2)
Glass plates (x2)
Combs 
Plastic trays (x4)
Mortar and pestle
Micropipettes
Water bath 
Reagents 
Sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) 
Acrylamide 
Tetra methyl ethylenediamine (TMED)
Glycerol
Bromophenol blue dye  
 
 
 
220 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Coomassie brilliant blue 
Glycine
Tris 
Methanol
Silver nitrate 
Sodium thiosulphate 
Sodium carbonate 
Formaldehyde 
Hydrochloric acid 
Glacial acetic acid
N’,N’ methylene bisacrylamide 
Ammonium persulphate (APS) 
Ethanol 
2-Mercaphoethanol
Stock solutions 
i. 10% SDS 10 ml 
Dissolve 1 g SDS in 8 ml distilled water. Heat to become crystallised. 
Adjust the volume to 10 ml. Store it at room temperature.
ii. 30% Acrylamide-bisacrylamide stock 100 ml
Acrylamide 29 g
 Bisocrylamide 1 g
Dissolve acrylamide and bisacrylamide in 60 ml of water. Heat the solution 
upto 37o
C to dissolve chemicals, make up to 100 ml with distilled water and 
store in dark bottle at 4o
C. In this, bisacrylamide is a cross linking reagent. 
During polymerisation, it cross links the linear molecules of acrylamide to 
form pore like structures. By varying the concentration of cross linker and 
monomer, the pore size can be increased and decreased.
Precaution: Wear gloves while handling the gel. Since the gel is 
neurotoxin, it should not come to contact with skin.
iii. Ammonium persulfate (APS) 10% 
APS i.e., (NH4) 2SO4 can be used to initiate the polymerisation reaction. It 
gives a smooth homogenous polymerisation but may react with proteins and 
may change artefacts. 
Dissolve 1g APS in 10 ml of distilled water. This solution is made afresh 
every time before the gel casting. 
iv. Tris solution 1.5 M (pH 6.8) 100 ml 
Dissolve 18.21 g Tris (hydroximethyl) amino methane in 60 ml water (Tris, 
M.W. = 121.14). Add concentrated HCl, drop-wise until pH falls to 7.4. Then, 
add in HCl drop-wise until pH falls to 6.8. Make up this solution to 100 ml 
with water and store at room temperature. Also prepare 1.5 Tris solution at pH 
8.8 in the same manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrophoresis 221 
v. Sample loading bufer (pH 6.8)
Tris (pH 6.8) 1.5 M 5 ml
SDS 10% 6 ml
2-Mercaptoethanol 7.5 ml
Bromophenol blue 0.1% 100 mg
Glycerol 15% 15 ml
Dissolve the ingredients and make total volume of 100 ml. Store it at 4o
C. 
vi. 10x SDS-PAGE running electrode bufer (pH 8.3) 
1 litre (Tris-glycine bufer)
Tris base 25 mM 30.3 g
Glycine 250 mM 144.1 g
SDS 0.1% 10 g
Dissolve in 850 ml water and make up to 1 litre with distilled water. Store 
at room temperature. 
vii. Coomassie staining solution 
Dissolve 2.5 g Coomassie brilliant blue in a mixture of 450 ml methanol, 100 
ml acetic acid and 400 ml water. Adjust volume to 1 litre with distilled water 
and store it at room temperature. 
viii. Coomassie destaining solution
Methanol (45%) 450 ml
Acetic acid (10%) 100 ml
Make up this mixture to 1 litre with water and store it at room temperature.
Procedure
i. Assemble the leak-proof glass plates according to the instructions given 
by manufacturers. 
ii. Decide the quantity of separating and stacking gel. Desired concentration 
of resolving gel is prepared using the values given in the Table 12.4. Mix 
the components in the order shown. Polymerisation begins as soon as 
TEMED is added. Shake the mixture rapidly.
iii. Prepare three-fourth volumes of separating gel mix and one-fourth 
volume of stacking gel and mix them. Use the following volumes of the 
gels for diferent spacers. 
Spacer Approximate volume of 
Separating gel Stacking gel 
0.5 mm spacer 4 ml 1.5 ml
1.0 mm 8 ml 3 ml
1.5 mm 10 ml 4 ml
iv. Pour the separating gel solution three-fourth of glass plates. Add 200-
250 µl of water to make the surface even. 
 
222 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
v. Allow the gel to solidify. It takes 20-30 minutes. Solidifcation can 
be observed as a line between gel and water. After polymerisation is 
completed, discard the water deposited on the top of the gel carefully.
vi. Now prepare 5% stacking gel according to the table given (Table 12.5). 
Stacking gel is poured onto separating gel. Insert clean Tefon comb into 
the stacking gel solution immediately without any air bubbles. Comb 
must be inserted maximum half-length of stacking gel. Allow it to 
polymerise at room temperature. 
Table 12.4. Varying components and their volumes used for the preparation of 
diferent concentrations of resolving gel for SDS-PAGE (Chawla, 2003)
% Gel Components Volume of components (ml) 
per gel mould volume of 
10 ml 20 ml 30 ml 
8% Water 5.3 10.6 15.9
30% Acrylamide-bis-acrylamide mix
1.5 M Tris (pH 8.8)
10% SDS
2
2.5
0.1
4
5.0
0.2
6 
7.5
0.3
10% Ammonium persulfate
TEMED
0.1
0.008
0.2
0.016
0.3
0.024
10% Water 4.0 7.9 11.9
30% Acrylamide-bis-acrylamide mix
1.5 M Tris (pH 8.8)
10% SDS
3.3
2.5
0.1
6.7
5.0
0.2
10.0
7.5
0.3
10% Ammonium persulfate
TEMED
0.1
0.008
0.2
0.016
0.3
0.024
12% Water 3.3 6.6 9.9 
30% Acrylamide-bis-acrylamide mix
1.5 M Tris (pH 8.8)
10% SDS
4
2.5
0.1
8 
5.0
0.2
12
7.5
0.3
10% Ammonium persulfate
TEMED
0.1
0.008
0.2
0.016
0.3
0.024
Table 12.5. Various components and their volumes used for the preparation of 
stacking gel for SDS-PAGE (Chawla, 2003)
Components Value of components (ml) per gel 
mould volume of 
5% stacking gel 4 ml 6 ml 10 ml
Water 2.7 4.1 6.8 
30% Acrylamide-bis-acrylamide mix 0.67 1.0 1.7
1.5 M Tris (pH 8.8) 0.5 0.75 1.25
10% SDS 0.04 0.06 0.1
10% Ammonium persulfate 0.04 0.06 0.1
TEMED 0.004 0.006 0.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrophoresis 223 
vii. Fill 1x Tris-glycine bufer in the power pack of SDS-PAGE apparatus.
viii. Once stacking gel is solidifed, carefully remove the lower spacer and 
insert gel plate into lower tank. Remove any air bubbles that became 
trapped at the bottom of the gel between the glass plates.
ix. Add running bufer to top reservoir and carefully remove comb.
x. Preparation of sample – Prepare protein sample leaf material of 
Coelogyne nervosa by crushing the material in 200 µl of sample bufer. 
Transfer it to an eppendorf tube and keep the samples in water both 
at 100o
C for 3-5 min. Centrifuge at 12,000 g for 10 min. Collect the 
supernatant in a fresh eppendorf tube and store in a refrigerator. 
xi. Load 10 µl of each protein samples and 10 µl of molecular weight 
marker (ready to use) into wells (avoid spillage in between wells) with 
the help of a microsyringe. 
xii. It should be washed with bufer from bottom reservoir after each sample 
is loaded. Leave frst and last wells, load samples from second well 
onwards.
xiii. Now give the electric power supply to the electrophoresis apparatus. The 
positive electrode should be connected to the bottom bufer reservoir. 
Apply a voltage of 8 V/cm to the gel. After the dye front has moved into 
the resolving gel, increase the voltage to 15 V/cm and run the gel till the 
bromophenol dye front reaches 0.5 cm from the lower edge of the gel; 
then turn of the power pack.
xiv. Remove gel plates carefully and free them apart with the help of a 
spatula. Mark the orientation of the gel by cutting a corner from the 
bottom of the gel that is closest to the no. 1 well.
xv. Staining – After the electrophoresis is completed, the gel is stained for 
proteins. Polypeptides separated by SDS-PAGE can be stained with 
Coomassie Brilliant Blue-250 and simultaneously fxed with methanol: 
glacial acetic acid. The gel is placed in a stain and incubated at 37o
C for 
one hour or at room temperature till bands are observed. 
xvi. Excess stain is removed by soaking the gel in the destaining solution of 
methanol/acetic acid. Change the destaining solution 3 or 4 times. The 
dye is sensitive and can detect up to 100 µg (0.1 mg) of protein in an 
acrylamide gel. 
xvii. The bands can be photographed and analysed at this stage. Gels may be 
stored indefnitely in a sealed plastic bag.
Result: The distinct sharp blue bands can be seen in the gel. The intensity of 
these bands is variable depending on the number of polypeptides in the same 
protein solution loaded in the gel. 
Using a protein molecular weight marker, calculate the molecular weight 
of protein samples. The distance migrated by each protein sample can be 
measured and compared with the standard protein travelled distance. By 
taking molecular weight in Y-axis and distance in X-axis, plot a graph.224 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Fig. 12.6. SDS-PAGE protein banding pattern in six populations of C. nervosa 
(PM – Protein marker, P1 – Yercaud, P2 – Dodabetta, P3 – Palni, P4 – Kodaikanal, 
P5 – Wayanad, and P6 – Munnar) Courtesy: Ramudu and Khasim, 2022.
In C. nervosa, the SDS-PAGE protein profle showed multiple bands of 
varied molecular weight ranging from 14 Kd to 116 Kd in six populations 
collected from diferent parts of the Western Ghats of India (Fig.12.6). 
Intraspecifc and interspecifc diversity could be studied by SDS-PAGE 
protein profle data.13 
Molecular Techniques 
Minute and cryptic genomic variations in nucleic acid sequences are crucial 
factors that distinguish diferent plant systems from one another, and such 
variations can be ascertained through molecular assays. In recent times, the 
feld of plant molecular biotechnology has witnessed the emergence of a wide 
array of techniques, from molecular markers to monitor genetic variations, 
Next Generation Sequencing technologies, and genome editing tools such 
as conventional plant transformation or Clustered Regularly Interspaced 
Short Palindromic Repeats/Cas9 (CRISPR/Cas9) genome editing system. 
All these techniques have collectively revolutionised plant molecular biology 
and biotechnology. However, an important prerequisite is the extraction of 
genomic DNA from plant specimens, which is the starting material for any 
of these studies (Aboul-Maaty and Oraby, 2019). Over the years, numerous 
protocols have been developed and reported for the extraction of high-quality 
genomic DNA isolation from plants (Dellaporta et al., 1983; Saghai-Maroof 
et al., 1984; Doyle and Doyle, 1990; Scott and Playford, 1996; Pirttilä et al., 
2001; Shepherd et al., 2002; Syamkumar et al., 2003; Masoodi et al., 2020). 
Although all these procedures are reportedly successful in the isolation of 
pure and intact plant DNA, they often require modifcations/ minor alterations 
when applied to diferent plant systems (Aboul-Maaty and Oraby, 2019). 
This may be attributed to biochemical heterogeneity among plant samples 
(Heikrujam et al., 2020). Various primary and secondary plant metabolites, 
as well as carbohydrates, lipids, polyphenolic compounds, etc, severely afect 
the quality of the DNA extracted (Khanuja et al., 1999; Aboul-Maaty and 
Oraby, 2019). Most of these compounds also reportedly act as inhibitors in 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) based molecular studies (Xin et al., 2003; 
Heikrujam et al., 2020), hence, afecting the quality (purity) of the DNA
samples isolated. Removal of biomolecular contaminants from the cells is 
often achieved with the help of chemicals such as CTAB (Cetyl-trimethyl 
Ammonium Bromide)(Saghai-Maroof et al., 1984; Doyle and Doyle, 1990) 
or Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS) (Dellaporta et al., 1983).Therefore, most 
of the protocols developed for isolation of genomic DNA from a plant cell 
follow the basic principle, wherein, the cell wall, cell membrane and nuclear 
membrane are disrupted to precipitate the nucleic acids (DNA and RNA), 
which is further purifed to obtain the intact genomic DNA. The concentrations 226 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
of the contents of the extraction bufer are routinely altered to increase the 
quality and yield of DNA isolated. 
13.1 Genomic DNA Extraction 
13.1.1 Choice of Plant Tissue and Function of Each 
Reagent Used 
The plant tissues from which DNA is to be isolated has to be identifed prior 
to extraction. Young and disease-free leaves are frequently chosen, as the 
quality and yield of DNA is superior. The tissues are then homogenised in dry 
ice, liquid nitrogen or tissue homogeniser to digest the cell wall and release 
the contents of the cell. The sample is then exposed to a suitable extraction 
bufer. The extraction bufer contains chemicals such as SDS (anionic) or 
CTAB (cationic) which are detergents which facilitate the disruption of the 
cell membranes. Sometimes, chemicals such as PVP (polyvinylpyrolidine) 
are used in addition to CTAB (Cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide) to 
denature metabolites such as polyphenols and lipids (Heikrujam et al., 2020). 
β-mercaptoethanol in the extraction bufer helps dissolve disulfde bonds to 
denature complex proteins, while Tris and NaCl protect the nucleic acids and 
trap the proteins bound to them. In nature, genomic DNA is protected from 
endogenous nucleases. During DNA extraction, EDTA (Ethylene diamine 
tetra acetic acid), present in the extraction bufer acts as a chelating agent for 
divalent cations such as Mg2+and Ca2+ions, thereby preventing endonuclease 
activity. With the removal of the cellular membranes, the DNA remains free in 
the solution but is still bound to proteins and other contaminants. Denaturation 
of proteins is accomplished by phenol, which is aided by chloroform which 
also acts as a stable barrier between the aqueous phase and the alcohol phase. 
Thorough mixing of the Phenol and C: I solution is necessary to ensure phase 
separation and maximise the yield of DNA. The addition of Isoamyl alcohol 
is carried out to prevent foaming and ensure proper mixing of solutions and 
phase separation thereafter (Khanuja et al., 1999; Ignacimuthu, 2001). The 
denatured proteins form a layer at the interphase. The nascent DNA in the 
aqueous phase is prone to wear and tear and thus should be handled with 
extreme care and caution. Chilled EtOH or isopropanol is used to spool out 
the DNA from the aqueous phase (Heikrujam et al., 2020).
Purifcation of extracted DNA: Repeated freezing and thawing of samples 
should be avoided and eforts must be made to reduce its exposure to the 
extraction bufer. Since the genetic material isolated will comprise both RNA
and DNA, the samples have to be subjected to treatment with RNase A
enzyme to facilitate the breakdown of RNA. Proteinase K will further purify 
the samples to disrupt the peptide bonds of the proteins attached to the DNA 
though endopeptidase activity. 	 	 	 	
 
Table 13.1. Peak absorbance wavelength of biomolecules and 
chemicals involved in DNA extraction 
Peak Absorbance (in nm) Substances
230 EDTA, Polysaccharides, Ethanol
260 Nucleic acids (DNA/RNA) 
270 Phenol 
280 Proteins 
320 Cell debris 
	 	 	 	 	
 
Molecular Techniques 227 
13.2	Quantifcation of DNA Samples Isolated
Quantifcation of the DNA samples involves estimating the concentration 
of DNA in the samples. Usually, this estimation is carried out 
spectrophotometrically, using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer. For an 
unknown sample, the DNA concentration can be measured using Beer￾Lambert’s law. Diferent substances generally contaminating DNA samples 
absorb UV light at diferent wavelengths as detailed in Table 13.1. At the same 
time, the A260:A280 ratio can give a clue about the purity of the DNA (Wilson 
and Walker, 2010). Generally, for double stranded DNA, its characteristic 
ratio should be 1.7 to 1.9 (Ignacimuthu, 2001). A higher ratio is expected 
if the sample is contaminated with RNA, while a lower ratio is observed 
with proteins and phenolic compounds. Absorbance ratio of ~1.8 is ideally 
associated with high quality DNA. A260:A280 ratio thus accurately suggests the 
purity of DNA samples isolated. 
13.3	Quality of the DNA Samples Isolated
The quality of the DNA samples isolated can be ascertained by separating 
them on 0.8% agarose gel. Gel electrophoresis involves migration of DNA
bands on agarose gel matrix under infuence of an electric feld (Ignacimuthu, 
2001; Chaitanya, 2013). Since most protocols for extraction involves isolation 
of total genomic DNA, which is high molecular weight molecule, and hence, 
a lower percentage of gel is used to separate it. Table 13.2 details the size of 
DNA fragments and the gel percentage used to separate them. Intact DNA, 
in its native form shows up as a sharp band (≥40 bp), while sheared and 
degraded samples appear smeared on the gel. Parameters such as application 
of voltage and agarose concentration should be critically evaluated to ensure 
proper migration of DNA on the gel matrix. 
Generally, a ladder (500 bp) or Hind III digest is used as a standard 
marker to evaluate the genome size of the plant (Aboul-Maaty and Oraby, 
2019). Lambda DNA is the commonly used marker for gel electrophoresis 
and when it is cut with restriction enzyme EcoR1 and Hind III (double digest) 
the following marker sizes (bp) will appear in the gel (Ignacimuthu, 2001). Table 13.2. Percentage of agarose gel to separate DNA fragments 
based on their size 
Agarose % Size of fragments separated (kb)
0.5 1-30
0.7 0.8-12
1.0 0.5-10
1.2 0.4-7
1.5 0.2-3.0
2.0 0.05-2.0
	 	
	 	 	
228 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
13.4	Agarose Gel Electrophoresis
13.4.1	 Reagents and Bufers
Two diferent bufer systems are generally used for carrying out gel 
electrophoresis, viz., TAE (Tris-Acetic acid, EDTA) and TBE (Tris Boric 
acid EDTA) bufers. While both the systems are equally competent, TAE 
has comparatively lower ionic strength and is used to separate larger DNA
fragments (>12 kb). This bufer system is usually efcient when the aim is 
gel purifcation and extraction of the DNA fragment. However, this bufer 
has to be replaced for extended run times. In contrast, TBE bufer has no such 
requirement, and has a much higher bufering capacity. It facilitates separation 
of smaller DNA fragments (<1 kb), owing to its high ionic strength and hence 
decreased mobility of DNA. 
Tank bufer: The tank bufer is prepared by diluting 10X bufer to IX 
concentration. It comprises of 10mM Tris-acetate (pH 8.0) and 1mM EDTA
(pH 8.0) and the remaining volume is made up with distilled water.
Ethidium bromide solution: (10mg/ml in 1 X TE bufer). To the sample 
bufer containing melted agarose, Ethidium bromide is added as EtBr 
intercalates between the bases of the DNA and can therefore be visualised 
when exposed to UV light in a Gel Documentation System.
13.5 Polymerase Chain Reaction 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) was developed in 1980s by Kary Mullis. 
It is an in vitro technique, which is used to synthesise new strands of 
DNA, complementary to our desired DNA template. It has proved to be a 
revolutionary technique, and has applications in a wide variety of scientifc 
areas, such as molecular biology, microbiology, diagnostics, forensic science, 
genetics, paternity testing, etc.
The amplifcation of DNA strands in PCR requires many important 
components. A thermostable DNA polymerase is required for synthesising 
new strands from template DNA. However, the polymerase can only add  
 
 
Molecular Techniques 229 
nucleotides into a pre-existing 3’-OH group, which is provided by DNA
primers. A primer is defned as a short stretch of 18-22 oligonucleotides which 
gets attached to its complementary region in the DNA template and provides 
the free 3’-OH group to polymerase. During PCR amplifcation, repeated 
cycles of denaturation of template, annealing of primers and extension by 
DNA polymerase with diferent dNTPs (deoxy nucleotide-tri-phosphates) are 
performed to generate many copies of the desired DNA (amplicons). 
The typical PCR reaction consists of the following steps:
i. Denaturation - The genomic DNA template is frst denatured by using 
heat to separate the two strands of DNA. Normally denaturation is carried 
out at 94-95°C for about 5-7 minutes. The DNA, which contains greater 
than 50% G/C content will require a higher denaturation temperature. 
Inefcient denaturation causes frequent errors.
ii. Annealing - The reaction is then cooled to a temperature that allows the 
primer(s) to anneal to their target DNA sequences. Low concentration 
and long primers extend necessary annealing times. The annealing 
temperature (Ta) can be estimated based on the melting temperature 
(Tm) using the following formula. 
Tm = (A+T) x 2+ (C+G) x 4; Ta = Tm- (5-10° C)
The Ta is preferably taken as 5°C below the Tm of the primer. A time 
within the range of 30 secs-1 min is usually sufcient.
iii. Extension - Annealed primers are then extended with thermostable Taq 
(Thermus aquaticus) DNA Polymerase. It requires roughly one minute 
for synthesising 2kbp. It is usually carried out at 72°C for 2 mins for all 
the cycles, with a fnal extension for 5-7 mins at 72°C.
Various other reagents like assay bufers, MgCl2, dNTPs etc. play a vital 
role in the PCR amplifcation reactions. Usually, the bufers are available in 
5X or 10X concentrations in stock, from which we take 1X bufer for our 
PCR reaction. MgCl must be added (if not present in bufer) as it functions 
as a cofactor for the DNA Polymerase. dNTPs are also vital to the reaction, 
which are added by the polymerase to the extending DNA strand. 1 Unit of 
Taq is required for 20-50 µl reaction mixtures. Primer(s) can be single or 
double, based on the type of marker system used. The 0.1-1 mM of primer(s) 
is enough for a PCR reaction. Both primers should have almost the same Tm 
(melting temperature) in the case of forward and reverse primers. Primer must 
not be complementary at its 3’ ends as this may lead to the formation of primer 
dimers. Presence of G or C at the 3’ end improves binding. It is preferred that 
all the reagents used in a PCR reaction should be from the same company for 
optimal results. Optimal concentrations of the reagents should be used, as too 
much of it will cause unspecifc amplifcations and too low concentrations 
will fail to cause any amplifcation.	 	
	 	 	
 
230 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
While preparing for a PCR reaction, the work surface should be cleaned 
properly and all the tubes, tips etc. should be sterilised before use. A master 
mix is prepared containing all the reagents in the required amount, except the 
template DNA (which is given individually in the PCR tubes). 10-50 ng of 
DNA is added to the tubes, depending on the quality of the DNA extracted. 
The master mix is then distributed to all the PCR tubes, which are then placed 
in the thermal cycler. The PCR cycle should be set in the thermal cycler as per 
our requirement. 
After the amplifcation is completed, 2-2.5 µl of 6X gel loading dye is 
added to all the samples. Alternatively, coloured bufers are available, which 
can be added directly into the master mix. 
Depending on the size of the amplifed fragments, 1.5-2% agarose gel can 
be prepared to resolve the PCR amplifed fragments. Most PCR fragments 
are usually below 5kb in size. The samples are loaded in the gel, along with 
a suitable molecular weight marker (1kb/500bp ladder). Ethidium bromide 
should be added to the gel during preparation to visualise the DNA bands. 
13.6	Types of PCR
13.6.1	 Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction
(RT-PCR)
Reverse transcription is a process in which single-stranded RNA gets 
transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) by the enzyme reverse 
transcriptase. RT-PCR is a highly sensitive technique, where single stranded 
RNA (ssRNA) is reverse transcribed to cDNA, which is then amplifed 
using primers, dNTPs and Taq DNA polymerase (Freeman et al., 1999). A
comparison between the amplifcations of DNA and cDNA can give us the 
information regarding the gene expression and the presence of introns in 
a gene. RT-PCR can help in the identifcation of polymorphismic loci and 
facilitate the cloning of rare transcripts (and avoid the costly preparation of 
cDNA libraries). Suitable primers are used which hybridises with the RNA. 
Reverse transcriptase creates the cDNA copy from the RNA. Two types of 
reverse transcriptase enzymes are commonly used for frst strand synthesis, 
viz. the enzymes from monkey mycloblastosis virus (AMV) and the moloney 
mouse leukaemia virus (Mo-MLV). The frst strand which is generated is used 
for the second strand synthesis of the cDNA, by adding a heat stable DNA
polymerase. Thus, the conventional RT-PCR reaction is a two-step reaction. 
All the tubes, glasswares etc. used for RNA extraction and PCR should be 
properly cleaned and sterilised, since a successful RT-PCR requires high 
quality, intact RNA template. RNAse inhibitors can be included to minimise 
the activity of RNAse. 
The primers used for the cDNA preparation afects its size and specifcity. 
Three types of primers may be used for RT-PCR: a) Oligo (dT): This primer  
 
Molecular Techniques 231 
targets the poly (A) + tail at the 3’ end of the mRNA. This primer usually 
produces a full-length cDNA. b) Hexanucleotides binds to the complementary 
sequences in the mRNA and leads to short cDNAs. Random hexanucleotides 
help in overcoming the difculties due to secondary structures in the 
RNA template. c) Specifc oligonucleotide primer binds selectively to the 
complementary regions of the mRNA of interest. This type of primer helps in 
the isolation of specifc genes and diagnostic assays.
13.6.2 Real Time PCR 
Areal time PCR, or qPCR (quantitative PCR), is an excellent molecular biology 
technique. It has a great advantage over conventional PCR, as it monitors 
the amplifcation of the targeted DNA molecule in real time (i.e., during the 
PCR) (Fraga et al., 2008). Real-time PCR can be used quantitatively (which is 
called quantitative real-time PCR) and semi-quantitatively (i.e., above/below 
a certain amount of DNA molecules) (semi-quantitative real-time PCR). To 
carry out the detection of the PCR products in real-time, two methods are 
commonly used: 
(a) non-specifc fuorescent dyes, that intercalate with any dsDNA randomly
(b) sequence-specifc oligonucleotide probes (labelled with a fuorescent 
reporter) which allows detection only after the probe has hybridised with 
its complementary sequence. 
Real-time PCR is carried out in a thermal cycler, which has the capacity 
to illuminate each sample with a beam of light (of at least one specifed 
wavelength). The fuorescence emitted by the excited fuorophore is then 
detected. The PCR process generally consists of a series of temperature 
changes, for the denaturation, annealing and extension stages that are repeated 
for 25–50 cycles. Since the fragments are of small sizes, the last step is usually 
omitted in real-time PCR. The temperatures and the time durations used for 
each stage depend on a variety of parameters, such as the polymerase enzyme 
used to synthesise the DNA, the concentration of divalent ions and dNTPs in 
the reaction and the binding temperature of the primers. 
13.6.3 Nested PCR 
Nested PCR involves two amplifcation reactions in sequence, carried out 
with two sets of primers. The amplicons generated by the frst amplifcation 
reaction are used as templates for the second reaction. The primers for the 
second reaction are oligonucleotides, which bind to regions internal to the 
frst primer. This type of PCR increases the specifcity/sensitivity of PCR, 
as a higher number of cycles are performed (Haf, 1994). Nested PCR is 
an excellent method to amplify segments of long templates but requires 
knowledge of the target sequences. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
232 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
The following components are required to be added in a nested PCR. 
10X Amplifcation bufer, MgCl2, Taq DNA polymerase, dNTP mix, 
Parafn wax (optional), Mineral oil (optional), Primers (20 µM of each): 
Inner oligonucleotide primer 1, Inner oligonucleotide primer 2, Outer 
oligonucleotide primer 1, Outer oligonucleotide primer 2.
13.6.4	 Multiplex PCR
Multiplex PCR detects multiple targets simultaneously, with diferent pairs 
of primers for each target. Since, multiple targets are involved, two or more 
probes are required that can be distinguished from each other and detected. 
Various fuorophores can be used as probes for detection. This type of PCR, 
with multiple target detection, has made it easier to carry out the comparative 
studies in various research felds of life science, clinical diagnostics, forensics 
etc. (Rajalakshmi, 2017). It is also widely used in SNP genotyping, GMO 
(genetically modifed organism) detection, mutation and polymorphism 
analysis, etc.
Some important factors to keep in mind while designing a multiplex PCR 
are: 
i. Designing of Primers: Primer design has a very critical role in multiplex 
PCR success. Since more than one pair of primers are used, care should 
be taken to properly design all the primer sets, as an inappropriate primer 
set will either miss amplifying the target, can’t amplify anything or will 
go non-specifc. Primer length, melting temperature (Tm), GC content 
and dimer formation capacity should also be considered while designing 
primers. Every set of primer being used should be unique and should not 
cross-react with each other. Primer Pex is an example of a software, used 
to design multiplex PCR primers. 
ii. Multiplex PCR reagents: Like any other PCR, if the reagents are 
not properly added in the master mix, no amplifcation will occur. 
All the reagents should be added, and in appropriate quantities. Very 
high concentration will lead to non-specifc amplifcation and low 
concentrations will lead to no amplifcation of the template DNA. The 
common reagents required in multiplex PCR are as follows:
• Taq DNA polymerase
• dNTP mix
• PCR reaction bufer
• Nuclease-free water
• Primer pairs
• Template DNA
• A probe/SYBR green dye
• Multiplexing bufer	 	
 
 
 
 
Molecular Techniques 233 
13.6.5	 Touchdown (TD) PCR
PCR optimisation usually needs a lot of efort and time. In touchdown PCR 
(TD PCR), primers can avoid amplifying the nonspecifc sequences. TD PCR 
simplifes the optimisation technique and makes it easier and faster. It helps in 
increasing the specifcity and sensitivity of the primers (Green and Sambrook, 
2018b). Calculating annealing temperature is harder if there are mismatches 
between the template DNA and the primers. In TD-PCR, the annealing 
temperature (Ta) for the frst two cycles is set at 3°C above the calculated Ta. It 
also reduces non-specifc amplifcation. It is also helpful while working with 
heterologous primers. The procedure requires around 90-120 mins, depending 
on the template length. It can be incorporated as a part of any standard PCR to 
enhance product formation. 
13.6.6	 Hot-Start PCR
Hot-Start PCR is a molecular technique that inhibits Hot-Start Taq polymerase 
activity or the incorporation of modifed dNTPs during reaction set up until a 
heat operation step occurs. It allows the reaction set up at room temperature 
without non-specifc amplifcation and primer- dimer formation. This type 
of PCR is very efective in reducing non-specifc amplifcation. An essential 
component of the master mix is limited before the frst denaturing step, or a 
reversible inhibitor of the polymerase is added (Green and Sambrook, 2018a). 
There are various ways to carry out the hot-start PCR reaction, such as:
i. Using enzyme-linked antibodies or oligonucleotides: The Taq 
polymerase can be linked with an enzyme to pause its activity at the 
initial stage. Once the denaturation temperature is achieved, the antibody 
gets degraded at such a high temperature and releases the Taq polymerase 
into the reaction mixture. The same can be achieved by using highly 
specifc oligonucleotides, which binds to Taq and keeps it inactive. Once 
the temperature crosses 50°C, the oligonucleotides detach from the 
enzyme and release it into the mister mix. 
ii. Pre-heating the thermal cycler: The thermal cycler (PCR machine) can 
be heated at 95°C before putting the tubes inside. The master mix is 
prepared at 4°C (on ice) and immediately transferred to the pre-heated 
PCR machine. It reduces the chances of Taq getting activated before it is 
required in the reaction. 
iii. Freezing the master mix: The master mix is freezed after preparation, 
and to the frozen surface, Taq polymerase and MgCl2 is added. This 
helps to keep non-specifc amplifcation under control.
iv. Delay Taq addition: The master mix without Taq can be put into the 
PCR machine. Once the temperature reaches 95°C, the Taq polymerase 
is added to the mixture.  
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	
	 	 	
234 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
v. Wax Beads: All the PCR components like primers, Mg2+, bufer, dNTPs 
are mixed at room temperature and covered with melted wax. The tube 
is cooled, and the wax is solidifed. The Taq enzyme and MgCl2 is added 
on the surface of the wax bead. During the PCR cycle, the wax melts and 
the enzyme is added to the reaction mixture. 
13.6.7	 Inverse PCR
Inverse polymerase chain reaction (Inverse PCR) is one of the many variants 
of the polymerase chain reaction (Haf, 1994). In this, restriction digestion is 
performed on the genomic DNA which digests only the unknown fanking 
regions but not the known DNA region. Inverse PCR is helpful when a DNA
region of known sequence is fanked with unknown sequences. The unknown 
fanking region is amplifed with the help of the information from the known 
DNA (Ochman et al., 1990). The procedure of inverse PCR is divided into 5 
steps: 
(a) The known DNA region fanked with an unknown DNA sequence is frst 
identifed.
(b) The gDNA is digested with restriction enzymes.
(c) The DNA fragments having unknown sequences are then ligated.
(d) The unknown DNA is now being fanked by the known DNA sequences.
(e) Primers complementary to the known sequence are used to amplify the 
unknown DNA region.
13.6.8	 Suicide PCR (Solid Phase PCR)
Suicidal PCR prescribes the use of any primer combination only once in a 
PCR (hence the term “suicide”), which should never have been used in any 
positive control PCR reaction, and the primers should always target a genomic 
region never amplifed before in the laboratory using this or any other set of 
primers. It avoids any risk of combination as it uses a single-shot-primer, and 
its specifcity is absolute. Suicide PCR is used in those studies where avoiding 
false positives and increasing the specifcity of the amplifed fragment is 
the main objective. This technique uses any primer combination, but only 
once in a PCR, which is not used in any positive control of the PCR reaction 
(Rajalakshmi, 2017). This technique ensures that no DNA contaminations 
from previous PCR reactions are present, which could otherwise generate 
false positives. Suicide PCR is used in paleogenetics to examine preserved 
genetic materials from the remains of ancient organisms. 
13.6.9	 Allele-specifc PCR (AS PCR)
Allele-specifc polymerase chain reaction (AS-PCR), known as Amplifcation 
Refractory Mutation System (ARMS-PCR), is a technique uses allele-specifc 
primers, which is used to analyse single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).  
	 	 	 	 	 	
Molecular Techniques 235 
SNP is a diference in DNA sequence of single base change between two 
individuals. The AS-PCR is also known as the Amplifcation Refractory 
Mutation System (ARMS-PCR). In this technique, two diferent primers are 
used for two alleles (Gaudet et al., 2009). One set of primers is a normal set, 
while the other is a mutant set (resistant to normal PCR). The 3’ ends of the 
primers are modifed in such a way that one primer set will amplify the normal 
allele while the other will amplify the mutant allele.
13.6.10	 Variable Number of Tandem Repeats (VNTR) PCR
Variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) is a cluster of tandem repeated 
sequences in the DNA, whose number of repeats difer from one individual 
to another. The tandem repeat sequences of DNA are also known as “Satellite 
DNA”; these are diferent types such as satellite DNA, minisatellite and 
microsatellite. Satellite DNA is highly repetitive DNA sequences, and each 
DNA sequence consists of several thousand base pairs. These are found in the 
regions of heterochromatin. The Y chromosome has abundant satellites. In 
case of minisatellite, each repeat ranges from 9 to 10 base pairs. It is an array 
of tandem repeats 500 to 30000 base pairs long. Most of the minisatellites are 
GC rich. They possess strong strand symmetry. Whereas in minisatellite, also 
known as short tandem repeats or simple sequence repeat the repeats are very 
short with 2-6 base pairs each. The whole array ranges from 10,000 to 100000 
base pairs long. These are usually found in the plant chromosomes, insects 
and euchromatin regions of vertebrates. VNTR is helpful in detecting inter￾specifc variations. It uses a very small amount of gDNA for the analysis. It is 
an important marker for individualisation.
13.7 Molecular Markers 
Genetic markers are one of the principal tools for detection of genetic 
variabilities, crop identifcation and improvement (Henry, 2012). These 
markers vary from one another, in terms of primers and their specifc binding 
sites to the DNA template. Usually, the markers which are highly reproducible 
and polymorphic are considered superior, as compared to others (Idrees et 
al., 2014). By nature, markers may either be dominant (homozygous) or co￾dominant (heterozygous). Both the classes of markers are extensively used 
for studies in genomic variations among plant species (Idrees et al., 2014). 
Throughout the years, numerous molecular markers have been developed and 
utilised. Earlier markers were designed based on hybridisation of radioactively 
labelled probes to template DNA, whereas the newly developed ones rely on 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) based DNA amplifcation (Nadeem et al., 
2018). Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) is an example 
of hybridisation based marker while Random Amplifed Polymorphic 
DNA (RAPD), Amplifed Fragment Length Polymorphism (AFLP), Inter 	 	 	 	
	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	 	
236 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Simple Sequence Repeats (ISSR), Direct Amplifcation of Minisatellite 
DNA (DAMD), Sequence Characterised Amplifed Regions (SCARs), Start 
Codon Targeted Polymorphism (SCoT), Simple Sequence Repeats (SSRs), 
Intron-Exon Splice Junction (ISJ), Sequence Tagged Sites (STS) and Single 
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) are frequently used PCR based markers 
(Nadeem et al., 2018).
13.7.1	 Random Amplifed Polymorphic DNA (RAPD)
This technique makes use of a single 10 bases long arbitrary primer which 
binds to random sequences in the genomic DNA. It cannot distinguish and 
reveal the homozygosity and heterozygosity of amplicons at the same locus, 
owing to its dominant nature (Nadeem et al., 2018). A major limitation 
accompanying this method is its lacking reproducibility (Garrido-Cardenas 
et al., 2018). 
13.7.2	 Amplifed Fragment Length Polymorphism (AFLP)
It is basically selective amplifcation of the restriction fragments obtained by 
digesting the genomic DNA. It is highly specifc, and its efciency relies on 
purity of the sample extracted (Nadeem et al., 2018). The genomic DNA is 
subjected to restriction digestion (usually by ECoRI + MseI), followed by 
ligation of enzyme adaptors, after which the fragments are amplifed with 
specifc ECoRI and MseI primers. Selective amplifcation is carried out using 
a labelled primer pair. The electropherograms maybe then visualised using 
automated machines and using programmes like GeneMapper.
13.7.3	 Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP)
The emergence of SNPs as reliable markers for detecting high genomic 
polymorphisms among individuals has paved the way for a high-throughput 
genomic evaluation of a population. Variations of a single nucleotide in 
the genome occur extensively throughout the genome and are inherited co￾dominantly, thereby enabling accurate determination of their zygosity and 
genotyping of many individuals (Henry, 2012; Garrido-Cardenas et al., 2018). 
13.7.4	 Scoring of Amplicons and Analysis of Gel Profles
Clear, defnite and reproducible bands are scored. The bands are selected, and 
their size is noted by comparing them with the standard marker. Scoring of 
gel profles is usually carried out for each primer, taking into consideration, 
one amplicon of a particular size at a time. For each amplicon, a binary matrix 
is formed by assigning “1” or “0” denoting the presence or absence of bands. 
This binary matrix acts as a raw material for further building of phylogenetic 
trees and calculation of other genetic parameters. Molecular Techniques 237 
For ease of understanding, we can consider a gel profle with a primer 
“A1” which is used to amplify 3 accessions of a particular plant (Fig. 13.1). 
The banding pattern of each genotype is thoroughly examined and fve 
scorable and clear bands can be identifed. The bands may be scored in a 
matrix form as depicted in Table 13.3.
Fig. 13.1. Marker profle of accessions S1-S3 with primer A1; only clear and defnite 
bands are chosen for scoring. Accession S1 has fve scorable bands, while S2 has 
four bands and S3 has fve.
Table 13.3. Scoring of gel profle obtained with primer A1. Five bands obtained 
are scored as 0 or 1 for each accession for their absence or presence respectively
Primer S1 S2 S3 
1 1 1
A1 1
1
1
1
1
1
1 1 1
1 0 1
The data obtained can further be analysed by three parameters viz. 
polymorphic information content (PIC), resolving power (RP), and marker 
index (MI). PIC measures the discriminatory ability of the marker depending 
on the detected allele number and their distribution frequency. It was calculated 
by the following formula PIC = 1-Σpi2, where pi is the frequency of the i
th 
allele (Sehgal et al., 2009). Resolving Power (Rp) detect variation between 
genotypes was calculated according to Prevost and Wilkinson (1999): Rp = 
ΣIb where Ib (band informativeness) takes the values of 1 – [2(0.5 – p)], 
where p is the proportion of individuals containing the band, and marker index 
(MI) for each primer was also calculated as a product of two functions such 
as the polymorphic information content and efective multiplex ratio (EMR) 
(Saxena et al., 2010) which can be defned as total number of polymorphic 
loci per primer multiplied by the rate of polymorphic loci obtained from their 
total number (Powell, 1996).	 	 	 	
	 	 	
238 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
13.7.5	 RNA Isolation from Plant Tissues
Studies designed with the objective of targeting gene expression and 
sequencing of transcriptomes of plants requires isolation of intact RNA 
from plant cells. The basic protocol for RNA extraction utilises specifc 
bufers which have high concentrations of guanidine-HCl which is a protein 
denaturing salt (Ignacimuthu, 2001). 
Extraction of intact RNAs is fundamental for the study of gene expression 
and for the isolation of new gene products through their cDNAs. The procedure 
makes use of an extraction bufer, containing a high concentration of a very 
strong protein denaturing salt, guanidine-HCl. This salt is very efcient in 
inactivating RNases. The main problem for RNA extraction from plant 
material is the protection of the RNA against degradation by ribonucleases. 
These enzymes are omnipresent and are extremely stable and quite difcult to 
inactivate. Some plant tissues, especially when older or in a stressed situation, 
can contain quite high concentrations of endogenous RNases. All RNA 
extraction procedures try to inactivate endogenous RNases as fast as possible. 
But it is at least as important to avoid any accidental contamination with 
RNases from other sources in the lab. Therefore, a set of basic guidelines have 
to be followed for extraction of RNA. Polysaccharides could also be removed 
quite efciently using the following method: To the RNA solution, add 40 
mM Na-acetate, and 0.5 vol of ethanol. Mix well and precipitate the insoluble 
material by centrifugation. Remove the supernatant and add 3 M Na-acetate to 
a fnal concentration of 0.3 M, and ethanol to a fnal concentration of 2 vol (+ 
1.5 vol). Place at -20°C or -70°C as usual for RNA precipitation.
13.7.6	 Some Guidelines for RNA Extraction
To avoid contaminations from glassware or mortars, it is advisable to provide 
laboratory material with exclusive use in RNA extraction. All glassware 
should be surface sterilised by washing with detergents, for instance a 
special detergent such as Absolve ™M and rinsed several times with DEPC 
(diethylpyrocarbonate) treated water. Afterwards, all glassware should be baked 
overnight at 180°C. Treat all bufers with DEPC (0.1-0.2%; e.g. overnight), 
a strong enzyme poison and RNase inhibitor. DEPC is not stable in solutions 
containing Tris and is able to modify RNA by carboxymethylation and this 
can lead to problems if the RNA is used for enzymatic reactions but does 
not interfere with hybridisation studies. However, DEPC can conveniently 
be removed from solutions, simply by heating or autoclaving (dissociation in 
CO, and ethanol takes place when heated). Plastic material, like polyallomer 
centrifuge bottles, should be washed in the same way as glassware sterilise 
by autoclaving it. Wherever possible, use disposable plastic tubes for 
centrifugation and storage of precipitated RNA. This material is considered 
free of any RNase contamination. Prepare all bufers and solutions in sterile 
glassware, using clean spatulas, and autoclaved double distilled water. Also,  
	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	
Molecular Techniques 239 
avoid contaminating chemicals by using dirty spatulas. Filter sterilised or 
autoclave all solutions. Use gloves to avoid RNase contaminations from 
fngers. Once precipitated in ethanol, the RNA is safe for prolonged storage at 
-20 or -70°C From the total amount of RNA present in the cell only 1 to 5% 
is mRNA and is heterogenous in size and sequence. The remaining part of the 
total cellular RNA consists of rRNA (28S, 18S, 18-85%) and low molecular 
weight RNAs (tRNA, small nuclear RNA, 10-15%). For many applications, 
it is necessary to isolate only the mRNA fraction, e.g., for in vitro translation 
or as an enrichment step to detect low copy number mRNAs by Northern 
blot hybridisation. Eukaryotic mRNA is characterised by the presence of 
a poly (A) tail (50-200 residues long) at the 3’ end. Therefore, the mRNA
fraction can be isolated by oligo (dT)-cellulose or poly (U)-Sepharose afnity 
chromatography. 
13.7.7	 Lab Wares Required for RNA Extraction
Mortars and pestles are sterilised as described above. High-speed centrifuge 
(Sorvall RC5-B or equivalent), and SS34 rotor, 40 ml polyallomer Oak Ridge 
tubes, and 30 ml Corex glass tubes (detergent washed, rinsed with DEPC 
treated water, and autoclaved), table-top centrifuge (Eppendorf or equivalent), 
and an autoclave. Automatic pipettes (200 and 100 μl) and autoclaved plastic 
tips. 
13.7.8 Reagents 
Extraction bufer: 8M Guanidine hydrochloride, 20 mM MES, pH 7.0, 
20 mM EDTA; sterilise by fltration. Before use, add 50 mM MES 
[2-(N-Morpholinoethanesulfonic] DEPC treated water. Add DEPC to double 
distilled water until saturation occurs (0.1-0.5%) and several drops are visible 
on the bottom of the tube. Shake drops vigorously and allow to stand at room 
temperature overnight and autoclave. 
13.7.9	 Quantifcation and Quality Check of RNA Samples
Quantitate RNAby diluting 5 µl in 1 ml alkaline water and read the absorbance 
at A and A20 (water used for spectrometry quantifcation should have pH> 
7.5); acidic pH afects UV absorption spectrum of RNA and signifcantly 
decreases the ratio. 
13.7.10 In Situ Hybridisation Techniques 
Cytogenetics studies have contributed immense knowledge to biology. 
Cytogenetics is a branch of genetics that studies the number and morphology 
of chromosomes. It studies the heredity and variations through morphology, 
structure and behaviour of chromosomes during cell division. Various 
cytogenetical studies have led to the revealing of unexpected details of 240 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
chromosome morphology, behaviour and evolution. The combination of the 
two disciplines of molecular biology and cytogenetics has generated a new area 
of research, which is known as Molecular Cytogenetics. The feld of molecular 
cytogenetics has developed to include many cyto-molecular techniques, 
mainly FISH (Fluorescenti in situ Hybridisation), GISH (Genomic in situ 
Hybridisation), etc. The use of molecular cytogenetical techniques like FISH 
and its variants helps in the studying of individual genomes/chromosomes 
or chromosomal fragments. These techniques are very helpful in analysing 
polyploids, hybrids, etc. 
Molecular cytogenetics includes various techniques such as 
heterochromatin banding, FISH, GISH, McFISH, Oligo-FISH, Flow 
cytometry, Flow sorting, Flow cytogenetics, Microcloning, Microdissection, 
etc. For these studies, preparation of mitotic or meiotic slides is required for 
analysis. 
13.7.10.1 Heterochromatin Banding 
Heterochromatin staining with base-specifc fuorochromes is a reliable method 
to distinguish some types of heterochromatins in plants. Heterochromatin 
detection together with physical mapping of DNA sequences by fuorescent 
in situ hybridisation (FISH) has proved to be a useful technique to analyse 
the patterns of karyotype evolution. This information provides a clearer view 
of the possible role of epigenetic factors in infuencing complex cellular 
phenomena. 
13.7.10.2 FISH 
FISH uses complementary hybridisation of labelled DNA/RNA probes. It 
helps in the direct mapping of the DNA sequences on the chromosomes. It 
is very efective for mapping single and repetitive DNA sequences present 
on the chromosome. FISH studies performed in the rRNA genes act as 
chromosome markers, which are excellent tools to improve karyotype 
description. The broad applications of FISH in structural, comparative 
and functional genomics place plant cytogenetics in a unique position to 
complement, accelerate, or guide plant-genome research. It has enhanced 
the elucidation of the numerical and complex chromosomal rearrangements 
(deletions, duplications, translocations, etc.). In the FISH technique, the slides 
are pre-treated with pepsin to remove RNA and protein contamination which 
may bind to the probe and increase the background noise. The removal of 
these contaminants helps the probes to access the target DNA easily. It also 
fxes the chromosomes and nuclei on the slide, so that they are not washed of
during the procedure (Fig. 13.2). 
Molecular Techniques 241 
Fig. 13.2. Methodology of Fluorescence in situ hybridisation. 
13.7.10.3 Mc-FISH (Multi-coloured FISH) 
It is a variant of the FISH technique. Mc-FISH is preferred when several 
target sequences are to be probed on a chromosome simultaneously. Mc-FISH 
requires the use of several fuorophores. Diferent target sequences can be 
labelled with fuorophores which have diferent emission spectra (Table 13.4).
Table 13.4. Fluorophores and binding sites
Fluorophores Colour Binding region
FITC (Fluorescein isothiocyanite) Green 
CY3 (Cyanine3) Red 5’ end of DNA
AMCA (7-amino 4-methyl Coumanine Blue 
3-acetic acid)
DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) Blue AT-rich regions 
TRITC (tetramethylrhodamineisothiocyanite) Red 
13.7.10.4 GISH 
GISH is a powerful complementary tool, which uses total genomic DNA as 
probes. It is very useful to study inter-specifc hybrids. The DNA probe helps  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
242 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
in visualising the whole genome or a portion of the genome, contributed by 
each parental species in interspecifc hybrids.
Just like FISH, the GISH also has the following steps:
1. Slide preparation 
Cells at metaphase (mitotic metaphase spread) stage. Denaturation is 
carried out on the genomic DNA of one parent and the genomic DNA of 
another parent. 
2. DNA probes preparation 
Here one is nick translated genomic DNA which is labelled one from one 
parent; another probe is unlabelled one. 
Nick translation, developed by Rigby et al. (1977), is a tagging technique 
in molecular biology, in which DNA polymerase I is used to replace some of 
the nucleotides of a DNA sequence with their labelled analogues, creating 
a tagged DNA sequence. So that fuorochrome is efectively bound to this 
tagged DNA sequence (Nick translated DNA sequence).
3. Hybridisation 
Prepare hybridisation solution (HS) that contains autoclaved Salmon 
testes DNA as carrier DNA, autoclaved genomic DNA as an unlabelled 
competitor DNAfrom one parent and fuorochrome labelled nick translated 
genomic DNA from another parent. 
4. Counter stain with DAPI (Diamidino-2-Phenyl indole) blue dye.
5. Visualisation 
Observe under the fuorescent microscope. Unlabelled probe is visualised 
with counterstaining (blue) where labelled probe with green.
Therefore, the GISH is also helpful to analyse natural polyploids, hybrid 
plants and their back cross progenies to ascertain their origin, genomic 
composition and intergenomic rearrangements. 
13.7.10.5 Oligo-FISH 
In this technique, oligonucleotides are used as probes. Oligonucleotides are 
polynucleotides containing a relatively small number of nucleotides. If highly 
repetitive sequences are targeted, properly designed synthetic oligonucleotide 
probes may prove to be superior reagents for rapid FISH. They have certain 
advantages such as, it hybridises rapidly, it is consistent and cheap. Oligo 
probes can be designed easily using the Chorus software (https://github.com/ 
forrestzhang/Chorus). Chromosome spreads can be prepared from actively 
growing root tips.
13.7.10.6 Fiber-FISH 
Fiber-FISH is the technique where in situ hybridisation (FISH) is performed 
on extended DNA fbers. A high-resolution map can be created by using the  
 
 
 
 
 
Molecular Techniques 243 
interphase nuclei as chromatin fbres extending into the nuclei because they 
stretch much more when compared to those in the metaphase chromosomes. 
It provides a fast and direct means of physical mapping at the molecular 
cytogenetic level. Nuclei are isolated from plant cells by destroying the 
nuclear membrane. The DNA fbers generated are then hybridised directly 
with DNA labelled probes. This procedure is used to map DNA clones at a 
resolution of 50-500 kilobase pairs.
13.7.10.7 Chromosome Painting 
Chromosome painting (CP) is a technique to visualise the entire chromosome 
via fuorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) using chromosome-specifc 
painting probes (Pinkel et al., 1988). CP is a powerful tool to diagnose 
chromosome abnormalities, detecting karyotype alterations during evolution, 
and constructing ancestral karyotypes (Marshall and Obe, 2015; Meng et al., 
2021). During the last few decades, CP probes have been mainly amplifed for 
fow sorted or microdissected chromosomes, followed by degenerate oligo￾nucleotide-primed PCR amplifcation.
However, presence of repetitive DNA in the genomes of plants results 
in the unfavourable non-specifc hybridisation signals. Technical advances in 
DNA synthesis have made it possible to massively synthesise oligonucleotides 
based on genome assembly without repetitive sequences. FISH technique in 
plants has shown superior resolution and versatility of oligo-based probes 
compared to conventional genomic clone or single-copy gene-based probes 
(Meng et al., 2018, 2020; Xin et al., 2018; Simonikova et al., 2019).
Various steps involved in the chromosome painting are given below (refer 
to Meng et al., 2021):
1. Chromosome spread preparation and denaturation -
Root tips are taken and fxed in Carnoy’s fuid (3:1 Acetic acid and 
alcohol) and stored in -20 °C until use. Later, root tips are digested in 
an enzymatic solution consisting of 2% cellulase and 1% pectolyase; 
incubated for 1 hour at room temperature, then squashed with a coverslip. 
Afterwards slides are dehydrated in an ethanol series (70, 90 and 100%, 
5 minutes each) prior to FISH assay.
2. Designing and synthesis of oligo-based chromosome 2 (from Saccharum 
spontaneum) painting probe￾The oligo-based Painted probe of S. spontaneumchromosome 2 is designed 
using Chorus software. The oligos (59 nt) specifc to chromosome 2 
are synthesised de novo in parallel by MY microarray (Ann Arbor, MI, 
United States). These are labelled in biotin or digoxigenin. 
3. FISH studies using oligo and rDNA probes-
˗ The above labelled chromosome painting probes are directly used for 
FISH analysis.  
 
 
 
 
 
244 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
˗ Rice 45S and 5S rDNA (Gong et al., 2002) are labelled with either 
digoxigenin-11-dUTP (Roche Diagnostics, USA) or biotin-16-dUTP
using standard nick translation reactions.
˗ In FISH assay, frstly, chromosomes are denatured in 70% formaldehyde 
in 2X SSC at 70°C for 1 minute and dehydrated in an ethanol series 
again. Now, the chromosome mixture (50% formaldehyde, 10% dextran 
sulphate, 20X SSC, 50 ng labelled probe) is denatured at 90°C for min 
and applied to the denatured chromosome studies, incubated for 12 h at 
37°C.
˗ Subsequently, digoxigenin-and biotin-labelled probes are detected using 
rhodamine-conjugated anti-digoxigenin (Roche Diagnostics, USA) and 
fuoroscen-conjugated avidin (Life Technologies, USA) respectively.
˗ Slides are counterstained with DAPI in VeetaShield antifade solution.
4. Visualisation of Chromosomes￾FISH signals are detected under the Olympus BX63 fuorescence 
microscope. Images are captured and merged by Cell Sens Dimension 
1.9 software with an Olympus DP80 CCD Camera. The fnal signals are 
processed and adjusted by Adobe Photoshop CC software (Meng et al., 
2021).
Chromosome Painting has become a versatile tool in basic research 
disciplines ranging from radiation biology to evolutionary cytogenetics and 
nuclear structure studies. 
13.8	Other Approaches
13.8.1 Flow Cytometry 
In plants, ploidy estimation is carried out by chromosome counting on 
microslides prepared from actively growing root-tips. Sometimes it may be 
complicated due to very small size of chromosomes, insufcient spreading 
on slides and low frequency of dividing cells. Under such conditions Flow 
Cytometry (fow = motion; cyto = cell; metry = measure) can be used for the 
determination of the nuclear DNA content in plants. To estimate the nuclear 
DNA content, suspension of nuclei or permeabilised cells are stained with 
DNA specifc fourochrome and amount of light emitted by the each nucleus is 
quantifed and the result of the analysis is displayed in the form of histogram 
of relative fuorescence intensity, representing the relative DNA content in the 
samples. In short, measuring the properties of cells while in the fuid stream is 
known as Flow Cytometry. However, in this technique, preparation of nuclear 
suspension or cell suspension suitable for fow cytometry is achieved with 
utmost care. 
Lucretti et al. (1993) studied the fow karyotyping and sorting of Vicia faba
chromosomes. They sorted out the acrocentric and metacentric chromosomes  
 
 
 
Molecular Techniques 245 
using the fow cytometry. The amount of light emitted from the chromosome 
can be quantifed and able to sort the type of chromosomes.
13.8.1.1 Instrumentation 
Traditional fow cytometers: These fow cytometers have three systems 
such as fuidics, optics and electronic system. In fuidics system, sample is 
injected into a stream of sheath fuid (mostly bufered saline solution), and 
it is exposed to laser beam. Next one, optics system consists of excitation 
optics and collection optics. Excitation has laser and lens that are used to 
focus the laser beam to fow of sample; whereas collection optics consists of 
collection of lenses which collects the light emitted from samples and these 
signals detected by optical detector. Finally electronic system converts signals 
into digital form and that can be read by computer. 
Data analysis: Various software are available, among them FCS 3.1 software 
has been used for any fow cytometry analysis program.
Stains: Now-a-days, diferent dyes available in the market with excitation 
and emission spectra ranging from ultraviolet to near infrared. Polymer dyes 
such as brilliant violet (BV), brilliant ultraviolet (BUV), brilliant blue (BB); 
fuorescent protein dyes including green fuorescent protein (GFP), cyan 
fuorescent protein (CFP), and yellow fuorescent protein (YFP), and all these 
are derived from jelly fsh, while red fuorescent protein from mushroom 
anemone; other dyes for nucleic acids including propidium iodide (PI), 
4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), dyecyclic violet etc. have been used 
for fow cytometry studies.
13.8.1.2 Vicia Faba Chromosomes Sorting 
Lucretti et al. (1991) classifed the chromosomes according to their relative 
DNA content, base content, protein content and morphological parameters by 
using fow cytometry.
A chromosome suspension from root tips is prepared and see that all cells 
should be at metaphase state: 
Synchronisation and accumulation of cells in metaphase–
• Root tips are incubated in Hoagland solution containing hydroxy urea 
for 12 hours.
• Washing and treated with amiprophos-methyl (APM) for 2 hours; all 
cells are accumulated in metaphase state. 
• Then root tips are collected, washing, fxed for 30 min at 5 ºC in 6% 
formaldehyde made in tris bufer (10 mM Tris, 10 mM Na2 EDTA, 
100 mM NaCl, pH7.5) with 0.1% Triton X-100.
• Washing; root tips cut into pieces and treated with 1 ml lysis bufer 
(15 mM Tris, 2mM spermine, 15mM mercaptoethanol, 0.1% Triton 
X-100, pH 7.5). 
 
 
 
246 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
• The suspension of released chromosomes and nuclei is fltered through 
a 50µm and 15µm nylon meshes. This chromosome suspension is 
separately collected and used for Flow cytometry analysis.
• To remove interphase nuclei and chromosome clumps, 750 µl of the 
suspension is layered on 700 µl of 40% sucrose in Tris bufer in a 10 
ml centrifuge tube and centrifuged at 200 rpm for 15 min. Now the 
supernatant is transferred to a sterile 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube.
• Chromosome suspension is stained with propidium iodide (PI) at fnal 
concentration of 50 µg/ml for 30 minutes before analysis. 
• Now this chromosome suspension is analysed with fow cytometers 
and sorter. 
Acrocentric and metacentric chromosomes could be sorted using this 
technique. In karyotyping studies, the histogram of fuorescence intensity 
obtained from PI-stained chromosome suspension is developed. Based on 
the histogram data, chromosome sorting is carried out. Modelling of fow 
karyotypes can be done using software i.e., KARYOSTAR software. Now 
these sorted chromosomes are shown to be suitable for in situ hybridisation. 
Chromosome suspension is separately collected and used for Flow cytometry 
analysis. 
Fig. 13.3. Methodology of analysis of various plant samples using fow cytometry.
(Adapted from the website http://www.ueb.cas.cz/Olomouc1/LMCC/lmcc.html.). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Molecular Techniques 247 
Flow cytometry and sorting is an exceedingly powerful technique for 
purifying cell sub-populations from complex cell mixtures. Flow cytometry 
gives us the scope to use multi-parametric analysis to identify highly specifc 
populations. Phenotypic characteristics, DNA content of cells, RNA content, 
or even assess functional characteristics such as ion fux or pH or altered 
cell states such as apoptosis and cell death can be analysed through this 
technique. This technique uses metaphase chromosomes which are stain with 
fuorescent dyes (one that binds toAT pairs, the other to GC pairs). The stained 
chromosomes fow past a laser beam and a photometer sorts them based on 
diferences in the scattering of light (Fig. 13.3).
According to the method of Galbraith et al. (1983), preparation of 
suspension of intact nuclei for analyses of nuclear DNA content has been done 
by mechanical homogenisation (chopping). The nuclear suspension prepared 
in a nuclear isolation bufer (4-morpholine Propane sulfonate/TRIS) is then 
sieved using a nylon mesh to remove large debris and nuclei stained with DNA
specifc fuorochrome (Propidium iodide/DAPI). As fow cytometry analyses 
relative fuorescence intensity, absolute estimation of nuclear DNA content 
requires the use of a reference standard of known genome size (Fig. 13.3).
13.8.2 Microdissection and Microcloning 
In microdissection and microcloning technique, the target chromosome is 
cut by glass micro-needles or lasers in an inverted microscope for separation 
from other chromosomes and the isolated chromosome segment is then 
collected and amplifed in vitro to establish specifc DNA libraries. After 
the development PCR technique, Chromosome dissection and microcloning 
methods was frstly applied to the rye chromosomes by Sandery et al. (1991). 
Now it has become a powerful technique for the localisation and cloning of 
plant genes. 
Experimental procedure 
The chromosome microdissection and microcloning technique is divided into 
fve steps:
1. Preparation of chromosome specimen
2. Identifcation of target chromosomes
3. Microdissection and collection of target chromosomes or chromosome 
segments 
4. Construction of microcloning library
5. Screening and identifcation of microclones.
Identifcation of target chromosomes
The chromosome specimen must be prepared precisely by conventional 
methods. After chromosome preparation, appropriate methods must be used 
to identify the target chromosome. Karyotyping analysis and chromosome 
banding are employed here. For example, meiotic monovalent chromosomes  
 
248 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
in wheat trisomics lines can be identifed by karyotyping analysis and 
successfully microdissected; similarly, B chromosome of Rye can be detected 
by chromosome banding technique and then microdissected. 
Chromosome microdissection and construction of Microcloning Library
Microdissection and collection of target chromosome/segments can be 
carried out by glass micro-needles, laser micro-beams and fow cytometry. 
Currently, there are special laser beam devices available for microdissection 
such as Laser beam devices—Arcturus XT, USA make; PALM Microbeam, 
Carl Zeiss, Germany. After microdissection, the obtained segments can be 
amplifed in vitro for subsequent studies. 
The construction of chromosome micro cloning libraries has mainly been 
conducted by two methods such as Direct cloning after enzyme digestion and 
PCR mediated cloning methods. 
Direct cloning after digestion
This technique was widely used before the PCR came into existence. 
Here, frstly, DNA is extracted from target chromosomes/segments, later 
deproteination and purifcation of DNA is carried out. Next, the extracted 
DNA is digested by restriction enzyme. Finally, the DNA digested is added to 
ligase to link the vector. This DNA linked to the vector is transferred into host 
bacteria to construct the chromosome DNA library. 
Sandery et al. (1991) frst applied this technique to rye plant; B 
chromosome was separated and cut with glass microneedle and successfully 
microcloned the chromosome after extraction, deproteinisation, purifcation 
and digestion. 
PCR-mediated microcloning
After PCR amplifcation in vitro, additional target chromosomes can be 
obtained to meet the needs of the molecular biology experiments. Here Linker 
Adaptor PCR (LA-PCR) has been adopted, this is as follows:
• First, DNA from target chromosome and digested by restriction enzyme;
• Second, according to the base sequence of sticky end produced after 
enzyme digestion, one linker and adaptor (short stretches of nucleic acid 
that helps in DNA ligation) are designed; and
• Finally, PCR amplifcation is carried out by using the linker as the primer.
Guo (1998)—successfully cloned the B chromosome of rye by LA-PCR 
with the linker-adapter system of Sau3A1 (from Staphylococcus aureus). 
Screening and identifcation of microclones 
The specifcity of the constructed DNA library is generally screened and 
identifed by using Southern hybridisation, in situ hybridisation and the PCR 
amplifcation. Southern hybridisation is useful to identify the source of the 
inserted DNAfragments in the library. Hu et al. (1998) successfully proved that 
microclones produced from in vitro PCR were derived from maize genome.  
 
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Molecular Techniques 249 
Guo et al. (1998) successfully located the PCR products at the terminal end of 
the B chromosome of the rye using the in situ hybridisation. With the help of 
PCR technique Hu et al. (2004) identifed four diferent DNA fragments, R1, 
R2, R3, R4 and these were proved to be derived from wheat 6B chromosome 
using SSR markers. 
Chromosome microdissection and microcloning are efcient tools that 
combine the felds of cytogenetics and molecular genetics. It is highly useful 
for establishing the relationships between specifc chromosomes and specifc 
linkage groups, for localising and cloning genes of interest etc.
13.9 Protocols 
13.9.1	 Isolation of Intact Genomic DNA, its Quality Check
and Quantifcation
Reagents for DNA Extraction 
• CTAB stock: 10% CTAB solution is made. Complete dissolution of CTAB 
occurs at higher temperatures, therefore heating may be necessary.
• IM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0: 6.057g Tris is dissolved in 50 ml double distilled 
water using a magnetic stirrer.
• 5M NaCl: 50ml solution is prepared by dissolving 14.96g NaCl dd water.
• 0.5 M EDTA, pH 8.0: 0.7306g of EDTA is dissolved in 10 ml double 
distilled water. 
All the solutions for DNA extraction should be autoclaved and stored at 
4°C for future use (Ignacimuthu, 2001).
• Extraction Bufer: A typical extraction bufer contains 100mM Tris bufer, 
1.4M NaCl, 10mM EDTA solution and 1% CTAB. 0.2% mercaptoethanol 
is added to the bufer just before use.
• RNase stock: 10mg/ml solution is prepared by dissolving RNaseA in 1M 
Tris bufer and 5M NaCl solution.
• 3M Sodium Acetate, pH 5.2: 40.81g of sodium acetate is dissolved in 100 
ml of distilled water. The pH of the solution is adjusted to 5.2 with glacial 
acetic acid. 
• 1X TE: 10 mM Tris bufer + 1mM EDTA is mixed and the fnal volume is 
made up with double distilled water.
• Proteinase K: For 80 mg tissue, 100 mg/ml proteinase K is used. The 
samples are incubated for 12-18 hours at 50°C.
Step-wise procedure for DNA Extraction 
i. 100-150 mg of young and disease-free leaves from each sample are 
cleaned with EtOH. The samples are then ground to fne powder using 
liquid nitrogen with mortar and pestle or by a tissue homogeniser. The 
macerated samples are then immediately transferred to 800µL of the pre- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
250 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
warmed (at 60°C water bath) extraction bufer. The tubes containing the 
bufer and the samples are mixed by inversion to form even suspensions.
ii. The suspensions are incubated in a water bath at 60°C for 45 minutes-1 
hour. The tubes are gently inverted every 15 minutes to ensure mixing. 
After the incubation period is over, equal volume of phenol: chloroform: 
isoamyl alcohol solution (25:24:1) is added to the tubes. The tubes are 
then placed on a shaker at room temperature for 15-20 minutes so that 
the contents of the tube are properly mixed and phase separation occurs. 
iii. The phases, aqueous and organic are separated by centrifugation at 
13,000g for 10 minutes. 
iv. The aqueous phase containing nucleic acids are pipetted out to fresh 
tubes. 
v. The DNAis precipitated out by adding ¾ volume of ice chilled isopropanol 
or 2 volumes of chilled EtOH to the aqueous phase. Additionally, 3M 
sodium acetate may also be added to the sample to facilitate precipitation 
of DNA. After gentle mixing of the contents of the tube, the DNA strands 
maybe visualised foating in the solution.
vi. The tubes are kept at -20°C for 20-30 minutes or may even be kept 
overnight to increase the yield of DNA. 
vii. After the requisite incubation period is over, the DNA is precipitated 
by centrifugation at 13,000g for 10 minutes at room temperature. The 
DNA is obtained at a pellet, which is subsequently air-dried and washed 
several times with 70% EtOH. 
viii. The DNA is again pelleted after the washing step is over and the pellet is 
air-dried and dissolved in 50-100µL of TE bufer.
ix. The samples are then incubated with RNaseA and Proteinase K for 1 
hour (at 37°C) and 12 hours (at 50°C) respectively.
x. Quality check and quantifcation of DNA is further tested by agarose gel 
electrophoresis and estimation based on absorbance values. 
Step-wise procedure for agarose gel electrophoresis 
i. Sealers/adhesive tapes should be used to securely seal the ends of the gel 
casting tray in which the gel is to be polymerised.
ii. The gel casting tray is set, and combs are placed at appropriate distance 
to ensure the formation of properly formed wells.
iii. Agarose is weighed in a balance and melted in 1X running bufer till a 
homogenous solution is obtained. 
iv. EtBr is added to the agarose solution, which is thereafter poured into the 
casting tray. It is allowed to settle down for the gel to polymerise.
v. Once it is properly polymerised, the combs and the adhesive tapes are 
carefully removed. 
vi. The gel is then placed in the tank by submerging it in the running bufer.
vii. The samples are loaded into the wells. 1/10 volume of Tracking dye 
(usually Bromophenol blue or SyBr Green) is added to the samples so 
that we can track the movement of DNA in the gel matrix. 
 
 
 
	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Molecular Techniques 251 
viii. A marker is added to the last lane which will serve as a standard to 
estimate the size of our DNA fragment. 
ix. The electrodes are connected with the negative terminal connected to the 
black electrode and the positive terminal connected to the red one.
x. The power supply should be turned on and the gel is run till the samples 
reach 1.0 cm above the end of the gel.
xi. The gel is removed from the apparatus and visualised in the gel 
documentation system. 
Result / Note: While running down the genomic DNA on agarose gel, the 
bands appear very clearly without any contamination. If RNA appears, that 
indicates the incomplete RNase treatment of DNA. Being smaller in size, the 
RNA moves faster than the DNA. 
13.9.2	 Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
PCR is performed on the thermocycler. As it is already mentioned earlier that 
it involves three steps, such as Denaturation, annealing and extension.
Equipment and Chemical Reagents 
• PCR machine – Thermocycler program should be set up according to the 
details given in Table 13.5.
Table 13.5. Thermocycler for DNA amplifcation – various steps
S. No. Step Temperature (o
C) Time No. of cycles
1 Initial denaturation 94 5 min 1
2 Denaturation 35-65 30 sec
3 Annealing 56 40 sec 35
4 Extension 72 1 min 50 sec
5 Final extension 72 15 min 1
Components of Reaction Mixture (20 µl) 
• Template DNA - 20-30 ng of genomic DNA that is to be amplifed.
• Pfu DNA Polymerase – 1 unit of this enzyme obtained from Pyrococcus 
furiosus and it could withstand at high temperature 98o
C. 
• Apair of oligonucleotides (forward and reverse) primer – 10 µM. Two short 
fragments of single-stranded DNA with 15-30 nucleotides are specifc for 
the target sequences and are complementary to the 3’ ends of the sense and 
antisense strands of the target sequence so that they have extended each 
other in opposite direction. 
• Deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs) – 2 µl of dNTPs. They 
include single units of all DNA – forming nitrogenous bases in their 
deoxynucleoside triphosphates (dATP, dTTP, dGTP, dCTP) which form the 
building ingredients for DNA synthesis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
252 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
• MgCl2 – 20mM – Magnesium ion (Mg2+
) in the +2 oxidation state acts as 
cofactor and enhances the enzyme activity and polymerisation of DNA. 
• 10x PCR bufer (pH 8.0) – 20 µl of this bufer host the reaction and provides 
congenial environment for PCR activity. 
• Distilled water is added to make up the fnal volume of reaction mixture, 
i.e., 20 µl.
Protocol 
i. Thawing the working standard PCR components.
ii. Gently vortex and briefy centrifuge all solutions after thawing.
iii. Prepare PCR master mix in a sterile 0.5 ml PCR tube by adding all the 
above components according to the quantity given. Enough master mix 
for the number of reactions should be prepared and add one more to 
compensate for pipetting errors. 
iv. Aliquot the master mix into individual sterile 0.2 ml PCR tubes and the 
template DNA (genomic DNA) to it. 
v. Gently spin the samples. 
vi. Place the PCR tubes loaded with samples in the thermal cycler. Carryout 
the amplifcation according to the program set up mentioned in the Table 
13.5.
vii. Polymerisation should be carried out for 1 min for every 1000 bp of 
length of the target DNA. 
viii. After reaction is over, take out the tubes and run 10 µl of reaction mix 
in 1% agarose gel for 45 min at 60 volts. Run the sample along with the 
marker (1 kb ladder).
ix. Visualise the PCR products in the UV light by using a gel documentation 
system. 
Fig. 13.4. RAPD banding pattern of PCR amplifed products of the mother 
plant and in vitro regenerated plants (L = Ladder; M- Mother plant; R1 – R6 – 
regenerated plants).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Molecular Techniques 253 
Result: Purifed DNA from the mother plant and six samples of in vitro 
derived plants of Dendrobium aphyllum were used for the genetic fdelity 
studies. Amplifed PCR product with RAPD primer showed the monomorphic 
and polymorphic bands (Fig. 13.4).
13.9.3 RNA Extraction 
Extraction bufer(forRNAextraction): 8M Guanidine hydrochloride, 20mM 
MES (2-N-Morpholinoethanesulfonic) DEPC treated water, 20mM EDTA
pH7.0, sterilise by fltration. Before use, add 50 mM MES (2-(N-Morpholino)-
ethane sulphonic) DEPC-treated water. Add DEPC (diethyl-pyrocarbonate) to 
double distilled water until saturation occurs (2 0.1-0.5%) and several drops 
are visible on the bottom of the tube. Shake drops vigorously and allow to 
stand at room temperature overnight and autoclave. 
Protocol 
i. Freeze plant material in liquid nitrogen; homogenise to a fne powder 
using a mortar with pestle. 
ii. Add 2 volumes of extraction bufer and after thawing, the powder is 
homogenised further in the bufer. Eventually, glassbeads can be added 
to improve homogenisation. 
iii. Transfer the extract to centrifuge tubes, and centrifuge for 10 min at 
10000 rpm at 4°C. Do not allow the extract to stand too long at room 
temperature; especially, if the tissue is expected to contain large amounts 
of starch (material starts to swell; store on ice in this case). 
iv. Recover supernatant and transfer to fresh tubes containing I volume of 
phenol: chloroform: isoamyl-alcohol (12:24:1) and mix the phases by 
vortexing. In case the extract contains foating particles, flter through one 
layer of sterile muslin cloth. However, this step might be an additional 
risk for RNA degradation.
v. Centrifuge for 15-30 min at 10000 rpm (room temperature). In case of 
high protein and polysaccharide contents of the tissue, an additional 
phenol extraction step is advisable. 
vi. Move supernatant to a fresh Corex tube; add 0.2 vol 1M acetic acid, and 
0.7 vol ethanol (precipitation of RNA, and not of protein and DNA). 
Incubate overnight at –20°C, or 1 h at –70°C.
vii. Precipitated RNA is pelleted at 10000 rpm for 20 min. Wash the pellet 
then with 70% ethanol to remove the salt, dissolve pellet in DEPC-treated 
water.
viii. Precipitate insoluble polysaccharides. Store at –70°C. For longer storage, 
store as ethanol precipitate. 
ix. Suspend the pellet in 1 ml of ‘Q’ water or sterile dd H2O in an aliquot of 
1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes.
x. The total RNA is quantifed by spectrophotometer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
254 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
xi. The integrity of RNA is estimated by running the sample (1 µg RNA) on 
1% (w/v) formaldehyde denaturing the agarose gel.
xii. When the RNA is electrophoresed on agarose gel, it appears in diferent 
lanes; low molecular weight RNA molecules run faster than the high 
molecular weight molecule on the agarose gel.
Result/ Note: The integrity of total RNA could be estimated by analysing 
1µg RNA sample on 1% formaldehyde denaturing agarose gel (Masoodi et 
al., 2020). Various lanes demonstrated that the RNA has been purifed and 
run on the agarose gel. Since it has low molecular weight, it runs faster on the 
gel. An absorbance of 1.0 at 260nm corresponds to approximately 40µg/ml of 
RNA. The A260-A320/A280-A320 ratio should be 1.8 - 2.1.
13.9.4 Protocol for Fluorescence in situ Hybridisation (FISH)
Materials required: 
1. Target DNA
2. A probe which binds to the target 
3. Label which is attached to the probe for the detection of the target 
Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) on metaphase chromosomes 
1. Pepsin pre-treatment of slides 
2. Denaturation of chromosomes 
3. Probe preparation 
4. Hybridisation 
5. Post Hybridisation washes 
6. Counter staining the chromosomes 
7. Microscopic analysis and Digital imaging 
Pepsin pre-treatment of slides:
1. The slides are incubated in 0.005% of pepsin in 0.01N HCl at 37ºC for 
20 min 
2. Washed in 1X PBS at RT for 5 min 
3. Fixed for 5 min in Post fxative solution at RT
4. Washed again in 1X PBS at RT for 5 min 5. Air dried and dehydrated in 
70%, 80%, 90%, 2 X 99% ethanol series at RT for 1 minute each and air 
dried. 
Denaturation of chromosomes: To allow hybridisation of the labelled 
probe DNA, the DNA target on the slide must be denatured to make it single￾stranded. Using high temperatures in formamide is a frequently employed 
technique to denature chromosomes. 
1. Slides are denatured in denaturation solution for 3 min and then 
immediately dehydrated in ice cold alcohol series (70 %, 80 %, 90 %, 2 
X 99 %) for 1 minute each. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	 	
 
 
 
Molecular Techniques 255 
2. Air dry the slides. 
Probe preparation: Probes are complementary sequences of nucleotide 
bases to the specifc sequence of interest. Most commercial probes are found 
dissolved in hybridisation solution which includes appropriate blocking 
reagents. 
Preparation of probe mix: Probe (1 μl), Hybridisation bufer (7 μl), Distilled 
water (2 μl).
Probe denaturation: Probe mix is denatured in a water bath at 73º C for 5 min 
and immediately chilled on ice for 5 min. 
Hybridisation:
 1. 10 μl of the prepared probe is hybridised on to the slide and covered with 
a 22 × 22 mm cover slip and sealed with rubber gum. 
2. Slides are hybridised in a humid chamber and incubated overnight at 
37ºC. 
Post Hybridisation washes: The post hybridisation washes remove the 
hybridisation mixture and unbound probe. The three variables to be considered 
are the composition of the solutions, washing temperature and the washing 
time. 
1. Slides are washed in Solution I for 5 minutes at 72 ºC 
2. Slides are washed in Solution II for 2 minutes at RT 7.7 
Counter staining the chromosomes: Counter staining reagents such as DAPI 
(blue) and/or Propidium iodide (PI, orange-red) are used along with the 
antifade solution, which prevents the fading of signals when viewed. 
1. 27μl of Vectashield antifade mounting medium, DAPI or 4 μl of DAPI 
and 4 μl of PI are added, covered with a 22 × 50 mm cover slip and sealed 
with nail polish
2. Slides are stored at 4ºC till further use.
Result/Note: The term ‘in situ hybridisation’ is derived from the fact that 
the DNA/RNA can be visualised when it is in the cell (in-situ). Several probes 
with diferent fuorescent dyes can be used simultaneously to investigate 
diferent sequences or chromosomes in plants. FISH technique has been 
widely used to identify the chromosomal location of human genes as well 
(Pierce, 2012).
13.9.5	 Protocol for Oligo-FISH
Preparation of plant materials: 
1. Seeds were frst acid-scarifed by soaking them in 98% H2SO4 for 24 
hrs. 
2. Rinsed and sowed in pots in a greenhouse.
3. Root tips were collected from fully developed seedlings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
256 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
4. Root tips were harvested and immediately pre-treated with 2 mM 
8-hydroxyquilonine for 4 hrs in the dark at room temperature.
5. Rinsed and fxed in 4:1 (95% ethanol: glacial acetic acid) and stored 
overnight at RT. 
6. Fixed root tips were rinsed (for 30 min) with de-ionised water (di-H2O) 
to remove the fxative.
7. Mildly hydrolysation (0.2 N HCl at 60 °C for 10 min and then 10 min at 
RT) 
8. Rinsed with di-H2O followed by cold (4 °C) 0.01 M citrate bufer before 
enzyme digestion. 
9. The enzyme digestion time varied from 24 to 35 min based on the 
thickness of root-tips. After chromosome preparation, slides containing 
good spreads were selected and used for FISH within a week or two, or 
stored at − 80 °C for future use.
10. Preparation of the enzyme mixture:
2% cellulase, 1% macerozyme, 2% Pectolyase, 30% cellulase, 30% 
pectinase and 40% 0.01 M Citrate bufer (pH 4.5).
FISH with oligonucleotide probes: 
• Treatment of slides with RNase-A in 2 × SSC in a water bath at 37 °C for 
60 min. 
• Wash twice in 2 × SSC at 37 °C, 5 min each.
• Dehydration through an ethanol series, 5 min each (70%, 85%, 95% and 
100%) at RT and air dried overnight.
• Hybridisation mixture was placed on the spread and covered with a glass￾cover slip without sealing. 
• The hybridisation mixture (25 μL/slide):
• 50% deionised formamide, 10% dextran sulfate, 5.0 μg of E. coli DNA
(used as blocking DNA), 25 ng of rDNA oligo probes in 2 × SSC and 
adjusted the volume to 25 μL with TE bufer.
• Place in a pre-heated (at 80 °C) humidity chamber, and then the chromosomal 
DNA was denatured at 80 °C for 4 min.
• The slides were cooled down for 2 to 3 mins at RT and then placed at 37 °C 
for incubation for 2 hrs.
• After incubation, slide of the glass-coverslip using 2 × SSC.
• Wash slides immediately in 2 × SSC at RT for 5 min, two washes in 0.1 
× SSC at 40°C 5 min each, and then washed in 2 × SSC at RT for 5 min 
followed by quick rinsed in di-H2O. 
• Dry the slides, counter-stain with DAPI and cover with a glass-coverslip.
Result/Note: Oligo-FISH technique can facilitate chromosome 
identifcation and comparative cytogenetic analysis. With the help of 
this technique Luo et al. (2022) distinguished the various sub-species of 
Hippophae rhamnoides L. (Elaeagnaceae). This taxa diferentiation data is  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Molecular Techniques 257 
helpful in providing visual and elaborate physical mapping and guide the 
breeders’ utilisation of wild sources of this taxon.
13.9.6	 Southern Blotting
It is a molecular biological technique, used for the analysis of DNA. It can 
be used to detect our desired DNA from a mixture of DNA samples. In this 
process, DNA fragments are frst separated by electrophoresis, and then 
transferred to a nitrocellulose flter. In the flter, the target DNA is hybridised 
with some ssDNA probes, which aids in their detection (Fig. 13.5). 
The process of Southern Blotting involves the following steps:
(a) DNA extraction from the cells were performed with standard gDNA
extraction and then purifed.
(b) Restriction digestion of the DNA sample is then performed using suitable 
restriction enzymes. 
(c) Electrophoretic separation of DNA fragments is done.
(d) Depurination is done by using dilute HCl which breaks the DNAfragments 
into smaller fragments, thus enhancing their transfer efciency.
(e) Denaturation uses a mild alkaline solution to make the target DNA single 
stranded which is suitable for hybridisation.
(f) The gel is put on top of a bufer saturated flter paper and nitrocellulose 
flter papers are put on top of the gel. On top of it, some dry flter 
papers are also placed. The DNA fragments are then pulled towards the 
nitrocellulose/nylon flter by capillary movement.
(g) The nitrocellulose membrane, carrying the ssDNA bands attached to it, 
is baked in the oven at around 80°C for 2-3 hours to attach the DNA onto 
the membrane. Alternatively, UV radiation can also be used to achieve 
the same. 
(h) Hybridisation probes binds to the target DNA and helps in detection of 
the desired DNA segment for further studies. 
Fig. 13.5. Schematic representation of Southern Blotting technique. 
 
258 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
(i) The membrane is thoroughly washed with a bufer to remove the excess 
probes. 
(j) An autoradiograph is used to observe the hybridised DNAmolecules (for 
Autoradiography, refer chapter 19).
Southern blotting is useful in RFLP mapping, identifcation of gene 
rearrangements and phylogenetic studies of various plants and animals. 
13.9.7 Northern Blotting 
This technique is used to study gene expression by using mRNA transcripts. 
The technique of northern blotting is very similar to that of southern blot 
technique; with the main diference being northern blot is used to study RNA
while southern blot is used for DNA analysis. The northern blot technique 
separates the mRNA by size, which is then transferred to a nitrocellulose/
Fig. 13.6. Schematic representation of Northern Blotting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Molecular Techniques 259 
nylon membrane, followed by hybridisation with a probe for detection (Fig. 
13.6).
Steps of northern blotting: 
(a) Extraction of RNA by using standard extraction protocols or extraction 
kits.
(b) From the RNA extracted, mRNA is selected by using oligo dT cellulose 
chromatography. Probes complementary to the poly A tail is used to 
isolate the mRNA. 
(c) Agarose gels, containing formaldehyde were used to disrupt the 
secondary structure of RNAs, which ensures proper binding with the 
probes for detection. 
(d) The RNA separated by electrophoresis is transferred to a blotting 
membrane, and immobilised by using UV light or heat.
(e) Probes (~25 bases long), complementary to the RNA of interest is 
allowed to hybridise with the RNA. The excess probes are washed of
with bufer.
(f) Autoradiography or chemiluminescence was then used to detect the 
RNA bound with the probe.
While the Southern blotting cannot blot RNA due to its inability to bind 
with the nitrocellulose flter, the Northern blotting is useful to detect and 
analyse RNA in a biological sample. 
13.9.8	 Western Blotting
Western blotting is also an analytical technique which is used to target a 
specifc protein for study, from a mixture of proteins. The mixture of proteins 
is frst separated by gel electrophoresis, on the basis of molecular weight. 
Similar to the other blotting techniques, the proteins are transferred to a 
membrane, which is then labelled with specifc antibodies (Fig. 13.7).
The following steps are followed to carry out western blot (Mahmood and 
Yang, 2012):
(a) Cells are lysed to extract the proteins, using phosphate bufer saline 
(PBS) and cell lysis bufer.
(b) The extracted protein sample is then prepared for electrophoretic 
separation. Both stacking and separation gels are prepared, and 
electrophoresis was performed.
(c) 6 flter sheets and sponge, soaked with transfer bufer and one 
polyvinylidene fuoride (PVDF) (moistened with methanol) are used to 
make a sandwich with the gel.
 Sponge 3 flter papers Gel PVDF 3 flter papers
(d) The sandwich is covered with bufer and the electrophoresis is done at 
4⁰C. 
 
 
 
 
 
260 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
(e) Proteins are moved onto a solid support from the gel by electroblotting 
method. In this method, electric feld is used to pull out the proteins from 
the gel. 
(f) Non-specifc binding of antibodies to the membrane is prevented through 
blocking. BSA and non-fat dry milk are commonly used blockers.
(g) The primary antibody, thereafter, binds to the target protein, and the 
membrane is repeatedly washed with antibody-bufer solution to remove 
the excess and unbound antibodies. 
(h) The membrane is subsequently exposed to a specifc, labelled enzyme 
conjugated secondary antibody, which binds with the primary antibody.
(i) A substrate reacts with the enzyme that is bound to the secondary 
antibody to generate coloured substance. 
Fig. 13.7. Schematic representation of Western Blotting.
Western blotting has been employed to detect low-quantity proteins and, 
to ensure and quantify a gene product as well.14 
Plant Tissue Culture 
Plant tissue culture is one of the most important techniques used for growing 
plant cells under sterile conditions. The suitable medium composition is a 
specifc factor for the growth and morphogenesis of plant species. The medium 
consists of water, solid or semi-solid support, macronutrients, micronutrients, 
vitamins, carbon sources, plant growth regulators or hormones, amino acids, 
sorbents, and other undefned organic supplements.
The advantages are used for rapid clonal propagation, plant breeding, 
plant research, production of useful substances, pathogen-free plants, long￾term conservation, and international exchanges. The potential is there to 
produce a signifcantly greater number of healthier plants in less space, with 
less labour, and at less cost than by other means of vegetative propagation 
(Kyte and Kleyn, 2001).
14.1 History 
Gottlieb Haberlandt (1902) did experiments on the culture of single cells,but 
they were not successful. He is recognised as the father of plant tissue culture. 
Kotte (1922) succeeded in culturing isolated root tips. Success was also 
achieved with bud cultures by Loo (1945) and Ball (1946). The frst true plant 
tissue cultures were obtained by Gautgeret (1934 and 1935) from the cambial 
tissue of Acer pseudoplatanus. The 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s proved to be 
exciting times for the development of new techniques. 
During the 1990s, continued expansion in the application of in vitro 
technologies to an increasing number of plant species has been observed. 
Tissue culture techniques are being used with all types of plants, including 
cereals, grasses, etc. Plant tissue culture helps in applied plant biotechnology, 
as well as stimulating fundamental scientifc progress.
14.2 Setup a Tissue Culture Laboratory 
A plant tissue culture laboratory has several functional areas, whether it is 
designed for teaching, research, or business and no matter what its size or 
how elaborate it is. Avoid locating it adjacent to laboratories that handle 
microorganisms or insects or facilities that are used to store seeds or other  
 
 
 
 
 
 
262 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
plant materials. Contamination from air vents and high foot trafc can be a 
problem. Foot trafc scufs up the wax on foors, as well as dust which help to 
spread contaminants (Smith, 2000). The tissue culture area should always be 
kept clean. In designing a plant tissue culture laboratory, three major rooms, 
which are a preparation room, a transfer room, and a culture room, are divided. 
In a small laboratory, it may be divided into 2 parts which may combine a 
preparation room and a transfer room, or a transfer room and a culture room. 
14.2.1 Preparation Room 
A media preparation room should have smooth walls and foors which are 
easy to clean to maintain a high degree of cleanliness, as well as enough space 
to prepare the media on the bench with pH meters, balances, and a sink in 
proximity. The reagents and stock solutions should be located alphabetically 
either on shelves or in a refrigerator adjacent to the bench. The equipment 
used in these rooms is: 
1. A balance
2. A hotplate or a microwave
3. A magnetic stirrer
4. A pH meter
5. An autoclave
6. A hot air oven
7. A refrigerator 
14.2.2 Transfer Room 
A transfer room needs to be as clean as possible with good ventilation. It 
should be isolated as much as possible from outside doors to prevent 
contamination and minimise the opening of doors. The walls, foors, and 
ceilings with lighted colours should be smooth to ensure frequent cleaning 
with detergent and standard disinfectants. The illumination of the laminar air￾fow cabinet is sufcient for work. Sterilisation of the instruments can be done 
with glass-bead sterilisers or faming after dipping in 90% ethyl alcohol. The 
culture containers should be stacked on mobile carts (trolleys) to facilitate 
easy movement from the medium storage room to the transfer room, and 
fnally to the c u l t u r e room. The chair seats of the transfer operators should 
be comfortable, as they must work for long periods in the same place. Fire 
extinguishers and frst aid kits should be provided in the transfer room as a 
safety measure. The personnel should leave shoes outside the room. Special 
laboratory shoes and coats should be worn in this area. Ultraviolet (UV) lights 
are sometimes installed in transfer areas to disinfect the room; these lights 
should be used only when people and plant material are not in the room. 
Safety switches can be installed to turn of the UV lights when regular room 
lights are turned on. Many workers fnd it more comfortable and relieve eye  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plant Tissue Culture 263 
strain to see out through the windows. The transfer room contains: 
1. A laminar air-fow cabinet with comfortable chairs
2. A dissecting microscope
3. Gas outlets
4. Vacuum lines
5. Forceps, spatulas, scalpel and disposable blades
14.2.3 Culture Room 
Controlled temperature, lighting, relative humidity, and shelving need to 
be considered in planning the culture room. The culture room should have 
suitable lights for diferent growth stages and temperature (20-28 o
C). Air 
quality should be clean without dust. High humidity in the culture room 
should be avoided because it increases contamination. Some culture rooms 
have dehumidifer and air scrubbers. There is no need for windows except 
when natural light is used. Overhead light sources can be minimised because 
the primary source of illumination is from the lights mounted on the shelves. 
Culture room contains: 
1. Shelves with lighting on a timer and controlled temperature.
2. Incubators with controlled temperature and light.
3. Shakers for liquid medium.
14.3 Media Components and Preparation 
The media is composed of inorganic compounds, plant growth regulators, 
vitamins, amino acids and complex organic supplements, carbohydrates, 
water, gelling agents, and activated charcoal. Table 1 shows components of 
commonly used tissue culture media.
Inorganic compounds are composed of macroelements (N, P, K, Ca, Mg, 
and S) of which all plants require in relatively large amounts and microelements 
(Fe, Mn, Zn, B, Cu, Mo, and Cl) in relatively small amounts.
Auxins and cytokinins are two main groups of plant growth regulators that 
are often used in several plants (Wu et al., 2004) and are required for stages 
of plant tissue culture. Auxins are used for inducing plant root, stimulating 
shoot cell elongation and callus formation or enhance the cytokinin efects. 
Cytokinins are popularly used for shoot proliferation, promoting cell division, 
and regulating growth and development. The presence of auxins in the medium 
is generally essential for embryo initiation (Steward et al., 1958). Auxins play 
two main roles in plant tissue culture. Firstly, they can be used to induce root 
formation, such as indole acetic acid (IAA) and indole butyric acid (IBA). 
Secondly, they can initiate callus formation, such as 2,4-dichlorophenoxy 
acetic acid (2,4-D) and NAA. and thidiazuron (TDZ) (Chen et al., 2004). 
TDZ is a substituted phenyl urea with cytokinin-like activity. It is generally 264 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
believed that TDZ is more active in stimulating shoot formation than BAP
or kinetin, even at extremely low concentration (Huetteman and Preece, 
1993). Disadvantage of TDZ in regeneration is the difculty in elongation and 
rooting of the regenerated shoots. This problem was overcome by transferring 
regenerated shoots to MS medium supplemented with BAP and NAA. 
Vitamins have catalytic functions in enzyme systems and are required in 
trace amounts. Thiamine (vitamin B1) is essential for all plant tissue cultures, 
whereas, nicotic acid (niacin) and pyridoxine (vitamin B6) may stimulate late 
growth (Gamborg et al., 1976).
Amino acids (mainly glycine) and complex organic supplements, such 
as coconut water, peptone, yeast extract, malt extract, fruit juices, and fruit 
pulps are used because of cheap price and less labour work, as well as other 
combination of known components supports growth of tissues. 
Carbohydrates are energy and carbon source which are added into all 
media because most cultures are not completely autotrophic. Carbohydrates 
are very important component in in vitro cultures because they have energy 
and carbon source, as well as an osmotic agent. They were added in any 
nutrient media that are essential for in vitro growth and development because 
photosynthesis is insufcient in in vitro culture (Pierik, 1987). Sucrose (20-40 
g/l) are commonly used in plant tissue culture in addition to glucose, fructose, 
and sorbitol under some conditions. 
Water is employed in all media, including the water used during the 
culture procedure. 95% of nutrient medium consists of water. Distilled water 
is needed for research; otherwise, purifed water by reverse osmosis, de￾ionisation, and fltration are appropriate.
Gelling agents are mostly used for stationary supports. Agar, agarose, 
flter paper, cotton, cheesecloth, vermiculite, etc. are used as gelling agents 
depending on the purpose and suitability of the culture. Agar is a natural 
product which is obtained from various types of seaweeds. Agarose is a 
highly purifed line air galactan hydrocolloid isolated from Gelidium species 
of seaweed. 
Activated charcoal (AC) is composed of carbon that has numerous pores 
on the surface. AC was used as a culture component for adsorption of toxic 
plant metabolites, such as phenolic compound and plant growth regulators 
(Thomas, 2008). AC provided a dark environment during in vitro culture that 
afected shoot and root production. AC could efectively stimulate formation 
of somatic embryos on ½ MS medium (Nainget al., 2011). Graphite and AC 
have carbon structures, odourless, and non-toxic substances; therefore, they 
were used to darken the culture medium of plant tissue culture. 
14.4 Explant Preparation 
Explant is a portion of a plant (tissue, organ, a few cells, or part of a callus 
mass) taken for culture in vitro. Strong and healthy, young age, season (Spring Plant Tissue Culture 265 
Table 14.1. Components of commonly used tissue culture media (mg/L)
Components Murashige Gamborg White, Lloyd and Vacin and Modifed Mitra et al., Nitsch and 
and Skoog, et al., 1968 1963 McCown, Went, Knudson, 1976 Nitsch, 
1962 1981 1949 1946 1969 
Macronutrients 
Ca(PO4)2 200
NH4NO3 1650 400 720
KNO3 1900 2500 80 525 180 180 950
CaCl22H2O 440 150 96 166
MgSO47H2O 370 250 720 370 250 250 250 185
KH2PO4 170 170 250 150 150 68
(NH4)2SO4 134 500 100 100
NaH2PO4H2O 150 16.50
Ca(NO3)24H2O 300 556 200 200
Na2SO4 200
KCl 65
K2SO4 990
Micronutrients 
KI 0.83 0.75 0.75 80 0.03
H3BO3 6.2 3 1.5 6.2 6.2 0.6 10
MnSO44H2O 22.3 7 0.75 0.075 25
MnSO4H2O 10 29.43
(Contd.)Table 14.1. (Contd.)
Components Murashige Gamborg White, Lloyd and Vacin and Modifed Mitra et al., Nitsch and 
and Skoog, et al., 1968 1963 McCown, Went, Knudson, 1976 Nitsch, 
1962 1981 1949 1946 1969 
ZnSO47H2O 8.6 2 2.6 8.6 0.05 10
Na2Mo042H2O 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.05 0.25
CuSO45H2O 0.025 0.025 0.25 0.025 0.05 0.025
CoCl26H2O 0.025 0.025 0.025
Co(NO3)26H2O 0.05
Na2EDTA 37.3 37.3 37.3 74.6 37.3 37.3
FeSO47H2O 27.8 27.8 27.8 25 27.8 27.8
MnCl2 3.9 0.4
FeCC4H4O6)32H2O 28
Vitamins and other supplements 
Inositol 100 100 100 100
Glycine 2 2 3 2 2
ThiamineHCl 0.1 10 0.1 1 0.3 0.3 0.5
PyridoxineHCl 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.3 0.3 0.5
Nicotinicacid 0.5 0.5 0.5 1.25 5
Ca-panthothenate 1
CysteineHCl 1
Ribofavin 0.3 0.05
Biotin 0.05 0.05
Folic acid 0.3 0.5
266 Plant Techniques: Theory and PracticePlant Tissue Culture 267 
is appropriate), size (larger is better for more nutrients and plant growth 
regulators) plants should be chosen without viruses, bacteria, fungi, mites, 
etc.) After detaching explants from the source plant, they must be cleaned. 
There is no rule for cleaning explants depending on how clean or dirty the 
explants are to begin with. The most common cleaning agent used to disinfect 
explants is bleach in various concentrations (pure household bleach is 5% 
sodium hypochlorite) commonly used concentrations are 5%, 10%, and 20% 
concentrations. Others are 70% ethyl alcohol, 3% hydrogen peroxide. The 
cleaning should be done in the media preparation room. Transport the cleaned 
explants to the transfer hood, still in bleach in covered containers, and apply 
the fnal rinses in the hood using sterile techniques.
14.5 Aseptic Technique 
A sterile environment during the culture of plant tissues must be maintained. 
Air currents must be avoided over the sterile area because they carry spores of 
contaminating microorganisms. Laminar air-fow cabinets allow a gentle fow 
of ultra fltered sterile air to pass across the working area; thus, preventing 
airborne contamination. Before the start of any sterile procedures, the working 
area should be thoroughly scrubbed with a tissue soaked with ethyl alcohol 
(70% v/v). Several techniques are employed for the sterilisation of glassware, 
surgical instruments, liquids, and plant materials. The goal in surface 
sterilisation of plant tissue is to remove all microorganism with a minimum 
of damage to the plant system to be cultured. Methods are dry heat, wet heat, 
ultrafltration, and chemical sterilisation. 
Dry heat is used only for glassware, metal instruments, or other materials 
that are not charred by high temperatures. Cotton, paper, or plastic cannot be 
used. Using 160 o
C (320 o
F) for 4 hours is sufcient.
Wet heat is used for liquids, a steam pressure of 15 lb/in2 (103 kPa) from 
an autoclave with vapour under pressure at 121 o
C (250 o
F) for 15 minutes. 
Do not close the escape valve until a steady stream. At the end of 20-min 
period, the pressure must be allowed to return slowly to the atmospheric 
level because rapid decompression will cause the liquids to boil out of the 
containers. Prolong autoclaving must be avoided because of the results in the 
decomposition of the chemicals present in the medium. 
Ultrafltration is used for some medium components which are heat-labile 
and must be sterilised at room temperature, then add to cooling agar medium 
and still in the solution state, such as Sintered-glass flters, the Nuclepore 
flter, etc.
Chemical sterilization is used, such as 70% ethyl alcohol for surface￾sterilized, 0.5% NaOCl (sodium hypochlorite) for sterilising solution.
Cleanliness is of primary importance in the transfer room. The following 
practices should always be observed to maintain safe and clean conditions in 
the laboratory: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
268 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
1. No eating, drinking, smoking, or storing food in the laboratory.
2. Wear a protective lab coat or apron when working with cultures. Long, 
full sleeves should be avoided because they collect dust.
3. Wear sterilises disposable medical gloves or plastic garden gloves.
4. Tie-back and cover long hair. Loose hair is a potential contaminant for 
cultures and risks catching fre from any open fames.
5. Sit straight and keep your head out of the laminar air-fow cabinet.
6. Set only necessary equipment in the laminar air-fow cabinet.
7. Sterilise in an autoclave or pressure cooker any jars and petri dishes 
containing contaminated cultures before emptying.
8. Disinfect work surfaces before and after working in the laminar air-fow 
cabinet. 
9. Keep transfer room doors closed to avoid unnecessary drafts.
14.5.1 Sterile Technique for Explants 
Procedure 
1. Before a start to work, turn on the ultraviolet lights for 15 minutes.
2. When to prepare the explants or any works; turn on the laminar air-fow 
cabinet for 10 minutes before use.
3. Wipe both hands and all things including plant material with a cloth 
soaked with 70% ethyl alcohol, and then put them inside the cabinet.
4. Wipe or spray inside the cabinet with 70% ethyl alcohol. Do not spray 
the HEPA flter.
5. Put knifes, forceps, and other equipments in a glass bead steriliser or a 
container (if use alcohol lamp or gas for sterilisation).
6. Flame the petri dish and open the lid.
7. Put plant material on the petri dish. 
8. Soak the knife and forceps in 90% ethyl alcohol and fame (if use alcohol 
lamp or gas)
9. Cut plant material to be explants.
10. Flame the prepared medium container lid and open.
11. Place the explant on the medium.
12. Flame the lid and the edge of the medium container, then close the lid.
13. After fnishing, take containers out and then wipe inside cabinet and 
close the cabinet. 
Sterile technique for transfer 
Procedure 
1.-5. are the same as sterile technique for explants.
6. Flame both a medium container with explant and a new medium container 
and open both lids. 
7. Place the explant on the new medium.  
 
 
 
 
 
Plant Tissue Culture 269 
8. Flame the lid and the edge of the new medium container, then close the 
lid. 
9. After fnishing, take containers out and then wipe inside cabinet and 
close the cabinet. 
14.5.2 Contamination 
One of the most important factors in preventing contamination of the cultures 
is the removal of airborne contaminants in the sterile area. Always keep all 
windows and doors closed to avoid drafts. A minimum number of persons 
should be presented. There are 4 sources of infections: 1. The plant (internal 
as well as external), 2. The medium should be sufciently sterilised, 3. The 
air, and 4. The person who works (inaccurate work). The most important is the 
plant, well sterilised before culture in vitro. 
Contamination in tissue culture operations can be costly, particularly if 
the contamination rate is greater than 1%. If the contaminations are observed 
in test tubes or bottles, the containers should not be opened and should be 
sterilised before discarding the contents. 
14.6 Pathways of Culture Cells and Tissues 
Roots, shoots, and fowers are the organs that may arise de novo from plant 
tissue culture (Organogenesis). Embryos are not classifed as organs because 
these structures have an independent existence. Skoog and Miller (1957) 
observed that relatively high auxin: cytokinin ratio induced root formation 
in tobacco callus,whereas, a low ratio favoured shoot production. Somatic 
embryogenesis is the producing embryos not from the development of the 
fertilised egg. Anther and pollen culture is to produce haploid plants by the 
induction of embryogenesis.
The in vitro growth and development of a plant is determined by a number 
of complex factors which are: the genetic make-up of the plant, nutrients, 
physical growth factors (light, temperature, pH, O2, and CO2) and some 
organic substrates (plant growth regulators, vitamins, amino acids, coconut 
water, banana, etc.).
There are four stages of plant tissue culture growth: 
1. Stage I: Establishment-Prepare the explants and start culture
2. Stage II: Multiplication-Proliferation of shoots 
3. Stage III: Rooting-Root initiation
4. Stage IV: Acclimatisation or transferring to the greenhouse - Lower 
relative humidity and increase light intensity and temperature
It is not necessary that each stage needs diferent culture medium. Asingle 
medium may be satisfactory for the frst three stages. Stage III can be skipped 
since rooting may stop multiplication. Instead, rooting will occur at Stage IV.270 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
14.7 Acclimatisation 
Acclimatisation is defned as the climatic or environmental adaptation of 
an organism, especially a plant that has been moved to a new environment 
(Conover and Poole, 1984). Acclimatization is required because there is 
a signifcant diference between the tissue culture or micropropagation 
environment and the greenhouse or feld environment. In the laboratory, the 
cultures have low light intensity; low temperature, 90-100% relative humidity, 
and cuticle poorly develop.
Good techniques for acclimatising tissue cultured plantlets should be 
applied. Acclimatisation can be started, while plantlets are still in vitro by 
providing higher light intensity and reducing relative humidity by loosening 
the lid (closure) for 1-2 weeks before moving the plantlets to the greenhouse. 
An abrupt change to the lower humidity and greater light in the greenhouse 
can be fatal to plantlets in a very short time (Kyte and Kleyn, 2001). In the 
greenhouse, plantlets should be covered with plastic, be watered very often, 
and gradually increase light intensity for a few weeks before growing normally 
in the greenhouse. 
14.8 Commercial Production 
Successful micropropagation on a commercial scale for producing many 
quality plants largely depends on high multiplication from suitable protocols 
and successful acclimatisation. It is not enough to produce high quality, 
healthy plants; one must also produce it in a timely fashion, giving customers 
what they want, when they want it, for a price they can aford.
It is desirable to predict the fnancial success of a commercial laboratory, 
record it in progress, and periodically evaluate it in retrospect. Good 
management involves constant planning, study, observation, review, and 
adjustment. Good marketing practices are essential for success (Kyte and 
Kleyn, 2001).
14.9 Culture Guide to Selected Plants 
The choice of medium depends mainly on plant species, the tissue, or organ 
to be cultured, and the purpose. It is best to start with published protocols. 
A starting point for tissue culture from a dicot tissue explant would be the 
preparation of the Murashige and Skoog, 1962 medium (MS medium) at 
diferent concentrations. MS medium is the most useful tissue culture medium 
and many variations have been developed. The medium is derived from 
White’s medium and originally developed for the cultivation of Nicotiana 
tabacum Calli. Compared to the White medium, the concentration of all 
components is increased. Due to the high concentration of minerals, MS 
medium is a very rich and saline medium and can be too salty to certain plant Plant Tissue Culture 271 
species. To avoid this problem, MS medium is often used with the micro 
elements in full concentration, but with the macro elements in respectively 
half or three quarters of the concentration as originally described. Monocot 
cultures respond to the Schenk and Hildebrandt, 1972 medium (SH medium).
The two examples are micropropagation of Grammato phylum speciosum 
Blume, a giant orchid species (Sopalunet al., 2010) and Vanda coerulea Grif. 
ex Lindl., a beautiful blue vanda orchid with tessellation on petals and sepals 
(Wasiksiriet al., 2010) are given in section 14.14.2 and 14.14.3.
14.10 Meristem Cultures and Production of Disease 
Free Plants 
Generally apical meristems such as shoot apex, root apex and axillary buds, 
are free from pathogens or carry a low concentrations of viruses, bacteria or 
fungi. These meristems are taken as explant and raised the plantlet. Since 
the meristems are free from the pathogens, plantlets derived from them are 
also free from pathogens. Various reasons have been attributed to the escape 
of the meristems by virus/bacterial presence; these are: (1) actively dividing 
meristematic cells do not allow the virus replication which are unable to 
cope up with the rapid cell divisions of meristems, (2) Absence of vascular 
elements and plasmodesmata are possible causes of low virus concentration 
in meristems (3) endogenous auxin supply is high.
Morel and Martin (1952) exploited the meristem culture techniques to 
eliminate the viral infection in plants. They were able to develop pathogen￾free Dahlias by using the meristems cultures. It is also possible to eliminate 
other pathogens such as viroids, mycoplasma, etc. (Pierik, 1989; Kane, 2000).
14.10.1 Collection of Meristem Tips 
Meristems should be collected from growing buds, such as stem tips, root tips, 
leaf axile or from germinated seeds. 
Size of the explant: It is better to have the explant size as minimum as 
possible; may be up to 0.4 mm. Because the size of the meristems is critical for 
virus elimination since a gradient distribution of pathogen established in plant 
tissues. It has been generally observed that virus-free plants regenerated in 
vitro are inversely proportional to the size of meristems cultured. About 60% 
cassava (Manihot esculenta) plantlets regenerated from 0.4 mm meristems, 
collected from sprouted cuttings of infected plants happened to be disease￾free ones (Razdan, 2005). In contrast, plants regenerated from large size 
meristems were indexed as diseased (Kartha and Gamborg, 1975).
Physiological conditions of explant: Meristem tips should be taken from 
actively growing buds. The percentage of virus-free plants can also depend on 
the season, especially trees which display periodic growth. In the temperate 
trees, the growth is limited to only a short period in spring, after that shoot  
 
272 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
apex remains dormant for quite a long period. In such cases, meristems tips 
should be collected and cultured during spring only.
Thermotherapy: The donor plant (mother plant) from which meristem 
tips are collected should be given heat treatment. A careful decision should be 
taken for suitable temperature and duration of heat treatment. Heat treatment 
may be given for 5-10 weeks. It is performed through hot water or hot air. 
The hot-water treatment efectively eliminates virus in dormant buds, whereas 
hot-air treatment is recommended for elimination of virus from actively 
growing shoots. For hot-air treatment, actively growing plants are placed in a 
thermotherapy chamber adjusted at a temperature at 35-40o
C for a period of 
a few minutes to several months. Heat treatment can kill the bacteria, virus, 
fungi, etc. 
Chemical treatment: Mother plant treated with antibiotics like 
actinomycin-D and cyclohexamide, can inhibit the virus replication. Further 
plant treated with nucleoside analogue ribavirin (syn. Virizole) was given 
positive efect and eliminating Potato virus X (PVX) in potato plantlets 
(Shepard, 1977), CMV from cucumber and alfalfa mosaic virus (Pierik, 1989),
14.10.2 Culture Medium 
Generally modifed MS medium has been used for the meristem tip cultures. 
Medium (2-5% sucrose) supplemented with low concentrations of auxins 
and cytokinins can stimulate cell divisions. In case of Cassava (Manihot 
esculent) and Dahlia, GA3 can suppress the callusing and favour better 
growth and diferentiation. Medium further supplemented with vitamins such 
as pyridoxin, pantothenic acid and nicotine acid, could enhance the growth. 
Cultures are incubated under room temperature at 21-25o
C. Bulbous plant 
cultures can be grown under fuorescent light.
14.10.3 Virus Indexing 
Screening of plants for the presence or absence of virus is known as virus 
indexing. It is a very important step in the production of virus-free plants. 
Many viruses have delayed resurgence periods in cultured plants (Razdan, 
2005). This necessitates performing the virus indexing periodically. Various 
strategies have been adopted for virus indexing. These are as follows: 
i. EM observations: Latent virus that do not exhibit any visible symptoms, 
have to be observed under Electronic Microscope. Immunosorbent 
Electron Microscopy (ISEM) method described by Barbara and 
Clark (1986) could be adopted, that combines both serology and EM 
observations for the detection of virus. 
ii. Sap transmission test: It is easily performed on commercial basis. Leaf 
sap is prepared from test plant (plant to be assayed for the presence and 
absence of virus) by grinding the leaves with equal volume of bufer  
Plant Tissue Culture 273 
solution (0.1 mol l-1 sodium phosphate) using a mortar and pestle. This 
flter-leaf sap is smeared on to the indicator plant which is predusted with 
600 grade carborendum powder. If any virus is present in leaf sap, the 
indicator plant developed some characteristic symptoms. Some of the 
plant species used as indicator plant are: Chenopodium amaranticolour, 
V. Quino, Gomphrena glubosa, Nicotin tabacum, etc. (Klopmeyer, 2000).
iii. Serological test: Among serological methods, ELISA (enzyme-linked 
Immunosorbent assay) is very popular to detect virus particles (Miller 
and Martin, 1988). It is more sensitive than bioassays, but it needs ELISA
reader and enzymes. In ELISA test, antiserum against virus is collected 
from sheep or rabbit and purifed. The primary antibody i.e., antiserum 
coated on to the microtitre (96-celled polystyrene plates) of ELISA
reader to which add macerated plant extract of any test plant (suspected 
virus-infected plant) and incubate for some time. During incubation, 
if any virus is there, it will bind to the antiserum. After incubation, 
the microtitre well is thoroughly rinsed, to wash away the unbound 
particles. In next step, enzyme conjugated secondary antibody linked 
with alkaline phosphates is added to the well. During second incubation 
period, conjugated secondary body binds to any virus particles present 
in the well that was previously bound by the coating antiserum. So, 
plant extract (antigen) is sandwiched with antibodies (primary as well 
as secondary antibody; hence, it is popularly known as Sandwich ELISA
test (Fig. 14.1). It is verifed by adding an enzyme substrate and intensity 
of colour development in each well can signify the presence and relative 
concentration of plant virus. 
Fig. 14.1. Sandwich ELISA test. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
274 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Micrografting 
Initiating meristem cultures of some species, particularly woody perennial 
fruit crops, are very difcult. The shoot regenerated from meristem cultures 
of these plants quite often does not form roots. In such case, micrografting is 
undertaken. In the very beginning Morel and Martin (1952) micrografted the 
Dahlia meristem on to a virus-free stock (seedling) maintained and propagated 
in vitro. Micrografting had proved to be very useful for elimination of virus in 
fruit crops, especially apricot, wine grape, Eucalyptus, peach, etc.
14.10.4 Protocols 
14.10.4.1 Virus Eradication in Potato Plants (Mellor and Stace-Smith, 
1977, Razdan, 2005) 
Reagent and other Equipment 
MS medium; growth regulators such as IAA/IBA, BAP/Kinetin.
Equipment 
Growth chamber, binocular microscope. 
Plant material 
Potato tubers, virus-free stock (seedling) indicator plants such as Chenopodium 
amaranticolour and Gomphrena globosa. 
Procedure 
i. Collect single-eyed tuber peace and plant it in soil under normal 
environmental conditions. As soon as the frst sprout is 15 cm tall, take 
a tip-cutting of 6-8 cm long. Remove the lower leaves and apply rooting 
hormone to the cut surface and plant the cutting in a 10 cm peat pot of 
sterilised soil. Cover it with glass beaker for 10 days.
ii. After 3-4 weeks transfer the entire set-up to a growth chamber where the 
light is 3000-4000 lx for 16 hr a day and the air temperature about 36o
C 
during the day and about 33o
C at night. 
iii. Two weeks later cut the tip of the young plant to promote the growth of 
axillary shoots.
iv. Give thermotherapy for 6 weeks and then collect one axillary shoot for 
bud excision, leaving at least two leaves on the plant to encourage further 
growth. 
v. From the excised shoot remove the lamina of leaves in such a way that 
the small basal portions of the petiole are left on the stem. Enfold the 
shoot in wet paper to prevent wilting. 
vi. Excise the meristem tip under binocular microscope. It is advisable to 
cut-of the meristems tip when the two youngest leaf primerdia are still 
left using a fne blade fxed in a suitable holder.
vii. Transfer the excised meristem to suitable culture medium. 
viii. Store the cultures at about 23o
C in a 16-hr light regime. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plant Tissue Culture 275 
ix. Transfer the regenerated rooted shoots to the soil. Maintain the plants 
under high humidity initially. In case, where shoots fail to develop root, 
their grafting may be performed.
x. Perform the virus indexing before transplanting the plants in soil at 
regular intervals, Indicator plants to be used here are C. amaranti colour 
and G. globosa. 
14.10.4.2 Virus-eradication in Ornamental Plants (Chawla, 2003) 
Reagents and other equipment 
MS medium with growth regulators such as BAP, IAA/NAA, KIN, gibberllic 
acid, sterile distilled water. 
Dissecting stereo microscope and other paraphernalia required for plant tissue 
culture experiments. 
Plant material 
Chrysanthemum, Gerbera 
Procedure 
i. Collect seeds from the plant and raise the seedlings from seeds. 
ii. Maintain the sterile condition in the inoculation chamber by using the 
70% alcohol and fame sterilisation.
iii. Collect shoot apices from in vitro derived plantlets with sharp razor 
blade. 
iv. Remove the outer whorl of leaves of shoot apex with sharp blade. 
v. A piece of meristematic tissue (explant) is excised by making V-shaped 
cut just 0.3 to 0.5 mm below the tip of the shoot apex. The explant 
should have small portion of procambial tissue and it is immediately 
transplanted on MS agar medium culture tube.
vi. MS medium is commonly used for this purpose. Medium is supplemented 
with auxins and cytokinins as they are useful for cellular multiplication. 
Gibberellins are necessary to ensure the elongation of the axis. Kinetin or 
BAP of 5×10-6, 5×10-7 M levels can be used, similar levels of NAA, IAA 
or IBA are employed here. GA3 should be at a level ranging from 10-7 to 
10-8 M. 
vii. The culture tubes are kept in culture room maintaining under 16/8 h 
photoperiod at 3000 lx, 25±2o
C. 
viii. When plantlets are formed after 4-6 weeks, take them out from the tubes, 
wash plantlets in running tap water and transfer them into pot conditions. 
ix. Keep the regenerants in small plastic pots with a sterile soil mix 
comprising sand: farmyard manure, soil in 1:1:1 proportion; see that soil 
is moist with water. Plants do not need to be watered for the frst few 
days.
x. Keep the plants in difused light. Remove inverted beaker or plastic wrap 
so as to allow free exchange of air for 1 hr each day. After another week, 
increase gradually the period of exposure several hours per day. After 2-3 
276 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
weeks, remove the wrap and inverted beaker completely from the plants 
in order to adjust with natural environmental conditions. 
xi. Sap transmission test is performed on these regenerated plants and make 
sure that all are disease free plants. 
14.11 Protoplast Fusion and Somatic Hybridisation 
In plant breeding programmes many desirable combinations of characters may 
not be transmitted through conventional methods of genetic manipulations. 
Alternate to this, Cocking (1979) has developed the technique, other than 
the sexual cycle, to get genetic recombinations. In this technique, fusion 
of two isolated somatic protoplasts is involved and this fusion product 
known as heterokaryon is subsequently developed into somatic hybrid. This 
phenomenon is known as somatic hybridisation (Fig. 14.2).
Fig. 14.2. Somatic hybridisation.
Through the fusion process, the nucleus and cytoplasm of both parents 
are mixed together and forms the heterokaryon. This results into the formation 
of various nucleo-cytoplasmic combinations of characters.
Sometimes interaction between plastome (cytoplast carrying cytoplasmic 
characters) and nuclear genome contributes to the formation of cybrids 
(cytoplasmic hybrids). Cybrids, in contrast to conventional hybrids, possess a 
nuclear genome from only one parent but cytoplasmic genes from both parents. 
The process of protoplast fusion resulting in the development of ‘cybrids’ is 
known as ‘Cybridisation’ (Fig. 14.3). So, protoplast fusion is an important 
tool for the induction of genetic variability and combination of traits.
Fig. 14.3. Cytoplasmic hybridisation.	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plant Tissue Culture 277 
The important steps involved in protoplast fusion are: (1) Isolation of 
protoplasts (2) Culture of protoplasts, (3) Protoplast fusion (4) Regeneration 
of somatic hybrids and cybrids.
14.11.1	 Isolation and Purifcation of Protoplasts
Sources of protoplasts 
(A) Leaves - The leaf is the best source of protoplasts because it allows 
isolation of a large number of relatively uniform cells. The following 
steps are involved in the isolation of leaf protoplasts: (a) sterilisation of 
leaves, (b) peel-of the epidermis, (c) incubation in the enzyme mixture, 
(d) isolation by fltration and centrifugation.
(B) Callus cultures - Young callus cultures or actively growing callus 
cultures are also ideal materials for obtaining large quantities of 
protoplasts. Young callus is subcultured and it can be used after two 
weeks for protoplast isolation. 
(C) Cell suspension cultures - The cell suspension cultures are also 
excellent source materials for isolation of protoplasts. A high-density 
cell suspension is centrifuged. After removing the supernatant, cells are 
incubated in an enzyme mixture (cellulose + pectinase) in culture fask 
and liberated protoplasts are purifed subsequently.
Methods of isolation of protoplasts 
(A) Mechanical (non-enzymatic) method - Through this method cell walls 
are removed mechanically with sharp-edged knife. First, cells are kept in 
hypertonic solution for a few min. This brings about the plasmolysis in 
plant cells, resulting in the separation of protoplasts from cell walls. Next 
the cells walls are broken with the help of knife to release the protoplast 
from the cells. The isolated protoplasts are transferred to isotonic solution 
to prevent further damage. This technique has been employed for the 
isolation of protoplasts from highly vacuolated cells of storage tissues 
like onion bulbs, radish root, beetroot, etc. 
(B) Sequential enzymatic (two-step) - Take be et al. (1968) had developed 
the technique of isolation of protoplasts by using commercially available 
enzymes in two steps. In the frst step, leaf segments are treated with 
pectinase (enzyme mixture A) and pectin is digested. In the second step, 
this tissue is treated with cellulase (enzyme mixture B) and cellulose is 
digested. In this way, whole cell wall is digested, and protoplasts are 
liberated. 
I step - enzyme mixture ‘A’ 0.5% pectinase (macerozyme + 0.3% 
potassium dextran sulphate in 13% mannitol at pH 5.8).
II step - enzyme mixture ‘B’ - 2% cellulase in 13% mannitol at pH 
5.4. 
278 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
(C) Mixed enzymatic (simultaneous/single step) method - In this method, 
leaf segments are treated with a mixture consisting of both macerozyme 
and cellulose enzymes. This can be completed in a single step.
Enzyme mixture consists of both 0.5% macerozyme and 2% cellulase 
taken in 13% mannitol at pH 5.4. Leaf material is incubated in this mixture for 
15-18 hr at 25°C. Protoplasts are isolated in a single step through this method.
Isolation and purifcation of protoplast by mixed enzymatic method
The protoplasts isolated as above may contain together with broken organelles 
and cell debris in the medium. So, purifcation of protoplasts is essential 
before proceeding for the protoplast fusion (Fig. 14.4).
Fig. 14.4. Flow chart of isolation and purifcation of protoplast 
by mixed enzymatic method.
Viability of Protoplasts 
Isolated protoplasts should be healthy and viable in order to undergo sustained 
division and regeneration. Protoplast viability could be tested by variety of 
methods including: (A) Presence of cytoplasmic streaming or cyclosis, (B) 
Presence of photosynthetic and respiratory activity. These tests indicate active 
metabolism in protoplasts. 
Besides these, protoplast viability is tested by using several dyes: 
(A) staining with fuorescein aseince (FDA), protoplasts fuoresce green/ 
 
 
Plant Tissue Culture 279 
white; it should be examined within 5-15 min. after the FDA dissociates; 
(B) phenosafranin (0.1%) detects dead protoplasts, turn red whereas viable 
protoplasts remain unstained even after 2 hr in the stain solution. (C) Calcofuor 
white (CFW 0.1%) detects onset of cell wall regeneration around plasma 
membrane of viable protoplasts appears in the form of a ring of aseincence. 
14.11.2 Culture of Protoplasts 
Since the isolated protoplasts are devoid of wall, these are very easy to undergo 
fusion in vitro. Protoplast fusion is employed to overcome the incompatibility
barriers operating at interspecifc and intergeneric levels. It is an important 
tool in somatic cell genetics and crop improvement programme. 
The frst step in the protoplast culture is the development of cell wall 
around the plasma membrane of isolated protoplast. This is followed by 
induction of divisions in the protoplast-derived new cell giving rise to a small 
colony. By providing proper, nutritional requirement, cell colonies may be 
induced to grow callus continuously or to regenerate whole plant.
Culture Media 
Generally, protoplast culture media contain 3-5% sucrose but in some systems 
(tobacco protoplast cultures) 1.5% sucrose content is required. Organic 
nitrogen in the form of CH (asein hydrolysate) and inorganic nitrogen 
NH4NO3 are supplementing the medium. Higher concentrations of iron, zinc 
and ammonia are used in these media. Various combinations of auxins (2, 4D, 
NAA, IAA) and cytokinins (Kinetin, zeatin, BAP) are used to induce cell wall 
formation and divisions in protoplasts. It has been observed that high auxin/ 
kinetin ratio is suitable and induce divisions in the protoplasts from actively 
growing cell cultures whereas high kinetin/auxin is for protoplasts derived 
from diferentiated cells (leaf tissue, stem tissue, etc.).
Protoplast Culture Techniques 
Various techniques have been employed for culturing of protoplasts. These 
are as follows: 
A. Bergman’s Cell Plating Technique
For culturing of protoplasts in the solid agar medium, this technique 
may be followed. About 2 ml aliquots of isolated protoplasts of suitable 
density (103
-105
 cell ml-1) are mixed with equal volume of agar nutrient 
medium (temperature not to exceed 45° C). On solidifcation of agar, 
the culture plates are sealed and maintained in an inverted position and 
incubated in difused light or in dark at 25°C. Here cell colonies are 
formed, and these can be conveniently observed under microscope.
Plating efciency is readily determined by the following formula:
Final no. of cell colonies 
Plating efciency = Initial no. of cell units  
 
280 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
B. Culturing the Protoplasts at Low Densities
Just like in cell cultures, the initial plating density of protoplasts has a 
profound efect on the plating efciency. At high densities, such as 1× 104
to 1 × 105 protoplasts per 1 ml of medium, the cell colonies arising from 
individual protoplasts tend to grow into each other at an early stage in 
culture. This may lead to the formation of chimeral tissue if the protoplast 
population is genetically heterogeneous. In somatic hybridisation and 
mutagenic studies, cloning of individual cell/protoplast is essential 
(Fig. 14.5). This can be achieved by plating the protoplasts at very low 
densities (100-500 protoplasts ml-1). At low density, the development 
process of individual protoplast of heterokaryon (hybrid protoplast), can 
be easily monitored, thereby enabling the isolation and identifcation of 
hybrid colonies in the absence of a stringent selection system (Bhojwani 
and Razdan, 2005).
Fig. 14.5. Microchamber technique. 
The nutritional components of the commonly used culture media are 
not suitable to induce cell division in protoplasts plated at low densities. A 
complex medium developed by Kao and Michayluk (1975) known as KM 
8P, induces faster division in mesophyll protoplasts of alfalfa, pea, potato and 
tomato fusion products plated at low densities. The cultures in this medium 
are kept in darkness because KM 8P medium turns phytotoxic under strong 
light.  
 
 
 
 
 
Plant Tissue Culture 281 
14.11.3 Protoplast Fusion 
In this part of the chapter, various methods of protoplast fusion, and hybrid 
cell selections are given; also, practical applications of protoplast fusion and 
cybridisation technique have been discussed.
14.11.3.1 Methods for Protoplast Fusion 
A. Spontaneous Fusion 
During enzymatic degradation of cell walls, some of the adjacent 
protoplasts may fuse together and form homokaryons (homokaryocytes) 
spontaneously. In this, plasmodesmatal connections in between the 
adjacent cells are enlarged and through these connections fusion of 
adjacent protoplasts takes place. However, the frequency of spontaneous 
fusion can be reduced by the sequential enzymatic method of protoplast 
isolation or exposure of cells to a strong plasmolyticum.
B. Mechanical Fusion 
The giant protoplasts of Acetabularia have been fused mechanically by 
pushing together two protoplasts. This fusion does not need any fusion￾inducing agents. However, in this process protoplasts are likely to get 
injury.
C. Chemical fusion 
Isolated protoplasts can be induced to undergo fusion with the help of 
fusogens (fusion inducing agents). In animals, Sendai virus is needed to 
induce fusion. In plants variety of fusogens are successfully employed 
to induce protoplast fusion, these are polyethylene glycol (PEG), 
NaNO3(Fig. 14.6) and high pH with high Ca++ ion concentration. 
(i) Polyethylene glycol (PEG) 
PEG has been used as fusogen in several species because of the 
reproducible high frequency of heterokaryon formation. About 0.6 ml 
of PEG solution (dissolve 1 g PEG mol. wt. 1500 in 2ml of 0.1 m 
glucose, 10 mM CaCl2 and 0.7 mM KH2 PO4
) is added in drops to 
a protoplast pellet in the tube, tightly capped and incubate at room 
temperature for 40 min. Occasional shaking of culture tubes helps to 
bring the protoplasts in contact. This is followed by elution of PEG by 
the addition of 0.5 - 1 ml of protoplast culture medium in the tube after 
every 10 min. Wash the protoplast by centrifugation and resuspend in 
the same culture medium. 
Both molecular weight and the concentration of PEG are critical in 
inducing successful fusion. PEG less than 100 ml. wt. is not able to produce 
tight adhesions while that ranging upto 6,000 ml. wt. can be more efective 
in inducing fusion. Treatment with PEG in the presence of high pH/Ca++ is 
reported most efective in enhancing the fusion frequency and survivability 
of protoplasts.  
 
 
 
282 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
(ii) NaNO3 treatment 
Protoplast fusion induced by NaNO3 was frst demonstrated by Power 
et al. (1970). Later, it was successfully employed in root tips of oat and 
maize seedlings. Isolated protoplasts are suspended in an aggregation 
mixture (5.5% sodium nitrate in 10% sucrose solution). This mixture 
induces the protoplast fusion on incubation (water bath maintained 
at 35°C). Finally, the mixture is replaced by liquid medium. The 
protoplasts in this culture medium are incubated again; this is repeated 
once or twice before plating the fused protoplasts on solid medium 
(Fig. 14.6).
(iii) Calcium ions (Ca++) with high pH 
Isolated protoplasts of two diferent parents are incubated in a solution 
of 0.4 m mannitol containing 0.05 m CaCl2, with pH 10.5 (0.05 M 
glycine-NaOH bufer) and temperature at 37°C. Aggregation of 
protoplasts generally takes place at once and fusion occurs within 10 
min. Many intraspecifc and interspecifc somatic hybrids have been 
produced using this method. 
Fig. 14.6. NaNO3 treatment for production of Somatic hybrid of Nicotiana.  
 
	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
Plant Tissue Culture 283 
(iv) Electrofusion 
Electric feld can also be used for protoplast fusion, known as 
electrofusion. Culture tubes are placed in electric feld in order to get 
fusion product. This method has been found to be simpler, quicker and 
more efcient than chemically induced fusion. More importantly, cells 
after electrofusion do not show any cytotoxic responses as generally 
found in PEG treatment of protoplasts. 
14.11.3.2 Mechanism of Fusion 
Protoplast fusion consists of three main phases: (i) Agglutination or adhesion 
- Two or more protoplasts come into close contact. This can be induced by 
a variety of treatments, e.g., PEG, high pH and high Ca++ ions; (ii) Plasma 
membrane fusion at localised sites - Membranes of protoplasts agglutinated 
by fusogen get fused at the point of adhesion, resulting into formation of 
cytoplasmic bridges between the protoplasts. Plant protoplasts carry a negative 
charge from -10 to 30 mv. Due to common charge plasma membranes of 
two agglutinated protoplasts do not come close enough to fuse. The high pH 
high Ca++ ions treatment has shown to neutralise the normal surface charge, 
so that agglutinated protoplasts come into close contact. High temperature 
also promotes membrane fusion due to perturbance of lipid molecules in 
plasmamembrane and fusion occurs due to intermingling of lipid molecules 
in membranes of agglutinated protoplasts. High molecular weight of PEG also 
promotes protoplast fusion. The PEG which is slightly negative in polarity 
can form hydrogen bonds with water, protein, carbohydrates, etc., which are 
positive in surface. When PEG molecule chain is large enough it acts as a 
molecular bridge between the surface of adjacent protoplast and adhesion 
occurs resulting into protoplast fusion. (iii) Heterokaryon formation - Fused 
protoplast increases its size forming spherical heterokaryon or homokaryon 
(see also Razdan, 2005 for details).
14.11.3.3	 Identifcation and Selection of Hybrid Cells
After the fusion treatment, the protoplast population consists of a mixture 
of parental types homokaryones and heterokaryones. Since heterokaryones 
are potential source for regenerating the hybrids, eforts have been made to 
select them from the protoplast mixture. The following procedures have been 
employed for this purpose.
A. Biochemical basis for selection 
Heterokaryones involving mesophyll protoplasts cannot be identifed 
from the two parental types. Here biochemical markers are required 
allowing only the growth of heterokaryones in cultures or form somatic 
hybrid plants.
(i) By using auxin-free medium: The auxin-free medium facilitates the 
hybrid Nicotiana glauca x N. longsdorfi. Parental protoplasts cannot  
 
 
 
284 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
grow in this auxin-free medium because these are auxin dependent to 
grow (Fig. 14.6).
(ii) Drug sensitivity: Diferential sensitivity of mesophyll protoplasts 
isolated from Petunia perodii and P. hybrida to the drug actinomycin 
D has been useful for hybrid selection (Razdan, 2005). Parental 
protoplasts are sensitive to the drug added to the MS medium. Whereas 
hybrid protoplasts are growing into callus which fnally gives rise to 
somatic hybrid plant in the MS medium supplemented with this drug 
(Fig. 14.7).
B. Visual Selection 
In most of the somatic hybridisation experiments, selection procedure 
involves fusion of chlorophyll-defcient (non-green) protoplast of one 
parent with green protoplast of other parent since this facilitates visual 
identifcation of heterokaryon at light microscopic level.
Fig. 14.7. Schematic representation of drug sensitivity test.
(i) Complementation selection coupled with diferential media 
growth: Visual selection procedure coupled with complementary 
natural diferences in the sensitivity of parental protoplasts to media 
constituents which enable only the hybrid cells to develop in cultures 
and regenerate plants, e.g., wild type protoplasts (mesophyll) of Petunia 
perodii fused with albino protoplasts isolated from cell suspension 
cultures of P. infate and P. parvifora in separate experiments. In all 
these combinations, green perodii protoplasts got eliminated at the Plant Tissue Culture 285 
small colony stage, while the protoplasts of the other plant develop 
colourless callus. On the contrary, hybrid components proliferate 
into green calli, subsequently develop into somatic hybrid plant (Fig. 
14.7). Similar procedures are followed in the selection of interspecifc 
hybrids in Daucus, Datura,etc. 
In case of intergeneric hybridisation, e.g., hybrid between Atropa 
bellandnna and Datura innoxia, the parental protoplasts and heterokaryons 
are allowed to develop calli in cultures. The morphological diferences in the 
resultant three types of calli permit the identifcation of hybrid tissue, which 
can then be selected out to regenerate somatic hybrid.
14.11.4 Cytoplasmic Hybridisation (Cbyridisation) 
In cytoplasmic hybridisation, fusion takes place between nucleus from one 
parent and cytoplasm of both parents, thus producing cytoplasmic hybrids, and 
called Cybrids. These cybrids can be obtained by using following methods: (i) 
fusion of normal protoplast from one parent with enucleated protoplast of other 
parent (Fig. 14.8); enucleated can be obtained by high speed centrifugation 
(20,000- 49-90 min) of protoplasts or by irradiate treatment, (ii) fusion of 
normal protoplast from one parent and protoplast containing non-viable 
nucleus from the other; this can be achieved by irradiation treatment, (iii) 
Selective elimination of one of the nuclei from the heterokaryon, and (iv) 
selective elimination of chromosomes of one parent at later stage after fusion. 
Cytoplasmic male sterility is obtained by cytoplasmic hybridisation. 
The identifcation of agronomically important traits regulated by the cell 
organelles of certain crop species, such as cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) 
and cytoplasmic tolerance to the triazine herbicides (CD), as found in rapeseed, 
Brassica napus has made the production of cybrids commercially important.
CMS is a valuable trait in breeding crops like rapeseed, since by 
preventing self-fertilisation, it can allow the economic production of single 
cross F1 hybrids. Besides this, incorporation CTT into rapeseed hybrids can 
allow the crop to grow in weed-infested areas. The weeds are eliminated by 
the application of triazine. In rapeseed, CTT is conferred by the chloroplast 
genome and CMS by the mitochondrion. In the procedure given in Fig. 14.8, 
mesophyll protoplast of CTT rapeseed ‘donor’ parent is fused with ‘recipient’
CMS rapeseed hypocotyl protoplast. When the fusion product undergoes 
organelle replication and random segregation it gives four types of plants. 
These are: (I) alloplasmic substitution cybrid which is male fertile and triazine 
tolerant A (mt-B/cp-B) but it possesses the nucleus of original CMS plant, (ii) 
reverse cybrid A (mt-B/cp-A) which is male fertile and triazine susceptible 
(due to opposite organelle combination, these are known as reverse hybrid) 
(iii) desired cybrid, A[mt-A(CMS)/cp-B(Cn)], which is cytoplasmic male 
sterile and triazine tolerant hybrid, and (iv) parental type A[mt-A(CMS)/cp￾A], is one which is male sterile and sensitive to triazine (Fig. 14.8)286 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
The technique of cybrid production has been exploited for obtaining 
the cytoplasmic male sterile Nicotiana and Petunia plants. Others like 
streptomycin resistance have also been transferred from Nicotiana tabaccumto 
N. sylvestris, using this technique. 
Fig. 14.8. Cytoplasmic male sterility in Brassica napus 
(redrawn from Yarrow, 1999).
14.12 Anther and Pollen Culture 
Haploids are useful in crop improvement because they possess single copy of 
genes either dominant or recessive that can express even recessive mutations 
phenotypically. Large number of haploid plants have been produced by 
culturing an anther or pollen. Guha and Maheswari (1964, 1966) frst reported 
pollen plantlets in anther cultures of Datura innoxia that caught the attention 
of plant breeders and geneticists all over the world. 
Induction of haploids by anther culture is known as Anther androgenesis 
or simple androgenesis. There are two types of obtaining the haploid plants, 
(a) Direct androgenesis in which pollen grain undergoes repeated cell division, 
diferentiated into embryoids, that eventually giving raise pollen plantlet 
whereas, (b) indirect androgenesis in which callus formation takes place, later  
 
Plant Tissue Culture 287 
diferentiated into embryoids, that subsequently giving rise pollen plantlets. 
The haploids plants are sterile, but they can be made fertile by diplodizing the 
chromosome number through colchicine treatment. 
Direct androgenesis 
e.g., Nicotiana, Datura, Atropa belladonna 
Indirect androgenesis 
e.g., Atropa, Arabidopsis, Asparagus 
Microspore has got four types of morphogenetic potentialities, these are: 
(1) to form a normal gametoplast (male gametotype), (2) to form a female 
gametophyte known as pollen embryosac; pollen embryo sacs were frst 
observed by Nemac (1898) in Hyacinthus orientalis this is popularly known as 
Nemac phenomenon, (3) to form embryoids, e.g., Atropa, Datura, Nicotiana 
(4) to form callus tissue in Arabidopsis, Asparagus, etc. 
Anther culture 
For production for haploid plants, anthers rather than isolated pollen grains, 
are cultured because isolated pollen grains and their cultures have been 
successful in only a few cases. Anthers at right stage of pollen development 
should be excised from experimentally grown donor plant and inoculated onto 
a suitable nutrient medium. Diferent factors afecting the haploid production 
through anther culture are: (a) composition of culture medium, (b) stage 
of pollen development, (c) physiology of donor plant, (d) temperature and 
(e) genotype of experimental material.
Culture medium 
Generally White, MS (Murashige and Skoog), Nitsch and Miller’s media are 
suitable for anther culture. These are supplemented with coconut milk and 
kinetic in various combinations. Embryoid formation from pollen has been 
observed on Nitsch’s medium alone but addition of cytokinetin (Kinetin or 
zeatin) that enhances good response (Misra, 2009). Sucrose at 2 per cent 
concentration has been found to be essential component in the medium. High 
concentration of sucrose seems to act as osmolyticum and tends to suppress 
callus formation and embryogenesis. Presence of iron in medium is equally 
important for pollen embryoid formation. Medium supplemented with 
activated charcoal (0.5-2 per cent) can stimulate androgenesis in some cases.
14.12.1 Ontogeny of Androgenic Haploids 
Microspore undergoes one unequal division, resulting into formation of one 
larger vegetative cell and smaller generating cell. Both cells combined or 288 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
individually are participated in sporotypic type development. Repeated cell 
divisions take place and form the multicelled microscope. Later it gives rise 
to androgenesis haploid plant. 
During androgenic haploid development, three major phases are observed, 
these are: (a) Induction, (b) Early segmentation of microspore and (c) Later 
development. During induction period (from the time of anther culture to 
the frst abnormal division) spreading about 6-12 days, there is complete 
degradation of gametophytic cytoplasm, and all cell organelles disappeared; 
ribosomes completely washed out. However, frst population of ribosomes 
and other cell organelles reappeared afresh following the frst sporophytic 
division of vegetative cell. That means, the vegetative cell programmed for 
gamtophytic development is now diferentiated to take up sporophytic course 
of development. 
In the early segmentation of the microspore, four modes of in vitro 
androgenesis have been identifed (Fig. 14.9). These are as follows:
Fig. 14.9. Early segmentation of the microspore and 
multicellular spore development. Plant Tissue Culture 289 
Pathway-I: Microspore undergoes equal division and both cells are distributed 
in sporophyte development, e.g., Datura innoxia. 
Pathway-II: Unequal division takes place, large vegetative cell contributes in 
formation of sporophyte, e.g., Hordeum vulgare, Nicotiana tobacum. 
Pathway-III: Unequal division; small generative cell is responsible for 
development of pollen plantlets, e.g., Hyoscyamus niger. 
Pathway-IV: Unequal division; both vegetative and genetic cells are 
contributed in pollen plantlet development, e.g., Datura innoxia, D. metel, etc. 
During later development, irrespective of the early pattern of divisions, 
the responsive pollen grain fnally becomes multicelled one. This multicelled 
pollen gain later gives rise directly to embryoid (direct embryogenesis), 
subsequently transforms into plantlet. In the direct embryogenesis only 
one plantlet is formed, e.g., Atropa, Datura, Nicotiana, etc. However, in 
majority of plants, multicelled microspore further proliferates and it bursts 
open, releasing the callus. Now embryoids are diferentiated on callus tissues. 
Numerous pollen plantlets are regenerated from the single mass of callus by 
media manipulation, e.g., Arabidopsis, Asparagus, Triticale, etc. (Fig. 14.10).
Fig. 14.10. Plantlet formation from multicelled pollen grain.  
 
290 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
14.12.2 Methods for Isolated Pollen Culture 
Pollen grains are collected at suitable stage of development from anthers. The 
isolated pollen gains are cultured by adopting following methods.
i. Nurse Anthers Culture Technique: Sharp et al. (1972) developed this 
technique and raised the haploids plants from isolated pollen grains of 
Lycopersicon esculentum. In this technique, a healthy anther collected 
from some other plant; from Nicotiana glutinosa, Petunia hybrid has 
worked as nurse tissue. This nurse anther is taken in petridish; a flter 
paper disc is placed on nurse anther. Separately, a suspension of pollen 
grains from another anther of tomato was prepared in liquid medium (10 
pollen per 0.5 ml of medium) and small aliquot of medium with 10 pollen 
grains is transferred to flter paper placed on nurse anther. Numerous 
clones are formed within a month. The clones obtained through this 
technique are uniformly haploid.
ii. Anther Culture Technique: This technique is useful to raise haploids. In 
this technique, crushing of anther is avoided. Here whole anther excised 
from cold treated buds is foated on liquid medium (medium used for 
anther culture). After a few days, anther dehisces and discharging the 
batches of pollen grains including the induced pollen grains at various 
stages of development. All plants raised from the culturing of these 
pollen grains are uniformly haploids. 
To improve the efciency of androgenesis, Wengel et al. (1975) and 
Rashid (1983) developed the technique, known as gradient centrifugation 
technique (Protocol given at the end of this section). In this technique, the 
embryogenic pollen grains capable of developing embryoids are separated 
from mixture of non-embryogenic pollen grains.
Production of homozygous diploids 
Haploids were sterile ones since they contain only single set of chromosomes. 
They may grow normally up to the stage of fowering, but in the absence of 
homologous chromosomes, the meiosis is abnormal and consequently, viable 
gametes are not formed. Hence, it its essential to diploidise the chromosome 
complement of haploids to retain fertile homozygous diploids. In this context, 
the haploids have got immense importance in crop implement program. 
Diploidisation of haploids can be achieved through the classical method 
of colchicine treatment. In this method, colchicine of 1 g/L concentration can 
be used; young-pollen derived plants are immersed in colchicine solution for 
about 96 hrs and later transferred to culture medium to allow further growth. 
Alternatively, colchicine is added to pollen suspension culture medium; after 
24 hrs of treatment, the haploids cells are transferred to fresh culture medium 
to allow further growth.  
 
Plant Tissue Culture 291 
Bulbosum method (Chromosome elimination through Distant 
Hybridisation) 
Kasha and Kao (1970) demonstrated the Bulbosum method in which crossing 
between Hordeum vulgare (cultivated barley) (2n=14) and H. Bulbosum (wild 
barley) (2n=14) had involved. In this method, the female gamete of barley is 
fertilised in the H.bulbosum. During formation of embryo the chromosomes 
of H. bulbosum having the barley genome in the embryos are eliminated. 
Young embryos (immatured embryos) are excised and cultured to obtain 
haploid plantlets similar to that of H. vulgare in terms of morphology and 
chromosome complements. 
14.12.3 Applications of Androgenic Haploids 
1. The androgenic haploids are useful in crop improvement program. 
Mutations induced in haploids can be easily detected since haploids have 
only a single set of genes and hence there is no interference of dominant 
alleles. It is possible to develop haploids with desirable mutation/desirable 
characters, later their chromosome complements are diploidised to obtain 
fertile diploid plants with desirable characters. 
Several mutant cell lines have been developed through haploids, such as 
cell lines of resistant to environmental stresses, herbicides, viruses, drugs 
(antibiotics), etc. For example, salt resistant cell lines of Datura innoxia, 
nitrate reductase cell lines of Nicotiana tabecum, streptomycim resistant 
cell lines of Petunia hybrida and disease resistant cell lines of many crop 
plants have been isolated from pollen culture. 
2. Haploids are useful in releasing new varieties through F1 double-haploid 
system. In haploid breeding technique, usually, only one cycle of meiotic 
recombination is involved. However, many agronomic traits (such as yield) 
are polygenetically controlled. One cycle of recombination is usually 
insufcient for the improvement of such quantitative traits since the linkage 
between polygenes will not release all potential variations available in a 
cross. To overcome this problem, alternative method of combining anther 
culture with sexual hybridisation among diferent genotypes of anther￾derived plants. The anthers of the hybrid progeny (F1) are excellent 
breeding material for raising pollen-derived homozygous plants (double 
haploids) in which complementary parental characteristics is combined 
in one generation (Fig. 14.11). This method shortens the breeding cycle, 
since in a normal hybridisation programme it takes several generations of 
backcrossing, or pedigree breeding to produce a stable homozygous line to 
release new variety (Luckett and Smithard, 1991). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
292 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Fig. 14.11. Application of F1 double-haploid system in releasing new recombinants 
(Han, 1987).
3. Pollen embryos, being haploid, can be exploited for genetic transformation 
studies. Neuhaus et al. (1987) produced transgenic plants of Brassica napus 
by microprojectile bombardment of DNA into individual pollen embryos; 
haploid plants regenerated from transformed embryos on diploidisation 
expressed the recombinant transgene homozygously.
14.12.4 Protocols 
14.12.4.1 Gradient Centrifugation Technique (Wenzel et al., 1975; 
Rashid and Reinert, 1981) 
i. Collection of anthers of barley at proper stage of pollen development.
ii. Prepare microspore suspension by gentle maceration.
iii. Remove debris by repeated fltration and centrifugation and take the 
pollen suspension. 
iv. Pollen suspension is layered on solution containing 55% percol and 4% 
sucrose and again centrifuge it for 5 min.
v. Androgenic, vacuolated pollen is formed a band at the top of the sucrose 
solution. 
vi. Band is pipetted, suspended in the washing medium (4% sucrose only) 
and centrifuge it; pellet at the bottom is deposited and supernatant 
discarded. 
vii. Take the pellet (rich in embryogenic pollen) and resuspend in same 
washing medium.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plant Tissue Culture 293 
viii. Now embryogenic pollen is cultured on pollen culture media (through 
anther nurse culture technique).
ix. Embryogenic pollen is used as explant and from these androgenic 
haploids have been raised. 
14.12.4.2 Raising of plantlets from isolated pollen (Nitsch, 1974; 
Razdan, 2005) 
i. Collection of unopened fower buds, surface-sterilization with 2% 
sodium hypochlorite and wash thoroughly with sterile distilled water.
ii. Place above anthers in 20 ml liquid medium and let anthers foat for 2-3 
days, and then squeeze out the microspores with a glass rod.
iii. Filter the solution containing microspores and debris through nylon sieve 
(pore size 40 µm for Nicotiana, 25 µm for tomato and 100 µm for maize).
iv. Centrifuge the suspension at 500-800 rpm for about 5 min.
v. Discard the supernatant and resuspend the pellet containing pollen in 
fresh medium, again centrifuge it. Repeat iv and v steps twice. 
vi. Finally, mix the pollen with suitable culture medium at a density of 103
-
104
 grains ml-1. 
vii. Transfer the pollen suspension into the petri plate and see that the pollen 
grains should not be too deeply immersed in the medium.
viii. Keep cultures in difused light (500 lx) at 25o
C temperature. 
14.13 Micropropagation 
In general, plant propagation is of two types, asexual (multiplication through 
vegetative parts) and sexual (through zygotic seeds). Sexually propagated 
plants show the high amount of heterogeneity because of their seed progeny 
is not true-to-type unless they have been derived from inbred lines (Bhojwani 
and Razdan, 1985). On the other hand, asexual reproduction gives rise 
to plants that are identical to parental ones. Multiplication of genetically 
identical copies of any cultivar by asexual reproduction is known as clonal 
preparation. A population derived from a single individual by asexual 
reproduction is called clone. In plants like banana, fg, grape, chrysanthemum, 
vegetative multiplication is the only way because they produce little or no 
viable seeds. The widely used methods of cloning agricultural crops are 
cuttings of vegetative parts, layering, grafting and budding. The most of 
horticulturists have been adopting the asexual or vegetative reproduction for 
clonal multiplication of selected cultivars. 
The advantages of vegetative reproduction over sexual reproduction are 
as follows: 
i. A sexual multiplications are faster than the seed propagation in plants 
with a long-life cycle. 
 
294 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
ii. Bypassing the undesirable juvenile phase associated with seed-raised 
plants by propagating them vegetatively directly from adult plant 
materials. 
iii. Establishing gene banks by multiplying varieties among clonally 
propagated plants. 
Though the vegetative propagation is more advantageous, but it involves 
a lot of labour, time consuming and expensive approach. Tissue culture 
technology ofers an alternative means of vegetative propagation. Clonal 
propagation through tissue culture means is called micro-propagation. It is a 
rapid method of clonal propagation which is cost-efective and time saving. 
By taking a small piece of plant material as explant and inoculate on suitable 
medium, it is possible to produce millions of plants within a short span of 
time. Micropropagation is an efective method of conservation of endangered 
and rare plant species. Use of tissue culture for micropropagation was initiated 
by Morel (1960) for orchid multiplication. Subsequently, it has been exploited 
by several horticulturists to develop and multiply various cultivars.
14.13.1 General Techniques of Micropropagation 
Micropropagation involves various stages. Murashige (1978a, b) proposed 
four distinct stages in Micropropagation of plants. Stages I-III are followed 
under in vitro, whereas stage IV is performed in a green-house conditions. 
Debergh and Maene (1981) suggested an additional stage ‘O’ for various 
micropropagating systems. All three stages are as follows (Razdan, 2009):
Stage 0: Selection and maintenance of stock plants for culture initiation.
Stage I: Initiation and establishment of aseptic culture (explant isolation, 
surface sterilisation and washing, inoculation on suitable culture 
medium).
Stage II: Multiplication of shoots or rapid somatic embryos formation using 
a defned culture medium.
Stage III: Isolation and germination of somatic embryos, shoot function and 
rooting of regenerated shoots in vitro or in vivo. 
Stage IV: Transfer of plantlets to sterilised soil for hardening under 
greenhouse environment (in some cases rooting of in vitro-derived 
shoots may be performed at this stage by skipping stage III).
Stage ‘O’ (Preparatory stage) 
It is the stage in which selection and maintenance of stock plants have been 
performed. Stock plants are grown under controlled conditions at relatively 
low humidity and good water facility, at least 3 months before the culture 
initiation. In woody and bulbous plants suitable temperature could help in 
breaking bud dormancy and provide more responsive plants. Systemic 
microbial contamination has to be checked in the stock plants.  
 
 
Plant Tissue Culture 295 
Stage ’I’ (Initiation and establishment of aseptic cultures) 
During this stage, explants are collected from diferent sources, and these are 
disinfected under aseptic conditions; subsequently these are inoculated on 
suitable culture medium. In this stage, cultures are initiated from explants 
of several organs but shoot tips and root tips are mostly used for commercial 
micropropagation. 
Generally, sub-terminal and older segments can withstand the toxic efects 
of sterilising agents much better than the terminal cuttings. The physiological 
status of parental plant from which explant is collected has played vital role on 
the response of buds. Explants collected from actively growing shoots during 
early growing season generally give good results (Anderdon, 1980). Bulbs, 
corms, tubers and other organs should be subjected to the temperature and 
photoperiodic treatments required to break dormancy before excising the bud 
(Bhojwani and Razdan, 1985). It becomes necessary to take submillimeter 
shoot tips as explants when the objective is to produce a plant free of viruses 
from the infected plant (see section 14.10). The best explants for growing 
virus-free plants are nodal cuttings. 
For multiplication through adventitious bud formation with or without 
callusing, explants should be derived from root, stem, leaf or nucellus to 
form adventitious buds. Cultures are also initiated from leaf-base or scale￾base explants which are highly meristematic in monocots. Immature zygotic 
embryos are suitable explants for propagation of woody species. Of course, 
in citrus and mango, nucellar cultures are highly embryogenic (Bojwani and 
Razdan, 1985). For rhizomatic plants such as strawberry and ornamental 
ferns, runner tips are taken as explant for their multiplication. 
Stage II (Multiplication of shoots) 
This is the most critical stage in which three approaches have been followed 
to achieve in vitro multiplication: 
i. Multiplication is achieved directly from explants excised from 
proliferating shoots (shoot meristem) and axillary buds. 
ii. Induction and multiplication of adventitious meristems through processes 
of organogenesis of somatic embryos directly on explants.
iii. Multiplication of calli derived from organs, tissues, cells or protoplasts, 
and their subsequent diferentiation either through somatic embryogenesis 
or organogenesis in serial subcultures. These callus-derived shoots are 
further multiplied. 
Multiplication by shoot tips and axillary buds: Each axillary bud has 
potential to give rise to axillary branching in vivo in the absence of apical 
dominance. Since the apical dominance is under the control of various 
growth regulators, it can be altered by media manipulation to induce the 
regeneration of axillary branching from axillary buds. Shoot tips cultured on 296 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
a basal medium without any growth regulators typically develop into single 
seedling-like shoots with strong apical dominance. Here shoots with apical 
dominance can be derived by taking a single nodal explant (Fig. 14.12). On 
the contrary, when shoots of some explant materials are inoculated on to 
medium supplemented with cytokinins, such as BAP, 2 ip, zeatin; axillary 
shoots develop precociously which proliferate to form secondary and tertiary 
shoots. These cluster shoots can be further sub-divided into smaller clumps 
of shoots/individual shoot which, in turn, will give rise to similar cluster of 
shoots when subcultural on fresh medium. This subdivision process may be 
continued indefnitely, and it is possible to regenerate plants in the range of 
0.1-3.0 x 106 within a year (Mantell et al., 1985). Many forest tree and orchid 
species are good enough to multiply by axillary buds.
Fig. 14.12. Single node method of plant propagation (redrawn from Pierik, 1989).
Multiplication by adventitious shoots/buds: Buds arise at any site other 
than normal axil region and are known as adventitious buds (or) adventitious 
shoots. The adventitious shoot regeneration is dependent on type of the 
explant used in clonal propagation. The structures like bulbs, corms, tubers, 
rhizomes, stems, internodes, leaf blades cotyledons, root elongation zone, etc. 
These organs can be used as a cutting in conventional clonal propagation. 
Bulbs and corms in Iris, Lilium, and Tulipa hybrids can proliferate the 
cluster of shoots. For bulbs with a strong apical dominance in Narcissus, 
Allium and Hyacinthus, it is necessary to destroy the main apex.
Vegetative propagation through adventitious bud formation from root 
(blackberry, raspberry) and leaf (Begonia, Crasula, Peporomia) cuttings is Plant Tissue Culture 297 
standard horticultural practice (Bhojwani and Razdan, 1985). The rate of 
adventitious bud development can be improved by media manipulation. For 
example, in Begonia, buds normally originate only along the cut ends but in 
a medium supplemented with BAP the bud formation is so profuse that the 
entire cut surface is covered with shoot buds (Reuther and Bhandari, 1981). 
Under the infuence of an appropriate combination of growth regulators, in 
vitro, adventitious buds can be induced on leaf and stem cuttings of even those 
species that are not propagated vegetatively.
Adventitious embryos (also known as embryoids) raised in vitro 
through embryogenesis of explant under suitable media are good source of 
micropropagation of plant. Each embryoid isolated and inoculated on suitable 
medium promoting organogenesis, can regenerate the plant. For example, leaf 
pieces of cofee trees form embryoids directly when inoculate on a basal MS 
medium supplemented with high concentration of cytokinin (Razdan, 2005). 
Hence, embryoids are the best source for micropropagation of plants.
Multiplication by callus culture: Explant inoculated on suitable medium, 
undergoes rapid divisions and gives rise to callus. Subculturing the callus and 
it can be induced to rediferentiate shoot buds or roots (Skoog and Miller, 
1957) and somatic embryos. Somatic embryo formation and organogenic 
regeneration can be controlled by growth regulators. Induction of root/shoot 
from callus depends on auxin/cytokinin ratio. 
Stage ‘III’ 
At this stage, germination of somatic embryos and rooting of regenerated 
shoots in vitro is performed. Various factors are infuencing at this stage, these 
are as follows: 
Physiological status of plant material: Explants collected from very 
young plant parts, have got good regenerative capacity. Seasons of the year are 
playing important role in regenerative capacity of tissue cultures, e.g., fower￾stem explants of Tulipa should be excised during dry storage (dormant) phase 
and nodal explants of Dioscoreaalata excised from plants growing under long 
photoperiods (16 hr).
Culture medium: Standard media have been used for stage I and II, 
whereas stage III, needs some modifcations. Auxins and cytokinins play an 
important role in micropropagation. To induce adventitions root formation, 
auxins are added to medium whereas for shoot formation high concentration 
of cytokinins is required. Medium fortifed with activated charcoal induces the 
root formation and detoxifes some harmful compound accumulated during in 
vitro cultures. The relative concentration of NH+
4 and K+ infuence the size 
and number of shoots and afect the induction of somatic embryogenesis.
Culture environment: The in vitro derived plants need optimal light 
intensity, i.e., 100 lx. The quality of light is equally important in organogenic 
diferentiation and growth of shoots. Blue light (467 nm) induces the bud 
formation in tobacco and further enhances number of shoots. Similarly,  
 
 
 
 
 
298 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
red light stimulates induction of fower bud and far-red light induces root 
production. Diurnal illumination of 16 hr day and 8 hr night may give 
satisfactory results in multiplication and proliferation of shoots. Optimum 
temperature 25o
C is needed during incubation. 
14.13.2 Acclimatisation of in Vitro - derived Plants to Soil 
Conditions 
Lastly stage IV involves the transfer of in vitro-derived plantlets to the 
sterilised soil for hardening under greenhouse environment. 
Generally in vitro-derived plantlets show some structural and physiological 
abnormalities, these are: (1) high humidity, poor development of cuticle, 
(2) they are not photosynthetically active because of immature development 
of mesophyll with larger air spaces (3) presence of open stomata causing 
the signifcant water loss during the frst few hours of acclimatisation and 
(4) poor vascular connection, between shoot and root reduce to very poor water 
conduction. Therefore, these plantlets are transferred to potting mix consisting 
of peat, vermiculate soil, sand and inorganic nutrients and maintained the high 
humidity during initial stage of acclimatisation upto 15 days.
Development of stomatal closure mechanic is important component of 
acclimatisation. The following measures should be taken to close the stomata 
as well as to reduce the humidity and extra deposition of epicuticular wax:
i. Exposing the plantlets to CaCl2, 
ii. Medium supplemented with linolein, and 
iii. Opening the culture tubes and keeping inside the desiccator with CaSO4. 
In vitro-raised tree-legume plants (Leucaena leucocephala) show high 
survival rates, provided these should be given pretransplant treatment. Plants 
are transferred to screw-cap bottles containing sterilised quartz sand irrigated 
with inorganic nutrient solution containing Rhizobium strain (NGR 8). 
Initially, bottles are kept closed for two weeks and subsequently remove the 
caps to maintain plants under controlled conditions of light and temperature 
(25±2o
C and 18 Wm-2) for another two weeks, later these are transferred to 
feld conditions.
14.13.3 Industrial Applications of Micropropagation 
Commercial applications of micropropagation are given below: 
i. Production of pathogen-free plants; currently the most popular 
application of micropropagation is the mass clonal preparation of 
desirable genotypes.
ii. Production of millions of plants by taking a small piece of tissue as 
explant within a limited time and space. 
iii. In vitro conservation and propagation of endangered and rare species.  
 
 
 
Plant Tissue Culture 299 
iv. Production of plants throughout the year irrespective of seasons, 
especially in herbaceous species.
v. Vegetative propagation is extremely important in the case of herbaceous 
taxa where seed progeny yields 50% males and 50% females but plants 
of one of the sexes are more desirable commercially (Bhojwani and 
Razdan, 1985).
14.14 Experimental Protocols 
14.14.1 In Vitro Multiplication of Dendrobium aphyllum 
(Rahamtulla, 2022) 
Micropropagation of D. aphyllum has been done by taking leaf segments as 
explants. Regeneration of plants is done through callus induction and PLB 
formation (Fig. 14.13).
Fig. 14.13. Flowchart of D. aphyllum plantlets regeneration from leaf explants. 
I. Surface sterilisation of the leaf explants 
1. Collect the young, fresh, healthy leaves from D. Aphyllum (Mother 
Plant). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
300 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
2. Wash the leaf with tap water to remove soil and dust particles deposited 
on the surface. 
3. Transfer the washed leaf into a glass beaker containing tap water; add 
a few drops of liquid detergent – Tween 20.
4. Cover the beaker mouth with muslin cloth with the rubber band and 
keep under running tap water for 10 minutes to remove any waxy/oily 
deposition on the leaf surface. 
5. Wash it twice with distilled water.
6. Transfer the leaf explant into a laminar airfow hood for further work 
to avoid contamination. 
7. Wash the above leaf with sterile distilled water thrice, each washing 
should be for 3-4 minutes.
8. Treat it with 0.5% HgCl2 solution for 5-7 minutes.
9. After treating it with disinfectant, wash it with sterile distilled water 
thrice, each washing should be for 3-4 minutes.
10. Wash with 70% alcohol for 2-3 minutes and again wash it with sterile 
distilled water thrice. 
11. Transfer the sterile leaf to a sterile Petri-plate.
II. Callus induction 
12. Cut the leaf into small pieces of about 0.5 × 0.5 cm with a sterile blade. 
13. Inoculate the leaf segments (0.5 cm each in length and width) with the 
abaxial surface on MS basal medium (Murashige and Skoog, 1962). 
14. Use the Plant growth regulators such as 2,4-D and BAP (0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 
2.0 mg/L) alone and in diferent combinations in the medium. Some 
explants should be inoculated on MS medium without hormones as a 
control measure. 
15. Later incubate the cultures at 25±2ºC in growth chambers under a 16/8 
photoperiod. 
16. Callus will start appearing within 2 weeks and good callus growth can 
be observed in 3-4 weeks.
III. Callus subculturing and proliferation of PLBs 
17. Subculture the callus induced from the leaf explants on the optimal 
medium. Callus can be sub-cultured after the 6th week on a fresh 
medium with the same composition. 
18. Later, cut the 6-week-old callus sections grown on the optimal medium 
into approximately 0.3-0.5 cm diameter segments. 
19. Inoculate the callus segments onto the culture medium with the same 
combinations of 2,4-D and BAP as done earlier. 
20. After subculturing, the callus mass develops Protocorm-Like Bodies 
(PLBs) on MS medium without any growth regulators (The number of 
PLBs will increase when the appropriate amount of growth regulators 
is used). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plant Tissue Culture 301 
IV. Regeneration of plantlets from PLBs 
21. Transfer the well-developed PLBs produced in the optimal medium to 
four diferent basal media such as MS medium, Mitra orchid medium, 
Vacin and Went orchid medium and Gamborg B5 medium without 
using growth regulators for the development of shoots and roots. 
22. Do subculture on the same media for the development of the complete 
plantlets. 
V. Acclimatisation of in vitro derived plantlets (see also section 14.7) 
23. Transfer the three-month-old in vitro-derived D. aphyllum plantlets to 
natural conditions for acclimatisation. 
24. Clean the plantlets with tap water to remove the sticked agar, treat 
them with 0.2% Diathane M-45 and transplant them into small pots. 
25. Use diferent materials such as coco peat, charcoal, and red brick 
pieces as potting media separately and in combinations. 
26. Arrange the potted plantlets into groups and place them on a wooden 
table and maintain the temperature ranging between 22°C to 25°C, 
illumination between 1200-1400 lux, and relative humidity of 80-90%.
27. Spray the water daily, and foliar sprays of NPK (1:1:1) weekly once to 
the potted plantlets. 
Result: 
D. aphyllum leaf explants inoculated on MS medium supplemented with 
1.5 mg/L 2,4-D and 1.0 mg/L BAP, produced a green compact callus with a 
diameter of 1.92 cm (Fig. 14.14A). The combination of 1.5 mg/L 2,4-D and 
1.0 mg/LBAP is the most favourable medium for callus induction (Rahamtulla 
and Khasim, 2022). After subculturing on the optimal medium, calli initially 
exhibited 3 diferent appearances: light green, yellow and light brown. The light 
green calli grew rapidly, consisting compact mass of isodiametric granules, 
and produced 1.2 PLBs on an average per 0.5 cm diameter of callus on MS 
medium without growth regulators. A low concentration of 2,4-D (0.5 gm/L) 
and a high concentration of BAP (1.5 gm/L) favoured the PLB formation. 
Diferent combinations of 2,4-D and BAP generated a greater number of 
PLBs in comparison to their individual efects. Media supplemented with 0.5 
mg/L 2,4-D and 1.5 mg/L BAP produced 7.6 PLBs on average from the callus 
segment and the highest percent (76%) of PLB formation had observed (Fig. 
14.14B). Further subculturing of these PLBs regenerated complete plantlets. 
After 6 weeks about 4.2 plantlets were formed from each PLB in MS basal 
medium (Fig. 14.14C). The highest shoot length (7.4 cm) and a greater number 
of leaves (3.8) on average were observed in the plantlets grown in MS basal 
medium (Fig. 14.14D, E). The plantlets with well-formed leaves and roots got 
established within 20 days of transplantation in the pots. The combination of 
charcoal and brick pieces supported the maximum survival frequency (100%) 
and growth of roots and leaves (Fig. 14.14F).  
 
302 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Fig. 14.14. A. Green compact callus on MS medium + 1.5 mg/L 2;4-D + 0.5 mg/L
BAP; B. The appearance of 7-8 PLBs from callus segments on MS medium + 0.5 
mg/L 2;4-D +1.5 mg/L BAP; C. Regeneration response of PLBs on MS medium;
D. Plantlets regenerated from single PLB subcultured on the MS basal medium;
E. Plantlet growth on MS medium; F. Plantlets in the combination of 
redbrick and charcoal pieces. 
14.14.2 Micropropagation of Grammatophyllum 
Speciosum Blume 
Sopalun et al. (2010) studied micropropagation of G. speciosum Blume. 
Protocorm-like bodies (PLBs) were induced from shoot tips.The highest 
frequency of PLBs (93%) were observed on explants incubated on half-Plant Tissue Culture 303 
strength ½ Murashige and Skoog (MS) liquid medium containing 2% (w/v) 
sucrose without any plant growth regulators (PGRs). Tests with diferent 
carbon sources compared to sucrose revealed that maltose promoted the 
highest relative growth of PLBs (7-fold increase); while, trehalose and sucrose 
yielded 5-fold and 4-fold increases, respectively. In ½ MS liquid medium, 
addition of 15 mg/l of chitosan promoted a 7-fold increase in PLB growth; 
while, 25 mg/l promoted a4-fold increase. However, the relative growth 
rate in solid culture was signifcantly lower in liquid culture. In addition, 
Chitosan supplementation in solid medium promoted shoot formation but not 
rooting. Plantlet regeneration was induced using a combination of NAA and 
BA supplementation in ½ MS solid medium with optimum induction shoot 
and root formation at 2.0mg/lNAA and1.0 mg/l BA. Using this protocol, 
approximately 8 months was required to obtain a hundred plantlets from one 
shoot tip. The plantlets showed no changes in ploidy when tested by fow 
cytometry. Fig.14.15 and 14.16 showed the establishment of G. Speciosum 
Blume micropropagation and transfer plantlets to the saranhouse, respectively. 
Summary of the micropropagation of G. speciosum is given Fig. 14.17.
Fig. 14.15. Establishment of Grammatophyllum speciosum Blume micropropagation;
A: A shoot tip was excised under a stereo microscope; B: PLBs were induced 
in ½MS liquid medium (2 months after culture); C: PLBs were subcultured for 
multiplication (1 month after culture); D: PLBs were cultured on ½MS solid medium 
supplemented with 0.05% (w/v) of activated charcoal, 2.0 mg/l NAA and 1.0 mg/l 
BA; E and F: Shoots and roots were induced, respectively 
(3 months after culture). Bar = 1 mm.304 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Fig. 14.16. Transfer of G. speciosum Blume plantlets to the saranhouse. A: Plantlets 
(6.0-8.0 cm long) were obtained after 3 months of culture; B: Plantlets were 
removed from the bottle and washed with tap water; C: Plantlets were transplanted 
to pots flled with small pieces of coconut husk; D: Plants grown 6 months in the 
saranhouse; E: Plants grown 1 year in the saranhouse; and F: Plants grown 2 years 
in the saranhouse. Bar = 1 cm (A to D).
Fig. 14.17. Flow chart of micropropagation of Grammatophyllum speciosum Blume.	 	
 
Plant Tissue Culture 305 
14.14.3 Micropropagation of Vanda Coerulea Grif. ex Lindl.
Wasiksiri et al. (2010) studied the efects of 6 diferent liquid media including, 
modifed Vacin and Went medium (Vacin and Went, 1949), Murashige and 
Skoog medium (Murashige and Skoog, 1962), Schenk and Hildebrandt medium 
(Schenk and Hildebrandt, 1972), half strength MS (½MS), half strength SH 
(½SH) and half strength KNO3 in SH (½KNO3SH) which contained 100 
ml/l coconut water and without sucrose on multiple shoot formation from 
lateral buds of Vanda coeruleaGrif. ex Lindl. After 8 weeks of culture, the 
survival of lateral buds (100%) was observed on ½SH and ½KNO3SH but 
the protocorm-like structure was found only in ½ KNO3SH. For increasing 
multiple shoots or protocorm-like bodies (PLBs), lateral buds were cultured 
Fig. 14.18. Micropropagation of a lateral bud of Vanda coerulea Grif. ex Lindl. in 
½ KNO3SH liquid medium after 8 weeks of culture in medium. A: without PGR, 
B: 0.1 mg/l TDZ, C: 0.5 mg/l TDZ, D: 1 mg/l TDZ, E: 1.5 mg/l TDZ, F: 2 mg/l 
TDZ, G: 1 mg/l BAP, H: 2 mg/l BAP, I: 0.1 mg/l NAA and 1 mg/l BAP, J: 0.5 mg/l 
NAA and 1 mg/l BAP, K: 1 mg/l NAA and 1 mg/l BAP, L: 0.1 mg/l NAA and 2 mg/l 
BAP, and M: 0.5 mg/l NAA and 2 mg/l BAP. Bar = 0.5 cm. 
306 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Fig. 14.19. Efects of organic additives and combinations with concentrations of 
sucrose and organic additives on embryogenesis on PLBs of Vanda coerulea Grif. 
ex Lindl. under culture in ½KNO3SH contained 100 ml coconut water and 1 g/l 
activated charcoal after 8 weeks of culture. A: ½KNO3SH agar medium without 
organic additives and sucrose. B: ½KNO3SH agar medium supplemented with 
10 g/l sucrose. C: ½KNO3SH agar medium supplemented with 20 g/l sucrose.
D: ½KNO3SH agar medium in combination with 50 g/l banana without sucrose.
E: ½KNO3SH agar medium in combination with 50 g/l banana and supplemented 
with 10 g/l sucrose. F: ½KNO3SH agar medium in combination with 50 g/l banana 
and supplemented with 20 g/l sucrose. G: ½KNO3SH agar medium in combination 
with 50 g/l potato without sucrose. H: ½KNO3SH agar medium in combination with 
50 g/l potato and supplemented with 10 g/l sucrose. I: ½KNO3SH agar medium in 
combination with 50 g/l potato and supplemented with 20 g/l sucrose. J: ½KNO3SH 
agar medium in combination with 50 g/l banana and 50 g/l potato without sucrose.
K: ½KNO3SH agar medium in combination with 50 g/l banana and 50 g/l potato and 
supplemented with 10 g/l sucrose, and L:½KNO3SH agar medium in combination 
with 50 g/l banana and 50 g/l potato and supplemented 
with 20 g/l sucrose. Bar = 1 cm.Plant Tissue Culture 307 
on ½SH and ½KNO3SH media supplemented with diferent concentrations 
of plant growth regulators (TDZ, BAP, and NAA). The highest fresh weight 
of PLBs (total fresh weight of 1.4 g) was observed on ½KNO3SH medium 
supplemented with 1 mg/l BAP and 0.1 mg/l NAA (Fig. 14.18). Development 
of PLBs was established by organic additives (activated charcoal, potatoes, 
bananas, and sucrose).
The results revealed that PLBs which cultured on ½KNO3SH 
supplemented with 1 g/l activated charcoal, 50 g/l potatoes, 50 g/l bananas, 
and 20 g/l sucrose produced the highest shoots (434 shoots/lateral bud). These 
new shoots were able to develop into plantlets. New shoots were cultured 
on ½KNO3SH supplemented with 1 g/l activated charcoal, 50 g/l bananas, 
and 20 g/l sucrose. After 16 weeks of culture, the best growth of plantlets was 
found (Fig. 14.19). Summary of the micropropagation of V. coerulea is given 
Fig. 14.20.
Fig. 14.20. Flow chart of micropropagation of Vanda coerulea Grif. ex Lindl. 
 
 
15 
Chromatography 
Chromatography is the most powerful technique to separate various 
components from a mixture of chemical substances based on their physico￾chemical properties. The term ‘Chromatography’ was coined by Russian 
botanist Tswett in 1906 (Greek words Chroma meaning ‘Colour’ and 
graphs to write’). In chromatography, the sample is applied at one end of a 
porous support that holds stationary phase (solid or liquid) and the mobile 
phase (liquid or gas) on another end is allowed to run over it. The various 
components in the sample get separated due to diferences in their position or 
distribution behaviour between the stationary and mobile places. The partition 
or distribution coefcient (Kd) is defned as the ratio of concentration of 
compound in two phases (A and B) at equilibrium. If, both the phases are 
liquids, the formula is as follows: 
Concentration of compound in solvent 'A'
Kd = Concentration of compound in solvent 'B' 
Separation of various compounds in the mixture takes place based on 
their distribution coefcient. In other words, the compounds in the sample that 
have greater afnity for stationary phase; the movement of such compounds 
is retarded since they tend to spend more time in that phase. On the other 
hand, the compounds with relatively higher afnity for mobile phase travel at 
a much faster rate as these are moved along with following mobile phase. This 
leads to separation of various compounds in the sample. 
Chromatographic techniques may broadly be classifed on the basis of 
nature of stationary phase. These include: 
i. Paper chromatography: In this system, a flter paper sheet is used as a 
support for stationary phase. 
ii. Thin layer chromatography (TLC): A glass plate, plastic sheet or a 
piece of metal foil can be used as support for stationary phase that has 
been applied in the form of a thin layer in these materials. 
iii. Column chromatography: In this, stationary phase is packed into a 
tubular glass, polypropylene or metal columns. 
The various chromatographic techniques have also been classifed based 
on the forces or interacting phenomenon between the solute molecules and the 
stationary phase. These are as follows:  
 
 
 
 
310 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
i. Partition chromatography 
ii. Adsorption chromatography 
iii. Afnity chromatography
iv. Ion-exchange chromatography 
v. Molecular sieve chromatography 
The other modern instrument known as High Performance Liquid 
Chromatography (HPLC) is highly expensive. The classical techniques such 
as paper chromatography and thin layer chromatography can be set up in 
ordinary laboratory without much expenditure. The separation, identifcation 
and quantifcation (semi) of amino acids using paper chromatography is given 
below. The same method can be employed to separate other smaller molecules 
such as sugars, organic acids etc., by changing the mobile phase and spraying 
(detection) reagents (Table 15.1). 
15.1 Paper Chromatography 
Depending upon the direction of fow of mobile phase the systems have 
been used in our laboratories. These are ascending and descending paper 
chromatography. In the ascending type, the solvent is kept at the base of the 
tank. Whatman flter paper is immersed in the solvent. The sample is applied 
at the edge of paper and see that the sample spot does not get dipped into the 
solvent; it should remain just above the surface of the solvent (Fig. 15.1). The 
solvent ascends (moves up) the paper by capillary action and the separation 
of compounds takes place according to the diferences in their partition 
coefcients. The most polar substances will be at the bottom with respect to 
the tank whereas the least polar will be on the top end of the tank (Fig. 15.1). 
Ascending technique is relatively slow process. 
Fig. 15.1. Ascending paper chromatography. 
(Redrawn from Sawhney & Singh, 2001).  
 
Chromatography 311 
In the descending method, the tank containing solvent (mobile phase) 
is ftted at the top of the chamber. The flter paper is hung in such a way that 
the side where the sample has been spotted is dipped in the tank. The solvent 
travels down the paper under the force of gravity (Fig. 15.1). In this technique 
most polar substances will be on the top with respect to tank whereas least 
polar ones will be at the bottom. 
15.2 Thin Layer (planar) Chromatography (TLC) 
Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC) is very useful in research laboratories to 
separate, identify and characterise various compounds. A variety of molecules 
such as sugars, amino acids, organic acids, lipids etc., are separated by this 
technique. The great advantage of this technique is within a short time, about 
30 min or more than 90 min, separation is achieved. 
The principle of TLC is similar to that of column chromatography 
(adsorption chromatography). In the adsorption process, the solute competes 
with the solvent for the surface sites of the adsorbent. Depending on the 
distribution coefcients, the compounds have been separated on the surface 
of the adsorbent. The adsorbent normally contains a binding agent such as 
calcium sulphate which facilitates the holding of the adsorbent to the glass 
plate. 
15.2.1 Preparative TLC 
Instead of thin layer, layer of adsorbent is coated and a greater amount of 
sample can be applied onto the plate. After the separation, the area of separated 
compound is scraped of, eluted with a suitable solvent and recovered in a 
relatively pure form. This modifed TLC is known as preparative TLC. In a 
preparative method, a large amount of sample is applied in the form of streak 
rather than a spot. The compounds are separated as a series of bands and these 
may be scraped of and eluted with a suitable solvent.
Extraction 
i. For extraction of amino acids, sugars, phenols, phenolic acids and plant 
acids follow the procedure given for amino acid extraction in the section 
Paper chromatography. 
ii. Neutral lipids: Macerate the fesh leaf tissue in 20 volume of isopropyl 
alcohol (cold), the re-extract with chloroform-methanol (2:1). Seed 
tissue is extracted directly with chloroform and ethanol (2:1) mixture. 
The lipids in cereals can be extracted with chloroform, ethanol, water 
200:95:5 mixture. Store the extracts at 5o
C in the presence of antioxidants 
(Butylated hydroxytoluene BHT 0.005%). Table 15.1. Identifcation of compounds by their colour*
Compound Absorbent Solvent system Mode of Identifcation Colour 
Amino acids Silica gel G (i)Ethanol and water 
(70:30) 
(ii)Butan-1-ol acetic and 
water (80:20:20) 
Spray with 0.1% ninhydrin in 
acetone and heat the plates for 5 
min at 100-110oC 
Pink or purple 
Mono and 
disaccharides 
Kieselghur G. 
(sodium acetate) 
(i)Ethyl acetate and 
propan-1-ol (65:35) 
Spray with 2% diphenylamine 
(in water) saturated with 
n-butanol (or) in n-butanol and 
methanol (1:1) containing 5% 
trichloroacetic acid. Heat at 
Aldohexoses give brown spots; 
aldopentoses give purple spots. 
100oC for 10-15 min. 
Neutral lipids 
(alkanes, 
triglycerides, 
diglycerides and 
monoglycerides 
Silica gel G Petroleum ether, diethyl 
ether and acetone 
(90:10:1) 
(or) 
Isopropyl ether acetic 
acid (24:1) 
(a) Spray with ethanolic 0.2% 
2,7 dichlorofuorescein, observe 
under UV light 
(b) Spray with 0.5% ethanolic 
rhodomine B 
Spots fuoresces light green.
Yellow or blue violet spots on 
a pink background. 
Plat acids Silica gel G Ethanol, water and 25% 
ammonium hydroxide 
(78:9,5:12,5) 
Spray with 
0.1% 2,6 dichlorophenol 
indophenols in ethanol (brief 
heating enhances the colour) 
Pink spots on sky blue 
background (oxalic acid gives 
rocket-like spot). 
312 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
(Contd.) Table 15.1. (Contd.) 
Phenols Silica gel G Acetic acid and Spray with vanillin HCl Orcinol and 2-methyl 
chloroform (1:9) resorcinol given blueish-pink 
(or) colour; 4-methyl resorcinol and 
Ethyl acetate and resorcinol give red colour. 
Benzene (9:1) 
Purine and Silica gel G Ethanol acetic acid and Spray with 0.25% mercuric White spots on violet 
Pyrimidine bases water (81:5:14) acetate and 0.05% diphenyl background 
carbazone 
*(adopted from Sadasivan and Manikam, 2005)
Chromatography 313 314 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
15.3 Column Chromatography 
In column chromatography, separation is achieved by passage of sample 
through vertically fxed tubular glass or polypropylene column which is loaded 
with an appropriate chromatography media. These columns with a porous 
sintered plate fxed at their base, are commercially available. Alternatively, 
a simple glass burette with a plug of glass wool at the base can be used as 
column. At the base, there is a small capillary tubing through which eluent 
from the column fows into test tubes from which fractions are collected.
Chromatographic media (stationary phase) in the column are water 
insoluble, porous and resolution of sample components occurs depending 
upon the size and shape of the stationary phase, accordingly fow rate depends. 
Large size and coarse particles have higher fow rate and give poor resolution, 
while fner particles with large surface to volume ratio have slower fow rate 
but greater resolution efciency. Generally, for better resolution, the smaller 
particles of 200-400 mesh have been employed. 
For fractionation and separation of components, the sample is loaded 
on the top of the column and eluted with an appropriate bufer. The efuent 
(eluent) emerging from the base of the column is collected in the form of 
fractions of fxed volume of fxed time in individual test tubes by using 
either an automatic fraction collector or manually. The collected fractions are 
analysed for the presence of desired substances or compounds. 
Various types of column chromatography have been classifed based on 
the nature of interaction between solutes and the stationary phase. These are 
given below: 
15.3.1 Absorption Chromatography 
In adsorption chromatography, the sample compounds (solute) are hold 
on to the surface of a solid adsorbent, having specifc absorption sites, via 
weak forces such as van der Waal’s forces and hydrogen bonding. Diferent 
compounds bind with varying strengths and hence can selectively be desorbed. 
For good resolution, selection of good adsorbent and eluent (or mobile phase) 
is very important. Some of the commonly used absorbants are charcoal, silica, 
alumina, etc. Eluent infuences quality of separation since polarity of mobile 
phase infuences the adsorption considerably.
In general, the polar solvents are preferred for the substances having polar 
or hydrophilic groups and non-polar solvents for substances with hydrophobic 
or non-polar groups. For example, alcoholic solvents for OH group containing 
substances; acetone or ether for substances with carbonyl groups; and 
hydrocarbons such as toluene or hexane for non-polar substances. 
15.3.2	 Afnity Chromatography
Purifcation of sample by afnity chromatography is diferent from all 
other forms of chromatography that this technique does not make use of the Chromatography 315 
diferences in physical properties (such as solubility, adsorption, molecular 
weight and ionic properties) of the molecule to be separated. Rather it 
exploits one of the unique and fundamental properties of biopolymers, i.e., the 
specifcity of their interaction with other biomolecules. In other words, afnity 
chromatography is a type of adsorption chromatography in which substance 
to be isolated is specifcally and reversibly bound to a complementary 
binding substance (ligand) immobilised on an insoluble chromatographic 
bed material (matrix). The unbound substances will be washed away while 
bounded substance subsequently recovered by displacement from the ligand 
either by specifc (afnity) elution or by non-specifc (change in pH or ion 
concentration) elution (Fig. 15.2). Some of the macromolecules separated by 
employing specifc ligand in afnity chromatography are given in the Table 
15.2. 
Fig. 15.2. Schematic representation of principle of Afnity chromatography.
Table 15.2. Specifc ligands commonly used in Afnity chromatography
Ligands Macromolecules/cells
Bicocytin 
Tryptophan 
Benzamidine 
Heparin 
Poly(U) or poly dT 
Lysine 
Concanavaline A 
Insulin, Concanavalin A 
Avidin 
Α-chymotrypsin
Thrombin 
Interferon 
Poly(A) messenger RNA 
Ribosomal RNA 
Glycoproteins, glycolipids 
Fat cells316 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
The commonly used matrices are cross-linked dextrans (e.g.,sephacryl), 
agarose (sepharose), polyacrylomide gel (biogel P), polystyrene, Cellulose, 
Porous glass and silica. 
Spaces arm: It facilitates efective binding to macromolecules (proteins) 
to the ligand and matrix. The length of the spaces arm is critical. If it is too 
short, the arm is inefective and the ligand fails to bind the substance, if it is too 
long, non-specifc efects become pronounced and reduce the selectivity of the 
separation. So the optimum length of the spaces arm is generally 6-10 c-atoms 
or their equivalent. The chemical nature of the spaces arm (hydrophobic or 
hydrophilic) is also critical for the success of separation. 
The approaches have been followed for the coupling of the legend. In 
frst one, spaces arm is frst linked to the matrix followed by the coupling of 
the ligand, whereas second approach involves the binding of the spaces arm 
to the ligand which is then linked to the matrix. The frst approach is more 
convenient than the second one. 
15.4 High Pressure Liquid Chromatography (or) 
High Performance Liquid Chromatography 
(HPLC) 
High Pressure Liquid Chromatography or High Performance Liquid 
Chromatography (HPLC) is an advanced column chromatography which 
has been used to separate various compounds from the mixture of various 
chemical compounds. It helps in identify, quantify and purify the individual 
compounds from the mixture of sample. 
In HPLC, the principle involves that some compounds of the sample take 
longer than others to pass through the chromatography column. The time 
taken by the molecule depends on afnity of the molecule with mobile phase 
(liquid or gas) and stationary phase (solid or liquid). Those compounds with 
greater afnity with the stationary phase take longer time to pass through the 
column (longer retention time). HPLC made of pump to pass a pressurised 
solvent containing the sample mixture through a column flled with a solid 
absorbent material. Each component in the sample interacts slightly diferent 
with the adsorbent, causing diferent fow rates for the diferent components 
and leading to the separation of compounds as they fow out of the column.
In this technique, the sample is forced by a liquid at high pressure (the 
mobile phase) through a column which is packed with a stationary phase 
composed of irregularly or spherically shaped particles (a porous monolithic 
layer or a porous membrane). 
HPLC is distinguished from traditional (low pressure) liquid 
chromatography; in HPC, operational pressure is signifcantly higher (50-350 
bar), while ordinary liquid chromatography typically depends on the force of 
the gravity to pass the mobile phase through the column. As the small amount Chromatography 317 
of sample to be separated in the analytical HPLC, typical column dimensions 
are 2.1-4.6 mm diameter, and 30-250 mm length. Moreover, HPLC columns 
are made with small adsorbent particles of about 2-50 µm particle size. Hence, 
HPLC gives superior resolving power to separate various compounds from 
the mixture of compounds. HPLC typically consists of a pumping system, 
simple injector, a chromatographic column of 5-25 cm length, stationary and 
mobile phases, detector and data collecting device (Fig. 15.2). The pump 
delivers the desired fow (50 MP pressure) and composition of the mobile 
phase through the column. The injector introduces a narrow stream of variable 
and reproducible sample volume onto the top of the analytical column. The 
optimum level of the analyte is maintained in the analytical column at an 
acceptable pressure drop. The detector generates a signal proportional to the 
amount of sample component emerging from the column, hence allowing for 
quantitative analysis of the sample components. A digital microprocessor and 
user software control the instrument and provide data analysis. 
HPCL has been used for several purposes, such as separation of 
compounds from the biological samples, detecting vitamin D, levels in blood 
serum, separation of various synthetic chemicals, during the production 
process of pharmaceutical and biological products etc. 
15.4.1 Normal Phase Liquid Chromatography (NPLC) 
In Normal Phase Liquid Chromatography (NPLC), stationary phase is more 
polar (hydrophilic, e.g., silica) than the mobile phase (toluene). The polar 
molecules which have greater afnity with hydrophobic phase would pass 
slowly through column than the non-polar molecules (Fig. 15.3).
Fig. 15.3. Normal Phase Liquid Chromatography. 318 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
15.4.2 Reverse Phase Liquid Chromatography (RPLC) 
In Reverse Phase Liquid Chromatography (RPLC), stationary phase is 
hydrophobic (non-polar, octadecylsilyl-C18), whereas mobile phase is more 
hydrophilic (polar). In this, non-polar molecules would move slowly through 
the column when compared with the polar molecules (Fig. 15.4).
Fig. 15.4. Reverse Phase Liquid Chromatography 
Selecting the mobile phase (solvent) is one of the most important steps 
when performing HPLC and is selected based on polarity. Solvent polarity 
relates to the ability of the components to partition into the phase. The relative 
polarity of various solvents is given below (Table 15.3). 
Table 15.3. Relative polarity of mobile phase (solvents) 
Solvent Relative polarity
Cyclohexane 
1-chlorobutane 
Carbon tetrachloride 
Toluene 
Tetrahydrofuran (THF)
Ethanol 
Methanol 
Acetonitrate 
Ethylene glycol 
Water 
0.04 
1.0 
1.6 
2.4 
4.0 
4.3 
5.1 
5.8 
6.9 
10.2 
In the HPLC analysis of a mixture, the components will separate based 
on their retention times. This will produce a chromatogram. Either the peak 
height or peak area can be used to estimate the concentration. Chromatography 319 
These values are proportional to the concentration and the peaks are 
sharp, and the fow rate is carefully produced. A calibration curve is prepared 
by plotting either peak height or peak area as a function of compound 
concentration. 
15.4.3 Ion Exchange HPLC 
In Ion Exchange HPLC, partition of ions takes place between a polar liquid 
phase and a stationary phase with ion exchange sites. The ion exchange sites 
are typically immobilised in small beads of resin that are formed by cross￾linked polymer. Bonded phase columns in which the ion exchanger is bonded 
to small particles of silica are also available. Cations are separated on cation 
exchange resins which contain negatively charged functional groups such 
as SO3 and –COO--. Anions are separated on anion exchange resins which 
contain positively charged functional groups such as CH2N+
(CH3)3. Resin 
afnity increases with increasing charge density.
15.5 Adsorption Chromatography 
In Adsorption chromatography, the stationary phase is a solid of polar nature 
such as hydrated silica or alumina. The mobile phase and solvent mixture are 
in completion for active adsorption on the stationary phase particles. Hence, 
more strongly adsorbed components are retained longer than weakly adsorbed 
components. As more polar compounds adsorb on a polar surface to a greater 
extent than the less polar compounds, retention in column is related to sample 
extract polarity. 
15.6 Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry 
(GC/MS) 
The diferent unknown samples can be separated by high resolution capillary 
Gas Chromatography (GC) coupled with an ion tap detector (ITD). The ITD 
is a variation of a quadrupole mass spectrometer (MS) and is designed to 
function specifcally as a GC detector. Separation of sample into its various 
compounds depends on solubility diferences of the sample vapour in a liquid 
(the stationary phase). The stationary phase is coated in a thin layer on solid 
particles (solid support) of large surface area and then packed uniformally 
into a column. A constant fow of the carrier gas passes through the column 
and transports solute molecules in the gas phase. The column has oven inside 
for precise temperature control. ITD records the total number of ions entering 
the mass analyser from the column. The chromatogram produced is called 
the total ion chromatogram. Each point in chromatogram is a mass spectrum. 
The basic principle in MS, it utilises the nature of ions. By accelerating 
an ion (anatom or molecule with an electric charge) to a certain speed, and  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
320 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
passing it through a magnetic feld, the path of the ion will be defected by 
magnetic feld. The amount of defection depends on the intensity of the 
magnetic feld and the mass number of the ion.
Each compound can be identifed by comparing its retention time (RT) 
to that of standard. RT is defned as ‘the length of time compound remains 
present in the column’. RT depends on the column temperature, its length, type 
of stationary phase and the carrier gas velocity. Furthermore, ITD provides the 
structure of compound. Therefore, compounds can be detected not only by 
their retention time but also their mass spectral data. 
15.7 Protocols 
15.7.1 Paper Chromatography (Sadasivan and Manikam, 2005) 
Materials and Reagents 
i. Chromatography chamber 
ii. Whatman No.1 flter paper
iii. Hair-dryer 
iv. Automixer 
v. Micropipette 
vi. Mobile phase (Solvent system) – Take n-butanol, glacial acetic acid and 
water in the ratio of 4:1:5 in a separating funnel, mix them thoroughly 
and stand to equilibrate for 30 min. Drain of the lower aqueous phase 
into beaker and place it inside to saturate the chromatography chamber. 
Upper organic phase is retained and use it for developing chromatogram. 
vii. Extraction of sample – With mortar and pestle grind a known quantity 
of the sample material in 10-fold volume of 70% ethanol. Shake the 
contents thoroughly at 55o
C for 30 min. Centrifuge it at 10,000 rpm for 
10 min. Collect the supernatant. Repeat the extraction of the pellet at 
55o
C at least twice. Collect supernatant and shake vigorously (for leaf 
extracts, treat with equal volume of petroleum ether 40-60o
C). Discard 
the petroleum ether layer containing chlorophyll. Evaporate the ethanol 
fraction to dryness under vacuum by using evaporator at 40-45o
C. 
Dissolve the residue in a known volume of absolute ethanol or water for 
analysis. 
viii. Dissolve diferent individual amino acids in a distilled water at a 
concentration of 1 mg/ml. Use very dilute (0.05 N) HCl to dissolve the 
free amino acids tyrosine and phenylalanine. Dissolve tryptophase is 
very dilute 0.05 N NaPH. 
ix. Ninhydrin reagent – Dissolve 100 mg ninhydrin in 100 ml acetone. 
x. Elution mixture – Prepare 1% copper sulphate solution. Mix ethanol and 
copper sulphate in the ratio 80:20.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	 	 	
Chromatography 321 
Procedure 
i. Cut the chromatography sheet carefully to the size 40x24 cm. Draw a 
line with pencil across the sheet about 5 cm away from one end. Mark a 
number of points at intervals of 3 cm. 
ii. By using micropipette apply 25 µl of each amino acid as a separate small 
spot-on flter paper.
iii. Also spot diferent known aliquots of sample extract.
iv. After spotting, set the chamber for ascending or descending type of 
chromatograph (see previous section). 
v. Add the organic (phase) solvent to the tank and close the chamber airtight. 
Develop the chromatogram, preferably overnight, till the solvent moves 
almost to the other end. 
vi. Mark the solvent front and dry the chromatogram in a fume chamber. 
vii. Spray the chromatogram with ninhydrin. Dry the flter paper at room 
temperate for 5 min and followed by at 100o
C in an oven for 2-3 min. 
Amino acids appear as purple spots; hydroxyproline and proline give 
yellow-coloured spots. Mark all the spot and calculate their retardation factor, 
Rf values by the following formula: 
Distance moved by the solute from the origin (cm) Rf = Distance (cm) moved by the solvent from the origin 
Comparing the Rf values with that of the authentic amino acids that are 
co-chromatographed, amino acids present in sample is identifed.
i. For quantitative estimation, cut each spot from the chromatogram and 
also cut into several small bits and transfer them to the bottom of the test 
tube. Add 3 ml of elution mixture, shake the tubes vigorously for 15 min. 
Decant the liquid and again elute the pieces with another 2 ml of elution 
mixture. Repeat this step till unit bits become colourless. Combine and 
clear the elute by centrifuging at 10,000 rpm for 10 min. take the readings 
of intensity of purple colour at 570 nm in a colorimeter, compare this 
with leucine (50 µg) run as standard. 
15.7.2	 Separation and Identifcation of Sugars by
Adsorption Thin Layer Chromatography 
(Sawhney and Singh, 2010) 
Sugars are separated on the basis of diferential adsorption onto silica gel. 
The sugars that have higher afnity for stationary phase are adsorbed more 
strictly and hence, they migrate slowly when mobile phase moves over them. 
Whereas, these sugars having lower afnity for stationary phase are absorbed 
very weakly and, they move more rapidly on the mobile phase. These separated 
sugars clearly appear when the plate is sprayed with aniline diphenylamine.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
322 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Reagents and materials 
Silica gel (G) 
Solvent system: Prepare a mixture of ethyl acetate: isoprepanol: water: 
pyridine (26:14:7:2 v/v) 
Standard sugar solution: Prepare 1% standard sugar solutions such as 
glucose, ribose, lactose etc., in 10% iso-propanol (v/v). For mixture in which 
sugars have to be identifed, mix the sugar solution in equal proportions.
Aniline diphenylamine reagent: Mix 5 volumes of 1% aniline and 5 volumes 
of 1% diphenylamine in acetone with 1 volume of 8.5% phosphoric acid. 
Glass plates (20 × 20 cm) 
Spreader 
TLC chromatographic tank 
Micropipettes 
Sprayer 
Hair drier 
Oven maintained at 105o
C 
Procedure 
i. Tape clean and neat dried glass plates (20 x 20 cm) on a fat plastic tray 
side by side without any gap. 
ii. Prepare the slurry of stationary phase (silica gel G) without clumps in the 
water or in a suitable bufer.
iii. With help of spreader, spread the uniform layer of 250 µm thickness by 
making it from one end of the tray to its other end. 
iv. Activate the glass plates by keeping them at 105o
C for 30 min. Allow the 
plates to cool in a desiccator before use. 
v. Gently put marks in a straight line with a help of a pin at a distance of 2 
cm from one edge of the plate. The adjacent marks should be about 15-20 
cm apart from each other. Extreme care should be taken that silica plate 
should not get scratched during this process. 
vi. Carefully apply the solution of individual standard sugars and the mixture 
of alcoholic extract of the sample on the separate marked spots. 
vii. Gently put marks or draw a line 1 cm from the opposite edge. 
viii. Place the glass plates in chromatographic tank that has already 
equilibrated with the solvent taking care that the base line on which 
samples have been applied should not dip into the solvent. 
ix. Now close the chromatographic tank with air-tight lid and allow the 
solvent to ascend along the silica plate by capillary action till the solvent 
reaches the marked line of the upper side of plate. Run the chromatogram 
for 90 min. 
x. Take out the plates from the tank and allow them to dry at room 
temperature. 
xi. For determining the location of sugars on the TLS plates, spray them  
 
 
 
 
Chromatography 323 
with freshly prepared aniline-diphenylamine reagent and ensure that 
silica gel should not blow of during spraying.
xii. Later keep the plates in hot air oven at 100o
C for 10 min. Bluish spots 
on the white background appeared that indicate the presence of sugars at 
that region of the plate. 
xiii. Measure the distance from the base line to the cooled spot and calculate 
the Rf value of each sugar; and identify the sugar or sample by comparing 
the Rf value of the standard sugar. 
We shall observe bluish spots at diferent locations on the silica plates after 
spraying with aniline-diphenylamine reagent. By calculating Rf value, we can 
identify the type of the sugar present in the plant sample. In the experiment, 
the size of the sample applied on the silica plate should be as small as possible. 
If large volume of the sample has to be spotted, then it should be done in small 
aliquots with an intermittent drying. Overloading is generally avoided in the 
adsorption thin layer chromatography. 
15.7.3 Column Chromatography and HPLC Analysis [Analysis 
of Phenolic Compounds from the Solvent Extract of 
Salvinia Molesta Mitchell (Giri and Jothi, 2018)] 
In this protocol, separation of phytocompounds in the ethyl acetate extract of 
Salvinia molesta by column chromatography and determination of phenolic 
compounds present in the active fractions by HPLC are taken-up. 
Chemicals and Phenolic standards 
Hexane, ethyl acetate, ethanol, methanol, acetone, vanillin-H2SO4spray, 
acetonitrile, phosphoric acid, acetic acid, chromanorm water, gallic acid, 
catechol, benzoic acid, resorcinol, ascorbic acid, vanillin, quercetin, silica gel 
and sea sand were procured from Hi Media Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai, India. 
Plant materials 
Clean plant materials of S. molesta under running tap water and shade drying 
at room temperature for three weeks. The dried materials are pulverised into 
fne powder, flter through a sieve (mesh no.40) and stored airtight bottles.
Procedure 
i. Prepare plant extracts using four solvents, namely hexane, ethyl acetate, 
ethanol and methanol; sequential extraction has been carried out starting 
from low polarity to high polarity. 
ii. Powdered plant material of 50 grams is soaked in 200 ml of hexanes in 
a stoppered container and placed on orbital shaker at 120 rpm for 72 h at 
room temperature. 
iii. Later, flter the mixes through Whatman No.1 flter paper and their 
concentrate under reduced pressure using a rotary evaporator.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
324 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
The same procedure (steps i, ii, iii) is followed for the other three solvents. 
The extraction process is carried out in triplicate with each solvent. The dried 
crude extract is collected and stored in amber vials and placed in refrigerator 
at 4o
C. 
Column chromatographic fractionation of ethyl acetate extract 
Ethyl Acetate Extract (EAE) is subjected to Silica gel column chromatography 
for the isolation of phytoconstituents. A vertical glass column (40 mm width 
× 60 mm length) made of borosilicate material is used for the fractionation: 
iv. Rinse the column with acetone and let it dry for some time. 
v. Place a piece of glass wool at the bottom of the column with the help of 
glass root. 
vi. Add sea sand (50-70 particle size) to the top of the glass wool to 1 cm 
height. Sand particles are rinsed down with the solvent. 
vii. Then pour hexane into the column up to 3/4th level by closing stopcock. 
viii. Silica gel 200 g (60-120 mesh size) is used as packing material. Prepare 
silica slurry with hexane; this silica slurry is poured from the top of the 
column up to 2/3rd level with simultaneous draining of the solvent to aid 
proper packing of the column. 
ix. Then add sea sand to the top of the silica slurry to 1 cm height and sand 
particles are rinsed down with solvent. 
x. Mix 20 g of EAE with minimum quantity of hexane and pouring down 
from the top of the column along the side and rinse down with the solvent. 
xi. Add sea sand to the top of the extract to 1 cm height. See that solvent 
level up to 6 cm above the extract should be maintained in order to 
prevent the drying of the column. 
xii. Follow the gradient elution method to separate fractions from EAE using 
solvents from low polarity to high polarity (from hexane to methanol) 
in varying ratio. Flow rate is adjusted to 5 ml/min and 40 ml solvent 
collected for each fraction. 
TLC of fraction 
xiii. Collect fractions separately and subjected to TLC (20x20 cm aluminium 
sheets coated with silica gel 60 F254) to detect the pressure of 
phytochemicals. 
xiv. Now spray TLC plates with vanillin-conc. H2SO4 spray (15 g of vanillin 
in 250 ml of ethanol + 2.5 ml of conc. H2SO4) and dried at 100o
C in hot￾air area for 20-30 min. The Rf value of each spot is calculated. 
xv. Fractions with the same Rf values are mixed together and condensed 
to dryness with a rotary evaporator; the dry weight of these combined 
fractions is calculated. 
HPLC analysis 
The condensed fractions and EAE are further analysed by HPLC for the 
presence of antioxidants phenolic compounds. This can be performed by two  
Chromatography 325 
methods using two diferent mobile phases selected on the basis of varying 
gradation of solvent systems in specifc retention times and elute detections.
In this protocol, analysis of all samples was performed using Shimadzu 
LC-10 AT VP, Luna 54 C18 reverse-phase analytical column (250 × 4.6 mm) 
with binary gradient mode, SPD-M10AVP photo diode array detector (PDA); 
injection volume 20 µl, total fow 1 ml/min, column oven temperature 25o
C 
and detection wavelength 280 nm; 55 mg of EAE and each fraction dissolved 
in 3 ml of methanol for the analysis. 
Solvents to be used for mobile phases are previously fltered through 
Millipore and degassed prior to use. Quercetin, ascorbic acid, benzoic acid, 
gallic acid, vanillin, resorcinol and catechol are used as standard solutions for 
the quantifcation of phenolic compounds.
Method A 
HPLC analyses of ascorbic acid, benzoic acid, gallic acid, vanillin, resorcinol 
and catechol are performed by method A. Gradient elution of two solvents is 
used for the quantifcation of these compounds; solvent A: Acetontrile and 
solvent B: phosphoric acid 0.1% in water. Gradient elution program begins 
with 92% of solvent B and it is held at this concentration for 0-35 min; then 
followed by 78% of solvent B for the next 35-45 min. Total run time is 45 
min only. 
Method B 
This method is used for HPLC analysis of quercetin. Gradient elution of two 
solvents is used for the quantifcation of quercetin; solvent ‘A’ with methanol, 
solvent ‘B’ 4% acetic acid. Gradient elution program begins with 100% of 
solvent ‘B’ held for 0-4 mins, then followed by 50% of solvent ‘B’ for 4-10 
min. Then it is reduced to 20% of solvent ‘B’ for the next 10-20 min. And 
further increased to 50% of solvent ‘B’ for the next 20-22 min. Total run time 
is 20 min. 
Results: HPLC analysis indicates the presence of phenolic compounds, 
viz., ascorbic acid, quercetin, gallic acid, resorcinol, catechol, vanillin and 
benzoic acid with specifc retention times.
15.7.4 GC-MS Screening of Solvent Extracts of Cymbidium 
Aloifolium (L.) Sw. (Orchidaceae) (Rampilla and 
Khasim, 2020) 
Equipment and its conditions 
Agilent GC-MS (Model-5975C inert MSD with Triple-Axis Detector, USA) 
equipped with an HP-5 MS fused capillary column (30 m × 0.25 mm i.d., 
flm thickness 0.25 µm) has been employed. While operating the equipment 
following chromatographic conditions are employed: Helium as the carrier 
gas, the fow rate of 1 ml/min; and the injector is operated at 200o
C and 
column oven temperature is programmed as a rate of 10o
C/min injection  
 
 
 
 
 
 
326 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
mode. Following Mass Spectroscopy conditions are used: ionisation voltage 
of 70 eV; ion source temperature of 250o
C; interface temperature of 250o
C; 
the mass range of 50-600 mass units. 
Soxhlet apparatus 
Vacuum rotary evaporation 
Reagents & materials 
n-hexane, methanol 
What man no. 41 flter paper
Collection of plant material and sample preparation 
i. The fast green leaves of Cymbidium aloifolium growing on Borassus 
faballifer host plant are collected from their natural habitat and packed 
in polyethylene bags. 
ii. The plant samples are shade dried and pound into fne powder and stored 
in air-tight polythene bags unit use. 
iii. The dried leaves powder (150g) is extracted in methanol at room 
temperature by using soxhlet extractor for 12-18 h. 
iv. The crude methanol extract is prepared and evaporated by vacuum rotary 
evaporation under reduced pressure. 
v. The crude extract is diluted with water and extracted with n-hexane. The 
extract is fltered using What man no.41 flter paper to obtain particle￾free extract. The residue is re-extracted twice with solvent to obtain fnal 
extract. 
vi. The sample of 2 µl is injected into the GC-MS instrument for 
phytochemical analysis. 
vii. Interpretation of GC-MS data is carried out using the National Institute 
of Standard and Technology (NIST) database library 2.0 version which 
has more than 62,000 patterns. The spectrum of the unknown component 
is compared with the specimen of the known one stored in NIST library. 
Result: Based on retention time and peak area (Table 15.4), some of 
compounds such as n-hexadecanoic acid (Fig. 15.5a), 9, 12-Octadecadienoic 
acid (Z,Z) (Fig. 15.5b), 9,12,15-octadecatrienoic acid (Z,Z,Z), Octadecatrienoic 
acid (Fig. 15.6a) and phytol (Fig. 15.6b) have been recorded.
Table 15.4. Compounds recorded in n-hexane extract of C. aloifolium
Compound Retention time Peak area %
n-Hexadecanoic acid 50.409 22.6956 
9, 12-Octadecadienoic acid (Z,Z) 52.803 28.5815 
9,12,15-Ocxtadecatrienoic acid (Z,Z,Z) 52.872 38.3769 
Octadecanoic acid 53.110 5.7647 
Phytol 52.538 4.5813 Chromatography 327 
Fig. 15.5a. n-hexadecanoic acid; b. 9, 12-Octadecadienoic acid (Z,Z) 
(Courtesy: Rampilla and Khasim, 2020).
Fig. 15.6a. Octadecatrienoic acid; b. Phytol(Courtesy: Rampilla and Khasim, 2020).328 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
The identifed various bioactive compounds have therapeutic properties 
that can be useful for the treatment of various diseases. These compounds 
reported from this investigation have some phylogenetic signifcance too. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
Phytochemical Methods 
Secondary metabolites including primary metabolite products possess 
biological activity and are distributed across the plant kingdom. These 
chemical compounds are referred to as phytochemicals. They provide health 
benefts for humans, and these are classifed under macro and micronutrients 
(Haster and Blumberg, 1999). Further, these phytochemicals act in plant 
defense against pathogen attacks and diseases (Mathai, 2000). Nearly 4,000 
phytochemicals have been reported and studied for their protective function, 
and physical and chemical characterization (Meagher and Thomson, 1999).
16.1 Basic Equipment for Phytochemical Studies 
i. Separatory funnel 
Generally, the separatory funnel is used in liquid-liquid extractions to 
separate (partition) the components of a mixture into two immiscible 
solvent phases of diferent densities.
ii. Rotary evaporator 
It is used to remove solvents efciently and gently from samples by 
evaporation. The purpose of distillation is to separate a given mixture 
into its components based on their respective volatilities, through the 
process of evaporation and condensation (liquid-gas-liquid). The main 
purpose of the rotary evaporator is as follows:
i. to concentrate non-volatile components in a mixture 
ii. to extract the volatile aroma and favour molecules from mixtures 
gently and at low temperatures
iii. Refux
Refux is a distillation technique involving the condensation of vapours 
and the return of this condensate to the system from which it originated. 
It is used to supply energy to reactions over a long period. 
iv. Soxhlet extraction
When a compound of low solubility needs to be extracted from a solid 
mixture a Soxhlet extraction can be carried out. The technique places 
specialized glassware in between a fask and a condenser. The refuxing 
solvent repeatedly washes the solid extracting the desired compound into 
the fask. 
 
 
 
330 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
A Soxhlet Extractor has three main sections such as a percolator (boiler 
and refux) which circulates the solvent, a thimble (usually made of thick flter 
paper) which retains the solid to be laved, and a siphon mechanism, which 
periodically empties the thimble. 
16.2 Steps Involved in Plant Collection 
Various steps are involved in plant sample collection. These are explained in 
the proceeding sections (Fig. 16.1).
16.2.1	The	Plant	Material	Collection	and	Identifcation
Plants that are useful to mankind, the pharmaceutical industry, and taxonomic 
importance, should be taken up for phytochemical analysis. Ideally, fresh plant 
materials should be collected and plunged into boiling alcohol immediately 
after their collection (Harborne, 2013). Alternatively, plants may be shade 
dried at room temperature before extraction. Once thoroughly dried, these 
are kept stored under safe conditions for quite a long period. In fact, for the 
analysis of alkaloids, favonoids, quinones and terpenoids, herbarium plant 
tissues (dating back many years) have been used (Harborne, 2013). In this 
context, Sanford and Heinz (1971) observed that the myristicin content of 
nutmeg Myristica fragrans fruits increased slowly on storage, while the more 
volatile β-Pinene content decreased over time. On the contrary, favonoids, 
and alkaloids in the herbarium specimens are remarkedly stable over time; 
therefore, the leaf sample of Strychnos nux-vomica originally collected in 
1675 still contained 1-2% by weight of alkaloid (Philipson, 1982). 
For phytochemical studies, botanical identifcation of plants is needed, 
and it should be authenticated by plant taxonomists. Regional foras are 
referred to and helpful in the identifcation of plants. For further purposes, 
it is a common practice to deposit the herbarium specimen in the recognized 
herbaria for future reference (see chapter 9).
16.2.2 Powdering 
After complete drying of moisture, the plant samples are to be powdered. 
There are diferent types of powdering, they include the following: 
i. Grinding can be done by milling in an electric grinder or by a spice mill 
or it can also be done in mortar or pestle. 
ii. Grinding increases the efciency of the extraction due to the increased 
surface area of the plants. The decrease in the surface area can lead to the 
dense packing of the material. 
iii. Milling the plants into a fne powder is always ideal but if they are too 
fne this afects the solvent’s fow and produces more heat which could 
degrade some thermolabile compounds.  
 
Phytochemical Methods 331 
Fig. 16.1. Flowchart of plant collection, identifcation, and solvent extraction. 
16.3 Choice of Solvent 
The solvent that is being used for the extraction process is very important 
in determining the biologically active phytochemicals from the plants. These 
solvents must be less toxic, easy to evaporate in less heat, should preserve 
the compounds in them, and should not dissociate them. The various solvents 
commonly used for extraction include: 
i. Water: It is a universal solvent; plant extracts with anti-microbial 
activities are usually extracted with water. But the organic solvents give 
consistent results in anti-microbial activities when compared to water. 
Water-soluble compounds in the extract cannot give signifcant results. 
ii. Alcohol:The alcoholic extracts of plants show more activity than aqueous 
extracts due to the presence of higher amounts of polyphenols. This is 
because of the higher cell wall and seed degradation by the alcohols that 
release the polyphenols which will be degraded in the case of aqueous 
extracts. But ethanol is more microbicidal than water. More bioactive 
compounds are extracted in 70% ethanol than pure ethanol. Ethanol is 
also found easier to extract intracellular ingredients from plant materials. 
Polar solvents like methanol, ethanol, and their aqueous mixtures are 
used for the extraction of phenolic compounds. The addition of water to 
alcohol will improve the rate of extraction. Methanol is more polar, but 
it is unsuitable for extraction due to its cytotoxic nature (Balamurugan et 
al., 2019).
iii. Acetone: Acetone dissolves many hydrophilic and lipophilic compounds 
from the plants, and it is miscible with water. It is low toxic and volatile 
and it is used for extracting antimicrobial activities. Extracting tannins 
and other phenolic compounds is done with acetone. They are also used 
to extract saponins.  
 
 
332 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
iv. Chloroform: Terpenoid lactones are obtained from barks by extraction 
with chloroform. Tannins and Terpenoids are treated with less polar 
solvents. 
v. Ether: They are used for the extraction of coumarins and fatty acids.
The solvent used for the extraction of medicinal plants is also known as 
the menstruum. The choice of solvent depends on the type of plant, the part 
of the plant to be extracted, the nature of the bioactive compounds, and the 
availability of solvent. In general, polar solvents such as water, methanol, and 
ethanol are used in the extraction of the polar compound, whereas nonpolar 
solvents such as hexane and dichloromethane are used in the extraction of 
nonpolar compounds. During liquid-liquid extraction, the conventional way 
is to select two miscible solvents such as water-dichloromethane, water-ether, 
and water-hexane. In all the combinations, water is present because of its high 
polarity and miscibility with an organic solvent. The compound to be extracted 
using liquid-liquid extraction should be soluble in organic solvents but not in 
water to ease the separation. Furthermore, the solvent used in extraction is 
classifed according to their polarity, from n-hexane which is the least polar to 
water the most polar (Table 16.1). 
During fractionation, the selected solvent is added according to the order 
of increasing polarity, starting from n-hexane, the least polar to water with 
the highest polarity. If you like to select fve solvents during fractionation, 
the usual practice is to choose two solvents with low polarity (n-hexane, 
chloroform), two with medium polarity (dichloromethane, n-butanol), and 
one with the highest polarity (water).
Table 16.1. Various solvents of extractions arranged according to 
the order of increasing polarity 
S.No. Solvents Polarity 
1. n-Hexane 0.009
2. Petroleum ether 0.117
3. Diethyl ether 0.117
4. Ethyl acetate 0.228
5. Chloroform 0.259
6. Dichloromethane 0.309
7. Acetone 0.355
8. n-Butanol 0.586
9. Ethanol 0.654
10. Methanol 0.762
11. Water 1.000 
 
 
 
 
 
Phytochemical Methods 333 
16.4 Extraction Methods 
Extraction involves the separation of the medicinally active constituents of 
plant tissues from the active or inert component by using solvent(s) and by 
using one of the standard extraction procedures. The products obtained from 
plants are relatively impure liquids, semisolids, or powders, intended only for 
oral or external use. Methods of extraction can be divided into cold methods 
and hot methods. 
16.4.1 Cold Extraction Methods 
It is the process of extracting a substance from a mixture via a cold solvent. 
The procedure is carried out at room temperature (15-25 ºC).
i. Maceration
This simple widely used procedure involves leaving the pulverized plant 
to soak in a suitable solvent in a closed container. Simple maceration is 
performed at room temperature by mixing the ground plant powder with 
the solvent (plant powder solvent ratio: 1:5 or 1:10) and leaving the 
mixture for several days with occasional shaking or stirring. This method 
is best suitable for thermolabile compounds. The main disadvantage of 
maceration is that the process can be quite time-consuming, taking from 
a few hours up to several weeks. There are three types of maceration, 
simple (single maceration), double maceration and triple maceration 
(Agrawal and Paridhavi, 2012). In double and triple maceration, the 
menstruum is equally divided into two and three parts respectively and 
used. The purpose is to obtain a more extractable yield.
ii. Percolation
Percolation (from Lat. percōlāre, to flter) concerns the movement and 
fltering of fuids through porous materials. The powdered plant material 
is soaked initially in a solvent. In a percolator, the additional amount 
of solvent is then poured on top of the plant material and allowed to 
percolate slowly (dropwise) out of the bottom of the percolator. If 
necessary, the same material can be re-extracted with a second solvent
to yield more extract.
16.4.2 Hot Extraction Methods 
i. Infusion 
Infusion is applicable for soft drugs only and drugs containing water￾soluble constituents (Agrawal and Paridhavi, 2012). The drug is mixed 
with water. It is allowed to stand for 30 minutes. Shaking or stirring is 
done if required.
Drug + H2O Filtrate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
334 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Here heat is not applied, and it is fltered. The fltrate is called an infusion. 
The infusion should be used within 24 hours. Sometimes 20-25% ethanol 
is used as a preservative and stored for quite a long period, e.g., compound 
infusion of gentian and chirata (Agrawal and Paridhavi, 2012).
ii. Decoction
A decoction is applicable only for water-soluble and heat-stable drugs 
obtained from hard and woody materials. The term decoction is derived 
from the Latin ‘decoquere’ (meaning to boil down), de = from; coquere 
= to cook. A decoction is a method of extraction by boiling, dissolved 
chemicals, from hard plant material, which may include stems, roots, 
bark, and rhizomes on a source of heat or direct fame then agitating until 
the active constituents will be dissolved in the solvent. Here the solvent 
used depends on the active constituent and source of heat. 
Drug + H2O heating for 15-20 minutes fltrate.
The fltrate is called decoction. It should be consumed within 24 hours.
iii. Digestion 
Digestion is a modifed form of maceration. Here heat is applied for 
macerated material. It is suitable for heat-stable substances only.
iv. Continuous hot extraction methods
Refux condenser: Plant material is immersed in a solvent in a round￾bottomed fask connected to a condenser. The solvent is heated until 
it reaches its boiling point. As the vapour is condensed, the solvent is 
recycled into the fask.
Soxhlet apparatus: The plant powder is placed in a cellulose thimble in 
an extraction chamber, which is placed on top of a collecting fask beneath 
a refux condenser. A suitable solvent is added to the fask, and the setup 
is heated under refux. When a certain level of condensed solvent has 
accumulated in the thimble, it is siphoned into the fask beneath. The 
main advantage of Soxhlet extraction is that it is a continuous process for 
the extraction of active constituents decomposed by direct heat.
16.4.3 Aqueous Alcoholic Extraction by Fermentation 
Some medicinal preparations of Ayurveda (like asava and arista) adopt the 
technique of fermentation for extracting the active principles. The extraction 
procedure involves soaking the crude drug, in the form of either a powder 
or a decoction (kashaya), for a specifed period, during which it undergoes 
fermentation and generates alcohol in situ; this facilitates the extraction of the 
active constituents contained in the plant material. The alcohol thus generated 
also serves as a preservative. If the fermentation is to be carried out in an 
earthen vessel, it should not be new: water should frst be boiled in the vessel. 
In large-scale manufacture, wooden vats, porcelain jars, or metal vessels are 
used in place of earthen vessels. Some examples of such preparations are Phytochemical Methods 335 
karpurasava, kanakasava, and dasmularista. In Ayurveda, this method is not 
yet standardized but, with the extraordinarily high degree of advancement in 
fermentation technology, it should not be difcult to standardize this technique 
of extraction to produce herbal drug extracts.
16.4.4 Counter-current Extraction 
In counter-current extraction (CCE), wet raw material is pulverized using 
toothed disc disintegrators to produce a fne slurry. In this process, the 
material to be extracted is moved in one direction (generally in the form of 
a fne slurry) within a cylindrical extractor where it comes in contact with 
the extraction solvent. The further the starting material moves, the more 
concentrated the extract becomes. Complete extraction is thus possible when 
the quantities of solvent and material and their fow rates are optimized. The 
process is highly efcient, requiring little time and posing no risk from high 
temperatures. Finally, a sufciently concentrated extract comes out at one end 
of the extractor while the mark (practically free of visible solvent) falls out 
from the other end (Handa et al., 2008).
16.4.5 Ultrasound Extraction (Sonication) 
The procedure involves the use of ultrasound with frequencies ranging from 
20 kHz to 2000 kHz; this increases the permeability of cell walls and produces 
cavitation. Although the process is useful in some cases, like the extraction of 
Rauwolfa root, its large-scale application is limited due to the higher costs. 
One disadvantage of the procedure is the occasional but known deleterious 
efect of ultrasound energy (more than 20 kHz) on the active constituents 
of medicinal plants through the formation of free radicals and consequently 
undesirable changes in the drug molecules. 
16.4.6 Supercritical Fluid Extraction (SFE) of 
Natural Products 
Supercritical fuid extraction (SFE) on an analytical and processing scale is 
quite widespread in the food industry for the extraction of fats and oils from 
seeds, foodstufs, and other materials. It is an alternative method to reduce 
the use of organic solvents and to yield more extract. The factors to consider 
include temperature, pressure, sample volume, analyte collection, modifer 
(cosolvent) addition, fow and pressure control, and restrictors. Generally, 
cylindrical extraction vessels are used for SFE, and their performance is good 
beyond any doubt. In this method carbon dioxide (CO2) is used as extracting 
fuid. In addition to its favourable physical properties, carbon dioxide is 
inexpensive, safe, and abundant. But while carbon dioxide is the preferred 
fuid for SFE, it possesses several polarity limitations. Solvent polarity is 
important when extracting polar solutes and when strong analyte-matrix 336 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
interactions are present. Organic solvents are frequently added to the carbon 
dioxide-extracting fuid to alleviate the polarity limitations. Of late, instead of 
carbon dioxide, argon is being used because it is inexpensive and more inert. 
Typically, supercritical carbon dioxide at pressures of at least 250 bar and a 
temperature of 20 and 40ºC conditions suitable for the extraction of oil from 
oil seeds of Helianthus annus and Brassica napus (Agrawal and Paridhavi, 
2012). 
16.4.7 Phytonics Process 
A new solvent based on hydrofuorocarbon-134a and a new technology to 
optimize its remarkable properties in the extraction of plant materials ofer 
signifcant environmental advantages and health and safety benefts over 
traditional processes to produce high-quality natural fragrant oils, favours, 
and biological extracts. Advanced Phytonics Limited (Manchester, UK) has 
developed this patented technology termed the “Phytonics process” (Handa 
et al., 2008). The products mostly extracted by this process are fragrant 
components of essential oils and biological or phytopharmacological extracts 
which can be used directly without further physical or chemical treatment.
The properties of the new generation of fuorocarbon solvents have 
been applied to the extraction of plant materials. The core of the solvent is 
1,1,2,2-Tetrafuoroethane, better known as hydrofuorocarbon-134a (HFC￾134a). This product was developed as a replacement for chlorofuorocarbons. 
The boiling point of this solvent is -25° C. It is not fammable or toxic. Unlike 
chlorofuorocarbons, it does not deplete the ozone layer. It has a vapour 
pressure of 5.6 bar at ambient temperature. By using modifed solvents with 
HFC-134a, the process can be made highly selective in extracting a specifc 
class of phytoconstituents. Similarly, other modifed solvents can be used to 
extract a broader spectrum of components. The biological products made by 
this process have extremely low residual solvents. The residuals are invariably 
less than 20 parts per billion and are frequently below levels of detection. 
These solvents are neither acidic nor alkaline and, therefore, have only 
minimal potential reaction efects on the plant constituents. The processing 
plant is totally sealed so that the solvents are continually recycled and fully 
recovered at the end of each production cycle. The only utility needed to 
operate these systems is electricity and, even then, they do not consume much 
energy. There is no scope for the escape of the solvents. Even if some solvents 
do escape, they contain no chlorine and therefore pose no threat to the ozone 
layer. The waste biomass from these plants is dry and “eco-friendly” to handle 
(Handa et al., 2008).
16.5 Preparation and Analysis of Plant Extracts 
After selecting a suitable solvent, the below-given steps should be followed to 
extract chemical compounds: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phytochemical Methods 337 
1. Grind the plant material into a fne powder using a mixer or mortar and 
pestle. 
2. Place the powdered plant material in a container that should be sealed.
3. Add the solvent to the container until the plant material is completely 
submerged. 
4. Seal the container and allow it to sit for 24-48 hours, shaking it 
occasionally. 
5. After the extraction time has elapsed, open the container and flter the 
plant material from the solvent using a muslin cloth or flter paper.
6. Collect the fltered solvent in another container, the crude extract.
7. Further refne the extract by evaporating the solvent using a rotary 
evaporator or some other method. 
16.5.1 Qualitative Phytochemical Screening of Crude Extracts 
The crude extracts obtained were used for the qualitative analysis of primary 
(carbohydrates and proteins) and secondary metabolites (alkaloids, favonoids, 
phenols, saponins, steroids, tannins, and terpenoids). The preliminary 
phytochemical screening was performed by following the standard protocols 
formulated by Harborne (2013), Trease & Evans (1989, 1996) and Sofowara 
(1993). 
16.5.1.1 Test for Carbohydrates 
A. Molisch’s Test:
i. Take 2 ml of the plant extract in a clean test tube.
ii. Add 2-3 drops of Molisch reagent slowly.
iii. Now add concentrated sulphuric acid along the sides of the test tube.
iv. The acid forms a layer at the bottom. 
v. Note the junction of the two layers.
Result:Formation of the violet ring indicates the presence of carbohydrates.
B. Benedict’s Test:
i. Take the plant extract to be tested in a clean test tube.
ii. Add 5 ml of Benedict’s reagent to it.
iii. Boil the solution for about 2 minutes.
iv. Cool the solution and observe the solution. 
Result: Formation of a green, red or yellow precipitate indicates the 
presence of reducing sugars. 
16.5.1.2 Test for Proteins 
A. Biuret Test: 
i. Take a cleaned and dried test tube. 
ii. Add the plant extract into the test tubes. 
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	
 
 
338 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
iii. Add 2 ml of Sodium hydroxide and 5 to 6 drops of copper sulphate 
solution to it. 
iv. Shake the test tube gently to mix the ingredients thoroughly and allow 
the mixture to stand for 4-5 minutes.
Result: The appearance of bluish-violet colour indicates the presence of 
protein. 
B. Xanthoproteic Test:
i. Take a cleaned and dried test tube. 
ii. Add the plant extract into the test tubes.
iii. Add a few drops of concentrated Sulphuric acid and shake the test 
tube. 
iv. Heat the test tube gently on a bunsen burner. 
Result: The formation of a yellow precipitate indicates the presence of 
protein. 
16.5.1.3	 Test for Alkaloids (Dragendorf’s Test)
i. Take a cleaned, dried test tube and add 0.5 gm of plant extract.
ii. Later add 5ml of 1% HCl, boil the mixture and flter it.
iii. To the above fltrate add 2-3 drops of Dragendorf’s reagent.
Result: The formation of a reddish-brown precipitate indicates the 
presence of alkaloids. 
16.5.1.4 Test for Flavonoids (1% Aluminium Chloride (AlCl3) Test)
i. Take a cleaned, dried test tube and add a small quantity of plant extract.
ii. Add a few drops of 1% AlCl3 to the plant extract. 
Result: The appearance of yellow colour indicates the presence of 
favonoids. 
16.5.1.5 Test for Phenols (10% Ferric Chloride (FeCl3) Test)
i. Take a cleaned, dried test tube and add a small quantity of plant extract.
ii. Later add a few drops of 10% aqueous FeCl3 solution. 
Result: The appearance of blue or green colour indicates the presence of 
phenols. 
16.5.1.6	 Test for Saponins (Frothing Test)
i. Take 2 ml of the plant extract in a clean test tube.
ii. Add about 5 ml of distilled water and mix well. 
Result: The formation of persistent froth indicates the presence of 
saponins. 	 	 	
 
 
	 	 	 	
 
 
	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phytochemical Methods 339 
16.5.1.7	 Test for Steroids (Liebermann-Burchard Test)
i. Take 1 ml of the plant extract in a clean test tube and dissolve it in 1 ml 
of chloroform and acetic anhydride. 
ii. Add a few drops of concentrated H2SO4 from the sides of the test tube. 
Result: The appearance of a brownish-green ring at the interface indicates 
the presence of steroids. 
16.5.1.8	 Test for Tannins (Iodine Test)
i. Take 2 ml of the plant extract in a clean test tube.
ii. Add a few drops of Iodine solution. 
Result: The appearance of faint bluish colour indicates the presence of 
tannins. 
16.5.1.9	 Test for Terpenoids (Salkowski Test)
i. Take a few drops of the plant extract in a clean test tube and add 2 ml of 
chloroform. 
ii. Add concentrated H2SO4 to form a lower layer. 
Result: The appearance of reddish-brown colour at the interface denotes 
the presence of terpenoids. 
16.6 Case Studies 
16.6.1 Quantitative Analysis of Secondary Metabolites 
in Dendrobium aphyllum (Roxb.) C.E.C. Fischer 
(Rahamtulla, 2022) 
i. Estimation of alkaloids (Harborne, 2013)
About 5 g of the powdered plant sample is transferred to a 250 ml beaker, 
and 200 ml of 10% acetic acid in ethanol was added and covered, allowed 
to stand for 4 hours. Later the sample is fltered, and the fltrate is brought 
to ¼th of its original volume in a water bath. Further, a few drops of conc. 
NH4OH is added to the extract until the precipitation was complete. The 
precipitate formed in the solution is washed with dilute NH4OH and the 
residue is transferred to petri plates, dried and weight is recorded. The 
weight is expressed in terms of gram % of alkaloids on a dry weight 
basis. 
ii. Determination of total phenols (Kaur and Kapoor, 2002)
The total phenolic content of plant extracts is measured by the Folin￾Ciocalteau reagent method with minor modifcations (Kaur and Kapoor, 
2002). About 100 µL of plant extract (1mg/mL) is added to 900 µL of 
methanol and 1 mL of Folin-Ciocalteau reagent. Later 1 mL of 20%  
 
340 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
(w/v) of Na2CO3 solution is added to the above mixture. The mixture 
is incubated at room temperature for 30 min. in dark. Afterward, the 
absorbance is measured at 765 nm. The total phenolic content is expressed 
in terms of gallic acid equivalent (µg/mg of extract).
iii. Determination of total favonoids (Liu et al., 2007)
The total favonoid content of plant extracts is assessed by the Aluminium 
chloride method with slight modifcation (Liu et al., 2007). About 500 
µL of plant extract (1mg/mL) is added to 0.5 mL of methanol and 1 mL
of 5% (w/v) sodium nitrite solution. Subsequently, about 1 mL of 10% 
(w/v) Aluminium chloride solution was added to the above mixture and 
shaken well. Later 100 µL of 1 M NaOH solution is added to the above 
mixture, and its absorbance is measured at 510 nm. The total favonoid 
content is expressed in terms of (µg/mg of extract) quercetin equivalent.
Results: The total alkaloid content of diferent plant parts of D. aphyllum 
is determined quantitatively (Table 16.2). Methanol leaf extract showed the 
highest alkaloid content (1.232 mg/gm dry weight), followed by root and stem 
extracts. Whereas phenolic content is high in methanol root extract (327.10 
µg/mg of gallic acid equivalent) followed by leaf and stem extracts. In the 
case of favonoid content is high in the methanol root extract (65.06 µg/mg of 
quercetin equivalent (QE)), followed by methanol leaf and stem.
Table 16.2. Quantitative estimation of alkaloids, total phenols and total favonoids 
in ethyl acetate and methanol extracts of diferent parts of D. aphyllum 
Solvents used Plant parts 
Used 
Leaf 
Total alkaloid 
content 
(mg/g) dry 
weight 
0.890
Total phenolic 
content 
(µg/mg of 
gallic acid 
equivalent) 
133.43
Total favonoid
content 
(µg/mg of 
quercetin 
equivalent) 
4.67
Ethyl acetate Stem 
Root 
0.342
0.702
244.54
180.17
16.71
11.14
Leaf 1.232 293.87 44.56
Methanol Stem 0.942 286.60 14.92
Root 1.004 327.10 65.06
Apart from the above methods, various separation techniques such 
as Column Chromatography, Gas Chromatography, and HPLC have been 
employed for the separation of various compounds (see chapter 15). Further, 
spectral data obtained from Ultraviolet spectroscopy, Infrared absorption 
spectroscopy, and Mass spectroscopy are useful for the identifcation of these 
chemical compounds (see chapter 7).17 
Cytological and Vital 
Staining Techniques 
The smear or squash technique is the most suitable for cytological studies. 
This technique has a great advantage over the sectioning method as the 
entire process is rapid and more suitable for critical observations. In properly 
prepared smears and squashes, one can make studies on separated single cells; 
besides this, cells that are released undergo much enlargement in volume, 
afording wider space for the chromosomes to become scattered. The only 
disadvantage of this method, when specially applied to somatic chromosomes, 
is that the individual cells being released from one another shift from their 
original site and the original topography is altered. 
17.1 Cytological Techniques 
The terms ‘smears’ and ‘squashes’ are often loosely used as one process but 
strictly speaking, these are two diferent processes (Sharma and Sharma, 
1972). In smears, the cells are directly spread on the slide without fxation 
or without pre-treatment to secure cell separation. Pollen mother cells from 
anthers are the most convenient for making smears. In squashes, on the other 
hand, special treatments are needed to dissolve the middle lamellae, so that 
cells are freed from the compact mass of tissue. This treatment may be carried 
out after fxation or even after staining. After passing through the required 
steps, softened bulk material or tissue is neatly squashed on the slide by 
applying pressure or tapping with a needle over the cover slip. The mitotic 
behaviour of chromosomes can be studied by squashing the root tips. 
17.1.1 Smears 
Smear method is a very quick and simple method for studying mitosis and 
meiosis. In this method, loosened cells are uniformly spread on the chemically 
cleaned slide without causing any injury to them. No adhesive is required for 
afxing the cells. The cells may be killed and fxed, dehydrated and stained 
properly and fnally made permanent. 
The smear method is limited to those cells which are not frmly united 
to one another by middle lamellae. Microsporocytes of higher plants are  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
342 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
of this sort, and they can be easily separated with this method. However, 
microsporocytes of some plants (e.g., Acacia and some orchids, in these 
pollinia are present) and testis cells of many animals cannot be satisfactorily 
smeared but some other methods should be employed for these specimens. 
Before smear preparation, microslides are chemically cleaned in the 
following solution:
Potassium dichromate 20 g
Conc. sulphuric acid 100 ml
Distilled water 100 ml
Dissolve potassium dichromate in distilled water and add sulphuric acid 
slowly. Cool the mixture as heat is produced during the process. Clean the 
slides in this mixture and later wash thoroughly in running tap water. Immerse 
the slides for sometime in strong alcohol containing some ammonia, then 
running tap water and dry them with muslin cloth.
17.1.1.1 Preparation of Smears from Anthers (Microsporangium) 
In normal course, anthers are taken out from the fower bud at least 15 days 
before the shedding of pollen grains. The anthers of Tradescantia may be 
fxed during mid-day to show good meiosis. Two ways of preparing smears 
are given below (Johansen, 1940): 
(i) Take out the anther from the fower bud and place it at one end of a 
chemically cleaned microslide and cut it transversely into small pieces 
with the help of a razor blade. Put a scalpel fat over the anther and 
quickly draw the scalpel lengthwise, applying the pressure gently to get 
a thin flm of microsporocytes.
(ii) Another method is to place pieces of anther at the centre of the slide. 
Hold another slide crosswise over the frst, exert gentle pressure to crush 
the anther pieces and spread the microsporocytes by drawing it back and 
forth. 
Smears prepared by the above methods are now killed and fxed in suitable 
fxative. Besides Radolph’s modifed Navashin’s fuid, the following fuid is 
also suitable for chromosome studies: 
10% aqueous chromic acid 1 ml
2% osmic acid in 2% chromic acid 7.5 ml
10% aqueous acetic acid 10 ml
Distilled water 41.5 ml
To the above mixture add 1% saponin.
17.1.1.2 Making Permanent Mounts 
i. Take a petri dish (about 16 cm in diameter), place two slender glass rods  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 343 
(cut into proper length) in the petri dish parallel to each other and pour 
the killing solution into the dish, just sufcient to immerse the rods.
ii. Invert and place the slide over the glass rod in such a way that the 
smeared surface should come in contact with the killing fuid. Keep it for 
10 minutes or more by covering another petridish.
iii. Later take out the slide and wash in slow running water for 15 mins.
iv. Immerse the smear in freshly prepared 1% aqueous solution of methyl 
violet 2B (do not use boiled solution) or any other suitable stain for 15 
mins. 
v. Rinse the slide in water for 30 minutes.
vi. Diferentiate in 70 and 95% alcohol (containing 0.5% picric acid) for 10 
secs in each grade. 
vii. Dip the slide in 95% alcohol containing three drops of ammonia for 15 
secs. 
viii. Completely dehydrate in absolute alcohol for 10 seconds.
ix. Completely diferentiate in clove oil for 10-15 seconds keeping the slide 
moving back and forth. 
x. Wash in xylene containing few drops of absolute alcohol.
xi. Transfer to pure xylene for 2 hrs and mount in Canada balsam.
Belling’s Iron-acetocarmine method 
Johansen (1940) has modifed one of the Belling’s formulae for the preparation 
of iron-acetocarmine:
Carmine dye 1 g 
Glacial acetic acid 90 ml
Aqueous ferric acetate few drops
Distilled water 110 ml
Add 110 ml distilled water to 90 ml glacial acetic acid and heat the 
solution upto boiling point. Now stop boiling and add 1 g carmine dye, cool 
to ice temperature and decant. Add a few drops of aqueous ferric acetate to 
the mixture till the colour appears wine-red (take care not to add more ferric 
acetate which causes precipitation). 
There are several ways of using iron-acetocarmine for diferent materials. 
Some of the methods are described below (refer to Johansen, 1940): 
Method I 
i. Place the fxed anther in a drop of acetocarmine on a clean slide.
ii. Remove excess fuid with blotting paper.
iii. Put fresh drop of stain over the material and squeeze out the 
microsporocytes by applying slight pressure; remove anther walls and 
other debris. 
iv. Put the cover slip and remove excess stain with blotting paper. 
v. Seal the coverslip with molten wax. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
344 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
vi. Leave the preparation for few days to facilitate the penetration of stain 
into microsporocytes. 
Method II 
i. Follow above steps (i) to (iii) as in section 10.1.1. Carnoy’s solution may 
be used as fxative here (see section 3.1.2.2.D for Carnoy’s preparation). 
ii. Put a drop of acetocarmine on the smear and place a cover slip on it. 
iii. Seal the cover slip with molten wax.
Method III 
i. Keep anthers in the vial containing 1:3 glacial acetic acid and absolute 
alcohol mixture for 12 hrs or some weeks to improve the staining ability 
of chromosomes. 
ii. Transfer the anther to clean slide and put a drop of acetocarmine over it. 
iii. Squeeze out the microsporocytes by applying pressure gently, remove 
anther wall and other debris.
iv. Gently heat the slide over the fame for a second so that the spread cells 
fatten. Do not allow to boil. 
v. Transfer the slide to a jar containing equal parts of acetic acid and 
absolute alcohol for 5 mins.
vi. Later pass through the following mixtures keeping for a minute in each:
(a) 1:3 acetic acid and absolute alcohol
(b) 1:9 acetic acid and absolute alcohol
(c) 1:1 absolute alcohol and xylene
vii. Mount with thin balsam (diluted with xylene).
17.1.1.2 Preparation of Smears from Root Tips 
The root tips are obtained from germinated seeds. Seeds are allowed to 
germinate in wet blotting paper discs or sand. The sand is thoroughly washed 
to make it free from any debris and seeds are sown in this sand. For teaching 
purpose, the seeds of Medicago falcata (ver. Methi) are suitable because they 
germinate soon, and their chromosomes are bigger in size. The young root tips 
are cut during morning around 7-9 a.m. During this time, the cells are actively 
dividing mitotically. 
The onion root tips are also suitable for teaching purpose. Root tips of 
onion (Allium cepa) are obtained by placing a bulb at the mouth of a glass jar 
full of water, so that the basal part of the onion bulb is always in contact with 
water. It is placed in dark to produce root tips for 3-4 days. Root tips are cut 
during morning hours. 
Several cytological fxatives are being used but Radolph’s modifed 
Navashin’s fuid (CRAF) has been found to be better for fxing root tips (for 
CRAF see section 3.1.2.2C).
Some of the methods for both temporary and permanent preparation of 
smears are described below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 345 
Method I (temporary preparation)
i. Take out root-tip, thoroughly wash to remove fxative and cut into small 
pieces, about 0.5 mm long.
ii. Place the root tip with two drops of acetocarmine on microslide and tease 
it lengthwise with the help of needles.
iii. Heat the slide over the fame for a second and repeat the process 4-6 
times to allow the cells to spread and fatten. Take care that it should not 
be boiled. 
iv. Put a cover slip and wrap around the slide covering the coverslip with 
blotting paper. Now apply pressure gently with fnger over the blotting 
paper to separate the cells. Take care to see that neither the cover slip is 
broken nor does it move sideways.
v. Remove the blotting paper and seal the cover slip with nail polish or 
.parafn wax.
Method II (Warmke’s 1935 temporary preparation method)
i. Fix the root tips in 1:3 acetic acid and absolute alcohol for 12 hrs to 
several weeks to improve the stainability of chromosomes.
ii. Take out the root tip from the fxative and place it in a mixture containing 
equal parts of 95% alcohol and concentrated HCl for 5-10 mins. This 
serves to dissolve pectin substances of middle lamellae. 
iii. Transfer the root tip to Carnoy’s fuid (with chloroform) for 5 mins or 
more (the tissues made soft by acid treatment, will become hard again).
iv. Put the root tip with a drop of acetocarmine on a clean slide and press it 
gently with the help of scalpel to separate the cells.
v. Place the cover slip over the material.
vi. Heat the slide over the fame, each time not more than a second.
vii. Seal the edge of cover slip with nail polish or parafn wax.
Method III (see also McClintock’s permanent preparation method, Johansen, 
1940)
Follow steps (i)-(vi) of above Warmke’s method for preparation of smear:
i. Keeps the slide in a dish containing 10% aqueous acetic acid.
ii. Remove the cover slip carefully with the help of forceps when it gets 
slightly raised after dipping in acetic acid. 
iii. Transfer the slide and cover slip carefully to the jar containing equal 
parts of acetic acid and absolute alcohol for 5 mins.
iv. Pass through the following mixtures keeping for a minute in each: 
(a) 1:3 acetic acid and absolute alcohol
(b) 1:9 acetic acid and nine parts absolute alcohol
(c) 1:1 absolute alcohol and xylene
v. Mount it with thin balsam (dilute with xylene) covering with same cover 
slip over the smear.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
346 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Method IV (Hillary’s permanent preparation method, Johansen, 1940)
Preparation of Leuco-basic fuchsin 
Basic fuchsin 1 g 
Boiling distilled water 200 ml
N/I HCl 30 ml
Potassium metabisulphite 3 g
+ Norit or activated charcoal 0.5 g
Dissolve 1 g basic fuchsin in 200 ml boiling distilled water. Shake well and 
cool it at 50°C. Then flter, add 30 ml N/I HCl, 3 g potassium metabisulphite, 
shake well and leave for 24 hrs in dark and fnally add 0.5 activated charcoal 
and shake well for a minute. Filter quickly through flter paper and keep the 
colourless stain in dark for future use. 
Procedure 
i. Fixed root tips should be washed thoroughly in water.
ii. Stain with leuco-basic fuchsine for an hour or more.
iii. Dehydrate through dioxan giving three changes.
iv. Take the root tip on a clean slide and put a drop of balsam (diluted with 
dioxan).
v. Tease the root tip lengthwise with the help of needle.
vi. Add more balsam if necessary, put a cover slip and gently press it with 
the fnger to allow the cells to spread. 
This method may also be used for preparing anther smears. 
17.1.1.3 Smears and squash preparations for meiosis and mitosis 
studies in plants 
Rapidity of fxation and handling of the material is the principle advantage of 
smear and squash preparation over hand/microtome sections. The smears will 
not only save time but increase the efciency of the worker to examine single 
layer of cells in intact condition. 
Material: The best material for laboratory studies of smear and squash 
preparation is Allium cepa and A. Sativus as mentioned earlier. However, for 
meiotic studies Phlox drummondii and Lathyrus species are also preferable. 
Squash Preparation: This method is useful to study the chromosomes 
and proved to be simple and best available method. Squash method was frst 
used by Schneider and adapted for chromosome work by Belling in 1921. 
A pre-treatment by certain chemicals like para-dichlorobenzene, alpha￾bromonaphthalene, etc., is given to the material to get good preparations with 
all separated chromosomes. 
Fixation: Fixation of the material to be studied is an important stage 
because, it helps in reducing the staining of the cytoplasm and thus giving  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 347 
a clear contrast of chromosomes. Even though diferent workers adopted 
diferent fxatives, 1:3 Acetic acid: Alcohol has been giving interesting results.
Storage of the material: The material may be stored in 70% alcohol at 
0-40 upto 60 days. But later, the stain will sufer. 
Staining: 1% acetocarmine is generally used for studying meiosis in 
PMCs while Fuelgen’s stain is suitable for studying the mitotic chromosomes. 
The method for Fuelgen’s staining is as follows:
i. Cut the tip of actively growing roots.
ii. Pre-treat them with 0.025% colchicine for 3 hours.
iii. Wash and dry them.
iv. Then transfer the roots to 1:3 acetic-alcohol.
v. After 24 hrs of fxation wash the root tips and hydrolyse them with 1N 
HCl at 600 for 8-10 min.
vi. Again, wash them dry and transfer the root tips to Basic Fuschin 
(Fuelgen’s stain) and keep them for 45 mins in it, in dark.
vii. Wash them and put in distilled water.
viii. Now the root tips (only the meristematic zone) are stained and ready for 
squash preparation. 
Spreading: The material is to be taken over a slide (i.e., anther for meiosis 
and root tip in case of mitosis). Crush the material with the help of a brass rod 
in a drop of acetocarmine stain and remove the debris with the help of forceps 
and put a cover slip over it. Gentle heating over a spirit lamp fattens the 
cells, sticks them to the slide and coverslip, and spread the chromosomes. The 
degree of spreading is proportional to the pressure of the coverslip partly to the 
amount of stain fxative used and also the pressure applied on the coverslip. 
Unless all the debris is removed, the possibility of well spread chromosomes 
becomes difcult. Gentle fnger-tip pressure on the cover slip under the flter 
paper folds, is useful for further improvement of the preparation. It is always 
advisable to use appropriate amount of stain. 
Mordanting: A trace of ferric chloride may be added to the fxative or 
carmine stain is suggested to get clear preparation. The mordant helps in 
softening and makes the material plastic thereby facilitates easy fattening. 
Storage of slides: In many cases duration of 4 days improves the quality 
of preparations. The edges of the coverslips should be sealed with rubber 
solutions or by bee-wax. They should be kept in refrigerator at 40o
C. 
Permanent method: Diferent researchers have provided several strategies 
for making the slide permanent, however no single type/method for making 
permanent slides is best for all materials. However, in general practice the 
following method is used:
i. Remove the rubber solution put over the edge of the cover slip.
ii. Invert the slide in a dish of 1:3 acetic acid-alcohol.
iii. Now take the slide and pass it through series of mixture of acetic acid:  
 
 
 
348 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
alcohol in the ratio of 1:3, 1:6, 1:9 and twice through absolute alcohol in 
series. 
iv. Then let the alcohol evaporate itself. 
v. Pass the slide over a spirit lamp to ensure equal spreading of mounting 
medium. 
vi. Similarly, pass the cover slip and fnally mount in euparol taken on a 
slide. 
vii. The slide must be kept in oven at 600o
C for 10-12 days.
17.1.2 Squashes 
In squash preparation, the frst step is the softening of the tissue. The diferent 
schedules can be divided into two categories: these are: (a) softening performed 
prior to staining, and (b) softening, clearing and staining performed in the 
same fuid. 
In the frst category, various chemical agents have been employed by 
diferent authors including the use of enzymes.
Chemical agents: The widely used chemical agent for softening the tissue 
is diluted hydrochloric acid. In Feulgen staining, this step is essential for 
securing Schif s reaction for aldehydes. In addition to liberating aldehydes 
of sugar, normal hydrochloric acid at 58°C serves two important purposes, 
namely dissolution of middle lamella, thus helping in cell separation and 
clearing of the cytoplasm. These two properties of hydrochloric acid have 
been employed in other schedules also after fxation. If dilute hydrochloric 
acid (10%) is used, for best results, the treatment should be carried out in 
slightly warm temperature such as 58-60°C for 4-5 mins until softening, later 
acid is washed of thoroughly either in 45% acetic acid solution or tap water 
before staining. 
Softening and maceration of the tissue can also be achieved during 
fxation by using the mixture consisting of equal parts of 95% alcohol and 
concentrated hydrochloric acid as fxative. No warming is needed and within 
5 mins of treatment the tissue becomes fxed and softened. If necessary, 
hardening of tissue may be carried out by keeping it in Carnoy’s fuid for 10 
mins. For hard materials, alcohol and hydrochloric acid mixed in the 3:1 ratio 
is more efective. 
Though there are some disadvantages, trichloroacetic acid can also be 
employed for cytoplasm clearing and softening of the tissues (for detail 
discussion refer to Sharma and Sharma, 1972).
Chromic acid is also employed for maceration of tissues, but it is time 
consuming and may take at least 24 hrs to soften the tissue. Since a strong 
concentration of chromic acid may injure chromosome parts, prolonged 
treatment with a diluted chromic acid (1%) is generally preferred (Sharma and 
Sharma, 1972). This procedure is generally not recommended for the study of 
chromosomal morphology.  
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 349 
In addition to acids, other reagents such as hydrogen peroxide and sodium 
hydroxide are also employed for softening of the tissues. Hydrogen peroxide 
is used with a trace of sodium or lithium carbonate added and the middle 
lamella is initially attacked. Satisfactory dissolution of the middle lamella has 
been obtained by using the mixture consisting of equal proportion of saturated 
aqueous ammonium oxalate solution and hydrogen peroxide. Ford (cited in 
Darlington and La Cour (1960) has recommended it for meristematic tissue 
fxed in osmic acid. However, for comparatively stif materials, this reagent 
is not suitable for softening. Alkali treatment, prior to squashing, was used by 
Tandler (cited in Sharma and Sharma, 1972) in plants. 
Enzyme treatments: The most reliable method for softening and clearing 
without causing injury to cellular parts is enzyme treatment (see also chapter 
14 for isolation of protoplast). The use of pectinase for dissolution of middle 
lamella has been applied by McKay and Clarke (cited in Sharma and Shanna, 
1972). Later 5% pectinase (macerozyme) solution in 1% aqueous peptone 
has been employed for this purpose. But this procedure is time consuming 
and takes 2-5 hrs of treatment. Sharma and Sharma (1972) noted that a 2% 
aqueous solution of pectinase, if applied for half an hour at 37°C, results in 
considerable softening of plant materials. 
In addition to the above-mentioned methods, there are a number of 
schedules in which softening is carried out together with staining. In some 
cases, the tissue is heated after fxation, over a fame for a few seconds in a 
mixture of the acidic dyes and hydrochloric acid. The commonly used acetic 
solutions of dyes are acetic-orcein, acetic-lacmoid and acetic-carmine (go 
through the next part of the chapter).
17.1.2.1 Other protocols 
A. Enzyme digestion method for root-tip cytology (Lattier et al., 2017)
In this enzyme digestion method, the root tips of gymnosperms and 
angiosperms were taken and, these were prefxed, postfxed and fnally 
enzyme digestion had carried out (Lattier et al., 2017). This technique 
reduces the handling of the roots allowing for long-duration enzyme 
digestion. 
Plant material 
Root tips are collected from various plants grown in glasshouse; these plants 
are Ribes sanguineum Purch, Quercus robur L., Thuja occidentalis L., 
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Siebold & Zucc., Acer tartaricum subsp. ginnala 
(Maxim.) Wesm. (collected feld location) and Hibiscus syriacus. 
Reagents 
8-Hydroxy quinoline 2Mm
Cycloheximide 0.24 Mm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
350 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Carboy’s fuid (6 parts 95% alcohol: 3 parts chloroform: 1 part glacial acetic 
acid; by volume 
Ethanol 70% (storage solution)
Enzyme mixture (0.5% cellolase from Trichoderma reesei + 0.5% cytohlicase 
from Helix pomata + 0.5%pectolyase from Aspergillus japonicas) in a sodium 
citrate bufer at pH 4.5.
Procedure 
i. Root-tips are collected in the micro-centrifuge tubes and suspended in a 
solution of 2mM 8-hydroxyquinoline and 0.24 mAQWM cyclohexamide. 
The root tips are kept in the dark at room temperature for 2-5h before a 
cold period in a refrigerator at 4°C for 2.5 h.
ii. After 5h in prefxative reagent, then the material is prefxed in Carnoy’s 
fuid overnight at room temperature. Later, the material is transferred to 
storage solution of 70% etanol and stored in refrigerator at 4°C.
iii. Then root squash is prepared in following way: The roots are transferred 
to a small beaker containing sterilised water for 5 minutes, swirling 
occasionally. This step is repeated twice for a triple rinse of each root 
a total of 15 minutes. Then, root is taken on the clean slide and root 
tips excised under the dissection microscope. The remaining material 
is discarded and excess water is removed with a single-ply, low-lint 
tissue (VWR International, Rednor, PA) leaving only a small droplet 
encompassing the root tip to maintain the hydration. 
iv. A ring of ultraviolet region is placed around the root tip and overlapping 
a waxed paper pull tab. A region is set in an ultraviolet crosslinker, and 
enzyme digestion solution is added to well to encompass the root tip. 
Enzyme digestion is carried out in an oven at 37°C with the slide in a 
petridish atop a small weighing dish and moist flter paper.
v. After the digestion, a pull tab is used to remove the enzyme digestion 
well, and the root tips are rinsed with a droplet of water before being 
wicked dry.
vi. A single drop of modifed carbol fuchsin stain (Kao, 1975) is added, and 
a cover-glass is lowered on the root-tip with half of a double-sided razor 
blade. 
vii. The slide is covered with a bibulous paper, and the root is squashed 
applying the gentle pressure from a pencil eraser. 
viii. The prepared microslide may be stored in the Petri-dish and observed 
under microscope. 
Results: Ploidy levels including diploids, triploids, and tetraploids 
with chromosome number ranging from 2n = 16 to 2n = 80 are observed. 
R. Sanguineum is confrmed as diploid, 2n = 16 whereas Q. robur is as a 
diploid, 2n = 24. Then T. occidentalis is confrmed as diploid, 2n = 22 while 
C. japonicum as diploid with 38 chromosomes. A. Tartaricum subspecies 
granula is confrmed as triploid (3x = 39) resulting from an interploid cross in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 351 
the isolated block (wild location), and H, syriacus is confrmed as tetraploid 
(4xx = 80). The range of haploid 2c genome sizes is spanned from 15.4 to 
24.71.
This protocol is useful for plant biologist working with taxa that exhibit a 
wide range of genome size and ploidy levels. 
B. Oxyquinoline-Acetic-Orcein Squash Method for Root-tips 
(Tjio and Levan, 1950; Radford et al., 1974)
Preparation of Reagents 
i. Stock solution of 8-hydroxyquinoline: Dissolve 0.3 g 8-hydroxyquinoline 
in one litre of distilled water. Store in refrigerator and use for several 
weeks.
ii. Aceto-orcein: Dissolve 2.2 g of orcein in 100 ml glacial acetic acid. 
Gently boil the glacial acetic acid to which add slowly the orcein; later 
cool it and flter. For use, dilute the stain upto 45% strength acetic acid 
by adding distilled water.
iii. HCl-orcein: HCl and aceto-orcein stain in 1:9 proportion is prepared. 
Procedure 
i. Root-tips are collected from germinating seeds and put in vials containing 
the aqueous oxyquinoline solution.
ii. Place the vials in a cool room for 4 hrs. Specimens like Pinus with large, 
long chromosomes require 24-30 hrs pre-treatment.
iii. Later place the root-tips in watch glass to which add few drops of HCl￾orcein (1:9) solution. Heat gently over the spirit lamp. The sample is to 
be heated 3 or 4 successive times at intervals of a minute. Take care as 
heat hastens the macerating efect of the HCl. Leave the specimen in this 
solution for 20-30 mins.
iv. Keep the root-tips in aceto-orcein stain (45% solution) for 20-30 mins; 
for small chromosomes, much longer period (12-16 hrs) of staining is 
needed. 
v. Stained root-tips are taken on the clean slide and broken into small 
pieces (not more than 1-2 mm in length) with the help of scalpel. Place 
the small pieces of tissue on another clean slide and cover it with glass 
immediately. Now gently tap the material with blunt instrument (handle 
of forceps) to tease and spread the material uniformly. Later invert the 
slide on blotting paper. Apply pressure slightly over the material with 
the ball of the thumb. The pressure applying here varies with the type of 
the material. The important point to be noted is that orcein preparation 
should not be heated. 
vi. Slides are kept in a refrigerator overnight without sealing. Later, these 
may be sealed with parafn or with fnger nail polish. They may be made 
permanent by the McClintock method or Conger dry ice method (Conger 
and Fairchild, 1953). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
352 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
C. Alcoholic Hydrochloric Acid-Carmine (Snow’s stain) for 
chromosomes in squash Preparations (Snow, 1963; Radford et al., 
1974) 
Staining Solution 
Carmine 4 g
Conc. HCl 1 ml
Distilled water 15 ml
85% ethanol 95 ml
Add carmine and conc. HCl to distilled water. Mix well and boil gently 
for 10 mins while stirring. Cool the solution to which add 85% ethanol and 
flter. Store in brown bottles. 
Procedure 
i. Fix the material (root tips or buds) in 3:1 ethyl alcohol and glacial acetic 
acid or in 3:1:1 ethyl alcohol, chloroform and glacial acetic acid.
ii. Wash the fxative by giving several changes in 70% ethanol, one hour in 
each change. 
iii. Leave the materials in stain for 24 hrs or more. To hasten the staining 
process, place capped vials in oven at 50-60°C for 24-48 hrs. 
iv. Rinse the materials with water or 70% alcohol and prepare squashes 
substituting 45% acetic acid in place of aceto-carmine.
v. Dissection of buds and maceration of the tissue, if needed, should be 
performed in 45% acetic acid.
vi. For permanent slides, mount in equal pans of Hoyer’s mounting medium 
(30 g of gum arabic be soaked in 50 cc of distilled water about 24 hrs, 
add 200 cc chloral hydrate and let the solution stand until the whole 
material dissolves and fnally add glycerine), and 40% acetic acid and 
squash. 
D. Feulgen Technique 
The Feulgen stain, or leuco-basic fuchsin stains DNA specifcally 
and is used for cytophotometric determination of DNA in nuclei or 
chromosomes. The basic principle involved in this technique is the 
liberation of the aldehyde groups of DNA by hydrolysis, a chemical 
reaction binding the free aldehyde groups to the leuco-basic fuchsin, 
followed by the removal of unbound stain from the chromosomes. The 
following steps are involved in the Feulgen squash technique performed 
in somatic tissues in Nicotiana. 
Procedure 
i. Fix the tissue in Carnoy’s fuid (six parts 95% alcohol, three parts 
chloroform, one part glacial acetic acid) or 3:1 absolute alcohol and 
glacial acetic acid for 2-24 hrs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 353 
ii. Later transfer the tissue in 70% ethanol and squash or store in 
refrigerator. 
iii. Hydrolyse the tissue in 10% conc. HCl for 10 mins at 60°C.
iv. Later rinse in several changes of distilled water.
v. Now the tissue is stained in leuco-basic fuchsin for 10-15 mins.
vi. Later unbound stain is removed by rinsing three times with SO2 water 
followed by distilled water.
vii. Transfer to 40% acetic acid.
viii. Squash in 45% acetic acid over the slide.
ix. Cover with cover glass.
E. Staining with Lacto-Propiono-Dimethylsulfoxide Carmine (Bonga 
and Venkateswaran, 1976) 
It is observed that a combination of dimethylsulfoxide and carmine 
stains the tissues intensely when compared to aceto-carmine (Bonga and 
Venkateswaran, 1976). But it also causes some swelling of chromosomes. 
This undesired swelling can be counteracted by adding lactic acid and 
propionic acid to the DMSO-carmine.
The staining procedure is as follows:
(i) Prepare the Lacto-propiono-dimethylsulfoxide carmine (LPDC) stain 
solution:
Carmine (alum lake) 2 g
Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) 150 ml
The above two are added and mixture is shaken for 30 mins at room 
temperature. Excess carmine is removed by fltration. Now this fltrate is 
known as DMSO-carmine. To the DMSO carmine add the following reagents: 
Lactic acid 25 ml
Propionic acid 25 ml
The above mixture is now referred to as LPDC and stored at room 
temperature. 
(ii) Root tips and callus tissue are fxed in 3:1 alcohol-acetic acid 
(iii) Later tissues are stained in 1 ml of LPDC in tightly stoppered screw cap 
vials in an oven at 90°C for 1 hr and then squashed under a coverglass in 
a drop of DMSO on a microslide. 
The LPDC staining is more superior than aceto-carmine staining. 
Cell separation is much better in squashes of tissue stained in LPDC than 
the squashes of tissue stained in aceto-carmine. Chromosomes, nuclei and 
nucleoli are stained more intensely and vacuoles and ctyoplasmic strands are 
clearly visible with LPDC staining. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
354 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
F. Use of Cellophane for Permanent Preparation of Squashes (Breugel, 
1980)
Root tips are fxed in ethyl alcohol: acetic acid (3:1) for 1 hr. Later 
macerate them in 1N HCl for 15 mins at 60°C. Rinse in water briefy and 
stain by Feulgen method (see Protocol C).
Later Procedure 
i. Place small pieces of root tips in a drop of 45% acetic acid on microslide.
ii. Presoak the 1 cm square of cellophane sheet, type 300 P (uncoated), 
density 1.4 available as cellophane 300 pT 50/50 (uncoated) in 45% 
aqueous acetic acid for few mins.
iii. Spread cellophane over tissue and cover with blotting paper. 
iv. Apply the thumb pressure gently to spread the cells; later rinse in 96% 
ethyl alcohol for 1 or 2 mins. 
v. Lift the cellophane sheet and rinse in fresh 100% ethanol. The squashed 
tissue sticks to the cellophane sheet. 
vi. Mount the wet sheet upside down in a drop of Euparal and put the 
coverslip. 
vii. Citric acid pre-treatment may be given for animal tissues.
G. A Quick Squash Method for Permanent Cytological Preparation 
(Lavania, 1981)
i. Place a drop of Haupt’s adhesive and rub it gently with fnger tip on the 
micro slide or coverslip. 
ii. Wash the other side of the slide with water for a few seconds.
iii. By placing the coverglass squash the material gently, either fresh or 
after maceration, in a drop of 45% acetic acid.
iv. Invert the squashed slide over a glass rod in a petri dish containing 
ethanol and apply gentle pressure to detach the coverslips. The 
squashed material remains stuck to the slide. Separation in ethanol will 
dehydrate the cells and will also harden them for better adhesion.
v. Air dry the preparation after a fresh rinse in ethanol and mount in 
Euparal, DPX or any other suitable mounting medium.
H. Technique for Preparation of Synoptonemal Complexes (SCs) from 
solanaceous plants (Stack, 1982)
Lycopersicon esculentum (2n = 24) and Solanum tuberosum were used 
by Stack (1982).
Stains 
a) Dissolve 1 g phosphotungstic acid (PTA) in 25 ml of water; flter the 
solution and mix with 75 ml of 95% ethanol.
b) Prepare 50% (w/w) silver nitrate solution just before use. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 355 
Medium 
0.1 ml liquid medium contains 0.8 M sorbitol (Sigma), 1% polyvinyl 
pyrrolidone (PVP, Ave. MW 10,000 Sigma), 0.6 mM KH2PO4, 1.0 mM CaCl2, 
1.6 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM 1,4 Piperazine diethanesulfonic acid (PIPES) (acid, 
Sigma), and 0.3% potassium dextran sulphate (Ave. MW 8000, Calbiochem), 
pH adjusted to 5.0 with 0.1 M KOH.
Procedure 
i. Excise and place the anthers containing primary microsporocytes 
showing leptotene through pachytene stages in cavity microslides (1.5 × 
1.5 mm depressions).
ii. Put 0.1 ml of above medium in the depression. Gently squeeze the anther 
contents and remove anther walls. Now add 1 mg β-glucuronidase from 
Helix pamata (No. G0751, Sigma). Β-glucuronidase should be desalted 
on a G25 sephadex column and lycophilised. Briefy stir the digestion 
medium to dissolve the enzyme. 
iii. Transfer the slide to a petri dish containing wet paper, towel and cover 
while digestion proceeds at room temperature for 20-40 minutes. 
iv. After incubation, the cell suspension is drawn into a micropipette with 
a tip approximately 0.2 mm in outside diameter. Cell masses are broken 
into individual cells in this process. 
v. Place approximately 5µl of cell suspension on microslide which is 
previously coated with Falcon plastic (to obtain 1% plastic solution 1 g 
of plastic from a Falcon plastic petridish should be dissolved in 100 ml of 
chloroform). New slides are wiped with a paper towel, dipped in plastic 
solution and dried in a vertical position. 
vi. Gently cover the cell suspension with an 18 × 18 mm cover-glass that is 
siliconised with ‘Prosil-28’ (Clay Adams) to make it hydrophobic. Now 
gently place the 16 g weight on the cover-glass before placing the 20 × 
30 mm piece of thin, absorbent tissue (Kimwipe Kimberly Clark) against 
the left edge of the cover-glass. A capillary attraction is established by 
placing a drop of water on the edge of the paper immediately adjacent to 
the cover-glass. After 15-30 secs when as much of the solute as possible 
has been drawn from beneath the cover-glass, 2.5 µl of distilled water 
is placed on the right edge of the cover-glass which is pulled under the 
cover-glass, displacing most of the solution while cells remained trapped.
vii. Now observe the slide under phase contrast microscope to determine 
whether there are numerous burst cells and spreads of synaptic complexes 
(SCs) on the slide.
viii. Remove the cover-glass by the dry ice method. The hydrophobic cover￾glass tends to separate and leave the cells on the hydrophilic plastic 
surface.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
356 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Fixation 
ix. Air-dry the slides briefy and fx in a freshly prepared 4% formaldehyde 
bufered with borate bufer (pH 8.2) for 10 mins (solution should be ice 
cold). 
x. Rinse the slides in 4% photofo 200 bufered with borate bufer (pH 8.2) 
for 10-15 seconds and air-dry briefy. 
Staining and Light microscopy 
xi. Dip the slides in PTA solution for 10 mins. Rinse briefy in 95% ethanol 
and air dry. 
xii. Perform the silver staining by following either the ammoniacal silver 
(Ag-As) technique of Goodpasture and Bloom (1975) or the silver nitrate 
incubation (Ag-I) technique of Bloom and Goodpasture (1976). 
xiii. The 50% (w/w) silver nitrate solution should be prepared immediately 
before use. 
xiv. Observe PTA-stained SCs under phase contrast optics. Silver stained SCs 
can be viewed very well with bright feld optics and are more suitable for 
photography:
Electron Microscopy 
i. Locate the good chromosome spreads with light microscope and record 
their coordinates. Add water from either end of coverglass till a thick 
flm is formed underneath the coverglass. Immerse the slide in petri dish 
containing water; the coverglass is foated free on the surface of water. 
Drain-of the water and coverglass, and air-dry the slide. 
ii. Relocate the good SCs spread with LM and cover with 50-mesh copper 
grid. Grids are made tacky, by dipping them in a solution prepared by 
dissolving adhesive from l-inch of cellophane tape in 10 ml of ethylene 
dichloride; allow the grids to dry.
iii. While monitoring the operation at a magnifcation of 100 × under a 
compound microscope, the slightly adhesive grids are moved into exact 
positions using an eye lash mounted on an applicator stick. The plastic is 
scored around each grid with a steel dissecting needle to leave a margin 
of several millimetres. A drop of water is placed on the outer edge of 
the score mark, and the plastic is teased up with a dissecting needle. By 
gradually adding water the plastic is usually separated from the glass 
with the grids in place. 
iv. Float the freed sheet of plastic onto the surface of the bowl of water. 
Cover the grids and plastic with a piece of glassine weighing paper to 
which the plastic adheres. Now lift the paper, plastic and grids from the 
water and air-dry.
v. Place the grids on a glass slide and observe under bright feld or phase 
contrast microscope, and record the grid squares with chromosome 
spreads.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 357 
vi. Finally, grids are transferred to AEI EM6B electron microscope for 
observation and photography. 
Results: Two parallel lateral elements are present in each SC. In tomato, 
SCs in distal segment of chromosomes are more darkly stained than SCs 
in proximal segments. PTA stains kinetochroes, lateral elements, central 
elements of SCs. Ovoid structures about 100 nm in their longest dimensions 
are observed lying on the central element of the SCs. These are probably 
recombination nodules on pachytene chromosomes. 
This technique ofers two-dimensional visualisation of complete sets of 
SCs by both light and electron microscopes and it is a powerful tool for genome 
analysis by allowing (1) determination of relative and absolute lengths of SCs 
and chromosome arm ratios at pachytene, (2) analysis of complex patterns of 
synapsis, and (3) the location of what are probably recombination nodules and 
the length of SCs.
I. A Modifed Fluorescence-plus-Giemsa Technique for Diferential
Staining of Sister Chromatid (Andersson, 1985)
Roots of cuttings of Tradescantia paludosa (clone ‘V’ and clone ‘O’) 
were used in this technique by Andersson (1985).
To develop roots, the cuttings are immersed in tap water for 5-6 days (in 
a green house-temperature cycle: 13½ hrs, 25°C; 10½ hrs, 18°C). After this, 
cuttings with roots of 10-20 mm length are transferred to an incubator where 
they are kept in the dark at 20°C.
Procedure 
i. Expose roots of 20-40 µm length to the aqueous solution of 100 µM 
5-bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd), 0.5 µM 5-fuorodeoxyuridine (FdUrd). 
This is done in glass tubes containing 40 ml of solution. 
ii. Roots which have been exposed to BrdUrd solution for 16 hrs, are 
transferred to aqueous solution of 100 µM thymidine (dThd) and 5 µM 
uridine, and kept there for 18 hrs.
iii. Later treat the roots with 0.5% colchicine for 3 hrs.
iv. Fixation: Fix the material in cold 3:1 methanol, acetic acid for 1-2 days. 
The tubes containing the BrdUrd and dThd solutions should be covered 
with black tape to protect the roots from light.
v. After fxation, rinse the roots in the same slightly acidic bufer (0.01 M 
citric acid C6H8O7. H2O - sodium citrate Na3C6H5O7. 2H20, pH 4.7) in 
which maceration is going to perform.
vi. Maceration: Macerate the roots either with a 1% pectinase solution 
(Sigma, from Aspergillus niger) or with a mixture of 0.5% pectinase and 
0.5% cellulase (Sigma, from Aspergillus niger) for 2 hrs at 27°C. The 
maceration is terminated by transferring the roots to distilled water at 
room temperature. Half an hour later, squashing is performed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
358 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
vii. Squash preparation: Squash in 45% acetic acid on slides coated with 
a mixture of 10% gelatin and chrome alum (Reidel-De Haen, Seelze, 
Hannover).
viii. Remove coverslips on dry ice and pass through 100, 85, 70, 50 and 30% 
ethyl alcohol and distilled water.
ix. Later place 200 µl of RNase (Sigma, Ribonuclease A from bovine 
Pancreas) solution [1 mg dissolved in 10 ml 0.5 × SSC (saline sodium 
citrate) (0.075 M NaCl + 0.0075 M Na3C6H5O7. 2H2O)] on each 
preparation and put the cover-slip, incubate for 50 minutes at 27°C.
x. Fluorochome staining: After a brief rinse in 0.5 × SSC, stain the 
preparation in a solution of 1 mg-Hoechst 33258-pentahydrate in 2000 
ml phosphate bufered saline (Oxford Limited, England) for 20 minutes, 
later briefy rinse in 0.5 × SSC.
xi. Place the slides in 0.5 × SSC in Coplin jars and immediately expose for 
40 mins at a distance of 15 cm to light from an Osram 300 W Ulatra￾Vitalux sun lamp.
xii. The irradiation should be followed by a treatment with 0.5 × SSC for one 
minute at 55°C.
xiii. Giemsa staining: Transfer the slides to 0.017 M phosphate bufer (pH 
6.8) and keep them for 5-10 mins. Later stain in a 3% Giemsa (Gurr R66) 
for 4 mins in the same bufer.
xiv. Rinse in running tap water and air dry. Dip the dry preparation in xylene 
and mount in Canada balsam. 
Results: The concentration of FdUrd is necessary to give rise to a good 
sister chromatid diferentiation varying between 5 × 10-9 and 1 × 10-7 M in 
the Vicia faba. Twice the concentration of pectinase is needed to get good 
separation of the meristematic cells. To get rid of background staining caused 
by cytoplasmic ribonucleic acid, the preparations are treated with RNase. For 
practical reasons, the slides are treated for 50 mins with RNase, but the time 
of exposure does not seem to be critical.
J. A Haematoxylin Staining Procedure for Maize Pollen Grain 
Chromosomes (Kindiger and Beekett, 1985)
Preparation of Haematoxylin stain 
Solution A: Dissolve 2 g of haematoxylin (Fisher, Lot 701073) in 100 ml 
50% propionic acid. Allow it to ripen for one week and store it in a stoppered 
brown bottle without refrigeration.
Solution B: Dissolve 0.5 g ferric ammonium sulfate [FeNH4(SO4)2] in 
100 ml 50% propionic acid. This solution keeps indefnitely in stoppered 
brown bottle without refrigeration.
Mix equal volumes of solutions A and B. The mixture, which turns dark 
brown, is ready for use immediately. The stain remains good for about two 
weeks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 359 
Collection and Preparation of Pollen grains 
Collect maize tassels when about 3 cm of the tassel becomes visible above 
the leaf whorl. This will usually give many male gametophytes at the 1st and 
2nd mitotic divisions. Material that is to be retained for longer periods should 
be placed in a 14:1 mixture of 70% ethyl alcohol: formaldehyde and stored in 
the refrigerator. 
Pre-fxation: It is not necessary, but it can be performed before staining so 
as to provide greater defnitions of mitotic chromosomes. Dissect out anthers 
and pre-fx for 30-45 mins in a solution containing 100 ml tap water, four drops 
of monobromonaphthalene and one drop of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). 
Monobromonaphthalene inhibits the spindle at metaphase allowing 
observation of shortened, well defned chromosomes.
Fixation: Later anthers are fxed in Carnoy’s fuid (3:1 95% ethanol acetic 
acid) or in 3:1 ethanol-chloroform for 30 minutes.
Staining Procedure 
i. Dissect out anthers and place in a drop of 45% acetic acid on a slide.
ii. Add a crystal of chloral hydrate; macerate to liberate pollen grains and to 
dissolve the chloral hydrate. Remove debris.
iii. Add a drop of stain and mix on the slide. For fxed material, wait for a 
minute before applying the coverslip. 
iv. Then apply the coverslip, blot of excess stain and apply gentle pressure 
on it. 
v. Gently heat the slide and then cool. Upon cooling, chromosomes and 
nuclei will darken and cytoplasm will clear.
vi. Continue heating and cooling until the desired, contrast is obtained. 
vii. To make the slide permanent, seal the edges of the coverslip with 
permount and allow it to dry.
Haematoxylin procedure is faster, gives more consistent staining, and 
provides superior contrast between nucleus and cytoplasm when compared to 
Belling’s iron acetocaramine stain. Slides cannot be kept indefnitely, as the 
stain begins to fade after about three months. Satisfactory staining of fxed 
material is obtained if the pollen is allowed to soak in the stain longer before 
heating. 
General Slide preparation for male meiotic studies 
i. Flower buds of appropriate size are fxed in freshly prepared Carnoy’s 
fuid (1:3 acetic acid: ethanol) for 4-5 days at room temperature.
ii. After fxation, the fower buds are stored in 70% ethanol at 4°C.
iii. Sepals and petals are removed from the selected fower buds and the 
anthers are taken; and then anthers are squashed in a drop of 2% aceto￾carmine stain. 
iv. In some cases, ferric chloride solution is used as a mordant and the 
stained cells are washed by adding drops of 45% acetic acid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
360 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
v. The prepared slide was covered using a cover slip and was slightly 
warmed by passing over a fame.
vi. Finally, the prepared slide is wrapped in a fold of blotting paper to 
remove access of stain leaving only a thin flm of fuid in between slide 
and cover-slip. 
vii. The prepared slide is observed under a microscope. 
K. Efcient preparation of Plant Chromosomes for SEM Study (Martin 
et al., 1994)
Root tips of 3-day old seedlings of Barley (cv. ‘Jgri’), barley telotrisomic lines 
and wheat-barley telosomic addition lines are taken.
Procedure 
i. Synchronise the meristematic tissue either by pre-treating the root tips 
in ice water for 24 hrs or by following Pan et al. (1993) and Busch et al. 
(1994).
ii. Fix in 3:1 ethanol-acetic acid (v/v) and store it at 20o
C. 
Digestion 
i. Chop and digest the root-tips in a solution of 2.5% cellulase ‘Onozuka’
R (Sigma chemicals, Munich), 2.5% Pectolyase Y-23 (Kikkoman, Japan) 
in 75 mM KCl (pH 4.0) at 30o
C for 50-60 mins.
ii. Filter the suspension through nylon cloth (100 mm).
iii. Treat with hypotonic solution of 75 mM KCl at room temperature for 8 
mins. 
iv. Spin down the protoplasts at 80g for 7 mins.
v. Resuspend in ethanol-acetic acid (3:1) and spin again at 80g for 7 mins. 
This step should be performed four times. 
vi. Finally resuspend the pellet in an appropriate volume of fxative and 
drop on ice-cold cleared slides.
vii. Spreading of cells and subsequent steps will be monitored in a ‘ZEISS 
Axiophot’ light microscope.
viii. Add a drop of 45% acetic acid before completely drying out the specimen.
ix. Cover the preparation with a coverslip, gently squash and subsequently 
freeze on dry ice.
x. Remove the coverslips and transfer the slides immediately to the fxative 
containing 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 75 mM Cacodylate bufer and 2mM 
MgCl2 (pH 7.4).
xi. Osmium impregnation, dehydration, critical point drying, and sputter 
coating is accomplished following Wanner et al. (1991).
xii. Observe the chromosomes under a Hitachis 4100 feld emission scanning 
electron microscope. 
xiii. Microdissect the chromosome with glass rods using a Zeiss inverted 
microscope.  
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 361 
Results: This technique ofers the production of relatively high numbers of 
chromosome spreads that can be viewed at high resolution showing structural 
details below 10 nm. This technique is not only restricted to metaphase 
chromosomes, but also to the chromosomes of all stages of the cell cycle. 
17.1.3 Chromosome Banding Technique 
Traditionally, chromosome identifcation has been done based on their 
morphological characteristics such as relative length, arm ratio and presence 
or absence of secondary constrictions. Besides this, nowadays chromosome 
banding technique has become popular and a useful tool in the identifcation 
and characterisation of chromosomes within the complement. In banding 
technique, various chromosome segments are selectively stained with an 
appropriate fuorescent agent (fuorochrome) that binds selectively to bases 
in chromosomal DNA. For example, quinacrine mustard (QM) fuoresces 
in alternate light and dark bands when viewed under ultraviolet light. Like 
fngerprints these fuorescent banding patterns are unique for each chromosome. 
These bands are generally consistent for a taxon except for minor variations. 
There is a general agreement that the technique, which involves denaturation 
of DNA followed by slow renaturation, permits identifcation of constitutive 
heterochromatin, because it mainly consists of repetitive DNA.
Various fuorochromes have been employed and they show diferent 
banding patterns. Acridine orange (AO) produces variable banding in plants 
while ethridium bromide gives reverse bands. These bands are made visible 
through low and high intensity regions under the fuorescent microscope or 
as diferentially stained areas under the light microscope. Heteromorphy for 
chromosome bands has also been demonstrated in many cases, so that the 
possibility of using bands as ‘markers’ has been established. Bands have also 
been detected after treatment of chromosomes with restriction enzymes (RE) 
and these bands are described as RE bands (Gupta, 1997).
The dye is usually applied to the chromosome preparation (either 
squashed or air dried) and then mounted in a suitable medium, and observed 
under fuorescent microscope. All these dyes show a pronounced specifcity 
for nucleic acids e.g., QM reacts with DNA by alkylation of certain purine 
bases, and AO, profavine and acrifavine bear positive charges that allow 
them to interact with the DNA-phosphate backbone. It is further stabilised 
by the intercalation of the fat acridine rings between nucleic acid base 
pairs (Sharma, 1976). AO is also used to study the strandedness of nucleic 
acids, particularly DNA in chromatin and chromosomes. After staining, 
AO molecules are dispersed within the helix of a double-standard DNA
combining as a monomer without intermolecular interactions and fuorescene 
green, absorbing light at 500 nm. On the other hand, stacks of AO molecules 
are formed combining as polymers on single-stranded DNA or RNA which 
fuoresces red, absorbing light at 463 nm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
362 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Methods to demonstrate the Giernsa-stained banding patterns of 
mammalian chromosomes have been described by many scientists using basic 
principle of in vitro hybridisation of DNA. The earlier methods depended on 
alkaline denaturation followed by renaturation in an adequate bufer. Later 
schedules for studying the G-banding are simpler, based on assumed diferential 
denaturation only. The agents for producing bands are alkali used in diferent 
temperatures, proteolytic enzyme and protein denaturing substance, including 
detergents, usually aniomic ones. The process of diferential processing used 
in these simplifed G-band techniques seems to depend on the temperature, 
pH, ionic strength, divalent cation content and proteolytic enzyme content of 
the medium. 
According to Chromosome Band Nomenclature (adopted at the Paris 
Conference in 1971), the following types of banding in human chromosomes 
have been recognised: 
Q-band: by quinacrine staining and fuorescence.
G-band: by staining with Giemsa and related stains after appropriate pre￾treatment. 
R-band or banding reverse to Q-band: by staining with Giemsa after 
heating to 87°C.
C-band: for constitutive heterochromatin, demonstrated by the 
denaturation-re-association technique.
E-band: Produced by enzymatic digestion, as classifed by Lejeune (1973 
quoted in Sharma, 1976), show swollen and shrunken regions corresponding 
to the dark and faint regions of G-banding.
The same nomenclature can be applied to banding patterns observed in other 
eukaryotic chromosomes. Other banding patterns include:
CT-bands: The centromeric and telomeric segments show bands after 
treatment in barium hydroxide, incubation and staining in ‘Stains All’ (4, 
5, 4’, 5’-dibenzo-3, 3’-diethyl-9-methyl thiacarbocyanine bromide) in 
mammals. 
N-bands: at nucleolus-organising regions, possibly due to acidic proteins 
in mammals. 
O-bands: by orcein staining, mainly for plant chromosomes; both 
intercalary and centromeric heterochromatin show bands.
Comings in 1973 (quoted in Sharma, 1976) has found that centromeric 
heterochromatin appears in the C-bands and the intercalary heterochromatin 
in the G-bands. The former is rich in highly repetitive satellite DNA while the 
latter is with non-repetitive poorly methylated DNA. Protein-DNAinteractions 
are also important factors in formation of chromosome bands. He observes 
that in C-banding the selective extraction of non-band DNA plays a major role 
but the intensity of Giemsa staining is enhanced by DNA protein interactions.  
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 363 
In both G and R bands, base composition may be involved but DNA-protein 
interactions seem to be the major role. In Q-banding, negative or pale staining 
regions are due to the presence of non-histone proteins binding in the small 
groove of DNA and preventing the intercalative binding of quinacrine. A
similar mechanism may be responsible for G-banding (Comings, 1974). 
Neither C- nor G-banding appears to depend on the diferential denaturation 
of DNA.
Various attempts have been made to induce chromosome bands by 
diferential digestion of the chromosomal DNA by nucleases. By using 
restriction endonucleases, it is to localise highly repetitive DNAs in human 
metaphase chromosomes. A diferent approach is undertaken by Schweiger 
(1977), who produced R-bands by DNase digestion of chromosomes after 
protecting the G-C rich DNA sequences with the DNA-binding antibiotic 
chromomycin A3. 
17.1.3.1 Protocols 
A. Methyl Green-Pyronin Dye to Stain C-banded Chromosomes 
(Puertas et al., 1983)
Fix the root tips of rye, Secale cereale L. in acetic: alcohol (1:3) before 
squashing in one drop of 45% acetic acid. Dehydrate the material in 
absolute alcohol for 24 hrs.
Preparation of Stains 
a. Giemsa: Mix 3 ml of Gurr’s R66 Giemsa in 100 ml of 1/15 M phosphate 
bufer (pH 7.0).
b. Methylgreen-pyronin: Dissolve 2 g of methyl green in 100 ml of distilled 
water; solution is repeatedly extracted with chloroform to remove traces 
of methyl violet formed when methyl green is exposed to air.
Pyronin 2% solution (in distilled water) is also washed with chloroform. 
Stock solutions can be stored in the refrigerator.
At the time of use, 7.5 ml of 2% methyl green, 12.5 ml of 2% pyronin, 
2.5 ml of 95% ethanol, 80 ml of distilled water and 0.5 g of phenol are mixed, 
adjusted at pH 4.5 with IN HCl.
Treatment before Staining 
i. Hydrolyse the material in IN HCl at 60°C for 12 mins.
ii. Incubation is performed in bovine pancreas ribonuclease (one mg 
ribonuclease is dissolved in 50 ml of 0.05 M acetate bufer at pH 5; 
the solution is heated to 80°C for 10 mins to eliminate possible DNase 
activity) at 37°C for 1 hr.
iii. C-banding-Routine method (Giraldez et al., 1979).
a. Hydrolysis is accompanied by treating the roots with 0.2 N HCl at 
60°C for 3 mins. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
364 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
b. Immerse in saturated solution of Ba(OH) at room temperature for 12 
mins. 
c. Incubate in 2 × SSC at 60°C for 1 hr.
iv. As treatment (iii) but without hydrolysis with 0.2 N HCl.
v. As treatment (iv) but with incubation in ribonuclease as in treatment (ii).
Staining Procedure 
a. Giemsa staining: In treatment (ii), (iii) and (iv) control slides are stained 
with Giemsa, cleared in xylene and mounted in DPX.
b. Methyl green-pyronin staining: Preparations after treatments (i) to (iv) 
are immersed in methyl green-pyronin for 2-5 mins. Later rinse in tertiary 
butyl alcohol, clear with toluene and mount in DPX.
To check the ability of pyronin to stain proteins, ovalbumin and bovine 
albumin are subjected to electrophoresis using the two diferent 12% starch￾gel electrophoretic systems given below:
a. 0.15 M Tris-citric acid, pH 7.75, as the gel bufer and 0.3 M NaOH boric 
acid, pH 8.6, as the electrode bufer.
b. 0.043 M Tris-citric acid, pH 7.0 as the electrode bufer and 0.006 M 
histidine, pH 7.0 as the gel bufer.
Gels are stained with pyronin prepared as above.
Slides stained with methyl green-pyronin show red bands.
Results: Giemsa stained slides are obtained best by the use of treatment: 
(staining procedure a) Methyl green-pyronin staining gives good results 
with treatment; (staining procedure b) in this clear blue nucleus with red 
heterochromatic blocks are observed; mitotic cells show blue euchromatic 
portions of chromosomes with red heterochromatic bands.
Untreated and methyl green stained preparations produce blue-green 
nuclei and with pyronin alone produce red nuclei, nucleoli and proteins 
subject to electrophoresis but do not show any afnity for pyronin. 
B. Heterochromatin patterns in Crotalaria L. (Gayatri et al., 1993)
Dry seeds of four species of Crotalaria L. viz. C. juncea Linn., C. 
Laburnifolia Linn., C. verrucosa Linn., and C. trifoliastrum Wild. were 
used in this study. 
Procedure 
i. Roots collected from germinated seeds are pretreated with cold water at 
4°C for 24 hrs and fxed in 3:1 alcohol: acetic acid for 24 hrs.
ii. Later roots are washed and subjected to hot hydrolysis in 1N HCl for 10 
mins at 60°C.
iii. After hot hydrolysis, wash again for 15 mins.
iv. Stain the root tips with pararosanilline chloride for 45-60 mins. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 365 
v. Later root tips are squashed in 0.5% acetocarmine, put the coverslip and 
seal it with parafn wax.
Gayatri et al. (1993) studied the variation with reference to the total 
number of bands, band size and position in between the chromosomes within 
a complement as well as between the four species; in C. laburnifolia and 
C. trifoliastrum and reported nearly equal amount of heterochromatin which 
was more than that of the other two species. The quantity of heterochromatin 
present in an arm of the chromosome is calculated as follows:
The quantity of heterochromatin in each arm of the chromosome is 
calculated as follows:
The quantity of heterochromatin in each arm ___________________________________________ × 100
Total quantity of heterochromatin in haploid genome 
C. Giemsa G-banding in Root Tips of Allium (Pefey and Vries, 1993)
Root tips of Allium fstulosum, A. Cepa ‘Jumbo’ and their interspecifc 
cross were taken for Giemsa G-banding studies.
Procedure 
i. Pretreat the root tips in a saturated solution of l-bromonaphthalene at 4°C 
for 2 hrs. 
ii. Later fx the material in fresh 96% ethanol, glacial acetic acid (3:1) at 
4°C for 30 mins.
iii. Some chemically fxed roots are squashed in 45% acetic acid and then 
frozen in liquid nitrogen, later coverslips are removed. Other roots are 
kept in the fxative for 2 hrs and washed with distilled water. 
iv. Incubate the tissue in a mixture of cellulase (1.5%, w/v) and pectinase 
(15%, w/v) in citrate bufer at pH 4.8 for 1 hr at 37°C to soften the tissue.
v. Rinse in distilled water.
vi. Spread root tips on a glass slide in a drop of 60% acetic acid with the help 
of a pair of needles. 
vii. Air dry the slides. 
Staining Method 
i. Immerse the slides in 0.01 M NaHC03, pH 9.0-9.1, at 27-30°C for 1-5 
mins. 
ii. Stain in 2 or 25% Giemsa, in pH 6.8 bufer solution (from Gurr’s bufer 
tablets). 
iii. Rinse the slides in distilled water twice.
iv. Air dry the slides.
v. Observe under light microscope to evaluate the banding pattern in 
chromosomes. If no bands are visible, the slides are rinsed briefy in 96%  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
366 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
ethanol: glacial acetic acid (3:1) fxative to partly remove the Giemsa 
stain and follow the staining method of Drewry (1982) given below:
vi. Place the slides again in 0.01 M NaHCO3, pH 9.0-9.1. 
Staining Method of Drewry (1982) 
i. Keep the above-prepared slides at 45-60°C for 1-12 hrs.
ii. Immerse the slides in trypsin solution [Gibco, trypsin-EDTA (10x) 5.0 
ml, Hank’s BSS 4.5 ml, H2O 40.5 ml] at room temperature for 1-40 mins.
iii. Stain in 2 or 25% Giemsa (Gurr) in pH 7.9 bufer (Gurr’s bufer tablets 
adjusted with NaHCO3) for 3-6 mins.
iv. Rinse in bufer solution, pH 6.8 (Gurr’s bufer tablets) and in distilled 
water twice.
v. Mount in DPX (Gurr).
Result: In all treatments, prophase and prometaphase chromosomes of 
Allium show rows of numerous dots and bands of diferent sizes extending 
along the length of the chromosome:
i. C-bands were located exclusively at telomers and interstitial C-bands at 
centromeric region. 
ii. The number of bands visible along the entire length of chromosomes in 
metaphase is reduced to chromosomes in late prophase. 
iii. G-bands stain more intensely without trypsinisation and with increasing 
trypsin incubation chromosomes become more dispersed and obscure 
the banding pattern to a large extent. G-banding visualised in the 
chromosomes of Allium using Giemsa stain is the frst demonstration of 
its kind. 
17.2 Vital Staining 
Vital dyes are used to study living tissues. According to Barbusa and Peters 
(1971), vital staining was developed by Grew in 1682. The extensive literature 
on vital staining is available in German. Detailed discussion on this aspect is 
outside the scope of this book. Stadelmann and Kinzel (1972) published the 
English review. A general opinion among biologists is that vital stains do not 
afect the structure and functioning of the cells being stained. However, this 
needs thorough investigation. Indeed, Barbusa and Peters (1971) concluded 
from their studies that vital dyes not only may be toxic to the target organism 
but may also cause a number of pathological symptoms in the organism, some 
so subtle that they may be overlooked. 
One must be careful while interpreting the results of vital staining 
with plant cells. For example, neutral red is commonly used by botanists. 
Accumulation of this dye by vacuoles is usually considered to indicate cell 
viability but O’Brien and McCully (1981) found that it is capricious. This  
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 367 
supports Bailley’s warning (1930) that vital staining of vacuoles in plant cells 
is due to tannins precipitating the dye, but not due to the uptake of dye through 
tonoplast. In this regard, Boyer (1963) has shown that tannin-flled vacuoles 
in pine needles stain strongly with neutral red.
Stefano et al. (2017) have studied plant vacuoles using various fuorescent 
probes including fuorescent-tagged proteins. For example, AFVY-RFP, a 
soluble marker based on the fusion of a manomeric red fuorescent protein 
(RFP) to the tetrapeptide AFVY, a C-terminal sorting signal of soluble proteins 
to the vacuole (Hunter et al., 2007) (Fig. 17.1). The fgure clearly shows the 
vacuolar lumen in the abaxial epidermal cells at 9 days after the germination 
(DAG) of seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana (17.1A). The VAC-YFP is another 
fuorescent-tagged tonoplast marker based on the fusion of the C-terminus of 
a v-TIP protein (Nelson et al., 2007) to the yellow fuorescent protein (YFP) 
(Fig. 17.1B). The fgure shows the tonoplast and transvacuolar strands in 
abaxial epidermal cells expressing the VAC-YFP at 12 DAG (Fig.17.1 B). 
Fig. 17.1. Staining of vacuoles with fuorescent proteins. (A) Confocal images of 
Arabidopsis abaxial epidermal cells (9 DAG) stably expressing AFVY-RFP, which 
marks the vacuolar lumen indicated by an asterisk. (B) VAC-YFP (12 DAG) in 
abaxial epidermal cells. Arrow points to tonoplast, arrowhead indicates bulbs, and 
empty arrowhead indicates transvacuolar-strand. Bar = 10 μm
(Courtesy: Stefano et al., 2017).
17.2.1 Protocols 
A. Staining of plant cell vacuoles (Stefano et al., 2017) 
The plant vacuoles are extremely important for growth and development, 
and infuence the vital cellular functions such as photosynthesis, 
respiration and transpiration. One of the important roles of vacuole is  
 
 
 
 
 
 
368 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
to regulate the cell turgor in response to diferent stimuli. Therefore, the 
morphology, dynamics and physiology of plant vacuole are fundamentally 
important for the advancement of plant science, particularly plant cell 
biology (Stefano).
Plant materials and chemicals 
Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings at 3 to 9 days after germination (DAG) 
Agrobacterium cultures 
Lipophilic styryl dye, N-(3-triethylammonium propyle)-4-(p￾diethylaminopropyl- hexatrienyl) pyridinium dibromide (FM4-64)
AFVY-RFP---a soluble fuorescent marker based on the fusion of 
a monomeric red fuorescent protein (RFP) to the tetrapeptide AFVY, a 
C-terminal sorting signal of soluble proteins to the vacuolar (Hunter et al., 
2007).
VAC-YFP, a tonoplast marker based on the fusion of the C-terminus of a 
v-TIP protein to the yellow fuorescent protein (YFP) (Nelson et al., 2007).
Plant growth 
i. Prepare the petriplates containing Linsmaier and Skoog (LS) medium. 
The seeds of A. thaliana are incubated on LS medium at pH 5.7 and 
incubate in a growth chamber at 22°C temperature, 55% humidity for 16 
hours of light and 8 hours of dark cycle.
ii. Keep the plates vertically to image root seedlings or position horizontally 
to take picture of the abaxial pavemental cells in cotyledon or leaf.
Stable or transient expression of vacuolar reporters in Arabidopsis lines 
AFVY and VAC transgenic lines: Grow the Arabidopsis AFVY-RFP stable 
transformant lines as mentioned above and below and similarly VAC-YFP
also. 
For transient expression of vacuolar markers of thaliana, the following 
materials are required:
i. Prepare plates with LS medium to stratify the seeds; one litre of medium 
consists of 1.18 g LS, 1% sucrose and 0.8% agar and then autoclave the 
medium for 25 minutes.
ii. Prepare the co-cultivation medium with LS medium, acetosyringone 
100 µm, silvet L-77 OF 0.005% and incubate agrobacterium along with 
seedling. 
iii. Prepare the washing solution using MgCL2 of 10 µM and acetosyringone 
100 µM and rinse the seedlings co-cultivated with agrobacterium.
Procedure 
AVFY-RFP and VAC-YFP samples for confocal microscopic studies 
a. Stable expression of genetically-encoded vacuolar markers in A.thaliana: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 369 
i. Sterilise the seeds expressing the transgene (AFVY-RFP or VAC-YFP) 
as follows:
Take some seeds in eppendorf tube, then add 1 ml of ethanol 70%, 
invert the tube, centrifuge at low speed and discard the solution. Then 
add 1 ml of 20% bleach solution, invert the tube few times, centrifuge 
briefy and discard the solution. Wash the seeds thrice with distilled 
water and inoculate on LS medium and verbalise at 4°C for 48 hours.
ii. Later transfer the petriplates to growth chamber maintaining 16 hours 
light and 8 hours dark cycle at 22°C.
iii. Conduct the confocal microscopic analyses on seedlings starting from 
3 DAG until desired to follow the vacuolar marker (up to 12DAG).
b. Transient expression of genetically-encoded vacuolar markers in 
A.thaliana 
i. Sterilise the seeds as previously described and these sterilised seeds 
are inoculated on LS medium. 
ii. Transfer the inoculated plates to the growth chamber maintaining 16 
hours light and 8 hours dark at 22°C.
iii. Two days after germination, prepare the co-cultivation medium.
iv. Three days after germination, inoculate the Agrobacterium carrying 
the binary vector with the vacuolar marker of interest, into LS with 
appropriate antibiotics, then shake at 200 rpm, at 28°C until the optical 
density read at 600 nm reach a value which is greater than 1.5.
v. Centrifuge the agrobacterium culture at 5000 rpm for 3 minutes, then 
discard the supernatant. 
vi. Resuspend the agrobacterium pellet in 100 mL of wash solution by 
vortex. Repeat this step once again.
vii. Again resuspend the pellet in 100 mL of wash medium.
viii. Add agrobacterium culture to 100 mLof cocultivation medium to reach 
a fnal optical density of 0.5, then pour the medium in the petriplate.
ix. Incubate the plates in the dark for 24 hours.
x. Open the plates, remove the medium, and wash atleast twice with 10 
mL of cocultivation medium 
xi. Seal the plate with micropore 3M and incubate in standard growth 
conditions. 
xii. After 48-96 hours after transformation, cotyledons or root tissue can be 
observed under the confocal microscope [for YFP, 514 nm (excitation) 
and 560-600 nm (emission; for RFP, 560 nm (excitation) and 600-650 
nm (emission).
To have an image of a good fuorescent signal of the vacuole or tonoplast, 
it is necessary to observe the sample after 48 hours because the signal may be 
higher in the endoplasmic reticulum before this time.  
 
 
 
 
370 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
B. The use of Fluorescein Diacetate and Phenosafranine for determining 
viability of cultured plant cells (Widholm, 1972)
Composition of Tobacco medium (in mg/L)
NH4NO3, 1650; KNO3, 1900; CaCl2.2H20, 440; MgSO4.7H20, 370; 
KH2PO4, 170; H3BO3, 6.2; MnSO4.4H2O, 22.3; ZnSO4.4H2O, 8.6; Kl 0.83; 
Na2MoO4.2H20, 0.25; CuSO4.5H2O, 0.025; COCl2.6H2O, 0.025; NaFe 
EDTA, 33.
Fluorescein diacetate (FDA) 
FDA, 0.01 % is prepared by diluting a 5 mg/ml acetone solution (stored in 
freezer) with the tobacco medium. This diluted solution is useful for few 
hours. 
Procedure 
i. Grow the culture of tobacco pith (Nicotiana tabacum L. cv. Xanthi and 
Wisconsin 38), Tomato stem (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.), garden 
carrot root (Daucus carota L.), germinating rice seed (Oryza sativa L., 
Blue Bonnett 50) and soybean stem (Glycine max Merr. cv. Wayne) as 
described by Widholm (1971).
ii. Pipette the cells of one gram into 100 ml fresh liquid medium and take 
fresh weights after fltration on Miracloth.
iii. Test the dyes (0.1% prepared in tobacco medium) by mixing a drop of 
the dye solution with a single drop of a cell suspension on a glass slide.
iv. Later, put the coverslip and observe under phase contrast, after 5 and 30 
min with a Zeiss microscope. The fuorescein and fuorescein diacetate 
treated cells are viewed with the same microscope utilising fuorescence 
technique. An Osram HBO mercury-vapour lamp with exciter flter 
BG12 is used in combination with barrier flter 47. 
The other compounds tested by Widholm are phenosafranine, neutral red 
(Mann Research Laboratories), 2,3,5-triphenyl tetrazolium-Cl, acid fuchsin, 
acridine orange, crystal violet, helianthin, indigo carmine, neutral red iodide, 
orange G, rhodamine B, rhodamine 6G, Sudan III (Allied chemical), isatin, 
methylene blue (Eastman Organic Chemicals), aniline blue, methyl green, 
safranine O (Fisher Scientifc Co.), brom phenol blue, brom phenol red, 
Janus Green B (Matheson Coleman and Bell), malachite green, nile blue A
(Hartman-Leddon Co.), methyl red (General Chemical Co.) and brom thymol 
blue. 
Results: FDA stains live cells whereas the others like phenosafranin, 
brom phenol blue, methylene blue, stain only dead cells. FDA probably stains 
live plant cells in the same way that it does with animal cells (Rotman and 
Papermaster, 1966) and pollen (Heslop-Harrison and Heslop-Harrison, 1970). 
The non-polar molecule enters the live cells where esterage cleaves of the 
acetate residues leaving fuorescein which then accumulates. The fuorescein 
molecule can fuoresce. Taking cyclosis and plasmolysis as the main criteria,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cytological and Vital Staining Techniques 371 
cells at various stages of culture growth were also examined for their viability 
by Widholm using fuorescein diacetate.
C. Vital staining for root hairs in perennial grasses (Marianne et al., 
1990) 
Roots of Paspalurn notatum, P. vaginatum, Stenotaphrurn secundaturn. 
Eremochloa ophiuroides, Zoysia japonica and Cynodon dactylon were 
taken by Marianne et al. (1990). Excise 10 cm long adventitious roots 
with intact primary and secondary branches and store in 20 ml glass 
scientillation vials containing 17 ml of 0.05 N phosphate bufer (pH 7.0), 
4°C for 18 hrs. Place control vial in boiling water for 10 mins, later cool 
and store at 4°C. 
Stains Used 
Prepare phenosafranin (PS), neutral red (NR) and methylene blue (MB) at a 
concentration of 0.1 g/L, Evans blue (EB) at 0.5 g/L and congo red (CR) at 1.0 
g/L in 0.05 N phosphate bufer at pH 7.0. 
Procedure 
i. Stain the root hairs of each grass in the above-mentioned stains for 4-24 
hrs. 
ii. Washing is performed in multiple baths of water and 0.05 M phosphate 
bufer (pH 7.0) for 45 mins to 72 hrs.
iii. Observe under the light microscope and compare the colours developed 
in diferent materials with reference to control.
Evans blue (EB) is found to be the best stain in terms of precision and 
least variability to show the quantity, size and viability of root hairs.
D. Pollen fertility with PHR stain (Ramanjini Gowda et al., 1991)
Pollen of Dolichos, ash gourd, sweet potato, Bougainvillea and Hibiscus 
were taken. 
Preparation of P.H. Ramanjini (PHR) stain 
Collect fully ripe purple-blue coloured fruits of Cocculus hirsutum. Crush 
these fruits and flter through muslin cloth. Add 20% phenol (v/v) to extract 
before using as stain. PHR stain may be modifed by adding water (60% v/v) 
and lactic acid (20% v/v) to it. 
Procedure 
i. Take the pollen dust onto a micro slide and put 1-2 drops of stain.
ii. Mix-up properly the pollen dust and stir with stainless steel needle.
iii. Mount the coverglass and examine after 5 minutes.
Result: The viable pollen grains appear dark to red in colour whereas 
nonviable ones do not take up stain. The intensity of the staining is dependent 
on the thickness of the pollen grain walls. 
18 
Electron Microscopic Studies 
Basically, the biological specimen preparation for electron microscopic (EM) 
studies is similar to that of light microscopy. However, some modifcations are 
made to meet the specifc requirements. Plant materials should be chemically 
killed and fxed (preserved) and followed by infltration and embedding. 
Later, cut into ultrathin sections on ultra-microtomes and stain them to bring 
out contrasts in tissues and cell organelles. 
18.1 Specimen Preparation for EM Studies 
Sample preparation includes fxation, infltration, embedding, sectioning and 
staining for EM studies (Table 18.1). 
Table 18.1. Characteristic diference in sample preparation between electron 
microscopy and light microscopy 
Electron microscopy Light microscopy 
Fixation Glutaraldehyde, Osmium 
tetroxide
FAA, formaldehyde, acrolein 
Embedding Monomeric epoxy resins Parafn wax
Sectioning Glass knife or diamond knife Steel knife 
Thickness of 
sections 
0.05-0.1 µm 2-10 µm and more thickness 
Staining Heavy metals like uranyl 
acetate, 
lead citrate 
Dyes 
18.1.1 Fixation 
The primary objective of the killing and fxation is to arrest the growth 
processes and preserve the material in some fxative reagent with minimum 
damage to the tissues. Several fxatives are currently employed such as 
osmium tetroxide, certain aldehydes, acrolein, potassium permanganate, etc.374 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Osmium tetroxide (OsO4) is widely used as a fxative for EM studies. Its 
penetration is slow, but it reacts rapidly with proteins, unsaturated fatty acids 
and phospholipids. Now-a-days, it is common for Transmission Electron 
Microscopy (TEM) that the material is prefxed in glutaraldehyde and post￾fxed in OsO4. 
Glutaraldehyde: It is a non-coagulant, and its structural formula is 
CHO(CH2)3-CHO (Sabatini et al., 1963). A solution of 4% glutaraldehyde in 
phosphate bufer (pH 7.0) is prepared. Specimen is prefxed in this solution 
for 2 hrs to overnight. If cytoplasm is abnormally electron dense or tissue 
shrunken, fx the material for 2 hrs at 0-4°C and then at room temperature. 
Osmium tetroxide (OsO4): Specimen is post-fxed in 2% OsO4 prepared 
in phosphate bufer at pH 6.8 (O’Brien and McCully, 1981) for 1-2 hrs. Under 
post-fxed condition, OsO4 gives positive electron contrast to membranes 
and preserves unsaturated lipids that would otherwise be extracted during 
dehydration and embedding (O’Brien and McCully, 1981). OsO4 penetrates 
fresh tissues slowly but after glutaraldehyde treatment, it appears to penetrate 
more rapidly. 
18.1.2 Embedding 
Generally, harder embedding medium (harder than parafn wax) is used for 
EM studies. After dehydration, the specimen is infltrated and embedded in 
epoxy resins like Epon, Araldite and Maraglas. Extreme care is necessary while 
handling these chemicals since they are carcinogenic and cause skin reactions. 
The materials are embedded in epoxy resin which is then polymerised to form 
a hard block. This medium allows smooth cutting of the specimen without 
damage to tissue on ultra-microtome. 
Epon embedding mixture (Luft, 1961): Generally embedding is carried 
out in gelatin capsules of various sizes. Also, there are special moulds 
available for the embedding of materials. Epon mixture is prepared by mixing 
solution-A and solution -B in varying proportions according to the degree of 
hardness required (Table 18.2).
Table 18.2. Preparation of epoxy embedding mixture
No. Hardness of 
fnal block Solution -A (ml) Solution-B (ml) 
1 Soft 80 20 
2 Standard 60 40 
3 Medium 50 50 
4 Hard 30 70 
 
 
 
Electron Microscopic Studies 375 
Epon Solution-A 
Mix 25 ml Epikote 812 and 50 ml of dodecenyl succinic
anhydride (DDSA) 
Solution-B 
Take 50 ml Epikote 812 and mix slowly with 50 ml of nadic 
methyl anhydride (NMA) 
During mixing of solutions A and B, 2% benzyl-dimethylamine is 
added to speed up the process of polymerisation. Gelatin capsule is flled 
with embedding medium and the specimen to be embedded is kept into the 
capsule. Allow the specimen to sink slowly through the viscous fuid. The 
polymerisation is performed by keeping this preparation in an oven at 60°C 
for 24 to 48 hrs. 
Araldite mixture (Mercer and Birbeck, 1966): Araldite mixture consists 
of the following ingredients:
Dodecenyl succinic anhydride 20 ml 
Araldite M 20 ml 
2,4,6-trimethylaminomethyl phenol (DMP-30) 0.6 ml
Dibutylphthalate 2.0 ml 
The mixture is heated to 50°C and after thorough mixing, this can be used 
as described above for Epon. 
The other embedding media such as Vestopal W (Ryter and Kellenberger, 
1958) and Maraglas epoxy resin (Desai and Desai, 1980) are also employed.
18.1.3 Ultramicrotomy 
Since electrons have low penetrating power, ultrathin sections of 60-100 
nm thickness are needed to observe under TEM. This can be achieved by 
employing ultra-microtome ftted-with glass or diamond knife. If high quality 
sections are needed, diamond knife should be used which is available with 
water trough attached. Water trough is prepared by wrapping a short strip of 
scotch insulating tape (no. 33) around the back of the knife and sealing it with 
parafn wax (Fig. 18.1).
After trimming, the blocks are fxed on to a microtome and the sections are 
taken. Sections foat onto the surface of water present in the trough and remain 
together in the form of a ribbon (see Fig. 18.1). The thickness of the sections 
cut with ultramicrotome will be judged with the help of colours generated in 
the ribbon by refection of light. Grey and pale gold to light silver-coloured 
sections having thickness of about less than 10 nm and 80 nm respectively is 376 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
useful for ultrastructural studies. Then the foating sections are collected from 
the trough onto a small circular copper grid (Fig. 18.2; for preparation of grids 
see Desai and Desai, 1980). 
Fig. 18.1. Glass knife with foating sections in the trough prepared from 
the adhesive (Redrawn from Desai and Desai, 1980). 
Fig. 18.2. Copper mesh grid. 
18.1.4 Contrast Enhancement 
In light microscopy, various staining techniques are employed largely to 
improve the specimen contrast with respect to the background. Many staining  
Electron Microscopic Studies 377 
reactions rely on colour contrast to achieve the contrast image of the specimen. 
But colour contrast is not seen with transmission electron microscope since the 
image is viewed either on a fuorescent screen or recorded photographically in 
black and white. The contrast in the TEM image of a specimen arises largely 
due to the scattering of the electron beam by its interaction with atomic nuclei 
in the specimen (Agar et al., 1974; Hayat, 1975). The number of scattering 
increases with the thickness of any element encountered and with its atomic 
number (i.e., mass thickness). Thus, the scattered intensity for any given 
solid angle is proportional to the mass thickness of the specimen (O’Brien 
and McCully, 1981). Chemically, biological materials are mainly composed 
of elements like carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen. These elements 
have low electron scattering power, hence the poor quality of the image of 
the specimen is seen. Various techniques are being developed to improve the 
quality of the TEM image of the specimen [e.g., lead staining of sections by 
Lever (1960), lead citrate staining by Venable and Coggeshall (1965), etc.]. 
18.1.4.1 Staining 
Some fxatives like osmium tetroxide (OsO4) and potassium permanganate 
(KMnO4) have got staining ability. The materials fxed in these fxatives 
are further stained to increase the contrast. Staining can be done before 
dehydration, during dehydration or after sectioning. Two general types of 
staining techniques are currently employed for TEM studies: (a) Negative 
staining and (b) Positive staining.
(a) Negative staining: This technique is widely applied to study cell 
fractions, viruses and other particulates. Negative staining provides a 
lighter image against the electron-dense background (Fig. 18.3). This 
technique was extensively reviewed by Haschemeyer and Meyrs (1972). 
Hall (1955) was the frst person to employ this technique to study the 
structure of the bushy stunt virus. 
In the negative staining technique, particles (biological material) are 
taken in a dilute solution (0.1-2%) of the salt of a heavy metal and placed on 
a support flm covering an EM grid. Excess fuid is removed, allowing the 
flm to solidify by evaporation. The metal salt (acting as a stain) encases the 
particles on the support flm and penetrates any irregularities to which it has 
access. Now the negatively stained particles appear as light areas or holes 
due to their poor electron-scattering capacity relative to the encasing metal 
salt (for details see O’Brien and McCully, 1981). Various metal salts viz. 
sodium or potassium phosphotungstate, uranyl acetate, uranyl formate and 
ammonium molybdate are currently used in this technique. Negative staining 
has been widely used in routine diagnosis of plant viruses (Desai and Desai, 
1980).  
 
378 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Fig. 18.3. Negatively stained specimen (Redrawn from Haschemeyer 
and Meyers, 1972).
(b) Positive staining: Positive staining makes electron-transparent particles 
visible against a relatively transparent background. This technique is 
more useful for ultrathin sections. 
Stains containing lead e.g., lead tartarate, lead citrate, etc., give more 
satisfactory results. Many researchers prefer to stain frst with 2% uranyl 
acetate and then with lead salts. 
In some cases, Potassium permanganate (KMnO4) has been used to study 
the lignifcation of the xylem (Zhou et al., 2015). Layering structure (alternating 
narrow and broad layers of several wall thickening) of sclerenchyma fbres 
and xylem vessels in Miscanthus sinensis is clearly seen when the sections are 
stained with KMnO4 (Figs. 18.4A, B; 18.5A, B). 
Fig. 18.4. TEM images showing layering structure of sclerenchyma fbre (Sf) in 
Miscanthus sinensis cv. internode tissue, stained with 1% w/v KMnO4. (A) Sf 
adjacent to xylem; (B) Sf adjacent to phloem. Ccml, cell corner middle lamella; Cml, 
compound middle lamella; Mxv, metaxylem vessel; Par, parenchyma; Sw, secondary 
wall (Adopted from Zhou et al., 2015). Electron Microscopic Studies 379 
Fig. 18.5. TEM images showing layering structure of M. sinensis internode tissue. 
(A) Metaxylem vessel (Mxv); (B) protoxylem vessel (Pxv) (Adopted from 
Zhou et al., 2015). 
18.1.4.2 Shadow Casting 
Shadow casting is widely used as means of contrast enhancement for electron 
microscopy. This technique involves the deposition of an electron-dense 
material at an angle over a specimen. For this purpose, various heavy metals 
viz. chromium, nickel, platinum, uranium, gold or their alloys are evaporated 
in the specially designed apparatus. In this process, the specimen acquires 
a shadow on the uncoated side (Fig. 18.6). This technique provides the 
topographical details of the specimen. 
Fig. 18.6. Deposition of metal evaporated onto a specimen in 
Shadow-casting technique. 
 
 
 
 
 
380 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Shadow casting was widely applied to study the cellulose orientation 
in extracted walls (Preston, 1974; Roland, 1978) and to demonstrate the 
substructure of scales and fagellae of marine algae (Manton, 1966).
18.1.4.3 Freeze Etching 
In freeze etching, the specimen soaked in 20% glycerine is frozen (-100o
C) 
and fractured with a cool knife. The exposed surface is then etched, causing 
sublimation of the ice block. To give contrast to the etched surface, shadow 
casting with heavy metal is performed. Later carbon replica is prepared from 
this preparation. The shadowed specimen is destroyed by chemical treatment 
and the carbon replica is examined under EM. This technique is useful to 
study cell walls and membrane structures. 
18.1.5 Protocols for Transmission Electron Microscopic 
(TEM) Studies 
18.1.5.1 Sections Staining with Lead Hydroxide (Lever, 1960) 
The specimen is fxed in OsO4 and embedded in methacrylate or araldite. 
Preparation of stain: Dissolve 1 gr of lead hydroxide in 100 ml of distilled 
water. Later boil the solution, cool and flter it. To fltrate (faintly clouded), 
add 2 N Potassium hydroxide drop by drop until it becomes clear; the mixture 
contains some lead in plumbite form (salt formation). 
Staining Procedure 
i. Float the grids face down over a few drops of staining solution for 5 mins 
in a covered watch glass. 
ii. Remove the excess stain and wash with distilled water.
iii. Agitate each grid in 1% KOH for 3-4 secs and immediately wash with 
distilled water. 
iv. Grids are blotted with flter paper, dried and examined in TEM.
Note: Lead impregnation of the specimen appears to be reduced when 
treatment in alkali is prolonged. 
18.1.5.2 Staining with Lead Citrate (Venable and Coggeshall, 1965) 
Preparation of Stain 
Dissolve 0.01-0.04 gr of lead citrate in 10 ml of distilled water in a centrifuge 
tube to which add 0.1 ml of 10 N Sodium hydroxide and shake it vigorously 
till lead citrate dissolves. 
Staining Procedure 
i. Stain grids in a small quantity of lead citrate for 1-5 mins.
ii. Wash in distilled water, twenty dips in each of the two or three vessels.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electron Microscopic Studies 381 
iii. Air-dry on flter paper.
Double staining with aqueous uranyl acetate followed by lead citrate can 
also be performed. For diferent tissues, trials should be made with various 
concentrations of lead citrate as well as time intervals (Lane and Europe, 
1965). 
18.1.5.3 Removal of Uranyl Acetate Precipitation using Oxalic Acid 
(Avery and Ellis, 1978) 
Material is fxed in 3% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate bufer (pH 7.2) 
and post-fxed in 1% OsO4. 
Staining: Specimens are divided into three groups. 
i. Enbloc staining with 0.5% uranyl acetate in 95% ethanol for 1 hr. 
ii. Enbloc staining with 2% aqueous uranyl acetate for 8-10 hrs.
iii. Without enbloc staining. 
Dehydration: Dehydrated in ethanol, embedded in Spurr’s (1969) low 
viscosity plastic. 
Removal of precipitate from sections: Silver gold or gold sections are processed 
on Marinozzi rings (Marinozzi, 1961) and treated with 1-15% aqueous oxalic 
acid, 15% oxalic acid in 5% methanol, 5% sodium thiosulphate or 1% EDTA. 
Washed with respective solvent and post-stained with 5% uranyl acetate in 
50% methanol followed by lead citrate (Reynolds, 1963). 
Examine before and after oxalic acid treatment without post-staining. 
Result 
i. Methanolic oxalic acid 15% for 30 mins removes precipitate from stained 
sections. 
ii. Aqueous oxalic acid 1-15% for 30-60 mins at 40°C destained the tissue.
iii. Complete removal of precipitate and staining is done with 1% aqueous 
oxalic acid for 30 secs.
iv. Sodium thiosulphate does not remove the precipitate. 
v. EDTA 1% (pH 12.5) for 30-60 mins does not remove precipitate. For 
removal of precipitates from stained sections refer to O’Brien and 
McCully, 1981. 
18.1.5.4 Fixatives used for Transmission Electron Microscopy 
A. Caulfeld’s osmium tetroxide-sucrose (Caulfeld, 1957)
Veronal-acetate-HCl bufer 2 ml
2% OSO4 8 ml 
Distilled water 4 ml 
0.1 N HCl 2 ml 
Crystalline sucrose  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
382 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
B. Bufered Potassium Permanganate (Luft, 1956) 
Bufer and 0.1 N HCl stock solutions are prepared as given in Appendix.
Fixative 
1.2% KMnO4 solution 1 part 
Veronal-acetate-HCl bufer 1 part
The pH is adjusted to 7.4-7.6 with 0.1 N HCl. The specimen is fxed for 
15 mins-12 hrs at Oo
C. Later specimen is rinsed for several mins in cold 25% 
ethanol and brought down to room temperature in fresh 25% ethanol. Then the 
specimen is dehydrated through graded ethanol. 
C. Phosphate-bufered osmium tetroxide (Millonig, 1961, 1962) 
Phosphate bufer 50 ml
OsO4 0.5 gr 
The fnal fxative is prepared as follows:
Stock bufer solution 5 ml
2% OsO4 10 ml 
The stock solution has a molarity of about 0.2 and pH 7.4. The pH can be 
adjusted with HCl. The fnal concentration of OsO4 in this solution is 1.33%. 
D. Potassium Permanganate-Potassium bichromate (Kawakami, 1961)
i. Fix specimen in 0.5% potassium permanganate, containing 1% calcium 
chloride neutralised with calcium carbonate for 10-30 mins. 
ii. Wash in 1% calcium chloride neutralised with calcium carbonate. 
iii. Post-fx with 0.5% potassium bichromate neutralised with potassium 
hydroxide to pH 7.2 and containing 1% calcium chloride for 10-30 mins.
iv. Wash again with neutral 1% calcium chloride. 
v. Dehydrate with ethanol series. 
vi. After staining, sections may be immersed in 1% lead acetate adjusted to 
pH 4.2 with 1% acetic acid for 10 mins. 
E. Glutaraldehyde-Osmium tetroxide mixture (Trump and Bulger, 1966)
50% aqueous solution of glutaraldehyde 1 part
4% aqueous solution of OsO4 2 parts 
0.1 M collidine bufer 5 parts
F. Glutaraldehyde-Potassium bichromate-Osmium Tetroxide (Sugihara et 
al., 1966) 
Potassium bichromate mixture (pH 7.2)
Potassium bichromate (5%) 16 ml
2.5 N KOH 2 ml 
Distilled water 2 ml 
Sorensen’s phosphate bufer 20 ml 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electron Microscopic Studies 383 
Procedure 
i. Fix the specimen in 6.25% glutaraldehyde bufered with 0.075 M Na￾Cacodylate (pH 7.2) for 30-60 mins.
ii. Wash the specimen thrice in cold 0.33 M sucrose solution. 
iii. Later fx the specimen in potassium bichromate mixture for 30 mins.
iv. Wash again thrice in the sucrose solution. 
v. Post-fx in 1 to 2% osmium tetroxide bufered with veronal-acetate (pH 
7.5).
vi. Post-stain the sections by immersion in uranyl acetate followed by lead 
acetate. 
G. Glutaraldehyde-acrolein-Potassium permanganate (Hayat, 1968a, b)
Glutaraldehyde-acrolein mixture is a rapid general preservative and 
potassium permanganate enhances contrast. It is a good fxative for 
algae, fungi and tissues of higher plants. It preserves well the cytoplasmic 
details including lipoprotein membranes. 
Procedure 
i. Fix specimen in a mixture (1:1) of glutaraldehyde (3%) and acrolein 
(3%) bufered with 0.2 M sodium cacodylate (pH 7.2) at 4°C for 1 to 2 
hrs. 
ii. Later wash the specimen in the same bufer.
iii. Post-fx in aqueous 6% potassium permanganate at 4°C for 20 mins.
iv. Rinse the specimen twice in the same bufer.
v. Post-stain the sections by immersion in lead citrate for 5 mins.
H. Glutaraldehyde-acrolein-paraformaldehyde-osmium tetroxide
10% glutaraldehyde 6 ml 
10% acrolein 3 ml 
6% paraformaldehyde 5 ml 
0.2 M bufer 5 ml
Distilled water 1 ml 
18.2 Electron Tomography in Plant Cell Studies 
Electron tomography (ET) protocols are mainly based on imaging a biological 
specimen, particularly a plant cell, at diferent tilt angles by transmission 
electron microscopy (TEM). ET can be applied to both plastic-embedded and 
cryo samples (frozen samples). In the advancement in TEM, direct electron 
detection, automated image collection and image processing algorithms allow 
for 2-7 nm scale axial resolution, in tomographic reconstructions of cells and 
organelles (Otegui and Pennington, 2018).
Conventional ETM can resolve cellular macromolecules at a resolution of 
1-2 nm. However, it generates 2D projections and requires specimen fxation 384 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
and processing, which sometimes causes articrafts and unwanted changes to 
the cell organelles. 
Fig. 18.7. Electron tomographic reconstruction of aleurone and starchy endosperm 
Cells at 22 DAP. (A) Tomographic slice (4.3 nm thick) of a starchy endosperm cell 
containing multiple protein bodies (asterisks) within the ER. (A’) The tomographic 
model is derived from the tomogram shown in (A); (B) Tomographic slice (4.3 nm 
thick) of an aleurone cell. PSVs with large inclusions (asterisks) and LB which is 
the predominant storage compartment in these cells. (B’) The tomographic model 
is derived from the tomogram shown in (B). Here only PSVs, PrVC, and a G are 
shown. This is a serial tomogram reconstructed from four serial 250-nm-thick serial 
sections. (C) and (C’) Tomographic slice and tomographic model of a PSV. In this, 
a large inclusion (asterisk), IM and a GL are seen. CW, cell wall; ER, endoplasmic 
reticulum; G, Golgi stack; GL, globoid; IM, intravacuolar membranes; LB, lipid 
bodies; PSV, protein storage vacuole; PrVC, prevacuolar compartments. Bar = 100 
nm. (Reprinted from Reyes et al., 2011, The Plant Cell; with copyright permission 
from Oxford University Press).Electron Microscopic Studies 385 
Electron tomography (ET) approaches are instead based on collecting 
images of an individual sample at diferent angles and combining the 
individual 2D projections onto a 3D reconstruction of tomogram via either 
Fourier or real space methods (Brooks and Chiro, 1975; Ercius et al., 2015). 
ET of Plastic-embedded samples and Cryo-ET of vitrifed material have 
allowed cell biologists to image macromolecular complexes and organelles 
in their native, 3D cellular context with an axial resolution of 2-7 nm or even 
higher when combined with image analysis approaches such as sub-tomogram 
averaging (Schur et al., 2014; Castano-Diez et al., 2017).
In combination with other molecular techniques, electron tomography is 
a powerful technique to study the fundamentals of cellular processes. ET of 
plastic sections and a few Cryo-ET studies of plant cells and algal cells have 
been published and reporting the variety of cellular structures and processes, 
such as preprophase band assembly (Mineyuki, 2014; Takeuchi et al., 2016; 
Karahara et al., 2009), phragmoplast organisation (Austin et al., 2005) and 
organelle dynamics during the cell cycle (Segui-Simarro, 2006). Further, 
Reyes et al. (2011) studied the zein-rich protein inclusions in maize endosperm 
cells. In this study, a combination of molecular approaches, in vivo imaging of 
fuorescent proteins and structural analysis by electron tomography have been 
adopted to reveal the synthesis and transport of storage proteins in aleurone 
cells. Semi thick sections (250 nm) from Epon-embedded endosperm samples 
at 14 and 22 days after pollination (DAP) have been taken. They found the 
protein bodies enclosed in a continuous ER network in the starchy endosperm 
(Fig. 18.7 A, A’). The architecture of the endomembrane system in aleurone 
cells is strikingly diferent with protein storage vacuole (PSV) and lipid 
bodies occupying most of the cellular volume (Fig. 18.7 B, B’). In addition 
to the zein-rich protein inclusions, the aleurone PSVs contained one or more 
globoids (crystals of phytic acid salts) and a large system of intravacuolar 
membrane (Fig. 18.7 C, C’).
18.3 Scanning Electron Microscopic (SEM) Studies 
The preparation of biological material for EM depends on the nature of the 
sample itself. In fact, all the techniques currently available are an attempt to 
gain optimum structural and cellular preservation with minimum shrinkage 
and distortion. Robards (1978) defnes three basic criteria for the successful 
preservation of biological samples mechanical stability, complete removal or 
immobilisation of water and efective conduction of absorbed electrons to 
earth. 
There are few samples that meet these criteria for a short period of time 
without any processing at all (Baker and Parsons, 1971; Ledbetter, 1976). 
However, in general, some sample preparation is needed since few samples 
are able to withstand vacuum desiccation. Unless the water is stabilised or 
removed before keeping the specimen in the vacuum of SEM, it will boil and 386 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
lead to deformation and cellular collapse (Boyde and Wood, 1969; Robards, 
1978; Hayat, 1974).
The sample preparation for SEM varies from the simple technique 
of water stabilisation to the more complex process of water removal by 
freeze drying, critical point drying, and resin etch techniques (O’Brien and 
McCully, 1981). The simplest preparation technique is to stabilise the water 
by quickly freezing the sample in Freon cooled by liquid nitrogen, and then 
transferring the sample to a modifed microscope stage which can maintain 
the temperature at -100°C while it is being viewed under vacuum (Heywood, 
1969; Trougton and Donaldson, 1972; Troughton and Sampson, 1973). 
Freezing of the specimen must meet Robards’ (1978) three basic criteria: 
rigidity of the sample (therefore no mechanical vibration), immobilisation of 
water (no surface tension stresses) and moderately efective earth created via
the solidifed water (for a detailed discussion refer to O’Brien and McCully, 
1981). 
18.3.1 Sample Preparation for SEM 
The surface of an object to be studied by SEM should meet some of the 
important characteristics such as it must be free from foreign particles or cell 
debris, stable when put under a high vacuum, remain stable after exposure to 
electrons, and should develop as few surface charges as possible, and it must 
emit enough secondary electrons. 
Biological specimens need special attention because most of them are 
soft, full of extracellular fuids, and poor conductors. There are several 
preparative techniques depending on the nature of the tissue and the type of 
studies to be carried out. Preparation of specimens for SEM studies involves 
the following steps. 
Specimen selection 
Specimen size depends upon (a) stage capacity (x-y movement) of the SEM, 
(b) type of fxation and (c) drying process used. It should be the smallest 
size possible, to reduce the preparation artifacts. Tissue culture, single cells or 
microorganisms can be processed in suspension on attached to a suitable base 
(coverslips) before going through preparative procedures. 
As extracellular products such as mucus, blood, other body fuids and 
tissue fragments may obscure the surface to be examined, they must be 
removed by gentle washing with cold isotonic bufer. Microorganisms and cell 
suspensions can be separated from their liquid environment by centrifugation.
Sterilisation of specimen 
Apart from hard objects such as teeth, bone and wood, all other biological 
materials must be stabilised to prevent from undergoing structural changes, 
which is done by chemical fxation or physical fxation (cryo-fxation). the Electron Microscopic Studies 387 
fxative and the fxation protocol are same as in the case of TEM specimen 
preparation. 
Washing and dehydration 
To remove the unreacted fxative, the specimen is washed in bufer (which 
was used for preparing the fxative), especially after secondary fxation with 
OsO4. The later may be reduced by dehydrating agents, causing precipitates to 
form on the specimen thus obscuring the surface morphology. 
Chemically fxed objects must be dehydrated before drying. The purpose 
of dehydration is to remove water before drying. The most commonly 
dehydrating are ethanol and acetone. To avoid initial osmotic damage 
to specimen, starting solvent (acetone or ethanol) should be 30% or still 
lower. Then specimens are dehydrated using increasing concentration of the 
dehydration agent up to dry absolute acetone stage. 
After dehydration, specimens are dried and there are diferent approaches 
of drying such as air drying and critical point drying. Air drying is the simplest 
method of drying, but it creates maximum distortion. It causes fattening of 
specimen surface because of compressive forces of surface tension of liquid 
gas interface, whereas critical point drying is the commonly used techniques 
to dry biological samples. This sample is transferred from an organic 
dehydration medium (acetone) to drying medium (liquid CO2 or freon 13) in 
a chamber that is cooled and put under pressure. 
Surface coating of specimen 
When the dehydrating agent (acetone) has been completely removed and 
impregnated with the metal (gold) that coats the surface of the specimen. 
Many metals, when heated in vacuum, evaporate readily into a mono-atomic 
state. The high temperature required to start evaporation of the materials can 
be achieved by resistive heating. The coating involves the following steps:
The specimen is mounted on rotating specimen stage to get even coating; 
thin wire of metal to be evaporated is wrapped around tungsten flament; then 
the chamber is evacuated; the tungsten flament is heated by supplying voltage; 
fnally, metal will start evaporating and a thin layer will deposit on a rotating 
specimen. Sometimes it causes uneven coating; whereas sputter coating 
allows uniform coating on the specimen even on the parts that are not directly 
facing the metal to be evaporated. Hence it is the most acceptable technique. 
In this technique, specimens are placed on a cooled base plate which functions 
as an anode. The other one, which is the metal (e.g., gold) to be evaporated, 
is positioned above the specimen. Then the chamber, in which the cathode 
and anode are located is evacuated. Inert gas such as argon is fooded into 
the chamber and is again evacuated. The negative high voltage applied to the 
cathode. This result in glow discharge and argon gas molecules gets ionised. 
The positively charged ions move towards the cathode and strikes on it, there 
by releasing atoms. The dislodged metal atom due to numerous collisions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
388 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
with the gas molecules get defected several times and hit the specimens at 
diferent angles. Thus, a uniform thin layer is deposited on the specimens. 
The thickness of coat depends up on the current applied, anode and cathode 
distance and sputtering time. 
With Balzer SCD 020 sputter coater, using gold as the target (cathode), a 
coating of about 35 nm thickness can be obtained under the conditions, such 
as an electrical current of 21.5 mA, pressure 0.05 mbar, argon gas, cathode to 
anode distance about 30 nM and sputtering time one minute. After the metal 
coating, specimen is ready for observation under SEM. 
18.3.2 Protocols for SEM Studies 
18.3.2.1 General Protocol of Specimen Preparation for SEM 
Sample size for SEM studies should be 2-3 mm. Steps to be followed are 
given below:
i. Primary fxation is performed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 2-6 hours at 
4°C. 
ii. Washing is due with 0.1 M phosphate bufer (3 washings), each washing 
of 15 minutes at 4°C.
iii. Post-fxation (optional) is carried out in 1% OsO4 for 2 hours at 4°C.
iv. Final washing is with 0.1 M phosphate bufer for three changes each of 
15 minutes at 4°C.
v. Dehydration is performed in various grades of acetone (30%, 50%, 70%, 
80%, 90%, 95%, 100%), 15 minutes in each grade under 4°C temperature.
vi. Critical point drying – Critical point drying with liquid CO2 at its critical 
point, i.e., 31.5°C at 100 psi (pound per square inch).
vii. Mounting of samples should be done on to the aluminium stubs. Sputter 
coating is preferred; using silver or gold, coat the samples with 20-30 nm 
thick flm. Now it is ready for observing under SEM.
viii. Image interpretation and magnifcation.
Magnifcation on EM images
Organelles are measured in micrometres (µm) and nanometre (nm) 
1 mm = 1000 µm
1 µm = 1000 nm
1 nm = 10 A°
The true size of objects in micrograph can be calculated by using simple 
and useful thumb rule, i.e., there are 1000 µm in one mm, therefore,1 µm 
object will appear to be 1mm in size when the magnifcation is ×1000. To put 
a scale mark representing 1 µm on micrograph, simply draw a line as many 
mm long as there are thousands in magnifcation.
For example, Magnifcation × 50000, i.e., 1 µm is magnifed 50000 
times; since 1mm equals 1000 µm, 1 µm equals to 50 mm or 5 cm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electron Microscopic Studies 389 
i.e., 
Precise measurement of objects in the micrograph 
The original size of the organelle seen from ultra micrograph can be measured 
either in micrometre or nanometre by using following calculation:
Size of micrograph (µm) × 1000
= True size in µm Magnifcation
or 
Size of micrograph (nm) × 1000000
= True size in nm
Magnifcation
Calculating the total magnifcation of a picture from Bar magnifcation
e.g., 
2 µm = 10 cm
1 µm = 5 cm = 50 mm
Since 1 mm = 1000 µm
1 µm = 50000 µm (50000 x)
ix. Precautions while working in the EM lab
Some of the following precautions should be taken while working in the EM 
laboratory. These are as follows:
a. Always use disposable hand gloves while handling the EM chemicals. 
b. The glassware should be kept clean and dry before starting the tissue 
processing protocols. 
c. If the skin comes into contact with any EM chemical, it should be 
cleansed with water. 
d. Care should be taken while weighing uranium salts; uranyl acetate 
should be weighed in a room free from the air current. 
e. Always use detergent to clean hands if you touch spur or other plastics. 
f. Use fume hood while dealing with OsO4. 
g. Never dispose the used EM chemicals into wash basin. Collect them 
separately into bottle or boxes and dispose into a pit or incinerator. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
390 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
18.3.2.2 Partial Embedment in Epoxy Resins (Chambers and 
Hamilton, 1973) 
i. Fix the material in 5% glutaraldehyde.
ii. Dehydrate in acetone series of 25, 50, 75, 95 and 100%. Two changes are 
given in 100% acetone. 
iii. Add Spurr’s resin, mix for 4-5 hrs. Spurr’s resin has got the following 
ingredients:
ERL-4206 10.0 gr 
(Vinyl cyclohexene dioxide)
D.E.R. 736 6.0 gr
(Diglycidyl ether of polypropylene glycol) 
NSA (Nonenyl succinic anhydride) 26.0 gr 
S-l accelerator 0.4 gr 
iv. After 36-48 hrs infltration in pure resin mix, cut tissues to expose 
surfaces which are being studied under SEM. 
v. Place in oven at 70°C for 1 hr. 
vi. Take out the material and rinse with acetone. 
vii. Again, put it in the oven in acetone for 5 mins. 
viii. Then remove from the oven and rinse vigorously with acetone till tissue 
has a mat like appearance when viewed with a dissecting microscope. 
ix. Place tissue on flter paper and polymerise at 70°C.
x. Mount on stubs and coat with gold.
This method gives good preservation of wall ingrowths of transfer cells 
and cells maintain turgidity and life-like appearance (O’Brien and McCully, 
1981). 
18.3.2.3 New Imprinting Material for SEM (Dwivedi et al., 1991) 
Seeds of Cicer arietinum and Sansevieria roxburghiana are taken. 
Procedure 
i. Dissolve thermocol material in chloroform to obtain 5% solution (w/v). 
ii. Clean and moisture the surface of the seed with a cotton swab soaked in 
chloroform. 
iii. Spread the solution on the surface with a glass dropper and allow it to dry 
for 5 mins. 
iv. After drying, the flm on the surface is peeled of and mount (imprint 
surface should be kept above) on specimen stub coated with double sided 
adhesive tape. 
v. Stubs are then sputter-coated with approximately 200 A° thick coating of 
gold, 
vi. Samples are scanned with JEOL JSM 35 C SEM at 15 KV and 
photographed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electron Microscopic Studies 391 
Negative replica provides reliable information, and this can be compared 
with that obtained through customary methods. 
18.3.2.4 New Drying Agent for SEM Study of Pollen 
(Chissoe et al., 1994) 
Sample Preparation 
i. Pollen grains of Avena are collected from herbarium sheets and freezer 
storage. 
ii. Pollen stored in test tubes are acetolysed, sieved through fne wire mesh 
(to remove undigested plant fragments), and placed on sucrose pads (for 
removing fner particles).
iii. Dehydrate in graded ethanol series, 5 mins in each grade. 
iv. Give three changes in absolute alcohol, 5 mins each. 
v. Later two changes of 100% hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) are given.
vi. Pollen is centrifuged and it is pipetted on to copper specimen mounts 
(JEOL-TEM SCAN 100-CX 2.4 × 5.6 mm).
vii. Sprinkle the pollen onto adhesive-coated specimen mounts after HMDS 
has evaporated. (Specimen mounts are coated with thermoplastic 
adhesive “Tempfx”).
viii. In some test Tempfx is sputter-coated with gold for 4 mins prior to pollen 
application. 
ix. All samples are sputter-coated with gold for 4-6 mins and observed under 
JEOL-880 SEM ftted with lanthanum hexaboride gun.
Pollen grains are almost distortion-free and retain original shape with 
HMDS treatment. 
18.3.2.5 Chromosomal Study with SEM (Martin et al., 1994) 
Root-tips of three-day old seedlings of Barley (cv. ‘Igri’), barley telotrisomic 
lines and wheat-barley telosomic addition lines are taken. Synchronise the 
meristematic tissue either by pretreating in ice water for 24 hrs or by following 
Pan et al. (1993) and Busch et al. (1994). Later fx the material in 3:1 ethanol￾acetic acid and store it at 20 ºC until preparation of specimens. 
Digestion 
i. Cut and digest the root-tips in a solution of 2.5% cellulase, 2.5% pectinase 
in 75 mM KCl (pH 4.0) for 50-60 mins at 30°C.
ii. Filter the solution through nylon mesh (100 µm), 
iii. Treat (hypotonic) with 75 mM KCl for 8 mins at room temperature.
iv. Centrifuge the suspension for 7 mins at 80 g.
v. Resuspend the protoplasts in 3:1 ethanol-acetic acid and pellet again for 
7 mins at 80 g, perform centrifugation four times.
vi. Finally resuspend the pellet in an appropriate volume of fxative and take 
a drop on ice-cold, clean slide.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
392 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
vii. Spread protoplasts on the slide by observing under ‘ZEISS Axiophot’
light microscope. 
viii. Add a drop of 45% acetic acid before completely drying of the specimen. 
ix. Cover the preparation with a coverslip, gently squash and subsequently 
freeze on dry ice. 
x. Remove the coverslips and transfer the slides to a fxative containing 
2.5% glutaraldehyde in 75 mM cocalodylate bufer and 2 mM MgCl2 
(pH 7.4).
xi. Osmium impregnation, dehydration, critical point drying, and sputter 
coating are performed (see section 18.3.1). 
xii. Observe chromosomes under Hitachis 4100 feld emission scanning 
electron microscope. 
xiii. Microdissect the chromosome with glass rods using a ZEISS inverted 
microscope. 
Results: This procedure gives good results for chromosome studies. This 
also allows to observe plant chromosomes of all stages of life cycle. 
18.3.2.6 Sequential SEM Observations of the Reproductive Meristem by 
Non-invasive SEM Technique (Hemandez, 2001) 
i. Expose the foral meristem of sunfower (Hlianthus annuus L) CV. 
Dekalb G100 (Dekalb Argentina S.A.) at a foral stage 5 (Mart and 
Palrner, 1981), i.e., 32-34 days after seedling emerges by removing the 
last formed apical leaves and involucral bracts. 
ii. Sequential replicas of a single receptacle surface are obtained during 
foret formation. To make a primary mould, exposed meristem surface is 
covered daily with a polyvinyl impression material SDS Kerr’s extrude 
wash (Sybron Dental Specialities, West Collins Orange, CA, USA).
iii. After 10 mins of polymerisation, remove the primary mould with 
tweezers. 
iv. To protect the apex from desiccation, the receptacle meristem is 
immediately covered with a cap made from wet tissue paper and 
aluminium foil. 
v. Invert the mould and afx to the microslide.
vi. To prepare the cast, fll the moulds completely with Spurr’s resin (hard 
mixture) and place in an oven at 70°C for 72 hrs.
vii. After hardening, mount the cast on aluminium SEM stubs and sputter 
coated (Green and Linstead, 1990; Hemandez and Green, 1993). 
viii. Observe each replica in a JEOL JSM35CF scanning electron microscope 
at 10 KV and photograph.  
Electron Microscopic Studies 393 
18.3.2.7 Orchid Seed Study with SEM (Khasim et al., 2015; 
Ramudu et al., 2020) 
Reagents 
Glutaraldehyde 2.5%; 0.2 M cacodylate bufer (pH 7.2); graded ethyl alcohol: 
acetone series 
Procedure 
i. Seeds of orchid species such as Calanthe triplicata, Cymbidium 
aloifolium, C.giganteum and Malaxis densifora were collected and fxed 
in 2.5 glutaraldehyde prepared in 0.2 M cacodylate bufer (pH 7.2), kept 
in room temperature for two hours. 
Fig. 18.8. SEM photographs of orchid seeds under high magnifcation. (A) Part of 
the testa in Malaxis densifora; (B) Testa cells with transverse walls in Calanthe 
triplicata; (C) A pore between testa cells in Cymbidium aloifolium; (D) Part of the 
testa with pores in Cymbidium giganteum.  
 
 
 
394 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
ii. Later seeds samples were dehydrated in graded ethyl alcohol, acetone 
series. 
iii. Seeds were dried at critical point dryers. 
iv. After dehydration, these dehydrated seeds were mounted on to copper 
stubs and gold coated for fve minutes.
v. Now the processed specimens were examined and photographed on a 
HITACHI 53000 N model SEM.
Results 
SEM photographs clearly showed the testa cell wall thickening in orchid 
seeds; Malaxis densifora and Calanthe triplicata (showed the transverse testa 
cell wall thickenings whereas Cymbidium aloifolium and C. giganteum with 
longitudinally oriented cell wall thickenings (Fig. 18.8 A, B, C, D). Various 
shapes of orchid seeds such as flamentous, rope-like, spindle shaped and 
fusiform shape were also studied with the SEM (Ramudu et al., 2020). 19 
Autoradiography 
Basic Principle 
The technique of Autoradiography involves the incorporation of radioactive 
substance into a cell, and subsequent detection of that material using a 
photographic emulsion. The primary source of radioactive substance used in 
cell biology is an organic molecule containing tritium, the radio-active form 
of hydrogen. Radioactive carbon, phosphorous and iodine are occasionally 
employed. 
Tritiated thymidine (3H-thymidine) is often used to study the synthesis 
and localisation of DNA. Thymidine is a soluble base which is specifc to 
DNA. Upon fxing the cells for histological observations, the DNA molecules 
(with their incorporated radioactive thymidine) are precipitated or cross￾linked as permanent parts of the cell. Un-incorporated thymidine is removed 
from the cell, as it remains soluble and is disposed of in the tissue washing 
procedures. 
When the tissues are sectioned and taken on to a glass slide, they contain 
radioactive nuclei; here nuclei should be ‘S’ phase of cell cycle during the 
exposure of cells to 3H-thymidine. Later photographic emulsion is applied 
directly over the section, so that it would expose to radioactive substance. 
Developed slides are now examined under microscope.
Process of autoradiography is outlined in Fig. 19.1 (See also Alberts et al., 
1994). If one wants to localise the newly synthesised DNA in the regenerating 
cells of rat liver, here the cells are actively dividing and, therefore, DNA 
synthesis occurs; the frst step in this technique is to supply the precursor, i.e., 
thymidine which is rapidly taken up by the cells and it is specifc for DNA. 
Thymidine is labelled with tritium (H3
) and it is injected in the form of H3-
thymidine into the cells. Now cells are allowed for some time to synthesise 
new DNA. The tissue is then fxed, embedded and sectioned.
Slides (or grids) with sections containing new synthesised H3
-DNA are 
then coated with a thin layer of very-fne-grain photographic emulsion. This 
step should be performed in dark since emulsion is light sensitive. The coated 
slides are kept in dark for a period ranging from days to weeks. Photographic 
emulsions are composed of silver halide crystals which are reduced to metallic 396 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Fig. 19.1. Autoradiography (Adopted from Alberts et al., 1994). 
silver by the energy from light in photography. In autoradiography, the 
energy is from the radioactive disintegrations of the isotopic H3
 in the 
DNA. Because H3
 is a weak energy emitter (see Table 19.1), its radioactive 
disintegrations travel only 1 µm and will reduce silver grains present just 
above the site of H3
-DNA. Following the exposure period, the emulsion￾coated slides are incubated in photographic developer (in the dark only). 
Table 19.1. Isotopes commonly used to study the Biological Materials 
Isotope Maximum Energy (Mev) Half-Life (Years) 
H3 0.018 12.3 
14C 0.155 5570.0 
32P 1.71 0.04  
 
 
 
 
 
Autoradiography 397 
This substance essentially supplies electrons to the tiny reduced silver 
grains, and they become precipitated with more silver. These precipitated 
silver grains are clearly visible under microscope. Following fxation to stop 
these reactions, the slides are observed under light microscope. Silver grains, 
0.2-1.0 µm in diameter, appear over the region where the newly synthesised 
H3
-DNA is located (nucleus). In the same way, RNA(H3
-uridine as precursor) 
and proteins (H3
-amino acids as precursor) can be localised in the cell auto 
radiographically. 
19.1 Protocols 
19.1.1 General Protocol for Autoradiography 
Reagents and other materials 
Alcohol-acetic acid fxative
Xylol, permount 
3H-thymidine 
Onin sets, Jars 
Materials for feulgen reaction 
Parafn embedding
Rotary microtome 
Kodak nuclear track emulsion 
Kodak D19 Developer 
Water bath at 42o
C 
Kodak fxer
Glass slide, cover slips 
Compound microscope 
Procedure 
i. Take onion on the small jar/beaker flled with water and allow it to 
develop roots for 4-7 days. 
ii. Then transfer the root tips to another beaker containing the 10 µ/ml 
^3H-thymidine solution. Root tips are be remained in the radioactive 
solution for 1 hr at room temperature. 
iii. After the radioactive treatment, rinse root tips by dipping several times, 
in water taken in another beaker and allow them to remain in the beaker 
for four hours. 
iv. Cut root tips into pieces and fx in alcohol-acetic acid (3:1) overnight.
v. Take out root pieces and wash them thoroughly for several minutes and 
put them in 1N HCl at 60o
C for 12 minutes. 
vi. Dehydrate the root tips in 70%, 90% and 100% alcohol for 20 minutes 
in each grade, embedded in parafn wax and section at 10-15 microns in 
rotary microtome.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
398 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
vii. Take sections in the microslide and deparafnise in alcohol: Xylene 
series (3:1, 1:1, 1:3 – alcohol: xylene).
viii. Stain the sections with Feulgen reaction. 
ix. Rehydrate the sections briefy in 70, 90 and 100% alcohol for two 
minutes each. 
x. In a dark room, melt some amount of liquid auto-radiographic emulsion 
on a water bath at 42°C. 
xi. Place two slides back-to-back and dip slowly into the moulted emulsion. 
Later take out, allow to drain out excess emulsion and keep the slides in 
light-proof container and allow them to dry in a vertical position. 
xii. After drying, place the slides in an opaque slide box containing drierite. 
Wrap in aluminium foil and place in a refrigerator. 
xiii. The slides should be kept in the refrigerator until a proper exposure has 
been made. This may vary from 5 days to two weeks. After one week, 
a trial slide is taken out and develop the autoradiogram in following 
method. Examine the slide under bright feld microscope. A correct 
exposure is determined by the appearance of black silver graining over 
the cells. If the trial slide is correct, then, remaining slides should be 
processed immediately. 
xiv. Develop the autoradiogram in the dark as follows:
a. Develop in Kodak D-19 developer at 20°C for 3 minutes. 
b. Wash with distilled water for 16 seconds. 
c. Fix with Kodak Fixer for 3 minutes.
d. Wash in running tap water for 15 minutes. 
e. Dehydrate by placing in 95%, 100% alcohol for 3 minutes each. 
f. Clear in two changes of xylol for 3 minutes each.
xv. Mount the slide with permount by placing the coverslip.
Result: Slides are observed under the microscope. Those nuclei exposed 
to radioactive substance are readily identifed. The number of silver grains can 
be counted to give a quantitative measure of ^3H-thymidine incorporation, 
that shows DNA synthesis very clearly in the cell. It is also possible to count 
the cells that are undergoing cell division. 
19.1.2 Liquid Emulsion Method (Fieq, 1959; CF Jensen, 1962) 
i. Use freeze-dried, freeze-substituted or chemically fxed tissue in 1:3 
acetic acid: alcohol. 
ii. Cut the material containing H3
 at about 5 µm thickness and if it contains 
C14 at about 5-10 µm. The tissue may also be stained with Feulgen and 
squashed. 
iii. Mount the section on slides pre-coated with gelatin-chrome alum 
adhesive (adhesive is prepared by dissolving 5 gr gelatin in 1000 ml 
warm distilled water and add 0.5 gr of chromium potassium sulphate).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Autoradiography 399 
Deparafnise with xylene or toluene. Rinse in absolute alcohol and air￾dry. 
iv. Fill a large beaker (1000 ml) with water at 50°C to serve as a water bath. 
In another beaker (25 ml) take distilled water about one third the amount 
of emulsion to be used. The third small beaker tied with fne cheese cloth 
at the top is taken. Carry all these beakers including glass rod and tissue 
paper into the darkroom. 
v. Bring the emulsion (K5, or K5
-Ilford in gel form; life 2-3 months) 
maintained at 4°C to room temperature. In the dark room (use a Wratten 
safelight lamp series to illuminate the dark room), open the emulsion 
container and with the help of glass rod put emulsion in a small beaker 
containing water. Keeping the bottom of this beaker in the warm water 
of a large beaker, stir the emulsion and water with glass rod until it forms 
a rich cream. 
vi. Carefully pass the emulsion through the cheese cloth covering the 
second beaker to remove the air bubbles. Remove the cheesecloth from 
the beaker and wipe out the glass rod with tissue paper. 
vii. Now pour a small amount of emulsion on the centre of the slide to form a 
pool roughly of 20 mm. Carefully and quickly spread the emulsion with 
glass rod. Take care that the tissue should not be rubbed. 
viii. Place the slide on a glass plate in a box about 2 × 2 × 2 ft size ftted with 
light-tight door, to prevent any light to enter, and with trays containing 
calcium chloride. Emulsion will reach full sensitivity only when it is 
dried (3-5 hrs). Slides are kept in the dark for 2-4 days. 
ix. After proper exposure time, develop the emulsion in a mixture containing 
1.125 gr of amidol (diaminophenol), 4.5 gr anhydrous sodium sulfte, 2 
ml 10% solution of KBr and 250 ml water. Develop in the dark for 20 
mins at 14°C or less. 
x. Astop bath of 1% acetic acid may be used to halt the process of developing 
the emulsion. 
xi. Fix in sodium thiosulfate (hypo) at 1/3 saturation for 30-45 minutes or 
until the emulsion is clear. The hypo solution is maintained at 14°C. 
xii. Wash in running tap water for about 1 hr. Water temperature should 
not be more than 14°C during washing since the thick emulsion slows 
difusion of chemicals used in developing. Higher temperature causes 
bubbling in emulsion that leads to ruining of autoradiograph. 
xiii. Place the slides in 70% alcohol for 30 mins. This expands the gelatin, 
that facilitates the staining of the tissue. 
xiv. Stain with methyl green-pyronin or Azure B for 5-30 mins depending on 
the type of tissue. 
xv. Diferentiate in water or 70% alcohol. The emulsion should lose most of 
the dye in this step. 
xvi. Air-dry and mount with any permanent mounting medium.	 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
400 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
19.1.3	 Stripping-flm Method (Doniach and Pelc, 1950;
C.F. Jensen, 1962) 
i. Freeze-dried, or freeze-substituted or chemically fxed (1:3 aceticacid: 
alcohol) material is taken. FAAis also a good fxative for autoradiography.
ii. Deparafnise and rehydrate in water.
iii. Use Kodak autoradiographic AR10 or V1042 stripping flm. This flm 
consists of a glass plate, a layer of gelatin and a layer of 4 µ thick 
emulsion with grain size of 0.2 µ. The flm is stored in a refrigerated 
heavy metal or lead container. 
iv. Illuminated by a very dim red light. Cut out the emulsion of an area of 
about 1½ square in the dark room with a razor blade. Handle the flm 
with extreme care at this step because stretching will cause the formation 
of latent images. 
v. Float the flm, emulsion-side down, on distilled water at 21-24°C. Allow 
it for a few minutes. 
vi. Slip a slide, tissue upward, into the water below the foating flm and lift 
the flm out on top of the sections.
vii. Now dry the slide by using an electric drier. Care should be taken to 
prevent dust from blowing and avoid exposure of the flm to possible 
sparking of the drier. The slide is kept in a brown plastic box wrapped 
with black paper. This box is placed in a desiccator which is refrigerated.
viii. Kodak D-19B developer is diluted with distilled water (1:2) and fltered.
ix. Develop for 5 minutes at 18°C.
x. Fix by placing the slide directly in Kodak acid fxer at 18°C until it 
becomes clear. 
xi. Wash in running tap water for 30 minutes at 18°C.
xii. Dry at room temperature under dust-free conditions.
xiii. Stain in haematoxylin or Unna’s stain.
Finally, the slide is dehydrated and mounted in Canada balsam and 
observe under the microscope. 
19.1.4 Restripping Method (Andresen et al., 1952, 
C.F. Jensen, 1962) 
Follow steps (i)-(iii) as described above. Mark the slide with India in to help 
you later in orientation of the restripped emulsion; (iv) Cover the tissue with 
nylon flm.
Preparation of nylon flm: Dissolve Dupont nylon (type FM 6901) in 
warm amyl alcohol. Allow drop of this solution to fall on dust-free water 
surface (flm should be thin enough). On a circular wire frame the flm is lifted 
and allowed to dry in a desiccator. This flm is placed on the slide to cover 
the tissue. Dip a glass rod with smooth round tip in the same nylon solution 
and press on the flm in a circle around the sections. Care should be taken not  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Autoradiography 401 
to enter the air bubbles at this step. The nylon flm will break away when the 
circle is completed. Apply additional nylon solution around the edge to make 
it watertight. 
i. Place the stripping flm over the slide and the nylon flm as described in 
above protocol and handle the slide in the same way until developing. 
ii. After exposure, re-strip the flm from the sections by cutting the emulsion 
at the edge of the slide and gently pulling it away from the section. When 
the flm is completely freed from the slide, grip it with a plastic clamp.
iii. Now develop the flm with clamp for 5 minutes at 18°C in D 19B 
developer. 
iv. Transfer the developed flm to acid fxing bath at 18°C. 
v. Wash the flm in distilled water for 15 mins giving two changes.
vi. After washing, free the flm from the clamp and mount it emulsion side 
up on a slide with the help of brush. 
vii. After emulsion is dried, mount it with Canada balsam. 
viii. Carefully remove the nylon flm from the tissue and stain it. The tissue 
may also be used for making another radiograph. 
19.2 Radiography of Botanical Material by Means of 
Low-energy X-rays (O’Brien and McCully, 1981) 
Relatively low-energy X-rays (soft X-rays in the range of 1-30 KV) are 
employed here to study the plant structure. Fresh material or herbarium 
specimens are radiographed with this simple technique. 
Procedure 
i. Cover the X-ray flm or other suitable photographic emulsion with a thin 
layer of black plastic to protect it from light. 
ii. Put the plant specimen directly upon the black plastic. 
iii. Now expose to X-rays; the optimum combination of energy and time of 
exposure varies, and it should be standardised on a trial-and-error basis.
iv. Develop the flm photographically and it can be examined either as a 
negative or as a positive after contact printing. 
The method has got potential importance in studying the leaf venation 
and distribution of calcium oxalate crystals in leaf, and useful in taxonomic 
studies (O’Brien and McCully, 1981).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
Cryopreservation Development 
for Germplasm Storage 
Plant Cryopreservation (Cryo is derived from the Greek word; ‘Cryos’ means 
cold or freezing and preservation mean storage) is the preservation of plant 
species in the form of plants outside natural habitats. (ex situ conservation), 
including DNA, seeds, pollen, buds, dormant buds, embryonic axes, zygotic, 
and somatic embryos at ultra-low temperatures (−130°C) but generally prefer 
to store the species using liquid nitrogen at −196°C, which is the temperature 
level that arrests biological activities, including all biochemical reactions of 
cells and no genetic changes during storage (Engelmann, 2004). Therefore, it 
is a reliable method for long-term storage of plant materials, although in some 
cases, such as storing seeds at −20°C, is more appropriate and less expensive 
than storage in liquid nitrogen and buds can be stored at −4 to −80°C, but 
storage cannot last long. Therefore, cold storage is another option for long￾term storage. But stored living materials should be checked periodically. 
20.1 Principles of Cryopreservation 
Plants that grow from warm to cold can withstand cold weather down to 
below 0°C. When the cold season passed, spring replaced it. Plants will begin 
to sprout new branches and leaves. Plants can withstand extreme cold weather 
because outside the cells contain more water than inside the cells, then ice 
crystals form outside the cells frst. The water will move sufciently out of the 
cells due to lower water potential than the outside until there is only a little 
water inside the cells which do not form ice crystals inside the cells when 
exposed to very low temperatures at −30°C. 
Prof. Dr. Akira Sakai (Sakai, 1960) conducted an experiment 
about 60 years ago using small branches of temperate trees, such as the willow 
and mulberry by reducing the temperature of those branches to −30°C before 
being immersed in liquid nitrogen or liquid helium for 1 year. After removing 
those branches from liquid nitrogen, they were still alive. This experiment 
is the frst experiment by experimenting with pieces of plants in the cold 
regions that cause water loss before being immersed in liquid nitrogen. Later, 
there were many experiments and various methods that were developed to be  
 
 
404 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
carried out easily, conveniently, quickly, and high efciently by increasing 
survival and low cost. However, the same principles are still used by reducing 
the amount of water inside the cells adequately by various methods, after 
that take plant materials to store at very low temperatures. The cells will 
be vitrifed instead of ice crystals which have sharp edges to damage the 
cells and cell membranes. In terms of structure and properties, choosing 
a semi-permeable membrane will cause the cells to fnally die.
Success in preserving plant varieties in super cold conditions based on the 
cooling rate and the concentration of chemicals (cryoprotectants) preventing 
ultra-low temperature in order not to make the solution inside the cells to be 
ice crystals, but to be glass transition (Panis et al., 2005). Plant materials to be 
preserved must be in the suitable growth stage, type of cell groups, and the size 
that can be dehydrated the cells sufciently and efciently. Table 20.1 shows 
the plant materials used for preserving plant species in super cool conditions 
and the advantages and disadvantages of preservation. 
Table 20.1. Plant materials used for preserving varieties in super cool conditions 
Plant 
materials Groups Advantages Disadvantages 
Seeds Small seeds, seeds 
that are resistant 
to dry and extreme 
conditions, 
cannot be asexual 
propagated. 
Easy to preserve 
and are orthodox 
seeds (tolerate to dry 
conditions). 
Cannot be 
used with large 
seeds that do not 
tolerate cold and 
dry conditions 
(recalcitrant 
seeds) and asexual 
propagation. 
Pollen Many groups Easy for diferent 
genera and helpful in 
plant breeding. 
Can store only half 
of the total number 
of chromosomes 
Dormant 
buds 
Trees that grow in 
the cold weather. 
The buds are rest and 
ready to be kept in the 
collection. Requires 
less time and 
labour. No need 
for tissue culture 
Resistance to cold, 
depends on seasons 
and genotypes. 
Requires more 
storage space 
than other 
laboratories. methods. Must 
have expertise in 
grafting or budding 
after storage.  
 
 
 
 
Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 405 
In vitro 
shoot tips 
Embryonic 
cultures 
Embryonic 
axes 
Zygotic 
embryos 
Many groups 
Many groups 
Plants which seeds 
are not resistant to 
dehydration and 
have large seeds 
(recalcitrant seeds). 
Plants which seeds 
are not resistant to 
dehydration and 
have large seeds 
(recalcitrant seeds). 
Can collect the tip all 
year round. Easy to 
handle both anatomy 
and physiology. 
In general. callus is 
easy to preserve. 
Easy to remove and 
proceed. 
Removing seed coats 
may increase survival, 
No techniques have 
been developed for 
all plants. Must 
have laboratories 
and skilled 
workers. 
Some plants 
do not produce 
somatic embryos. 
Techniques are not 
yet widely used for 
preserving plant 
species. 
Must do tissue 
culture to get the 
plantlets after 
storage. 
Time consuming 
and quite difcult 
techniques. 
Preservation of plant materials in cold conditions need to understand 
the basic mechanism of this principle which are: 1. Slow cooling (slow 
freezing) and 2. Vitrifcation.
Slow cooling 
This principle is used in the initial stages of preserving plant varieties in super 
cool conditions. Plants can endure the cold weather in the fall and very cold, 
lower than the freezing point in the winter, then sprouting new branches and 
leaves in the spring. When the weather starts to be cold, the water that is in the 
solution outside the cells which has more water than inside the cells will begin 
to form ice crystals. The remaining solution that does not form ice crystals 
will have a higher concentration. Therefore, to maintain the balance of water 
inside and outside the cells, water from inside the cells will move out from 
the protoplasm according to the water potential from higher to the outside 
which has lower water potential. Due to the presence of water outside the 
cells more than inside the cells, the cells will be dehydrated and wither. The 
concentration of the solution inside the cells will gradually increase and at the 
same time the temperature will slowly decrease. Until the end, the volume of 
cells that are not frozen will have very little water, and outside the membrane,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
406 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
the ice crystals will reach a temperature of −40°C, which is enough to store 
in liquid nitrogen (−196°C). The solution in the cells will have very high 
viscosity that does not form ice crystals but form glass-liked (vitrifcation) 
instead (Fig. 20.1). 
Therefore, the preservation of plant varieties in an extremely cold state 
used the principle of slow cooling. It is the method used in the beginning to 
keep the dormant buds of trees in the cold region by collecting plant materials 
from the trees in the winter through cold weather using slow cooling method, 
cultured at very low temperatures, such as 0°C for a while or immersed 
in cryoprotectants, such as glycerol and sucrose at low concentration for 10-
20 minutes, then use programmable freezing controller (Fig. 20.2) which is 
expensive, complicated, difcult to use, high cost, and takes many hours to 
work to lower the temperature at a rate of 0.5-2°C per minute, depending on 
crop type and growth stage until −40°C. Then, plant materials will be stored 
in liquid nitrogen. This method was applied to non-organised tissues, such 
as cell suspension and callus. After removing plant materials from liquid 
nitrogen, the temperature must be slowly increased the same as changing from 
the winter to the spring. Since the solution inside the cells still has low water 
content, if the temperature rises quickly, it may afect the metabolism of cells.
Fig. 20.1. The water inside the cell drops to a point where the solution inside 
the cell is very concentrated when exposed to extremely low temperatures, such 
as below 0°C, the water inside the cells changes from liquid to glass, which is 
called non-crystalline or amorphous phase or vitrifcation, the water molecules 
will form ice crystals or solid state. As a result, the amount of water in the solution 
outside the cell decreases, so the water potential outside the cell is lower than 
inside the cells. Water then moves from the inside of the cells to the outside of 
the cell enough to not cause the formation of ice crystals inside the cells. The 
rate of temperature reduction must be appropriate in order not to injure various 
organs inside the cell and the cell membrane. The cell is still alive.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 407 
Fig. 20.2. Programmable freezing controller. 
Vitrifcation
The glass transition is a process of physical changes from liquid to non￾crystalline, amorphous, and a glass state (Fahy et al., 1984). Cells can 
be preserved in non-ice crystals which do not damage cell membrane 
(Benson, 2008) (Fig. 20.3). Changing the state of the cell to a glass state 
requires two changes: (1) The rate of temperature reduction is very fast and 
(2) The solution within the cell is highly concentrated (Sakai, 2000). 
Normally, when plant materials in a cryotube are put into liquid 
nitrogen, the temperature drops quickly (about 60°C/sec). Later, there is a 
development to reduce the temperature faster by dripping the anti-coolant 
solution containing the plant materials onto the aluminium foil, called 
the droplet method, which can reduce the temperature to around 4,000°C per 
minute (Panis et al., 2005; Schafer-Menuhr et al., 1996) and cryo-plate, which 
will reduce approximately 5,000°C per minute (Yamamoto et al., 2011). That 
means lowering the temperature at a fast rate and warming it at a fast rate after 
removing liquid nitrogen will increase the survival of cells. 
The Vitrifcation method was developed by Sakai et al. (1990) and applied 
to various plants in the tropics, sub-tropic, and temperate. The method is based 
on the creation of glass by immersing the plants in a highly concentrated 
anti-cold chemical, such as PVS2 solution at temperatures of 25°C and 0°C 
(Matsumoto et al., 1994) to extract water from the cells without damaging the 
tissue. The moisture content of cells must be about 20-30% (Matsumoto et at., 
1995) before being stored in liquid nitrogen and form the condition of glass 
inside and outside the cells (Figs. 20.3, 20.4, and 20.5). Vitrifcation method is 
an easy, convenient, less time consuming, and low cost, requires no expensive 
and complicated equipment (a programable freezing controller). After that, 
plant materials are removed from liquid nitrogen, then do rapid warming 
to prevent the transition from a glass state to ice crystals but skip a liquid 
state. Therefore, it will not damage the cell condition and cryopreserved cells 
are still alive.  
 
408 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Fig. 20.3. Characteristics and structure of water molecules in a liquid state (A, D), an 
ice crystal (B, E), and a glass state (C, F). Cell Membranes are destroyed when the 
water inside the cells is in an ice crystal state (E).(Image courtesy of Dr. Bart Panis). 
Fig. 20.4. Vitrifcation method using concentrated chemicals to prevent 
cold conditions. The most widely used solution is PVS2 (Plant Vitrifcation 
Solution Formula 2), developed by Prof. Dr. Akira Sakai contains 30% (w/v) 
glycerol,15% (w/v) ethylene glycol, 15% (w/v) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 
and 0.4 M sucrose. Glycerol and DMSO will move into the cells. Ethylene glycol 
will not move into the cells but will make the water which has higher water potential 
from inside the cells moves out of the cells. Therefore, preserved plant materials in 
liquid nitrogen are in a glass state, both inside and outside the cells.  
 
 
 
 
Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 409 
Before storage, cells grow 
normally. 
Intracellular ice crystals after storage 
in liquid nitrogen without exposure to 
PVS2 solution, cells die. 
Cells after exposure to PVS2 solution and be stored 
in liquid nitrogen, cells survive. 
Fig. 20.5. Cryopreservation of jackfruit embryonic axes using the 
vitrifcation method (Thammasiri, 1999).
Figure 20.6 describes the concentration of solution inside the cells. 
As the solution rises, the temperature of glass transition will decrease and 
the area where ice crystals form will be reduced. Therefore, increasing the 
concentration of solution inside the cells will result in reducing the occurrence 
of ice crystals inside the cells, leading to higher survival. However, the cells 
must be resistant to dry conditions at 20-30% moisture content inside the 
cells. Plant tissue containing a lot of water are not tolerant to dry conditions, 
except pollen, seeds, and somatic embryos of plants that are tolerant to dry 
conditions (orthodox species). 
Further, Fig. 20.6 clearly explains the slow cooling mechanism that allows 
plants to be preserved in a super cold condition and still survive. From the 
autumn to the winter, water begins to form ice crystals when the temperature 
is below 0°C in external cells frst because there is more water content than 
inside the cells, then the water from inside the cells will be more and gradually 
move out from the cells causing the water inside the cells to decrease. The 
solution inside the cells gets more concentrated. The area of the ice crystals will  
 
410 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Fig. 20.6. The relationship between temperature and concentration of solution to 
liquid, solid (ice) and glass phases (Tm = Melting point temperature; 
Th = Homogeneous nucleation temperature; Tg = Glass transition temperature) 
(Image courtesy of Dr. Bart Panis). 
gradually decrease as the concentration of the solution increases. Therefore, 
the chance of the formation of ice crystals within the cells will be less. It 
takes some time from liquid to ice crystal state; therefore, if the temperature 
keeps getting lower, and the concentration of solution increases steadily 
to the interception point of Th and Tg, the glass state will be formed. The 
formation of ice crystals will occur very little or not at all. The important thing 
is to naturally reduce the temperature slowly. If decreasing too quickly, the 
concentration of solution inside the cells remains low because water does not 
move out of the cells quickly, resulting in ice crystal formation. Since ice 
crystals form from −40°C or reduce the temperature rapidly will cause ice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 411 
crystals at low temperature. In summary, the plants must be cooled slowly so 
that the amount of water inside the cells is very low to about −40°C and then 
can be stored in liquid nitrogen and the cells are still alive. 
On the other hand, preservation of plant materials by vitrifcation is the 
opposite of slow cooling by exposure to highly concentrated solution, such as 
PVS2 solution for suitable time and reducing the temperature rapidly to have 
about 20-30% water content inside the cells. In order not to be toxic to cells and 
the reduction of exposure time, some chemicals with a low molecular weight, 
commonly use DMSO and glycerol will rapidly increase the concentration of 
solution inside the cells and help to eliminate free radicals and stabilise cell 
membranes. Another part of the chemicals due to their high molecular weight 
will be outside cell membrane, such as sucrose which helps to move water 
out of the cells and to stabilise cell membrane condition. Therefore, freezing 
of anti-coolant substances, such as PVS2 solutions, causes the solution inside 
the cells to rapidly increase concentration by the chemicals moving in and the 
water moving out according to the water potential. The amount of water in 
the cells should be 20-30% to be stored in liquid nitrogen. Therefore, when 
the concentration of solution increases rapidly, the temperature reduction 
must also be fast. Due to the high concentration of solution, the formation 
of ice crystals is even lower and rapid temperature reduction will reduce 
the time of exposure to plants, thus decreasing the toxicity. For example, 
the Droplet method reduces the temperature at around 4,000°C per minute 
and Cryo-plate method decreases the temperature at around 4,500°C per 
minute. From liquid to ice crystal state, it takes time for the formation of 
ice crystals. Therefore, quickly lowering the temperature would be able to 
overcome the ice crystal state to be glass state and increasing survival. Evidence 
of glass state must be studied from the physical process. The general method 
used is measuring the latent heat released. 
In summary, slow cooling uses pre-treatment chemicals to withstand low 
temperature conditions that have low concentration and slowly reduce the 
temperature, while vitrifcation uses highly concentrated solution and rapid 
cooling rate. The two methods have the same goal to prevent ice crystal 
formation within the cells to get high survivals after being taken out of the 
storage in a super cold condition. 
20.2 Steps in Plant Cryopreservation 
There are 7 main steps in plant cryopreservation. Some plants may not require 
every step (skipping steps 1, 2, 5, or 6) in preservation depending on plant 
species and cryopreservation methods. The whole protocol is as follows: 
i. Preculture The cells will be adjusted to low temperature using 0.3 M 
sucrose (1-3 days) for (a) adding sucrose and, (b) adding ABA (abscisic 
acid) to stabilise cell membrane under dry condition.  
 
 
 
 
412 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Fig. 20.7. The cells of wasabi plants immersed in preculture chemicals, a solution 
of 0.4 M sucrose for 20 minutes. There is a noticeable loss of water in some 
cells (Image courtesy of Prof. Dr. Akira Sakai). 
ii. Loading solution Using chemicals to protect osmotic pressure, such as 
2 M glycerol + 0.4 M sucrose (20 minutes) for dehydrating the cells 
to reduce osmotic pressure and help to withstand highly concentrated 
solution, such as PVS2 solution and adjust to dry and vitrifcation 
conditions. 
Fig. 20.8. Immersion of the cells of Wasabi into a highly concentrated 
PVS2 solution. The water inside the cells is reduced sufciently to prevent ice 
crystal formation inside the cells when exposed to low temperatures. Instead, 
the glass condition will be formed and not harm the cells when stored in liquid 
nitrogen. In this fgure, we can see that the size of the cytoplasm. dramatically 
decreases when compared with immersion in preculture solution (Image courtesy 
of Prof. Dr. Akira Sakai). 
iii. Dehydration Nowadays, scientists combine dehydration chemicals at a 
suitable rate for each plant. These chemicals are called plant vitrifcation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 413 
solutions (PVS) which have many formulas (Table 20.2). The formula 
used in the present 4 formula is PVS1 (Usagami et al., 1989), PVS2 
(Sakai et al., 1990), PVS3 (Nishi gawa et al., 1993), and PVS4 (Sakai et 
al., 2000). Highly concentrated solution, such as PVS2 solution at 25o
C 
or 0o
C (for suitable time) is used for dehydrating the cells sufciently. 
The chemical composition in each formula is shown in Table 20.2. 
Table 20.2. Chemical composition of PVS solution of 4 formulae 
Chemical (g / l) PVS1 PVS2 PVS3 PVS4 
Glycerol 220.0 300.0 500.0 350.0 
Ethylene Glycol 150.0 150.0 - 200.0 
Propylene Glycol 150.0 - - -
Dimethyl sulfoxides 70.0 150.0 - -
Sucrose - 136.9 500.0 205.0 
Sorbitol 91.1 - - -
These chemicals have diferent functions during the cold and warm 
process. Sugar helps stabilise cell membrane and proteins. DMSO will 
capture free radicals, increase the absorption of membrane cells and protect 
the cell structure during the cold condition. Glycerol helps stabilise cell 
membrane. But the work of these chemicals is not yet fully understood: 
iv. Storage in liquid nitrogen All the cryopreserved cells will be vitrifed 
from −115o
C to −196o
C (in liquid nitrogen). 
v. Rapid warming Warm the cryopreserved cells rapidly at 35-40o
C in 
water bath to change from glass state to liquid state. 
vi. Unloading solution Move the cells to concentrated 1.2 M sucrose for 20 
minutes to reduce osmotic pressure and not let water move into the cells 
too fast. This step is for acclimation before culture. 
vii. Culture on suitable medium Culture the cells on suitable medium for 
plantlet development. Then, transfer the plantlets to the greenhouse, 
applying acclimatisation for 2 weeks. 
20.3 Methods in Plant Cryopreservation 
Preservation of plant materials in cold conditions need to understand the basic 
mechanism of this principle which can be done in two ways: 1. Slow cooling 
or slow freezing (cell dehydration due to cold temperature) and 2. Vitrifcation 
(glass formation). In slow cooling, dormant bud and slow freezing methods 
are concerned. In vitrifcation, cells are dehydrated by exposure to highly 
concentrated chemicals or air drying before freezing, followed by rapid 
warming to avoid intracellular ice formation. Six diferent vitrifcation-based 
methods are: 1. vitrifcation, 2. encapsulation-dehydration, 3. encapsulation- 
414 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
vitrifcation, 4. droplet-vitrifcation, 5. vitrifcation cryo-plate method (V
cryo-plate), and 6. dehydration cryo-plate (D cryo-plate). Up till now, there 
are eight methods chronologically as follows: 
20.3.1 Dormant Bud Method 
This is the frst plant cryopreservation method that dormant buds were 
collected during winter when buds were dehydrated at −10 to −30o
C before 
storage in liquid nitrogen (−196o
C). This method was successful in willows 
(Salix koriyanagi) and poplar (Populus sieboldii) (Sakai, 1960). Later, 
dormant bud method was studied in apple (Sakai and Nishiyama, 19781; 
Forsline et al., 1998; Towill and Bonnart, 2003), cherry (Towill and Forsline, 
1999), blueberry (Jenderek and Reed, 2017), etc. 
Dormant Buds 
Fig. 20.9. Diagram showing Dormant Bud method. 
The protocol for preserving dormant buds is shown in Fig. 20.9. This 
method works well with cold perennials, such as apples, willows, mulberry, 
conifers, etc., and is another option for plant cryopreservation. 
20.3.2 Slow Freezing Method 
Slow freezing was the standard method in the early time (Panis and Lambardi, 
2005), but need a programmable freezing controller to reduce the temperature 
at the rate of 0.5-2°C/min depending on the plant species and the growth stage 
until about −40°C, then store in liquid nitrogen. The protocol takes many 
hours to complete and requires expensive tools. This method was popular 
during 1980-1990 to store undeveloped plant tissues, such as suspended cells 
and calli of various plants.  
 
 
 
Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 415 
Slow Freezing 
Fig. 20.10. Diagram showing the Slow Freezing method. 
The protocol for Slow freezing method is shown in Fig. 20.10. Slow 
freezing method is used to preserve plant species in extremely cold 
conditions compared to other methods. Due to complications, it takes a 
long time and must use a programmable freezing controller but may work 
better in some plants in China at the National Gene bank in Beijing of 
the 82 plants collected, only 3 mulberry plants were kept dormant by slow 
freezing method and had a survival rate of 90% (Zhang et al., 2014). 
20.3.3	 Vitrifcation Method
Vitrifcation is a method developed to reduce the temperature and to warm 
rapidly, all parts of cells and tissues in a glass state. Vitrifcation method involves 
treatment of explants with plant vitrifcation solution (PVS), such as PVS1, 
PVS2, PVS3, and PVS4 to induce dehydration of explants during cooling and 
warming to avoid intracellular ice-crystal formation (Uragami et al., 1989; Sakai 
et al., 1990). The key to successful cryopreservation by vitrifcation method is to 
prevent injury by optimising exposure time to PVS for dehydration (Niino, 2007) 
because over exposure time to PVS may result in cell injury and intracellular 
ice formation during cooling. The optimum exposure time to PVS depends on 
explant size and species specifc. The suitable dehydration duration was related to 
the sample size, the composition, and loading solution (Chen and Wang, 2002). 
Sakai et al. (1990) succeeded to cryopreserve nucellar cells of naval orange 
using PVS2 solution, after that many plants were experimented with success. 416 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Vitrifcation
Fig. 20.11. Diagram showing Vitrifcation method.
The protocol for the Vitrifcation method is shown in Fig. 20.11. 
Vitrifcation is a method developed with short processing time, low cost, and 
less skilled work. It gives high survival, but it needs accurate time because of 
a short protocol time. In addition, the use of chemicals to dehydrate cells may 
be toxic to cryopreserved plant materials. 
20.3.4 Encapsulation-dehydration Method 
Encapsulation-dehydration method is developed from artifcial seed 
production that explants are encapsulated in alginate beads, precultured with 
high sucrose, desiccated by air-drying in a laminar air-fow cabinet or with 
silica gel, and then plunged into liquid nitrogen (Sakai et al., 2000; Matsumoto 
and Sakai, 1995). The advantages of this method are easy for manipulation 
of encapsulated explants (Hirai, 1998), preventing direct contact of toxic 
chemicals with plant materials, and non-toxic cryoprotectants are applied to 
protect during dehydration (Niino and Sakai, 1992). However, this method 
is the longer dehydration procedure than vitrifcation method (Thammasiri, 
2000). Fabre and Dereuddre (1990) succeeded to cryopreserve tomato 
apical meristems by using this method. There are many plant species to be 
cryopreserved by encapsulation-dehydration. 
Jitsopakul et al. (2008a) successfully cryopreserved protocorms of 
Vanda coerulea by encapsulation-dehydration in combination with a loading 
solution (Fig. 20.12). Protocorms were selected 70 days after sowing seeds, 
harvested from 7-month-old fruits. After encapsulation in an alginate matrix 
composed of 2% Na-alginate, 2 M glycerol plus 0.4 M sucrose (loading 
solution), the protocorms were precultured in modifed VW liquid medium 
(Vacin and Went, 1949) supplemented with 0.7 M sucrose on a shaker (100 
rpm) at 25±3o
C for 20 h. Encapsulated protocorms were then dehydrated Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 417 
in a sterile air-fow in a laminar air-fow cabinet at 25±3o
C for 1-10 h, and 
then directly plunged into liquid nitrogen for 1 d. After thawing at 49o
C for 
2 min, cryopreserved beads were cultured on modifed VW agar medium for 
regrowth. The highest regrowth of 40% was observed with cryopreserved 
bead with 35% water content for 8 h dehydration. No morphological variation 
was detected between non-cryopreserved and cryopreserved plantlets, and 
ploidy level was unchanged because of cryopreservation. 
Fig. 20.12. Regrowth of Vanda coerulea protocorms after cryopreservation by 
encapsulation-dehydration in combination with loading solution. A: Precultured 
beads after sterile air-fow dehydration for 10 h. B: Cryopreserved protocorms 
after 20 days of regrowth. C: 3 months of culture on modifed VW agar medium 
showing shoot growth. D: Plantlets after 8 months of culture on modifed VW
agar medium (left: non-cryopreserved, right: cryopreserved plantlet). E: Plantlets 
derived from cryopreserved protocorms after 5 months and F: 15 months of culture 
in the greenhouse. Bar for A-C = 1 mm, for D = 0.5 cm, and for E and F = 1 cm. 
Source: Jitsopakul et al., 2008a (with permission from Cryo Letters Journal). 
The protocol for the Encapsulation-dehydration method is shown in 
Fig. 20.13. No highly concentrated chemicals used for dehydration, but 
air blow is used instead; therefore, it is not toxic to plant materials and 
environment. Encapsulation helps to reduce the damage from moving plant 
materials and air blow, as well as taking longer time (20-30 minutes more) 
for operation which help fexible operation. In addition, there is no unloading 
solution after rapid warming since the water from outside the cells will not 
move in fast due to the presence of calcium alginate encapsulation and in a 
dry condition including without highly concentrated chemical solution. The 
disadvantages of this method are long operation of 2-3 days, medium or low 
survival depending on adjusted protocols, and high sucrose concentration 
after dehydration which some plant species cannot tolerate.  
418 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Encapsulation-Dehydration 
Fig. 20.13. Diagram showing Encapsulation-Dehydration method. 
20.3.5	 Encapsulation-vitrifcation Method
Encapsulation-vitrifcation method is a combination of encapsulation￾dehydration method and vitrifcation method. The explants are encapsulated in 
alginate bead, and then subjected to dehydration by highly concentrated plant 
vitrifcation solutions, such as PVS1, PVS2, PVS3, and PVS4. This method 
gives higher survival than encapsulation-dehydration (Hirai and Sakai, 1992; 
Sakai et al., 2008; Matsumoto, 2017). 
Encapsulation-Vitrifcation
Fig. 20.14. Diagram showing Encapsulation-vitrifcation method.
The protocol for Encapsulation-vitrifcation method is shown in Fig. 
20.14. Encapsulation-vitrifcation method is the method that is applied 
from Encapsulation-dehydration. Survival is higher than the Encapsulation-Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 419 
dehydration method and close to or slightly lower compared with 
the vitrifcation method. 
20.3.6	 Droplet-vitrifcation Method
This recent method is the fast freezing from small drops of plant vitrifcation 
solution (PVS) on aluminium foil. Droplet-vitrifcation method is a 
combination of droplet-freezing and solution-based vitrifcation, then placed 
on aluminium foil strip in droplet of vitrifcation solution and then frozen by 
rapidly immersion in liquid nitrogen (Sakai and Englemann, 2007). Rapid 
warming was done by dipping the aluminium foil strips in unloading solution 
without using a water bath (Kim et al., 2006). During the cooling and warming 
procedures, rapid heat transfer is needed to avoid freezing injury (Agrawal et 
al., 2004; Kim et al., 2006; Yoon et al., 2006). Aluminium foil has an efcient 
thermal conductivity, resulting in quick and uniform heat distribution among 
tissue Halmagyi et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2006; Yoon et al., 2006). A high 
warming rate was employed to avoid recrystallisation of intracellular ice or 
addition cell dehydration by extracellular ice (Kim et al., 2006). The frst 
success of droplet-vitrifcation method was studied in potatoes (Pennycooke 
and Towill, 2000). Later, successes in papaya (Ashmore et al., 2001), prunes 
(De Boucaud et al., 2002), jam (Leunufna and Keller, 2003), chrysanthemum 
(Halmagyi et al., 2004), banana (Panis et al., 2005), rose (Halmagyi and 
Pinker, 2006), Bletilla striata (Jitsopakul et al., 2008b), Grammatophyllumspe 
ciosum(Sopalun et al., 2010), Vanda coerulea (Jitsopakul et al., 2008a), Sugar 
cane (Barraco et al., 2011), Vanilla orchid (Gonzalez-Arnao et al., 2009; 
Hernandez-Ramirez et al., 2014), Oil Palm (Gantaitet al., 2015), Grapes 
(Pathirana et al., 2015), Orange (Volk et al., 2012), etc. 
Jitsopakul et al. (2008b) studied droplet-vitrifcation method for 
cryopreservation of Bletilla striata mature seeds (0 day after sowing), 
zygotic embryos (3 days after sowing) and protocorms (6, 9, and 12 days 
after sowing). Mature seeds were surface-sterilised and sown on solidifed 
New Dogashima (ND) medium supplemented with 3% sucrose and cultured 
-2 under illumination provided at an intensity of 62.0 µmol. m s
-1 for 16 h/d . 
at 25°C for preparation of zygotic embryos and protocorms. Mature seeds, 
zygotic embryos, and 6-day-old protocorms were precultured in liquid ND 
medium supplemented with 0.3 M sucrose for 3 h on a shaker (110 rpm) and 
then dehydrated with 2 M glycerol and 0.4 M sucrose in ND liquid medium 
(loading solution) for 15 min, followed by exposure to PVS2 solution for 
60 min at 25°C. Then, plant materials were soaked in liquid nitrogen by 
droplet-vitrifcation method, and then were cultured on solidifed ND medium 
supplemented with 3% sucrose, germination rates of cryopreserved mature 
seeds, cryopreserved zygotic embryo, and survival rate of cryopreserved 
6-day-old protocorms were 93%, 91%, and 84%, respectively. Cryopreserved 
9-day-old protocorms gave the highest survival rate of 66% when precultured 
with 0.5 M sucrose for 3 h on a shaker, dehydrated with loading solution 420 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Fig. 20.15. Mature seeds of Bletilla striata. A: Development of mature seeds 
sown on solidifed ND medium supplemented with 3% sucrose under illumination 
provided at an intensity of 62 µM m-2.s-1 for 16 h/d at 25°C for 3 days, B: 3 days, 
C: 6 days, D: 9 days, E: 12 days, and F: Twenty droplets of PVS2 solution (2 µl) 
with protocorms, placed on sterilised aluminium foil strip (7 × 20 mm2
). Bar: A-E 
= 0.5 mm, F = 1 cm. Source: Jitsopakul et al., 2008b (with permission from Cryo 
Letters Journal). 
for 15 min, followed by exposure to PVS2 solution for 40 min at 25°C and 
cultured on solidifed ND medium supplemented with 480 mg/l ammonium 
nitrate and 3% sucrose. No survival was observed in cryopreserved 12-old￾day protocorms. Fig. 20.15 A-F showed the development of mature seeds. 
Mature seeds developed into zygotic embryos at 3 days after sowing (Fig. 
20.15B). Protocorms formed green spots on zygotic embryos at 6 days of 
sowing (Fig. 20.15C). Protocorms formed apical meristems at 9 days of 
sowing (Fig. 20.15D) and formed primary leaves at 12 days of sowing (Fig. 
20.15E). 
Droplet-Vitrifcation
Fig. 20.16. Diagram showing Droplet-vitrifcation method. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 421 
The protocol for Droplet-vitrifcation method is shown in Fig. 20.16. 
Droplet-vitrifcation method is a relatively new method which is improved 
from Vitrifcation. The explants are dehydrated by using just one drop of 
highly concentrated plant vitrifcation solution and place on an aluminium 
foil which contributes to heat. It is convenient to move 10-12 explants on the 
aluminium foil at the same time. High survival is obtained from rapid cooling 
and warming from aluminium foil and rapid warming is skipped from this 
protocol. 
20.3.7 V Cryo-plate Method 
A new method for preserving plant species in cold conditions was developed 
11 years ago by Yamamoto et al. (2011) is the V cryo-plate method. It is the 
combination of encapsulation-vitrifcation and droplet-vitrifcation methodsto 
make artifcial seeds to attach well (high quality) on aluminium sheets 
(cryo-plate) size 7 mm × 37 mm × 0.5 mm, which has 10-12 holes (hole 
size 1.5 mm × 0.75 mm) in which the aluminium sheet is thicker than the 
aluminium foil (aluminium foil) used with the droplet-vitrifcation method. 
The thermal conductivity of the aluminium sheet is better than the aluminium 
foil which has a cooling rate of approximately 4,000°C/min and an increase 
of temperature of around 3,000°C/min; while aluminium sheets have a 
temperature reduction of around 5,000°C/min and an increase of temperature 
around 4,500 °C/min. Therefore, V cryo-plate method gives higher survival 
than droplet-vitrifcation method because the cooling and warming rates 
are faster. The advantages of the V cryo-plate method are: 1. The cooling 
and warming rates are very fast. Therefore, providing high survival. 2. The 
protocol is easy and convenient because the plant materials are attached to 
the aluminium sheet throughout the operation, not in a suspended state in a 
super cool solution, such as PVS2 and PVS3. Using this method does not need 
special skills. 
Jitsopakul et al. (2021) studied orchid pollinia cryopreservation using 
the V cryo-plate and apply it to some orchid species for breeding. Pollinia 
of Rhynchostylis gigantea (L.) Ridl. were collected from completely open 
fowers in the morning and then were placed on aluminium cryo-plates 
embedded in alginate gel, then immersed in loading solution containing 2 M 
glycerol and 0.4 M sucrose for 15 min at room temperature (29°C), and then 
dehydrated with PVS2 solution for 0-60 min at 29°C. The cryo-plates with 
pollinia were directly plunged into liquid nitrogen for 40 min, and rapidly 
warmed in 1 M sucrose for 15 min. The cryopreserved and non-cryopreserved 
pollinia were used for hand-pollinating fowers of the same species for 
producing hybrids. The results showed that the viability of non-cryopreserved 
and cryopreserved pollinia dehydrated with PVS2 was 100%. The highest 
fruit set after pollinating fowers with cryopreserved pollinia dehydrated with 
PVS2 for 40 min was also up to 100%. The protocol for cryopreservation of 422 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
Fig. 20.17. Cryopreservation of R. gigantea pollinia using V cryo-plate method for 
hand-pollination with R. gigantea var. harrisoniana fowers. (a) R. gigantea fowers 
and (b) pollinia. (c) Pollinia were placed on aluminium cryo-plates embedded in 3% 
sodium alginate solution, then soaked in 100 mM CaCl2 and PVS2, respectively. 
(d) Cryo-plates with pollinia were transferred to uncapped 2 mL cryotubes held on 
cryo-canes and then directly plunged into liquid nitrogen. (e) Non-cryopreserved 
and cryopreserved pollinia staining red were considered viable, while the unstained 
pollinia were considered non-viable. (f) R. gigantea var. harrisoniana fowers. 
(g-h) Capsule set after hand-pollination of cryopreserved pollinia of R. gigantea 
with R.gigantea var. harrisoniana fowers. (i) Capsule and seeds of R. gigantea 
var. harrisoniana x R.gigantea. (j-k) Seeds of R. gigantea var. harrisoniana x R. 
gigantea germinated and developed into protocorms and then plantlets on modifed 
VW agar medium. (l) Hybrid plantlets grown in the greenhouse at Rajamangala 
University of Technology Isan, Surin Campus, Surin province, Thailand for one year. 
Source: Jitsopakul et al., 2021 (with permission from Cryo Letters Journal). 
R. gigantea (L.) Ridl. pollinia using V cryo-plate method was successfully 
applied for the cryopreservation of nine Thai orchid species (Fig. 20.17). The 
exposure time to PVS2 afected the pollinia viability (range 40-100%; average 
93%) and capsule set (range 20-100%; average 78%) of the nine species. The  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 423 
successful capsule set and seed production after pollination with cryopreserved 
pollinia in all orchid hybrids were observed. Seed germinated into protocorms 
and developed to plantlets cultured on modifed Vacin and Went (1949) agar 
medium. Cryopreservation of freshly collected orchid pollinia using V cryo￾plate method is an efcient tool for the long-term storage of plant germplasm 
and for orchid breeding. 
V cryo-plate 
Fig. 20.18. Diagram of V cryo-plate method. 
The protocol for V cryo-plate method is shown in Fig. 20.18. The V 
cryo-plate method is developed from a combination of Encapsulation￾vitrifcation and Droplet-vitrifcation methods. The advantages of the V cryo￾plate method are: 1. The cooling and warming rates are very fast. Therefore, 
providing high survival. 2.The protocol is easy and convenientbecause the plant 
materials are attached to the aluminium sheet throughout the operation, not in 
a suspended state in a super cool solution, such as PVS2 and PVS3. Using this 
method does not need special skills. 
20.3.8 D Cryo-plate Method 
Niino et al. (2013) developed the D cryo-plate method, which is a combination 
of encapsulation-dehydration with the V cryo-plate method (Niino et al., 
2014). As some plants may be afected using PVS2 solutions, there is low 
survival. Therefore, to avoid this damage, cells were dried by blowing air from 
a laminar air-fow cabinet.In addition, the cryopreserved plant materials can be 
larger than those using the V cryo-plate method because there is no problem of 
dehydration and the toxicity of the PVS2 solution after prolonged immersion. 
Both V cryo-plate and D cryo-plate methods have the same protocol except  
424 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice 
for the cell dehydration by air-drying, silica gel, or drying beads, instead of 
using concentrated chemical solutions, such as PVS2 solution. 
Later, Cordova II and Thammasiri (2016) developed D cryo-plate method 
using silica gel and drying beads for dehydrating cells. In this experiment, 
protocorms were placed in the preculture solution consisting of 0.7 M sucrose 
on a shaker (110 rpm) at 25+3°C for 1 d. After that, protocorms were placed 
one by one in the wells which flled before with the alginate solution containing 
2% (w/v) sodium alginate in calcium-free ½MS basal medium with 0.4 M 
sucrose. The cryo-plates were hardened for 20 min by slowly dispensing the 
calcium chloride solution containing 0.1 M calcium chloride in ½MS basal 
medium with 0.4 M sucrose. Then the cryo-plates were surface dried using 
sterile flter paper, placed in Petri dishes containing silica gel or drying beads 
in a laminar air-fow cabinet (Fig. 20.19). Cryo-plates were dehydrated for 
5 h until 25% moisture content was achieved. Dehydrated cryo-plates were 
placed in 2 ml cryotubes and plunged directly into liquid nitrogen for 1 d. 
Fig. 20.19. Cryo-plate method dehydrated with silica gel or drying beads. 
A: Protocorm development, B: Preculture of protocorms in ½MS liquid medium 
with 0.7 M sucrose for 1 d, C: Pour the alginate solution containing 2% (w/v) 
sodium alginate in calcium-free ½MS basal medium with 0.4 M sucrose in the 
wells, D: Place the precultured protocorms in the wells one by one, E: Pour the 
calcium chloride solution containing 0.1 M calcium chloride in ½MS basal 
medium with 0.4 M sucrose, F: Dehydration with 50 g silica gel, G: Dehydration 
with 30 g drying beads, H: Put each cryo-plate in a 2 ml cryotube, I: Plunge 2 ml 
cryotubes into liquid nitrogen for 1 d, J: Warming in 1.2 M sucrose solution for 
20 minutes, K: Plate on ½MS agar medium, L: Regrowth, and M: Regrowth after 
60 days. Source: Cordora II and Thammasiri, 2016 (with permission 
from Cryo Letters Journal).  
 
 
Cryopreservation Development for Germplasm Storage 425 
Cryo-plates were removed from cryotubes and warmed in unloading 
solution (1.2 M sucrose solution) for 20 min. Protocorms were then removed 
from the cryo-plate and placed on ½MS agar medium for regrowth. Growth 
conditions were conducted using 16 h light at 25+3°C. For efect of the cryo￾plate method, regrowth of control treatments dehydrated using silica gel was 
observed to be 90%. Regrowth of control treatments dehydrated using drying 
beads was observed to be 92.1%. In all other treatments, regrowth was observed 
to be 73.8% using silica gel for dehydration. Regrowth for all other treatments 
dehydrated using drying beads was observed to be 76.5%. Regrowth was 
observed at the 2nd week of transfer to ½MS media. Dehydration using silica 
gel or drying beads did not signifcantly afect regrowth rate. Protocorms 
dehydrated using silica gel or drying beads developed into normal plantlets. 
The protocol for D cryo-plate method is shown in Fig. 20.20. 
The development of the V cryo-plate method, which is a combination 
of Encapsulation-vitrifcation and Droplet-vitrifcation method and followed 
by the D cryo-plate method which is a combination of Encapsulation￾dehydration with V cryo-plate method by using an aluminium sheet that 
conducts heat well as a vehicle to carry 10-12 plants at the same time 
throughout every step. Therefore, making the operation convenient, fast, 
efcient and with high survival. Since it has a cooling rate of 5,000°C/min 
and a warming rate of 4,500°C/min. 
D cryo-plate 
Fig. 20.20. Diagram showing D cryo-plate method. 21 
Microbiological Techniques 
Microorganisms live together in mixed populations in nature. It is possible 
to isolate a particular type of organism by using the enrichment culture 
technique, frst described by Winogradsky (quoted in Tauro et al., 1993).This 
method enables the growth of a particular type of organism, which is achieved 
by employing suitable growth substances. For example, to isolate the sulphur 
oxidising bacteria from the soil, the medium is supplemented with sulphur, 
which only enables the growth of sulphur bacteria. Subsequently,the isolation 
of pure culture is possible by employing one of the purifcation techniques 
described below. Similarly, a medium incorporated with sodiumazide 
facilitates the growth of lactic bacteria whereas it inhibits others. 
The isolation of fungi from a mixed population of fungi and bacteria is 
made possible by incorporating the antibacterial substance in the medium. 
Thus, a variety of methods are available by which a selected group of 
organisms can be isolated very easily. 
21.1 Isolation Methods 
21.1.1 Serial Dilution Technique 
The serial dilution technique was originally developed by Lister (quoted from 
Tauro et al., 1993).In this technique, the mixed culture sample is serially 
diluted in a liquid medium so that the fnal concentration will contain one or 
none of the microorganisms. Growth in the last tube of the dilution series is 
presumed to be from a single cell. This method is useful for the isolation and 
purifcation of bacteria and yeasts.
21.1.2 Pour Plate Technique 
The pour plate technique involves plating an aliquot of appropriately diluted 
culture suspension onto molten agar medium at 40-45°C and pouring it into 
sterile petri dishes. Upon solidifcation, the plates are incubated. Pour plates 
exhibit both surface and subsurface growth. Though it is not an ideal method 
to isolate pure cultures of all types of organisms, it is suitable to isolate and 
purify the cultures of aerobic bacteria. These bacteria can be further purifed 
by serial dilution technique or by the repeated streak plate technique.428 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
21.1.3 Streaking Technique 
In the streaking technique, the petri plate is divided into four sectors; a small 
aliquot of diferent dilutions is streaked on the surface of the solid medium 
with the help of an inoculation loop in these four sectors (Fig. 21.1). Upon 
incubation of the streak plate, pure colonies are developed, each arising from 
a single mother cell. Mother cell divides in exponential numbers, resulting in 
billions of daughter cells and forming a pure colony. Remember,a colony is a 
pure colony if it does not overlap any other colony (Beishir, 1996).
Fig. 21.1. Streak plate technique (Redrawn from Beishir, 1996).
21.1.4 Isolation of Anaerobic Bacteria 
Anaerobic bacteria are isolated either by pour plating technique using a 
medium containing a reducing agent like thio glycolate and incubating under 
anaerobic conditions or by roll-tube technique. In the roll-tube technique, an 
aliquot of appropriate dilution is added to the molten, reduced agar medium, 
and the tube is rolled in such a way that a thin layer of medium is formed on the 
inner walls of the tube. The tubes are sealed with butyl stoppers and anaerobic 
conditions are maintained by providing oxygen-free CO2 or nitrogen. Tubes 
are dried during a prolonged incubation period which is necessary because of 
the slow growth of obligately anaerobic bacteria. Microbiological Techniques 429 
21.2 Media 
A medium may be synthetic (chemically well-defned) containing chemically 
known compounds in known quantities or it may be non-synthetic containing 
unknown organic substances such as yeast extract, potato extract, coconut 
milk, beef extract, tomato juice, etc.
Generally, a medium should contain carbon sources (sucrose or glucose), 
inorganic salts, and in some cases vitamins, amino acids, and other growth￾promoting substances for the satisfactory growth of microorganisms. The 
recipe for the medium depends on the microorganism to be grown and some 
of the commonly used media for the growth of microorganisms are mentioned 
in the appendix (see also Sullia and Shantharam, 1997).
A liquid medium to which agar is not added is known as broth. For 
the growth of aerobic microorganisms in liquid culture, a proper supply of 
oxygen is necessary. For providing proper aeration, liquid culture fasks are 
continuously agitated on the rotary shaker, and it provides uniform growth 
of microorganisms. Cultures on a large scale are prepared in special devices 
called fermentors where sterile air is kept continuously bubbling through the 
medium. 
To obtain a solid medium, a solidifying agent like agar (obtained from 
algal weeds Gelidium, Gracilaria, etc.) should be added to the broth. Agar 
contains complex carbohydrates generally not utilised by microorganisms and 
has no nutritive value. Agar gel has some advantages over other gelling agents, 
they are: (i) it will not react with any other constituents of the medium, (ii) 
it will not be degraded by any other enzymes used in the medium, and (iii) it 
melts only at 100°C and upon solidifcation at 40°C forms solid agar medium 
which is hard and transparent in the petri dishes (when they are stored upside 
down).
Sterilisation of media 
Media sterilisation can be achieved either by autoclaving or by fltration 
through membrane flters. Culture media in glass containers sealed with 
cotton plugs or aluminium foils should be autoclaved at 15 pounds per square 
inch (Psi) and 121o
C for 15 mins. The pressure should not exceed 20 Psi as 
higher pressure may lead to the decomposition of carbohydrates and other 
constituents of the medium. Autoclave time depends on the volume of the 
liquid to be sterilised (Table 21.1).
Table 21.1. Minimum time required for autoclaving nutrient media 
Volume (ml) *Sterilisation time (min) 
1-200 15
200-1000 20
1000-2000 40 
*At 15 Psi and 121°C.430 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Some thermolabile substances like vitamins, amino acids, hormones, 
natural plant, and animal extracts, etc., may decompose during auto claving. 
These substances require flter sterilisation.
Seitz Filter: Seitz flters are asbestos discs about 1 mm thick. The asbestos 
disc is ftted into a metal container supported by a metal grid and screwed 
tightly. An ehrlenmeyer fask with a side arm is ftted to the apparatus. The 
whole setup is autoclaved for 5 mins at 15 Psi and 121°C. After cooling the 
apparatus, the liquid medium is fltered through a flter by applying suction. 
After fltration, the Seitz flters are discarded. The disadvantage of this method 
is that some compounds of the media may get absorbed into the flter disc.
Sintered Glass Filters: These flters are made of fnely ground glass 
fused sufciently to leave small pores. These flters are useful for chemically 
defned media. Less adsorption of chemical compounds takes place in these 
flters than in the asbestos discs.
Membrane Filters: These are very thin membranous flter discs made up 
of cellulose acetate (millipore flters) with a pore size of 0.43-0.47 µm. The 
membrane flter allows large volumes of liquid to pass through rapidly under 
suction. These flters do not cause the adsorption of chemical compounds and 
are used as disposable items. These are widely used among other bacterial 
flters.
Filter sterilised solutions are then added to the autoclaved substances and 
a completely sterilised medium is prepared. This can be used for culturing 
microorganisms. 
21.3 Maintenance and Preservation of Cultures 
It is necessary to maintain and preserve the pure cultures of microorganisms 
for further research. Some of the simple methods for the maintenance and 
preservation of microbial cultures are given below (see also Tauro et al.,1993).
21.3.1 Transfer to Fresh Media 
Microbial cultures are maintained continuously by periodic transfer onto a 
fresh medium in the culture tubes. The frequency of transfer may be varied 
with the organism, e.g., a culture of E. coli needs to be transferred at monthly 
intervals. To keep the cultures viable, it is necessary to use the appropriate 
growth medium and to maintain proper storage temperature. Many 
heterotrophic bacteria can be maintained on agar medium by transferring to 
fresh medium after every 20-30 days.
21.3.2 Lyophilisation 
In this method, cell suspensions are taken in the culture vials and these are 
frozen by immersing in a mixture of dry ice and acetone or liquid nitrogen. Microbiological Techniques 431 
The culture vials are evacuated and dried under a vacuum, sealed, and stored 
at low temperatures. By this method, cultures are preserved for a longer period 
without any change in the organism. However, it has been reported that the 
loss of vacuum during storage leads to the inactivation of cultures. 
21.3.3 Overlaying with Mineral Oil 
Many bacteria and fungi are well preserved by covering the fresh growth in 
agar slants with sterile mineral oil. The mineral oil is placed at the tip of the 
slanted surface. Care must be taken to cover the entire surface of the culture 
with the mineral oil. In this method, cell viability is very high when compared 
to frequent transfer and storage at low temperatures. These cultures are stored 
at 0-5°C. With this method, microorganisms may be preserved satisfactorily 
for more than 5-20 years.
21.3.4 Storage in Sterile Soil 
This method is widely employed for preserving spore-forming bacteria and 
fungi. Spore suspensions are added to sterile soil (sterilised at 15 Psi and 
121°C for 2-3 hrs at intervals of 1-2 days) and the mixture is dried at room 
temperature and stored in the refrigerator. Bacterial cultures maintained by 
this method remain viable for 70-80 years.
21.3.5 Storage in Silica Gel 
The microorganisms such as bacteria and yeasts can be stored in silica gel at 
low temperatures for about 1-2 years. In this method, fnely powdered, heat 
sterilised, and cooled silica powder is mixed with a thick suspension (paste) 
of cells and stored at low temperatures. The basic principle involved in this 
technique is quick desiccation at low temperatures which allows the cells to 
remain viable for longer periods. 
21.4 Preparation and Staining of Specimens 
Generally, living microorganisms are directly examined under a light 
microscope. Often, they must be fxed and stained to increase visibility and to 
study specifc morphological features. Sections are generally used to study the 
parasitic microorganisms in plant and animal tissues. 
21.4.1 Fixation 
The primary aim of fxation is to terminate the life processes of the cell as well 
as preserve external and internal structures of the cell with minimum alteration 
when compared to the living state. In other words, the microorganism is killed 
and attached frmly to the micro slide.432 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
There are two diferent types of fxation: (1) Heat-fxation of bacterial 
smears by gently fame heating the air-dried flm of bacteria. This adequately 
preserves the overall morphology of bacteria. (2) Chemical fxation preserves 
the cellular organelle intact and protects the overall morphology of bacteria. 
Chemical fxatives penetrate the cells and react with cellular components, 
usually proteins and lipids, to render them inactive, insoluble, and immobile. 
Common chemical fxatives are ethanol, mercuric chloride, acetic acid, 
formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde, etc. (see also Chapter 3).
21.4.2 Dyes and Simple Staining 
The dyes used to stain microorganisms have two common features: (1) they 
have chromophore groups with conjugated double bonds that give the dye its 
colour, and (2) they can bind with cells by ionic, covalent, or hydrophobic 
bonding, e.g., a positively charged dye binds to negatively charged molecules 
on the cell. Ionisable dyes may be divided into two general classes based on 
the nature of their charged group (see also Chapter 4).They are as follows:
Basic dyes (Cationic dyes) - These dyes have positively charged groups and 
are generally sold as chloride salts. Basic dyes bind to negatively charged 
molecules in the specimen such as nucleic acids and many proteins. Since 
the surfaces of bacterial cells are negatively charged, basic dyes are very 
commonly used in bacteriology. Some of the cationic dyes are safranin, crystal 
violet, basic fuchsin, methylene blue, malachite green,etc. 
Acid dyes (anionic dyes) - These dyes possess negatively charged groups 
such as carboxyls (-COOH) and phenolic hydroxyls (-OH). Acid dyes bind to 
positively charged cell structures. Some of the acid dyes are fast green FCF, 
eosin, aniline blue, rose bengal, acid fuchsin, etc. 
The pH may alter the staining efectiveness since the nature and degree 
of the charge on cell components change with pH. So anionic dyes stain best 
under acidic conditions when proteins and other molecules carry positive 
charges; basic dyes are most efective at higher pHs.
In most dyes, ionic interactions are probably the most common means 
of attachment. Dyes can bind through covalent bonds and their solubility 
characteristics decide the afnity with the specimen. For example, DNA can 
be stained by the Feulgen method in which Schif’s reagent is covalently 
attached to its deoxyribose sugars after HCl treatment. Sudan III (Sudan 
Black) selectively stains lipids because it is lipid soluble, but it will not 
dissolve in aqueous portions of the cell. 
Simple stains are also referred to as monochrome stains because only 
one dye is employed for staining the microbes. Basic dyes like crystal violet, 
methylene blue, and carbolfuchsin are frequently used to determine the size, 
shape, and arrangement of bacteria.  
 
 
 
 
	 	 	
Microbiological Techniques 433 
21.4.2.1 Simple Staining Method for Bacteria in Milk by using Breed’s 
Methylene Blue 
Breed’s Methylene Blue 
Take 0.3 g methylene blue chloride and add 30 ml ethanol. To this mixture add 
100 ml of 2% phenol in water and mix properly. This mixture is directly used 
for staining the bacteria. 
Procedure 
1. Take the clear microslide on which place 0.01 ml of milk sample and 
spread it with a needle. Dry the smear with gentle heat. 
2. Immerse the slide in xylene or chloroform to remove the fat.
3. Fix the smear with 95% alcohol for 2 mins.
4. Stain the smear with Breed’s methylene blue for 2 mins.
5. Wash the smear with 90% alcohol till the smear appears faintly blue, air 
dry, and examine under oil-immersion objective.
Result: Bacteria appear dark blue against a light blue background.
21.4.2.2 Demonstration of Anthrax bacilli by using Polychrome 
Methylene Blue 
Preparation of Polychrome Methylene Blue Solution 
Take 100 ml of Loefer’s methylene blue solution in a brown bottle and 
allow it to ripen for more than 10 months. Shake the solution intermittently 
during this period. The above process is hastened by adding 1% K2CO3 to the 
solution. The slow oxidation of methylene blue forms a violet compound that 
gives polychrome properties to this stain. 
In addition to simple staining, polychrome methylene blue solution is also 
used for Mc Fadyean’s reaction in which anthrax bacilli appear blue against 
purple granular background (Desai and Desai, 1980).
21.4.3 Protocols 
21.4.3.1	 Diferential Staining of Bacteria
The staining procedure which diferentiates two groups of bacteria known as 
gram-negative and gram-positive is termed a diferential staining technique. 
The basic principle involved in this technique is due to diferences in chemical 
and physical properties of the bacterial cell wall. They react diferentially with 
the staining reagents. There are two important diferential stains viz., Gram 
stain and Acid-fast stain. 
Gram Stain 
The Gram stain developed by the Danish physician Christian Gram in 1884 is 
the most widely employed staining technique in bacterial staining. It has great  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
434 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
taxonomic signifcance and has importance in the identifcation of an unknown 
prokaryotic organism. For eukaryotic cells, this stain is not signifcant since 
most of them are gram-negative except yeasts and a few moulds which are 
gram-positive. In general, gram-negative bacteria are more widely distributed 
than gram-positive and their morphological features are given in Table 21.2.
Based on the Gram stain technique, bacteria are divided into two groups: 
(i) Gram-positive, those that retain primary dye such as crystal violet and 
appear purple in colour, (ii) Gram-negative, which lose the primary dye on 
destaining with alcohol and take the colour of counterstain like safranin or 
basic fuchsin and they appear red in colour. 
Preparation of Reagents 
(i) Gram’s crystal violet. It consists of two solutions: 
Solution A 
Crystal violet 2.0 g
Ethanol, 95% 20.0 ml
Dissolve the crystal violet in the ethanol: 
Solution B 
Ammonium oxalate 0.8 g
Distilled water 80.0 ml
Dissolve the ammonium oxalate in the distilled water. Now mix solutions 
A and B and shake well, properly mixed.
(ii) Gram’s iodine
Iodine 10 g
Potassium iodide 2.0 g
Distilled water 300.0 ml
Grind both iodine and potassium iodide together by using a mortar and 
pestle to which add water and mix thoroughly. Store the solution in a tightly 
closed bottle. 
(iii) Safranin 
Safranin 0.25 g
Ethanol, 95% 10.0 ml
Distilled water 100.0 ml
Dissolve the safranin in the ethanol and mix thoroughly. Add the distilled 
water and mix well. Later flter the solution and use it directly.
(iv) Acetone alcohol
Ethanol, 95% 70.0 ml
Acetone 30.0 ml
Mix the above two thoroughly.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microbiological Techniques 435 
Procedure 
i. Prepare and fx the bacterial smear on the clean micro slide.
ii. Stain the smear with a basic dye, crystal violet for 30 secs.
iii. Wash the slide carefully with distilled water from a wash bottle. (Do not 
squirt water directly onto the smear).
iv. Now add Gram’s iodine to the smear and allow it to stand for 10 secs.
v. Wash of the iodine carefully with distilled water.
vi. Destain the smear with 95% ethyl alcohol for about 10-20 secs. This 
is a critical step. The degree of alcohol decolourising depends on the 
thickness of the smear.
vii. Wash gently with distilled water.
viii. Add basic stain safranin for 30 secs.
ix. Wash with distilled water and blot the slide dry with absorbent paper and 
examine under the oil immersion objective.
Table 21.2. Gram reaction and morphology of some common bacterial genera 
(Adopted from Desai and Desai, 1980)
Gram reactiona Morphological characters Genera 
Positive Rods in chain, non-sporulating Lactobacillus 
Rods either in the chain or single Bacillus 
sporulating 
Besides the above characteristics, spores Clostridium 
bigger than the cells 
Bigger rods, often forming obtuse angle or Mycobacteriab 
small bundle of parallel cells 
Cocci in bunch Staphylococcus 
Cocci in chain Streptococcus 
Cocci, ovoid or lanceolate, occurring in Diplococcus 
pair 
Cocci, sporulating Sporosarcina 
Negative Rods either in single or short chain Azotobacter, 
Corynebacterium 
Escherichia 
Rhizobium 
Proteus, 
Pseudomonas, 
Salmonella, 
Serratia, 
Shigella 
Rods ovoid Francisella 
Pasteurella 
Yersinia 
(Contd.)436 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Table 21.2. (Contd.)
Gram reactiona Morphological characters Genera 
Rods, curved 
Cocci in pair 
Cocci in single 
Vibrio 
Neisseria 
Acidaminococcus 
Megasphaera 
Veillonella 
Spiralc Borrelia 
Leptospira 
Spirillum 
Treponema 
a
Gram reaction of various genera listed above are based on the results of the test with 
24 hrs old cultures.
b
The Gram reaction is debatable.
c
The staining of these organisms requires a special staining technique.
Result: Gram-positive appear purple by retaining crystal violet and gram￾negative red by taking counterstain.
Biological reaction: The primary stain, crystal violet, and Gram’s iodine form 
a complex called CV-1. Gram’s iodine acts as a mordant in the formation 
of this complex. This complex is taken up by the peptidoglycan layer in the 
bacterial cell wall (Fig. 21.2).
Fig. 21.2. Cell walls of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. 
There is no universally accepted explanation for Gram’s reaction. The 
most widely accepted theory is based on the diference in permeability of the 
cell wall. Gram-negative cells have got a greater lipid content, in their walls 
than Gram-positive. Lipids are soluble in acetone and alcohol which are used  
	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	 	 	
Microbiological Techniques 437 
as a decolouriser in Gram staining. Removal of lipids by the decolouriser is 
thought to increase the porosity of cell walls and cause the rapid decolourisation 
of Gram-negative bacteria. Another interpretation is that gram-positive cell 
walls consist of many layers of peptidoglycan (Fig. 21.2; see Table 21.3); the 
CV-I is trapped in the cell wall following alcohol treatment which causes a 
decrease in the diameter of the pores in the cell wall peptidoglycan. In gram￾negative bacteria, the peptidoglycan layer is much thinner and there is less 
cross-linkage than in the walls of gram-positive bacteria. Because of the large 
pores left in the gram-negative bacteria, the CV-I gets extracted upon alcohol 
treatment. 
Table 21.3. Some characteristic diferences between gram-positive 
and gram-negative bacteria 
Character Gram-positive Gram-negative 
1. Gram’s staining
2. Cell wall composition
3. Peptidoglycan in cell wall
4. Teichoic acid in cell wall
Purple or dark violet
Low in lipid (1-4%)
Many layers in 
thickness
Red (the colour of the 
counterstain)
High in lipid (11-20%)
Very thin 
Absent 
5. Sensitivity to penicillin 
6. Nutritional requirements
7. Resistant to physical 
disruption 
Present
More 
Generally complex, 
only few species 
autotrophic 
More resistant 
Less
Relatively simple, 
many species 
autotrophic 
Less resistant
Examples Lactobacillus 
Clostridium 
Corynebacterium 
Salmonella 
Staphylococcus 
Streptococcus 
Diplococcus 
Shigella, Proteus 
Pseudomonas 
Escherichia 
Azotobacter 
Rhizobium 
Pasteurella 
Vibrio, Spirillum 
21.4.3.2	 Modifed Staining Technique for Gram-positive and Gram￾negative Bacteria (Garvey et al., 1986)
Solution 
Crystal violet--dissolve 1.0 g crystal violet in 100 ml distilled water.
Sodium bicarbonate--dissolve 2.5 g sodium bicarbonate in 100 ml distilled 
water. 
Gram’s iodine--dissolve l.0 g. iodine and 2.0 g. potassium iodide in 300 ml 
distilled water. Do not heat the solution because iodine sublimes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
438 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Cello solve (ethylene glycol monoethyl ether)
Carbol new fuchsin stock solution
Solution A – dissolve 1 g new fuchsin in 5.0 ml ethanol
Solution B – mix 5.0 ml phenol in 90.0 ml distilled water
Combine solutions A and B and flter before use. Working carbol new 
fuchsin is prepared by diluting 25.0 ml stock carbol new fuchsin solution with 
75.0 ml distilled water.
Tartrazine solution--dissolve 0.01 g tartrazine or acid yellow (C.I. 19140, 
Matheson, Coleman and Bell) in 100 ml distilled water to which 2.0 ml acetic 
acid has been added. 
Histoclear 
Staining procedure 
i. Placental tissues injected with a broth culture of Staphylococcus 
aureus,Clostridium perfringens and Escherichia coli and various autopsy 
and surgical sections were fxed in 10% neutral bufered formalin, cleared 
in Histoclear, embedded in paraplast plus and cut at 4 µm. 
ii. Deparafnise and hydrate to distilled water.
iii. Keep sections in working crystal violet solution (combine 1 ml 1%crystal 
violet and 0.2 ml 2.5% sodium bicarbonate just before use) for 1 minute.
iv. Wash with tap water to remove excess crystal violet.
v. Then keep in Gram’s iodine for 1 minute.
vi. Wash with tap water to remove excess iodine.
vii. Diferentiate sections in cello-solve until obvious extraction of blue 
colour stops, then leave in the diferentiator for 2 minutes.
viii. Rinse in absolute alcohol. 
ix. Keep sections in working carbol new fuchsin solution for 90 seconds.
x. Rinse briefy in tap water to remove excess carbol new fuchsin.
xi. Counterstain in 0.01% tartrazine in 2% acetic acid solution for 15 
seconds. 
xii. Dehydrate within 15 secs, clear, and mount.
Result: Gram-positive bacteria and some fungi appear blue; gram-negative 
bacteria and nuclei appear red; background appears yellow. In this procedure, 
the inclusion of sodium bicarbonate in the crystal violetstain increases the 
resistance of the gram-positive bacteria to decolorisation. The brightness of 
gram-negative bacteria is maintained through the reduction of background 
staining brought about by acetic acid in the tartrazine counterstain. 
21.4.3.3	 Acid-faststaining
Acid-fast staining is also a diferential staining employed to diagnose 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and M. leprae which causes tuberculosis and 
leprosy respectively.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microbiological Techniques 439 
Preparation of reagents 
Ziehl-Neelsens’ Carbolfuchsin
Basic fuchsin 0.3 g
Ethanol, 95% 10.0 ml
Phenol crystals 5.0 g
Distilled water 95.0 ml
Dissolve basic fuchsin in the ethanol. In a separate container, dissolve 
phenol crystals in water. Mix these two solutions together thoroughly. 
Acid-alcohol decolouriser 
Conc. HCl (37%) 3.0 ml
Ethanol, 95% 97.0 ml
Add conc. HCl to the ethanol and mix well. 
Loefer’s methylene blue
Methylene blue chloride 0.3 g
Ethanol, 95% 30.0 ml
Distilled water 100.00 ml
Dissolve methylene blue in the ethanol, to which add distilled water. 
Later flter and use it.
Procedure 
i. Prepare and fx the bacterial smear onto a clean microslide.
ii. Stain the smear with carbolfuchsin for 5 minutes and heat gently. 
iii. Gently wash the slide with distilled water. 
iv. Now apply the decolouriser onto the slide for 1 minute.
v. Wash carefully with distilled water.
vi. Counterstain the smear with methylene blue for 1 minute.
vii. Wash with distilled water and blot dry. Observe the acid-fast slide under 
oil immersion. 
Result: Acid-fast bacteria appear red whereas non-acid-fast cells appear blue 
by accepting the counter stain. 
Biological reaction: The cell walls of acid-fast organisms contain a wax-like 
lipid called mycolic acid which makes the cell wall impermeable to most 
of dyes. Carbolfuchsin is easily soluble in carbolic acid (phenol) solution. 
Carbolfuchsin mixed with carbolic acid easily penetrated the cell wall. Here 
carbolic acid acts as a chemical intensifer for penetration. Heat is also applied 
to penetrate the stain into the cell wall. Once the cell wall is stained with dye, 
it resists decolourisation when washed with an acid-alcohol decolouriser.  
 
 
 
 
 
	 	 	 	 	 	
440 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
21.4.3.4	 Negative Staining
The bacterial capsule is composed of polysaccharides which are water soluble 
and non-ionic. Since the bacterial capsule is non-ionic, it cannot be stained 
in the usual manner. Several techniques have been developed that allow the 
background to be stained and leave the capsule unstained. This is known as 
negative staining. By using India ink, the background looks dark, and the 
capsule appears like a clear ring around the bacterial cell (Fig. 21.3).
Fig. 21.3. Gins’ method of capsule stain.
Modifed Gins’ Capsule Stain using the Blood Smear Method (Beishir, 1996)
In the modifed Gins’ capsule stain, both negative and positive stains are 
employed. This can be observed under the oil immersion objective and 
magnifed 1000 times.
i. By using inoculating loop add Klebsiella pneumoniae to equal amounts 
of India ink and water and take it on one end of the clean slide.
ii. With the help of the second slide spread the mixture on the slide.
iii. Allow the smear to air-dry. 
iv. Now stain the smear with crystal violet for a minute.
v. Drain and rinse the smear. 
vi. Allow to air-dry and observe under the microscope. 
Result: Indian ink stains the background dark leaving the capsule unstained 
and clear (negative stain) with the small purple cell body in the centre of the 
ring (positive staining by crystal violet, see Fig. 21.3).
21.4.3.5	 Staining of Vesicular Arbuscular Mycorrhizae (VAM)
There are three major types of mycorrhizae such as ectomycorrhiza 
(ectotrophic mycorrhizae), endomycorrhizae and ectendomycorrhizae 
(a form of mycorrhizae in which hyphae may penetrate the plant cells).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microbiological Techniques 441 
The endomycorrhizae caused by the aseptate hyphae, particularly the 
members of Endogonales have often been referred to as Vesicular Arbuscular 
Mycorrhizae (VAM) because these fungi form dichotomously branched 
haustoria with the host cell called arbuscules. Apart from that, the fungal 
hyphae also bear a swollen thick structure called vesicles. These are 
extremely common and widespread in the plant kingdom (Aneja, 2003). 
Standard mounting media for determining VAM are water, lactophenol or 
lactoglycerine. Staining the spores with lactophenol cotton blue is useful 
for revealing the hyphal characteristics and for interpreting some types of 
the apparent surface texture of the spores. 
Chemical reagents and other materials 
• VAM infected root 
• 18% Lactophenol
• FAA 
• 10% KOH
• 95% Ethyl alcohol
• Chlorazol black E
• Chloral hydrate 
• Glycerine 
• Basic fuchsin
• Mounting fuid [chloral hydrate 20 g, gum Arabic 20 g, glycerine 
20 g, Glucose syrup 3 ml, basic fuchsin 10 drops (0.3 g., 10 ml 95% ethyl 
alcohol), 35 ml water]
• Autoclave-resistant jars
• Water bath at 90 ºC
• Clean microslides 
Procedure 
i. Wash VAM-infected roots thoroughly and fx them overnight in FAA.
ii. After that roots are washed with tap water several times to remove FAA. 
iii. Now roots are transferred to KOH solution taken in autoclave-resistant 
jars.
iv. Clear the samples by autoclaving them at 15 psi for 15 minutes.
v. Rinse the samples several times with tap water. 
vi. Wash with deionised water.
vii. Stain roots with staining solution (equal volumes of 80% lactic acid, 
glycerine and distilled water with 0.1% chlorazol black E) for 1 hour or 
longer at 90ºC.
viii. Now stained roots are kept in glycerine for destaining.
ix. Finally mount the roots on a clean micro slide using mounting media. 
Observe the stained VAM fungi under the bright feld microscope for 
their structures. Here, the staining solution is to be prepared several hours 	 	 	 	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	 	
442 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
before use and it is kept undisturbed to allow undissolved particles to settle 
down later the particles are discarded. 
21.4.3.6	 Lactophenol Cotton Blue Mounting of Fungi
Lactophenol cotton blue stains the fungal cytoplasm and gives a light blue 
background, against which the walls of the hyphal can readily be seen. The 
stain contains four constituents, such as phenol, lactic acid, cotton blue and 
glycerine. Phenol serves as a fungicide; lactic acid acts as a clearing agent; 
cotton blue stains the cytoplasm of the fungus, and fnally, glycerine provides 
the semi-permanent preparation. 
Chemical reagents and other materials 
• A young culture of Penicillium or Aspergillus (5-7 days old)
• Lactophenol cotton blue in a dropper bottle
• Microslides and coverslips 
• Mounted needles (2)
• Spirit lamp 
• 70% alcohol
• Nail polish (or) parafn wax
• Compound microscope 
Procedure 
i. Put a drop of lactophenol cotton blue on a clean microslide.
ii. Transfer a small tuft of the fungus (containing spores and spore-bearing 
structures) onto the slide using a famed, cooled needle.
iii. Gently tease the sample using the needles. 
iv. Mix gently the stain with mould structures. 
v. Place a coverslip over the preparation (see that to avoid air bubbles 
trapping in the stain).
vi. To keep the slides for several months, apply a thin layer of nail polish 
around the edge of the coverslip and let the preparation dry overnight. 
Observations and Results 
Observe the slide under a compound microscope with high-power lenses. The 
fungal cytoplasm is seen as a lightly stained blue region forming a layer inside 
the unstained cell wall of hyphae, conidiophores, phialides, conidia, that is 
surrounded by light blue background on the slide.
21.4.3.7	 Antimicrobial Activity
Plants and other natural sources can provide a huge range of complex and 
structurally diverse compounds. Recently, many researchers have focused on 
the investigation of plant and microbial extracts, essential oils, pure secondary 
metabolites and new synthesised molecules as potential antimicrobial agents. 
A variety of laboratory methods can be used to evaluate or screen the in vitro  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microbiological Techniques 443 
antimicrobial activity of an extract or a pure compound. The most known and 
basic methods are the disk-difusion and agar well methods. 
Disk Difusion Method (Tendencia, 2004)
This method is based on the principle that an antibiotic-impregnated disk, 
placed on agar previously inoculated with the test bacterium, pick-up moisture, 
and the antibiotic difuses radially outward through the agar medium producing 
an antibiotic concentration gradient. The concentration of the antibiotic at the 
edge of the disk is high and gradually diminishes as the distance from the disk 
increases to a point where it is no longer inhibitory for the organism, which 
then grows freely. A clear zone or ring is formed around an antibiotic disk 
after incubation if the agent inhibits bacterial growth. 
The disk difusion method is performed using Mueller-Hinton Agar 
(MHA), which is the best medium for routine susceptibility tests because it 
has good reproducibility, low in sulphonamide, trimethoprim, and tetracycline 
inhibitors, and gives satisfactory growth of most bacterial pathogens. The 
inoculum for the disk difusion method is prepared using a suitable broth such 
as tryptic soy broth. This medium is prepared according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions, dispensed in tubes at 4-5 ml and sterilised. A sterile 0.9% salt 
solution may also be used. Media are supplemented with 1-2% sodium 
chloride (NaCl) is intended for marine organisms.
I. Preparation of agar medium 
i. Prepare MHA from the dehydrated medium according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Media should be prepared using distilled 
water or deionised water. 
ii. Heat with frequent agitation and boil to dissolve the medium 
completely. Sterilise by autoclaving at 121°C for 15 min.
iii. Check the pH of each preparation after it is sterilised, which should be 
between 7.2 and 7.4 at room temperature. This is done by macerating 
a small amount of medium in a little distilled water or by allowing a 
little amount of medium to gel around a pH meter electrode. 
iv. Cool the agar medium to 40-50°C. Pour the agar into a sterile glass or 
plastic petri dish on a fat surface to a uniform depth of 4 mm. 
v. Allow to solidify. 
vi. Prior to use, dry plates at 30-37°C in an incubator, with lids partly 
ajar, for not more than 30 minutes or until excess surface moisture 
has evaporated. Media must be moist but free of water droplets on 
the surface. The presence of water droplets may result in swarming 
bacterial growth, which could give inaccurate results. They are also 
easily contaminated. 
Storage 
If plates are not to be immediately used, they may be stored in the refrigerator 
inside airtight plastic bags at 2-8°C for up to 4 weeks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
444 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Unpoured media may be stored in airtight screw-capped bottles under the 
conditions specifed by the manufacturer.
Control 
Before use, check the ability of the agar to support the growth of control 
strains (listed in the Introduction) by streaking bacterial cultures on the agar 
medium. It is also advisable to check the ability of each batch of media to 
support the growth of a representative member of the species to be tested. 
II. Inoculum Preparation 
i. From a pure bacterial culture (not more than 48 hours, old except for 
slow-growing organisms), take four or fve colonies with a wire loop.
ii. Transfer colonies to 5 ml of Trypticase soy broth or 0.9% saline. 
iii. Incubate the broth at 30°C or at an optimum growth temperature 
until it achieves or exceeds the turbidity of 0.5 Mac Farland standard 
(prepared by adding 0.5 ml of 0.048 M BaCl2 to 99.5 ml of 0.36 NH2
SO4; commercially available).
iv. Compare the turbidity of the test bacterial suspension with that 
of 0.5 Mac Farland (vigorously shaken before use) against a white 
background with a contrasting black line under adequate light. 
v. Reduce turbidity by adding sterile saline or broth. 
III. Inoculation of plates 
i. Dip a sterile cotton swab into the standardised bacterial suspension. 
ii. Remove excess inoculum by lightly pressing the swab against the tube 
wall at a level above that of the liquid. 
iii. Inoculate the agar by streaking with the swab containing the inoculum.
iv. Rotate the plate by 60° and repeat the rubbing procedure. Repeat two 
times. This will ensure an even distribution of the inoculum. 
v. Allow the surface of the medium to dry for 3-5 minutes but not longer 
than 15 minutes to allow for the absorption of excess moisture.
IV. Antimicrobial disks 
i. The number of antimicrobial agents to be tested should be limited. To 
make the test practical and relevant, include only one representative of 
each group of related drugs; those indicated for veterinary use to control 
or prevent disease, and those that can be useful for epidemiological 
or research purposes. Use antibiotic disks purchased from a reputable 
manufacturer. The disk diameter is approximately 6 mm. Disks should 
be properly stored in a tightly sealed container with a desiccant at 
2-8°C. Expired disks should not be used.
Application: 
i. Using sterile forceps or a disk dispenser, place the antibiotic disk on 
the surface of the inoculated and dried plate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microbiological Techniques 445 
ii. Immediately press it down lightly with the instrument to ensure 
complete contact between the disk and the agar surface. Do not move 
a disk once it has come into contact with the agar surface since some 
difusion of the drug occurs instantaneously.
iii. Position disks such that the minimum center-center distance is 24 mm 
and no closer than 10 to 15 mm from the edge of the petri dish. A
maximum of six disks may be placed in a 9-cm petri dish and 12 disks 
on a 150 mm plate. Reduce the number of disks applied per plate if 
overlapping zones of inhibition are encountered. 
Control 
Include one plate inoculated with a control strain (Table 21.4) for every set of 
plates and incubate together. 
Incubation 
i. Incubate plates in an inverted position at 30°C or at an optimum growth 
temperature. 
ii. Observe for the zone of inhibition after 16 to 18 hours. Slow growing 
organisms may require longer incubation period. 
Reading and measurement of zones of inhibition 
i. The zone of inhibition is the point at which no growth is visible to the 
unaided eye. 
ii. Record the presence of individual colonies (arrow) within zones of 
inhibition. 
iii. Record occurrence of fuzzy zones (arrow). In measuring the zone 
diameter, the fuzzy portion of the zone should be ignored as much as 
possible. The zone limit is the inner limit of the zone of normal growth.
iv. Read and record the diameter of the zones of inhibition using a ruler 
graduated to 0.5 mm. 
v. Round up the zone measurement to the nearest millimeter. 
Interpretation of results 
Compare the diameter of the zone of inhibition of the test isolates with those 
in the chart of interpretative standards for veterinary pathogens. 
Report result as follows:
Resistant (R), Intermediate (I) or Susceptible (S). 
Example Disk used: Chloramphenicol, 30 µg (C-30) 
Zone of inhibition: 16 mm
Result/interpretation 
Intermediate is based on the zone diameter interpretative chart (Table 21.5) 
Susceptibility test results using agents other than those listed in the chart are 
interpreted based on the presence or absence of a defnite zone of inhibition 
and is considered only as qualitative until such time as interpretative zones 
have been established. Table 21.4. *Acceptable inhibitory zone diameter (mm) limit of control strains recommended for use in the disk difusion test of 
antimicrobial sensitivity testing of bacteria isolated from animals. 
Antimicrobial Disk Escherichia Staphylococcus Pseudomonas Streptococcus 
coli aureus aeruginosa pneumoniaea 
Agent Content ATCC 25922 ATCC 25923 ATCC 27853 ATCC 49619
Amikacin 30 µg 19-26 20-26 18-26 -
Amoxicillin- 20/10 µg 18-24 28-36 - -
Clavulanic acidb 
Ampicillin 10 µg 16-22 27-35 - 30-36
Cefazolin 30 µg 21-27 29-35 - -
Cefoxitin 30 µg 23-29 23-2 -
Cephalothin 30 µg 15-21 29-37 - 26-32
Chloramphenicol 30 µg 21-27 19-26 - 26-32
Clindamycin 2 µg - 24-3 - 19-25
Erythromycin 15 µg - 22-30 - 25-30
Gentamicin 10 µg 19-26 19-27 16-21 -
Imipenem 10 µg 26-32 - 20-28 -
Kanamycin 30 µg 17-25 19-26 - -
Oxacillin 1 µg - 18-24 - <12c 
Penicillin 10 units - 26-37 - 24-30
446 Plant Techniques: Theory and PracticeRifampin 5 µg 8-10 26-34 - 25-30
Tetracycline 30 µg 18-25 24-30 - 27-31
Ticarcillin 75 µg 24-30 - 21-27 -
Ticarcillin- 75/10 µg 24-30 29-37 20-28 -
Spectinomycin 100 µg 21-25 13-17 10-14 -
Sulfsoxazole 250 µg or 300 µg 15-23 24-34 - -
Trimethoprim- 1.25/ 23-29 24-32 - 20-28
Sulfamethoxazoled 23.75 µg
Vancomycin 30 µg- 17-21 - 20-27
* Adopted from M31-A2 NCCLS. 2002. Performance Standards for Antimicrobial Disk and Dilution Susceptibility Tests for Bacteria Isolated 
from Animals; Approved Standard-Second Edition. NCCLS document M31-A2 (ISBN 1-56238-461-9). NCCLS, 940 West Valley Road, Suite 
1400, Wayne, Pennsylvania 19087-1898, USA. - no established range. a. applicable only using Mueller-Hinton Agar supplemented with 5% 
defbrinated sheep blood, incubated in 5% CO2. b. the range for E. coli ATCC 35218 is 17-22 mm. c. best assessed using Staphylococcus aureus 
ATCC 25923 with an acceptable zone diameter of 18-24 mm. d. very medium-dependent,especially with enterococci. 
Microbiological Techniques 447  
448 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Table 21.5. Zone diameter interpretative standard for veterinary pathogens 
Antimicrobial Agent Disk Content Zone Diameter (mm) 
S I F R 
Amikacin* 30 µg >17 15-16 < 14
Gentamicin* 10 µg > 15 13-14 < 12
Kanamycin* 30 µg >18 14-17 < 13
Spectinomycin 100 µg > 14 11-13 < 10
Amoxicillin￾clavulanic acid* 
Staphylococci 20/10 µg > 20 - < 19
Other organisms 20/10 µg >18 14-17 < 13
Ticarcillin-clavulanic 
acid* 
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa 
75/10 µg > 15 - < 14
Gram(-)enteric 
organisms 
75/10 µg >20 15-19 < 14
Ampicillin* 
Enterobacteriaceae 10 µg > 17 14-16 < 13
Staphylococci 10 µg > 29 - < 28
Enterococci 10 µg >17 - < 16
Streptococci (not
S. pneumoniae)
10 µg > 26 19-25 < 18
Oxacillin* 
Staphylococci 1 µg > 13 11-12 < 10
Penicillin*
Staphylococci 10 units > 29 - < 28
Enterococci 10 units > 15 - < 14
S. pneumoniae 1 µg oxacillin > 20 - -
Streptococci (not 
S. pneumoniae)
10 units > 28 20-27 < 19
Ticarcillin*
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa 
75 µg > 15 - < 14
Gram (-) enteric 
organisms 
75 µg > 20 15-19 < 14
Penicillin-novobiocin 10 units/30 µg > 18 15-17 < 14
Imipenem* 10 µg > 16 14-15 < 13
Cephalothin* 30 µg > 18 15-17 < 14Microbiological Techniques 449 
Cefazolin* 
Ceftiofur 
Enrofoxacin 
(canine/feline)
Enrofoxacin 
(chickens/turkeys)
Enrofoxacin (bovine)
Difoxacin
Orbifoxacin
Clindamycin 
Pirlimycin
Erythromycin* 
Streptococci 
Organisms other than 
Streptococci 
Tilmicosin (Bovine)
Tilmicosin (Swine)
Chloramphenicol* 
Streptococci (not 
S. pneumoniae)
S. pneumoniae 
Organisms other than 
Streptococci 
Florfenicol 
Tiamulin
Trimethoprim￾sulfamethoxazole* 
30 µg
30 µg
5 µg 
5 µg 
5 µg 
10 µg
10 µg
2 µg
2 µg
15 µg
15 µg
15 µg
15 µg
30 µg
30µg
30 µg
30 µg
30 µg
> 18
> 21
> 23
> 23
> 21
> 21
> 28
> 21
> 13
> 21
> 23
> 14
> 11
> 21
> 21
> 18
> 19
> 9
15-17
18-20
-
17-22
17-20
18-20
-
15-20
-
16-20
14-22
11-13
18-20
-
13-17
15-18
-
17-22
18-22
< 14
< 17
< 16
< 16
< 16
< 17
< 17
< 14
< 12
< 15
< 13
< 10
< 10
< 17
< 20
< 12
< 14
< 8
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae 
Organisms other than 
S. pneumoniae 
Rifampin* 
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae 
Organisms other 
than Streptococci 
Sulfsoxazole*
1.25/23.75 µg
1.25/23.75 µg
5 
5 
250 or 300
> 19
> 16
> 19
> 20
> 17
16-18
11-15
17-18
17-19
13-16
< 15
< 10
< 16
< 16
< 12
Tetracycline*
Streptococci 30 > 23 19-22 < 18
(Contd.) 
450 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
Table 21.5. (Contd.)
Antimicrobial Agent Disk Content Zone Diameter (mm) 
S I F R 
Vancomycin* 
Enterococci 30 > 17 15-16 < 14
Streptococci 30 > 17 - -
Other gram-positive 30 > 12 10-11 < 9
organisms 
* human data taken from M100-S12 supplements to M2 and M7
S-Susceptible, I-Intermediate, R-Resistant, F-Flexible; should be considered
susceptible if appropriate dosing modifcations specifed in the packaging insert are 
applied. 
Agar well difusion method 
The Agar well difusion method is widely used to evaluate the antimicrobial 
activity of plants or microbial extracts. Similarly, to the procedure used in 
the disk-difusion method, the agar plate surface is inoculated by spreading 
a volume of the microbial inoculum over the entire agar surface. Then, a 
hole with a diameter of 6 to 8 mm is punched aseptically with a sterile cork 
borer or a tip, and a volume (20-100 ml) of the antimicrobial agent or extract 
solution at desired concentration is introduced into the well. Then, agar plates 
are incubated under suitable conditions depending on the test microorganism. 
The antimicrobial agent difuses in the agar medium and inhibits the growth 
of the microbial strain tested. 
Antimicrobial efcacy of ethyl acetate leaf extract of Acampe praemorsa 
and Aerides odarata (Orchidaceae) (Jhansi, 2020).
Collection of plant materials and preparation of the extract 
Fresh leaves of Acampe praemorsa and Aerides odorata were collected near 
Paderu, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh (India), they are washed with tap 
water and then thoroughly with sterile distilled water to remove dust and 
soil particles. One hundred grams of the above plant materials were crushed 
separately in the mixer grinder and then soaked (dissolved) in 250 ml of ethyl 
acetate and methanol solvents. The mixtures were kept for 24 hours at room 
temperature. The mixtures were fltered separately with muslin cloth and 
then they were fltered through Whatmann flter paper no. 42. The fltrates 
thus obtained were concentrated by evaporating at room temperature. In this 
process, most of the solvent part of the extracts was evaporated leaving behind 
a pure extract. These pure extracts were ready for use and kept in a screw tight 
sterilised glass bottle. Microbiological Techniques 451 
Test organisms 
Antibacterial against three gram-positive bacteria viz., Bacillus megaterium 
(NCIM 2187), Lactobacillus acidophilus (MTCC 495), Enterococcus faecalis 
(MTCC 439) and three gram-negative bacteria namely Klebsiella pneumonia 
(MTCC 109), Proteus vulgaris (MTCC 7299) and Escherichia coli (ATCC 
35218). antifungal activity against Candida albicans (ATCC 10231) and 
Aspergillus favus (ATCC 9643).
The antibacterial screening was determined by the agar well difusion 
method (Bauer et al., 1966). Suspensions of diferent bacteria were prepared 
by using 24 hours old bacterial cultures. Using these bacterial suspensions, 
agar plates were prepared individually by following the pour plate method. 
After solidifcation, 6 mm diameter wells were punched in agar plates with 
a sterile cork borer. The plates were incubated at 37⁰C for 24 hours. After 
incubation, the diameter of the zone of inhibition was measured. For each 
sample and Bacterial species, triplicates were maintained. 
Antifungal screening: The fungi were grown in Czapek dox agar media at 
28⁰C and spores were collected after 5-6 days from agar plates.
Determination of MIC Minimum inhibitory concentration was determined 
by using the broth dilution method. Minimum Inhibitory Concentrations were 
determined at diferent concentrations viz., 50 µg/ml, 100 µg/ml, 150 g/µl and 
200 µg/ml on those bacterial strains which showed zones of inhibition against 
the plant crude extracts. Control tube was maintained for each concentration. 
The lowest concentration (highest dilution) of the extract that produced no 
visible bacterial growth, no turbidity in comparison with the control tubes was 
regarded as MIC. 
Result 
Ethyl acetate extracts of the plant leaves showed considerably more activity 
with high zones of inhibition against all bacteria except Acampe praemorsa 
extract against Bacillus megaterium and Aerides odorata extract against 
Klebsiella pneumoniae. Ethyl acetate and Methanolic extracts of both plants 
against Proteus vulgaris showed the same zone of inhibition. Both extracts 
of Aerides odorata showed the same zone of inhibition against Enterococcus 
faecalis. Ethyl acetate extract of Aerides odorata was found to be more active 
with the inhibition zone 17 mm against Lactobacillus acidophilus and Ethyl 
acetate extract of Acampe praemorsa, with inhibition zone 17 mm against 
Candida albicans; methanolic extract of both plant leaves did not show any 
zone of inhibition against Aspergillus favus. The MIC values of extracts were 
determined as the lowest concentration that completely inhibited bacterial 
growth after 48 hours of incubation at 37⁰C. The least MIC value for the 
methanolic extract of Acampe praemorsa against all bacteria is 100 µl, least 452 Plant Techniques: Theory and Practice
MIC for the extract of Aerides odorata against Lactobacillus acidophilus, 
Enterococcus faecalis was observed at 50 µl, followed by Proteus vulgaris 
and Escherichia coli at 100 µl, Efcient MIC values were observed for 
ethyl acetate extract of all plant leaves, at 50 µl against all except Klebisella 
pneumoniae which showed at 100 µl. 
References
Aboul-Maaty, N.A.F. and H.A.S. Oraby, 2019. Extraction of high-quality genomic 
DNA from diferent plant orders applying a modifed CTAB-based method. 
Bulletin of the National Research Centre, 43(1): 1-10. 
Agar, A.W., R.H. Alderson and D. Chescoe, 1974. Principles and practice of electron 
microscopic operation. In: A.M. Glauert (Ed.), Practical Methods in Electron 
Microscopy. North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
Agrawal, A., R. Swennen and B. Panis, 2004. A comparison of four methods for 
cryopreservation of meristems in banana (Musa spp.). CryoLetters, 25: 101-110. 
Agrawal, S.S. and M. Paridhavi, 2012. Herbal Drug Technology. Universities Press, 
Hyderabad, India. 
Alberts, B., D. Bray, J. Lewis, M. Raf, K. Roberts and J.D. Watson, 1994. Molecular 
Biology of Cell. Gerland Publishing, Inc., New York. 
Allen, F.H.E. and J. Friend, 1983. Resistance of potato tubers to infection by 
Phytophthora infestans: A structural study of haustorial encasement. Physiol. 
Plant Pathol., 22: 285-292
Anderson, E.W. 1985. Tissue culture propagation of red raspberries. In: Proceedings 
of Conference on Nursery Production of Fruit Plants through Tissue Culture – 
Applications and Feasibility. Agri. Res. Sci. Educ. Admin. U.S.D.A., Beltsville. 
pp. 27-34.
Andersson, H.C. 1985. Sister chromatid exchanges in Tradescantia paludosa. Stain 
Technology, 60: 193-199.
Aneja, K.R. 2003. Experiments in Microbiology, Plant Pathology and Biotechnology 
(4th edition). New Age International Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi.
Ashmore, S., M. Azimi, R.A. Drew. 2001. Cryopreservation trials in Carica papaya. 
Acta Hort., 560: 117-120.
Austin, J.R. II, J.M. Segui-Siwarro and L.A. Schtyin, 2005. Quantitative analysis of 
changes in spatial distribution and plug-end geometry of microtubules involved in 
plant-cell cytokinesis. J. Cell. Sci., 118: 3895-3903.
Australian National Herbarium, 2016. Australian Botanical Garden, Canberra.
Avery, S.W. and E.A. Elis, 1978. Methods for removing uranyl acetate precipitate 
from ultrathin sections. Stain Technology, 53: 137-140.
Azizi, P., M.Y. Ranfi, M. Maziah, S.N.A. Abdullah, M.M. Hanaf, M.A. Latif, A.A. 
Rashid and M. Sahebi, 2015. Understanding the shoot apical meristem regulation: 
A study of the phytohormones, auxin and cytokinin in rice. Mech. Dev., 135: 1-15.
Badria, F.A. and W.S. Aboelmaaty, 2019. Plant histochemistry: A versatile and 
indispensable tool in localization of gene expression, enzymes, cytokines, 
secondary metabolites and detection of plants infection and pollution. Acta Sci. 
Pharmaceut. Sci., 3: 88-100.454 References
Baker, E.A. and E. Parsons, 1971. Scanning electron microscopy of plant cuticles. 
Journal of Microscopy, 94: 39-49.
Baker, I.R. 1958. Principles of Biological Microtechnique. Methuen & Co. Ltd., Great 
Britain.
Baker, I.R. 1969. Cytological Techniques. Methuen & Co. Ltd., Great Britain.
Balamurugan, V., S. Fatima and S. Velurajan, 2019. A guide to phytochemical 
analysis. International Journal of Advance Research and Innovative Ideas in 
Education, 5(1): 236-245.
Ball, E. 1946. Development in sterile culture of stems tips and subjacent regions of 
Tropaeolum majus L. and of Lupinus albus L. American Journal of Botany, 33: 
301-318.
Bancraft, J. and M. Gamble, 2008. Theory and Practice of Histological Techniques, 6th 
ed. Churchill Livingstone Inc., Edinburgh.
Barbara, D.J. and M.F. Clark, 1986. Immunoassays in plant pathology. In: T.L. Wang 
(Ed.), Immunology in Plant Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. pp. 
197-219.
Barbusa, P. and T.M. Peters, 1971. The efects of vital dyes on living organisms with 
special reference to methylene blue and neutral red. Histochemical Journal, 3: 
71-93.
Barnett, R.J. and A.M. Saligmann, 1952. Histochemical demonstration of protein￾bound sulphydril groups. Science, 116: 323-327.
Barraco, G., I. Sylvestre and F. Engelmann, 2011. Comparing encapsulation￾dehydration and droplet-vitrifcation for cryopreservation of sugarcane 
(Saccharum spp.) shoot tips. Sci Hortic., 130: 320-324.
Bartels, P.H., 1966. Principles of Poiarized light. In: G.L. Weid (Ed.), Introduction to 
Quantitative Cytochemistry. Academic Press, New York.
Beddi, C.S., L.V. Modolo and R.M.S. Isaias, 2014. The role of phenolics in the 
control of auxin in galls of Piptadenia gonoachantha (Mart.) MacBr (Fabaceae: 
Mimosoideae). Biochem. Syst. Ecol., 55: 53-59.
Bedetti, C.S., N.C. Jorge, F.C.G. Trigueiro, G.P. Bragança, L.V. Modolo and R.M.S. 
Isaias, 2018. Detection of cytokinins and auxin in plant tissues using histochemistry 
and immunocytochemistry. Biotechnic & Histochemistry, 93: 149-154.
Beishir, L. 1966. Microbiology in Practice (6th ed.). Addison Wesley Longman Inc., 
California.
Bennet, H.S. 1961. The microscopical investigation of biological materials with 
polarized light. In: R.M. Jones (Ed.), Handbook of Microscopical Techniques. 
Hafner Publishing Co. New York.
Bennet, H.S., W.D. Wyrick, S.W. Lee and J.H. Jr. McNeil, 1976. Science and art in 
preparing tissues embedded in plastic for light microscopy, with special reference 
to glycol methacrylate, glass knives and simple stains. Stain Technology, 51: 71-
97.
Benson, E.E. 2008. Cryopreservation theory. In: B.M. Reed (Ed.), Plant 
Cryopreservation: A Practical Guide. Springer, New York. pp. 15-32. 
Berlyn, G.P. and J.P. Miksche, 1976. Botanical Microtechnique and Cytochemistry. 
Iowa State University Press, Iowa.
Bersier, J.D. and G. Bocquet, 1960. Les methods I’ eclairissement en vascularisation 
et en morphogenie vegetales comparees. Archives des Sciences Geneva, 13: 555-
556.References 455 
Bertalanfy, L. von. 1963. Acridine orange fuorescence in cell physiology, 
cytochemistry and medicine. Protoplasma, 57: 51-83.
Bhandari, N.N., 1997. Staining Techniques – A Manual. Ultimate Printers. New Delhi.
Bhojwani, S.S. and S.K. Razdan, 1985. Plant Tissue Culture: Theory and Practice. 
Elsevier Science Publishers. Amsterdam.
Bloom, S. and C. Goodpasture, 1976. An improved technique for selective silver 
staining of nucleolar organizer regions in human chromosomes. Hum. Genet., 34: 
199-206.
Bonga, J.M. and S. Venkateswaran, 1976. Fixing and staining of Conifer tissues with 
lacto-propionic-dimethyl-sulfoxide-caramine. Stain Technology, 51: 197-199.
Bonnet, H.T. Jr. and J.G. Torrey, 1965. A comparison of the application of several 
histological procedures to mature primary root tissue. Protoplasma, 60: 310-313.
Boyde, A. and C. Wood, 1969. Preparation of animal tissues in surface staining 
electron microscopy. Journal of Microscopy, 90: 221-249.
Boyer, M.G. 1963. The role of tannins in neutral red staining of pine leaf vacuoles. 
Stain Technology, 38: 117-120.
Breugel, F.M.A. 1980. Improved methods for permanent chromosome preparations: 
Cellophane squashes and citric acid dissociation. Stain Technology, 55: 50-52.
Bronnier, R. 1975. Simultaneous demonstration of lipids and starch in plant tissues. 
Stain Technology, 50: 1-4.
Brooks, R.A. and G. Di Chiro, 1975. Theory of image reconstruction in computed 
technology. Radiology, 117: 51-572.
Bruni, A., G. Dallolio and D. Mares, 1977. Use of fuorescent labeling methods in 
morphological and histochemical studies in latex in situ. Caryologia, 30: 486-487.
Burstone, M.S. 1955. An evaluation of histochemical methods for protein groups. J. 
Histochem. Cytochem., 3: 32-49.
Burton, G.W. 1952. Quantitative inheritance in grasses. Pro VI Int. Grassl. Cong., 
277-283.
Busch, W., R. Martin and P.G. Hermann, 1994. Sensitivity enhancement of fuorescence 
in situ hybridization of plant chromosomes. Chromosome Research, 2: 15-20.
Carstensen, E.L., E.G. Aldridge, S.W. Child, P. Sullivan and H.H. Brown, 1971. Stain 
ability of cells fxed with glutaraldehyde and acrolein. J. Cell Biol., 50: 529-532.
Cass, D.D., D.J. Peteya and B.L. Robertson, 1985. Megagametophyte development 
in Hordeum vulgare. 1. Early megagametogenesis and the nature of cell wall 
formation. Can. J. Bot., 63: 2164-2171. 
Castaño-Díez, D., M. Kudryashev and H. Stahlberg, 2017. Dynamo catalogue: 
Geometrical tools and data management for particle picking in subtomogram 
averaging of cryo-electron tomograms. J. Struct. Biol., 197: 135-144.
Cawood, A.H., U. Potter and H.G. Dickinson, 1978. An evaluation of Coomasie blue 
as a stain for qualitative microdensitometry of protein in section. J. Histochem. 
Cytochem., 26: 645-650. 
Cecich, R.A., P. Lersten and J.P. Miksche, 1972. A cytoplasmic study of nucleic acids 
and proteins in the shoot apex of white spruce. Amer. J. Bot., 59: 442-449.
Chaitanya, K.V. 2013. Cell and Molecular Biology: A Lab Manual. PHI Learning Pvt. 
Ltd.
Chamberlain, CJ. 1932. Methods in Plant Histology (5th edn.). University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago. 
456 References
Chambers, T.C. and C.D. Hamilton, 1973. Scanning electron microscopy of transfer 
cells: A new method for preparation of plant tissues. Journal of Microscopy, 99: 
65-68.
Chapman, D.M. 1975. Dichromatism of bromophenol blue with an improvement in 
the mercuric bromophenol blue technique for protein. Stain Technology, 50: 25-
30.
Chawla, H.S. 2003. Plant Biotechnology: Laboratory Manual for Plant Biotechnology. 
Oxford & IBH Publishing, New Delhi.
Chayen, J. and P.B. Gahan, 1959. An improved and rapid embedding method. 
Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science, 100: 275-277.
Chayen, J., L. Bitensky and R.G. Burcher, 1973. Practical Histochemistry. Wiley, New 
York.
Chen, T.Y., J.T. Chen and W.C. Chang. 2004. Plant regeneration through direct shoot 
bud formation from leaf cultures of Paphiopedilum orchids. Plant Cell Tissue Org 
Cult., 76: 11-15.
Chen, Y. and J.H. Wang, 2002. Cryopreservation of carrot (Daucus carota L.) cell 
suspensions and protoplasts by vitrifcation. CryoLetters, 24: 57-64.
Chissoe, W.F., E.L. Vezey and J.J. Skvarla, 1994. Hexamethyl-disilazane as a drying 
agent for pollen scanning electron microscopy. Biotechnic & Histochemistry, 69: 
192-198.
Clayden, E.C. 1962. Practical Section Cutting and Staining. J & A Churchill Ltd., 
London.
Cocking, E.C. 1979. Parasexual reproduction in fowering plants. New Zealand J. 
Bot., 17: 665-671.
Comings, D.E. 1974. The structure of human chromosomes. In: H. Busch (Ed.), The 
Cell Nucleus. Academic Press, New York.
Compton M.E. 2006. Use of statistics in plant biotechnology. Methods in Molecular 
Biology (Clifton, N.J.), 318: 145-163. https://doi.org/10.1385/1-59259-959-1:145
Compton, M.E. 2012. Use of statistics in plant biotechnology. In: Plant Cell Culture 
Protocols, pp. 109-127. 
Conger, A.D. and L.M. Fairchild, 1953. A quick-freeze method for making slides 
permanent. Stain Technology, 28: 281-283.
Conn, H.J. 1936. Biological Stains (3rd ed.). Commission on Standardization of 
Biological Stains. Geneva. 
Conover, C.M. and R.T. Poole, 1984. Acclimatization of indoor foliage plants. Hortic. 
Rev., 6: 120-154.
Cordova, L.B. II and K. Thammasiri, 2016. Cryopreservation on a cryo-plate of 
Arundina graminifolia protocorms, dehydrated with silica gel and drying beads. 
CryoLetters, 37: 68-76.
Croat, T.B. 1978. Survey of herbarium problems. Taxon., 27: 203-218.
Currier, H.B. and S. Strugger, 1956. Aniline blue and fuorescence microscopy of 
callose in bulb scales of Allium cepa L. Protoplasma, 45: 552-559.
Darlington, C.D. and L.F. La Cour, 1960. The Handbook of Chromosomes (5th ed.). 
Allen and Unwin, London.
De Boucaud, M.T., M. Brison, B. Helliot et al. 2002. Cryopreservation of Prunus. In: 
L.E. Towill and Y.P.S. Bajaj (Eds.), Biotechnology in Agriculture and Forestry. 
Cryo-preservation of Plant Germplasm II (pp. 287–311). Springer, Berlin￾Heidelberg.  
 
References 457 
Debergh, P.C. and L.J. Maene, 1981. A scheme for commercial propagation of 
ornamental plants by tissue culture. Sci. Hortic., 14: 335-345.
Dellaporta, S.L., J. Wood and J.B. Hicks, 1983. A plant DNAminipreparation: Version 
II. Plant Molecular Biology Reporter, 1(4): 19-21. 
Desai, J.D. and A.J. Desai, 1980. Methods in Microbiology: Microscopy and Staining. 
Prashant Publishers, Vallabh Vidyanagar, India.
Dodappa, P. 2005. Analysis of histochemical features of male sterility in GMS safower 
Carthamus tinctorius L. Doctoral Thesis. Karnatak University, Dharwad, India.
Doyle, J.J and J.L. Doyle, 1990. Isolation of plant DNA from fresh tissue. Focus, 12: 
13.
Drewry, A. 1982. G-banded chromosomes in Pinus resinosa. J. Heredity, 82: 363-376.
Dwivedi, J.N., M. Yunus, K. Kulshreshtha and K.J. Ahmad, 1991. A new imprinting 
material for scanning electron microscopic studies. Biotechnic & Histochemistry, 
66: 225-227.
Edwards, A.W. 2005. RA Fischer, statistical methods for research workers (1925). 
In: Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics 1640-1940. Elsevier Science. pp. 
856-870.
Eklavya, C. 1979. A technique for making CBB stained sections of parafn and resin 
embedded tissue permanent. Indian J. Bot., 2: 73-75.
Ellis, R.L. 2000 The Microtone: Functions and Design. Woods & Ellis.
Engelmann, F. 2004. Plant cryopreservation: Progress and prospects. In: Vitro Cellular 
and Developmental Biology-Plant, 40: 427-433. 
Ercius, P., O. Alaidi, M.J. Rames and G. Ren, 2015. Electron tomography a three￾dimensional analytic tools for hard and soft materials research. Adv. Mat., 27: 
5638-5663.
Esau, K. 1993. Plant Anatomy (8th reprint). Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi.
Eschrich, W. and H.B. Currier, 1964. Identifcation of callose by its diachrome and 
fuorochrome reactions. Stain Technology, 39: 303-307.
Evans, L.V. and M.S. Holligan, 1972. Correlated light and electron microscope studies 
on brown algae. I. Localization of alginic acid and sulphated polysaccharides in 
Dictyota. New Phytologist, 71: 1161-1172. 
Fabre, J. and J. Dereuddre, 1990. Encapsulation-dehydration: A new approach to 
cryopreservation of Solanum shoot-tips. CryoLetters, 11: 413-426.
Fahy, G.M., D.R. MacFarlane, C.A. Angell and H.T. Meryman, 1984. Vitrifcation as 
an approach to cryopreservation. Cryobiology, 21: 407-426. 
Feder, N. and T.P. O’Brien, 1968. Plant microtechnique: Some principles and new 
methods. Amer. J. Bot., 55: 123-142. 
Fischer, R.A. 1925. Statistical Methods for Research Workers. Oliver and Boyd, 
Edinburgh. 
Fisher, D.B. 1968. Protein staining for ribboned epon sections for light microscopy.
Histochemie, 16: 92-96.
Fisher, J.B. 1985. Induction of reaction wood in Terminalia (Combretaceae): Roles of 
gravity and stress. Ann. Bot., 55: 237-248.
Flax, M.H. and M.H. Himes, 1952. Microspectrophotometric analysis of metachromatic 
staining of nucleic acids. Physiol. Zool., 25: 297-311.
Fleming, W. 1873. Eine Einbettungs methode. Archiv fur mikroskopische Anatomie 
and Entwicklungsmechanik, 9: 121-125. 
458 References
Flitney, F.W. 1966. The time course of the fxation of albumin by formaldehyde, 
glutaraldehyde, acrolein and other higher aldehydes. J. Roy. Microscop. Soc., 85: 
353-364.
Forsline, P.L., C. Stushnof, L.E. Towill et al., 1998. Recovery and longevity of 
cryopreserved apple buds. J. Am. Soc. Hort. Sci., 123: 365-370.
Fraga, D., T. Meulia and S. Fenster, 2008. Real time PCR. Current protocols Essential 
Laboratory Techniques. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470089941.et1003s00
Frangioni, G. and G. Borgioli, 1979. Polystyrene embedding: A new method for light 
and electron microscopy. Stain Technology, 9: 91-92. 
Franklin Rahman, T. 2015. Plant Collection and Presentation. Botanical Research 
Institute of Texas (BRIT), Texas, USA.
Freeman, W.M., S.J. Walker and K.E. Vrana, 1999. Quantitative RT-PCR: Pitfalls and 
potential. Biotechniques, 26(1): 112-125.
Gahan, P.B. 1984. Plant Histochemistry and Cytochemistry: An Introduction. 
Academic Press, Florida.
Galbraith, D.W., K. Harkins, J.M. Maddox, N.M. Ayres, D.P. Sharman and E. 
Firoozabady, 1983. Rapid fow cytometric analysis of the cell cycle in intact. Plant 
Tissues Science, 220: 1049-1057.
Gamborg, O.L., T. Murashige, T.A. Thorpe and I.K. Vasil, 1976. Plant tissue culture 
media. In Vitro. 12: 473-478.
Gantait, S., U.R. Sinniah, P. Suranthran et al., 2015. Improved cryopreservation of oil 
palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) polyembryoids using droplet-vitrifcation approach 
and assessment of genetic fdelity. Protoplasma, 252: 89-101.
Garrido-Cardenas, J.A., C. Mesa-Valle and F. Manzano-Agugliaro, 2018. Trends in 
plant research using molecular markers. Planta, 247(3): 543-557.
Garvey, W., A. Fathi, F. Bigelow, B. Carpenter and C. Jimenez, 1986. Areliable method 
for demonstrating gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Stain Technology, 
61(4): 251-253.
Gatenby, J.B. and H.W. Beams, 1950. In: The Microtomist’s Vade-mecum by Lee. B. 
Churchill, London.
Gaudet, M., A.G. Fara, I. Beritognolo and M. Sabatti, 2009. Allele-specifc PCR 
in SNP genotyping. In: A. Komar (Ed.), Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms. 
Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 578. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-60327-411-1_26
Gautherat, R.J. 1934. Culture du tissues cambial. C.R. Hebd. Seances Acad. Sc., 198: 
2195-2196.
Gautherat, R.J. 1935. Recherches sur la culture des tissusvegetaux, Doctoral Thesis. 
Paris.
Gautherat, R.J. 1985. History of plant tissue culture: A personal account. In: I.K. 
Vasil (Ed.), Cell Culture and Somatic Cell Genetics of Plants (Vol. 2). New York, 
Academic Press. pp. 1-59.
Gayatri, D., K.L. Umabala, V. Manga and M.V. Subba Rao, 1993. Heterochromatin 
patterns in four species of Crotalaria L. Nucleus, 36: 45-50.
George, Z. and M. James, 2004. Biomedical Technology and Device Handbook. CRC 
Press LLC.
Gini, T.G. and G.J. Jothi, 2018. Column chromatography and HPLC analysis of 
phenolic compounds in the fractions of Salvinia molesta Mitchell. Egyptian 
Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences, 5(3): 197-203. 
 
References 459 
Giraldez, R., M.C. Cermeno and J. Orellana, 1979. Comparison of C-banding pattern 
in the chromosomes of inbred lines and open-pollinated varieties of rye. Z. 
Pfzucht., 83: 40-48.
Giron, D., E. Huguet, G.N. Stone and M. Body, 2016. Insect-induced efects on plants 
and possible efectors used by galling and leaf-mining insects to manipulate their 
host plant. J. Insect. Physiol., 84: 70-89.
Goldblatt, P.J. and B.F. Trump, 1965. The application of del Rio Hortega’s silver 
method to epoxy-embedded tissue. Stain Technology, 40: 105-115.
Gomez, K.A. and A.A. Gomez, 1984. Statistical Procedures for Agricultural Research. 
John Wiley & Sons.
Gong, Z.Y., H.K. Wu, Z.K. Cheng and M.H. Gu, 2002. Physical mapping of the 45S 
rDNA and 5S rDNA to rice prometaphase chromosome. Acta Genet. Sin., 29: 241-
244.
Gonzalez-Arnao, M.T., C.E. Lazaro-Vallejo, F. Engelmann et al., 2009. Multiplication 
and cryopreservation of vanilla (Vanilla planifolia ‘Andrews’). In Vitro Cell Dev. 
Biol. Plant, 45: 574-582.
Green, M.R. and J. Sambrook, 2018a. Hot start polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 
Cold Spring Harbor Protocols, 2018(5): 95-125.
Green, M.R. and J. Sambrook, 2018b. Touchdown polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 
Cold Spring Harbor Protocols, 2018(5): pdb-prot095133.
Green, P.B. and P. Linstead, 1990. A procedure for SEM of complex structures applied 
to the Inforescence of snapdragon (Antirrhinum). Protoplasma, 158: 33-38.
Guha, S. and S.C. Maheshwari, 1964. In vitro production of embryos from anthers of 
Datura. Nature (London), 204: 497-497.
Guha, S. and S.C. Maheshwari, 1966. Cell division and diferentiation of embryos in 
the pollen grains of Datura in vitro. Nature, 212: 97-98.
Guo, G., C. Chen, X. Li, W. Song and R. Chen, 1998. Cloning of the telomere 
associated sequences of rye B-chromosomes. Acta Bot. Sin., 40: 1123-1128.
Gupta, P.K. 1997. Cytogenetics. Rastogi Publications, Meerut, India.
Gurr, E. 1960. Encyclopedia of Microscopic Stains. Leonard Hill, London.
Gurr, E. 1965. The Rational Use of Dyes in Biology. Leonard Hill, London.
Haberlandt, G. 1902. Kulturversuchemitisolierten Pfanzenzellen. Sitzungsber. Akad. 
Wiss. Wien., Math.-Naturwiss. Kl., Abt. 1(111): 69-92.
Haf, L.A. 1994. Improved quantitative PCR using nested primers. Genome 
Research, 3(6): 332-337.
Hall, C.E. 1955. Electron densitometry of stained virus particles. Journal of 
Biophysical and Biochemical Cytology, 1: 1-12. 
Halmagyi, A. and I. Pinker. 2006. Plant regeneration from Rosa shoot tips cryopreserved 
by a combined droplet vitrifcation method. Plant Cell Tissue and Organ Culture, 
84: 145-153.
Halmagyi, A., C. Deliu and A. Coste, 2005. Plant regrowth from potato shoots tips 
cryopreserved by a combinated vitrifcation-droplet method. CryoLetters, 26: 
313-322.
Halmagyi, A., G. Fischer-Kluver, G. Mix-Wagner et al., 2004. Cryopreservation of 
Chrysanthemum morifolium (Dendranthema grandifora Ramat.) using diferent 
approaches. Plant Cell Rep., 22: 371-375.
Han Hu, 1987. Application of pollen-derived plants to crop improvement. In: S. 
Natesh et al. (Eds), Biotechnology in Agriculture. Oxford & IBH Publishing Co. 
Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi. pp. 155-168.460 References
Handa, S.S., S.P.S. Khanuja, G. Longo and D.D. Rakesh, 2008. Extraction 
Technologies for Medicinal and Aromatic Plants. Earth, Environmental and 
Marine Sciences and Technologies. International Centre for Science and High 
Technology, Trieste. pp. 21-25.
Hanson, W.D. 1956. Heritability, statistical genetics and plant breeding 
NASNRC. Washington. Publ., 981: 115-140.
Harborne, J.B. 2013. Phytochemical Methods: A Guide to Modern Techniques of 
Plant Analysis. Third edition (8th Indian reprint), Springer (India), New Delhi.
Haschemeyer, R.H. and R.J. Myers, 1972. Negative Staining. In: M.A. Hayat (Ed.), 
Principles and Techniques of Electron Microscopy, Vol. 2. Van Nostrand Reinhold 
Co., New York.
Hasler, C.M. and J.B. Blumberg, 1999. Phytochemicals: Biochemistry and physiology. 
Introduction. Journal of Nutrition, 129: 7568-7578.
Hayat, M.A. 1968a. A study of glutaraldehyde-potassium permanganate fxation 
of plant embryos for electron microscopy. Proc. 4th Europ. Reg. Conf. Electron 
Micros., Rome, 2: 379.
Hayat, M.A. 1968b. Triple fxation for electron microscopy. In: C.J. Arceneaut (Ed.), 
Proceedings of 26th Annual Meeting Electron Microscopy Society of America. 
Vol. 90. CJ. Claitor’s Publishing Division, Baton Rouge, La.
Hayat, M.A. 1974. Principles and Techniques of Scanning Electron Microscopy, Vol. 
1-6. Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York.
Hayat, M.A. 1975. Positive Staining for Electron Microscopy. Van Nostrand Reinhold 
Co., New York.
Hazra, A. and N. Gogtay, 2016. Biostatistics series module 2: Overview of hypothesis 
testing. Indian Journal of Dermatology, 61(2): 137.
Heikrujam, J., R. Kishor and P.B. Mazumder, 2020. The chemistry behind plant 
DNA isolation protocols. Biochemical Analysis Tools-Methods for Bio-Molecules 
Studies, 8: 131-141.
Hemandez, L.F. 2001. Floret Patter morphogenesis in the capitulum of the sunfower 
Helianthus annuus. Microscopy and Analysis, 20: 15-20.
Henry, R.J. (Ed.) (2012). Molecular Markers in Plants. Wiley Blackwell, John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc., USA.
Hernandez, L.F. and P.B. Green, 1993. On the transductions for expression of pattern: 
Biophysical analysis in sunfower (Helianthus annuus L.). The Plant Cell, 5: 
1725-1738.
Hernandez-Ramírez, F., M.T. Gonzalez-Arnao, C.A. Cruz-Cruz et al., 2014. 
Comparison of diferent preconditioning and loading treatments with vanilla 
(Vanilla planifolia Jack.) apices cryopreserved using the droplet-vitrifcation 
procedure. Acta Hortic., 1039: 173-180.
Herr, J.M. Jr. 1992. Recent advances in clearing techniques for study of ovule and 
female gametophyte development. In: E. Ottaviano, P.L. Muleahy, M.G. Sari and 
M.G. Bergamini (Eds), Angiosperm Pollen and Ovules, Springer-Verlag, London. 
pp. 149-154.
Heslop-Harrison, J. and Y. Heslop-Harrison, 1970. Evaluation of pollen viability 
by enzymatically induced fuorescence: Intracellular hydrolysis of fuorescein 
diacetate. Stain Technology, 45(3): 115-120
Heslop-Harrison, Y. 1977. The pollen-stigma interaction: Pollen-tube penetration in 
Crocus. Ann. Bot., 41: 913-922.References 461 
Heywood, V.H. 1969. Scanning electron microscopy in the study of plant materials. 
Micron, 1: 1-14.
Hill, W.G. 2013. Brenner’s Encyclopedia of Genetics || Genetic Correlation, 237–
239. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-374984-0.00611-2
Hirai, D. and A. Sakai, 1999. Cryopreservation of in vitro-grown axillary shoot-tip 
meristems of mint (Mentha spicata L.) by encapsulation vitrifcation. Plant Cell 
Reports, 19: 150-155.
Hirai, D., K. Shirai, S. Shirai et al., 1998. Cryopreservation of in-vitro grown meristems 
of strawberry (Fragaria X ananassa Duch.) by encapsulation- vitrifcation. 
Euphytica, 101: 109-115.
Wilson, K., A. Hofmann, J.M. Walker and S. Clokie (Eds), 2018. Wilson and Walker’s 
Principles and Techniques of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Holland, J.B., W.E. Nyquist, C.T. Cervantes-Martínez and J. Janick, 2003. Estimating 
and interpreting heritability for plant breeding: An update. Plant Breeding 
Reviews, 22: 09-112. 
Holmgren, P.K., W. Kenken and E.K. Scholfed, 1981. Index Herbarium. Part I. The 
Hebenaria of the world. Dr. Junk, The Hague, Netherlands.
Hu, Z., B. Dang, Y. Zhou, L. Cui, L. Wang, T. Zhang, L. Li and Z. Chen, 1998. 
Isolation of single chromosome and DNA amplifcation in vitro in Zea mays. Acta 
Genet. Sin., 25(6): 545-550.
Hu, Z.M., H. Wang, R. Shi, B.Y. Dang, J. Hu, W.B. Yin, Y.H. Chen, S., Jiang and H. 
Zheng, 2004. Microdissection and construction of region-specifc DNA libraries 
of wheat chromosome 6B. Acta Bot. Sin., 46(11): 1357-1365.
Huetteman, C.A. and J.E. Preece, 1993. Thidiazuron: A potent cytokinin for woody 
plant tissue culture. Plant Cell Tissue Org. Cult, 39: 105-119.
Hughes, J. and M.E. McCully, 1975. The use of an optical brightner in the study of 
plant structure. Stain Technology, 50: 319-329 
Humphrey, C.D. and F.E. Pittman, 1974. A simple methylene blue-azure II – Basic 
fuchsin stain for epoxy-embedded tissue sections. Stain Technology, 49: 9-14.
Idrees, Muhammad and Irshad, Muhammad, 2014. Molecular markers in plants for 
analysis of genetic diversity: A review. European Academic Research, 2(1): 1513-
1540.
Ignacimuthu, S.J. (2001). Methods in Biotechnology. Elite Publishing House, New 
Delhi. 
Inamdar, J.A., V. Murugan and R.B. Subramanian, 1987. Staining methods for the 
detection of laticifers in plant tissue. Journal of Microscopy, 147: 347-351.
Jacquard, A., J.P. Miksche and G. Bernier, 1972. Quantitative study of nucleic acids 
and proteins in the shoot apex of Sinapis alba during transition from vegetative to 
the reproductive condition. Amer. J. Bot., 59: 714-721.
Jayabalan, Mi and J.J. Shah, 1986. Histochemical techniques to localize rubber in 
Guayule (Parthenium argentatum Gray). Stain Technology, 61: 303-308.
Jenderek, M.M. and B.M. Reed, 2017. Cryopreserved storage of clonal germplasm 
in the USDA national plant germplasm system. In Vitro Cell Dev. Biol. Plant, 53: 
299-308.
Jensen, W.A. 1962. Botanical Histochemistry. W.H. Freeman and Company, London.
Jhansi, K. 2020. Ethnobotanical and phytochemical studies in sacred groves of 
Eastern Ghats of India with special reference to therapeutic properties of four 
orchid species. Doctoral thesis. Acharya Nagarjuna University, India.462 References
Jitsopakul N., P. Homchan and K. Thammasiri. 2021. Cryopreservation of orchid 
pollinia using the V cryo-plate method. CryoLetters, 42: 25-32.
Jitsopakul, N., K. Thammasiri and K. Ishikawa, 2008a. Cryopreservation of Vanda 
coerulea protocorms by encapsulation-dehydration. CryoLetters, 29: 253-260.
Jitsopakul, N., K. Thammasiri and K. Ishikawa, 2008b. Cryopreservation of Bletilla 
striata mature seeds, 3-day germination seeds and protocorms by droplet￾vitrifcation. CryoLetters, 29: 517-526. 
Johansen, D.A. 1932. A new method of diferentiating gentian violet when used as a 
somatic chromosome stain. Stain Technology, 7: 17-20.
Johansen, D.A. 1940. Plant Microtechnique. McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New 
York.
Johnson, H.W., H.F. Robinson and R.E. Comstock, 1955. Estimates of genetic and 
environmental variability in soybeans. Agronomy Journal, 47(7): 314-318.
Jurand, A. and M.J. Ireland, 1965. A slow rotary shaker for embedding in viscous 
media. Stain Technology, 40: 233-234.
Kajtar, M., R.R. Cohen and T.P. O’Brien, 1970. Rotary shaker suitable for fxation 
and infltration of histological specimens at reduced temperatures. Laboratory 
Practice, 19: 721-722. 
Kane, M. 2000. Culture indexing for bacterial and fungal contaminants. In: R.N. 
Trigiano and D.G. Gray (Eds), Plant Tissue Culture Concepts and Laboratory 
Exercises. CRC Press, Boca Raton. pp. 427-432.
Kao, K.N. and M.R. Michayluk, 1975. Nutritional requirements for growth of Vicia 
hajastana cells and protoplasts at a very low population density in liquid media. 
Planta, 126: 105-110.
Kao, K.N. 1977. Chromosomal behaviour in somatic hybrids of soybean – Nicotiana 
glauca. Mol. Gen. Genet., 150: 225-230.
Karamara, I., J. Suda, M. Johnson, E. Yokota, T. Shimmer, K. Misaki, S. Yonemura, 
L.A. Staehelin and Y. Mineyuki, 2009. The preprophase band is a localised center 
of Clathrin-mediated endocytosis in late prophase cells of the onion cotyledia 
epidermis. Plant J., 57: 819-831.
Kartha, K.K. and O.L. Gamborg, 1975. Elimination of cassava-mosaic disease by 
meristem culture. Phytomorphology, 65: 826-828.
Kasha, K.J. and K.N. Kao, 1970. High frequency haploid production in barley 
(Hordeum vulgare L.). Nature (London), 225: 874-876.
Kasten, F.H. 1967. Cytochemical studies with acridine orange and the infuence of 
dye contaminants in the staining of the nucleic acids. International Review of 
Cytology, 21: 141-202.
Kaufmann, J. and A.G. Schering, 2007. Analysis of variance ANOVA. Wiley 
Encyclopedia of Clinical Trials. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780471462422.eoct017.
Kaur, C. and H.C. Kapoor, 2002. Anti‐oxidant activity and total phenolic 
content of some Asian vegetables. International Journal of Food Science & 
Technology, 37(2):153-161.
Kawakami, N. 1961. A permanganate-chrome fxative and lead acetate staining for 
electron microscopy of microorganisms. J. Electron Microscopy, 10: 14.
Khanuja S.P.S., A.K. Shasany, M.P. Darokar and S. Kumar, 1999. Rapid isolation of 
DNA from dry and fresh samples of plants producing large amounts of secondary 
metabolites and essential oils. Plant MolBiol Rep., 17: 1-7. 
 
References 463 
Khasim, S.M. 2002. Botanical Microtechnique: Principles and Practice. Capital 
Publishing Company, New Delhi, India.
Khasim, S.M., J. Ramudu and S. Shakuntala, 2015. Seed morphometry in Coelogyne 
Lindl., Cymbidium Sul. and Pholidota Lindl. (Orchidaceae) with special reference 
to their ecological signifcance. Acta Hort., 1078: 41-48.
Kim, H.H., J.W. Yoon, Y.E. Park et al., 2006. Cryopreservation of potato cultivated 
varieties and wild species: Critical factors in droplet vitrifcation. CryoLetters, 27: 
223-234.
Kim, T.K. 2015. Ttest as a parametric statistic.Korean Journal of Anesthesiology, 68(6): 
540-546.
Kindiger, B. and J.B. Beckett, 1985. A haematoxylin staining procedure for maize 
pollen grain chromosomes. Stain Technology, 60: 265-269.
Klopmeyer, M.J. 2000. Indexing for plant pathogens. In: R.N. Trigiano and D.J. Gray 
(eds.), Plant Tissue Culture-Concepts and Laboratory Exercises. CRC Press, Boca 
Raton. pp. 417-425.
Knox, R.B. and J. Heslop-Harrison, 1970. Pollen-wall proteins: Localization and 
enzymatic activity. J. Cell Sci., 6: 1-27.
Kotte, W. 1922. Kulturversuchemitisolierten Wurzelspitzen. Beitr. Allg. Bot., 2: 413-
434.
Krishnamurthy, K.V. 1988. Methods in Plant Histochemistry. S. Viswanathan Printers 
& Publishers Private Ltd., Madras.
Kushida, H. 1964. Improved methods for embedding with Durcupan. J. Electron 
Microscopy, 13: 139.
Kyte, L. and J. Kleyn, 2001. Plants from Test Tubes. Timber Press, Oregon, U.S.A.
Lane, B.P. and D.L. Europe, 1965. Diferential staining of ultrathin sections of epon￾embedded tissues for light microscopy. J. Histochem, Cytochem., 13: 579-582.
Langeron, M., 1942. Precis de Microscopie, 6th edn. Masson, Paris.
Lattier, J.D., H. Chen and R.N. Contreras, 2017. Improved method of enzyme digestion 
for root tip cytology. HortScience, 52(7): 1029-1032.
Lavania, V.C. 1981. A quick squash method for permanent cytological preparation. 
Stain Technology, 56: 54-55.
Lazic, S.E. 2008. Why we should use simpler models if the data allow this: Relevance 
for ANOVA designs in experimental biology. BMC Physiology, 8(1): 1-7.
Ledbetter, M. 1976. Practical problems in observation of unfxed, uncoated plant 
surfaces by SEM. Proceedings of the 9th Annual Scanning Electron Microscopy 
Symposium. IIT Research Institute, Chicago, pp. 453-460.
Lee, D.K., J. In and S. Lee, 2015. Standard deviation and standard error of the 
mean. Korean Journal of Anesthesiology, 68(3): 220-223.
Lee, P.Y., J. Costumbrado, C.Y. Hsu and Y.H. Kim, 2012. Agarose gel electrophoresis for 
the separation of DNA fragments. J. Vis Exp., 62: 3923. Online doi: 10.3791/3923
Leunufna, S. and E.R.J. Keller, 2003. Investigating a new cryo-preservation protocol 
for yams (Dioscorea spp.). Plant Cell Rep., 21: 1159-1166.
Lever, J.D. 1960. A method of staining sectioned tissues with lead for electron 
microscopy. Nature, 186: 810-811.
Lewis, K.R. and B. John, 1963. Chromosome Marker. Churchill, London.
Liliie, R.D. and H.M. Fullmer, 1976. Histopathologic Technic and Practical 
Histochemistry, 4th edn. McGraw-Hill, New York. 
464 References
Lillie, R.D. 1969. Conn’s Biological Stains, 8th ed. Williams & Wilkins Co., Baltimore.
Lillie, R.D. 1977. H.J. Conn’s Biological Staining, 9th ed. The Williams & Wilkins 
Company, Baltimore.
Linn, C.H., H.H. Falk and C.R. Stocking, 1977. Rapid chemical dehydration of 
plant material for light and electron microscopy with 2,2-dimethoxypropane and 
2,2-diethoxypropane. Am. J. Bot., 64: 602-605.
Lip, V.W. and. W. Ratzenbock, 1963. Selecktivfarbung der Erythrocyten mit 
Xanthenon. Acta Histochem., 16: 317-320.
Liu, X., M. Dong, X. Chen, M. Jiang, X. Lv and G. Yan, 2007. Antioxidant activity 
and phenolics of an endophytic Xylaria sp. from Ginkgo biloba. Food Chemistry, 
105(2): 548-554.
Long, C. 1961. Biochemistry Handbook. D. Van Nostrand Co. Inc., Princeton, NJ.
Loo, S.W. 1945. Cultivation of excised stem tips of Asparagus in vitro. American 
Journal of Botany, 32: 13-17.
Luckett, D.J. and R.A. Smithard, 1992. Doubled haploid production by anther culture 
for Australian barley breeding. Aust. J. Agri. Res., 43: 67-78.
Lucretti, S., J. Doležel, I. Schubert and J. Fuchs, 1993. Flow karyotyping and sorting 
of Vicia faba chromosomes. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 85: 665-672.
Luft, J.H. 1956. Permanganate – A new fxative for electron microscopy. J. Biophys. 
Biochem. Cytol., 2: 799-802.
Luft, J.H. 1961. Improvements in epoxy resin embedding methods. J. Biophys. 
Biochem. Cytol., 9: 409-414.
Luo, X., J. Liu and Z. He, 2022. Oligo-FISH can identify chromosomes and distinguish 
Hippophaë rhamnoides L. taxa. Genes, 13(2): 195. https://doi.org/10.3390/
genes13020195
Lutman, B.F. 1946. A one-solution tannic-acid-iron stain for plant tissue sections. 
Stain Technology, 21: 153-160.
Mader, H. 1954. Untersuchungen an korkmembranen. Planta, 43: 163-181.
Mahmood, T. and P.C. Yang, 2012. Western blot: Technique, theory, and 
troubleshooting. N. Am. J. Med. Sci., 4(9): 429-434.
Malti and K.R. Shivanna, 1984. Structure and cytochemistry of the pistils of Crotalaria 
retusa L. Proc. Indian Natn. Sci. Acad. B., 50: 92-102. 
Mantell, S.H., J.A. Matthews and R.A. McKee, 1985. Principles of Plant 
Biotechnology: An Introduction to Genetic Engineering in Pants. Blackwell 
Scientifc Publications, Oxford, UK. pp 67-93.
Manton, I. 1966. Observations on scale production in Pyramimonas amylifera Courad. 
Journal of Cell Science, 1: 429-438.
Marengo, N.P. 1952. Formalin pyrogallol as a fxative for plant cytoplasm. Stain 
Technology, 27: 209. 
Marianne, J.O.P., R.L. Green, I.B. Beard and C.E. Gates, 1990. Vital staining for root 
hairs in perennial grasses. Crop Sci., 30: 947-950.
Marinozzi, V. 1961. Silver impregnation of ultrathin sections for electron microscopy. 
J. Biophys. Biochem. Cytol., 9: 121-132.
Martin, R., W. Busch, R.G. Herrmann and G. Wanner, 1994. Efcient preparation 
of plant chromosomes for high-resolution scanning electron microscopy. 
Chromosome Research, 2: 411-415. 
Masoodi, K.Z., S.M. Lonas and R.S. Rasool, 2020. Advanced method in Molecular 
Biology and Biotechnology. A Practical Lab Manual. Academic Press. 
 
 
References 465 
Mathai, K. 2000. Nutrition in the adult years. In: L.K. Mahan and S. Escott-Stump 
(Eds.), Krause’s Food, Nutrition, and Diet Therapy, 10th ed. pp: 271-275.
Matsumoto, T. 2017. Cryopreservation of plant genetic resources: Conventional and 
new methods. Reviews in Agricultural Science, 5: 13-20. 
Matsumoto, T., A. Sakai and K. Yamada, 1994. Cryopreservation of in vitro-grown 
apical meristems of wasabi (Wasabia japonica) by vitrifcation and subsequent 
high plant regeneration. Plant Cell Reports, 13: 442-446. 
Matsumoto, T., A. Sakai, C. Takahashi and K. Yamada, 1995. Cryopreservation of 
in vitro-grown apical meristems of wasabi (Wasabia japonica) by encapsulation￾vitrifcation method. CryoLetters, 16: 189-196. 
Matsumoto, T. and A. Sakai. 1995. An approach to enhance dehydration tolerance 
of alginate-coated dried meristems cooled to –196°C. CryoLetters, 16: 299-306.
Mayor, H.D., J.C. Hampton and B. Rosario, 1961. A simple method for removing the 
resin from epoxy-embedded tissue. J. Biophysical and Biochemical Cytology, 9: 
909-910. 
Maze, J. and Shu-Chaung Lin, 1975. Frontiers in Plant Science. DOI: 10.3389/6 pls. 
2021.731664. 
Mazia, D., P.A. Brewer and M. Alfert, 1953. The Cytochemical staining and 
measurement of protein with mercuric bromophenol blue. Biol. Bull., 104: 57-67.
McCully, M.E. 1966. Histological studies on the genus Fucus. 1. Light microscopy of 
the mature vegetative plant. Protoplasma, 62: 287-305.
Meagher, E. and C. Thomson, 1999. Vitamin and mineral therapy. In: G. Morrison and 
L. Hark (Eds), Medical Nutrition and Disease, 2nd ed. Malden, Massachusetts: 
Blackwell Science Inc, 3358.
Mellor, F.C. and R. Stace-Smith, 1977. Virus-free potatoes by tissue culture. In: J. 
Reinert and Y.P.S. Bajaj (Eds), Applied and Fundamental Aspects of Plant Cell, 
Tissue, and Organ Culture. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. pp. 616-635. 
Meng, Z., J. Han, Y. Lin, Y. Zhao, Q. Lin and X. Ma, 2020. Characterization of a 
Saccharum spontaneum L. from four geographical regions of India, using 
molecular markers. Genet. Resour. Crop Evol., 53: 1221-1231.
Meng, Z., G. Wang, H. Khurshid, G. Raza, J. Han, B. Wang and K. Wang, 2021. 
Chromosome parking provider insights into the genosome structure and evolution 
of sugarcane. Frontiers in Plant Science, DOI:10.3389/6 pts. 2021.731664.
Meng, Z., Z. Zhang, T. Yan, Q. Lin, Y. Wang, W. Huang and K. Wang, 2018. 
Comprehensively characterizing the cytological features of Saccharum 
spontaneum by the development of a complete set of chromosome-specifc oligo 
probes. Frontiers in Plant Science, 9: 1624. Doi 10.3389/fpls.2018.01624
Mersey, B. and M.E. McCully, 1978. Monitoring of the course of fxation of plant 
cells. Journal of Microscopy, 114(1): 49-76.
Miller, S.A. and R.R. Martin, 1988. Molecular diagnosis of plant disease. Ann. Rev. 
Phytopathol., 26(1): 409-432.
Millonig, G. 1961. Advantages of phosphate bufer for osmium tetroxide solutions in 
fxation. J. Appl. Phys., 32: 1637.
Millonig, G. 1962. Further observations on a phosphate bufer for osmium solutions 
in fxations. Proc. 5th Intern. Cong. Electron Microsc. 2B, Academic Press, New 
York.
Mineyuki, Y. 2014. 3D image analysis of plants using electron tomography and micro￾CT. Microscopy (Oxford England), 62(suppl 1): i8-i9. 
 
466 References
Misra, S.P. 2009. Plant Tissue Culture. Ane Books Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi.
Mohammad, F. and S. Mohamed, 2012. Microtomes and microtome knives – A review 
and proposed classifcation. https//www.researchgate.net/publication/ 2582.1245.
Mollenhauer, H.H. and C. Totten, 1971. Studies of seeds. 1. Fixation of seeds. J. Cell 
Biol., 48: 387-394. 
Morel, G. 1960. Producing virus-free Cymbidiums. Am. Orchid. Soc. Bull., 29: 495-
497.
Morel, G. and C. Martin, 1952. Cure of dahlias attacked by a virus disease. Comptes 
rendus hebdomadaires des seances de l’Academie des sciences, 235(21): 1324-
1325.
Murashige, T. 1978a. Principles of rapid propagation. In: K.W. Hughes et al. (Eds), 
Propagation of Higher Plants through Tissue Culture: A Bridge between Research 
and Application. U.S. Dept. of Energy, Washington, D.C. pp.14-24.
Murashige, T. 1978b. The impact of plant tissue culture on agriculture. In: T.A. Thorpe 
(Ed.), Frontiers of Plant Tissue Culture. University of Calgary Press, Calgary, 
Canada. pp. 15-26.
Murashige, T. and F. Skoog, 1962. A revised medium for rapid growth and bioassays 
with tobacco tissue culture. Physiol. Plant., 15: 473-497.
Nadeem, M.A., M.A. Nawaz, M.Q. Shahid, Y. Dogan, G. Comertpay, M. Yildiz, R. 
Hatipoglu, F. Ahmad, A. Alsaleh, N. Labhane, H. Ozkan, H. Chung, A.H. Naing, 
J.D. Chung and K.B. Lim, 2011. Plant regeneration through indirect somatic 
embryogenesis in Coelogyne cristata orchid. American Journal of Plant Science, 
2: 262-267.
Namba, M., A.M. Jr. Dannenberg and F. Tanaka, 1983. Improvement in the 
histochemical demonstration of acid phosphatase, β-galactosidase and non￾specifc esterase in glycol methacrylate tissue sections by cold temperature 
embedding. Stain Technology, 58: 207-213.
Narayana, P.S., D. Varalakshmi and T. Pullaiah, 2016. Research Methodology in Plant 
Science. Scientifc Publishers (India), Jodhpur.
Nashel, D.J. and A.B. Fischmann, 1983. Polychlorinated biphenyls in microscope 
immersion oil. J. Am. Med. Assoc., 249: 1706.
Nelson, B.K., X. Cai and A. Nebenführ, 2007. A multicolored set of in vivo organelle 
markers for co‐localization studies in Arabidopsis and other plants. Plant J., 51(6): 
1126-1136.
Nemec, B. 1898. Über den Pollen der petaloiden Antheren von Hyacinthus orientalis 
L. Rozpr. Ceske. Akad. Prag., 7: 17-23.
Neuhaus, G., G. Spangenberg, O. Mittelsten Scheid and H.G. Schweiger, 1987. 
Transgenic rapeseed plants obtained by the microinjection of DNA into 
microspore-derived embryoids. Theor. Appl. Genet., 75: 30-36.
Newcomb, E.H. 1967. Fine structure of protein-storing plastids in bean root tips. The 
Journal of Cell Biology, 33(1): 143-163.
Niino, T. and A. Sakai, 1992. Cryopreservation of alginate – Coated in-vitro grown 
shoot tips of apple, pear and mulberry. Plant Science, 87: 199-206.
Niino, T., D. Tanaka, R.R. Tantely et al., 2007. Cryopreservation of basal stem buds of 
in vitro growth mat rush (Juncus spp.) by vitrifcation. CryoLetters, 28: 197-206.
Niino, T., K. Watanabe and N. Nohara et al., 2014. Cryopreservation of mat rush 
lateral buds by air dehydration using aluminum cryo-plate. Plant Biotechnol, 
31(3): 281-287. 
References 467 
Niino, T., S. Yamamoto, K. Fukui, C.R. Castillo Martinez, M. Valle Arizaga, T. 
Matsumoto and F. Engelmann, 2013. Dehydration improves cryopreservation of 
mat rush (Juncus decipiens Nakai) basal stem buds on cryo-plate. CryoLetters, 
34: 549-560.
Nishizawa, S., A. Sakai, Y. Amano and T. Matsuzawa, 1993. Cryopreservation of 
asparagus (Asparagus ofcinalis L.) embryogenic suspension cells and subsequent 
plant regeneration by the vitrifcation method. Plant Science, 88: 67-73. 
Nitsch, C. 1974. La culture de pollen isolé sur milieu synthétique. C.R. Acad. Sci. 
Paris, 278: 1031-1034.
O’Brien, T.P. and K.V. Thimann, 1965. Histological studies on the coleoptile. J. Tissue 
and cell types in the coleoptile tip. Amer. J. Bot., 59: 910-918.
O’Brien, T.P. and M.E. McCully, 1981. The Study of Plant Structure: Principles and 
Selected Methods. Termarcarphi Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.
O’Brien, T.P., Feder and M.E. McCully, 1964. Polychromatic staining of plant cell 
walls by toluidine blue O. protoplasma. Jour?? , 59: 367-373.
O’Brien, T.P., J. Kuo, M.E. McCully and S.-Y. Zee, 1973. Coagulant and non￾coagulant fxation of plant cells. Aust. J. Biol. Sci., 26: 1231-1250. 
Ochman, H., M.M. Medhora, D. Garza and D.L. Hartl, 1990. Amplifcation of fanking 
sequences by inverse PCR. PCR Protocols: A Guide to Methods and Applications, 
219-227.
Ogunniyan, D.J. and S.A. Olakojo, 2014. Genetic variation, heritability, genetic 
advance and agronomic character association of yellow elite inbred lines of maize 
(Zea mays L.). Nigerian Journal of Genetics, 28(2): 24-28.
Palanivelu, P. 2016. Analytical Biochemistry and Separation Techniques. Twentyfrst 
Century Publications, Keeranatham, Coimbatore, India.
Pan, W.H., A. Houben and R. Schlegel, 1993. Highly efective cell synchronization 
in plant roots by hydroxyurea, amiprophosmethyl and colchicine. Genome, 36: 
387-390.
Panis, B. and M. Lambardi, 2005. Status of cryopreservation technologies in plants 
(Crops and Forest Trees). The Role of Biotechnology. Villa Gualino; March 5-7, 
Turin, Italy.
Panis, B., B. Piette and R. Swennen, 2005. Droplet vitrifcation of apical meristems: A 
cryopreservation protocol applicable to all Musaceae. Plant Science, 168: 45-55. 
Panse, V.G. and P.V. Sukhatme, 1978. Stat. Math. Agri. Work. ICAR. Publication, 
New Delhi. 
Parham, R.A. and H.M. Kaustinen, 1976. Diferential staining of tannin in sections of 
epoxy-embedded plant cells. Stain Technology, 51: 232-240.
Pathirana, R., A. McLachlan and D. Hedderley, 2015. Removal of leafroll viruses 
from infected grapevine plants by droplet vitrifcation. Acta Hortic., 1083: 491-
498.
Pattabhi, V. and N. Gautham, 2004. Biophysics. Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi.
Peace, K.E. and T.D. Cannon, 1988. Biotechnology and the biostatistician. Drug 
Information Journal, 22(4): 499-513.
Pearce, R.B. 1986. Chlorantine fast green BLL as a stain for callose in oak phloem. 
Stain Technology, 61: 47-50.
Pearse, A.G.E. 1968. Histochemistry: Theory and Applied, Vol. 1 (3rd edn.). Churchill, 
London.
Pearse, A.G.E. 1972. Histochemistry: Theory and Applied, Vol. 2. Churchill 
Livingstone, Edinburgh. 
468 References
Pearse, A.G.E. 1980. Histochemistry: Theoretical and Applied. Vol. 1 (4th edn.), 
Preparative and Optical Technology. Churchill Livingstone, London.
Pefey, E.B. and J.N. De Vries, 1993. Giemsa G-banding in Allium. Biotechnic & 
Histochemistry, 68: 83-86.
Peirson, D.R. and E.B. Dumbrof, 1969. Demonstration of a complete casparian stris 
in Avena and Ipomoea by a fuorescent staining technique. Can. J. Bot., 47: 1869-
1871.
Pennycooke, J.C. and L.E. Towill, 2000. Cryopreservation of shoot tips in vitro plants 
of sweet potato [Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam.] by vitrifcation. Plant Cell Rep., 19: 
733-737.
Peterson, C.A. and R.A. Fletcher, 1973. Lactic acid clearing and fuorescent staining 
for demonstration of sieve tubes. Stain Technology, 48: 23-27. 
Phillipson, J.D. 1982. Chemical investigations of herbarium material for 
alkaloids. Phytochemistry, 21(10): 2441-2456.
Pierce, B.A. 2012. Genetics: A Conceptual Aproach. W.H. Freeman and Company, 
New York.
Pierik, R.L.M. 1987. In Vitro Culture of Higher Plants. Martinus Nijhof Publishers, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Pinkel, D., J. Landegent, C. Collins, J. Fuscoe, R. Segraves, J. Lucas and J. Gray, 1988. 
Fluorescence in situ hybridization with human chromosome-specifc libraries: 
Detection of trisomy 21 and translocations of chromosome 4. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA, 85: 9138-9142.
Pirttila, M.A., M. Hirsikorpi, T. Kamarainen, L. Jaakola and A. Hohtola, 2001. DNA
isolation methods for medicinal and aromatic plants. Plant MolBiol Rep., 19: 273.
Power, J.B., S.E. Cummins and E.C. Cocking, 1970. Fusion of isolated plant 
protoplasts. Nature (London), 225: 1016-1018.
Prento, P. and H. Lyon, 1973. Nucleoprotein staining – An analysis of a standard 
trichloroacetic acid-fast green FCF procedure. Histochem. J., 5: 493-501. 
Prescott, L.M., J.P. Harley and D.A. Klein, 1999. Microbiology (4th edn.). WCB 
McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Preston, R.D. 1974. Plant cell walls. In: A.W. Roberts (Ed.), Dynamic Aspects of 
Plant Ultrastructure. McGraw-Hill Book Co., London.
Prevost, A. and M.J. Wilkinson, 1999. A new system of comparing PCR primers 
applied to ISSR fngerprinting of potato cultivars. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 98(1): 107-112.
Pringsheim, P. 1963. Fluorescence and Phosphorescence. John Wiley, New York. 
Puertas, M.J., A. Dela Pena, M.C. Cermeno and F. Merino, 1983. C-banded 
chromosomes stained with Methyl Green-Pyronin. Stain Technology, 58: 111-112. 
Radford, A.E., W.C. Diskinson, J.B. Massey and C.R. Bell, 1974. Vascular Plant 
Systematics. Harper & Row Publishers, New York.
Rahamtulla, M. 2022. Molecular and ethnomedicinal studies in some Indian 
Epidendroideae (Orchidaceae) with special reference to micropropagation 
of Dendrobium aphyllum (Roxb.) C.E.C Fischer. Doctoral Thesis, Acharya 
Nagarjuna University, India.
Rahamtulla, M. and S.M. Khasim, 2022. In vitro regeneration of an epiphytic orchid, 
Dendrobium aphyllum using leaf explants. J. Orchid Soc. India, 36: 121-129. 
Rajalakshmi, S. (2017). Diferent types of PCR techniques and its applications. 
International Journal of Pharmaceutical, Chemical & Biological Sciences, 7(3): 
285-292. 
References 469 
Ramanjini Gowda, P.H., T.K. Subbaiah and S.H. Joshi, 1991. A new stain for pollen 
fertility studies. Biotechnic & Histochemistry, 66: 321-323. 
Rampilla, V. and S.M. Khasim, 2020. GC-MS analysis of organic extracts of 
Cymbidium aloifolium (L.) Sw. (Orchidaceae) leaves from Eastern Ghats of 
India. In: S.M. Khasim, S.N. Hegde, M.T.G. Arnao and K. Thammasiri (Eds.), 
Orchid Biology: Recent Trends and Challenges. Springer Nature, Singapore. pp. 
507-517.
Ramudu, J. and S.M. Khasim, 2022. Genetic diversity of an endemic medicinal orchid, 
Coelogyne nervosa, from Southern India using morphological and molecular 
markers. Act Hort., 1339: 125-131.
Ramudu, J., S.M. Khasim and G. Ramesh, 2020. Orchid seed ultrastructure: Ecological 
and Taxonomic Applications with reference to Epidendroideae (Orchidaceae). 
In: S.M. Khasim, S.N. Hegde, M.T.G. Arnao and K. Thammasiri (Eds.), Orchid 
Biology: Recent Trends and Challenges. Springer Nature, Singapore, pp. 281-302.
Rashid, A. 1983. Angiosperm pollen – A system for cell diferentiation. Curr. Sci., 52: 
964-967.
Rashid, A. and J. Reinert, 1981. High-frequency embryogenesis in ab initio pollen 
cultures of Nicotiana tabacum. Naturwissenschaften, 68: 378-379.
Rawlins, T.E. and W.N. Takashi, 1952. Techniques in Plant Histochemistry and 
Virology. National Press, Millbrae, New York.
Razdan, M.K. 2005. An Introduction to Plant Tissue Culture. Oxford & IBH Publishing 
Co. Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi.
Reeve, R.M. 1974. Relevance of immature tuber periderm to high commercial losses. 
Amer. Potato Jour., 81: 254-262.
Reuther, G. and N.N. Bhandari, 1981. Organogenesis and histogenesis of adventitious 
organs induced on leaf blade segments of Begonia-Elatior-hybrids (Begonia x 
hiemalis) in tissue culture. Gartenbauwissenschaft, 46: 241-249.
Revila, M.A., D. Tolivia and J.F. Tarrago, 1986. A new and permanent staining method 
for starch granules for fuorescence microscopy. Stain Technology, 61: 151-154.
Reyes, F.C., T. Chung, D. Holding, R. Jung, R. Vierstra and M.S. Otegui, 2011. 
Delivery of prolamins to the protein storage vacuole in maize aleurone cells. The 
Plant Cell, 23: 769-784.
Reynolds, E.S. 1963. The use of lead citrate at high pH as an electron opaque stain in 
electron microscopy. J. Cell Biol., 17: 208-212.
Reynolds, J.D. and W.V. Dashek, 1976. Cytochemical analysis of callose localization 
in Lilium longifolium Pollen tubes. Ann. Bot., 40: 409-416.
Richardson, K.C., L. Jarett and E.H. Finke, 1960. Embedding in epoxy resins for 
ultrathin sectioning in electron microscopy. Stain Technology, 35: 313-323.
Richardson, R.A., M. Body, M.R. Warmund, J.C. Schultz and H.M. Appel, 
2017. Morphometric analysis of young petiole galls on the narrow-leaf 
cottonwood, Populus angustifolia, by the sugar beet root aphid, Pemphigus 
betae. Protoplasma, 254: 203-216.
Rigby, P.W., M. Dieckmann, C. Rhodes and P. Berg, 1977. Labelling deoxyribonucleic 
acid to high specifc activity in vitro by nick translation with DNA polymerase I. J. 
Molec. Biol., 113: 237-251.
Ringertz, N.R. 1968. Cytochemical demonstration of basic proteins by dansyl chloride. 
J. Histochem. Cytochem., 16: 440-441. 
Riopel, J.L. and A. Spurr, 1962. Carbowax for embedding and serial sectioning of 
botanical material. Stain Technology, 37: 357-362.  
 
470 References
Ritter, C., H.S. Distefano and A. Farah, 1961. A method for the cytophotometric 
estimation of ribonucleic acid. J. Histochem. Cytochem, 9: 97-102.
Robards, A.W. and M.J. Purvis, 1964. Chlorazol black E as a stain for tension wood. 
Stain Technology, 39: 309-315.
Robards, A.W. 1978. An introduction to techniques for scanning electron microscopy 
of plant cells. In: J.L. Hall (Ed.), Electron Microscopy and Cytochemistry of Plant 
Cells. Elsevier/North Holland Biomedical Press, Amsterdam.
Roberts, L.W. 1960. Protein-bound sulfhydryl groups in Coleus wound meristems. 
Amer. J. Bot., 47: 110-114.
Robinow, C.F. and J. Marak, 1966. A fber apparatus in the nucleus of the yeast cell. 
J. Cell Biol., 29(1): 129-151.
Roland, J.C. 1978. General preparation and staining of thin sections. In: J.L. Hall 
(Ed.), Electron Microscopy and Cytochemistry of Plant Cells. Elsevier/North￾Holland, Amsterdam.
Rotman, B. and B.W. Papermaster, 1966. Membrane properties of living mammalian 
cells as studied by enzymatic hydrolysis of fuorogenic esters. Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sci. USA, 55: 134-141.
Ruch, F. 1970. Principles and applications of cytofuorimetry. In: G.L. Wied and G.F. 
Bahr (Eds), Introduction to Quantitative Cyto-chemistry II. Academic Press, New 
York. pp.431-450.
Ruthman, A. 1970. Methods in Cell Research. G. Bell & Sons, London.
Ryter, A. and E. Kellenberger, 1958. L’inclusion au polyester paur I’ultramicrotomie. 
J. Ultrastruct. Re., 2: 200-214.
Sabatini, D.D., K. Bensch and R.J. Bamert, 1963. Preservation of cellular structure 
and enzymatic activity by aldehyde fxation. J. Cell Biol., 17: 19-58.
Sadasivan, S. and M. Manikam, 2005. Biochemical Methods. New Age International 
Ltd., New Delhi.
Saghai-Maroof, M.A., K.M. Soliman, R.A. Jorgensen and R.W. Allard, 1984. 
Ribosomal DNA sepacer-length polymorphism in barley: Mendelian inheritance, 
chromosalmallocaltionk, and population dynamic. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 81: 
8014.
Sakai, A. 1960. Survival of the twigs of woody plants at –196°C. Nature, 185: 393-
394. 
Sakai, A. 2000. Development of cryopreservation techniques. In: F. Engelmann and 
H. Tagaki (Eds), Cryopreservation of Tropical Plant Germplasm. International 
Plant Genetic Resources Institute, Rome. pp. 1-7. 
Sakai, A. and F. Englemann, 2007. Vitrifcation, encapsulation-vitrifcation and 
droplet-vitrifcation: A review. CryoLetters, 28: 151-172.
Sakai, A. and Y. Nishiyama, 1978. Cryopreservations of winter vegetative buds of 
hardy fruit trees in liquid nitrogen. HortSci., 13: 225-227.
Sakai, A., D. Hirai and T. Niino. 2008. Development of PVS-based vitrifcation and 
encapsulation-vitrifcation protocols. In: B.M. Reed (Ed.), Plant Cryopreservation: 
A Practical Guide. Springer, New York. pp. 33-58.
Sakai, A., S. Kobayashi and I. Oiyama, 1990. Cryopreservation of nucellar cells of 
naval orange (Citrus sinensis Osb. var. Brasiliensis Tanaka) by vitrifcation. Plant 
Cell Reports, 9: 30-33. 
Sakai, A., T. Matsumoto, D. Hirai and T. Niino, 2000. Newly developed encapsulation￾dehydration protocol for plant cryopreservation. Cryo Letters, 21(1): 53-62. 
 
References 471 
Sandery, M.J., J.W. Forster, S.R. Macadam, R. Blunden, R.N. Jones and S.D. Brown, 
1991. Isolation of a sequence common to A- and B-chromosomes of rye (Secale 
cereale) by microcloning. Plant Mol. Biol. Rep., 9: 21-30.
Sanford, K.J. and D.E. Heinz, 1971. Efects of storage on the volatile composition of 
nutmeg. Phytochemistry, 10(6): 1245-1250.
Sass, J.E. 1967. Botanical Microtechnique (3rd edn.). Iowa State University Press, 
Iowa. 
Sawhney, S.K. and R. Singh (Eds). 2010. Introductory Practical Biochemistry. Narosa 
Publishing House, New Delhi.
Saxena, R.K., K. Saxena and R.K. Varshney, 2010. Application of SSR markers for 
molecular characterization of hybrid parents and purity assessment of ICPH 2438 
hybrid of pigeonpea [Cajanuscajan (L.) MilIspaugh]. Molecular Breeding, 26(2): 
371-380.
Schafer-Menuhr, A., E. Muller and G. Mix-Wagner, 1996. Cryopreservation: An 
alternative for the long-term storage of old potato varieties. Potato Research, 39: 
507-513. 
Schmidt, P., J. Hartung, J. Bennewitz and H.P. Piepho, 2019. Heritability in plant 
breeding on a genotype-diference basis. Genetics, 212(4): 991-1008.
Schsnk, R.D. and A.C. Hildebrandt, 1972. Medium and techniques for induction and 
growth of monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plant cell cultures. Canadian 
Journal of Botany, 50: 199-204.
Schur, F.K.M., W.J.H. Hagen, M. Rumlova, T. Ruml, B. Muiller, H.G. Krausslich 
and J.A.G. Beriggs, 2014. Structure of the immature. HIV-I Capsid in intact virus 
particles at 8.8 Ao
 resolution. Nature, 517: 505.
Schwab, D.W., A.H. Sanney, J. Scala and L.M. Levin, 1970. Preservation of fne 
structures in yeast for fxation in a dimethyl sulphoxide-acrolein-glutaraldehyde 
solution. Stain Technology, 45: 143-147. 
Schweiger, D. 1977. R-banding produced by DNase 1 digestion of chromomycin 
stained chromosomes. Chromosoma, 64: 117-124.
Scott, K.D. and J. Playford, 1996. DNA extraction technique for PCR in rainforest 
plant species. BioTechniques, 20: 974.
Sehgal, D., V.R. Rajpal, S.N. Raina, T. Sasanuma and T. Sasakuma, 2009. Assaying 
polymorphism at DNA level for genetic diversity diagnostics of the safower 
(Carthamus tinctorius L.) world germplasm resources. Genetica, 135(3): 457-
470.
Shah, J.J. and A.M. Babu, 1986. Vascular occlusions in the stem of Ailanthus excels. 
Roxb. An Bot., 97: 603-611.
Sharma, A. 1976. The Chromosomes. Oxford & IBH, New Delhi.
Sharma, A.K. and A. Sharma, 1972. Chromosome Techniques: Theory and Practice 
(2nd edition). Butterworth, London.
Sharma, O.P. 1993. Plant Taxonomy. Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New 
Delhi. 
Sheng, M., M. Gao, L. Wang and X. Ren, 2020. Chromosome microdissection and 
microcloning: Technique and application in the plant Sciences. Cytologia, 85(2): 
93-100.
Shepard, J.F. 1977. Regeneration of plants from protoplasts of potato virus X-infected 
tobacco leaves II. Infuence of virazole on the frequency of infection. Virology, 
78: 261-266. 
 
 
472 References
Shepherd, M., M. Cross, R.L. Stokoe and L.J. Scott, 2002. High-throughput DNA
extraction from forest trees. Plant MolBiol. Rep., 20: 425.
Shimomura, T. and J. Dijkstra, 1975. The occurrence of callose during the process of 
local lesion formation. Neth. J. Plant Pathol., 81: 107-121.
Silverman, M. 1986. Light-polymerizing plastics as slide mounting media. Stain 
Technology, 61: 135-137.
Šimoníková, D., A. Němečková, M. Karafátová, B. Uwimana, R. Swennen, J. 
Doležel and E. Hřibová, 2019. Chromosome painting facilitates anchoring 
reference genome sequence to chromosomes in situ and integrated karyotyping 
in banana (Musa spp.). Frontiers in Plant Science, 10: 1503. doi.org/10.3389/
fpls.2019.01503
Skoog, F. and C.O. Miller, 1957. Chemical regulation of growth and organ formation 
in plant tissue culture in vitro. Symposium of the Society of Experimental Biology, 
11: 118-131.
Smith, M.M. and M.E. McCully, 1978a. Enhancing aniline blue fuorescent staining 
of cell wall structure. Stain Technology, 53: 79-85.
Smith, M.M. and M.E. McCully, 1978b. A critical evaluation of the specifcity of 
aniline blue induced fuorescence. Protoplasma, 95: 229-254.
Smith, R.H. 2000. Plant Tissue Culture Techniques and Experiments (Second edition). 
Academic Press, San Diego.
Snow, R. 1963. Alcoholic hydrochloric acid-carmine as a stain for chromosomes in 
squash preparations. Stain Technology, 38: 9-13.
Sopalun, K., K. Thammasiri and K. Ishikawa, 2010. Micropropagation of the Thai 
orchid Grammatophyllum speciosum blume. Plant cell, Tissue and Organ culture, 
101: 143-150.
Sopalun, K., K. Thammasiri and K. Ishikawa. 2010. Vitrifcation-based cryopreservation 
of Grammatophyllum speciosum protocorms. CryoLetters, 31: 347-357.
Spur, A.R. 1969. A low-viscocity epoxy resin embedding medium for electron 
microscopy. J. Ultrastructural Research, 26: 31-43.
Stack, S. 1982. Two-dimensional spreads of synaptonemal complexes from 
solanaceous plants. 1. The Technique. Stain Technology, 57: 265-272.
Stadelmann, E.J. and H. Kinzel, 1972. Vital staining of plant cells. In: D.M. Prescott 
(Ed.), Methods in Cell Physiology, Vol. 5. Academic Press, New York.
Staubli, W. 1963. A new embedding technique for electron microscopy combining a 
water-soluble epoxy resin (Durcupan) with water-soluble araldite. J. Cell Biol., 
16: 197.
Steedman, H.F. 1960. Section Cutting in Microscopy. Blackwell Scientifc 
Publications, Oxford.
Steel, R.G. and J.H. Torrie, 1980. Principles and Procedures of Statistics: ABiometrical 
Approach (Vol. 2), McGraw-Hill, New York. pp. 137-139.
Stefano, G., L. Renna and F. Brandizzi, 2017. Plant cell vacuoles: Staining and 
fuorescent probes. https:// brandizzilab.natsci.msu.edu › Publications
Steinbreckt, R.A. and K. Ernst, 1967. Continuous penetration of delicate tissue 
specimens with embedding resin. Science Tools (LKH Instruments Journal), 14: 
24.
Steward, F.C., M.O. Mapes and K. Mears, 1958. Growth and organised development 
of cultured cells: II. Organisation in cultured grown from freely suspended cells.
American Journal of Botany, 45: 705-707. 
References 473 
Sugihara, R., K.J. Lee, T. Sugioka and G. Yasuzumi, 1966. Experiments on triple 
fxation for electron microscopy. Proc. 6th Intern. Cong. Electron Micros., Maruzen 
Co. Ltd., Tokyo. pp. 2-25.
Sullia, S.B. and S. Shantharam, 1997. General Microbiology. Oxford & IBH, New 
Delhi. 
Sutherland, J. and M.E. McCully, 1976. A note on the structural changes in the walls 
of pericycle cells initiating lateral roots. Can. J. Bot., 54: 2083-2087.
Syamkumar, S., B. Lowarence and B. Sasikumar, 2003.Isolation and amplifcation of 
DNA from rhizomes of turmeric and ginger. Plant Molecular Biology Reporter, 
21(2): 171-171.
Takebe, I., Y. Otsuki and S. Aoki, 1968. Isolation of tobacco mesophyll cells in intact 
and active state. Plant Cell Physiol., Tokyo, 9: 115-124.
Takenchi, M., I. Karahara, N. Kajimura, A. Takaoka, K. Murata, K. Milaki, S. 
Yonemura, S. Stachelin and Y. Mineyuki, 2016. Single Microflaments mediate 
the early steps microtubule bundling during preprophase band-formation in onion 
cotyledon epidermal cells. Mol. Biol. Cell., 27: 1809-1820.
Tauro’, P., K.K. Kapoor and K.S. Yadav, 1993. An Introduction to Microbiology. 
Wiley Eastern Limited, New Delhi.
Tendencia, E.A. 2004. Disk difusion method. In: Laboratory manual of standardized 
methods for antimicrobial sensitivity tests for bacteria isolated from aquatic 
animals and environment. Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines. pp. 13-29. 
Thammasiri, K. 1999. Cryopreservation of embryonic axes of jackfruit. CryoLetters, 
20: 21-28. 
Thammasiri, K. 2000. Cryopreservation of seeds of Thai orchid (Doritis pulcherrima 
Lindl.) by vitrifcation. CryoLetters, 21: 237-244.
Thomas, T.D. 2008. The role of activated charcoal in plant tissue culture. Biotechnol. 
Adv., 26: 618-631.
Tjio, J.A. and A. Levan, 1950. The use of oxyquinoline in chromosome analysis. 
Annals de La Estacion Expt. de Aula Dei, 2: 21-64.
Towill, L.E. and P.L. Forsline, 1999. Cryopreservation of sour cherry (Prunus cerasus 
L.) using a dormant vegetative bud method. CryoLetters, 20: 215-222.
Towill, L.E. and R. Bonnart, 2003. Cracking in a vitrifcation solution during cooling 
or warming does not afect growth of cryopreserved mint shoot tips. CryoLetters, 
24: 341-346.
Troughton, J.H. and F.B. Sampson, 1973. Plants: A Scanning Electron Microscopy 
Survey. John-Wiley, Sydney.
Troughton, J.H. and L. Donaldson, 1972. Probing Plant Structure. Chapman & Hall, 
London.
Trump, B.F. and R.E. Bulger, 1966. New ultrastructural characteristics of cells fxed in 
glutaraldehyde-osmium tetroxide mixture. Lab. Invest., 36: 355.
Trump, B.F., E.A. Smuckler and E.P. Benditt, 1961. A method for staining epoxy 
sections for light microscopy. J. Ultrastructural Research, 5: 343-348.
Udenfriend, S. 1969. Fluorescence Assay in Biology and Medicine, Vol. 2. Academic 
Press, New York.
Upadhyay, A., K. Upadhyay and N. Nath, 2003. Biophysical Chemistry: Principles & 
Techniques. Himalaya Publishing House, Delhi.
Usagami, A., A. Sakai, M. Nagai and T. Takahashi. 1989. Survival of cultured cells and 
somatic embryos of Asparagus ofcinalis cryopreserved by vitrifcation. Plant 
Cell Reports, 8: 418-421.  
474 References
Vacin, E.F. and F.W. Went, 1949. Some pH changes in nutrient solutions. Bot. 
Gaz., 110: 605-613.
Van Gijzel, P., 1975. Polychromatic UV fuorescence microphotometry of fresh and 
fossil plant substances with special reference to location and identifcation of 
dispersed organic matter in rocks. In: B. Alpem (Ed.), Petrographie Organique et 
Potentiel ‘Petrolier. CNRS, Paris.
Venable, J.H. and R. Coggeshall, 1965. A simplifed lead citrate stain for use in 
electron microscopy. J. Cell Biol., 25: 407-408.
Venkataraman, K. 1952. The Chemistry of Synthetic Dyes, 2 Vols. Academic Press, 
New York.
Vijayaraghavan, M.R. and A.K. Shukla, 1990. Histochemistry: Theory and Practice. 
Bishen Singh Mahendra Pal Singh, Dehra Dun.
Vijayaraghavan, M.R., W.A. Jensen and M.E. Ashton, 1972. Synergids of Aquilegia 
Formosa – Their histochemistry and ultrastructure. Phytomorphology, 22: 144-
159.
Volk, G., R. Bonnart and R. Krueger et al., 2012. Cryopreservation of citrus shoot tips 
using micrografting for recovery. CryoLetters, 33: 418-426.
Wachtel, A.W., M.E. Gettner and L. Omstein, 1966. Physical Techniques in Biological 
Research. Academic Press, London.
Wade, H.W. 1952. Notes on the carbowax method of making tissue sections. Stain 
Technology, 27: 71-79.
Wall, J.S. (1971). A high resolution scanning electron microscope for the study of 
single biological molecules. Doctoral thesis. The University of Chicago, Chicago.
Wanner, G., H. Formanek, R. Martin and R.G. Herrmann, 1991. High resolution 
scanning electron microscopy of plant chromosomes. Chromosoma, 100: 103-
109. 
Warmke, H.E. and S.J. Lee, 1976. Improved staining procedures for semithin epoxy 
sections of plant tissues. Stain Technology, 51: 179-185.
Wasiksiri, W., K. Thammasiri and N. Chuenboonngarm, 2010. Medium development 
for micropropagation of Vanda coerulea Grif. ex Lindl. from lateral buds. In: 
Proceedings of the 36th Congress on science and technology of Thailand.
Wilcox, E.M. 1898. The use of soap in embedding plant tissues. Journal of Applied 
Microbiology and Laboratory Methods, 1: 68-69.
Wildholm, J.M. 1972. The use of fuorescein diacetate and phenosafranin for 
determining viability of cultured plant cells. Stain Technology, 47: 189-194.
Wilson, C.W. 1992. An update on protein stains: Amido black, Coomassie blue G, and 
Coomassie blue R. Biotechnic & Histochemistry, 67: 224-234.
Wilson, K. and J. Walker (Eds). 2002. Practical Biochemistry: Principles and 
Techniques (Fifth edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Wilson, K. and J. Walker (Eds). 2010. Principles and Techniques of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Woodrofe, 1941. Fundamentals of Leather Science. Waddon, Harvey.
Wu, I.F., J.T. Chen and W.C. Chang. 2004. Efects of auxins and cytokinins on embryo 
formation from callus of Oncidium ‘Gower Ramsey’. Plant Cell Tissue Org Cult., 
77: 107-109.
Xin, H., T. Zhang, Y. Han, Y. Wu, J. Shi, M. Xi and J. Jiang, 2018. Chromosome 
painting and comparative physical mapping of the sex chromosomes in Populus 
tomentosa and Populus deltoides. Chromosoma, 127: 313-321. 
 
References 475 
Xin, Z., Velten, J.P., M.J. Oliver and J.J. Burke, 2003. High-throughput DNAextraction 
method is suitable for PCR. Biotechniques, 34(4): 820-826.
Yamaguchi, H., H. Tanaka, M. Hasagawa, M. Takuda, T. Asami and Y. Suzuki, 2012. 
Phytohormes and willow gall induction by a gall-inducing sawfy. New Phytol., 
196: 566-595.
Yamamoto, S., T. Rafgue, W.S. Priyantha, K. Fukui, T. Matsumoto and T. Niino, 2011. 
Development of a cryopreservation procedure using aluminum cryo-plates. 
CryoLetters, 32: 256-265. 
Yarrow, S. 1999. Production of cybrids in rapeseed (Brassica napus). In: R.D. Hall 
(Ed.), Plant Cell Culture Protocols. Humana Press, Totawa, N.J. pp. 211-226.
Yasuma, A. and T. Ichikava, 1953. Ninhydrin-Schif and Alloxan-Schif staining: A
new histochemical staining method for proteins. J. Lab. Clin. Med., 41: 296-299.
Yoon, J.W., H.H. Kim and H.C. Ko, 2006. Cryopreservation of cultivated and wild 
potato varieties by droplet-vitrifcation: Efect of subculture of mother-plants and 
of preculture of shoot tips. CryoLetters, 27: 211-222. 
Zee, S.Y. and T.P. O’Brien, 1970. Studies on the ontogeny of the pigment strand in the 
caryopsis of wheat. Aust. J. Biol. Sci., 23: 1153-1171.
Zhang, D., L. Ren, J.H. Yue, L. Wang, L.H. Zhuo and X.H. Shen, 2014. GA4
 and IAA 
were involved in the morphogenesis and development of fowers in Agapanthus 
praecox ssp. orientalis. J. Plant Physiol., 171: 966-976.
Zhang, J., X. Xin, G. Yin, X. Lu and X. Chen, 2014. In vitro conservation and 
cryopreservation in National Genebank of China. Acta Hortic., 1039: 309-317. 
Zhou, X., D. Ding, J. Ma, Z. Ji, X. Zhang and F. Xu, 2015. Ultrastructure and 
topochemistry of the plant cell wall by transmission electron microscopy. In: M. 
Khan (Ed.), The Transmission Electron Microscope – Theory and Applications. 
pp. 285-306. InTech online; DOI: 10.5772/60752
Zirkle, C. 1928a. Nucleolus in root tip mitosis in Zea mays. Bot. Gaz., 86: 402-418.
Zirkle, C. 1928b. The efect of hydrogen ion concentration upon the fxation images of 
various salts of chromium. Protoplasma, 4: 201-227.
Zirkle, C. 1933. Some decarboxylic acids as components of fxing fuids. Protoplasma, 
19: 565-577.
Zirkle, C. 1934. Amines in cytological fxing fuids. Protoplasma, 20: 473-482.A
Acclimatisation 269, 270, 278, 298, 
301 
Acid fxation image 33
Acridine orange method for DNA and 
RNA 197, 198
Adventitious shoots 296
Aeriedes odorata 450, 452 
Afnity chromatography 314, 315
AFLP 235, 236 
Agarose gel electrophoresis 217, 228
Analytical centrifuges 106
Andersson 357
Androgenic haploids 287, 291, 293
Aniline blue 67
ANOVA 161-163
Antibacterial screening 451
Antifungal screening 451
Arabidopsis 287, 289, 367, 368 
Arithemetic mean 141, 142, 143
Ascending paper chromatography 310
Aseptic technique 267-269
Autoradiography
Liquid Emersion method 398, 399
Stripping-flm method 400
Restripping method 400, 401
Azo stains 59 
Azure B 74, 184
B
Basic fxation image 36
Basic fuchsin 67, 68
Beer-lambert Law 108, 110
Benedict’s test 337
Bergeman’s cell plating technique 279
Birefringents 14, 15
Biuret reaction 190, 337
Brazilin 62, 63, 82
Subject Index 
Breed’s methylene blue 433
Bright-feld microscope 10, 11, 12
Bulbophyllum khasyanum 88 
Bulbophyllum trimulum 91 
Bulbosum method 291
C
C. giganteum 393 
Calanthe triplicate 393, 394 
Calcofour MZR method 178
Callose 182
Canada balsam 67, 125
Carminic acid 65 
Carnoy’s fuid 34
Carthamus tinctorius L. 180, 187 
Chromatography 308-309
Afnity chromatography 314-316
Adsorption chromatography 311, 314
Chromosome banding technique 248, 
361 
Chromosome painting 243, 244
Clearing (bleaching) 85-87
CMS 285, 286
Coagulants 29
Coal-tardyes 66-80
Coefcient of variation 164
Colorimetry 108-114
Column chromatography 309, 314, 
323, 324 
Ion-Exchange chromatography 310
Molecular sieve chromatography 310
Components of variance 166
Confocal microscope 16, 17
Coomassie brilliant blue R 94, 95
Copper meshgrid 376
Correlation 167, 168
Cresyl violet method for RNA 199
CRISPR/Cas9 225 
Cryopreservation 400-425478 Subject Index
Cryostat microtome 56, 57
Crystal violet 69
CTAB 225, 226, 249
Culture of protoplast 279, 280
Cymbidium aloifolium 325, 326, 393, 
394 
Cytokinins 203-205
Cytoplasmic hybridization 285, 286
D
D cryo-plate method 411, 423-425
DAPI 241, 242, 244, 245, 247, 255, 
256 
Dark-feld microscope 13
DDD test for protein 192, 193
Decoction 334
Dehydration 39, 40-43
Dendrobium aphyllum 299-302
Density gradient centrifugation 102, 
103 
Diferential centrifugation 102, 103
Diferential staining 433
Disc gel electrophoresis 215, 216
Disk difusion method 443
Distribution Coefcient (Kd) 309
DNA sample quantifcation 227
DNFB test 188
Dragendorf’s test 338
Droplet-Vitrifcation method 419-421
Drug sensitivity 284
E
EDTA 218
Electrofusion 283
Electron microscope 18, 373-394
SEM 18, 19
STEM 26
TEM 18
Electron tomography 383-385
Electrophoresis 209-224
ELISA test 273
Embedding & sectioning 45-53, 54-57, 
374 
Encapsulation and dehydration method 
416-418
Encapsulation and vitrifcation 418, 419
Enzyme digestion method 248, 349
Epoxn-embedding mixture 374
F
FAA 33 
Factorial design 139
Fast green FCF 70
Feulgen reaction for DNA 198
FISH 240-245, 254-256
Fixation images 28, 29
Flow Cytometry 24, 244-247
Fluorescence microscope 15, 16
Freehand sectioning 87, 88
Frothing test 338
FSGA staining 18
G
GC-MS 319, 326
Genetic Advance 167
Genomic DNA extraction 226
Giemsa G-banding 365
GISH 240-242
Glutaraldehyde 374, 381-383, 388, 390, 
392, 393 
Gram staining 437
Grammatophyllum speciosum 302-304
Guayule 206
H
Haploids 286-289
Harborne 330, 337, 339
Haupt’s fuid 121
Herbarium 127, 133-135
High speed Centrifuges 105
Histochemical methods 175-208
Horizontal gel electrophoresis 212, 213
Hot-start PCR 233
HPLC 316, 317 
Hybrid cells 283, 284
I
Infltration 43, 44
Infrared spectrometer 118
Infusion 333, 334
Inverse PCR 234
Iodine-potassium iodide test 178
J
Johansen 342, 343, 346L
Subject Index 479
K
Kao 280, 291
Killing & Fixation 27-39
Lactophenol 124, 126, 441, 442
Latex 206, 207
Laticifers 207
Liebermann-Burchard test 339
Lillie 207, 208
Low-voltage electrophoresis 210, 211
Lyophilisation 430-431
M
Maceration 88, 333
Malachite green 72
Malaxis densifora 393 
Maule’s reaction 200
Mayer’s adhesive 121
Median 143-148
Mercuric bromophenol blue 187
Meristem cultures 271-276
Microchamber Technique 280
Microdissection and Microcloning 
247-249
Micrografting 274
Micropropagation 293-299
Microtome sections 90-97
Mixed Enzymatic Method 278
Model 48-150
Molecular techniques 225-260
Molisch’s test 337
Mordants 4, 63, 83, 84
Mounting media 121-124, 126
MS medium 264, 271, 272, 274, 275, 
284, 300-302
N
NADH analysis 112
NaNO3 treatment 282
Natural dyes 62-66
Natural resins 124,125
N-bands 362
Negative staining 377, 378
Nemac phenomenon 287
Nested-PCR 231
Nitro stains 59
Nitroso stains 59
Nitsch 265, 266, 287, 293
Non-coagulants 30
Northern blotting 258
NPLC 317
Nucleic acids 195-199
Null hypothesis 163
Numerical aperture 7
Nurse anther culture technique 290 
O
O’Brien and McCully 93, 94
Objective 11-13
Ocular 11-13
Oligo-FISH 240, 242, 255, 256
Orchid root 91
Orchid seed 393, 394
Organogenesis 269, 295, 297
Osmium tetraoxide 374, 377, 380-382, 
387, 388 
P
Partition chromatography 310
PAS stain 181 
Path analysis 168
PCR 228 
PEG 281
Percolation 333
Perls’s reaction 193, 194
Phase-shifting plate 14
Phloroglucinol 81, 200
Phytochemical methods 321-340
Phytonics process 336
Pierik 264, 272, 276, 296
Plant vacuoles 367
Plating efciency 279
Polarization microscope 14, 15
Portable centrifuges 104
Positive staining 378
Pour plate technique 427
Preparative TLC 311
Preparatory ultracentrifuges 105
Protoplast culture 279, 280
Protoplast fusion 281-283
Protoplast isolation 277, 278
PVS2 407-409, 411-413, 415, 419-424
Q
Q-band 362, 363
Quinoline stains 61480 Subject Index
R
Randomised block design 139
Range 151-153
RAPD 235, 236, 252, 253
R-band 362
Real-time PCR 231
Refux 329
Refractive index 8
Regression analysis 170
Resins 51-53
Resolution 7, 9
Resolving power 7
Resorcinol blue method for callose 183
Rf 321
Rhodamines 78
RNA extraction 198
Rotary evaporator 329
RPLC 318, 319 
RT-PCR 230
Rubber histochemical localization 206
Ruthenium red 78
S
Safranin and Fast green 88, 89
Safranin‘O’ 60
Salkowski test 339
Salviniamolesta 323 
Sandwich ELISA 273
Sap transmission test 272, 273
SDS-PAGE 219-224
Sedimentation Co-efcient 104
SEM 360
Sequential enzymatic method 277
Serial dilution technique 427
Serological test 273
Shadow casting 379
Sledge microtome 55
Slow freezing method 413-415
Smears 341, 342, 346
SNP 232, 234, 235, 236
Somatic hybridization 276-286
Southern blotting 257
Soxhlet extraction 329-330
Spectrophotometry 115-120
Squashes 341, 348, 352-354
Standard deviation 153-160
Standard error of mean 160, 161
Stefano 367, 368
Stereo microscope 9, 10
Streaking technique 428
Suberin 201, 202
Sudan dyes 79, 80
Suicide PCR 234
Supercritical fuid extraction (SFE) 335
Swinging bucket rotors 100
T
TLC 309, 311, 322, 324 
T-test 163
TEMED 213, 221, 222
Thiazins 59
Thiazole stain 61
Toluidine BlueO 80
Total proteins 186-190
Touchdown PCR 233
U
Ultramicrotome 55, 56, 375
Ultraviolet-visible spectrometer 118
Uranyl acetate 18
V
VAM 440-441
Vanda coerulea 416, 417, 419 
Vcryo-plate method 421-423, 425
Velamen 91
Vertical slab gel electrophoresis 211
Vertical tube rotors 101
Viability of protoplasts 278
Viciafaba 244, 245 
Virus indexing 272, 273
Vital staining 84, 341, 366-371
Vitrifcation 405-409, 411-416, 418-
421, 425 
VNTR PCR 235
Von Kossa’s technique 194
W
Wax-block preparation 47, 48
Western blotting 194, 259
X
Xantho proteic test 338
Z
Zimmerman’s stain 89, 90
Zirkle-Erliki fxative 36
Zonal rotors 102
Zone of inhibition 445, 451
