PLANKTONPLANKTON
A WORLDWIDE GUIDE 
TOM JACKSON AND JENNIFER PARKER
CONSULTANT EDITOR: ANDREW HIRST
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
PRINCETON AND OXFORDPublished in 2024 by Princeton University Press
41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
99 Banbury Road, Oxford OX2 6JX 
press.princeton.edu
Copyright © 2024 by Quarto Publishing plc
Conceived, designed, and produced by
The Bright Press
an imprint of The Quarto Group
1 Triptych Place, London, SE1 9SH, United Kingdom
T (0) 20 7700 6700
www.quarto.com
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced 
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic 
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by 
any information storage-and-retrieval system, without 
written permission from the copyright holder. Requests for 
permission to reproduce material from this work should be 
sent to permissions@press.princeton.edu
Library of Congress Control Number: 2023940417
ISBN: 978-0-691-25599-6
Ebook ISBN: 978-0-691-25608-5
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available 
Publisher: James Evans 
Editorial Director: Isheeta Mustafi, Anna Southgate
Art Director: James Lawrence
Managing Editor: Jacqui Sayers 
Senior Editor: Izzie Hewitt
Project Editor: Ruth Patrick 
Copy Editor: Caroline West
Design: Anna Gatt
Picture Research: Katie Greenwood
Illustrations: John Woodcock
Cover and prelim photos: 
Front cover: British Antarctic Survey/
Science Photo Library
Endpapers: Norman Kruing/USGS/NASA
Page 2: Alexander Semenov/Getty Images
Page 4–5: Scenics & Science/Alamy
Cover design: Wanda España
Printed in Malaysia
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1CONTENTS
Foreword 06
Introduction A DRIFTER’S LIFE 08
Chapter 1 A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY 12
Chapter 2 LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS 54
Chapter 3 FEEDING AND BREEDING 90
Chapter 4 WHERE PLANKTON WANDER 124
Chapter 5 FEEDING THE OCEANS 152
Chapter 6 FACING THE FUTURE 182
Glossary 218
Further Reading 219
Index 220
Picture Credits 2246 | FOREWORD
FOREWORD
The oceans, lakes, and running waters that cover our planet 
make it a blue and wet home in large part. Life started in these 
aquatic environments, and today they host diverse organisms 
that play an important function in the health of the planet. 
All the major branches of life are represented here, with some 
that do not even exist on land. The roles these environments 
and their inhabitants play are critical: photosynthetic 
production culminating in major sources of protein for 
growing populations; supplying half the oxygen we breathe; 
removing from the atmosphere a major portion of the carbon 
dioxide we have produced from burning fossil fuels. Plankton, 
the drifters in the water environments, are explored in this 
book. There are case studies covering a wide range of species, 
from well-known animals and plants to more obscure groups. 
This tour of the plankton not only provides insights into 
their adaptations and how they make a living, but also offers 
details on the techniques we use to collect, count, and assess 
these creatures and the roles they perform. It is not an 
overstatement to say that the future of humankind and 
our planet are intimately interwoven with the success of the 
plankton. Shifts in climatic temperatures, environmental 
impacts, and associated changes in plankton and aquatic 
environments are therefore also explored in this volume.
Planktonic form and function
The striking photographs in this book highlight the 
magnificence of planktonic life-forms: from the “etched” silica 
covering of the phytoplankton Coscinodiscus, to the glittering 
colors of “sea sapphire” copepods Sapphirina, and the delicate 
feeding frills of the cnidarian jellyfish Pelagia noctiluca. We 
prize great art in our societies; this book perfectly highlights 
the art that nature has created. Yet their beautiful forms are 
intimately linked with their functions. Evolution has produced 
morphologies, life histories, and behavioral strategies that 
allow plankton to overcome the challenges of living in open 
waters. This is an environment that is viscous; in comparison 
to air, it is much more difficult to extract oxygen, and it is full 
of the hungry mouths of predators. Unlike forests or grassy 
plains, there are few places to hide here. The arms race between 
predators and their prey has led to many planktonic species 
being virtually transparent and therefore difficult to see; other 
species have dilute watery bodies that allow extremely rapid 
growth in size but which make calorie-poor meals, while some 
have escape speeds of 500 body lengths per second, ten times 
the 50 body lengths per second achieved by an F16 fighter 
jet. This liquid environment is also a challenge for finding 
sufficient resources and mates, and many planktonic solutions 
are explained here.
The study of plankton
The scientific study of plankton is in many ways a young 
discipline, and while scientists have raced to address many 
important questions, they are still working hard to provide 
understanding from the largest scale, tracing global elemental 
cycles, to the molecular scale, sequencing newly discovered 
genomes. In reading this book I very much hope you get a 
sense of the many advances being made in this discipline and 
the excitement of the discovery that is underway.
Professor Andrew Hirst
OPPOSITE | A sea sapphire; the males of this marine 
copepod show distinctive glittering colors. The male 
swims in a spiral when performing a courtship dance 
to attract females. This movement, together with how the 
color is created, causes it to vary between iridescent to 
near invisible depending on the angle of its body.78 | INTRODUCTION9
A DRIFTER’S LIFE
Plankton are all too easy to ignore, but we do so at our 
collective peril and to our personal detriment. Collectively, we 
should be thinking a lot more about plankton because they are 
often characterized as the “lungs of the world.” Set aside your 
preconceptions about rainforests for a minute. The plankton 
drifting in the world’s oceans are generating almost twice as 
much oxygen as jungle trees. Surely that fact alone means we 
should give plankton our full attention. But that is not all. 
These tiny organisms are the basis for many of the food chains 
in the ocean. Billions of fish, whales, sharks, seabirds, seals, 
you name it … rely on plankton to form the foundations of 
their marine ecosystems. And many of those fish and other 
sea creatures are foods that we harvest from the oceans daily. 
Eventually the life stories of plankton will be played out at 
the dinner table.
Taking a deep dive into plankton brings you eye to eyespot 
with some of the world’s most awesome organisms. There are 
billions of tons of microbial creatures with an unimaginable 
diversity simply floating in the waters. At the large scale, 
plankton include jellyfish that are longer than blue whales 
and bag-like salps with fish living inside like a wild-born 
aquarium. At the smaller end are crystal-cut microbes with 
intricate silica skeletons, tiny fish fry, mini shrimp-like krill 
gathering in gargantuan swarms, and even snails that build 
a raft of bubbles to sail the wide oceans. And among them 
are the phytoplankton, microscopic plant-like organisms 
that played the leading role in creating this green-blue planet 
we call home. And all of this from plankton that are almost 
invisible to the naked eye!
What are plankton?
Defined briefly, plankton are aquatic life-forms that cannot 
swim very well in relation to other marine creatures, if at 
all. They live in almost every sizable body of water, from a 
modest rockpool to the greatest ocean. They are united by virtue 
of being passive passengers, going where the currents, tides, 
and waves take them. The term plankton was introduced in 
the 1880s and derives from the Greek word for “wanderer.”
In more detail, plankton comprise a complex diversity of 
all kinds of living things, some plant-like, some animal-like, 
and others that defy the dichotomy and are best described 
as something in between. Plankton can be categorized in 
numerous other ways as well: by their size; by the way they 
gain their energy and nutrients; by their life cycles; and by 
their ecology and their roles in watery environments.
A more precise definition of plankton is very difficult to 
muster. Swarming in their trillions, some do have a limited 
ability to move under their own power. This is usually as 
part of a DVM—a diel (diurnal or daily, that is, 24 hours) 
migration, with many plankton migrating to the surface at 
night to feed, and returning to safer, darker deep waters in 
the daytime. These planktonic migrants are often dominated 
in terms of numbers by marine copepods, which are small 
crustaceans that are relatives of shrimp and crabs, as well as 
squid and other members of the mollusk group, and various 
fish. They travel upward at dusk for the hours of darkness, 
then down again by dawn to hide from daylight in deeper, 
darker waters. Despite this up-and-down motion, the self￾powered movements of these DVM hordes are very limited 
in horizontal directions, and usually negligible at the scale 
of great ocean currents.
Unsung heroes
For several reasons, including being mostly very small, 
plankton are “sea soup” and the basis of innumerable food 
chains and ecosystems. Like plants on land, microscopic 
phytoplankton capture the sun’s light energy and use it for 
growth and reproduction. These humble organisms are little 
recognized and yet fundamental. They power a huge amount 
of ocean life. The phytoplankton are eaten by small animals 
and animal-like organisms called zooplankton. In turn, both 
of these groups are the primary food for bigger animals, 
which are consumed by still larger ones, and so on. In this way, 
aquatic food webs build up to support a vast array of creatures, 
OPPOSITE | The scientific name of the mauve stinger 
jellyfish, Pelagia noctiluca, encapsulates the creature’s 
habit of glowing in dark water at night.10 | INTRODUCTION
including the world’s biggest animal species—the great 
whales—and in many communities the ocean food webs are 
an intrinsic part of the human diet.
So plankton, despite their unglamorous image and relative 
obscurity, provide the energy and sustenance for myriad 
forms of life in both marine and freshwater bionetworks. 
They replenish gaseous oxygen in our atmosphere and 
dissolved oxygen in aquatic environments. They also cycle 
the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide between the atmosphere 
and the watery realms. They are critical to the health of our 
seas and oceans. They are, indeed, unsung heroes of our hugely 
complex and multifaceted global ecosystem.
Guides to the future
Due to their huge significance, plankton are also vital indicators 
of the biological and ecological status of Earth’s biosphere. 
Measuring, tracking, and recording them—their numbers 
and seasonal fluctuations in abundance, their biodiversity, 
distribution, and welfare—are becoming increasingly essential. 
Plankton are revealing the impacts of modern human-created 
disturbances such as rampant pollution; overfishing and food 
web disruption; the progressive changes of atmospheric and 
oceanic composition; and the vast, looming, overarching 
processes of climate change and global warming.
Research into planktonic health and fitness can help 
to guide us as we strive to extract ourselves, our artificially 
cultivated environments, and what remains of Earth’s natural 
wilderness, from the challenges that humanity is generating. 
Plankton reveal the problem and will in many ways show us 
how to repair the damage we are causing. Plankton need 
attention. This book is a good place to start.
ABOVE | Not all the eggs of the smooth lumpsucker 
(Aptocyclus ventricosus) will hatch. The viable ones 
have an embryo with obvious eyes visible inside.
OPPOSITE ABOVE | A colony of common salps (Salpa 
fusiformis) hangs out in the coastal waters of Balayan 
Bay, in the Philippines.
OPPOSITE BELOW | The larva of a blind lobster, a deep￾sea species of Stereomastis from the tropical Atlantic 
Ocean, floats in the Atlantic waters off Cape Verde.11A WONDERFUL
DIVERSITY
CHAPTER 1
A bucketful of seawater does not appear to be full of life. Most plankton are too small to see 
with the naked eye, so the water seems largely clear when given a cursory glance. But take 
a closer look and you’ll find the oceans are teeming with hidden life with a diversity to rival 
that of a rainforest or other land habitat. Upper estimates suggest that more than 250,000 
species of plankton have been identified, but that number could be only 10 percent of 
the total count.
The panoply of plankton species contains a full range of life on Earth, from the smallest 
bacteria to complex multicellular life such as jellyfish, free-floating seaweeds, and the 
microscopic larval forms of fish. Nevertheless, plankton includes some of the most primitive 
or ancient groups of organisms on the planet. 
Multicellular plants and animals, such as worms, vertebrates, and mollusks, have their 
genesis in the Cambrian explosion that took place around 500 million years ago. For 
hundreds of millions of years preceding this astounding radiation of life, unicellular plankton 
were a dominant form of life on Earth, floating as they did in the later servings of 
the primordial “soup.” 14 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
evolved around 2.5 billion years ago. Again, this remarkable 
step in the history of life may well have occurred in a bloom 
of plankton. The truth is nobody knows. 
Eukaryotes evolved from a more primitive form of life called 
the prokaryotes. The latter term means “before nucleus,” and 
organisms under this banner have simple insides with no 
distinct nuclear structure or other organelles. The complex 
cells of the eukaryotes are, in fact, a team of simpler, smaller 
prokaryotic cells, which came together in a near miraculous 
event called symbiogenesis. The details of that story are for 
another time, but the prokaryotes involved are still very much 
part of today’s plankton community.
PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES
For most of the natural history of our planet, the phrase 
“life on Earth” has mostly referred to plankton. The earliest 
evidence of life dates back 3.8 billion years when it was 
mostly confined to the oceans, floating in the waters of the 
young Earth. 
To begin with, for at least a billion years, the plankton was 
exclusively made up of prokaryotic life. The more familiar 
life-forms in and out of the ocean that we see around us today 
are eukaryotic, so named because their body cells have a 
distinct nucleus. Humans are eukaryotes, as are seaweeds, 
jellyfish, and the green algae in the ocean. These creatures, 
or rather the cell type they use to build their bodies, be they 
a single-celled organism or straggly salp several meters long, 
BELOW | The rainbow waters of the Grand Prismatic 
Spring, in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, USA, 
are colored by extremophile bacteria in the water and 
growing in mats on the bottom. Only the superheated 
blue center is empty of microbes.
OPPOSITE | The steps of endosymbiosis proposed by 
the theory of symbiogenesis that led to the evolution 
of complex cells.
BELOW | Generalized diagrams of a prokaryotic cell 
(below) and eukaryotic cell (bottom). 
Pili
Nucleoid
Cytoplasm
Cell wall
Plasma membrane
Flagella
Vesicle
Endoplasmic 
reticulum
Plasma membrane
Golgi 
apparatus
Nucleus
Nucleolus
Prokaryotic cell structure
Eukaryotic cell structure15
Nucleoid 
(containing DNA)
Prokaryotic cell
Cytoplasm
Cell membrane
Cell membrane 
infoldings
Nucleus
Mitochondria
Nuclear membrane
Endoplasmic reticulum
Protobacterium
Cyanobacterium
Mitochondrion
Chloroplasts
Ancestor of animals, fungi, 
and other heterotrophs
Ancestor of plants 
and algae
First eukaryote
Archaeon
The process of endosymbiosis
2
1
3
4
5
1 An archaeon grows in size. 
As a result its cell membrane 
becomes folded to increase 
the total surface area. This 
allows the organism to transport 
enough materials in and out 
of the cell. 
2 Some of the folds detach from 
the cell membrane. Some 
surround the cell’s genetic 
material to form a nucleus. 
Others become endoplasmic 
reticula, centers of metabolic 
activity now seen in all 
eukaryotic cells.
3 The cell consumes a free-living 
bacterium, probably as an 
item of food to be digested 
inside the cell. However, the 
bacterium is somehow spared 
destruction and begins to live 
as a symbiont.
4 In return for a place to live, the 
symbiont provides the host cell 
with a more efficient means of 
handling energy. The symbiont 
divides inside the cell and is 
passed on when the host also 
divides. This is the origins of 
the eukaryotic mitochondrion.
5 The first eukaryotes are 
heterotrophic. The first 
autotrophs arise later when 
a cyanobacterium enters the 
cell, again probably consumed 
as prey but which manages 
to thrive in its new home. This 
symbiont has become the 
chloroplast, the eukaryotic 
organelle for photosynthesis.16 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
Primitive life
A more familiar name for a prokaryote is a bacterium, but 
the group also includes archaea. To the layperson, and most 
biologists for that matter, the difference between bacteria and 
archaea is rather opaque. In fact, the two groups were only 
formally divided in the later 1970s. That division is based on 
the distinct chemistry of their most crucial metabolism, and 
this can only mean that these organisms have lived separate 
lives since almost the dawn of life itself. 
While bacteria make up a large proportion of oceanic 
plankton, archaea are much less common in the water column. 
They dominate extreme anaerobic habitats where there is no 
oxygen to drive metabolism. While planktonic communities 
are almost exclusively aerobes, archaea are able to survive in 
the chemical-rich, low-oxygen, and unusually warm waters of 
hydrothermal springs. 
The host cell of the endosymbiosis, as in the large cell within 
which the other prokaryotes gathered, is thought to be an 
archeon. The nucleus and other structures made from folded 
internal membranes evolved inside this primordial organism. 
Eukaryotic cells also have mitochondria, the power packs of 
the cell, and many have chloroplasts, which host the process 
of photosynthesis. The mitochondria are the descendants of 
a bacterium that is now spread by tick bites, so its place in the 
story of plankton is not clear. However, the chloroplast, the 
photosynthetic capsule that has turned the world green—
including occasional swathes of the ocean—is related to 
today’s cyanobacteria. Also known, rather incorrectly, as the 
blue-green algae, these bacteria, barely 1 millionth of a meter 
long, make up about three-quarters of the phytoplankton on 
Earth. (Having said that, cyanobacteria are found in almost 
every other habitat, including soils and swamps, and even 
float in the air as aeroplankton.)
Other phytoplankton
Prokaryotes are all single-celled organisms, although it is not 
uncommon for cyanobacteria and other bacterioplankton to 
cluster into colonies and chains. In contrast, all multicellular 
organisms, in plankton or elsewhere, are eukaryotic. They are 
built from collections of large, complex cells that take on 
specialist roles among the whole. 17
OPPOSITE | The euglenid Phacus pleuronectes has an 
eyespot that it uses to seek out bright water and thus 
boost its rate of photosynthesis. 
That said, there is an entire kingdom of life (some say 
several kingdoms) made up of single-celled eukaryotes. This 
group is called the Protista, or less formally, protists. They 
include familiar life-forms like amoebas and protozoa. In 
terms of plankton, the most abundant protists are plant-like 
phytoplankton. These microscopic plankton are “plant-like” 
because they use photosynthesis to harness directly the energy 
of the sun. However, many share features with animals. For 
example, a euglenid, a green-colored protist, which is common 
in freshwater plankton, gets food and energy both from eating 
foods and photosynthesis.
Diatoms
Out in the ocean, the photosynthetic protists are dominated 
by diatoms, a kind of golden algae with exquisite “shells” made 
from silica around their cell bodies. There are an estimated 
100,000 species of these beautiful microbes, although many 
of them are not planktonic. (Instead, they are adapted to living 
in the benthic community, those organisms that survive in 
sediments on the seafloor.) The diatom’s shell, better known 
as a frustule, comes in two halves with one fitting snugly over 
the other to provide a rigid capsule for the cell inside. There are 
two main forms: Centric diatoms have rounded shells when 
viewed from above, while from the same angle pennate 
diatoms have a boat shape. Some also have elaborate spines, 
called setae, which create intricate, crystal-like structures 
when the diatoms cluster in colonies. 
Whiptails
The other two main forms of phytoplankton protists are the 
flagellates and dinoflagellates. All these organisms have at 
least one flagellum (plural flagella), which is a long, whiplike 
structure that emerges from the cell membrane. Flagella are 
mostly used as a means of locomotion, pushing against the 
water as they wiggle and whirl. This movement is immaterial 
when flagellated plankton are borne along by ocean currents, 
but the appendage helps with evading capture by bigger beasts 
and also enables many of these photosynthesizing protists to 
grab prey—often diatoms—and engulf them as a supplement 
to their diet. 
Dinoflagellates have two flagella. There are only around 
2,000 known species, but they receive a lot of attention 
because the toxic blooms of some cause dangerous “red tides” 
that can decimate marine wildlife, threaten fisheries, and 
pose a danger to humans in the water. Dinoflagellates are 
independent single-celled organisms, but they often form 
long, chain-like colonies. There are two groups, although the 
division is not a clear one. Thecate dinoflagellates are covered 
in spines and plates made from cellulose (also the main 
structural material in plant cells). Athecate dinoflagellates 
lack these features.
Flagellates are much more of a grab-bag of organisms. They 
all have flagella, mostly two but sometimes up to 16. Often the 
flagella are equal in length, although occasionally not. The cell 
shapes tend to be ovoid but can elongate into rods. A range of 
spines, plates, and shells can help distinguish one flagellate 
from another and sometimes the cells cluster into colonial 
sheets and chains. In other words, they come in a very wide 
range of shapes and sizes. All flagellates photosynthesize and 
some also feed on other plankton, engulfing their smaller prey 
through a furrow-shaped “mouth” on one side of the cell.18 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
ZOOPLANKTON
Plankton that are exclusively heterotrophs—or “other 
eaters”—which survive by consuming the bodies of other 
organisms are grouped as zooplankton. Of course, many of 
these are animals, such as crustaceans and jellyfish, but there 
are also protists that fit this description. The main protist 
groups are the ciliates, foraminifera, and radiolaria.
Protozoa
Due to their animal-like tendencies, ciliates, foramenifera, 
and radiolaria are loosely termed protozoa, or “early animals.” 
This early name suggested that such microbes are the simpler 
relatives of us, the animals. However, later scholarship has 
revealed that the first multicellular animals probably evolved 
from choanaflagellates, a group of protists, some of which are 
planktonic, that filter bacteria from the water. No matter, the 
name has stuck. 
There are around 8,000 species of ciliate. As the name 
suggests, they have multiple cilia, which are small, hairlike 
extensions of the cell membrane. These are used to draw 
particles of food to a feeding pore, or oral cavity, on one side 
of the cell body.
Foraminifera live deep within a protective shell, or test. The 
shapeless cell body is at the heart of this intricate construction 
of calcium-rich chemicals, and thin filaments of membrane, 
called filopodia, connect to the water outside. There are 7,500 
species described, but this is likely to be just a fraction of the 
true total. Foraminifera are unicellular, but their tests can be 19
OPPOSITE | The marine radiolarian Actinomma 
delicatulum has a beautiful siliceous skeleton.
ABOVE LEFT | An example of Euplotes, a freshwater genus 
of a kind of ciliate known as a hypotrich. This light 
micrograph, magnified around 400 times, shows the 
dense tufts of cilia at the top and bottom of the cell body. 
ABOVE RIGHT | This scanning electron micrograph 
with added color shows the fossil remains of a tiny 
foraminiferan test (protective shell).
more than 0.04 in (1 mm) wide. They are the most common 
shelled organisms in the oceans. Their dead remains sink to 
the seafloor and create a thick layer of eerily still ooze.
Radiolarians are characterized by a lattice of spines that 
surrounds the cells, creating a spiked ball or lenticular 
structure that can be as big as 0.02 in (500 µm) across. 
These protists are hard to keep in lab cultures and so almost 
everything we know about them—which is not much—comes 
from watching them in the wild.20 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
Mycoplankton
Not all heterotrophic plankton are animals (or 
animal-like). There is a surprisingly large contingent 
of fungi in plankton communities as well. Known 
as mycoplankton, the fungal community is mostly 
microscopic, although thumb-sized colonial masses 
of fungal filaments are commonplace. Fungi are a 
separate kingdom of multicellular (and eukaryotic) 
organisms alongside the plants and animals. They 
cannot photosynthesize and have no mouths or 
digestive systems for consuming food. Instead, they 
are saprotrophic, which—somewhat uncharitably—
means “rot eater.” On land, that is a primary role 
of fungi. They grow on their food, be it a fallen log 
or discarded fruits, and exude digestive chemicals 
directly onto it. The enzymes digest the food externally 
and then the fungus just needs to absorb the nutrients 
it requires. In the sea, this mode of eating remains, 
although the fungi’s food is mostly the dead remains 
of phytoplankton. As a result, mycoplankton are most 
abundant in surface waters, where sunlight sustains 
the phytoplankton. It is estimated that there are a 
thousand single-celled fungi in a milliliter of seawater 
(compared to a million bacteria).
Metazoa
True animals have the archaic name metazoa, which means 
“later animals.” In reality, any organism that has the complexity 
to qualify as a metazoan also meets the bar of being an animal. 
Animals are multicellular eukaryotic organisms that feed on 
other organisms to access the energy and nutrients they need. 
While the simplest animals of all, blob-like organisms such as 
sponges and placozoa, live on the seafloor, the zooplankton 
community is made up of members of all the major animal 
phyla, even the ones that have made a name for themselves in 
larger forms on land. The phyla include the mollusks, which are 
the relatives of snails and squids; the arthropods; which include 
crustaceans, one of the mainstay groups of zooplankton; and, 
of course, chordates. Chordata is the phylum that contains 
the vertebrates, or animals with a spine. As well as us humans, 
the chordates include fish, which contribute in small ways to 
the plankton community, as we’ll see later.
There are also many other phyla, including several types of 
worm, which make a showing in the plankton. Despite their 
apparent simplicity, worms, planktonic or not, have a bilateral 
body plan. In other words, the left side is a mirror image of 
the right, and there is a head and mouth at one end and a vent 21
OPPOSITE | This salmon egg is infected with the fungus 
Saprolegnia parasitica. The fungus causes saprolegniosis 
(water mold disease), which affects wild and cultured 
freshwater fish and fish eggs worldwide.
BELOW | Colored scanning electron micrographs of silica 
spicules. These tiny objects found floating in the plankton 
are the structural units of sponge bodies.
toward the other. This seems rudimentary to animal life, 
but a significant proportion of zooplankton do not have this 
bilateral body. Instead, they have radial bodies with a mouth 
at the center and no discernible head or central control 
unit to the body. These animals are best known as jellyfish 
(Cnidaria), but any student of plankton will know that they 
are an extraordinary diversity of forms. They do indeed have a 
simpler body plan, but the best advice is stay back and marvel. 
These creatures not only glitter in the dark; they are also 
built to sting!22 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
JELLYFISH
The planktonic jellyfish mostly belong to the phylum Cnidaria. 
This group includes organisms traditionally called jellyfish 
(although this belies their diversity), which are almost 
universally planktonic, along with sedentary bottom-dwellers 
like corals and sea anemones. Even so, these latter two groups 
spend their early days as a planktonic larval form. 
Cnidaria body plan
The basic body plan of a cnidaria is a bell-shaped cavity with 
tentacles attached. In the case of the anemones and corals, the 
adult body has tentacles that face upward (a form known as a 
polyp), while the jellyfish and their allies have a medusa body, 
where the tentacles hang down from the main body. The name 
Cnidaria is based on the Greek word for nettle, and indeed 
the jellyfish, anemones, and even the corals have hundreds of 
thousand stinging cells on their tentacles. These are primed to 
launch barbed stingers into whatever they touch. The stingers 
form a physical connection, which can be interpreted as 
stickiness. Anyone that has fingered an anemone in a rock pool 
ABOVE | A generalized diagram of a 
polyp and medusa, the two body plans 
of cnidarians.
LEFT | A generalized life cycle of a jellyfish, 
which sees the organism develop from an 
egg and through the different sedentary 
polyp stages to planktonic adult medusa.
OPPOSITE | A crown jellyfish (Cephea 
cephea). Also sometimes called the 
cauliflower jellyfish.
will recognize this. However, the stinger cells, known as 
nematocysts, also deliver a venom that is concocted to paralyze 
prey. Once that is achieved, the captured victim is hoisted to 
the mouth. Although we use the word mouth for cnidarians, 
this opening also acts as the genital pore that pumps out 
sperm and eggs and as the anus, where the waste from 
digestion is ejected. 
Endoderm
Mesoglea
Gastrovascular 
cavity
Tentacle
Ectoderm
Polyp Medusa
Tentacle
Mouth
Endoderm
Mesoglea
Ectoderm
Gastrovascular 
cavity Basal disk
Mouth
Adult jellyfish 
(medusa phase) 
releases eggs and 
sperm into the water
Planula larva 
develops from 
a fertilized egg
Polyp phase
Polyp with buds
Ephyra larva
The life cycle of a jellyfish
The polyp and medusa stages2324 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
ABOVE | A box jellyfish with a cubic body and several 
short tentacles.
OPPOSITE ABOVE | A bloom of sea gooseberries 
(Pleurobrachia pileus) in the North Atlantic off the coast 
of Shetland. These comb jellies snare mesoplankton with 
a pair of long tentacles that dangle from the main body.
OPPOSITE BELOW | Beroe abyssicola comb jelly.
The “jellyfish” are able to swim by flexing their muscular 
bodies in a rhythmic way to create a jet of water pumped 
from the body cavity. However, their efforts are not powerful 
enough for them to move against ocean currents, and so they 
drift wherever the water takes them. 
Classifying jellyfish
The animals popularly known as jellyfish fall into three orders. 
The true jellyfish belong to the Scyphozoa, which have the 
typical umbrella-like body frilled with small tentacles and 
more substantial oral tentacles that hang below the mouth.
There are around 200 species of these “true” jellies, with some 
growing to 61
⁄2 ft (2 m) wide. 
Less numerous are the Cubozoa. As their name suggests, 
these are sometimes called box jellyfish, or more aptly sea 
wasps, because they sting swimmers in shallow waters. 
They are about the size of a shoebox at most, including the 
tentacles. The squarish shape makes them more efficient 
swimmers and they have a top speed of 1,000 ft (300 m) an 
hour! Some are highly dangerous, with venoms that can stop 
the heart within minutes and others that cause extreme pain. 
(Most stings are less severe. The best treatment is a mild acid, 
such as vinegar.)
The third group of jellies is the Hydrozoa, which includes 
nearly 4,000 species. Their bodies are generally small and 
simple compared to their cousins. There are colonial forms 
of hydrozoans where the body is composed of several 
interdependent organisms that have taken on different 
roles—feeding, breeding, and hunting, for example. These 
colonial hydrozoans—also called siphonophores—can trail 
stinging tentacles 130 ft (40 m) long. They are one of the 
most numerous hunters in the ocean.25
Comb jellies
Often mistaken for their stinging cousins, 
the comb jellies actually belong to a 
separate phylum named Ctenophore. 
Comb jellies are thought by some to 
be even more primitive than jellyfish 
and may be the last living relatives of 
the first multicellular animals to evolve. 
Around 100 species have been 
described, although there are likely to 
be considerably more. The difficulty is 
retrieving undamaged samples of these 
most fragile of animals. Almost all comb 
jellies are planktonic carnivores. Some 
are barely visible without a microscope, 
while the largest species are more than 
3 ft (1 m) across. The “comb” moniker 
comes from the tooth-like fringes of cilia 
that are used for controlling swimming 
and buoyancy.26 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
CRUSTACEA
No netting sample of plankton is complete without a plethora 
of crustaceans. They represent at least half the biomass of 
the mid-sized mesoplankton. The Crustacea is one of the 
largest and most diverse of all animal groups, only beaten by 
the insects that dominate the land. There are around 70,000 
species of crustacean described so far, but many of them, 
especially the planktonic species, are difficult to tell apart. That 
and the lack of sampling and research means it is estimated 
that at least 90 percent of these species are as yet unknown.
As arthropods, crustaceans have a body supported by an 
exoskeleton instead of an internal one. Breathing is via gills, 
the legs are highly jointed, and the animals use limb-like 
appendages as antennae and mouthparts. Beyond these simple 
common features the diversity of crustaceans is difficult to 
take in, ranging as they do from spider crabs and pill bugs 
(woodlice) to water fleas and mantis shrimp. 
Some crustacean examples
Copepods alone, just one of the many subclasses of 
crustaceans, are considered to be one of the most abundant 
forms of animal on Earth. Despite this, one can be forgiven for 
not really knowing what they are. Adults are seldom more than 
a few millimeters long, and they are considerably smaller than 
this for much of their life cycle. Copepod means “oar foot” in 
reference to the paddling action of the legs when swimming. 
Other crustaceans include the decapods, which are perhaps 
the most familiar in that they include crabs, lobster, and 
prawns. Adult prawns and shrimp are found in vast shoals 
as part of the plankton, while the larval forms of the larger 
decapods are also mostly drifters before settling down to a life 
on the seabed. The same is true of mantis shrimp, which are 
vicious raptorial hunters that spend their younger days in the 
plankton, but occupy a different subclass called Stomatopoda. 
There are other prawn-like crustaceans, most notably 
the euphausids, which are better known as krill. How they 
differ from shrimp is rather academic and to do with body 
segmentation and the like. There are only 86 species of krill, 
but they make their presence felt in the mid-range of the 
plankton world. A krill swarm in cold polar waters packs 
30,000 animals into every cubic meter! 
ABOVE LEFT | An adult peacock mantis shrimp 
(Odontodactylus scyllarus) on a coral reef in 
the Philippines.
LEFT | Sea sapphire males display iridescent flashes of 
color, possibly to attract females. The colors are structural 
in that they are formed by the interplay of light reflecting 
from layers of crystals inside cells.
OPPOSITE | A seething shoal of Thysanoessa spinifera, 
a Pacific krill, near the coast of southern California.2728 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
SWIMMING WORMS
For the uninitiated, a worm is a worm. It’s a long, legless, 
wiggling creature. However, this simple body plan is not due to 
a close relationship between wormlike animals. Evolution has 
produced worms many times over. 
The big hitters are the round worms, or nematodes; the 
flatworms, which are often parasitic; and the annelids, which 
include leeches and earthworms among a trove of other 
forms. The first two members of wormkind are not features of 
plankton, but the annelids are, specifically marine creatures 
called polychaetes. This name means “many hairs” and 
polychaetes have multiple bristle-like appendages which 
function as primitive limbs for walking or swimming. Several 
polychaetes are planktonic throughout their life cycles, while 
bottom-dwelling species spend their early days as tiny larval 
forms that drift in the water. 
Another significant group of planktonic wormlike animals 
are the chaetognaths, or arrow worms. These translucent, 
dart-shaped worms are mostly a few millimeters long but are 
present in vast numbers. The cumulative biomass of arrow 
worms is about a third of the weight of the copepods, their 
preferred food source. The predator-prey relationship between 
these worms and those little crustaceans is one of the driving 
forces of the diel vertical migrations (see page 134).
The arrow worms are only distant relatives of the 
polychaetes. Instead, they are more closely aligned with 
nematodes, arthropods, and that other major phylum of 
animals, the Mollusca. 
RIGHT | This view of an arrow worm (Sagitta sp.) shows 
the hooked, grasping spines on each side of the head.29
SNAILS AND 
ECHINODERMS
Mollusks are yet another invertebrate group with a startling 
diversity on land and in the sea. They are no doubt most 
familiar as garden snails and slugs, but also include shellfish 
like scallops and limpets, plus brainy cephalopods like the 
giant squid and cuttlefish. The majority of mollusks are shelled 
creatures, and this precludes them from a free-swimming 
lifestyle. However, around 150 mollusks, mostly snails, have 
evolved to be fully planktonic. 
Snails are known for gliding around on their singular 
muscular foot. In the planktonic form, this foot has spread out 
and thinned into a winglike structure more suited to swimming. 
The snails exude strings of mucus to help with buoyancy and act 
as sea anchors to hold the animal steady in the water. The shell 
is very thin and lightweight and in some cases too small for the 
animal to withdraw all of its soft body parts.
Another group of heavy-set creatures are the echinoderms, 
better known as the starfish and sea urchins. Echinoderms 
have bone-like skeletons in the skin, which, as well as protection, 
add weight that hinders swimming. The echinoderms are 
famed for their five-fold radial symmetry, but this is only a 
feature of the most familiar adults. The larval forms of starfish, 
brittlestars, and the like are bilaterally symmetrical. They are 
also small and lightweight enough to be part of the plankton, and 
during the breeding seasons these larval urchins and starfish 
can make up a significant proportion of the zooplankton.
Small phyla, but not minor
Oceanic zooplankton are also members of lesser known but 
no less interesting animal phyla with only a few thousand 
species between them. These include the bryozoans, which 
form tiny colonies on the seabed or just about anything solid 
and submerged. Their microscopic larvae are a common 
feature of plankton. The bryozoans are a close relative of the 
brachiopods and phoronids. The brachiopods, or lamp shells, 
live on the seabed when adult, standing above the sediment 
on little stalks, but are planktonic as larvae. Phoronids are like 
gnarled worms and live in the seabed of shallow seas. In the 
breeding seasons in spring and fall, phoronid larvae become 
a large part of the plankton in these waters.
TOP RIGHT | The free-swimming echinopluteus larva of 
the sea potato sea urchin (Echinocardium cordatum).
ABOVE RIGHT | This swimming snail is called a sea angel. 
It is a type of mollusk called a pteropod, literally meaning 
“winged feet” in reference to its muscular swimming. 30 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
CHORDATA
The ocean-going members of the phylum Chordata are 
generally hailed for their size, strength, and impressive 
intelligence. They include the usual suspects of dolphins, 
sharks, whales, and turtles. 
Although none of these seems to have a place in the 
plankton, chordates are very much present in the zooplankton 
community. A major component are fish eggs and the tiny 
larvae that hatch from them. Oceanic fish of all kinds, from 
hake and swordfish to sea bass and anglerfish, spawn in open 
waters. This means their eggs, fertilized or not, float in their 
trillions in the water column. The lucky few eggs, which are 
mostly less than 0.08 in (2 mm) wide, will hatch into tiny 
larval fish. These minute vertebrates, themselves only a few 
millimeters long, have a vaguely alien appearance, mostly 
because they emerge with a yolk-sac life-support system 
dangling from the body. This provides the energy and 
nutrients the baby fish needs as it starts out in life. The 
early days, probably early months, of that life will be spent 
in the plankton, where the fish steadily grow until they are 
able to swim against the currents and make their own way 
in the world.31
Tunicates
Not all members of the Chordata are vertebrates. There is a subgroup called the 
tunicates, which share the nervous structures that develop into our brain and spinal 
cord. In the tunicates, however, that process is diverted to creating a flimsy, tube￾shaped creature that filters seawater for whatever morsels it can get hold of. Sometimes 
meeting distant relatives is a shock! Most of the 3,000 species of tunicate are benthic, 
and have names like sea squirts and sea tulips. However, there are some planktonic 
members, which fall into two groups: the salps and larvaceans. The barrel-shaped 
salps are mostly a few centimeters long and could be easily mistaken for a blob of 
gunge. However, they can form elaborate colonial chains that trail for meters through 
the water. The larvaceans are mostly about 0.04 in (1 mm) long. They have a tadpole￾shaped body surrounded by a “house” made of jelly—a mixture of cellulose and 
mucus. The animals float around in the bubble-like house, which filters suitable food 
particles from the surrounding waters.
OPPOSITE | The larval stage of a 
flatfish in the Mediterranean Sea. 
The eggs and larvae of fish are 
known as ichthyoplankton.
ABOVE | Common salp (Salpa fusiformis) 
with copepods inhabiting its inner 
chamber in Balayan Bay, in the 
Philippines. Salps are non-vertebrate 
members of the Chordata.32 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
One needs to look closely at seawater to fully appreciate the 
enormous diversity of plankton it contains. There are a number 
of methods for investigating plankton abundance and taking 
a snapshot of their populations across the oceans. The simplest 
sampling method is to filter seawater by dragging a cone￾shaped net behind a boat. An early pioneer of this approach 
was Charles Darwin (1809–1882), who used a muslin net 
during his days aboard HMS Beagle in the 1830s. 
Today’s plankton nets are made from nylon in a variety of 
mesh sizes. Holes smaller than 20 micrometers (µm) are used 
to collect single-celled life. Larger, single-celled plankton and 
the tiniest animals, such as rotifers, will be picked up in nets 
with a mesh size of about 80 µm. Smaller crustaceans and 
worms need a net with a mesh size of about 150 µm, while the 
tiny larvae of fish will get caught in nets with holes of about 
500 µm (which is equal to 0.5 mm). There are, of course, many 
types of larger plankton than this—some can be several meters 
long—but macroplanktonic organisms of this size are not 
suited to sampling by conical net. Instead, larger nets are used 
with automated systems for opening and closing to keep the 
samples trapped inside. 
More accurate measurements
Plankton nets can be used at different depths to build a 
profile of plankton in the water column. However, because 
they accumulate, these samples are not a very good method 
for assessing what plankton lives where. A more advanced 
form of sampler called the continuous plankton recorder 
(CPR) goes some way to answering these questions. The CPR 
is a self-contained device which is towed behind a ship, often 
a merchant vessel that happens to be passing a place of 
interest. The CPR filters the plankton on a strip of silk, which 
inches through the machine as water flows through it. Every 
centimeter of silk represents a nautical mile (approximately 
6,000 ft/1,800 m) of tow. The entire silk strip—most are about 
4 in (10 cm) wide in total—will therefore present a crude 
spatial profile of the plankton and its relative abundance 
through the tow zone.
TAKING SAMPLES33
The most accurate method of quantifying plankton 
communities is to use water bottles. As their name suggests, 
these are devices of various designs that collect a sample of 
seawater from a specified location at a specified depth. The 
disadvantage over netting and CPRs is that the samples contain 
far fewer organisms, and the sampling process must be carried 
out individually many times over, a laborious pursuit compared 
to the passive sweep of a net. Nevertheless, the results from 
water sampling are much more indicative of what is in the 
water. Plus there is the advantage of collecting plankton of all 
sizes, bar the largest types. The samples include tiny organisms 
that are smaller than 2 µm and mostly comprise bacteria. 
Additionally, the water contains femtoplankton, which are viral 
particles best measured in nanometers, not micrometers. 
OPPOSITE | An illustration from1880 of HMS 
Beagle sailing through a phosphorescent sea, lit by 
bioluminescent sea creatures, as reported by Darwin 
during his voyage of discovery many years before.
LEFT | A rosette of water bottles can be seen sampling 
plankton below the vessel used by researchers during 
the Tara Oceans Expeditions in 2011.
BELOW | Small shrimp and fish are visible in this 
zooplankton sample taken in the Canadian Arctic.34
| A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
Viroplankton
Viruses are not generally accepted as 
fully fledged living beings since they 
do not feed, respire, or perform other 
basic biological functions. Nonetheless, 
marine viruses are astonishingly abundant, 
with the vast majority being harmless 
to humans. Instead, most are specialist 
parasites of planktonic bacteria, known as 
bacteriophages, or attack other planktonic 
microorganisms. It is estimated that there 
are ten of these viruses for every bacterium 
in the ocean, which equates to a quarter 
of a billion viruses in every milliliter, or 
75 billion in a regular drinking glass. 
Every day a fifth of the ocean’s community 
of single-celled microorganisms dies due 
to the actions of an infectious virus.
ABOVE | Bacteriophages 
(colored white) are attacking 
blue Streptococcus bacteria 
in this false-colored scanning 
electron micrograph.
LEFT | Bacteriophages (colored 
green) attacking a bacterial cell 
(tinted orange).35
BELOW | This micrograph made with a light microscope 
shows a range of different marine diatoms, with a variety 
of shapes.
SAMPLE ANALYSIS
A water sample is intrinsically no different from a bucket 
of water collected at the seaside. At first glance it does not 
reveal much. At least three-quarters of its plankton will be 
microorganisms, mostly single-celled protists (such as algae 
and protozoans) and bacteria. Larger colonies of algae and 
microscopic animals will show up easily under a microscope. 
To highlight the smaller organisms, and begin the process of 
identifying them, samples are treated with fixative chemicals 
to stop the dead material breaking up.
Next, the biological material is separated from the water, 
so it can be measured, sorted by type, and counted. To prevent 
further damage to the samples, this is most commonly 
achieved by a passive settling process. The device used is called 
an Utermöhl tower, which is helpful for standardizing results, 
but essentially the sample of seawater is left to settle so its 
plankton contents gradually sink to the bottom of a collecting 
vessel. As a rule of thumb, a sample is left for two hours for 
every centimeter of seawater in the tower. However, smaller 
plankton will sink more slowly than the bigger beasties.
Once settled, the sample is studied under a microscope. 
The best view comes from an inverted setup, where the light 
source is shining down on the sample and the objective lens 
is directed to look up from underneath. This instrument can 
be used to view the plankton settled at the bottom of the 
container. There is no need to process the sample further. 36 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
Smaller organisms are counted in sectors, which represent 
a fraction of the total, by magnifying one part of the sample 
at a time. Larger members have to be counted in total across 
the whole sample at once, with the microscope set to a 
lower magnification. The anatomy of larger plankton, 
mostly zooplankton, is also best studied with binocular 
microscopes that have the objective lens above the sample. 
Light sources of different kinds can be positioned above 
and below to highlight features such as appendages, bristles, 
and mucus layers.
As well as assessing samples manually, chemical testing 
can be used to identify the presence of certain organisms. 
Several biochemical toolkits can detect certain “fingerprint” 
chemicals in the sample, most notably the ribosomal DNA 
(rRNA) of different organisms. RNA is a close companion 
of DNA and used to encode genes in all forms of life. One of 
its roles is as a structural material for making ribosomes, the 
units in every cell that decode genetic material and convert its 
information into the functional entities that aid life processes. 
All life uses rRNA, and its precise makeup is an excellent signal 
of the lineage of plankton found in the sample, especially the 
small microorganisms that are harder to count and quantify 
in other ways. 
ABOVE LEFT | Marine plankton seen through a 
light microscope.
ABOVE RIGHT | A bloom of diatoms, mainly species 
of Thalassiosira, as seen in a differential interference 
contrast (DIC) light micrograph. 
OPPOSITE | Ecologists at work on Lake Greifen, near 
Zurich, Switzerland, using an underwater camera 
called an Aquascope.37
Optical detectors in the wild
The boom in digital video and underwater optical technology 
in the last couple of decades has allowed researchers to 
observe plankton in the wild waters that they call home. 
These systems are of most use for studying zooplankton, 
which are able to evade nets—or may simply not fit—and 
which exhibit behaviors that are lost when static samples are 
taken to the lab. 
Cameras are fitted to nets to capture some of the action 
as plankton are scooped up. They are also mounted on 
free-floating devices designed to capture the behavior 
of marine animals on video. To achieve clear imagery of 
plankton, most of which is microscopic, requires some special 
camera work. This involves flooding a small volume of water 
in front of the camera with light, either from LEDs or laser 
sources. The camera can then focus on the organisms in this 
volume, many of which are largely transparent. Sometimes the 
camera points down onto a “light sheet,” which is a horizontal 
area of water illuminated by a fast flashing strobe. The camera’s 
focal length always matches the position of the light sheet. 
In turbid waters, where suspended silt makes it hard to see 
anything at all, shadowgraph techniques are used to scan a 
small volume of water. In these cases, pulses of light are used 
to create a three-dimensional map of the objects that block this 
light. This data is then used to recreate the scene and reveal the 
animals floating among the mud particles.38 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
Antarctic krill are crustaceans that live in the Southern Ocean. 
They are thought to be among the most abundant animal 
species in the world, with their total biomass estimated at 
500 million tons. Antarctic krill are an important food source 
for many marine animals, not least the world’s largest giant 
whales, but also seals, penguins, and fish. They also represent 
a food source for humans. Krill oil is a valuable source of 
omega-3 fatty acids. The animals are most abundant in the 
Antarctic Peninsula region, where they form huge swarms 
that have a density of 30,000 krill in every cubic meter.
At first glance, Antarctic krill look very like small shrimp, in 
common with all krill, or euphausids. They have a transparent 
pinkish carapace and a long, slender body that is divided into 
three main sections—head, thorax, and abdomen. In decapods 
such as shrimp these body divisions can be less clear. 
Feeding and survival
Antarctic krill are filter feeders. They strain microplankton 
from the water using their feathery forelimbs, known as 
thoracopods, which sweep the water to trap a “basket” of food 
items in front of their open mouths. In turn, Antarctic krill are 
an important part of the Antarctic ecosystem and a staple food 
for many larger predators. When a swarm is under attack, all 
the krill can undergo a mass molt, where the crustaceans shed 
their outer carapace. This doubles the targets for hunters and 
raises the chances that the living krill are spared the onslaught. 
Another tactic is to go deep, although most of the food the 
swarm needs is up in the sunlit euphotic zone.
Life cycle
Antarctic krill live for several years, as long as they avoid being 
a bigger beast’s meal, of course. They breed using internal 
fertilization, and mating is an elaborate five-step process. The 
breeding season is between December and March, the austral 
summer. Eggs are shed in deeper, dark waters. After hatching, 
the krill go through a number of larval stages with appendages 
added at each step. The krill transform from one stage to the 
next with each molt, and at all phases of its life, the krill 
remains planktonic. 
Antarctic krill Euphausia superba
OPPOSITE | An Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) in the 
Southern Ocean. Its food “basket” appendages can be 
seen clearly.
FAMILY: Euphausiidae
DISTRIBUTION: Southern Ocean
HABITAT: Open water
FEEDING HABITS: Filter feeder
NOTES: Has the largest genome of any animal on Earth, with 
the DNA containing 42 billion bases, compared to 
the 3.4 billion in human DNA.
SIZE: 21/2 in (6 cm)40 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
Pelagobia worms belong to a genus of holoplanktonic 
polychaetes. Polychaetes are annelid worms characterized by 
many bristle-like extensions called chaetae poking out of the 
body. Pelagobia longicirrata is the more common species and is 
found in all the world’s oceans. All are small, slender worms 
that spend their whole lives in the water column. 
Pelagobia are filter feeders and survive by sifting food 
particles of all kinds—mostly microbes and waste—from the 
water using feathery antennae. The mouthpart is then everted 
(turned inside out) to slurp up items from these feelers. The 
mouthpart can also be used to actively target food in the water. 
Pelagobia worms are an important part of the marine food 
web, being eaten by a variety of animals, including fish, crabs, 
and seabirds.
Body plan
As annelids, the worms are divided into multiple repeating 
body sections, with a head at one end with a mouth and 
sensory organs. The body is covered with small, overlapping 
scales. Although they are worms, polychaetes do look as if they 
have legs. However, these are unjointed, soft extensions of 
each body segment, called parapodia (which roughly translates 
as “beside feet” or “almost feet”). The adult worms have 
between 15 and 18 segments, each with a pair of parapodia. 
The appendages are fringed with chaetae which enlarge their 
surface area so they can function as oar-like swimming limbs. 
Similar paddle-like appendages are developed by benthic 
worms so they can swim up to the surface to spawn during 
the breeding season. 
Stages to adulthood
It is likely that the holoplanktonic species evolved a life cycle 
where they never needed to return to the seabed. The life 
cycle has multiple stages. Eggs are fertilized externally in the 
water. The larval worm starts out as a single head segment, 
but the body elongates as more segments are added in six 
developmental stages before reaching the adult form.
Polychaete worm Pelagobia longicirrata
OPPOSITE | A dorsal (top-down) view of a Pelagobia 
longicirrata, showing the parapodia extending from the 
body’s many segments.
FAMILY: Lopadorrhynchidae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Open water
FEEDING HABITS: Filter feeder
NOTES: The worms have symbiotic bacteria living in their 
digestive tract. These helpful germs break down the 
cellulose in the cell walls of phytoplankton, which is 
otherwise unavailable using animal enzymes.
SIZE: 3
/16 in (4 mm)42 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
Rotifers are minute aquatic animals that belong to a separate 
phylum, Rotifera. With some being as small as 50 µm across, 
they are among the smallest multicellular animals of all. A 
typical body is made of just 1,000 cells. Most rotifers can only 
be seen with a powerful microscope, although a few giant 
species reach 1/8 in (3 mm) across and are visible to the naked 
eye. Even so, that is easier said than done. Rotifers are 
transparent, and only the digestive tract, which is tinted 
with food, is immediately obvious. 
The name rotifer is derived from the Latin word for 
“wheel” because many of these creatures have round bodies. A 
colloquial name for them is wheel animals, although many are 
more bell-shaped. The rounded body is fringed by a “crown” 
of cilia at the front end, which forms a loosely defined head 
section. The most visible feature of the head are the tiny red 
eyespots, which are sensitive to light but cannot form images. 
The cilia are at once used for locomotion through the water 
and for drawing a current through the crown from which food 
is filtered out. The digestive system is inside the trunk section 
of the body, and there is a rear section, known as a foot, which 
is much reduced in planktonic species to a tail-like spike.
Wide-ranging habitat
Being so small it is difficult to grasp just how widespread these 
tiny creatures are. They are primarily water animals, but do 
persist in damp soils and foliage on land as well. They are 
even found frozen in permafrost. Rotifers live in all freshwater 
and marine habitats and are often bottom feeders that 
are anchored to the seabed and form microscopic colonies. 
However, a large number are planktonic, and rotifers are 
a significant feature of freshwater plankton communities.
Parthenogenetic reproduction
Rotifers are able to reproduce both sexually and asexually. 
The asexual process is parthenogenetic, whereby females lay 
eggs without needing to mate with a male. The egg hatches 
into a miniature version of the adult and is always female. 
Male rotifers are produced occasionally. They have a limited 
life cycle and only exist to fertilize the eggs produced by other 
rotifers with their sperm, thus boosting the genetic diversity 
of the population.
Rotifer Conochilus unicornis
OPPOSITE | A colony of rotifers, Conochilus unicornis, use their 
tail-like feet to cling to a central collective mass of mucus.
FAMILY: Conochilidae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Marine and fresh water, as well as damp, 
terrestrial habitats.
FEEDING HABITS: Filter feeder
NOTES: Rotifers can even survive when trapped in ice. 
SIZE: 0.01 in (250 µm)44 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
Diatoms are phytoplankton and make up an important part 
of the marine food web. They are eaten by a variety of animals, 
including zooplankton such as copepods, krill, and jellyfish, 
as well as planktivorous fish like the basking shark.
Coscinodiscus is a common genus of diatoms found in 
seawater. It contains more than 100 species that make up part 
of the plankton throughout the world’s oceans. Coscinodiscus
diatoms are centric diatoms, which means they have a circular 
shape. This form comes from the outer covering called a 
frustule, which is made up of two overlapping sections, or 
valves. The valves are highly patterned with a variety of pits, 
ridges, and spines. 
There are, however, around 200,000 species of diatom as 
a whole. Some have boat-shaped, pennate forms instead of a 
centric anatomy. The frustules are made of silica, which creates 
beautiful optical effects. Diatoms are sometimes called golden 
larvae as well as more lyrical names such as “jewels of the sea” 
or “living opals.”
Value in oceanography
Coscinodiscus is one of the must abundant genera of diatoms 
in the sea and provides an important source of data for 
oceanographers. The size, shape, and markings of 
Coscinodiscus valves identifies individual species, and the 
abundance of different species can be used to track changes in 
the environment. A bloom of these diatoms can produce 
damaging quantities of mucilage that clog the gills of fish and 
other marine life.
Reproduction
Diatoms are able to reproduce both sexually and asexually. The 
latter system is the most common, with individual diatoms 
dividing into two. Each daughter cell inherits one valve from 
the parent. In a fully grown diatom, the top valve always fits 
neatly over the lower one. When new cells form, the inherited 
valve is promoted so it is always the top valve and a smaller 
lower valve grows to fit perfectly inside it. As a result, one of 
the daughter cells—the one using the smaller lower valve—
will always be smaller than its parent, a process that continues 
down the generations.
Diatom Coscinodiscus sp.
OPPOSITE | A dorsal (top-down) view of the diatom 
Coscinodiscus jonesianus. The epitheca, or upper valve, 
of the frustule can be seen here. The lower valve, or 
hypotheca, fits underneath.
FAMILY: Coscinodiscaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Sunlit oceans
FEEDING HABITS: Photosynthetic
NOTES: Some species release harmful toxins that can reach 
dangerous levels during a bloom.
SIZE: 0.008 in (200 µm)46 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
This species of marine dinoflagellate is characterized by its 
distinctive shape. In common with the other 100-plus species 
of the Tripos genus, it has a long, slender cell body that is 
tapered at both ends. The cells have a distinct top—the apex, 
or apical horn—and two antapical horns at the lower end. 
The U-shaped antapical horns in this species are curved 
upward compared to the central axis set by the apex. Other 
members of the genus have straighter horns or another 
distinctive shape. 
The cell body is surrounded by a two-part shell, or frustule. 
The frustule is made up of upper and lower valves that are 
joined together at the midline by a girdle section, seen here as 
a faint double line. Dinoflagellates are by definition organisms 
with two flagella. The first is connected via a lateral groove 
between the valves, while the second is located near the 
antapex (in this case, the lowest point where the horns curve 
out and up). 
In keeping with all dinoflagellates, Tripos muelleri is a 
photosynthetic organism. As one of the larger examples of 
a dinoflagellate, this species is mostly found in coastal waters. 
Smaller dinoflagellates are more common out in deeper 
open waters, where nutrients are more sparse. Researchers 
are finding that many members of the Tripos genus are 
mixotrophic, meaning that as well as photosynthesizing, 
they also consume food particles, mostly bacteria, by 
engulfing them with their cell body. 
Red tides
Tripos species have a complex life cycle. Most of the 
reproduction is asexual, where a single cell divides into four 
or eight cells. To achieve that, the cell must first escape from 
its shell. During the sexual phase, two cells merge to create a 
temporary form which then divides, releasing offspring called 
swarmers. Dinoflagellates also form inactive cyst forms, which 
can sink to the seabed and lie dormant for a period.
Tripos dinoflagellates are one of the types of plankton that 
are responsible for red tides, where the population explodes in 
such vast numbers that the color of the water changes—as well 
as red, it can also be brown and green. These plankton produce 
toxins in quantities that threaten fish.
Dinoflagellate Tripos muelleri
OPPOSITE | The orientation of the three horns indicates that this 
is a species of Tripos.
FAMILY: Ceratiaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Mostly coastal seas
FEEDING HABITS: Photosynthetic
NOTES: Named for the German naturalist Johann Adam 
Müller (1769–1832).
SIZE: 0.008 in (200 µm)48 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
Emiliania huxleyi is a species of coccolithophore, a type of 
marine protist. It is one of the most abundant and widespread 
species of coccolithophore, and it can be found in all the 
world’s oceans. This species is especially widespread because it 
is able to withstand water temperatures ranging from 34–86°F 
(1–30°C). It is especially well represented in non-polar seas. 
E. huxleyi is a flagellated phytoplankton, although the 
term flagellate simply refers to the presence of the whip-like 
appendage and holds no particular taxonomic value. Indeed, 
in this species the flagellum is only present for a short sexual 
phase of the life cycle. Most of the time, there is no flagellum 
at all. 
Porous skeleton
As a coccolithophore, E. huxleyi is more defined by the calcium 
carbonate plates, known as coccoliths, which encase its body. 
Together the coccoliths form a porous skeleton called a 
coccosphere. The stark white of these structural materials 
makes these organisms look like tiny snowflakes. Chalk, the 
soft form of limestone, is a rock constructed of an 
immeasurable quantity of coccospheres of long-dead plankton. 
The heyday of the coccolithophores was about 100 million 
years ago, in the Late Cretaceous Period. This period is best 
known for witnessing the rise and fall of the dinosaurs, 
but is really named after all the chalk beds created at the time 
by coccolithophores. 
Huge blooms 
E. huxleyi is most evident in summer when it forms blooms 
that cover hundreds of thousands of square kilometers. 
Blooms are stimulated in part by warmer waters, and a climate 
feedback mechanism has been identified. As climate change 
heats the oceans, blooms of coccolithophores become larger 
and more frequent. The blooms form by vegetative growth—
another term for asexual reproduction—which occurs when 
the coccolithophore has its white skeleton in place. The pale 
bloom increases the reflectivity of the surface water, pushing 
heat and light back into the atmosphere (and space). The end 
result is that deeper waters become cool. The long-term effects 
of this apparent climate mechanism are still being investigated.
Coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi
OPPOSITE | A colorized scanning electron micrograph of 
Emiliana huxleyi, showing the skeleton, or coccosphere, 
of calcium carbonate plates, the coccoliths.
FAMILY: Noelaerhabdaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Sunlit oceans
FEEDING HABITS: Photosynthetic
NOTES: Named for Thomas Henry Huxley (1825–1895), 
an English biologist.
SIZE: 0.0004 in (10 µm)50 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
Aequorea victoria, also known as the crystal jelly, is a small 
hydrozoan jellyfish from the Pacific Ocean. It is most abundant 
along the cold-water coastlines of North America, from the 
edge of the Arctic Ocean to Central America. Seen here is the 
adult planktonic medusa, a form with the tentacles hanging 
from a bell. Sexually mature individuals will have a bell above 
11
⁄4 in (3 cm) in diameter. The largest specimens are 2 in 
(5 cm) across. Larval forms of this species, in common with 
most hydrozoans, start out as seafloor creatures. At this stage 
they take a polyp form, where the tentacles reach up from the 
body in an inverse orientation to the medusa.
Bioluminescence 
The bell is transparent and decorated with blue or green spots. 
A. victoria is also bioluminescent, meaning that it can produce 
its own light. The light is created by a protein called aequorin, 
which is activated inside cells by calcium ions. When the 
calcium ions bind to aequorin, a flash of blue light is released. 
That blue light can then be converted to green by another 
protein called GFP (somewhat uninspiredly short for green 
fluorescent protein). 
A. victoria uses its light for communication, mostly to 
attract mates in dark waters. Flashing lights also have a 
defensive function by startling predators and suggesting 
that the animal is much larger than is the case. In twilight 
environments where light is twinkling down from the surface, 
the light show can create a camouflage, helping the jellyfish to 
blend in with the shimmering surroundings.
The protein aequorin has been used in a variety of scientific 
studies, not least into the nature of bioluminescence itself. 
This research has led to a burgeoning of artificial fluorescent 
proteins, which are used in a variety of applications, including 
cell biology and medical imaging. In 2008, Osamu Shimomura, 
Roger Tsien, and Martin Chalfie were awarded the Nobel Prize 
in Chemistry for their work on aequorin and GFP.
Hydrozoan jellyfish Aequorea victoria
OPPOSITE | The crystal jelly (Aequorea victoria), like many 
pelagic organisms, has an ability to produce bioluminescence.
FAMILY: Aequoreidae
DISTRIBUTION: Eastern Pacific
HABITAT: Coastal waters
FEEDING HABITS: Predators
NOTES: A source of fluorescent proteins.
SIZE: 11/4 in (3 cm)52 | A WONDERFUL DIVERSITY
When adult, this snake-shaped fish lives in the freshwater 
rivers of western and northern Europe. However, that is just a 
single phase of one of nature’s most incredible life cycles, and 
one that even now we do not fully understand. In a turnabout 
from the more familiar breeding pattern, such as that used 
by salmon where young fish swim down river to the sea and 
then return as adults to breed, European eels do it the other 
way around. They spawn in the middle of the ocean, and 
then spend their larval stage, seen here and known as a 
leptocephalus, as marine plankton slowing drifting their 
way to freshwater habitats. 
To the Sargasso Sea 
The story begins in the inland waters of Europe where sturdy, 
meter-long eels spend up to 20 years, using their sense of smell 
to find worms and aquatic insect larvae to eat. They then head 
down river and out to sea using that same sense of smell to 
swim fast and deep to the Sargasso Sea. Deep in these waters, 
no one is quite sure where, the eels spawn and die. 
The next generation emerge from the eggs as tiny, 
transparent larvae called leptocephali, which are about 0.04 in 
(1 mm) long. They have flattened, leaflike bodies and swim 
weakly, meaning they can only drift in the water. The larval 
eels feed on smaller planktonic organisms, such as copepods, 
rotifers, and microscopic jellyfish, as they move in the gyre of 
the Sargasso. A gyre is a swirl of warm currents that corrals 
a vast patch of floating Sargassum seaweeds. 
The current spreads out the tiny eels until they are caught in 
the Gulf Stream, which takes them northeast across the ocean 
to the shores of Europe. Once in the stream, the leptocephali 
take about 300 days to make the crossing. After reaching 
neritic, or coastal, waters, the changing smells of the water 
stimulate the flimsy planktonic larvae to metamorphose into 
sturdier glass eels, or elvers, which enter the freshwater system 
for the first time. 
Sadly, the amazing European eel is now critically 
endangered due to overfishing of juvenile elvers as they swim 
into rivers. These juvenile eels are then raised in farms. Eel 
farmers are currently unable to breed their own stock due to 
the species’ unique life cycle and so rely on fishing. As a result, 
very few wild eels remain.
European eel Anguilla anguilla
OPPOSITE | The leptocephali of a European eel (Anguilla 
anguilla) head for fresh water. 
FAMILY: Anguillidae
DISTRIBUTION: Sargasso Sea and the Gulf Stream
HABITAT: Open ocean
FEEDING HABITS: Prey on zooplankton
NOTES: Critically endangered due to overfishing.
SIZE: 0.04 in (1 mm)L IFESTYLES AND 
ADAPTATIONS
CHAPTER 2
Earth has a lot of room for plankton, with the oceans covering more than 70 percent of the 
surface of the globe. Almost 90 percent of that ocean is more than 3,200 ft (1,000 m) deep 
and generally a lot deeper than this. All that water makes up more than 99 percent of the 
world’s habitable space where life can persist. Nevertheless, the oceans are barren 
compared to land, harboring only an estimated 15 percent of the planet’s species. Even 
so, the oceans are very diverse, with a wider array of phyla represented despite fewer 
total species than on land.
 Despite the apparent simplicity of their lifestyle, plankton are by no means a ubiquitous 
feature of the oceans. They are not spread evenly, either geographically or by depth. 
Researchers still have much to learn about why plankton communities thrive in some places 
but not others. Such knowledge will be crucial in a world subject to climate change and 
ecological damage.56 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
FORCES AT WORK
RIGHT | A bloom of moon jellyfish (Aurelia aurita).
Plankton all share one ability: they stay afloat. This may be an 
intrinsic fact based purely on the size of the organism. Other 
plankton are adapted to this floating lifestyle, with simple 
features like gas vacuoles inside the cell body that act as tiny life 
preservers to reduce the density of the whole cell to below that 
of the surrounding seawater. Larger plankton have entire gas 
bladders or air bags that do the same job, while less clean-cut 
adaptations rely on strings of mucus splaying though the water 
to spread the weight and reduce the effects of gravity. Others 
are suspended by active swimming. They will sink when they 
don’t swim, so swim they must just to stay where they are.
Archimedes did not have a working knowledge of plankton, 
nor as far as we can tell did he care much for marine biology, 
but he was the first to articulate the way forces work to create 
floating and sinking. All plankton have a weight and this all 
adds up. It is estimated that the cumulative mass of the world’s 
cyanobacteria alone is about a billion tons. But a single bacteria 
cell has a negligible weight of one picogram—or a trillionth of 
a gram. In life plankton do not sink, but once dead they cannot 
counter gravity and down they must go.
Sinking and floating is all down to the size of the buoyant 
force, which is the push of all the surrounding water molecules. 
Archimedes might have put it in these terms: A plankton 
displaces its volume in water, and if it weighs less than that 
volume of water, it will float. This is because the force of gravity 
on the plankton is weaker than the buoyant force. If it is 
considerably weaker, then the plankton will rise to the surface. 
(It could even float off into the air if released from the water’s 
surface tension by wind-blown sprays. Like balloons, 
aeroplankton float in the air due to the buoyant force of the 
surrounding gases.) A more general case is that plankton are 
close to the density of water, being largely composed of water, 
so they achieve a neutral buoyancy, more or less staying at the 
same depth until the water is churned by waves and currents. 5758 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
to expand in diversity and sheer quantity. Mesoplankton is 
still dominated by animals, like the previous groupings, and 
this time includes the planktonic larval forms of nektonic 
animals. (Nekton refers to sea animals that can swim and 
move independently of the currents.) On top of that, the 
list is filled with many of the biggest hitters of the zooplankton 
community, such as the copepods, arrow worms, and 
water fleas. 
Smaller still are the microplankton, which occupy a size 
between 20 and 200 micrometers (µm, or a millionth of a 
meter). At this size, the single-celled protists begin to appear, 
including organisms like ciliates and foraminifera. There are 
also tiny animals, such as rotifers and the numerous larvae of 
copepods. Next come the nanoplankton, which are between 
Sizing up
Buoyancy is obviously not a function of size, but the vast 
majority of plankton are small organisms. It is perhaps 
instructive that megaplankton, the biggest subset, refers 
to anything over 8 in (20 cm) wide. This group is dominated 
by the jellyfish but also includes less common creatures 
like the salps and other free-floating tunicates. Less than 
8 in (20 cm) wide but larger than 3/4 in (2 cm) are the 
macroplankton, which again are visible to the naked eye—
if, that is, you can get a good enough look in the water. This 
group includes the larger crustaceans, like shrimp and krill, 
plus some comb jellies.
Below 3/4 in (2 cm), we enter the domain of the 
mesoplankton. This is where the community really starts 59
OPPOSITE | Floating colonies of ciliate protozoa, 
a species of Stantor, showing the gas bubbles used 
to lift colonies.
LEFT | A chain of Anabaena cyanobacteria. The slightly 
larger and darker cells are heterocysts, which convert 
nitrogen from the water into nitrate. 
BELOW | A diagram showing the relative sizes 
of plankton.
2 and 20 µm. This size group is dominated by the protists. 
There are no animals this small and bacteria are smaller still. 
Bacteria occupy the picoplankton group, which are smaller 
than 2 µm. Despite their tiny stature, the members of this 
group, dominated as they are by cyanobacteria, play a major 
role in the ecology of the oceans and the planet as a whole. 
Additionally, bacteria are the only kind of planktonic 
organisms found consistently at all depths (although in 
diminishing concentrations). Plankton does not end with 
bacteria, however. The femtoplankton contains marine 
viruses, which are only a fraction of a micrometer in length. 
As discussed in Chapter 1, viruses are biologically active agents 
that have a major ecological impact on marine life, but they are 
not really living things in the accepted sense (see page 34).
Plankton size categories
Megaplankton (8–78¾ in/20–200 cm)
Macroplankton (¾–8 in/2–20 cm)
Mesoplankton (0.007–¾ in/0.2–20 mm)
Microplankton (0.0008–0.008 in/ 
20–200 µm)
Nanoplankton (0.00004–
0.0008 in /2–20 µm)
Picoplankton 
(0.2–2 µm)
Net plankton60 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
VERTICAL ZONES 
The living conditions in the ocean are by no means uniform, 
varying according to depth, latitude, and numerous other 
factors. In most places, life in the ocean is hard, but wherever 
one looks, there will be some plankton. The surface layers of 
the ocean are bathed in sunlight by day, and in certain places 
visibly teem with life. But with depth comes darkness, cold, 
and a rapid increase in water pressure that would kill an 
unprotected human diver still within view of the surface. Due 
to the variables, oceanographers divide the oceans into zones 
based on depth. The defining factors for these ocean zones are 
firstly light and, secondly, the location and topography of the 
seafloor beneath. 
The sunlit zone
The upper layer of sea is the euphotic zone, better understood 
as the sunlit zone. As one might expect, this upper zone is 
bathed in sunlight by day. However, light and water do not mix 
well. At most, the brightness of the sun beams will be reduced 
to 1 percent of their original intensity by a depth of 650 ft 
(200 m), and that is in the clearest waters. In turbid waters 
churned up with sediment, the light barely makes it 33 ft 
(10 m) down. 
The euphotic zone is where all the action is. An approximate 
90 percent of all marine life lives here. It is impossible for 
phytoplankton, those organisms that rely on photosynthesis 
as their primary source of nutrition, to live in any other part 
of the water column for long periods. Zooplankton and sea 
animals in general flock to this zone to join the food chain 
that starts with those phytoplankton. 
Into the gloom: the twilight zone
Below the sunlit waters, deeper than 650 ft (200 m), we 
enter the dysphotic zone, again perhaps better termed as 
the twilight zone. Here light arrives from the surface but not 
strongly enough to be used for photosynthesis and it never 
gets above a deep gloom. Nevertheless, the twilight zone is 
something of a haven for animal life, including many of the 
biggest shoals and swarms of zooplankton. 
The dark zone provides a refuge for the zooplankton, mostly 
in the mesoplankton groups, and also many nektonic species, 
from where they launch assaults on the communities of 
phytoplankton and zooplankton in the euphotic zone. This 
results in the largest mass movement of life on the planet, 
OPPOSITE | Tropical fish, including the Bengal snapper 
(Lutjanus bengalensis) and bannerfish (Heniochus 
diphreutes) dive toward a coral reef in order to 
avoid predators, North Ari Atoll, the Maldives, in 
the Indian Ocean.
RIGHT | The oceanic zones are delineated by the 
light environment.
Euphotic zone
Dysphotic zone
Aphotic zone
Ocean light zones6162 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
known as the diel (or diurnal) vertical migration (DVM). 
Chapter 4 gives a more in-depth look at the DVM (see page 
134), but in a nutshell, zooplankton lurk in the twilight zone 
until the sun sets at the surface, thus plunging the euphotic 
zone into darkness. Under the cover of this darkness, the 
zooplankton, such as copepods and krill, rise up to feed on 
the phytoplankton. They cannot risk foraging by day lest they 
are targeted by visual predators in the euphotic zone. 
Fish and a host of other marine animals follow the night￾time marauders up to the surface. (Lanternfish famously have 
their own lights to guide them as they feast in vast night-time 
shoals). By contrast, a few other zooplankton head to deeper 
waters at night to get away from this upsurge of predatory 
activity. They will swim back to the light come morning. In 
those species that show reverse DVM, this may allow them to 
avoid the predators that are following the DVM of their prey.Into the midnight zone
No light ever reaches below about 3,200 ft (1,000 m). 
From here the water is in the aphotic zone, more commonly 
described as the midnight zone. It is completely dark 24 hours 
a day, no matter what the sunlight conditions at the surface. 
This zone continues all the way to the seabed. Life has thinned 
out somewhat in these dark waters, but it is still there. In 
OPPOSITE | This dorsal (top-down) view of a copepod shows 
the antennae on the head are covered in setae. These hair-like 
structures are used to detect the tiniest motions of prey in the 
water, and help them forage.
terms of plankton, the ecology of the midnight zone limits 
them. Many have arrived here by mistake, churned in surface 
water by storm winds and ocean currents, and doomed never 
to get back to the surface. As such, these plankton become 
part of the marine snow (see page 100), which is a perpetual 
shower of organic—and mostly dead—material that sinks 
from the more productive zones nearer the surface. It is the 
ultimate source of nutrients for most of the food chains that 
exist in the deep ocean and on the seafloor.
BELOW | Bolinopsis infundibulum comb jelly 
in the twilight zone.64 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS65
EVADING DETECTION
Marine life uses a variety of tricks to evade capture by 
predators, whether this is the countershading displayed by 
dolphins and penguins, the reflective scales of fish, or being 
transparent, as is the case for some plankton. 
These clever tricks make use of the optical properties 
of water, which are quite distinct from those of air. This 
distinction has a profound effect on the vision of marine 
creatures, especially the oceanic ones, which spend their days 
in the endless vastness of deep, open oceans. That in turn 
impacts the strategies used by marine life, including plankton, 
to stay out of sight. 
The difference is clear
One way to experience the different visual ecology of water for 
oneself is to dive a few meters under clear water on a sunny 
day and take a look at Snell’s Window. This is a bright patch 
on the surface above you. You can see through it and make out 
features above the water, although the full 180-degree field 
of view is compressed and distorted into just over 90 degrees. 
It is not something human eyes are good at interpreting, but 
this is all that marine life can ever see from below the surface. 
Snell’s Window is a product of refraction, and is named for 
the Dutch Renaissance astronomer who described the way 
refraction works. Refraction alters the direction of light beams 
as they move from one transparent medium to another, such 
as from air to water. The refractive properties of water focus all 
light that gets through from the air into this narrow window. 
The end result is that wherever you look up at the surface, you 
see an opaquely illuminated boundary, not a detailed image of 
what lies beyond. Look down, and there is no source of light, 
only a descending darkness. 
One obvious product of this marine light environment is 
the countershading that is a feature of many big sea creatures, 
from dolphins and whales to sharks and penguins. The idea is 
that the top of the body is dark and this transitions to a paler 
underside. When viewed from above, the dark surface blends 
in with the darkness emanating from the deep. Seen from 
below, the pale underbelly is hard to make out against a 
background of bright light entering Snell’s Window. In smaller 
creatures like plankton, this shading may be reversed, as is the 
case with the violet sea snail (Janthina janthina; see page 80), 
which hangs upside down from the surface of the water and so 
has a shell that is paler on top and a bluish purple underneath.
Big blue
The major factor for smaller animals is that water is blue. This is 
the color of the substance, just as table salt is white and charcoal 
is black, although the blueness of water is only apparent when 
observed in large quantities. Meanwhile, air is colorless (a blue 
sky is an optical effect, not the color of the gases). So in some 
senses, blue is more akin to the green in a forest. If an organism 
wants to blend in, that is the color it needs to be—little forest 
animals are more likely to be green for this reason. 
However, it does not quite work like this in water. A green 
tree frog appears that color because its skin reflects the green 
fraction of sunlight and absorbs the red and blue parts. In the 
ocean, the water has already absorbed the red and green light 
and is transmitting a little blue light, which illuminates the 
objects swimming or floating in it. To appear the same color 
as the water around it, an object must reflect all the light that 
hits it. This is why fish have mirror-like scales. The scales reflect 
the light between the fish and the observer, which is identical 
to the light coming from behind the fish. Thus, the fish 
disappears behind a cloak of invisibility. At least that is the 
plan, and for eyes that are attuned to pick out three colors 
like ours, it can work well. But fish themselves are less easily 
OPPOSITE ABOVE | An oceanic whitetip shark 
(Carcharhinus longimanus) in the Red Sea, seen 
swimming below Snell’s Window.
OPPOSITE BELOW LEFT | A flock of king penguins 
(Aptenodytes patagonicus) reveal their countershaded 
bodies while swimming off Macquarie Island, 
near Antarctica.
OPPOSITE BELOW RIGHT | The mirror scales of these 
fusiliers, Caesio lunaris, make them hard to see in the 
blue waters of Palau, in Micronesia.66 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
fooled. They have dichromatic vision, which is tuned to 
visualizing shapes against the background of water. Fish that 
hunt by sight, such as sardines or anchovies, scan the water 
for the shapes of zooplankton. 
To minimize detection, therefore, many zooplankton 
species, including copepods, use a simple trick: the best way to 
stay unseen in water is to have a largely transparent body. The 
elaborate colorings used for camouflage on land are of no use 
here. So the light passes straight through the plankton, leaving 
no tell-tale silhouette that can be spotted by predatory fish. 
The internal structures of the plankton, its digestive tract 
especially, will show up but offer less of a target for predators. 
Of course, as with all biological adaptation, adopting 
transparency involves a trade-off. Pigments are inherently 
useful in that they absorb the nasty, high-energy rays of 
ultraviolet light, which could otherwise disrupt the cell 
chemistry of plankton. In lakes where fish predators are less 
of a threat, plankton are more pigmented for this very reason.
Staying alive
Inevitably plankton cannot evade detection forever. Therefore 
they have a last line of defense. This may be an escape response 
where zooplankton flick an appendage to dart off in a random 
direction at high speed. Copepods make impressive “jumps” by 
delivering determined strokes with their cephalic appendages, 
the limb-like body parts on the head. This provides acceleration 
through the water of 500 body lengths per second, exceeding 
the equivalent acceleration of an F16 fighter jet. 
Another strategy to avoid being eaten is to grow a lot of 
protective jelly. Both phytoplankton and zooplankton of 
various kinds have developed gelatinous bodies. It allows them 
to grow to a large size very quickly and without expending too 
many resources. Predators tend to view the ball of jelly as a 
less-than-perfect meal. 
RIGHT | The bioluminescence from a dinoflagellate bloom 
lights up the water in spectacular fashion along the 
beach at Jervis Bay, in Australia (right) and the Maldives 
(far right).67
Bioluminescence
In the dark oceans, organisms make their own light in a 
process called bioluminescence. Many types of plankton 
do this, from bacteria and dinoflagellates to jellyfish. Why 
plankton bioluminesce is not always clear. It may be that 
the light is a signal to other members of the species to 
attract mates or even communicate in more advanced 
ways. In turn, the light may be a trick, designed to fool 
prey into thinking they are seeing friendly relatives but 
instead drawing them closer to their foe. Bioluminescence 
creates a cold light, which means no other energy, such 
as heat, is emitted with it. The light is produced by a 
chemical process. The color is not chemical but structural, 
which means the different hues are produced by the way 
the same chemicals (known as luciferins) are arranged in 
the light-emitting organs.SEAFLOOR PROFILE
As well as depth, plankton communities are also affected by 
the undersea topography, the ups and mostly downs of the 
seabed. Areas of oceans near the coast are called neritic, while 
farther out from land the waters are described as oceanic. 
Neritic waters are mostly shallow because they overlay a 
continental shelf. 
Continental shelves
A continental shelf is the lower lip of a landmass, the part of 
the continental crust that is below sea level. The water here is 
only a few tens of meters deep and so is, in effect, completely 
contained within the euphotic zone. 
Continental slopes
Eventually, the shelf gives way to a steep drop called a 
continental slope, which plunges thousands of meters to 
the deep seafloor. This marks the transition from the thick 
continental crust to the thinner and lower-lying oceanic crust. 
The continental slopes form the walls around the vast oceanic 
basins, which hold Earth’s surface water. Beyond the slope the 
waters are oceanic. 
Continental rises
The continental slope meets a continental rise, a less steep 
slope that descends more gently to the abyssal plain. The 
continental rise is built from materials that flow over the 
rim of the continental shelf, including gargantuan undersea 
mudslides that can create tsunamis. All the debris piles 
up at the base, forming a transitional zone between the 
physical materials and the chemical signatures derived 
from the continental crust and those made from the oceanic 
crust beyond.
Abyssal plains
An abyssal plain is well named. Compared to land it is mainly 
flat, with areas of low hills. It is also largely empty of life, with 
barely 1/8 oz (4 g) of living material for every square meter. 
(Although, interestingly, that doubles on the abyssal hills.) 
Compare that with the biomass density of 3/4 oz (20 g) per 
square meter in a desert or 88 lb (40 kg) in a rainforest.69
OPPOSITE | A deep submarine canyon 
plunges through the continental shelf just 
off the shore of Monterey, California. 
This connection to deep water means 
this area of sea is full of life.
Ocean zones 
The oceanic waters above the abyssal plain are divided into 
zones that correspond to the seafloor topography. The 
epipelagic region corresponds with the euphotic zone. The 
dysphotic waters are the mesopelagic region. Below this 
we enter the aphotic zone. The open waters down to the 
depth of the bottom of the continental slope or thereabouts 
are described as bathypelagic. Below this depth the water 
is uniformly cold. It is at its densest around 39°F (4°C), 
and water of this temperature accumulates below around 
13,000 ft (4,000 m) down, creating an eerily still layer known 
as the abyssopelagic realm. However, the ocean does not end 
there. There is deeper water still. 
ABOVE | A diagram outlining 
the profile of the seafloor 
as it extends out and down 
from the coast, as well as the 
zones of water above.
High water
Pelagic
Neritic Oceanic
Photic Dysphotic Aphotic
Epipelagic
656 ft (200 m)
Mesopelagic
2,300–3,280 ft (700–1,000 m)
Bathypelagic
6,560–13,000 ft (2,000–4,000 m)
Abyssopelagic
19,670 ft 
(6,000 m)
Hadalpelagic
32,800 ft 
(10,000 m)
50o
F (10o
C)
39o
F (4o
C)
Benthic
Bathyal
Abyssal
Hadal
Sublittoral
Littoral
Low water
Ocean depth zones70 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS71
OPPOSITE ABOVE | The Deep Discoverer ROV (remotely 
operated vehicle) investigates a deep-sea coral habitat 
on the Retriever Seamount.
OPPOSITE BELOW | The heat and minerals expelled by 
the hydrothermal vent on the floor of the mid-Atlantic 
provide energy and nutrients for a community of animals 
to survive around it.
LEFT | A computer model of the topography of the region 
surrounding the Mariana Trench (seen as a purple arc). 
The Pacific Ocean trench is the deepest point on Earth.
Ocean trenches and seamount
Volcanic regions on the seafloor appear either where the crust 
is breaking apart and spreading as new rock is formed, or one 
section of crust is being slowly destroyed as it is pushed under 
by another into the seething magma from whence it came. In 
the latter situation, the seafloor is dragged down into deep 
ocean trenches, the deepest being the Mariana Trench in the 
western Pacific—there the seafloor is more than 7 miles (11 km) 
down. However, there are still plankton in these trenches, 
in what is called the hadal zone. These plankton are mostly 
chemotrophic bacteria, which sustain themselves with nutrient 
chemicals that would not register as food for most life-forms.
Hydrothermal vents
In volcanic regions of the seafloor, the crust is very thin and 
the heat of the Earth’s interior is close to the surface. Of 
course, this can lead to eruptions of lava that build new 
seafloor or undersea volcanoes, known as seamounts, but the 
heat energy also reaches the surface via hydrothermal vents. 
These are essentially hot springs on the seabed. Cold seawater 
percolates down into the deep rocks, where it is superheated 
by the magma below. The superheating, which sees the water 
remain liquid but far exceed its normal boiling temperature, 
allows numerous minerals to dissolve, which would ordinarily 
stay locked in the rocks. As the hot water, which can reach 
temperatures of 750°F (400°C) or more, emerges through 
a vent at the surface, it is chilled instantly. (The water at the 
seabed is generally 39°F/4°C.) 
The sudden cold makes the dissolved minerals come out of 
solution and form a smoke-like precipitate that plumes into 
the surrounding water. These minerals include sulfates, iron, 
and nitrogen chemicals, and these are used as a source of 
energy and nutrition by bacteria in the water around the vents. 
These bacteria are known as chemotrophs, and in essence 
they “eat” inorganic chemicals. In the absence of light and 
phytoplankton around the deep-sea vents, the chemotrophic 
plankton is the basis for the food chain. It is sifted from the 
water by a host of strange creatures which tolerate the soup￾warm waters close to the vents. They include the yeti crab 
(genus Kiwa), which is covered in bristles. The crab does 
not hunt. Instead, it waves its bristled pincers in the water, 
encouraging planktonic bacteria to grow there in mats. The 
crab then slurps up this homegrown food from its own pincers.72 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
FOLLOW THE NUTRIENTS
Mapping the presence of plankton—and its absence—is an 
excellent way of tracking the motion of nutrients through the 
water. The neritic zones are more full of life than the sunlit 
oceanic waters. It is no coincidence that more plankton blooms 
occur in these areas, and that most of the world’s fisheries are 
based here. The reason is broadly that the shallower seas have 
a ready supply of nutrients washing into the water off the land.
These nutrients include nitrates, phosphates, and minerals 
like iron, which are essential for the growth of phytoplankton, 
and in turn the zooplankton communities that rely on them 
for survival. The sediments floating in the neritic waters 
and on the seabed of the continental shelf have a particular 
chemical signature, with minerals present in specific 
proportions. This material is slowly but consistently shed down 
the continental slope, where the minerals end up on the cold 
deep seafloor, not up in the warmer euphotic zone where life 
needs it to thrive. 
Epipelagic waters have a different nutrient balance to 
coastal waters. The minerals coming from the land do not 
reach here easily. The nutrient supply there is used up quite 
rapidly, in a matter of a few weeks, as the phytoplankton 
bloom in spring, or another growing season. Then the growth 
rate drops off as the nitrates and other essential ingredients of 
life run out. For activity to continue, there needs to be a degree 
of mixing between the impoverished but sunlit surface waters 
and the dark, cold, and nutrient-rich waters deeper down.
Mixing layers
Despite the swell and choppiness seen on the ocean surface, 
the waters beneath are perhaps surprisingly still. Deeper 
waters hold more chemical nutrients so any influx of deep 
water will replenish the surface waters.
There are various mechanisms for mixing. An obvious 
example is seasonal storms and winds that churn up the water. 
This effect is most marked at high latitudes. After the spring 
growth spurt, the phytoplankton population begins to 
dwindle, and it is the turn of the zooplankton to multiply. Fall 
storms begin to mix up the deeper layers of water, and there 
may be a second surge in phytoplankton before the daylength 
eventually shortens. This mixing process continues through 
winter, and come spring the epipelagic waters are renewed.
In warmer latitudes plankton growth is not limited by 
changes in daylength but struggles due to a lack of minerals. 
There are few winds and storms to mix things up, and the 
water settles into strongly defined layers of warm water on 
top and colder water below. As a result, tropical seas lack the 
nutrients of colder seas to the north and south. Despite having 
the perfect, sunny climate for growth, tropical seas have a 
lower abundance of plankton compared to the storm-tossed 
waters north and south.
RIGHT | The surface of the ocean, and the plankton 
in it, is seldom still for long. 
OPPOSITE | The deep blue waters of the tropical 
oceans—here around the Bahamas archipelago, 
in the Caribbean—are surprisingly empty of life.73
HNLCs
A quick method for measuring the quantity 
of phytoplankton in water, and to gain an 
understanding of the abundance of plankton in 
general, is to look at the amount of chlorophyll 
in the water. It makes sense that areas without 
essential nutrients will also have low chlorophyll 
figures. However, researchers find that there are 
high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll areas, or HNLCs. 
The plankton present there are nanoplanktonic 
bacteria rather than larger algae. HNLCs cover 
about a fifth of the world’s surface waters, mostly 
in the equatorial Pacific and Southern Ocean. 
There are two possible reasons for HNLCs. The 
first proposes that despite there being plentiful 
nitrogen and other macronutrients, the waters 
lack iron in a form that plankton can exploit. Iron 
is readily available in neritic waters, but oceanic 
seas rely on it being delivered by dust storms that 
blow off the land far out to sea. HNLCs, so the 
theory goes, seldom receive their dose of iron 
and this dearth stunts phytoplankton growth. 
Experiments that add iron to these waters have 
demonstrated that phytoplankton abundance 
goes up, but is then limited by the supply of other 
macronutrients, as is seen elsewhere. The second 
hypothesis is that phytoplankton in HNLCs, 
especially diatoms and other photosynthetic 
protists, are limited by grazing pressure. 
Zooplankton lurking in the dysphotic zone are 
like goats on a barren hillside. Each night they 
come to the surface and crop back all available 
food to its minimum levels.74 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
OCEAN CURRENTS
The motion of seawater is driven by long-term ocean currents 
that work together to slowly mix all the oceans’ waters. Some 
of the most fertile oceans, such as along the Pacific coast of 
South America or around the southern capes of Africa, owe 
their great abundance to cold, nutrient-rich currents. 
The motion of the ocean’s currents is driven by the prevailing 
winds and by the rotation of the Earth, but the flow of water is 
also from a system of thermohaline circulation. This is to do 
with the temperature and salinity, or saltiness, of the water. As 
this is a global phenomenon, it is best to start in polar waters, 
where the seawater freezes into ice. The remaining water 
inherits the salt of the frozen water and so its salinity rises. 
As water becomes more saline, its density increases and so 
this polar water sinks toward the sea floor. There, the cold 
water starts to flow (very slowly) through the deep ocean 
toward the equator, bringing nutrients with it. In tropical 
regions, waters are warm and low in salt, creating a surface 
layer that floats on top of the colder, denser, salty layer below. 
The low-saline waters spread toward the poles, drawn by a 
current created by the sinking waters around the ice sheets. 
In turn, the movement at the surface draws up water from the 
deep. There are major upwellings like this in the Indian and 
Pacific Oceans and around Antarctica. The rising water is the 
ultimate driver of ocean mixing, bringing nutrients locked 
away in the deep up to the surface. Where there are upwellings, 
there will also be plankton.
Cold water
Warm water
Arctic Ocean
Atlantic 
Ocean
Indian Ocean
Heat 
released 
to air
Deep, cold, and saline current
Heat 
released 
to air
Heat 
released 
to air
Thermohaline 
circulation
Shallow, 
warm current
Southern Ocean75
Upwellings
On a smaller, more local scale, upwellings occur 
around many ocean islands and undersea mountains, 
or seamounts. The seafloor currents are forced up these 
geographical obstacles, bringing a cold soup of nutrients 
nearer to the surface. Upwellings also form where wind 
blows away from land or parallel to the shore. This 
displaces the surface waters and draws up deeper waters. 
In the case of seamounts, the submerged peak acts as an 
oasis in the otherwise deserted ocean. The upwelling feeds 
plankton and other wildlife on one side and at the summit. 
The waters around leeward slopes are less productive.
OPPOSITE | The thermohaline circulation, or global 
conveyor belt, is a slow but steady driver of the motion 
of water through the global ocean.
ABOVE | A diagram showing a localized upwelling 
driven by winds. 
ABOVE RIGHT | A fin whale (Balaenoptera physalus) lunge￾feeding, with its mouth open and throat pouch distended, 
in the southern Sea of Cortez, off Baja California. 
RIGHT | A bronze whaler shark (Carcharhinus brachyurus) 
swims through a sardine bait ball during the Sardine Run 
off the east coast of South Africa.
North
Coastline
Wind
Upwelling
Seafloor
South76 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
The Ornithocercus genus of planktonic dinoflagellates is known 
for the striking appearance of its members. This is especially 
apparent when viewed with a scanning electron microscope, 
which imparts a 3D view of the protists. The genus belongs to 
the thecate dinoflagellates, meaning they have an outer casing 
made from 17 or 18 overlapping plates of cellulose. This is 
the same structural material as that used in the cell walls of 
terrestrial plants, but unlike plant cells, the cellulose plates are 
inside the dinoflagellate’s cell membrane, not surrounding it. 
The species shown here is Ornithocercus magnificus, the 
first of the genus to be described back in the 1880s. It is 
found in warm tropical waters. The primary cellular feature 
distinguishing Ornithocercus from other members of the 
phylum is a ringed structure that appears as a collar around 
the top of the cell body. This is created by the upper valve, 
or section, of the casing, which is much reduced compared 
to the lower valve. 
Survivors of the deep 
Despite being characterized as phytoplankton, Ornithocercus
cells do not contain chloroplasts. Instead, they are obligate 
heterotrophs that absorb organic material through the cell 
membrane. As such, they can survive in deeper, darker, and 
more turbid water, where photosynthesis is not possible. 
However, the dinoflagellates are also very much part of the 
phytoplankton community in the euphotic zone of tropical 
seas, thanks to their symbiotic relationship with cyanobacteria. 
These photosynthetic bacteria are packed into the girdle region 
of the cell body. It is thought the symbionts benefit from the 
chemical conditions inside the host rather than floating freely 
in the water. When the host drops into darker waters, they 
can consume the passenger bacteria and replenish supplies 
on brighter days. 
Global spread 
Being very much a warm-water species, the presence of 
O. magnificus and other members of the genus is used by 
oceanographers and climate scientists as an indication of 
growing conditions. One hypothesis is that these plankton 
will spread to the north and south as the oceans are warmed 
by the climate. As O. magnificus appears in new areas of the 
oceans, that hypothesis appears to be true.
Dinoflagellate Ornithocercus magnificus
OPPOSITE | A scanning electron micrograph of an Ornithocercus 
magnificus dinoflagellate from the Mediterranean Sea, 
magnified 560 times.
FAMILY: Dinophysaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Warm ocean water
FEEDING HABITS: Heterotroph
NOTES: Hosts symbiotic cyanobacteria.
SIZE: 0.004 in (100 µm)78 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
Gloeotrichia is a genus of single-celled, photosynthetic 
organisms belonging to the cyanophycean class of bacteria. 
They are mostly lacustrine, or lake-bound, plankton and thrive 
in clear and cold water. They are seen as filamentous colonies 
that float in the water, mostly on or close to the surface. These 
planktonic colonies can swell to 0.08 in (2 mm) across and 
contain millions of cells. The cells attach to each other by 
forming a blob-like mucus envelope with numerous hair-like 
filaments or palisades. The colonies are thought to form slimy 
mats on rocks and stones on lakebeds, where there are plenty 
of nutrients. Then gas vesicles inside the colony are used to 
bring it up to the surface where the light is more intense. 
Freshwater inhabitants 
Gloeotrichia have been studied in many environmental and 
research projects as they are often the dominant bacterial 
species in a given freshwater habitat. They are of interest for 
understanding nutrient cycling in freshwater systems, being 
especially involved in the way nitrogen, iron, and phosphorous 
compounds move through these habitats. It is suspected that 
these bacteria are in fact meroplanktonic and only spend a 
portion of the year floating in the water. The rest of the time, 
in winter mostly, they lie dormant in the sediment.
The freshwater cyanobacteria can also be toxic and can 
become a danger in summer when they bloom, turning lakes a 
distinct blue-green color. The bacteria need to be monitored on 
public health grounds, lest they impact lake users or get into 
treated drinking water supplies. Blooms of lacustrine plankton 
such as this are associated with a process called eutrophication 
(see page 189). This is where nutrients meant for terrestrial 
crops, or from wastewaters, are washed into watersheds and 
accumulate in lakes. There these chemical fertilizers stimulate 
the growth of lake plankton, disrupting the natural balance 
of the ecosystem. The bloom of phytoplankton at the surface 
stops light, heat, and oxygen reaching lower levels of the 
water column.
Cyanobacteria Gloeotrichia echinulata 
OPPOSITE | A light micrograph of Gloeotrichia echinulata as 
part of the lacustrine plankton.
FAMILY: Gloeotrichiaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Freshwater lakes
FEEDING HABITS: Photosynthetic
NOTES: Can be harmful to humans and other animals.
SIZE: Colonies are 0.08 in (2 mm) wide80 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
The snails belong to a group of mollusks called gastropods. The 
violet sea snail, also known as the purple bubble raft snail, has 
a shell and muscular foot in keeping with its kin, but it is not 
like other snails. The shell is light and flimsy and provides little 
of the protection afforded by that of its relatives living on land 
or on the seabed. This is because instead of sliding slowly but 
surely over a solid substrate, the violet sea snail clings to the 
underside of the ocean’s surface. Its foot is especially slimy, 
with bubbles of thick mucus that form a collection of buoyancy 
aids to prevent the mollusk from sinking. Animals that float at 
the surface of the water form a special plankton community 
called the neuston (and the term pleuston is also used).
The snail’s mucus contains the same chemicals deployed by 
marine snails and other mollusks to make floating egg rafts. 
The larvae that hatch from these floating eggs are called 
veligers and are generally small enough to be planktonic 
for this early stage of development. A thin, skin-like shell 
surrounds the body of the larvae, which thickens as the 
mollusk grows and inevitably sinks to the seafloor. 
In Janthina janthina, in contrast, the eggs are not left to 
float freely but are instead retained by the mother (herself 
already floating) until the veligers hatch. This species is 
an active feeder and uses a tongue-like radula to graze on 
microscopic hydrozoans floating at the surface. The snail’s 
favored foods are the medusae of Velella velella, or sea rafts.
Hermaphroditic advantage 
Violet sea snails, which are confined to warmer waters but 
nevertheless found floating the world over, are sequential 
hermaphrodites. In this case, that means younger adults are 
male and then become female as they age. This ordering allows 
the older, bigger snails to maximize the production of eggs, 
which can be fertilized by the essentially unlimited supply 
of sperm from the smaller males.
Countershading 
The sea snail’s paper-thin, globular shell is there primarily for 
camouflage by providing a reverse countershading to help it 
hide from predators. The top of the shell is pale and the lower 
parts are darker and tinged with bluish purple (hence the 
name). Normally these colors are seen the other way around, 
pale underneath and darker on top, but violet sea snails spend 
their lives hanging upside down. 
Violet sea snail Janthina janthina
OPPOSITE | A violet sea snail (Janthina janthina) hangs upside 
down from the sea surface suspended by a raft of mucus￾coated bubbles secreted by the foot.
FAMILY: Epitoniidae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Tropical and subtropical oceans
FEEDING HABITS: Preys on jellyfish
NOTES: Uses air from above the water to fill its bubbles.
SIZE: 11/2 in (4 cm)82 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
Salps are barrel-shaped, planktonic tunicates, and that means 
they are more closely related to us than to any jellyfish or many 
other forms of plankton. If that were not enough, they are 
a fascinating group of animals in other ways. They are one of 
the most efficient swimmers in the animal kingdom and have a 
complex life cycle. Salps are found in all the world’s oceans, and 
they are most abundant in temperate and tropical waters. They 
range in size from a few millimeters to several meters long. 
The salp shown here, Pegea confoederata, is one of the 
larger species. Salps are filter feeders and consume the smaller 
plankton and other food particles in the water around them. 
The salp feeding mechanism is also tied up with the animal’s 
unusual method of locomotion. The salp contracts its body to 
pump water through a gel-filled body cavity. This creates a jet 
of water that propels the salp forward. For plankton, salps are 
high-speed swimmers, with some reaching speeds of 330 ft 
(100 m) per hour.
Salps are an important part of the marine food web, 
providing food for fish, whales, and seabirds. Salp biomass 
makes up a significant proportion of the marine snow that 
sinks to deeper ocean zones. As such, salp abundance is a good 
way of monitoring the quantity of material that is entering 
long-term carbon sinks as part of the biological pump (see 
page 101).
Growing chains 
Salps have a complex life cycle, reproducing both sexually 
and asexually. In the sexual phase, two salps release eggs and 
sperm into the water. The eggs are fertilized and the resulting 
larvae develop into juvenile salps. The juvenile salps then 
undergo a process called blastogenesis, in which they divide 
repeatedly to form a chain of daughters. The chain of salps 
can contain hundreds or even thousands of these cloned units.
As the chain of salp grows, the older individuals at the front 
of the chain eventually die. The remaining salps then break 
off from the chain and form new chains. This process of chain 
formation and breakage continues throughout the life of the 
salp. In ideal conditions, the salps will form swarms containing 
thousands of chain organisms, always lengthening, then 
dividing, and so on. It is said they can multiply as fast as 
any microorganism.
Salp Pegea confoederata
OPPOSITE | A group of salps, here Pegea confoederata, hangs 
in the surface waters off San Diego, California.
FAMILY: Salpidae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: All 
FEEDING HABITS: Filter feeder
NOTES: Small fish swim inside the salp to escape predators.
SIZE: 12 in (30 cm)84 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
As the name suggests, Cubozoa jellyfish have a boxy body, and 
are often called box jellyfish. That name is mostly associated 
with the species shown here, Chironex fleckeri from the 
Indo-Pacific, which can strike fear into tourists enjoying 
the warm, clear tropical waters in paradises across the South 
Seas. The jellyfish’s more targeted common name is sea wasp, 
which raises the alarm a little more but perhaps not enough. 
C. fleckeri is highly venomous; some say “the most lethal 
jellyfish in the world”—and by extension the deadliest 
plankton, too. At least 64 people have died from sea wasp 
stings in Australia alone since 1884. Being almost completely 
see-through when immersed in water, the creature is nearly 
impossible to spot and poses a significant threat to swimmers. 
They are most common near shore in the summer months.
A nasty sting 
The venom of C. fleckeri is a complex mixture of proteins that 
can cause a variety of symptoms, the most apparent being 
extreme pain. As well as nausea, vomiting, muscle cramps, and 
paralysis, the venom creates a surge of potassium in the blood 
and this is the real danger in that it can cause a sudden and 
fatal cardiac arrest. Death can come in seconds, but in a great 
many cases of sea wasp stings it does not come at all. The best 
course of treatment is to call for help and then irrigate the 
stings with vinegar. The acid shuts down the action of the 
stinger cells (but does not neutralize the venom’s toxins), then 
gently brush away tentacles on the skin (a credit card is a good 
tool, or use tweezers).
Trailing tentacles 
C. fleckeri is the largest of the box jellyfish. Its bell usually 
reaches about 61/2 in (16 cm) in diameter but can grow up to 
14 in (35 cm). A set of 15 tentacles trails from each of the four 
corners of the pale blue bell. (There are faint white markings 
on the largely transparent body as well. When viewed from 
certain angles these give a hint of a human skull, at least to the 
pattern-hungry human eye.) When the jellyfish is on the move, 
the tentacles contract to about 6 in (15 cm) in length and 
thicken to 3/16 in (5 mm) across. When the animal is ready 
to feed, it relaxes the tentacles, unfurling a web of stingers 
that trails 10 ft (3 m) behind it. 
Sea wasp Chironex fleckeri
OPPOSITE | A deadly sea wasp (Chironex fleckeri) pictured off 
the coast of Northern Australia.
FAMILY: Chirodropidae
DISTRIBUTION: Indo-Pacific region
HABITAT: Warm surface waters
FEEDING HABITS: Active hunter of small fish
NOTES: Urinating on stings is an urban myth—it makes 
things worse.
SIZE: 61/2 in (16 cm) in diameter86 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
The Portuguese man-of-war is a creature of warm seas that 
sails the oceans, catching the wind with a sail-shaped float. 
The animal is named because the shape of the curved gas 
bladder that bobs along at the surface reminded sailors of yore 
of a fierce fighting ship approaching from the horizon. They 
were right to keep an eye on this bizarre animal, a colonial 
hydrozoan. It is one of the longest animals in the world. 
Trailing largely unseen in the waters below, its tentacles are 
100 ft (30 m) long, which makes this megaplankton about 
the length of the largest blue whales. Those long tentacles 
are venomous and can deliver a substantial and very painful 
sting. Fatal attacks on humans have been recorded, but they 
are very rare.
Living as a colony 
The Portuguese man-of-war is not actually a single animal but 
a colony of polyps and medusae called a siphonophore. Each 
member of the colony takes on a specific bodily function. At 
the top is the elongated, gas-filled bladder, or pneumatophore, 
which acts as a sail and a float. Below there are tentacles. 
These are mostly polyps called palpons, which are devoted to 
stinging prey using microscopic harpoon-like stingers delivered 
from cells called nematocysts. Prey for the man-of-war is 
mostly small fish, but it will eat whatever is paralyzed and 
killed by the stingers and is small enough to be hauled to the 
gastrozooids. These are polyps lacking in tentacles that are 
able to digest foods externally by secreting enzymes. 
The other structures in the colony develop from meduzoid 
forms, not polypoid like the rest, and these are involved in 
reproduction. One type is the gonophore which produces 
sex cells, either sperm or eggs depending on the sex of the 
colony—this is either male or female, not both at once. 
Another zooid called the nectophore has a locomotory 
function. It breaks off from the main colony along with the 
gonophores and mingles with those of other colonies. Breeding 
happens in the fall. A single larva buds off new clones that 
take up roles in the growing colony. Most of this development 
happens deep underwater. One of the last body parts to form 
is the pneumatophore, which is pumped up with carbon 
monoxide, and then the colony rises to the surface.
Portuguese man-of-war Physalia physalis
OPPOSITE | A Portuguese man-of-war (Physalia physalis) pictured 
above and below the water. The purple and pink coloration 
distinguishes this species.
FAMILY: Physaliidae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Warm seas
FEEDING HABITS: Fish
NOTES: Are left- or right-handed depending on how their 
sail curves.
SIZE: 100 ft (30 m)88 | LIFESTYLES AND ADAPTATIONS
The water fleas, the main component of the crustacean class 
Branchiopoda, are ubiquitous members of freshwater or 
brackish habitats. Nevertheless, they are able to withstand 
the salinity of marine habitats by pumping the excess salt out 
of their bodies. In coastal water fed by large rivers, water fleas 
can form a substantial fraction of the marine mesoplankon 
at certain times of year, most often late summer. They even 
swarm with densities reaching 100,000 individuals for every 
cubic meter.
At barely 0.04 in (1 mm) long, these rotund little creatures 
are busy swimming up and down in the water column, using 
a pair of feathery antennae as oars. Their other appendages, 
which include six legs, are used to catch prey. Most water fleas 
are active hunters, using their limbs to grab prey that is a few 
dozen micrometers across. The species shown here specializes 
in grazing on microplankton held in the surface film of water. 
Other water fleas are focused on even smaller food items, 
which they filter from the water.
Another striking feature of the water flea’s rounded body is 
the single large eye at the top of the body. This is a compound 
eye, which means it can pick up motion as well as differentiate 
light from dark. Water fleas use the eye to time their vertical 
migrations, heading down to avoid sunlight and up again when 
night falls. They use the darkness to feed in relative safety. If 
they spot an approaching predator, flicks of the spike-like tail 
are used to effect an escape.
Aphids of the ocean 
The common name for these animals, water fleas, is apt 
perhaps, but when it comes to their system of reproduction 
they could be better termed water aphids. These aquatic 
crustaceans have adopted a similar breeding system to 
the one used by the sap-sucking bugs that appear in large 
crowds almost overnight in gardens. To swell the population 
and exploit food sources in summer, water fleas use 
parthenogenesis. Here the female churns out large numbers 
of daughters without the need to mate with a male. The brood 
of eggs can be seen inside the specimen pictured here. Male 
offspring are only produced after several generations. The eggs 
produced by sexual means often enter a dormant phase and 
settle to the bottom of the ocean to sit out the winter months. 
Water flea Scapholeberis sp.
OPPOSITE | A light micrograph of a water flea (Scapholeberis
sp.), showing eggs inside.
FAMILY: Daphniidae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Freshwater
FEEDING HABITS: Graze on microplankton
NOTES: Has only one eye.
SIZE: 0.04 in (1 mm)FEED ING AND 
BREEDING
CHAPTER 3
This is a chapter of two parts which examine the two great divides that separate the world’s 
plankton communities. The first part looks at food and feeding and the other sex and 
breeding. The former is familiar already: The division between phytoplankton and 
zooplankton is founded on how these organisms procure the nutrients they need to build 
and maintain their bodies and the energy used to sustain life processes. The two main 
strategies are autotrophism and heterotrophism. The trophism suffix is rooted in the Greek 
word for nourishment. The prefixes, auto and hetero, are perhaps more familiar, meaning 
“self” and “other,” respectively. Phytoplankton are autotrophs, or literally “self-nourishers,” 
and zooplankton are heterotrophic, meaning they are “nourished by others.” In other 
words, zooplankton do not create food. Instead, they consume the bodies of other 
organisms—mostly those of phytoplankton.
The second division involves plankton reproduction and life cycles: holoplankton are 
permanent members of the plankton, while meroplankton are temporary members as the 
larvae of larger organisms such as fish, mollusks, sea urchins, starfish, and so on.92 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
As we have established, all phytoplankton are autotrophs 
and survive using a form of photosynthesis, a process that 
harnesses the power of the sun to build complex organic 
molecules from the simple materials found in water. This quite 
remarkable feat forms the starting point of all food chains 
(almost) in the oceans and on land, and is thus the source of 
food energy for all living things on the planet. On top of that, 
the photosynthetic labors of phytoplankton supply 50 percent 
of the atmosphere’s oxygen supply. (The other half comes from 
forest trees and other land plants.) Where would life on Earth 
be without it? An answer to that is provided by plankton, more 
of which later (see page 95). 
PHYTOPLANKTON AND AUTOTROPHISM
Fixing carbon
Phytoplankton are just one type of autotroph, specifically 
a photoautotroph. Obviously this refers to a reliance of 
light as the source of energy that drives the process. In basic 
terms that process is “fixing carbon,” which is a rather archaic 
description of how autotrophs build their carbon-rich organic 
chemicals, such as sugars and proteins, from inorganic sources 
of carbon, namely carbon dioxide. However, chemoautotrophs 
are also able to do this as well. Carbon dioxide is still the source 
of carbon but instead of sunlight, these organisms get the 
energy that drives the process from a chemical source. 93
OPPOSITE | Micrasterias are freshwater phytoplankton 
with an interesting bilateral symmetry. Two “semi-cells,” 
mirror images of each other, are joined by a narrow 
connection that contains the nucleus.
ABOVE LEFT | These deep-sea giant tube worms (Riftia 
pachyptila) live around hydrothermal vents. They get their 
nutrients from symbiotic bacteria that extract energy from 
minerals in the water.
ABOVE RIGHT | A light micrograph reveals a rotifer feeding 
on an alga, shown in green below the tiny animal. 
The bacteria in the waters around a hydrothermal vent 
are chemoautotrophs. They are able to thrive here because 
there is no light and little oxygen around, and therefore no 
phytoplankton competing for other resources. There is also 
a good supply of inorganic chemicals in the water, such as iron, 
sulfides, and ammonia. The bacteria use the reactive power 
of these chemicals to kickstart carbon fixation.94 | FEEDING AND BREEDING95
The Great Oxygenation Event
It was once the case that all autotrophic plankton were 
chemoautotrophs. Back then the biosphere was anaerobic. 
That meant there was no free oxygen in the water or in the air. 
As far as we know, all life was confined to the oceans in those 
early eons. The sun bathing the waters did not promote 
biological activity. Instead, it was largely a hazard delivering 
destructive beams of UV. 
However, around 3.5 billion years ago, a new form of life 
evolved that made use of the vast quantities of energy hitting 
the oceans day after day. These were the ancestors of today’s 
cyanobacteria. They were the first photoautotrophs, and they 
gradually transformed the Earth. The waste products of a 
chemosynthesis, the analog of photosynthesis, vary from 
hydrogen gas to particles of iron or sulfur. But photosynthesis 
takes light and uses it to combine carbon dioxide and water 
molecules into sugars like glucose. The waste product is always 
pure oxygen. 
While remarkable, this does not sound outlandish today. 
But as the photosynthetic process began, it certainly was. Free 
oxygen is a highly reactive substance; all fires use it to burn, 
after all. So to begin with, the oxygen reacted with whatever 
chemicals were around. Most notable was the oxidation of 
dissolved iron, forming an insoluble red iron oxide. This 
material settled on the seabed, and with a reduction in iron 
in the water, the activity of the plankton was reduced. The 
sediment changes to silicon-rich layers made up of the 
remains of the plankton. Then the iron levels return and 
OPPOSITE | This banded iron formation was deposited 
around 2 billion years ago as Earth transitioned to an 
oxygen-rich atmosphere.
photosynthesis restarts, creating a fresh band of iron deposit. 
The banded ironstones created by this process are still visible, 
and were produced at a time when the free oxygen released by 
plankton was immediately soaked up by minerals. Eventually 
those minerals ran out—it took at least 1 billion years!—and 
the atmospheric chemistry was then forever changed as 
oxygen became a permanent component. It was not a static 
volume, of course. Oxygen was and is being used by other 
life-forms—not least you and I as we breathe—and so it must 
always be replaced by more photosynthesis. As of now, the 
level of atmospheric oxygen has reached an equilibrium of 
around 20 percent. It is being added as fast as it is being 
taken away. 
From our vantage point of evolutionary history, this Great 
Oxygenation Event is nothing short of miraculous. Primitive 
phytoplankton breathed new life into the biosphere, creating 
a world that would nurture all kinds of organisms, something 
that we marvel at to this day. However, it was also potentially 
the biggest mass extinction in the history of the planet. The 
chemoautotrophs were adapted to anoxic habitats (where 
the waters are depleted of oxygen because demand exceeds 
supply), and the reactive oxygen was nothing short of poison 
to them. Only a handful of these primitive microbes survive in 
habitats too extreme for the newly evolving aerobes, or oxygen 
breathers. Today we find the survivors of the oxygenation in 
waterlogged rocks deep underground, in hot springs, and 
buried in muds that are too thick for oxygen to permeate.96 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
Primary production
The cyanobacteria, named after their cyan-like, blue-green 
coloring, are still the dominant form of life in the oceans. 
In fact, Prochlorococcus bacteria are the most numerous 
organism on the planet. It is estimated that there are an 
octillion of them in the oceans. (An octillion is a billion billion 
billion.) Together with other phytoplankton, these organisms 
are generating half of the world’s oxygen supply as a by￾product of carbon fixation. This fixation or harvesting of 
carbon is also called primary production, and it is the 
foundations upon which all life now rests.
Primary production is the point at which useful energy 
enters the biosphere. It arrives as light and is packaged up into 
a molecule of glucose, which makes for a versatile and easy-to￾store fuel. The chemistry involved is complex but is broadly 
divided into two phases: the light reaction (because it relies 
on light) and the dark reaction (which does not, although it 
doesn’t only happen in the dark either).
Using light
The light reaction is based around the pigment chemical 
chlorophyll, which is bound to membranes inside the cell. (In 
eukaryotic phytoplankton, such as diatoms and dinoflagellates, 
this all happens inside the chloroplast organelles.) Chlorophyll 
is the main reason photosynthetic organisms are broadly 
green. In structure, it is a cousin chemical of the hemoglobin 
that soaks up oxygen in red blood cells. That compound gets 
its redness from an ion of iron at its core. Chlorophyll’s green 
comes from a magnesium ion.
Yet there is another way to see this life-giving color: Pairs 
of chlorophyll molecules form two distinct reactive centers. 
One is activated by blue light and the other uses red light. 
The unused color is green, which simply bounces off and is 
reflected back as an unneeded component. Meanwhile, back at 
the chlorophylls, the trapped light energy is used to split water 
into hydrogen and oxygen ions. The oxygen is expelled before 
it can do too much chemical damage to the cell’s innards, while 
the hydrogens, also highly reactive, are handed over to the dark 
reaction for the final phase.97
OPPOSITE | A colored transmission electron micrograph 
showing some Prochlorococcus cyanobacteria in 
cross section.
BELOW | A diagram of the metabolic pathways carried 
out in the chloroplast during photosynthesis.
No light needed
The so-called dark reaction has an unsung chemical hero, 
a molecule that is doing all the work while chlorophyll basks 
in its reflected glory (and reflected green light). Perhaps the 
reason this chemical is less famous is because of its name: 
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase. Nevertheless, 
biochemists shorten it to the pithy rubisco. It is the job of 
rubisco to actually build the glucose molecules that feed not 
only the phytoplankton itself but also all other life in the 
oceans. It does this by reacting the free hydrogens with carbon 
dioxide in a controlled stepwise fashion (a pathway called the 
Calvin cycle). However, rubisco has a conflicted character, and 
it is just as likely to use oxygen to break up glucose into carbon 
dioxide and water as run the reaction the correct way. To solve 
this problem, cyanobacteria evolved carboxysomes, which 
are bag-like structures packed full of carbon dioxide. The high 
concentration of this raw material ensures that oxygen cannot 
interfere, and so rubisco behaves itself and builds the glucoses.
Light
H2O
O2
CO2
Sucrose
(export)
Chloroplast
Light reactions:
Photosystem ll
Electron transport chain
Photosystem l
Electron transport chain
ATP
ADP
NADP+
NADPH
RuBP
Starch 
(storage)
3-Phosphoglycerate
G3P
Calvin 
cycle
H+
+P
Metabolic pathways in chloroplast during photosynthesis98 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
ZOOPLANKTON AND HETEROTROPHISM
The concepts of food chains and food webs are well known, 
and they hold true in the oceans, just as they do on land. In 
the same way that an antelope eats the grass and the lions 
eat the antelopes in the archetypal terrestrial example, so the 
zooplankton in the sea eat the phyotoplankton and then the 
fish eat the zooplankton. 
In the parlance, the phytoplankton are the producers 
because, as has been discussed, they create the source of 
bioavailable energy. The zooplankton are the next link in 
the chain and are the primary consumers. Then there are 
successive links of consumers. The planktivorous fish are 
secondary consumers, and they in turn are eaten by larger 
predators, which are the tertiary consumers. Eventually, the 
food chain reaches its end with top predators, such as sharks, 
sperm whales, and orcas. 
The pyramids
Another term for the largest hunters is apex predator, which 
points to another way of understanding the ecology of 
nutrition, and with a surprising result when it comes to ocean 
communities. This other approach is to visualize the food web 
as a trophic pyramid, where the top predators fill the apex, or 
small, pointed top section. The pyramid works well as a means 
of expressing the chemical energy contained within each layer. 
4 Top predators 
(shark, tuna)
3 Intermediate predators 
(large fish)
2 First order consumers 
(zooplankton, small 
fish, mollusks)
1 Primary producers 
(phytoplankton, 
seagrass, algae)
The trophic pyramid1
2
3
4
5
6
99
OPPOSITE | Food webs are arranged in hierarchies 
of consumers, known as trophic levels.
ABOVE | A diagram of how energy flows through 
a food web. It is initially harnessed by the primary 
producers and flows up through trophic levels before 
dissipating away.
The primary producers create the largest layer at the base, and 
with every successive layer, the consumers take up less room. 
As a general rule of thumb, only about 10 percent of the 
energy captured by each layer is transmitted to the next one 
up. The other 90 percent is lost as heat or wasted materials. In 
the case of the ocean this waste material also includes “marine 
snow,” a steady shower of organic materials that sinks through 
the water. This reduction in energy continues up the pyramid, 
with only a tiny fraction reaching the apex. The small amount 
of energy available to them limits the number of apex 
predators in the ocean (or on land).
Decomposers
Heat energy loss
Sun’s energy
Energy flow in a trophic pyramid
6 Top predators 
(shark, orca, albatross)
5 Third-level carnivorous 
consumers (squid)
4 Second-level 
carnivorous 
consumers (larger fish) 
3 First-level carnivorous 
consumers (small fish, 
jellyfish, crustaceans, 
sea stars)
2 Herbivorous 
consumers 
(zooplankton, 
mussel, limpet)
1 Primary producers 
(phytoplankton, 
seaweed)100 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
ABOVE | It is easy to see why ostracod crustaceans are 
nicknamed “seed shrimp.”
RIGHT | A whale fall at the Davidson Seamount.
OPPOSITE | Biological carbon makes its way to the seabed 
where it is sequestered in a long-term carbon sink.
Marine snow
Below the sunlit zones, there is no primary production. Still, 
there is no disconnect from the food chain. Instead, plankton 
in these deeper waters rely on marine snow. This is a constant 
supply of organic materials, from feces to dead bodies of all 
sizes, which falls from the productive sunlit waters to lower 
levels. It is the only source of food for zooplankton and 
bacteria living in deeper waters, apart from migrating animals. 
As such, this group of consumers are outside the trophic 
pyramid. Instead, they are detritivores, which means “waste 
eaters” for obvious reasons. Ostracods, or seed shrimp, 
are important detritivores. The greatest prize for an ocean 
detritivore is a whale fall, where the carcass of a mighty rorqual 
(baleen whale) descends to the seabed. This single item of 
detritus provides the deep-sea community with the equivalent 
of 2,000 years of fragmented marine snow.The carbon pump
Not all marine snow is eaten by detritivores. Some will slip 
through the net and settle on the seafloor. Here it will be 
sequestered into sediments as part of a phenomenon called the 
carbon pump. This crucial process takes biological carbon and 
other materials out of the food chain and locks it away in the 
seabed, eventually as solid rocks or petroleum reservoirs. The 
process is slow but steady. Every year, around 900 million tons 
of this material arrives on the seabed, which is 7 percent of the 
total biomass of marine life. It arrives as fine particulates which 
create a marine sediment called ooze. It takes about 
160,000 years for the carbon pump to add one more 
meter of fresh ooze. The carbon pump (see also page 158) 
is of enormous interest to oceanographers and climate 
scientists. The pump forms part of the wider carbon cycle 
and is a means by which carbon is removed from the 
biosphere to fill long-term sinks. How the pump behaves as 
the oceans warm up and disrupts marine ecosystems is an 
important factor in understanding the ramifications of 
anthropogenic climate change (see page 192).
Pathogen, 
pollutant, 
and 
nutrient 
runoff
Benthic flux
Surface ocean 
0–328 ft 
(0–100 m) 
euphotic zone
Twilight zone 
328– 3,280 ft 
(100–1,000 m) 
mesopelagic zone
Deep ocean 
12,000 ft 
(3,700 m) 
Seafloor (benthic zone)
Reactive sediments
Sinking flux to sediments
Respiration
CO2
Dimenthyl sulfide, 
nitrous oxide, 
methane
Large phytoplankton
Fe, N 
(atmospheric 
deposition)
Small phytoplankton
Aggregate formation
Zooplankton
Zooplankton 
migration
Detritus
Detritus
Microzooplankton
Carbon 
uptake
Organic 
carbon
Decomposition Consumption
Archaea
Bacteria
Surface
CO2 CO2
CO2
Respiration
Respiration
Sinking 
particles
Bacteria 
and viruses
Burial
Physical mixing
Physical mix ni g
CO2
Deep water formation (downwelling)
CO2
N, P, Fe, Si
Predation by birds, fisheries
Deep sea consumers
Ventilation (upwelling)
The carbon pump process102 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
ABOVE LEFT AND RIGHT | The biomass pyramids for marine 
and terrestrial ecosystems.
OPPOSITE LEFT | The ciliate Paramecium bursaria has an 
endosymbiotic green alga.
OPPOSITE RIGHT | A light micrograph of a Euplotes
freshwater ciliate.
Tertiary consumers: Sea lions
Secondary consumers: Fish
Primary consumers: Zooplankton
Producers: Phytoplankton
Tertiary consumers: Snakes
Secondary consumers: Rodents
Primary consumers: Insects
Producers: Plants
Aquatic ecosystem Terrestrial ecosystem
Biomass pyramids
When the ocean food chain is organized by biomass, not by 
energy, something strange happens. On land, back with the 
grass, antelopes, and lions, the biomass of each trophic layer 
roughly tracks the corresponding layer of the energy pyramid 
in size. Suffice it to say, there are a lot more plants on land 
than there are lions. Somewhat counterintuitively, the 
situation in the oceans is reversed. The biomass of marine 
heterotrophs is an estimated 5 gigatonnes (Gt), while the 
biomass of the marine autotrophs, which are mostly 
phytoplankton, is just 1 Gt.
These data show that the biomass pyramid of a marine 
food chain is inverted, so the phytoplankton are outweighed 
by the zooplankton. Nevertheless, most of the marine biomass 
is unicellular, with multicellular consumers making up a third 
of the total biomass (2 Gt). That leaves 3 Gt for single-celled 
zooplankton, living short, frenzied lives. 
Such a setup does highlight the fragility of the marine 
food web. The phytoplankton are multiplying rapidly when 
conditions are right, and their populations are limited by 
the grazing power of the zooplankton as well as the supply 
of nutrients. 103
Mixotrophs
There is some crossover between the two dominant 
nutrition strategies and this muddies the waters 
(sometimes literally) with the abundance of different 
groups of plankton. Mixotrophs are organisms that 
make use of both autotrophism and heterotrophism. 
The great majority of mixotrophs are protists, and 
photosynthesis is usually the dominant partner in the 
arrangement. However, the protists are still able to 
take in food particles, either by engulfing them with the 
cell membrane (a process called phagocytosis), or by 
drawing foods to a mouth-like pore in the cell’s exterior. 
One particularly striking example of this are the ciliates, 
which are generally regarded as zooplankton. When 
some ciliates consume smaller autotrophic protists they 
retain their prey’s chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are the 
site of photosynthesis in eukaryotic cells, and by 
commandeering them the ciliate has an internal energy 
supply. This phenomenon is a form of endosymbiosis 
and throws light on the origins of complex cells and 
complex life, as discussed in Chapter 1 (see page 14).104 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
GRAZERS AND PREDATORS
Life is hard for most zooplankton and with little reward in the 
lower reaches of the trophic pyramid. They are always searching 
for that next meal and this can take some doing because in the 
oceans, food is diluted. When food is found it will be low in 
nutrients anyway—and so the search continues.
Ocean grazers
Despite the ecology being markedly different in the oceans, 
one term used to describe how organisms feed comes from the 
terrestrial realm. The majority of zooplankton are described as 
grazers, despite there being no grass available to eat—the term 
has obviously taken on a broader meaning. A grazer is any 
organism that is surrounded by its food. It is not able to take 
control of a discrete food supply or make many decisions about 
what to eat and when to move on to pastures new. This refers 
to animals that eat grasses and small herbs just as much as the 
copepods, krill, crab larvae, and protozoans that are munching 
their way through phytoplankton. Many of them are filter 
feeders that sift out food from the water in various ways. In so 
doing, these unfussy eaters may consume waste materials and 
other zooplanktons.
Plankton hunters
Among the zooplankton there are some species, such as 
jellyfish and hydrozoans, that are active predators, where prey 
is snared using stinger tentacles. Nevertheless, it is most likely 
that a zooplankton, especially the mesoplankton and above, 
will be consumed by a free-swimming animal. Surviving on 105
OPPOSITE | A larvacean “house” made from mucus, 
belonging to Oikopleura labradorensis.
BELOW LEFT | Green turtles (Chelonia mydas) play an 
important role in marine ecosystems by helping to keep 
jellyfish populations in check.
BOTTOM LEFT | A blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus) with 
a mouthful of water and food.
BELOW | A basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) swims 
with its mouth wide open to filter plankton from the 
surface waters close to the Scottish island of Coll.
plankton requires an economy of scale. Plankton are mostly 
water, and so the nutrient density is not always high. To 
survive, animals need to take in a lot of plankton with minimum 
energy expended, and that means going big. It is perhaps no 
surprise that the largest animals on Earth are planktivorous. 
The three largest species of fish are sharks which have dispensed 
with the slash of teeth and all that blood and guts. Instead, 
the whale shark, basking shark, and megamouth shark cruise 
through the waters filtering plankton from the water as they go. 
Similarly, the largest animals on the planet, ever, are plankton￾eating baleen whales that feed by gulping in gargantuan 
mouthfuls of water. The water is then flushed out through 
flexible bristle filters—actually made from the same stuff as 
fingernails and hair—which sift out the solid contents. These 
megamammals, such as the blue whale, sei whale, and right 
whale, mostly target swarms of meso- and macroplankton, 
such as krill, but will eat whatever they can get along the way. 106 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
PLANKTON LIFE CYCLES
Planktonkind are split according to how much of their life cycle 
is spent drifting, tossed this way and that in the water column. 
Holoplankton are fully committed, spending all their lives as 
drifters. As such, they form the larger group by species number 
and biomass. All phytoplankton belong to this group, while the 
most abundant zooplankton, such as krill and copepods, also 
lead purely planktonic lives and go through every developmental 
stage floating in the water. 
However, a significant proportion of zooplankton spend 
only a portion of their lives in the water column. These are the 
meroplankton. The most common trajectory is to be planktonic 
when young and small, an example being larval fish which 
become free-swimmers that join the nekton. Another route 
is the one followed by many benthic animals (meaning they 
spend the bulk of their lives on the seafloor), including 
crustaceans such as lobsters, echinoderms like sea urchins, 
and cnidarians such as sea anemones, which are all part of 
the plankton in their larval forms. Only once big enough will 
they settle on the seafloor to begin their benthic phase. By 
contrast, jellyfish and similar hydrozoans spend their early 
days anchored to the seabed and only take to the wanderer’s 
life in the water to complete their complex life cycles.
Breeding systems
There is only one activity that diverts plankton from feeding, 
and that is breeding. Ecologists use a concept called r/K 
selection to illuminate why organisms employ different 
reproductive strategies. The fundamental idea is that 
organisms opt for quantity or quality. The former is an 
r-selected strategy, where the r stands for “rate.” Here 
organisms devote their energies to producing offspring at 
a high rate: the higher, the better. The trade-off is that the 
vast majority of these young will not survive long enough 
to reproduce themselves. The alternative is K-selection 
(capitalized because the K stands for “capacity” in German). 
In this approach, the rate of reproduction is kept low and 
aimed at replacing older members of the species as they die. 
So the population remains stable at the maximum capacity 
that the habitat can sustain in terms of nutrients and living 
space. The r-selected organisms are hopelessly overshooting 
this capacity all the time. The trade-off with K-selection is that 
a large degree of parental care is needed to ensure the 
offspring survive. 
It is clear why most plankton deploy r-selected breeding 
strategies. Their short generation times and the vastness of 
their ocean habitat means they cannot hope to control their 
surroundings enough to raise young. There is an exception, of 
course. The opossum shrimp, or mysids, and some amphipods 
and copepods hold their larvae in a pouch during the very 
earliest stages of development (see page 122). Still, even then, 
the pressure to breed quickly means the crustaceans release 
their young into the water when they are still very small.
OPPOSITE | A female pram bug, a type of Phronima
amphipod, has created a nest from the remains of 
a salp body. 
BELOW | A pair of marine copepods mating.107108 | FEEDING AND BREEDING109
Sex or no sex?
The other consideration is whether breeding plankton should 
reproduce sexually or asexually. Sexual reproduction requires 
two parents to provide sex cells which merge into a single 
cell that represents a new individual. It will have a unique 
genetic makeup, half drawn from each parent, and this 
genetic diversity helps it withstand the everchanging slate 
of threats it will face. A disadvantage is that the parents need 
to meet up for long enough to complete the procedure, which 
is difficult for organisms lacking control over their position 
and trajectory. 
Copepods exist in such crowded conditions that males 
and females can find partners to copulate with easily. Krill 
do something similar, with specialized, limb-like appendages 
for delivering sperm to the eggs. 
Some planktonic mollusks, such as sea angels, are 
simultaneous hermaphrodites, meaning they have both 
male and female genitals at the same time. It is unlikely that 
these floating snails fertilize their own eggs, instead having a 
reciprocal exchange of sex cells with a mate. Planktonic worms 
of varying stripes are also hermaphrodites. 
Meanwhile, a few snails with planktonic larvae rely on 
spawning, which is when unfertilized eggs are released into the 
water. Sperm is then squirted over them, often synchronized 
by the phase of the Moon, in the hope some of it will hit a target. 
Spawning is a common feature of fish reproduction, and 
results in fertilized eggs with embryos developing inside 
that become part of the plankton.
Jellyfish and similar creatures make the best of both worlds. 
They may gather in vast swarms to broadcast sperm and eggs 
into the water. Others take it a bit more personally, with males 
using tentacles to transfer packets of sperm from one animal 
into the body cavity of another, where young are fertilized.
OPPOSITE | A close-up view of a clutch of clownfish 
(Amphiprion ocellaris) eggs in the Batangas marine 
protected area, in the Philippines.
TOP | A pair of mating sea angels (Hydromyles 
globulosa). Sea angels are oceanic sea slugs.
ABOVE | Embryos are visible inside the eggs laid by 
a smooth lumpsucker (Aptocyclus ventricosus) near 
northern Japan.110 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
of phytoplankton known as blooms.
Blooms
While they might look impressive, a bloom of plankton 
(sometimes misleadingly called an algal bloom) is sometimes 
unwelcome and can last from days to months. Blooms appear 
when phytoplankton, such as dinoflagellates and diatoms 
(usually in saltwater bodies) and cyanobacteria (typically in 
freshwater systems), multiply and accumulate rapidly in such 
quantities that they become visible. They can make the water 
brown, green, and even red. The bloom is consequential 
because the thick layer at the surface blocks light from 
reaching farther down. Also, all that life uses the oxygen in the 
water, which spells trouble for the organisms under the bloom. 
Vast blooms appear whenever environmental conditions are 
right for rapid growth—a combination of stratification of the 
water column and long daylengths—but they can also be 
caused by an influx of nutrients like phosphorus and nitrogen. 
These nutrients might arrive from a seasonal upwelling that 
brings materials up from deep water. Often, however, the 
excessive nutrients are the result of human activity—for 
example, sewage runoff and agrochemical pollution where 
fertilizers are washed into the sea and boost plankton growth 
instead. For more on the devastating effects blooms can have 
on the ocean’s food web, see page 164.
Asexual growth
By far the fastest way to reproduce is to produce clones, 
or genetically identical offspring. This allows organisms to 
reproduce whenever conditions are right. As a result, a single 
asexual plankton can populate an entire sea. However, this also 
runs the risk of a genetic fault wiping out that population in 
one go. With minimal variation between individuals there is no 
natural defense against an emerging threat like disease or an 
incoming predator. Despite this, most of the phytoplankton 
and single-celled zooplankton rely on asexual reproduction 
to boost numbers fast and make the most of good growing 
conditions. But they also factor in a sexual phase to their life 
cycle, which means they can diversify the genetic makeup of 
future generations. 
Asexual reproduction takes three forms. The first is the most 
complex and is called parthenogenesis. This is where the bodily 
machinery that evolved for sexual reproduction is repurposed 
for mass reproduction. It is comparatively rare in plankton, but 
is a feature of the life cycles of rotifers and bryozoans. 
It is more common for asexual plankton to use budding and 
binary fission. The former sees a miniature version of the adult 
body develop as an appendage until it breaks off to begin life 
as an independent organism. This is how some meroplanktonic 
hydrozoans reproduce. Potentially there are hydroids on the 
seabed that have lived for millions of years, budding off young 
from time to time and by chance avoiding predation, disease, 
or death by other means. The single-celled plankton of all kinds 
are more likely to use binary fission, where they simply divide 
in two, a fast method that leads to the population explosions 
ABOVE LEFT | The cylindrical cells of Aphanothece marine 
cyanobacteria are embedded in mucilage.
OPPOSITE | A swirling, green phytoplankton bloom can 
be seen here in the Gulf of Finland, in the easternmost 
part of the Baltic Sea. 111112 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
Weighing in at more than two tons and with long, vertical fins 
spanning around 11 ft (3.3 m), the oceanic sunfish is one of 
the biggest fish in the world. In fact, only sharks, which all 
have a cartilaginous skeleton, grow bigger than this. The 
oceanic sunfish is almost as long as it is tall, and is the largest 
and heaviest bony fish in the world. It is named for the way 
the rounded giant likes to sunbathe at the surface of tropical 
waters. This big fish is a slow but steady predator that hoovers 
up slow but steady prey. As well as the odd fish and other 
small nektonic creatures, plus reported meals of seaweeds and 
shellfish on the ocean bottom, sunfish prefer to consume salps 
and jellyfish, which cannot escape its slow pursuits. In the 
more mature stages it is nektonic, but during its development 
like many other fish species it is planktonic.
Broadcast spawning 
The breeding strategy of the sunfish is one of the most 
r-selected in the animal kingdom. They breed through a 
process called broadcast spawning—and the fish don’t hold 
back. The female releases 300 million eggs into the water, 
a record for any fish. The male releases milt, a sperm-laden 
liquid, near the eggs in the hope that they will be fertilized. 
For the majority this is a vain hope, and very few of the 
successfully fertilized eggs reach adulthood. The eggs are 
very small and buoyant. Spawning is staged to occur when 
the water is warm enough for the young. If conditions are 
right, the eggs hatch after about 24 hours, and tiny larval fish, 
or fry (about 0.1 in/2.5 mm long) emerge.
The fry will spend several months as plankton, at the 
mercy of the water and unable to swim away from danger. 
They already have the rounded body shape of the adult, 
where the tail fin of more familiar fish is much reduced. In 
place of the tall dorsal and ventral fins seen in the mature 
form, the fry bristles with protective spines, giving it the look 
of a tiny sheriff’s badge when viewed side on. The tiny fish 
feast on smaller plankton and grow fast. Within a few months 
they are 6 in (15 cm) long and look a lot more like the adult. 
At this size the fish are able to take on a more mature, non￾planktonic lifestyle.
Ocean sunfish Mola mola
OPPOSITE | An ocean sunfish (Mola mola) assesses its 
chances of survival.
FAMILY: Molidae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Tropical and temperate waters
FEEDING HABITS: Fish, squid, jellyfish, and salps.
NOTES: Shows the greatest size difference between the larva 
and adult of any vertebrate animal.
SIZE: Larva 0.1 in (2.5 mm)114 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
Pseudo-nitzschia australis is a type of pennate, or boat-shaped, 
diatom that is responsible for some of the most damaging algal 
blooms. As one of the causes of harmful algal blooms (HABs) 
it is closely monitored by public health officials. P. australis
blooms are caused by a variety of factors, including warm 
water temperatures, nutrient pollution from agrochemicals or 
sewage discharges, and natural upwellings. Each cell secretes a 
long, needle-shaped, silica shell that is only a few micrometers 
wide. The shell overlaps with that of its neighbors, and these 
connections allow the diatoms to form long, chain-like colonies.  
Amnesic shellfish poisoning 
The diatom produces domoic acid, a neurotoxin that can cause 
amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP). ASP is a serious illness 
caused by eating filter-feeding shellfish, such as oysters and 
scallops, to name only a few, which have themselves consumed 
the diatoms suspended in the water. The symptoms of ASP 
include diarrhea, vomiting, headache, and confusion. In 
severe—and rare—cases, sufferers have seizures and fall into a 
coma. Very occasionally, the disease is fatal. There is no known 
antidote for domoic acid poisoning, so treatment is supportive. 
In other words, if all else fails, life-support machines keep 
people alive until their body excretes the toxins. The dangers 
of P. australis are not limited to humans. The toxin can also 
be harmful to other animals, including seabirds, marine 
mammals, and fish. Domoic acid poisoning has led to mass 
die-offs of marine populations.
Fisheries are routinely closed during and after HABs, often 
for years on end. Nevertheless, isolated incidences of ASP do 
occur and present for the most part an inconvenience and not 
a health emergency. Domoic acid is heat-sensitive, so cooking 
shellfish to an internal temperature greater than 150°F (65°C) 
will destroy the toxin.
Diatom Pseudo-nitzschia australis
OPPOSITE | Pseudo-nitzschia australis diatoms observed through 
a light microscope.
FAMILY: Bacillariaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Pacific and Atlantic Oceans
HABITAT: Coastal waters
FEEDING HABITS: Photosynthetic
NOTES: Toxins impact shellfish harvesting.
SIZE: 0.004 in (100 μm)116 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
Pelagia noctiluca, also known as the mauve stinger or oceanic 
jellyfish, is a species of jellyfish found in all the world’s oceans. 
It is unusual in that it does not have a bottom-dwelling polyp 
stage like most scyphozoan jellyfish. The species is most 
common far out to sea in deep, open waters. It can gather 
in vast swarms or blooms, and these occasionally appear on 
beaches in spectacular fashion when wind and current conspire 
to wash the jellyfish ashore. 
P. noctiluca is one of the most common jellyfish species, 
and is especially abundant in the Mediterranean. It is a 
venomous jellyfish with painful stings that should be avoided. 
It can swim freely and uses its four oral arms and eight trailing 
tentacles to catch prey. This includes small fish, mesoplankton, 
and other jellyfish. 
Ocean night-light 
This species is highly bioluminescent, so much so that the 
animal is also called the night-light jellyfish. Swarms can 
illuminate clear waters on dark, moonless nights. They produce 
the brightest light in turbulent waters, such as those churned 
up by a passing ship. This could suggest that the light’s primary 
function is to attract prey which cross paths in the fast-moving 
patch of water. Alternatively the current could emulate the 
presence of a predator and thus stimulate a defense response. 
Most spawning happens during the day and the night-light 
signals may give time for the jellyfish to congregate. 
Polyp-free reproduction 
The life cycle of P. noctiluca begins when females release eggs 
into the water. The eggs are fertilized externally by the males, 
and the resulting larvae are called planulae. A planula is a 
free-swimming larva powered by cilia, which also filter foods. 
After a week, the planula transforms into an ephyra, which 
has skipped the bottom-dwelling polyp stage used by related 
jellyfish. The ephyra needs warm water conditions to grow 
enough to then switch to the medusa adult stage. The 
young medusae appear in early winter and are only 1/2 in 
(1 cm) across. They may not grow much at all in cold 
conditions but are fully mature come the next breeding 
season the following summer. 
Mauve stinger jellyfish Pelagia noctiluca
OPPOSITE | The mauve stinger jellyfish (Pelagia noctiluca) lives 
up to its name.
FAMILY: Pelagiidae
DISTRIBUTION: North Atlantic, Mediterranean
HABITAT: Warmer open waters
FEEDING HABITS: Smaller zooplankton
NOTES: Large blooms sometimes wash up on beaches.
SIZE: 12 in (30 cm)118 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
A radiolarian is like a microscopic sculpture drifting in the 
oceans. Its soft cell body is contained within a spiky sphere of 
silica called a test. Silica is a glass-like mineral form of silicon 
dioxide, which the microbe has extracted from the water. 
Radiolarians are classified as zooplankton. They are most 
common in the sunlit waters near the surface, and several 
classes have adopted a symbiotic relationship with tiny 
dinoflagellates that have evolved to live inside the larger 
host cell. These passengers offer sugar and oxygen in return 
for refuge. Nevertheless, planktonic Radiolaria are well 
represented in dark waters too, reaching depths of around 
6,500 ft (2,000 m). 
Some radiolarians form colonies, but the species shown 
here, a member of the Nassellaria order, is a solitary roamer. 
The spikes and spines on the shell aid with buoyancy. The cell 
also has multiple thread-like pseudopods for filter feeding. 
These extensions trap tiny phytoplankton and particles of 
other organic materials. 
Radiolarians are especially common in warmer, oligotrophic 
waters. These are surface regions that lack the nutrients 
needed by phytoplankton, and so there is a relative scarcity 
of grazing for mesozooplankton. Nonetheless, there is 
plenty of oxygen in the water, so smaller grazers can survive 
there, making the most of whatever phytoplankton foods are 
able to gain a foothold.
At the dawn of microbiology 
The Nassellaria order was first identified as a distinct group 
of radiolarians by the pioneer of microbiology, Christian 
Gottfried Ehrenberg. After a career as a field zoologist, which 
saw him explore North and East Africa, study corals in the 
Red Sea, and tour the Far East with his friend Alexander von 
Humboldt, Ehrenberg returned to work at Berlin University. 
Over the decades there, he specialized in the anatomy 
of microscopic organisms and described thousands of 
species, among them many radiolarians but also diatoms 
and foraminifera.
The radiolarian fossil record 
Radiolarian shells are varied and distinctive, and over 
millennia they settle on the floor of the oceans, creating a 
siliceous ooze. This sediment enters the rock cycle, yet the shell 
structure is retained as it all turns to stone. The morphology 
of shells and the depths of radiolarian sediments are useful 
indicators of what was happening during different eras of 
the long history of the oceans. Climate changes and mass 
extinctions are all written in the radiolarian fossil record.  
Radiolarian Theocapsa sp.
OPPOSITE | The skeleton of a Theocapsa radiolarian, as seen 
through a scanning electron microscope.
FAMILY: Diacanthocapsinae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Down to 6,500 ft (2,000 m)
FEEDING HABITS: Phytoplankton
NOTES: Changes color of test to match surroundings.
SIZE: 0.004 in (100 µm)120 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
A barnacle is a sessile creature, a crustacean glued to a rock 
destined to watch the world go by. Most are located in shallow, 
rocky seas while a few, perhaps the lucky ones, find themselves 
attached to the hulls of ships or the flanks of a whale, and are 
swept along for the rest of their lives. However, in common 
with many marine crustaceans, everything from crabs to 
copepods, every barnacle begins its life as plankton, specifically 
a minute creature called a nauplius.
The story of a barnacle nauplius is a one of adventure and 
transformation. It looks almost nothing like the adult form, 
being equipped with a simple eye, three pairs of leg-like limbs, 
and feathery antennae. It uses these appendages to stay afloat 
and filter feed phytoplankton from the water. At less than 
a millimeter across, the nauplius is at risk itself of being 
consumed by a multitude of larger zooplankton, so it is ever 
ready to put on a spurt of speed to escape such an attack. 
From nauplius to barnacle 
As the nauplius grows, it undergoes a series of molts, or 
shedding of its exoskeleton. After each molt, the nauplius 
becomes more complex, with more appendages and a
more sophisticated body plan. After six molts, the nauplius 
reaches the cyprid stage, a tiny creature with a hard shell and 
a pair of antennae. The cyprid uses its antennae to feel out the 
surface of a rock or other object, and then it attaches itself 
to the surface.
Once the cyprid is attached, it undergoes a final molt and 
transforms into a barnacle. The barnacle will stay attached to 
this hard surface for the rest of its life. It has a tough shell and 
a pair of feathery appendages, called cirri, which are adapted 
from the original legs. The cirri are used to filter plankton from 
the water.
Barnacle nauplius Semibalanus balanoides
OPPOSITE | The larva of a common rock barnacle (Semibalanus 
balanoides), a type of acorn barnacle.
FAMILY: Balanidae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Shallow waters
FEEDING HABITS: Filter feeder
NOTES: The scientific name means “curl foot.”
SIZE: 0.02 in (500 µm)122 | FEEDING AND BREEDING
At first glance, mysids are yet another type of oceanic 
crustacean that looks a lot like a little decapod prawn. 
However, the big giveaway is that the carapace is only attached 
to the forward sections of the thorax. This gives mysids 
a longer, more flexible, tail-like abdomen and a hunched, 
round-shouldered profile. (In decapods the carapace covers 
the whole thorax.) 
Brood chamber
The common name for mysids is the opossum shrimp, in 
reference to the American marsupial mammals famed for 
carrying large litters of tiny young in their pouches. Female 
mysids have an analogous brood chamber attached to the 
thorax, creating a rounded belly shape to go with the hunched 
shoulders. The initial function of the egg sac is to improve the 
efficiency of fertilization. Eggs are laid inside the pouch, and 
their number is proportional to the length of the animal. 
Then the male will deliver sperm by grasping the female with 
a limb-like genital appendage. 
The female hangs on to the fertilized eggs as they develop. 
The eggs hatch in synchrony with the mother’s next molt, and 
tiny larvae, barely 0.04 in (1 mm) long, enter the water. Their 
short stay avoids wasting resources on eggs that are never 
fertilized or are eaten before hatching, although the newborn 
larvae are still in grave danger of being predated. Even so, the 
streamlined efficiency of the breeding system means that 
the females can produce a brood every couple of weeks and 
as frequently as every four days in optimal conditions.
Cannibalism
Opossum shrimp are filter feeders and eat whatever they 
can sift from the water. The shrimp shown here is a deep-sea 
species. It lives well below the euphotic zone, being found 
6,200 ft (1,900 m) below the surface. As well as a pouch 
full of eggs, there is a pair of large eyes that scan the dark for 
signs of life and food in the gloom. Down here, food is scarce 
and the adults may resort to cannibalism to survive. This 
mostly takes the form of older mysids preying on the larvae 
as they emerge from the brood. 
Opossum shrimp Boreomysis sp.
OPPOSITE | A lateral (side-on) view of a deep-sea mysid or 
opossum shrimp, so named for the pouch where fertilized 
eggs are stored.
FAMILY: Mysidae
DISTRIBUTION: Worldwide
HABITAT: Marine and fresh water
FEEDING HABITS: Filter feeder
NOTES: Uses a pouch to hold developing eggs.
SIZE: 1 in (2.1 cm)WHERE 
PLANKTON 
WANDER
CHAPTER 4
Wherever there is light, phytoplankton are found in aquatic systems, from oceans and seas 
to lakes and ponds. Phyto and zooplankton are the most widely distributed group of 
organisms on Earth and can be found at all depths of the oceans. Their abundance in a 
given habitat depends largely on light and nutrient availability. In all of Earth’s water bodies, 
plankton (and especially phytoplankton) are most abundant in the euphotic zone—the 
uppermost layer, where there is enough light to support photosynthetic growth.
Many plankton species are restricted to certain habitats, such as freshwater, estuarine, 
or coastal habitats, the open ocean surface, the deeper ocean, or the bottom of the 
sea. Other plankton species are more widespread and can exist in many different 
environments. Plankton move with currents and gyres, and are part of the world’s largest 
migration—a daily phenomenon—as well as seasonal movements through water columns.126 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER
Plankton are not distributed randomly across water bodies. 
While some larger members of plankton have the behavioral 
capability to change position in the water, their ability to 
move independently is limited, and active movement is simply 
not an option for most planktonic organisms. Their passive, 
floating state, or slow swimming speed in comparison to tides 
and currents, makes plankton extremely sensitive to physical 
and chemical changes in the oceans. The distribution of 
planktonic organisms along the vertical and horizontal planes 
of a water body is, therefore, influenced by the physical and 
chemical characteristics and dynamics of the environment. 
Environmental properties that affect plankton communities 
include water temperature and pH, nutrient availability 
(including phosphorus and nitrogen), and light intensity. They 
are further affected by factors such as water depth and surface 
currents, wider systems of ocean currents (including gyres), and 
water salinity and turbidity. Plankton are also influenced by the 
distribution and movements of predators and, at a more local 
scale, freshwater inputs, like water flowing from a river.
PLANKTON DISTRIBUTION
Plankton and environmental change
Environmental changes resulting from human activity have 
caused—and continue to cause—disruption to plankton 
populations in marine and freshwater ecosystems. Even the 
slightest change in aquatic conditions can significantly alter 
the composition of a plankton community, and so the entire 
food web. As such, plankton are a vital consideration when 
it comes to global warming and climate change. Plankton’s 
sensitivity to change makes them useful indicators of 
environmental shifts, and given their critical part in the 
carbon cycle, marine plankton also offer opportunities for 
mitigating climate change. The future for plankton is discussed 
further in Chapter 6: Facing the Future.
ABOVE | Single-celled diatoms are found in all marine 
and freshwater environments—and even in moist 
terrestrial habitats.127
FRESHWATER PLANKTON
Plankton are abundant in freshwater bodies, including lakes, 
glacial lakes, reservoirs, rivers, streams, ponds, and wetlands. 
Thanks to inputs from terrestrial ecosystems, freshwater 
systems tend to have higher concentrations of nutrients, 
including nitrogen and phosphorus, than saltwater bodies. 
The nutrient-rich waters facilitate primary production 
by phytoplankton, and so, since phytoplankton feed most 
other plankton, freshwater habitats support abundant and 
diverse plankton communities.
While the ecology of marine and freshwater plankton is 
generally similar, several factors make the oceans and seas very 
different to freshwater environments, including higher salinity. 
Many species across the plankton genera are adapted to live 
in either fresh or salt water, but several groups of plankton 
exist in both environments. Some have even adapted to live 
in the harsh conditions of fresh water and marine anoxic 
environments (where waters are depleted of oxygen), like 
BELOW | Diatoms belonging to the genus Pinnularia are 
mostly found in ponds and moist soil, although they also 
inhabit springs, deltas, and lakes.
purple and green sulfur bacteria (Chromtiaceae and 
Chlorobiaceae, respectively).
Zooplankton common in freshwater systems include 
Cladocera and copepods, as well as rotifers and protozoans. 
Though there is more biodiversity among zooplankton in the 
oceans, plankton diversity is high among freshwater protists. 
Cyanobacteria, sometimes called blue-green algae, is most 
common in lakes, though some species can also be found in 
saltwater environments. Freshwater systems contain species 
from most planktonic algal groups and commonly include 
diatoms, silicoflagellates, dinoflagellates, and Chlorophyta, 
many of which are restricted to freshwater environments.128 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER
OPPOSITE ABOVE LEFT | Daphnia species inhabit a remarkable 
range of freshwater habitats, from temporary rock pools to lakes.
OPPOSITE ABOVE RIGHT | The distribution of Daphnia is linked to 
the occurrence of predators; lakes with planktivorous fish tend 
to have smaller Daphnia species.
OPPOSITE BELOW | The circulation of surface currents is integral 
to ocean mixing, and so nutrient provision for marine plankton.
MARINE PLANKTON
Marine plankton comprise a highly biodiverse group of 
organisms, from microscopic phytoplankton and cyanobacteria 
to large jellyfish. The majority of phytoplankton in saltwater 
systems are species of Pyrrhophyta (including a range of 
dinoflagellates) and Heterokontophyta (including many 
diatom species). Marine plankton also include a great diversity 
of zooplankton. Holoplankton (like copepods and ctenophores) 
and meroplankton, like the larvae of bivalves and crustaceans, 
are abundant among marine plankton.
Such diversity in marine systems is hardly surprising, given 
that the oceans comprise around 70 percent of the Earth’s 
surface and the larval forms of many of the ocean’s inhabitants 
are planktonic. Plankton found in pelagic waters are arguably 
the most important group of organisms on the planet—they 
hold a critical ecological role in the food chain and are 
responsible for producing around half the world’s oxygen. 
Ocean biomes
It is very difficult to accurately group and divide plankton 
communities geographically in the world’s oceans, since their 
distribution is dependent on so many dynamic environmental 
factors. Plankton are present throughout the oceans, but their 
spatial distribution is also very difficult to study, so is not well 
understood. Sampling with plankton nets has provided some 
useful data on global zooplankton distribution, but many 
species cannot be accurately sampled with nets, so there aren’t 
many databases derived from consistent global sampling.
It is understood that the latitudinal biodiversity gradient—a 
global pattern identified in terrestrial and aquatic environments, 
which describes heightened biodiversity at the equator (and 
reduced biodiversity toward the poles)—seems to hold for most 
plankton species. In terms of biomass, however, zooplankton 
is usually lower nearer the equator and higher in temperate 
zones, where plankton communities are supported by changes 
between seasons and greater upwelling of nutrients. (Upwelling 
occurs when winds push surface waters away from the coast 
and nutrient-rich, deeper water replaces them.)
Ocean mixing
Phytoplankton, and so plankton species that graze on 
phytoplankton, are more numerous in surface waters of oceans 
and seas, where there is enough sunlight for photosynthesis. 
The surface waters also contain plenty of nutrients, particularly 
in areas with high levels of mixing, like coastal waters. Mixing 
and circulation are key to ensuring the movement of nutrients, 
so the physical characteristics of an ocean habitat significantly 
impact the local abundance and distribution of plankton.
Because nutrients near the surface are utilized rapidly by 
phytoplankton, vertical mixing is necessary to provide enough 
nutrients from the rich waters beneath the mixed layer to 
sustain plankton in this top layer of the oceans. Mixing can 
occur with the main currents and seasonal changes, such as 
when conditions become windier in the fall, with weather 
events like storms and eddies, and with inputs from freshwater 
sources like rivers and estuaries. Mixing is, therefore, weaker 
and less frequent in the subtropics, where the seasons are less 
defined, and so mixed layers remain shallow all year. This can 
result in lower levels of nutrients at the surface and hence 
lower levels of plankton and productivity too.
Coastal areas tend to have high nutrient levels, thanks to 
supplementation by freshwater sources and mixing through 
coastal upwelling and tidal mixing. Since they are nutrient￾rich, plankton are abundant in these habitats. Coastal and 
estuarine ecosystems are some of the most important marine 
habitats in terms of their primary production and function 
as a nursery habitat for key fisheries species, but they are 
also among the most threatened by anthropogenic activity 
(see page 187).129130 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER131
Polar regions
Plankton are important components of polar ecosystems. The 
extreme environmental conditions of the Arctic and Antarctic 
are too harsh to support species without physiological 
adaptations—the polar waters are not only subject to cold 
temperatures, but also significant seasonal changes in light 
and ice cover. Despite such extreme conditions, some 
phytoplankton species thrive in these habitats, supporting the 
communities of zooplankton and other marine species inhabiting 
the freezing waters. They live in open water during the (brief) 
summer and beneath layers of ice for the rest of the year.
The most abundant phytoplankton in polar regions are 
diatoms, which are well adapted to low light conditions and 
utilize the nutrients from meltwater for growth. Diatoms 
often bloom under ice sheets, providing a food source for 
zooplankton, like Antarctic krill, and other marine animals. 
These phytoplankton form the base of the polar food webs 
that ultimately feed large predators like whales, seals, 
penguins, and polar bears. During the parts of the year with 
extremely low levels of sunlight, plankton in polar waters often 
enter a state of reduced activity or diapause; sometimes they 
live out many months of the year in this hibernating state at 
thousands of meters depth in the ocean, safely out of reach 
of many predators (see page 137).
ABOVE | The latitudinal diversity gradient refers to an 
increase in species richness toward the equator and 
a decrease toward the poles.
OPPOSITE | Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) live in large 
schools in Antarctic waters, sometimes reaching densities 
of up to 60,000 per 35 cubic feet (1 cubic meter).
Latitudinal diversity gradient LOW DIVERSITY
LOW DIVERSITY
HIGH DIVERSITY
EQUATOR EQUATOR132 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER
THROUGH THE WATER COLUMN
There are four main groups of organisms in aquatic 
environments: neuston, plankton, nekton, and benthos. 
Neuston are organisms that live right at the surface of water 
bodies, either on top of or attached to the underside of the 
water’s surface film. The group includes a diverse range of taxa 
such as insects, spiders, worms, and protozoans. Plankton 
comprise the next layers; these organisms might drift at the 
water’s surface, but they do not live at the interface and 
interact with the surface film like neuston. 
Nekton comprises all aquatic life that actively swims and 
can move independently of the currents. This group includes 
many familiar water inhabitants, like fish, sharks, whales, 
turtles, and octopuses. They are found throughout the water 
column but become less common with increasing depth. Lastly, 
benthos describes all organisms that live on or within bottom 
sediments or on rocky substrates. The larger of these organisms 
include worms, sponges, and crustaceans, but many are less 
than a millimeter long, like nematodes and benthic copepods. 
Plankton play an important ecological role throughout the 
water column, supporting underwater life, directly or indirectly.
BELOW LEFT | Plankton even thrive in extreme 
environments; in Antarctic waters, phytoplankton 
often bloom when sea ice retreats in spring.
BELOW| Phytoplankton are found primarily in the euphotic 
zone, where there is ample sunlight. Most zooplankton 
live in this zone too, but they are more widely distributed 
throughout the water column.
Coastal zone Pelagic zone
Intertidal 
zone
Benthic zone (seafloor)
Continental shelf
Aquatic organisms and the water column
High water
Low 
water 
Phytoplankton Zooplankton
Sponge 
(Benthos)
Sea spider 
(Benthos)133
Plankton zones
Phytoplankton, the primary producers, harness energy 
from sunlight, so are restricted to areas with consistent 
light. This group of plankton is, therefore, found primarily 
in the uppermost water level—the euphotic zone. The 
depth of the euphotic zone varies from around 160–650 ft 
(50–200 m) below the surface, ending at the compensation 
depth, where the column transitions to the dysphotic zone. 
At the compensation depth, light intensity reaches around 
1 percent and the energy produced through photosynthesis 
balances with destruction by respiration. The compensation 
depth changes throughout the day and with the season and 
becomes redundant at night.
Zooplankton species that graze on phytoplankton are 
primarily found in the euphotic zone, but other members of 
the plankton group live throughout the water column, from 
the surface waters right down to the sediment. Bacteria, 
viruses, and some plankton higher up the food chain can be 
found in the dysphotic and aphotic zone, alongside nekton, 
like fish and squid.
Pelagic zone
Euphotic zone
650 ft 
(200 m)
Dysphotic zone
3,200 ft 
(1,000 m)
Aphotic 
zone
32,800 ft 
(10,000 m)
Portuguese man-of-war
(Neuston)
Turtle
(Nekton)
Zooplankton Shark Phytoplankton
(Nekton)
Whale
(Nekton)
Octopus
(Nekton)
Fish
(Nekton)
Fish
(Nekton)
Anglerfish
(Nekton)
Sea cucumber 
(Benthos)134 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER
DAILY MIGRATION
The rise of aquatic life to the water’s surface to feed, followed 
by a deep sinking to avoid predation, is the world’s largest 
mass migration, and it happens every single day. Plankton are 
key components of the migration, which is known as the diel 
(or diurnal) vertical migration (DVM). The phenomenon occurs 
in all aquatic habitats—freshwater and marine—all over the 
planet, and the immense sweeping movement in the oceans 
can be seen from space. 
The DVM helps to explain the remarkable diversity in the 
oceans; by migrating through the water column in communities 
divided by trophic level, the ocean has many layered niches 
along the vertical plane, as well as the horizontal one. Through 
the DVM, the behaviors of predators from the top trophic 
levels are driven by those of herbivorous zooplankton.
The triggers
From phytoplankton to sharks, almost all aquatic organisms 
undertake the migration on a 24-hour cycle. Most travel up 
toward surface waters at dusk, descending back into deeper 
water before dawn breaks, but not all organisms travel at the 
same time and some even follow the opposite pattern. Life 
of all sizes, including zooplankton, travels a remarkable 
distance—tens or hundreds of meters—in a matter of 
hours. A 0.08 in (2 mm)-long copepod, for example, can travel 
up to 328 feet (100 m)—equivalent to a 6½ foot (2 m)-long 
wildebeest traveling 62 miles (100 km) daily. That’s more 
than ten times the distance wildebeest actually travel each day 
during their famously grueling annual migrations. Most small 
plankton travel solely on ocean currents, without actively 
moving through the water levels. 
It is thought that the DVM patterns are driven by predator–
prey relationships, a theory that is supported by evidence that 
some prey of non-visual feeders undertake the DVM in reverse 
Time of day
Depth
00:00 06:00 12:00 18:00 00:00
Classic and reverse diel vertical migration135
to other organisms. The DVM is, therefore, usually triggered by 
sunlight. Even when light is scarce during dark polar winters, 
the migration continues, but in these conditions, the trigger 
changes from sunlight to moonlight. During the dark months, 
moonlight increases the risk of predation on zooplankton by 
visual hunters at the poles, so the triggers for the migration in 
high-latitude marine habitats shift to moonlight—as evidenced 
by a move from 24-hour solar cycles to 24.8-hour lunar cycles. 
Scientists have also recorded mass sinking of zooplankton with 
full moons every 29.5 days during polar winter months. 
Why bother?
Moving such a distance through water every day is 
energetically costly, especially for small organisms. There is 
a trade-off between saving energy and avoiding predation. 
Take copepods, for example. These mesozooplankton graze 
on phytoplankton, which photosynthesize and so live at the 
water’s surface. The most efficient scenario would seem to 
be for a copepod to feed 24 hours a day in shallow depths 
where phytoplankton are most abundant, but being at the 
illuminated surface during the daytime would also put them 
at the highest risk of being consumed by visual predators. 
Instead, copepods move away from the surface with the DVM 
during daylight hours—they might not be able to feed all the 
time, but that cost is outweighed by the benefit of reducing 
their risk of predation.
OPPOSITE | In the classic DVM (white arrows), visual fish 
predators drive larger zooplankton from the surface. 
Some smaller zooplankton that are less preferable to 
visual predators follow the reverse DVM (teal arrows).
ABOVE | Zooplankton migrate to deeper water before 
dawn every day to avoid predation by visual feeders.
Impact on the carbon pump
Beyond the benefits to individual organisms in the aquatic 
food web, the DVM plays a significant role in carbon cycling. 
Carbon is harnessed by phytoplankton in the surface waters 
and if it were not for the carbon pump (see page 101), which 
is facilitated by the daily migrations, much of the carbon would 
be consumed and then respired and hence lost back to the 
atmosphere. Instead, it is moved down through the water 
levels and a considerable amount of organic carbon, as well 
as inorganic carbon in structures such as the limestone shells 
of coccolithophores, is eventually sequestered in deep-sea 
sediment. This movement of carbon has a significant impact 
on the global carbon cycle (see page 158) and as climate change 
alters components of the DVM, there will be knock-on effects 
to the wider system.136 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER
LONGER-TERM MIGRATIONS
Less frequent vertical migrations are also undertaken by 
zooplankton inhabiting seasonal environments, such as 
habitats at high altitude and upwelling systems. Where the 
environmental conditions vary throughout the year, plankton 
move between vertical habitats depending on the season. 
While the daily migrations of aquatic life through the vertical 
water column have been extensively studied, these longer-term 
migrations of plankton are less well understood.
Seasonal migrations
Seasonal movements of zooplankton were first recognized in 
the late 1800s, when scientists noticed that some crustaceans 
disappeared from the upper levels of the water column in 
summer and reappeared again in spring. Further investigations 
revealed that some jellyfish and crustaceans moved to a deeper 
level of the ocean for part of the year. The strategy has since 
been recorded in many zooplankton species living in habitats 
where the quality degrades for part of the year.
Seasonal depth cycle
Water level
Summer Fall Winter Spring Summer
Descent Diapause
Resting eggs
Ascent137
OPPOSITE | Some zooplankton enter diapause during 
periods of unfavorable conditions. In this conceptual 
model, cladocera in a shallow pond descend and 
sexually reproduce, releasing resting eggs as the 
pond dries out over summer. When the pond refills, the 
resting eggs hatch and females reproduce asexually by 
parthenogenesis until the water level declines again the 
following summer.
RIGHT | Zooplankton ascend to the upper levels of the 
water column when local conditions improve.
The predictable seasonal vertical migrations of plankton 
(and other animal species) are triggered by a change in 
environmental conditions. This could be a decrease in primary 
producers, thanks to limited light or nutrients, such as in 
high latitude or coastal upwelling systems, or temperature 
changes caused by droughts or freezing conditions, as in some 
freshwater systems. Predation pressure can change throughout 
the year, too. When conditions deteriorate, plankton migrate 
to deeper water and in some cases enter a dormant state until 
conditions improve and they can comfortably return to the 
upper levels of the water column. 
Resting stages
During seasons with unfavorable conditions, many 
zooplankton in both freshwater and marine ecosystems 
produce eggs with thick shells and extra lipid droplets, allowing 
them to survive for long periods—months, even—in a diapause 
state in the sediment. When conditions improve, the eggs 
hatch and the plankton rise to the upper pelagial for the 
remainder of their life cycle. Plankton that produce resting 
eggs include rotifers, copepods, and cladocerans.
Some zooplankton can also enter resting stages in 
adulthood. During seasons where environmental conditions 
decline, these plankton sink to deeper water layers, away from 
hungry mouths of many predators, where they enter diapause 
months before returning to surface waters. In some species, 
the females enter diapause when they have been fertilized; 
they keep the sperm in their spermathacae (organs in the 
female reproductive system that store viable sperm) and 
release it to fertilize their eggs around six months later, when 
the conditions have improved and there is less competition for 
food. Other zooplankton encyst themselves in an exoskeletal 
layer (a cuticulin) that protects them from desiccation and 
predation. Some species develop the cuticulin in surface waters 
and this helps them sink to the sediment, while others actively 
swim into the sediment before developing the protective layer.
Wider impact
As with the DVM, seasonal vertical migrations of plankton 
have knock-on effects that influence the whole ecosystem. 
As herbivorous zooplankton move through the water levels, 
so too do their predators. Before entering a resting stage, 
zooplankton accumulate lipids necessary for their survival 
through long periods of dormancy. These plankton are 
therefore energy-rich prey for predators that hunt in deep 
waters. This movement of energy from the surface to the 
depths is also important for the biological pump of carbon into 
deep ocean, and so plays a major role in the wider carbon cycle 
(see page 158).138 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER139
AEROPLANKTON
Plankton are not only found in bodies of water—they 
are also floating in the atmosphere. Like aquatic plankton, 
aeroplankton (or air plankton) contains mostly microscopic 
organisms, including viruses, bacteria, fungi, and other 
protists—many of which are the same, or similar, species to 
those found in soil or aquatic environments. Aeroplankton also 
contains pollen, spores, seeds, and insects. The organisms hang 
in the atmosphere, moving with the wind—sometimes around 
the whole globe—before being deposited.
Plankton are expelled into the atmosphere through a 
wide range of mechanisms—for example, animals sneezing, 
coughing, defecating, or scratching; ocean spray; desert dust 
swept up by the wind; or active-release mechanisms by fungi 
and plants. Two billion tons of soil are estimated to move in 
the atmosphere every year. 
Once in the air, the organisms might become attached 
to inorganic particles or incorporated into water droplets; 
they are transported higher into the atmosphere with 
turbulence and air currents. The amount of time they spend 
in the air depends on factors such as particle size and shape, 
the number of particles released from the source at once, 
and meteorological conditions. Heavier particles will drop 
to the ground faster than light ones, and light particles might 
reach the Earth’s surface by dry deposition or in droplets, 
like rain or snow. 
The abundance and diversity of aeroplankton varies with 
the weather, seasons, and habitat below. There are far more 
microbes per square meter of air above cities, for example, 
than over deep oceans. The circulation of air around the Earth 
determines the dispersal of floating organisms and, as well 
as dispersal of the aeroplankton species, the movements of 
aeroplankton affect cloud formation, precipitation, and air 
conditions for plants (the phyllosphere). 
The implications of aeroplankton movement are important 
for climate change and environmental health, but direct 
evidence of the impacts on ecosystems is only just starting 
to come to light. With the observation that increases in desert 
dust are correlated with coral reef decline, links have been 
established between microbial pathogens in dust storms 
and diseases in marine organisms, like sea urchins, turtles, 
and sea fans. 
Despite being present throughout the atmosphere, 
aeroplankton are difficult to study—even more so than 
aquatic plankton—because of the challenges of sampling at 
high altitudes. They can be sampled using traps and sweep 
nets from aircrafts, kites, and balloons. More recently, satellite 
imagery has been utilized to analyze the long-distance movement 
of aeroplankton. Still, the atmosphere is considered to be the 
least understood biome on the planet.
OPPOSITE| Unlike most plants, which require insects for 
pollination, pine trees release pollen actively and rely on 
wind for dispersal.
ABOVE| Many millions of microorganisms swept into the 
air from dust storms and sea spray are deposited around 
the planet every day (here over the Sahara).140 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER
Soaring spiders
Though probably not the first organism to come to mind 
when thinking of plankton, spiders have adapted remarkable 
mechanisms to exploit the atmosphere’s currents. In mass 
migration events, some species of arthropod climb to the 
highest points in their habitats before taking to the skies. 
Spiders are traveling hundreds of kilometers through the 
atmosphere—sometimes up to 21
⁄2 miles (4 km)—floating 
on the wind in an act called ballooning.
The spiders let out one or multiple strands of silk as they leap 
into light wind. For decades, scientists were unable to identify 
the precise conditions that triggered these mass migrations, 
with ballooning events seemingly happening whatever the 
weather. Humidity and wind speed have been deemed to be 
important: there should be a light breeze. This puzzled 
scientists further, since the light wind conditions should 
not allow spiders as big as those observed in the skies 
to balloon.
Eventually, the mystery was solved. Spiders use electric 
fields; the atmospheric potential gradient, caused by the 
global atmospheric electric circuit, stimulates ballooning. 
Spiders have sensory hairs that are extremely sensitive to 
various stimuli: they respond to air and water flows, air 
motion close to thermal noise, sound, and, so it turns out, 
electric fields. When there is a vertical electric field and 
optimal wind conditions, spiders balloon. The atmospheric 
electric circuit both triggers spiders to balloon and 
physically enables ballooning.141
OPPOSITE | In Australia, ballooning events can see 
millions of spiders jumping into the air from high 
vantage points.
ABOVE | Ballooning wouldn’t be possible without the 
fine but extremely strong silk threads produced by a 
spider’s spinneret. Here, a species of money spider 
(Tenuiphantes) is tiptoeing on a daisy with the silk 
dragline clearly visible.
Disease spread
As methods for studying aeroplankton have improved, 
scientists have demonstrated that disease-causing 
microorganisms travel great distances from infectious sources 
on air currents, before infecting individuals who have never 
been in contact with the disease source. Understanding the 
movements of aeroplankton is, therefore, a top priority for 
infectious disease prevention and control. The field of study 
is riddled with challenges—aeroplankton are notoriously 
difficult to study and diseases can be spread with very small 
numbers of infectious organisms.
For some infectious diseases, such as Influenza A and 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, for example, humans only need 
to come into contact with a few cells for infection to take hold. 
The size of the particles is important when it comes to disease 
spread. While some infectious particles are too large to be 
transmitted over more than a few meters, large particles 
(those up to 0.004 in/100 µm) can remain suspended if the 
velocity of air moving through a space is high. These large 
particles can also desiccate rapidly, and those that have fallen 
from the air can become airborne again when desiccated. 
The spread of infectious particles in indoor settings like 
offices and healthcare facilities has been extensively studied, 
but analyzing the spread over great distances in the Earth’s 
atmosphere presents bigger challenges. Because of the 
complexities, there is no global monitoring network for 
infectious microbes. But there are calls for this to change. In 
future, high-altitude air quality observatories (which already 
exist, but do not yet monitor the movement of infectious 
microbes) could be used to help mitigate and control infectious 
disease threats from aeroplankton.142 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER
About the same size as a grain of rice, Calanus finmarchicus
is a large species of copepod that is hugely abundant in the 
northern Atlantic Ocean. The species is a crucial component 
of the food web in temperate and subarctic waters, both 
as predator and prey. It has proven to be resilient to 
environmental change: The species shifted its distribution 
during the last ice age, and populations are on the move once 
again in response to global warming today. The organism’s 
ability to enter a state of diapause when food availability is 
low is key to its ability to thrive in challenging conditions.
Survival skills
C. finmarchicus spends a remarkable six months of the year 
(sometimes more) hibernating deep in the North Atlantic 
Ocean, where individuals sink to depths of more than 328 ft 
(100 m)—and often more than 1,630 ft (500 m)—below 
the surface, and rest, relatively safe from predation, until 
conditions improve. During these periods, when food is scarce, 
they survive on stored lipid reserves, which comprise much of 
their body weight. Their diapause period ends in late winter or 
spring, and they rise to the surface in time to gorge on spring 
phytoplankton blooms. They mate when they return to the 
surface and lay eggs when food is plentiful.
Food source
Not only is C. finmarchicus a vital primary consumer, its lipid 
reserves also make it a key food source for many other marine 
species, including commercial fishery species like larval cod, 
haddock, and herring. Consumption of C. finmarchicus by 
commercial fish has been estimated at around 20–100 percent 
of annual C. finmarchicus production. The species has also been 
shown to have a significant impact on the calving success of 
North Atlantic right whales—a Critically Endangered species.
Copepod Calanus finmarchicus
OPPOSITE | Calanus finmarchicus contributes to over half the 
total zooplankton biomass in the northern North Atlantic, where 
it is most abundant.
FAMILY: Calanidae
DISTRIBUTION: Abundant in the North Sea and Norwegian Sea, as 
well as subartctic waters in the North Atlantic.
HABITAT: Found in oceans and shallow seas, and on ocean 
shelves, near subpolar gyres, which are centered over 
the deep ocean basins where C. finmarchicus sinks 
during overwintering.
FEEDING HABITS: Mainly graze phytoplankton, including diatoms, 
dinoflagellates, and also ciliates.
NOTES: During long periods of starvation, C. finmarchicus can 
maintain egg production, as well as its metabolism (at 
a low rate).
SIZE: 1
/16–3
/16 in (2–4 mm) 144 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER
The genus Protoperidinium comprises more than 200 species, 
which have been identified from waters all over the globe—
though little is known about the ecology of each individual 
species. Members of Protoperidinium are heterotrophic 
dinoflagellates of fairly similar appearances. They are generally 
round or diamond-shaped, with thorns or spines and grooves 
along the center of the cell that show a division between the 
upper and lower halves. Protoperidinium species have plates 
around the cells that form a strong casing made of cellulose 
(called the theca) and flagella to help the organisms move 
through the water.
Raptorial feeders
All species belonging to Protoperidinium are heterotrophic. They 
lack chloroplasts and are raptorial feeders—using a method 
called pallium feeding to consume prey, whereby they exude a 
pseudopod (known as a pallium), which surrounds and digests 
the phytoplankton outside the heterotroph cell. Their diets 
vary between species and region; some species are generalists 
while others are highly specific grazers that will only grow if 
they consume a specific phytoplankton species.
Diverse distribution
Protoperidinium species are found almost universally in aquatic 
environments, including in many different habitats—from salt 
ponds to tropical seas and the Arctic Ocean. Some species are 
present year-round while others vary with the time of year 
and are only found in regions for one or two seasons. Their 
distribution tends to be driven by food availability, and the 
seasonality recorded in some species typically coincides with 
diatom blooms, with populations reaching their highest 
numbers during or straight after autotrophic biomass peaks.
Dinoflagellate Protoperidinium sp.
OPPOSITE | Protoperidinium use chemoreception to detect prey, 
circling around diatoms and other dinoflagellates to locate 
them before attaching to them.
FAMILY: Protoperidiniaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Protoperidinium have been recorded in aquatic 
regions all over the world; they often occur seasonally 
and are most abundant in coastal waters.
HABITAT: Species are found in a wide range of habitats, 
including marine, brackish, and fresh water.
FEEDING HABITS: Diets vary between species; some are very specific 
while others are generalists. Typically, they consume 
large diatoms and other dinoflagellates.
NOTES: Unlike most plankton species, members of 
Protoperidinium consume prey the same size, or even 
bigger than, themselves. They therefore compete with 
larger zooplankton, like copepods, for food.
SIZE: Up to 0.01 in (300 µm)146 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER
Crustaceans are typically the most abundant members of the 
mesozooplankton—by a long way (in terms of both number of 
species and number of individuals). They also display some of 
the most impressive metamorphoses from meroplanktonic 
larvae to motile adults. Among these notable transformations 
is the development of mantis shrimp from small, transparent, 
free-floating organisms to stunningly colorful and famously 
aggressive benthic predators.
Predatory plankton
Even as larvae, mantis shrimp are voracious predators. As 
such, they are likely to have a significant impact on food 
webs, though their specific ecological roles are understudied 
and not well understood. Around 500 species of mantis 
shrimp (those belonging to the order Stomatopoda) have been 
described, but—despite their relatively high abundances in 
samples—the larval stages have only been identified for a 
small percentage of these. Larval mantis shrimp are large 
zooplankton that can reach lengths of several centimeters; 
they prey on other zooplankton and are largely restricted to 
shallow, tropical waters.
Life stages
Mantis shrimp have a complex life cycle. Beginning as eggs 
laid by females (and either carried or attached to substrate 
until they hatch), mantis shrimp emerge as nauplii. At this 
initial stage, the larvae have simple bodies and a single eye; 
they use their appendages for movement and feeding on 
small zooplankton. It is when they progress to the next 
stage—zoea—that they develop more complex bodies, 
following several molts. When they develop from zoea to 
megalopa larvae, they begin to resemble adult mantis shrimp 
but are still part of the planktonic community, since they 
cannot swim against currents until they settle and 
metamorphose into juvenile mantis shrimp.
Mantis shrimp Alima sp.
OPPOSITE | Larval mantis shrimp use drag-powered swimming; 
they push water back and then move their limbs forward to 
propel themselves through the water.
FAMILY: Squillidae
DISTRIBUTION: The family is widespread in marine coastal waters, 
including the Pacific, Indian, and Atlantic Oceans, 
and the Caribbean and Mediterranean seas.
HABITAT: Mantis shrimp are mostly found in tropical regions 
with warm waters, though they are also present in 
subtropical and even some temperate regions.
FEEDING HABITS: Predators of other smaller zooplankton, including 
planktonic crustaceans.
NOTES: Some species come together only to mate, while 
others pair for life.
SIZE: Up to 11/2 in (4 cm)148 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER
Brachiopods are meroplanktonic, spending the first part of 
their life cycle as planktonic larvae and the latter part as sessile 
juveniles and adults that live on the seafloor. As adults, they 
are recognizable for having bilaterally symmetrical shells—
because their shells are in two parts, the adults look similar to 
bivalve mollusks.
Brachiopoda is an entire phylum, containing around 450 
species that have traditionally been divided into two classes: 
Inarticulata and Articulata (which includes Terebrataliidae). 
As adults, brachiopods range in size from 1
⁄16 in (1 mm) to 3
⁄8 in 
(9 mm). They are solitary animals that all exhibit a free-living 
larval stage. The larvae of those traditionally classed as 
Inarticulata resemble the adults and use their protruding 
lophophore (a tentacle-like organ that captures food particles 
in the water) for feeding and movement during their several 
months of planktonic life. Larvae of Articulata, on the other 
hand, are planktonic for just a few days before settling on 
substrate and undergoing metamorphosis.
Filter feeding
Like all brachiopods, the larvae of Terebratalia transversa
use a lophophore for feeding. This is lined with cilia, which 
facilitate a water current that transports food particles into 
the organ. Their diet varies depending on the region and 
season, but they mostly consume phytoplankton. After the 
larvae metamorphose and become sedentary adults, the 
feeding habits of T. transversa change and it filter feeds 
(still using the lophophore) to capture organic particles and 
detritus from the nearby water; this might include bacteria, 
phytoplankton, and small organic particles. 
Predators
The larvae of T. transversa and other brachiopods form 
an important part of the diets of numerous marine 
organisms, including zooplankton (like copepods), filter￾feeding invertebrates (like bivalve mollusks, clams, and 
barnacles), and fish with filtering mechanisms (like herring 
and anchovies).
Brachiopod Terebratalia transversa
OPPOSITE | During the larval stage, Terebratalia transversa
are free-swimming and enjoy a mobile life before settling on 
the seafloor. 
FAMILY: Terebrataliidae
DISTRIBUTION: Northeast Pacific waters, from Alaska to Mexico
HABITAT: Live in temperate marine waters, usually in tidal and 
subtidal zones.
FEEDING HABITS: Primarily phytoplankton during the larval stage.
NOTES: T. transversa larvae are small and transparent, with 
a distinct hinge region between two uncalcified shells.
SIZE: Larvae 0.01–0.06 in (0.3–1.5 mm); adults up to 11/2 in 
(4 cm)150 | WHERE PLANKTON WANDER
The horseshoe worm family—Phoronidae—and, in fact, the 
whole phylum, Phoronida, contains just two genera (Phoronis
and Phoronopsis). Their larvae are filter-feeding zooplankton 
known as Actinotroch. The early larval stages of horseshoe 
worms are very difficult to identify and there is a paucity 
of information around species belonging to the genera. 
Nevertheless, the organisms are abundant in the oceans and 
present at high densities (tens of thousands per square meter) 
when conditions are favorable in some regions.
The tentacle crown
The larvae live near the surface—usually at a depth of up to 
230 ft (70 m), but sometimes to around 1,300 ft (400 m). 
There, they feed on phytoplankton and small zooplankton, 
which they consume by generating water currents through 
their characteristic ciliated bands, called actinophores. These 
bands help them to move through and maintain their position 
in the water column, as well as draw in small particles to feed. 
(Interestingly, in adulthood, some species also incubate their 
eggs among their tentacles.)
Later life
As adults, horseshoe worms are bottom dwellers; they settle in 
the benthic layer of oceans and attach to substrate (like rocks 
or shells) using a pedicle, where they metamorphose into their 
sessile adult form. Here, they live out their life cycle as filter 
feeders, consuming food particles through their lophophore—
a specialist feeding structure that extends from the coelom.
Horseshoe worms Phoronis sp.
OPPOSITE | During a 30-minute metamorphosis, the tentacles of 
the Actinotroch are replaced by a lophophore, the anus moves, 
and the gut changes from straight to a U-shaped bend.
FAMILY: Phoronidae
DISTRIBUTION: Phoronids are found at high densities in seas and 
oceans all around the world; they have wide 
geographic ranges and are likely cosmopolitan.
HABITAT: Surface waters of marine environments around 
the world.
FEEDING HABITS: Phoronis larvae consume phytoplankton and 
small zooplankton.
NOTES: Phoronids were first described under their larval 
genus name—Actinotrocha; adult phoronids were 
not described until years later, and eventually the 
connection between the two was made (though more 
larval types have been described than adult).
SIZE: Larvae up to 1
/8 in (3 mm)FEED ING THE 
OCEANS
CHAPTER 5
Aquatic food webs commonly begin with plankton—the “organic soup” that provides 
energy for swathes of ocean, sea, and freshwater life. The energy fueling the fierce 
thrashing of an orca’s tail can, ultimately, be traced back to a single-celled plankton 
harnessing energy from the sun’s rays through photosynthesis. This remarkable process 
provides food for virtually all of Earth’s aquatic inhabitants (not to mention a huge 
proportion of the oxygen on which the world’s biosphere relies). Without plankton, the 
foundations of the food web would collapse, along with the entire marine ecosystem 
and the global carbon cycle.
The aquatic food web involves a multitude of complex interactions between organisms. 
It is divided into two main parts: the microbial loop and the transfer of carbon between 
larger organisms. Plankton play an important role at both levels, but the ecological role 
of microscopic plankton is of particular interest. Most plankton are microscopic, and it is 
the interactions between these invisible organisms that kickstart—and maintain—the 
aquatic food web.154 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
The very beginnings of marine food webs have long been of 
interest to biologists, but delving into the microbial ecology 
of the oceans is no easy task. For decades, the extent of 
the aquatic microbiome was unrealized. Even with the 
new technologies and computational techniques widely 
implemented today, microbiologists are still searching for 
answers around the complexities of the interactions between 
the billions of microorganisms inhabiting Earth’s water bodies.
Counting microplankton
Until the development of direct count assays using 
epifluorescence microscopy in the late 1970s, only organisms 
large enough to be seen under a light microscope could be 
studied. Suddenly, it was possible to count bacteria more 
accurately, and it became immediately clear that these 
microorganisms were much more abundant in oceans than 
biologists realized. The number of cells appearing under 
epifluorescence microscopes dwarfed the counts from agar 
plates, and estimates rocketed from hundreds of cells per 
milliliter of water to hundreds of thousands.
Just a few decades ago, the assay count breakthrough 
highlighted the extent of the knowledge gap when it came to 
aquatic microbial ecology: the majority of bacterial strains were 
unknown. Though the insights it offered were invaluable, the 
usefulness of microscopy (even epifluorescence microscopy) 
was still limited when it came to analyzing the millions of 
microorganisms in the ocean. It was not until the dawn of 
molecular biology that scientists could even begin to glean 
a true understanding of the microscopic diversity of Earth’s 
water columns.
Molecular innovation
With advances in molecular biology in the 1990s, 
microbiologists could isolate bulk DNA from ocean samples 
and use polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to analyze them. 
A technique using 16s ribosomal RNA (16s rRNA) proved 
particularly useful in the study of microscopic aquatic life. 
All microorganisms produce 16s rRNA to build proteins and, 
with the help of PCR, it was now possible for the gene that 
produces 16s rRNA to be identified in a sample of seawater. 
Microbiologists did just that, before analyzing the genes and 
recording variants of the 16s rRNA gene—each of which 
represented a different microorganism species. With this 
technique, hundreds of species were identified in each 
water sample.
Molecular techniques improved rapidly with the Human 
Genome Project, and by the early 2000s scientists could 
analyze DNA at unprecedented rates. When Craig Venter 
and his team applied these techniques to samples from the 
Sargasso Sea, they estimated that more than 47,000 species 
of microorganisms were living in that well-studied (but 
apparently relatively biologically inactive) area near Bermuda. 
Molecular biology revolutionized the study of microbes in the 
ocean, and these rapid, inexpensive, and precise approaches 
are still key to the study of microscopic plankton today.
A BRIEF HISTORY
OPPOSITE | For decades, plankton smaller than 
0.2 µm were invisible to scientists, who only had 
access to light microscopes. 155156 | FEEDING THE OCEANS157
Studying zooplankton
Studying larger zooplankton might sound like a simpler task, 
but the oceans remain a challenging environment for biologists 
and while many zooplankton are large enough to capture in 
fine nets, some are still too small, some are too fragile, and 
others are too savvy (and capable of avoiding capture). As 
such, innovative techniques are employed alongside filtration 
methods to measure and monitor zooplankton. These include 
direct observation through scuba techniques, remotely 
operated vehicles, acoustic sensors, and submersible 
technologies, like digital holographic cameras.
Carbon capture
When scientists began analyzing ocean water from 
below 1,600 ft (500 m) in the 1930s, they found that 
the ratio of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus (all 
building blocks of cellular molecules) was the same as 
in phytoplankton. Some 20 years later—in 1958—Alfred 
Redfield, a biologist at Harvard University, proposed 
that phytoplankton were not just mirroring the ocean’s 
chemical composition; rather, they were causing it. 
Scientists learned that phytoplankton utilize carbon 
dioxide to generate the organic matter essential 
for life. They are vital to the carbon cycle—without 
phytoplankton, the oceans would be more acidic and 
less carbon dioxide would diffuse into the water from 
the air. Levels of gas in the atmosphere would be higher 
and the entire carbon cycle would be altered. 
It took a view from space to truly appreciate the impact of 
microscopic plankton on the carbon cycle. Phytoplankton 
have a pigment—chlorophyll a—that enables them to 
absorb light for photosynthesis. The more phytoplankton 
there are, the darker the water appears from space. 
Using data from the Coastal Zone Color Scanner, 
and with the help of a NASA satellite, scientists could 
finally estimate global phytoplankton productivity. 
Phytoplankton, it revealed, incorporated 50–55 billion 
tons of inorganic carbon—almost half of the world’s 
carbon primary production—despite comprising less 
than 1 percent of the planet’s photosynthetic biomass.
OPPOSITE | Congregations of phytoplankton can now be 
monitored from space thanks to their bright chlorophyll 
pigmentation. Here, massive congregations of greenish 
phytoplankton swirl in the dark water around Gotland, 
a Swedish island in the Baltic Sea.
ABOVE | Although they are bigger than phytoplankton, 
most zooplankton are still microscopic, so studying them 
often requires analyzing water samples in a laboratory.158 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
THE CARBON CYCLE
To gain insights into the intricacies of the aquatic food web, 
it is essential to first understand the carbon cycle. Carbon is 
the energy currency of aquatic organisms—the majority of 
an organism’s energy is stored in carbon bonds. Food webs 
are used to map out the cycle of carbon through the living 
components of ecosystems. The processes in the aquatic web 
provide energy for, and cycle energy between, life under water, 
and play an indispensable role in carbon capture (removal of 
carbon from the atmosphere).
In aquatic webs, carbon enters the system through several 
routes: atmospheric carbon dioxide (which dissolves in surface 
waters), terrestrial labile dissolved and particulate organic 
matter (organic carbon from plants and soil, for example, 
which is broken down by bacteria), and refractory terrestrial 
carbon. Refractory terrestrial carbon is also organic carbon 
from sources like plants and soil, but it is the portion that 
resists bacterial degradation. It only accounts for a small 
portion of dissolved and particulate organic matter, but it can 
remain in the oceans for thousands of years, so is significant 
in its role as a carbon reservoir.
The biological pump
The biological pump is the process by which carbon is 
transferred into the oceans from the atmosphere and 
land runoff and, eventually, sequestered in the seafloor. 
Atmospheric carbon is fixed through photosynthesis by 
primary producers, while carbon that enters the system as 
dissolved and particulate organic matter is utilized by bacteria.
The pump describes the movement of this fixed organic 
carbon through the water column via various biological 
processes. Once carbon has been fixed, and so can be used by 
non-photosynthetic organisms as energy, organisms higher 
up the trophic levels—consumers—transfer it through the 
food web by eating live organisms. Carbon is used as energy 
and integrated into the shells of calcareous cells walls of 
phytoplankton like coccolithophores. Decomposition, where 
carbon is remineralized through the microbial loop (see 
page 160), occurs alongside these processes. 
A portion of fixed carbon sinks with feces or after the death 
of cells. When organisms die, for example, particles often form 
aggregates, which makes them heavier. These particles sink 
faster than smaller particles and, consequently, are more likely 
to escape predation and decomposition and make it right 
down to the sea floor. These particles are known as “marine 
snow” and can evade decomposition by bacteria, falling to 
the depths of the oceans without interruption. Carbon is also 
pumped from the surface layer through physical mixing and 
transferred with the diel vertical migration (see page 134).
When carbon is eventually deposited in seafloor sediments, 
it remains there, removed from the atmosphere, for thousands 
of years or more. This process, whereby carbon is sequestered 
from the atmosphere and terrestrial runoff and transported 
into the depths of the oceans, comprises the biological pump. 
More than 10 gigatonnes (Gt) of carbon are transferred into 
the deep ocean through the marine biological pump every year.
Carbon dioxide Carbon dioxide
Phytoplankton Zooplankton
Bacteria
Sinking POM
Suspended POM
Organic compound burial
Respiration
Vertical 
migration
Euphotic zone Dysphotic zone
The biological pump159
ABOVE | The microbial loop, fueled by dissolved organic 
matter, occurs alongside the classical aquatic food web.
DOM
Inorganic 
nutrients
Phytoplankton
Zooplankton
Large predators (fish)
Microzooplankton and 
mixotrophic algae
Small predators 
(invertebrates, fish)
Large predators (fish)
Grazers 
and scrapers 
(invertebrates)
Littoral 
zooplankton
Shredders 
and collectors 
(invertebrates)
Bacteria
Bacteria and fungi
Terrestrial and aquatic detritus
Periphyton 
macrophytes
Pelagic food web Microbial loop Littoral/benthic food web
Food webs and the links between them
OPPOSITE | Through the biological pump, organic carbon 
is transported deeper into the oceans and a small portion 
becomes buried in the seafloor, where it remains for 
thousands of years.160 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
THE INVISIBLE WEB
Beginning with photosynthesizing single-cell organisms, 
the aquatic food web is a complex cycle with multi-way 
interactions throughout. In its simplest form, the web begins 
with primary producers: microscopic bacteria and plant-like 
phytoplankton that harness energy from the sun. The 
producers are eaten by primary consumers, like larger 
microplankton and zooplankton. Zooplankton form the 
diet of aquatic animals (like fish and crustaceans), and these 
animals might be consumed by larger animals (like carnivorous 
fish), then the larger animals by apex predators, like sharks.
There are complex interactions between all “levels” of the 
food web, including top-down pressures, where organisms 
higher up the trophic levels regulate populations of their prey, 
and bottom-up pressures, where phytoplankton production 
regulates populations of animals higher up. The direction of 
these pressures varies between aquatic habitats, with ecological 
conditions, and over time.
The invisible elements of the food web are critical to aquatic 
ecosystem function. They might be small but, together, the 
ocean’s microscopic plankton are far more abundant and have 
a far greater combined biomass than all multicellular ocean life. 
It is estimated that there are many more bacteria in the ocean 
than there are stars in the universe. Their role in the food web 
shapes entire ecosystems; without them, all of nature’s cycles 
would soon collapse. Earth’s oceans bring to mind images of 
fish, seaweed, and whales but, in reality, it would be much 
more accurate to envision diverse, dense pools of bacteria.
Starting small
Small microscopic plankton are the basis of much ocean 
life. These tiny organisms—invisible to the naked eye—are 
divided into three groups based on their size: microplankton 
(20–200 µm), nanoplankton (2–20 µm), and picoplankton 
(0.2–2.0 µm). Aquatic viruses, which are less than 0.2µm, 
are classified in their own group: femtoplankton. Taxonomic 
classification of microscopic plankton is challenging, particularly 
for picoplankton and femtoplankton, due to the limitations of 
microscopy at such a small scale. But with the help of molecular 
techniques, scientists are beginning to realize the monumental 
extent of diversity among the smallest plankton groups. 
Picoplankton, also known as bacterioplankton, are the 
smallest members of the plankton collective—they include 
cyanobacteria and bacteria. These organisms are phototrophic 
and heterotrophic, respectively. Cyanobacteria can perform 
photosynthesis—they get their energy from light radiation 
and can synthesize organic compounds from inorganic 
substrates. Bacteria, on the other hand, consume organic 
carbon to generate energy. Picoplankton is a hugely diverse 
group, containing more species than freshwater plants and 
animals combined.
Nanoplankton—the medium-sized group of microscopic 
plankton—include protists, diatoms, and small algae. This group 
also includes both phototrophic and heterotrophic organisms. 
Microplankton contains the largest of the microscopic plankton, 
and comprises most phytoplankton, rotifers, ciliate protozoans, 
and juvenile copepods. 
Even at the microscopic level, trophic relationships between 
plankton groups are complex. It is useful to separate the wider 
food web of large (that is, non-microscopic) zooplankton and 
other animal species from the microbial components—the 
interactions between which are best understood using the 
microbial loop.
The microbial loop
There are two classes of organic matter in the oceans: dissolved 
organic matter (DOM) and particulate organic matter (POM). 
The categories are based simply on size—pores smaller than 
0.45 µm are considered DOM, while those bigger are POM. 
DOM is much more abundant and is one of the greatest 
reservoirs of organic carbon on Earth.
DOM and POM play an important role in organic carbon 
cycling, and the flow of DOM and POM through the microbial 
food chain is described with the microbial loop—a process that 
occurs alongside (and is interlinked with) the main food web. 
In surface waters, phytoplankton fix organic carbon into 
POM through photosynthesis, and the POM is passed through 161
BELOW | Complex aquatic food webs are fueled by 
primary producing phytoplankton and their primary 
consumers, zooplankton.
Top predators Predators Filterers Zooplankton Phytoplankton
Large sharks
Smaller sharks
Tuna
Marlin
Shrimp
Copepods
Amphipods
Squid
Lanternfish
Mackerel
Pteropods
Diatoms
Dinoflagellates
A complex aquatic food web162 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
the trophic levels to grazers and fish. POM can be transported 
into deeper water by sinking particles—a key process 
for removing carbon from the surface of the oceans and 
sequestering it in sediment on the ocean floor.
Phytoplankton also release DOM into the oceans. 
DOM diffuses into the water throughout a phytoplankton’s 
life, and also after its death. When zooplankton graze on 
phytoplankton, they lose much of the material through 
sloppy eating and the remnant DOM is released into the water. 
A similar release of DOM happens when a microbe is attacked 
by a virus and the host cell dies. Larger organisms also 
contribute to DOM in the water throughout their life cycles, 
including during the decomposition process after their death.
Historically, this DOM was considered a waste product, 
of little use to marine organisms. The recognition that bacteria 
break DOM down with enzymes and incorporate it into 
biomass was a major breakthrough and inspired the concept
of the microbial loop. 
Bacteria scavenge DOM floating in the water column and 
use what was previously considered to be waste matter to 
generate material for use as an energy source and to grow their 
own bodies—a process called secondary production. Bacteria 
consume vast amounts of DOM and regenerate inorganic 
nutrients, so the release of DOM by phytoplankton drives 
secondary production and bacterial growth. DOM is 163
incorporated back into the food web as bacteria are consumed 
by heterotrophic nanoplankton and microplankton, and even 
some larger metazoans such as appendicularians, which are, 
in turn, consumed by larger zooplankton. In due course, the 
carbon released from DOM by bacteria returns to the food 
chain as DOM and POM, closing the loop.
Despite the small biomass of individual bacteria in 
comparison to bigger phytoplankton and zooplankton, 
RIGHT | In the microbial loop, bacteria 
release carbon via respiration and recycle 
organic matter so it can be reincorporated 
into the food web. The microbes contribute 
to the production of recalcitrant DOM, 
which resists degradation and can be 
sequestered in the seafloor.
OPPOSITE ABOVE | Diatoms process light 
into energy for zooplankton primary 
consumers with the help of chlorophyll 
and carotenoid pigments.
OPPOSITE CENTER | Cyanobacteria such 
as Chroococcus turgidus are also known 
as blue-green algae because of their bold 
coloring, caused by chlorophyll a pigments.
OPPOSITE BELOW | Cryptomonads are 
dinoflagellates; some are mixotrophs, which 
means they can both photosynthesize and 
utilize energy from consuming bacteria.
bacteria have a much greater surface area. As such, they 
encounter and absorb more chemical substances in water than 
other microorganisms. Scientists now recognize that their 
considerable surface-to-volume ratio means bacteria have a 
rapid metabolic rate and, as a result, their contribution to the 
carbon cycle and aquatic food web is momentous.
Heterotrophic 
bacteria
Inorganic 
nutrients
POM
Long-term storage
The microbial loop
CO2
CO2
CO2
Phytoplankton Zooplankton
DOM
Microbial loop164 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
Effect of blooms on food webs
Algal blooms are a natural component of ecosystems and 
can have benefits for the food web. The spring bloom in 
temperate seas, for example, is a key annual event that 
provides huge concentrations of algae for higher organisms 
to feed on. Blooms of plankton can, however, have serious 
and harmful impacts on aquatic food webs. If a bloom 
becomes so dense that sunlight cannot penetrate the blanket 
of plankton, it can prevent other organisms from getting the 
light they need to survive. Moreover, the plankton can clog 
animal’s gills and suffocate them. And when a bloom ends, 
the degradation of the huge population of algae can extract 
significant amounts of oxygen from the water, leaving 
insufficient levels for other organisms. Blooms can be 
responsible for mass fish die-offs—sometimes impacting 
millions of animals—and the deaths of shellfish and seabirds.
Blooms can also release harmful substances into the 
ecosystem. Cyanobacteria produce hepatotoxins, 
neurotoxins, cytotoxins, and endotoxins, which can be 
difficult or impossible for water purification plants to remove 
from drinking water. Diatoms produce neurotoxins, which 
become particularly harmful as they accumulate in the food 
chain; they cause seizures in vertebrates and build up in 
shellfish and small fish which, when consumed by larger 
vertebrates (including humans) can cause serious health 
issues, and even death.165
The nano and micro grazers
The microbial loop is intertwined with the wider food web of 
plants and animals. Microplankton and nanoplankton affect 
populations of picoplankton directly by consuming them 
and, indirectly, by grazing on other picoplankton consumers, 
like heterotrophic nanoplankton. They control the bacteria 
populations in aquatic environments. Larger flagellates and 
cilliated protozoa consume smaller flagellates (as well as 
bacteria). In turn, microscopic zooplankton consume 
nanoplankton and other microplankton, and so the food 
web expands and energy is transferred between all factions 
of the microscopic community. 
This transfer of organic matter between microscopic 
organisms is extremely important for the efficiency of the food 
web. The microscopic loop reintroduces DOM, which would 
OPPOSITE | Some algal blooms aren’t easy to see, but in 
severe cases can expand visibly over the surface of vast 
expanses of water, here in Lake Erie, in North America. 
ABOVE | Most toxic red tides are caused by dinoflagellates; 
they are typically triggered when pollution causes 
a nutrient imbalance in coastal waters, here in the 
Marmara Sea, near Turkey.
otherwise be unavailable to most organisms higher up the 
food chain, into the food web. This valuable energy, passed 
on to larger microplankton that consume the bacteria, has 
far-reaching effects in the more traditional food web.166 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
THROUGH THE TROPHIC LEVELS
The next trophic levels—primary consumers—comprise 
a great diversity of metazoan zooplankton, as well as 
microscopic nanoplankton and microplankton. Metazoan 
zooplankton include both primary and secondary consumers. 
The group includes rotifers, meroplankton (for example, 
echinoderm and polychaete larvae), and holoplanktonic 
organisms, like copepod nauplii and copepodites. 
Meroplankton includes the larval forms of many benthic 
organisms, including crustaceans, sea urchins, and worms. 
Their roles in the food web vary—they are diverse and 
seasonal. Many zooplankton are suspension feeders that 
graze on phytoplankton, but the larger species also consume 
smaller zooplankton.
Copepod nauplii—the larval form of copepods—are the 
most abundant metazoans in the oceans and are found in 
freshwater habitats, too. They consume prey in a similar 
fashion to their adult counterparts and, though they are much 
smaller, they have a similar ecological role to adult copepods. 
Copepods play an important part in the food web, both as 
grazers of microzooplankton and as prey for forage fish.167
Large zooplankton like krill and ctenophores are an important 
source of protein in marine habitats. These animals belong 
primarily to the next level in the food web—secondary 
consumers—since a large portion of their diet comprises 
smaller zooplankton. Forage fish are also important secondary 
consumers. These species consume small zooplankton and 
are prey for larger predator fish, as well as mammals and 
birds. Large animals like seabirds, polar bears, and seals 
rely on plankton’s role in the food web, as does the human 
fisheries industry.
BELOW LEFT | Many species of fish rely on krill as 
a significant component of their food intake.
BELOW | Copepods have important roles as both grazers 
of phytoplankton and prey for larger zooplankton, filter 
feeders, and fish.168 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
FEEDING HUMANS
Overfishing is a major issue that continues to exert huge 
pressure on ocean ecosystems. Not only are fish populations 
being depleted, but non-target species are often harmed as 
bycatch, including crustaceans (like krill) and decapods (like 
prawns and shrimp). There is global pressure to reduce the 
damage that overfishing causes to the marine environment, 
but with demand for protein rising in line with a growing 
human population, progress has been slow. To protect the 
world’s aquatic habitats, developing less damaging methods 
of animal production is more important than ever.
Fish farming offers a more sustainable option for seafood 
production and, already, aquaculture accounts for a significant 
proportion of meat consumed by people around the world. 
The aquaculture industry is vital for food security and the 
contribution of fish to the human diet is set to increase. Today, 
these facilities often use unsustainable practices, but with 
improved processes, the industry has the potential to not 
only provide sustainable sources of protein, but also protein 
with bioavailable nutrients and fatty acids that are not 
naturally available in land-based foods.
Plankton in fisheries
The role of plankton in aquatic ecosystems is integral to fisheries 
for two reasons. Firstly, the majority of farmed fish produce 
larvae that live among and feed on plankton. Phytoplankton 
and zooplankton are also crucial in the primary and secondary 
production that supports fisheries. As in wild ecosystems, 
plankton are essential to the life cycle of fish in aquaculture 
systems, even in ponds where fish are given manufactured 
feed. They are important for supplementing food in the early 
life stages—for fingerling fish and postlarval crustaceans.
Maintaining an optimal balance of microbial plankton is 
a challenge in aquaculture systems. While there may be lots 
of species of phytoplankton present in an aquaculture pond, 
a few will usually dominate, comprising the majority of the 
phytoplankton community. Species composition in such 
communities can change rapidly—over several weeks—
and needs to be monitored carefully.
Potential problems
The concentration of nutrients in the water is monitored in 
aquaculture systems to control phytoplankton, but there is 
always a risk of an imbalance—especially in systems that use 
fertilizer or manufactured feed. The more inorganic nitrogen 
and phosphate in a water body, the more phytoplankton there 
will usually be, and if this balance is tipped in favor of one 
phytoplankton species, it can trigger a harmful algal bloom. 
An overabundance of some phytoplankton species, including 
cyanobacteria (blue-green algae), can produce odorous and toxic 
substances that may give fish and shrimp an “off-flavor” odor 
and taste. The issue is serious for aquaculture producers; 
off-flavor fish and shrimp will not be accepted by processors. 
To prevent waste due to off-flavor, producers usually undertake 
regular flavor tests. Some producers stock fish species that 
graze on cyanobacteria alongside the species they are farming 
to reduce the risk of blooms. If a bloom occurs, the water can 
be treated with copper sulfate, which kills the algae. 
Algal blooms can also cause toxicity—an issue most 
prevalent in the shellfish industry, where organisms are farmed 
in cages in eutrophic bays and estuaries. Toxins produced by 
phytoplankton do not usually impact the health of mollusks, 
so they can accumulate until they are present in the mollusks’ 
tissues at quantities that are dangerous, or even deadly, to 
humans. It is very difficult to prevent the growth of these 
toxin-producing algae in aquaculture ponds, so the emphasis 
is on not excessively feeding and supplementing the ecosystem 
with more nutrients than is necessary.
OPPOSITE ABOVE LEFT AND RIGHT | Global fish production 
reached 200 million tons in 2022; production increased 
by 33 million tons since 2021 and continues to rise.
OPPOSITE BELOW LEFT | Most sea bass farming is 
undertaken in sea cages and involves a natural 
exchange of water through nets.
OPPOSITE BELOW RIGHT | Shellfish farmed in crates and 
cages in environments with harmful algal blooms can 
cause neurotoxic shellfish poisoning in people.169170 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
A gelatinous zooplankton, Mnemiopsis leidyi is a species of 
ctenophore (a comb jelly) indigenous to temperate, subtropical 
estuaries along the Atlantic coast. The walnut-shaped species 
plays an important role in the food web as a consumer of a 
wide variety of zooplankton, as well as being a prey item for 
larger animals, including fish, birds, and aquatic mammals. The 
species has made headlines since it was accidentally introduced 
to the Black Sea, where it thrived and became a harmful 
invasive species. 
Ocean invaders
The species was transported in the ballast waters of ships from 
its native home along the eastern coasts of North and South 
America to the Black Sea in the 1980s. The ctenophore had no 
natural predators to slow its population growth, so M. leidyi
populations rapidly spread through the new habitat, causing 
widespread disruption to the ecosystem. Their rapid growth 
was fueled by a diet of plankton, fish eggs, and fish larvae, and 
the species soon had a catastrophic impact on the food web. 
M. leidyi depleted commercial fish stocks in the Black Sea, 
consuming both the commercial fish larvae and the plankton 
that comprised much of the commercial fish diet. The impact 
of the species on fisheries has since been controlled with the 
introduction of another ctenophore species, which feeds on 
Mnemiopsis. Monitoring the movement of ctenophores is 
challenging because of their physiology; the organisms are 
small and near transparent and have a delicate, gelatinous 
consistency, so they are not caught in nets easily without 
damaging them. It isn’t clear how widely or how fast 
Mnemiopsis is spreading.
Sea walnut Mnemiopsis leidyi
OPPOSITE | The rows of cilia along the body of a sea walnut 
(Mnemiopsis leidyi) refract light and can cause rainbows to 
pulse along them. 
FAMILY: Bolinopsidae
DISTRIBUTION: Native to the western Atlantic Ocean but invasive in 
European seas, especially the Black Sea.
HABITAT: Marine and brackish waters; known primarily as a 
coastal ctenophore, but has been recorded in deeper 
ocean waters—the maximum reported depth is 328 ft 
(100 m).
FEEDING HABITS: Actively predates on fish eggs and larvae, and 
zooplankton; an individual can eat up to ten times its 
body weight each day and survive food shortages for 
three weeks by reducing its body size.
NOTES: The name ctenophore describes the organism’s ctenes, 
or combs, which run down its body and help it move 
in water.
SIZE: Adults up to 5 in (12 cm) in length172 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
All organisms living in Antarctic pelagic ecosystems have 
adapted to cope with extreme conditions, including the 
presence of sea ice and seasonal variability as a result of 
the annual light cycle (there can be no sunlight for days to 
months in winter, while in the height of summer, the sun can 
be visible at midnight). Due to these environmental changes, 
phytoplankton tend to bloom intensely for a short period each 
year. This means that food availability for zooplankton changes 
drastically with the seasons, and so organisms have developed 
various adaptations in their metabolism, life cycle, and feeding 
habits to cope.
One common adaptation among organisms living in these 
extreme conditions—particularly primary consumers like 
copepods—is an increased capacity to store energy as lipids 
during the more productive months, which can then be 
released for reproduction or survival as necessary during 
less productive seasons. This is a vital process for Antarctic 
organisms throughout the food web, as it ensures energy 
availability year-round.
Lipid link
Themisto gaudichaudii is an amphipod with a particularly 
important role in the Antarctic food web. As a carnivorous 
species, the organisms have greater access to energy 
throughout the year, and so do not store lipids to the same 
degree as herbivorous species. They are, however, extremely 
important for the transfer of lipids between zooplankton that 
mainly eat phytoplankton (primary consumers) and predators 
higher up the food chain. 
T. gaudichaudii is a great example of the vital role 
carnivorous zooplankton play in the food web. Populations are 
abundant in Antarctic waters and these secondary consumers 
feed mainly on copepods. They are also a key prey source 
for higher predators like fish, penguins, and seabirds, thus 
ensuring that top predators have access to enough energy 
year-round in the challenging polar conditions.
Marine shrimp Themisto gaudichaudii
OPPOSITE | As a key part of Antarctic food webs, Themisto 
gaudichaudii can be used to indicate the presence of Antarctic 
waters in subantarctic regions.
FAMILY: Hyperiidae
DISTRIBUTION: Southern Ocean, the subantarctic, and Antarctic 
HABITAT: Marine waters 328–1,300 ft (100–400 m) deep
FEEDING HABITS: Important predators of copepods
NOTES: T. gaudichaudii is the main prey for many 
planktivorous seabirds in the Southern Ocean and 
has a trophic role similar to that of Antarctic krill 
further south.
SIZE: Juveniles 1
/16–3
/16 in (2–4 mm); adults around 
1 in (2.5 cm) 174 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
Ostracods—also known as seed shrimp—are an important 
and abundant class of crustacean found throughout the 
world’s oceans. Most planktonic ostracods, including 
Conchoecissa ametra, belong to the order Halocyprida, which 
describes those that lack obvious eyes. Like all ostracods, the 
body of C. ametra is completely enclosed within a carapace. 
Adults have seven pairs of limbs, while juveniles have fewer 
or only partially developed sets—as crustaceans, they 
undergo numerous molts during their development before 
metamorphosing into adults.
Deep dwellers
C. ametra is a detritivore and members of the Conchoecissa
genus are more common in ocean samples than those taken 
from coastal waters. Species within Halocyprida typically live 
in marine environments like the deep sea, open ocean, and 
intertidal zones. They are recorded in the water column and at 
the sea floor; some have even developed adaptations to survive 
in extreme environments like hydrothermal vents. They have 
an important role in the food web as detritivores, although 
they also consume phytoplankton and small zooplankton. 
Ocean cleaners
By consuming organic detritus, Halocyprida and other 
ostracods contribute to nutrient cycling in marine 
environments. The ocean’s detritivores break down dead 
plant and animal material and waste, then recycle the 
nutrients. Halocyprids are also important food sources for 
larger organisms. Fish, crustaceans, and other filter-feeding 
marine animals consume halocyprids as part of their diet.
Ostracod Conchoecissa ametra
OPPOSITE | Deep-sea-dwelling Conchoecissa ametra does 
not have eyes and its body is encased in a carapace.
FAMILY: Halocyprididae
DISTRIBUTION: Pacific and Indian Oceans, and regions of the Atlantic
HABITAT: Marine waters, to depths of 5,000 ft (1,500 m)
FEEDING HABITS: Filter feeder that consumes detritus as well as 
coccolithophores, radiolarians, crustaceans, 
and tintinnids.
NOTES: Living organisms are bright scarlet, but appear 
black at the depths at which they are found, where 
there is no red light.
SIZE: 1
/8–3
/16 in (3.3–4.6 mm) 176 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
Phytoplankton are the foundation of all aquatic food webs, 
performing the vital role of fixing atmospheric carbon 
dioxide into biological matter. Diatoms like those belonging 
to the Thalassiosira genus are responsible for a considerable 
proportion of marine primary production. When conditions 
are favorable, these diatoms rapidly divide and can form huge 
blooms, which, in turn, have an important role in the carbon 
cycle. As nutrients are depleted and the blooms die off, cells 
sink through the water column, eventually sequestering 
carbon deep in the ocean. Some have suggested that the 
role of diatoms in the carbon cycle is comparable to that 
of all rainforests combined.
Hardy bloom
An important component of food chains in cold, turbid waters, 
T. rotula is a photosynthetic diatom that forms chain colonies. 
This species and others in the genus, which contains more 
than 100 species, are particularly important primary producers 
because they are well adapted to low temperature and light 
conditions. Since they can thrive in these less optimal 
conditions, members of Thalassiosira often bloom during 
spring in temperate regions, like northern European seas.
Individual T. rotula cells are discoid (other species in the 
large genus are cylindrical, spherical, or box-shaped) and 
can join together to form defensive chains with thick bundles 
of threads between them. This helps the organisms to evade 
predation by zooplankton, which can exert control over 
blooms of solitary phytoplankton species. Members of the 
genus can be found in diverse habitats around the world, 
and are particularly important to food webs in temperate 
and polar regions.
Diatom Thalassiosira rotula
OPPOSITE | In Thalassiosira rotula thick bundles of chitin threads 
extend from each single-celled diatom to bind individuals 
together and form long chain colonies.
FAMILY: Thalassiosiraceae
DISTRIBUTION: Primarily found in temperate water regions, but more 
widespread if considered alongside T. gravida, which 
might be the same species.
HABITAT: Found primarily in shallow, near-shore marine habitats.
FEEDING HABITS: Primary producers that fix carbon dioxide through 
photosynthesis.
NOTES: Since they have small genomes, members of the 
Thalassiosira genus have been used in molecular 
studies, which have revealed important differences 
between diatoms and other eukaryotes.
SIZE: 0.0003–0.002 in (8–55 μm)178 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
Asterionellopsis is a genus of delicate, intricately shaped 
diatoms with needle-like projections. They are often found in 
chains or colonies; individual cells join together at their valve 
faces or form ribbon-like chains. Asterionellopsis species are 
important primary producers in coastal waters and the 
open ocean. They play a key role in the marine food web, 
transferring energy from the sun to zooplankton and other 
organisms farther up the trophic levels, as well as in the carbon 
cycle, since they remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere 
and store it in sediments in the seafloor when they die and 
sink through the ocean water column.
Blooming diatoms
It has been reported that some species in the genus can 
become large-scale blooms. Phytoplankton blooms like those 
caused by Asterionellopsis have become increasingly common 
in coastal waters. Eutrophication (see page 189) caused by 
anthropogenic activity, such as pollution from agricultural 
practices, can affect these habitats. An increase in nutrients 
like phosphorus and nitrogen can trigger blooms by making 
conditions more favorable for diatoms like Asterionellopsis, 
thus helping them dominate other plankton species. Coastal 
blooms of diatoms are being reported more frequently and 
across all latitudes. 
The blooms can threaten marine ecosystems and the 
productivity of fisheries, and also pose human health risks. 
Asterionellopsis blooms have been shown to impact plankton 
dynamics. In some cases, meroplankton become dominant 
and some species of mostly carnivorous copepods notably 
outnumber species that are mostly herbivorous at the peak 
of the blooms. These changes in the balance of plankton 
communities can have repercussions for other parts of the 
food web during bloom periods.
Diatom Asterionellopsis sp.
OPPOSITE | Each spine projecting from this Asterionellopsis 
glacialis colony chain belongs to an individual diatom. 
FAMILY: Fragilariaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Cosmopolitan in cold to temperate coastal waters
HABITAT: Shallow marine waters
FEEDING HABITS: Primary producer diatoms that transform light from the 
sun into energy through photosynthesis.
NOTES: Asterionellopsis species are also important 
palaeoenvironmental indicators; their fossilized 
remains are preserved in seafloor sediment and 
can help in the reconstruction of past conditions.
SIZE: 0.001–0.006 in (30–150 μm) 180 | FEEDING THE OCEANS
A genus of freshwater and marine plankton, Dinobryon
species have a cylindrical, conical, vase- or funnel-shaped lorica 
(shell-like layer) on the body. Members of Dinobyron belong 
to the Chrysophyceae class, which are known as golden 
algae because of the organisms’ yellowish chloroplasts. They 
come together to form recognizable branching, tree-shaped 
colonies, which probably make them difficult for zooplankton 
to consume. 
Mixed diet
Many species of Dinobryon are mixotrophs, meaning they 
are able to obtain energy from both photosynthesis and 
phagotrophy—feeding by engulfing a food cell or particle, in 
this case bacteria. They inhabit lakes, estuaries, and coastal 
seas; Dinobryon species are more common in freshwater 
environments and some play a particularly important role 
as grazers of bacteria in oligotrophic lakes. Despite being 
capable of photosynthesis too, mixotrophic members of 
Dinobryon can consume bacterial species at a rate equal to 
some heterotrophic flagellates.
Eutrophic blooms
Dinobryon species form stomatocysts—the organisms are able 
to enclose themselves in rigid cell walls, which protect them 
during periods of challenging environmental conditions. The 
cysts provide safety against predation and changes in physical 
conditions, so the organisms can remain in a dormant state 
and emerge again when conditions improve. When the 
environment becomes more favorable—for example, when 
the water temperature rises or the nutrient concentration 
improves—Dinobryon populations can emerge, rise to the 
surface, and reproduce at a rapid rate.
At this time—usually during the spring and summer 
months in temperate regions, when the water is warm—
Dinobryon species can bloom. They are most likely to bloom 
in eutrophic waters with plenty of sunlight. The blooms grow 
rapidly because Dinobryon species have defenses against 
predation by zooplankton; some species have spines or 
bristles, and colonies can form elongated shapes with slimy, 
mucilaginous sheaths, making them much harder to consume.
Golden algae Dinobryon sp.
OPPOSITE | A tree-like colony of Dinobryon contains many 
vase-like lorica, each with a gold-colored chloroplast inside.
FAMILY: Dinobryaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Cosmopolitan, but more common in temperate regions
HABITAT: Particularly abundant in the euphotic zone of relatively 
low-nutrient lakes.
FEEDING HABITS: As mixotrophs they can photosynthesize and feed on 
other organic matter.
NOTES: Each Dinobryon species forms a unique siliceous 
cyst, called a stomatocyst, which helps in their 
identification. 
SIZE: About 0.0008 in (20 μm) FAC ING THE 
FUTURE
CHAPTER 6
Marine ecosystems—which are fueled by plankton—regulate the planet’s climate. Ensuring 
the conservation of plankton is, then, essential to mitigating climate change and ensuring the 
survival of animal life on Earth. The diverse collection of free-floating organisms contributes 
hugely to global biodiversity and primary production and, in turn, the global economy. 
Marine biomes are vast, complex, and diverse—they are difficult to study and their 
components are poorly understood compared to those of terrestrial ecosystems. Only 
around 230,000 of an estimated 10 million marine species have been described. Because so 
little is known about Earth’s aquatic environments, it is difficult to predict how human activity 
might impact these systems in future—and what wider implications such changes might have.
Considering the various ways aquatic environments are threatened by human activity can 
help scientists understand the pressures on plankton communities and predict how they 
might respond when these threats are amplified in future. There are a great many human￾driven pressures on aquatic ecosystems, including habitat loss through land conversion, 
overexploitation of fish and marine invertebrates, invasive species, climate change 
(including global warming), ocean acidification, pollution, and mineral extraction.184 | FACING THE FUTURE
CLIMATE CHANGE
Links have already been established between plankton and 
climate change. Long-term surveys have shown systematic 
changes in plankton communities in various locations around 
the globe. The distribution of Antarctic krill, for example, has 
contracted considerably over the last 90 years—a change that 
is likely linked to changing weather conditions and reduced sea 
ice cover. Changes in communities of zooplankton have been 
reported in the face of climate change too, and the effects are 
not limited to marine environments.
While many of the recently reported changes in plankton 
populations can be linked to climate change, the precise causes 
are not always clear. Ocean mixing and global warming are 
thought to be important factors. The growing intensity and 
frequency of weather events impacts mixing, which affects 
light levels, surface temperatures, and nutrient recycling—all 
important factors for phytoplankton productivity (and so all 
plankton and marine organisms higher up the trophic levels). 
Simultaneously, increasing water temperatures favor some 
species over others and result in changes to community 
compositions, as well as shifts in plankton distribution.
Ocean warming
The oceans have been gradually cooling over the last 8 million 
years, but the last time the waters were this warm—before the 
cooling began—plankton were living 2,000 miles (3,200 km) 
from where they are found today. Global warming is bypassing 
8 million years of cooling, suddenly shifting the oceans 
back through millennia, and organisms do not have time to 
adapt. As ocean temperatures continue to rise, a pattern of 
movement away from the tropics and toward the poles is 
North 
America
South 
America
Pacific Ocean
May 9–May 15, 2022 May 8–May 14, 2023
410F
(+50C)
23 0 0F 
(-50C)
Sea surface temperature anomaly
(Ref. period 1985–1993)185
OPPOSITE | The temperature of the surface waters of 
Earth’s oceans recently hit an all-time high. This image 
shows sea-surface temperatures in May 2022 and May 
2023 compared to a reference period of 1985–1993. 
Data source: NOAA.
predicted for plankton. Other major changes associated with 
warming include shifts in phenology (the timing of recurring 
biological events) and a reduction in body size. The changes are 
likely to result in the loss of plankton populations and, in turn, 
many other marine species across the food webs.
The ranges of many plankton species have already extended 
with increasing water temperatures. Lots of species belonging 
to primary producer genus Ceratium, for example, have 
shifted into warmer waters. Scientists are witnessing seasonal 
changes too, and at high latitudes, a decrease in the ratio of 
dinoflagellates to diatoms has been attributed to increasing 
temperatures in surface waters coupled with heightened 
winds in summer.
The distribution of phytoplankton may be changing more 
drastically with ocean warming than zooplankton grazers. 
Merozooplankton might also be affected more than 
holozooplankton. The differing rates of adaptation to climate 
change are concerning because of the potential disruption 
to aquatic food webs. If the abundance of those organisms 
at lower trophic levels shifts to peak at a different time to 
abundance of their predators, less energy will be transferred 
through the food web.
TEMPERATURE ANOMALY (°F)
YEAR
1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
-1.5
-1.25
-0.75
-1.0
-0.5
-0.25
0
0.25
0.75
0.5
1.0
ABOVE | The average global sea-surface temperature has 
risen by more than 1.5°F since the 1880s.
Rise in global sea surface temperature186 | FACING THE FUTURE
OCEAN 
ACIDIFICATION
The pH of oceans is decreasing with increasing atmospheric 
carbon dioxide. If nothing is done to prevent it, water pH 
is expected to change more than it has done for 300 million 
years. How exactly this change might impact plankton is a 
hot topic in marine science—there are a number of complex 
variables that make the overall impact of such a significant 
change difficult to predict.
Photosynthesis by phytoplankton is stimulated by 
increased dissolved carbon dioxide—this could make marine 
plankton an increasingly useful sink as atmospheric carbon 
continues to rise in coming decades. Unfortunately, the overall 
effects of the predicted changes are not so straightforward. 
Different species of plankton have different sensitivities to 
carbon dioxide concentration. Increases in carbon dioxide 
levels will give some species an advantage over others, thus 
altering the community structure and dynamics of the whole 
food web. 
ABOVE | Reduced water pH will affect 
the structural integrity of mineralized 
coccospheres and might also make 
coccolithophores easier to digest.
LEFT | An increase in dissolved carbon 
dioxide causes higher concentrations 
of bicarbonate and hydrogen ions, 
and a decrease in carbonate ions. 
Together, these changes result 
in acidification.
Adding to the complexity, phytoplankton like 
coccolithophores use bicarbonate to produce calcium 
carbonate, which increases carbon dioxide levels and so 
could be a further source of atmospheric carbon dioxide. 
Acidification will hamper the ability of some plankton to 
build exoskeletons (including coccolithophores) and will 
impact zooplankton and picoplankton communities, too. 
CO2
CO2
H2O H2CO3
Atmospheric 
carbon dioxide
Dissolved 
carbon 
dioxide
Water
Carbonic 
acid
Bicorbonate ions
HCO3
Deformed shells
Hydrogen ions
H+
Carbonte ions
CO3
2-
Ocean acidification
Less acidic More acidic187
OVERFISHING
The overexploitation of fish and marine invertebrates has 
long been a major cause of biodiversity loss. Populations of 
large fish have already been depleted, triggering shifts in 
commercial fishing to deeper areas of the oceans and species 
farther down the trophic levels (called “fishing down the 
food web” as we rely more on smaller species and more on 
herbivorous species). It is estimated that a third of fisheries 
are being pushed beyond their biological limits. And the 
effects reach far beyond the target fish—other species are 
killed as bycatch, habitats are disrupted by fishing equipment, 
fishing debris adds to pollution, and there are knock-on 
effects of depleting fish populations on the food web. When 
top predators are targeted by the commercial fishing industry, 
trophic cascades are triggered, with effects reaching down 
to plankton. 
The impacts of overfishing on plankton are heightened by 
environmental shifts caused by climate change. In the Central 
Baltic, for example, the popular commercial fish, cod, struggled 
to recover from overfishing when faced with decreased salinity, 
which causes recruitment failure. Populations of Acartia
copepods and sprat increased concurrently, thanks to rising 
water temperatures and the reduced predation pressure from 
cod. Together, these changes marked a major restructuring of 
the trophic levels in the ecosystem, which cascaded down the 
trophic levels and impacted zooplankton populations.
ABOVE | Aerial view of fishermen catching fish using 
a huge net. The number of overfished stocks around 
the globe has tripled in the past 50 years.188 | FACING THE FUTURE
MINERAL EXTRACTION
Mining aquatic bodies for resources like sand, silt, and 
mud, and mineral-rich sand like ilmenite and diamonds has 
detrimental effects for entire ecosystems, including plankton 
communities. The processes of excavation and dredging in 
aquatic bodies cause direct harm to organisms, as well as 
altering the environment. Riverbeds and ocean floors are 
often destroyed; dredging tears up these habitats, which 
are particularly important for eggs and larvae (including 
meroplankton), so can impact species success. The physical 
mining process also increases turbidity and sedimentation, 
reducing light penetration and hampering primary production 
by phytoplankton; this can cause shifts in phytoplankton 
communities, since some species are more sensitive to low 
light conditions than others.
Terrestrial mining operations also have negative effects on 
nearby aquatic systems. Heavy metals, inorganic particles, and 
toxic substances are often released into water bodies. Resulting 
changes in water quality can be detrimental to plankton 
growth and reproduction. Zooplankton communities are 
impacted through the ingestion of inorganic particles 
associated with phytoplankton, which reduces the nutritional 
value of their food intake and decreases growth. Runoff from 
mining activities can cause nutrient imbalances too, triggering 
a shift in phytoplankton community structure and, in some 
cases, harmful algal blooms.
Deep-sea mining 
Pressure to extract as-yet unexploited mineral deposits 
in the deep sea is on the rise—particularly with an 
increasing global demand for metals used in advanced 
technologies. The development of deep-sea technology 
is making the mining projects more feasible, and 
considerable sums of money have been invested into the 
field. The prospect is very real, despite scientists being in 
agreement that the environmental consequences would 
be enormous, and much deep-sea life would be lost even 
before it becomes known to science.
The process would cause severe environmental damage 
vertically and horizontally throughout the water column, 
including a great loss of biodiversity and ecosystem 
functions. Seafloor habitats would be destroyed and 
sediment plumes would cause disruption. There would be 
considerable noise and light pollution, and contaminants 
would alter water properties. All of these activities could 
impact plankton communities. 
RIGHT | Aquatic systems surrounding copper mines can 
become polluted by copper acid, which turns the water 
red and can cause environmental damage.189
EUTROPHICATION
Nutrient enrichment is one of the main sources of pollution 
in freshwater and marine coastal systems. The frequency 
and extent of eutrophication have increased with human 
activity—in particular, as a result of increased fertilizer use 
in agriculture. The change in nutrient levels triggers shifts 
in the dynamics of aquatic ecosystems, often causing an 
overabundance of plants and phytoplankton. Notably, 
eutrophication leads to algal blooms. It causes changes in the 
ecosystem structure, nutrient cycles, and the food web, and 
alters the commercial and recreational usage of a water body. 
Current strategies for managing eutrophication, including 
top-down control of consumers and bottom-up approaches 
BELOW | The heightened uptake of carbon by 
phytoplankton during a bloom increases water 
pH and can adversely affect plankton growth.
like diverting nutrients and applying algicides, tend to be 
impractical, unaffordable, or ineffective. Demand for clean 
water is only going to increase with human population growth, 
so protecting these valuable resources by minimizing nutrient 
inputs and developing more effective management approaches 
to eutrophication is a priority.190 | FACING THE FUTURE
ORGANOCHLORINE POLLUTION
For decades, organochlorine pesticides were extensively used 
for insect pest control in agriculture and public health. Though 
their use has since been curbed by environmental regulations, 
the pesticides are still of global concern because they persist 
in aquatic systems, where they intoxicate aquatic life and 
accumulate in the tissues of aquatic and terrestrial invertebrates 
and vertebrates. Plankton have been identified as important in 
the dispersal of organochlorine pesticide particles in the oceans. 
Although organochlorines are not directly harmful to 
zooplankton, the organisms disperse particles horizontally 
and vertically, and bring them into the food web. The toxins 
accumulate at each trophic level and cause harm, or even 
death, to animals—especially top predators. Crustaceans, 
which are more closely related to insects than many animals, 
are particularly susceptible to the effects of pesticides. 
ABOVE | Common organochlorine pesticides were 
banned in the USA and Europe in the 1970s, but they 
are still used in developing countries.
Organochlorine particles also reduce photosynthesis by 
marine phytoplankton. As some phytoplankton species are 
more sensitive to the impacts of pesticides than others, this 
can change the composition of primary producer communities, 
and so higher trophic levels.191
PLASTIC POLLUTION
Plastic pollution has been shown to impact all levels of the 
marine food chain, including primary production and carbon 
sequestration. Large plastic debris causes harm to marine life 
through ingestion and physical entanglement. Though harder to 
study, it is clear that microplastics and nanoplastics are a huge 
and increasing problem. There are an estimated 1014 microplastic 
particles drifting in marine habitats today and millions of tons 
more contaminate aquatic bodies every year. 
Floating plastics accumulate on the ocean surface, 
reducing light transmission to phytoplankton beneath, and 
therefore reducing primary production. At high concentrations, 
microplastics negatively affect phytoplankton growth, and 
this effect increases with decreasing particle size—an important 
consideration, given that quantities of microplastics will 
increase as large plastic debris degrades and fragments in water 
TOP LEFT | Microplastics and the toxins associated with 
them accumulate in the bodies of marine animals higher 
up the food chain.
ABOVE LEFT | Nets and other waste from the fishing 
industry account for the majority of large plastic pollution 
(measuring over 8 in/20 cm) floating in the oceans. 
ABOVE | Physical entanglement can pose a serious threat 
to large zooplankton, like this jellyfish.
systems over time. Toxins from microplastics can also harm 
zooplankton, and microplastic particles aggregate with other 
contaminants and transport them into the tissues of organisms 
when the microplastics are consumed. What’s more, when 
zooplankton ingest microplastics, they become satiated and 
their nutritional intake reduces. This has knock-on effects at a 
population level: their eggs become smaller and less successful. 192 | FACING THE FUTURE
HOW PLANKTON ARE RESPONDING
Aquatic environments are already undergoing noticeable 
change. Anthropogenic activities are causing ongoing 
environmental stressors for plankton, including changes to 
water quality, temperature, nutrient supply, light transmission, 
and pH, as well as direct physical threats to plankton and 
indirect impacts from threats to other trophic levels. Resulting 
adjustments in seasonal distribution, migrations, and 
community structure have been reported in plankton. 
While some taxa have been able to adapt to (or even thrive in) 
changing environments to date, the extent of future impacts 
of human activities on aquatic systems is likely to cause 
significant disruption to plankton populations, including 
widespread extinctions. 
Biodiversity is key to ecosystem stability. It is widely 
accepted that biodiversity among plankton is going to decline 
in a future of continued anthropogenic-induced change. 
Plankton communities will undergo reorganization in response 
to changing physical, chemical, and environmental factors, and 
the historic balance of diversity will be lost. This instability will 
have far-reaching consequences for the food web and for the 
global climate system by the end of the century.
While there is indisputable evidence for some shifts, there 
are still a great many unknowns around how plankton are 
responding to environmental changes. Long-term research 
is lacking around plankton phenology (the cyclic events 
in biological life cycles) in the tropics and Southern 
Hemisphere, for example, and it is not clear how the effects of 
anthropogenic activities will impact important variables in the 
carbon cycle, like zooplankton grazing and excretion rates. The 
extent of change to the ocean’s biological pump is also largely 
unknown. Without a solid foundation of knowledge around 
historical and recent changes in plankton communities, 
predicting their future is a huge challenge. Given their vital 
roles, filling the knowledge gaps and making progress in this 
field is a priority.
The future of phytoplankton
Regional variation is expected in primary productivity; climate 
change will reduce suitable environments for phytoplankton at 
lower latitudes and extinctions will outweigh colonizations. 
At the same time, diversity will increase at high latitudes, 
where colonizations will exceed extinctions. A general trend 
suggests an increase in phytoplankton biomass toward the 
poles and a decrease toward the equator, in the tropics, and 
in temperate regions. This shift is anticipated to be driven by 
changing supplies of nutrients (leading to reduced biomass at 
low latitudes) and water temperature increases, which cause 
higher biomass in eutrophic higher latitude regions.
Biodiversity and community structure will also be 
impacted. Increased stratification, for example, will reduce 
ocean mixing, which can contribute to both positive and 
negative changes in phytoplankton richness. Although 
phytoplankton colonization is expected to outweigh extinction 
at high latitudes, the diversity will likely be among fewer types 
of phytoplankton compared to the present balance. Regional 
variations coupled with gaps in knowledge make it very difficult 
to accurately model the future of phytoplankton populations.
Smaller phytoplankton are expected to dominate—another 
important shift, since these are less effective producers for larger 
plankton, and nekton such as fish. Regions dominated by small 
phytoplankton species tend to sequester less carbon to the 
deep ocean and support less productive ecosystems. The effects 
of this change will be experienced throughout the food web. 
Under laboratory conditions, phytoplankton communities 
have adapted to new conditions (like increased water 
temperature or acidification) within several hundred 
generations—just a few years, given their short lifespans. 
There is hope, then, that some species of phytoplankton will 
adapt to changing conditions; however, this scenario is less 
likely given the speed of change and the great number of 
important environmental variables (and shifts in the whole 
food web) that will be changing at once.193
ABOVE | Models such as this one by Ibarbalz et al., 
2019, suggest that from the beginning to the end of 
the 21st century, species diversity among most groups 
of plankton will increase (red)—particularly toward the 
poles—but diversity is expected to decrease among 
copepods in temperate regions (blue).
>50
25
0
-25
<-50
Bacteria (P) Bacteria (H)
Endophotosymbiont Parasitic protists Copepods
Protists (P)
Anomalies (%)
Projected changes in diversity of the organisms shown by 
the end relative to the beginning of the 21st century
BELOW | A model showing the distribution of 
phytoplankton in the world’s oceans from 1994 to 
1998. Red represents large diatoms, yellow represents 
flagellates (also large phytoplankton), green represents 
prochlorococcus (small phytoplankton), and blue 
represents synechococcus (other small phytoplankton). 
The higher the opacity, the greater the carbon biomass.194 | FACING THE FUTURE
The future of zooplankton
The distribution of zooplankton will be influenced by changes 
in primary production communities, since zooplankton rely 
on primary producers for energy. Where phytoplankton go, 
the next trophic levels will follow. Climate change and global 
warming will have a significant impact on the timings of 
plankton blooms—especially at high latitudes. A key concern, 
then, is the likelihood that the timings of life stages of 
zooplankton and their predators will not change in synchrony: 
there will be a mismatch in timings and the effects will be 
evident across whole aquatic ecosystems. With resulting 
decreases in fish recruitment and changes to spawning and 
migrations, trophic mismatch could be extremely costly for 
ecosystems and fisheries.
Other changes in phytoplankton communities will 
influence zooplankton, too. For example, expected shifts to 
communities dominated by small phytoplankton species will 
hamper growth and reproduction in zooplankton. In terms of 
their response to warming oceans and increasing acidity, some 
zooplankton taxa are likely to perform better than others, so 
shifts in community structure are expected. Generalizations 
are difficult to make, since the rate of increase in sea 
surface temperature varies regionally (temperatures 
in the North Atlantic are expected to rise much quicker 
than in the Southern Ocean, though the Antarctic peninsular 
is warming at the fastest rate), but changes have already 
been reported across zooplankton populations with 
increasing temperatures. 195
OPPOSITE | Phytoplankton blooms in the North 
Atlantic and Arctic Oceans can be seen 
from space every year; here, a bloom of 
coccolithophores covers the Barents Sea.
ABOVE | Many factors can trigger peaks in 
zooplankton abundance, as shown here; for 
example, phytoplankton blooms, declines in 
predation pressure, and physical oceanographic 
features, like currents and eddies.
Scientists have witnessed shifts in phenological timing; 
spring or summer species tend to occur earlier and fall species 
later, and these shifts are happening sooner in zooplankton 
than in other marine species. Zooplankton have already 
begun shifting in geographical range toward the poles, and are 
expected to move farther poleward or deeper into the water 
column, where temperatures are lower. There are shifts toward 
smaller size, too. As with phytoplankton, smaller species are 
expected to dominate with increasing water temperatures, 
with consequences for fisheries and carbon sequestration. 
Together, these changes will have impacts on the biological 
pump and energy transfer through the food web.196 | FACING THE FUTURE
PLANKTON’S ROLE 
IN TIMES OF CRISIS
Today, plankton are responsible for providing around half of 
the oxygen production on Earth. Plankton are also responsible 
for regulating the planet’s climate through the absorption and 
sequestering of atmospheric carbon dioxide. The oceans are 
the world’s biggest carbon sink and have a huge role to play 
in mitigating the rise in carbon dioxide and global warming. 
As human activities emit increasing quantities of greenhouse 
gases, conserving plankton’s biodiversity and delicate balance 
in ecosystems will be integral to minimizing the resulting 
climate change. Lastly, plankton are going to play an integral 
role in providing the aquatic protein necessary to feed a 
growing human population.
Plankton’s role in the planet, and humanity’s, future 
cannot be overemphasized. These groups of passive, mostly 
microscopic, and largely understudied aquatic organisms are 
heavily involved in the most important systems on Earth. 
The planet’s future depends on the conservation of plankton 
biodiversity, and a monumental amount of work remains 
to be done before accurate predictions can be made, and so 
mitigation and management plans can be implemented, to 
ensure their prosperity.
RIGHT | Plankton assemblages are already restructuring 
with global warming; monitoring their movements could 
provide valuable insights into changing ocean systems.197
Environmental indicators
Plankton have also been recognized as important 
environmental indicators in aquatic systems. They 
provide useful information about environmental 
change, and so can be beneficial in the wider study 
of changing aquatic systems. Whole populations 
respond quickly to changes in temperature and 
currents, and significant alterations in their range and 
distribution can result. The lifespans of plankton are 
also generally very short, increasing the rate at which 
community dynamics shift with environmental change. 
Finally, few plankton species are used for commercial 
purposes, so, unlike other marine species, their 
populations are not directly impacted by exploitation. 
Thus, changes in plankton communities are easier to 
link with wider, long-term environmental shifts, like 
those caused by climate change. 
By monitoring plankton populations, scientists can 
assess changes in the health of the water body. 
Sampling plankton might offer insights into fish 
populations, pollution, and climate change. Plankton 
might even be more useful indicators of change than 
the environmental variables themselves, because 
plankton populations can change rapidly and 
significantly with subtle environmental fluctuations. 
Taken alone, such fluctuations might not be 
noticeable. The amplified responses seen in plankton 
communities can be easier to spot and monitor. 198 | FACING THE FUTURE
Monitoring challenges
Plankton are present throughout water bodies and, since most 
are microscopic, their populations can be very challenging to 
monitor—especially in the open ocean. Long-term data on 
plankton is hard to come by and funding for long time-series 
surveys has fluctuated over the years. In the late 1980s, 
funding was pulled for several long-term monitoring projects 
in Europe, which were not deemed worthwhile. The projects 
did not become a priority again until the late 1990s, when 
there was an emerging interest in climate change. 
Today, numerous long time-series plankton monitoring 
programs are underway, but a lack of consistent data from 
long-term studies combined with spatial and temporal 
variations in plankton communities has resulted. When 
coupled with a general lack of understanding around how 
climate change and other human activities will alter aquatic 
ecosystems, the challenge of predicting the future of the 
underwater biomes is clear. To improve knowledge specific 
to plankton, traditional sampling techniques are now being 
supplemented with molecular sampling, advanced underwater 
sensors and cameras, and satellite imagery.
Feeding the planet
Plankton are essential for both clean air and plentiful food. 
Fisheries provide at least 20 percent of animal protein 
consumption for around half of the planet’s human 
population. They are crucial to feeding the growing human 
population, and the role of aquaculture is likely to increase in 
future as technologies and techniques improve and people rely 
less on catching wild fish. Aquaculture is the fastest growing 199
OPPOSITE | Plankton monitoring is increasingly important 
with our changing climate, and more efficient techniques 
are being developed to supplement conventional net 
sampling. Here, researchers use a cone-shaped plankton 
net to sample gelatinous zooplankton for a Coral Reef 
census, off Lizard Island, Queensland, Australia.
ABOVE | As the basis of the aquatic food chain, plankton 
are essential for sustaining populations of wild and 
farmed fish. This open-sea fish farm is in the Aegean 
Sea, near Turkey.
food sector; today almost as many fish and marine 
invertebrates are farmed than are caught in the wild, and 
the industry continues to grow.
While aquaculture has the potential to be a sustainable 
industry capable of supplying the world’s growing protein 
requirements, there are still a number of issues that need to 
be addressed in many aquaculture systems. Notably, facilities 
can consume significant amounts of energy and often channel 
nutrient-rich effluent into river systems and coastal waters, 
causing eutrophication and algal blooms (see page 189). Some 
aquaculture systems operate sustainably but for the sector as a 
whole to be considered sustainable, a greater focus needs to be 
given to the environment.
There is a great level of uncertainty around how human￾induced changes to the environment will impact plankton 
communities, but whatever the impacts, there will be 
consequences for commercial fisheries. Even inland 
aquaculture systems rely on wild fish, which are processed into 
fishmeal and oil and used as feed. Fish rely on zooplankton 
for food—especially during their larval stages. Synchrony in 
timings of plankton abundance and larval fish abundance is 
essential for the success of fish populations. If a mismatch in 
timings develops due to changing environmental systems, the 
yield of fisheries will undoubtedly suffer.200 | FACING THE FUTURE
Prochlorococcus marinus is the most abundant photosynthetic 
organism in the oceans, and probably on Earth. It is the only 
species that has been described within the Prochlorococcus
genus, but because of its sheer abundance, it has been the 
subject of extensive research both in its natural habitat and in 
laboratories. Belonging to the picoplankton group, these tiny 
cyanobacteria are extremely important primary producers 
in the world’s oceans, together generating a considerable 
proportion (around 20 percent) of global photosynthetic 
oxygen production. 
Unusual pigments
Besides its abundance and minute size, P. marinus is 
also remarkable in its pigmentation. The species contains 
unique chlorophyll derivatives known as chlorophyll a2 and 
chlorophyll b2, which are not seen in combination in other 
phototrophs. What’s more, the species is often found below 
the euphotic layer, where it divides once a day, and so can 
apparently photosynthesize in very low light levels.
Species success
While there is only one species of Prochlorococcus, various 
strains have been identified which live in different ecological 
niches. This diversity within the species is thought to have 
been instrumental to its success. It is particularly abundant in 
the subsurface layer of oligotrophic regions, like the central 
oceanic gyres. These waters are very nutrient poor, but due to 
its tiny size, Prochlorococcus has a high surface to volume ratio 
that gives it an advantage in such challenging environments. 
The species also probably either requires unusually small 
quantities of nutrients or is remarkably efficient at scavenging 
matter recycled by heterotrophic bacteria—its process of 
nutrient assimilation is not yet well understood.
Cyanobacteria Prochlorococcus marinus
OPPOSITE | Environmental constraints were important in the 
evolution of Prochlorococcus marinus; its tiny size is an 
adaptation to nutrient-deprived environments. 
FAMILY: Prochlorococcaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Considerable oceanic distribution, with P. marinus
found in warm waters all over the globe.
HABITAT: Most commonly found at depths of 328–656 ft 
(100–200 m) in oligotrophic waters.
FEEDING HABITS: A photosynthetic cyanobacteria that uses a 
combination of two unusual chlorophyll pigments.
NOTES: In phosphate-poor environments, Prochlorococcus
thrives, thanks to its adaptation of using sulfolipids 
instead of phospholipids (lipids containing sulfur rather 
than phosphorus).
SIZE: The smallest known cyanobacteria (and photosynthetic 
organism), P. marinus cells are just 0.5–0.7 μm in 
diameter.202 | FACING THE FUTURE
Foraminifera such as Globigerina are single-celled heterotrophic 
organisms. Most foraminifera are benthic, living at the 
seafloor, but others—including Globigerina—float higher in 
the oceans. Species belonging to the genus Globigerina live in 
the euphotic zone of marine water columns (the uppermost 
layer, which receives enough sunlight for photosynthesis) and 
have a wide distribution around the world, from the tropics to 
the poles. Globigerina species can thrive in more challenging 
conditions, including high water temperatures and salinities. 
Their regional abundance varies with the seasons and the 
timing of phytoplankton blooms.
Globigerina ooze
Foraminifera are an important part of the carbon pump. When 
foraminiferan species die, their empty, calcareous shells (called 
tests) sink through the water column to the seafloor sediment. 
This material is known as foraminiferal ooze—or globigerina 
ooze, since species of Globigerina are the main component—
and covers some 50 percent of the ocean floor. In some areas, 
like the western Indian Ocean, mid-Atlantic Ocean, and 
equatorial South Pacific, the white ooze covers most of the 
ocean floor. Globigerina ooze is a calcareous sediment that 
produces chalk and limestone. 
Due to their calcareous nature, there is an extensive fossil 
record for foraminiferans, making them useful for geological 
dating and petroleum exploration. When forming their 
shells, foraminifera incorporate oxygen from the ocean. The 
degradation of organic material in deep-sea sediment involves 
aerobic processes, and oxygen isotope analyses of foraminifera 
shells can determine the water temperature when the shells 
were formed, helping scientists reconstruct historical ocean 
environments. They have become increasingly important tools 
in petroleum exploration, since they can help to accurately date 
sediment at ocean depths.
Foraminifera Globigerina sp.
OPPOSITE | The test of this Globigerina species is covered with 
numerous thin spines made of transparent calcite.
FAMILY: Globigerinidae
DISTRIBUTION: Distributed in oceans around the world and most 
commonly recorded in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans.
HABITAT: Mostly found in the upper 200 ft (60 m) of the water 
column, Globigerina distribution tends to follow 
seasonal patterns.
FEEDING HABITS: Feed primarily on phytoplankton, including diatoms 
and dinoflagellates, and are often most abundant 
around times of algal blooms.
NOTES: The organisms have shells with multiple chambers, 
which are connected by small openings called 
foramina—the class (foraminfera) was named after 
this characteristic.
SIZE: Up to 0.01 in (250 μm) in diameter204 | FACING THE FUTURE
A marine raphidophyte (a group of flagellated unicellular 
algae), Chattonella is a genus containing five very similar 
species of single-celled photosynthetic algae. Like all species 
in the class, those belonging to Chattonella are large cells that 
have a pair of flagella, but no cell walls. They live primarily 
in brackish habitats. During the winter months, Chattonella
species develop a protective cyst and lie dormant attached 
to a solid surface on the seafloor sediment, where they can 
remain in a low-energy state until they have matured and 
conditions are more favorable.
Fish deaths
Species belonging to Chattonella sometimes form red tide algal 
blooms when the cells leave their cyst stage and move into 
their motile, planktonic life stage. When they emerge in 
favorable conditions, they can reproduce rapidly by once-a-day 
binary fission. These red tides are harmful to the ecosystem 
and have devastating effects on fish populations. When a 
Chattonella species blooms, the algae release harmful toxins 
that result in suffocation for fish. The precise mechanisms 
aren’t fully understood, but it is thought that during a bloom 
reactive oxygen species (ROS)—highly reactive chemicals 
formed from molecular oxygen—are generated, and these toxic 
species injure fish gills and cause mucus production, ultimately 
hampering the ability of the fish to take in oxygen and 
resulting in death.
Chattonella can cause huge fish mortalities and have a 
considerable economic impact on fisheries. With increasing 
eutrophication of water bodies, these blooms are becoming 
more frequent, so a search for control mechanisms is 
underway. Unlike diatoms, Chattonella species do not need 
light for germination, so are able to bloom at times that 
diatoms cannot. It has therefore been suggested that biological 
control using diatoms could be a useful technique to prevent 
the harmful blooms, since diatoms have higher growth rates 
than Chattonella. As a result, triggering their emergence could 
prevent Chattonella from growing so rapidly. Another option 
might be to culture fish alongside seaweed and seagrass that 
house algicidal bacteria.
Marine algae Chattonella sp.
OPPOSITE | Several species of Chattonella have been 
associated with harmful red tides, including Chattonella 
antiqua, pictured here.
FAMILY: Vacuolariaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Species are present in tropical, subtropical, and 
temperate regions.
HABITAT: Most commonly found in coastal marine regions like 
estuarine habitats and wetlands.
FEEDING HABITS: Photosynthetic autotrophs that harness energy 
from sunlight.
NOTES: Being without cell walls, Chattonella cells can change 
size and shape.
SIZE: 0.001–0.002 in (30–50 μm)206 | FACING THE FUTURE
A Pacific diatom, Neodenticula seminae has moved through the 
Arctic to the Atlantic in a remarkable example of how plankton 
can respond to a changing climate. In 1999, scientists were 
taken aback when they identified a member of N. seminae in 
a sample taken from the northwest Atlantic, where N. seminae
hadn’t roamed for at least 800,000 years. N. seminae, it turns 
out, had migrated through ocean currents all the way from 
the Pacific, through the Arctic, and into the Atlantic during 
a summer when the Arctic’s ice cover had melted.
Traveling to waters new
The reduction in ice cover, resulting from climate change, 
opened a passage between the Arctic and the Pacific, creating 
a migration route that would usually be blocked due to freezing 
temperatures. Arctic sea ice cover is at its lowest since records 
began and while N. seminae is among the first plankton 
reported to have made the journey, it shows the very real 
risks associated with the impacts of climate change on aquatic 
ecosystems. The diatom has since colonized the Labrador 
Sea and been reported in Icelandic waters and the Gulf of 
St. Lawrence in Canada.
The implications
Even one species being introduced to a new habitat can cause 
significant ecological damage, but this breach in what is usually 
a barrier between two oceans could mean that more species 
(including planktonic and marine animals higher up the food 
chain) are able to take the same path. This has the potential to 
cause widespread disruption to ecosystems and fisheries. 
Diatom Neodenticula seminae
OPPOSITE | Individual Neodenticula seminae are roughly 
rectangular but they form colonies, which sometimes grow 
in coiled ribbon shapes like those shown here.
FAMILY: Bacillariaceae
DISTRIBUTION: Once restricted to the Pacific, N. seminae has now 
colonized the Atlantic and been found in the Labrador 
Sea, Icelandic waters, and the Gulf of St. Lawrence.
HABITAT: Common in cold-water marine environments, including 
under ice, and thrives in nutrient-rich waters like 
upwellings or glacial meltwater.
FEEDING HABITS: N. seminae is a photosynthetic diatom—it produces 
oxygen and sugar from light and water.
NOTES: The introduction of N. seminae to the Atlantic might 
have a beneficial impact on carbon sequestration in 
the region, since the species has an important role 
in the Pacific Ocean’s biological pump. However, 
the effects of the colonization are not yet clear.
SIZE: Around 0.0004–0.002 in (10–60 μm)208 | FACING THE FUTURE
Ciliates are common in virtually all water bodies on Earth, 
including freshwater and marine environments, as well as in 
soils. Thousands of ciliate species have been described, all of 
which have hairlike organelles called cilia, which are used to 
aid movement and feeding. They are mostly heterotrophs, 
feeding on smaller phytoplankton (as well as detritus), and 
the cilia around their mouths helps them to consume prey.
Favella is a genus of tintinnid ciliate (belonging to the order 
Tintinnida) with vase-shaped loricae (shell-like outer casings). 
Favella species are important predators of phytoplankton 
and prey of other zooplankton, like copepods. Their loricae 
have small pores that allow arm-like projections, called 
pseudopodia, to protrude for feeding and locomotion. 
Members of the genus are abundant in marine waters; 
they have high growth rates and often predate on toxic 
dinoflagellates. Favella is a model genus for ciliate research, 
since they are fairly large and their protective casings make 
them easier to sample than other, naked, ciliates.
Change indicators
Alongside other tintinnids, Favella can be useful in helping 
researchers to better understand interactions between the 
climate and the oceans. There are several factors that make 
them effective as proxies of oceanic change: importantly, they 
are abundant in marine environments; have identifiable 
morphologies; and have the protection of loricae. The 
distribution of populations is influenced by environmental 
factors, so changes in populations of genera like Favella can 
indicate recent and ongoing changes in environmental 
conditions resulting from climate change.
Ciliate Favella sp.
OPPOSITE | The single-celled Favella ehrenbergii swims in 
a helical pattern while rotating on the longitudinal axis.
FAMILY: Ptychocylididae
DISTRIBUTION: Abundant in marine waters, from tropical to neritic 
temperate regions.
HABITAT: Favella species are widespread in oceans, from the 
open ocean to coastal waters.
FEEDING HABITS: Consume a great diversity of phytoplankton prey, 
particularly dinoflagellates.
NOTES: Favella species capture prey with their tentacle-like 
projections. They respond in the same way to prey 
items and similarly sized microplastics. In oceans 
increasingly concentrated with microplastics, their 
consumption of plastic is of concern for their future.
SIZE: 0.004–0.017 in (100–430 μm)210 | FACING THE FUTURE
As a result of hitching lifts around the world’s waterways 
through various means of human transport, the European 
green crab, Carcinus maenas, has become one of the hundred 
most invasive species in the world and is causing widespread 
harm to marine ecosystems in Australia, South Africa, South 
America, and North America’s Atlantic and Pacific coasts. An 
adult green crab can consume 40 half-inch clams in the space 
of one day and these predators are threatening a number of 
fisheries, including the clam industry.
Crab control
In attempts to help reduce the invasive population in the 
United States, the crabs were trapped and removed, with 
fishermen offered a bounty for catching the species, but these 
efforts were unsuccessful. Biological control options have also 
been explored. There is potential for some level of control 
using North America’s native blue crab (Callinecetes sapidus) 
and rock crabs (Romaleon antennarium and Cancer productus). 
The possible effects of a parasitic barnacle (Sacculina carcini) 
on crab populations have also been tested to see if it might 
be useful in the control of C. maenas, but this would be a 
controversial method and requires more thorough testing 
before it can be implemented.
There has also been a drive to increase the use of European 
green crabs as food in the United States. The species is 
sometimes used as an ingredient in soups and sauces, but 
another member of the genus—the Mediterranean green 
crab, C. aestuarii—is more commonly eaten. The methods for 
preparing the Mediterranean green crab are being adapted for 
the European green crab in regions where it is invasive, and 
there have been proposals for fishing the crabs commercially 
to make crab mince.
European green crab Carcinus maenas
OPPOSITE | Larvae of the European green crab (Carcinus 
maenas) have four zoeal stages, where they have spines on 
their body and their limbs are not fully developed (as shown 
here) and one megalopal stage—the final larval stage of 
crustaceans, where the appendages become defined.
FAMILY: Carcinidae 
DISTRIBUTION: Native to European and North African coastal waters 
but invasive along coastlines of Australia, South Africa, 
South America, and North America.
HABITAT: Most common in sheltered habitats like estuaries 
and harbors.
FEEDING HABITS: Feeds mainly on detritus.
NOTES: C. maenas remains in its larval stages for 50 days 
or more and, as zoea (free-swimming larvae), makes 
nocturnal vertical migrations with the ebb tide.
SIZE: Larvae around 0.04 in (1 mm) long; the non-planktonic 
adults up to 3 in (8 cm) across the carapace212 | FACING THE FUTURE
A small holoplanktonic sea snail, Limacina helicina and 
other members of the Limacinidae family are known as sea 
butterflies, thanks to their parapodia, which evolved from 
a gastropod foot and now resemble wings. They are filter 
feeders that capture phytoplankton and zooplankton with 
big, spherical nets of mucus, which they then consume along 
with their prey.
Keystone species
L. helicina is a keystone species in the Arctic, with two 
subspecies in different geographical regions (another species 
from the same genus occupies the Antarctic). The number 
of L. helicina individuals can comprise more than half the 
total mesozooplankton abundance in regions of the Arctic 
at times. Due to their great abundance, they are vital grazers 
of phytoplankton, including diatoms and dinoflagellates, 
and also have a predatory impact on copepods, tintinnids, 
and even juveniles of their own species! They are an important 
component of the marine food web in the challenging polar 
conditions, and are a prey species for larger zooplankton, 
fish (including herring and pink salmon), and even seabirds 
and seals.
Acidification indicator
L. helicina also produces a calcium carbonate shell, which can 
help it sink through the water column during the daily vertical 
migration. The shell contains a type of calcium carbonate called 
aragonite, which is very soluble. Since the shell is soluble in 
seawater and L. helicina is distributed in polar waters, it is likely 
to be one of the first zooplankton species to be impacted by 
acidification. As such, it is a key indicator species for ocean 
acidification. The shell of L. helicina also makes it important to 
the carbon cycle: individuals transport calcium carbonate (as 
part of their shells) to the sediment beds of the deep ocean.
Sea snail Limacina helicina
OPPOSITE | The sea butterfly (Limacina helicina) flaps its wing￾like parapodia to move through the water.
FAMILY: Limacinidae
DISTRIBUTION: Only found in Arctic and subarctic waters. 
HABITAT: Lives at depths of up to 160 ft (50 m).
FEEDING HABITS: Plays an important role in the food web as a 
phytoplankton grazer, but consumes zooplankton, too.
NOTES: Once considered a polar species, with populations in 
both Arctic and Antarctic waters, now the Antarctic 
population is thought to be a different species.
SIZE: 0.02–0.12 in (0.5–3 mm)214 | FACING THE FUTURE
The Leptodora genus contains just two species and one of them, 
L. kindtii, is the largest known planktonic cladoceran, or water 
flea. The species is recognizable for having six pairs of legs and 
a long body without a two-valved shell—its body is extremely 
transparent, apart from a single compound eye. L. kindtii
has a key role in the food web of lakes, predating heavily on 
zooplankton, particularly other cladocerans, and, because of 
its large size, is also important prey for many fish species.
Predatory plankton
Members of Leptodora are known for being voracious plankton 
predators and use their long legs to capture and manipulate 
their zooplankton prey. Like all plankton, they are drifters and 
do not actively hunt for prey. Rather, they wait for a chance 
encounter, then capture the zooplankton with their long legs. 
L. kindtii’s six legs are prehensile and, together, are known 
as the trap basket (or feeding basket) because of their role in 
grabbing and manipulating prey. L. kindtii exerts top-down 
control on zooplankton prey species in their habitats.
Invasive impact
Though still widely distributed in freshwater lakes, a collapse 
of L. kindtii densities was reported in North American lakes in 
the 1980s with the introduction of the invasive Bythotrephes 
longimanus. B. longimanus is also a large, carnivorous cladoceran 
species, and individuals have an advantage over L. kindtii
because they produce larger neonates that grow more rapidly. 
They consume large prey throughout most of their lives and 
also have a short prey handling time, so dispatch of their prey 
more efficiently. As adults, Bythothrepes also consume a greater 
diversity of prey.
Giant water flea Leptodora kindtii
OPPOSITE | The giant water flea (Leptodora kindii) is 98 percent 
transparent with a long body and two giant antennae, which it 
uses for swimming.
FAMILY: Leptodoridae
DISTRIBUTION: Found in abundance in temperate lakes across the 
Northern Hemisphere.
HABITAT: Mostly found in brackish and freshwater lakes.
FEEDING HABITS: Carnivorous predators that mostly eat zooplankton 
prey, like rotifers and Daphnia.
NOTES: Derived from the Greek language, Leptodora means 
“thin-skinned” and describes the characteristic soft 
bodies of these species.
SIZE: Up to 1 in (2.5 cm) 216 | FACING THE FUTURE
WHAT’S NEXT?
The climate crisis is intensifying and plankton have been 
recognized as a crucial component of the carbon cycle and food 
web. Plankton have the potential to mitigate the effects of 
climate change and so the focus on plankton research is 
growing. As scientists continue to analyze data from long 
time-series plankton surveys, patterns are emerging and new 
pieces of the global puzzle of the impacts of human activities 
on plankton are gradually being put into place. Given the 
innumerable inter-connected variables in aquatic ecosystems, 
there are still a lot of unknowns and ongoing monitoring 
programs will be key to providing important insights into 
plankton adaptations.
Scientists predict that water temperatures will increase 
significantly, oceans will become more acidic, and the 
oxygen concentration of aquatic systems will be reduced 
in some regions. In the face of such considerable and rapid 
environmental changes, some species will adapt, some will 
migrate to new regions, and others will face extinction. While 
it isn’t clear which species will suffer which fates, it is clear that 
the overall changes in ecosystems are going to be enormous; 
all functions of aquatic systems will be impacted, with 
consequences for both Earth’s climate and food production.
The greatest threat to plankton, and much of Earth’s 
extraordinary biodiversity, is the ever-increasing amount of 
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. The burning of fossil fuels 
is the leading contributor to climate change and needs to be 
drastically curtailed to prevent large-scale changes in plankton 
diversity, composition, and, in turn, ecosystem functions.
The role of plankton in slowing climate change must not 
be underestimated—plankton play a hugely valuable role in 
Earth’s systems and they have a wholly unique potential for 
mitigating the climate crisis. Their planet-saving abilities are, 
however, limited—plankton are not the long-term, permanent 
solution to climate change. To save the planet, the underlying 
drivers of change need to be targeted: human activity must 
change. There is an urgent need to tackle overconsumption, 
pollution, and reliance on unsustainable resources.217
ABOVE | Tiny but mighty: the wide diversity of plankton in Earth’s water bodies has cascading effects that shape entire ecosystems.218 |GLOSSARY
GLOSSARY
aeroplankton Organisms and other 
biological materials such as fungal spores 
and pollen that are suspended in the air.
amphipod A type of crustacean with 13 
body segments; some are planktonic but 
most live on the seabed.
anoxic An environment that is devoid 
of oxygen.
aphotic Refers to a sector of the water 
column that is dark all the time.
autotrophism The ability of a life-form to 
fix inorganic carbon from the environment 
and turn it into an energy source. Such 
organisms are called autotrophic.
benthic Relating to the bottom of a body 
of water such as a seabed.
bioluminescence Light produced by 
living things through chemical reactions 
in their bodies.
cilium (pl. cilia) A small, hairlike extension 
on a cell membrane; many cilia waft in 
concert to create a current or move the 
cell around. 
copepod A small, generally microscopic, 
crustacean that is very common in plankton; 
copepods have teardrop-shaped bodies and 
long antennae. 
cyanobacteria A type of photosynthetic 
bacteria sometimes referred to as blue￾green algae.
decapod A type of crustacean that includes 
the shrimps, prawns, crabs, and lobsters.
detritivore An organism that eats the waste 
and remains of other organisms.
diapause A pause in the development of 
an embryo.
dysphotic Refers to a sector of the water 
column that never gets brighter than a 
twilight gloom even at midday.
endosymbiosis When one organism lives 
within the cell membrane of another.
eukaryote An organism built from cells 
with a membrane-bound nucleus and 
other organelles.
euphotic Refers to a sector of the water 
column that is sunlit during the day.
eutrophic Describes when a body of water 
is high in nutrients, leading to population 
explosions in photosynthetic plankton.
flagellum (pl. flagella) A long, whiplike 
extension of cell membrane used to propel 
a cell.
frustule The shell around a diatom 
composed of two halves, or valves.
heterotrophism The ability of a life-form to 
acquire energy and nutrients by consuming 
the bodies of other living things. Such 
organisms are called heterotrophic.
holoplankton (permanent plankton) 
Aquatic organisms that spend their whole 
lives as plankton.
hydrozoan A type of cnidarian such as the 
Portuguese man-of-war.
lophophore A feeding organ used by 
brachiopods and phoronids.
marine snow A continuous shower of 
biological material that sinks to the bottom 
of the ocean, providing a source of food for 
deep-sea animals.
medusae The free-swimming life stage 
of cnidarians such as jellyfish.
meroplankton (temporary plankton) 
Aquatic organisms that spend only part 
of their life cycle—usually the larval 
stage—as plankton.
micrometer (μm) A metric unit of 
measurement equivalent to 0.001 mm 
or 0.000039 in.
mixotroph An organism that combines 
autotrophism (self-sustaining food 
production) with heterotrophism (acquiring 
carbon by consuming other organisms).
nematocyst A stinging organelle in the 
tentacles of all cnidarians, like jellyfish, 
which is specialized for prey capture 
and defense.
neritic The shallow region of oceans above 
the drop-off of the continental shelf, near 
the coastline.
oligotrophic Describes environments 
that offer little to sustain life; in the case 
of plankton, refers to regions of water that 
are relatively low in nutrients.
parapodia A lateral extension of the foot used 
by some mollusks for swimming.
parthenogenesis A form of asexual 
reproduction from an ovum without 
fertilization from a male.
pelagic Relating to the open ocean or seas, 
as opposed to neritic waters.
phagotrophy Feeding by engulfing a food cell 
or particle; the process of ingesting particles 
into food vacuoles for digestion.
phototrophic Describes life-forms able to 
photosynthesize using the synthesis of organic 
compounds from the energy in sunlight.
phytoplankton Photosynthesizing members 
of the plankton community; also known as 
microscopic marine algae.
prokaryote A single-celled (unicellular) 
organism without a distinct nucleus.
protist A single-celled organism with a 
distinct nucleus that is not a plant, animal, 
or fungus.
protozoa Tiny unicelluar organisms with 
animal-like tendencies, such as ciliates 
and radiolaria.
saprotrophic Relates to a form of 
extracellular digestion used to process 
non-living organic matter.
siphonophore An order of marine hydrozoans 
belonging to the phylum Cnidaria that form 
colonies of polyps.
spermathaca (pl. spermathacae) An organ in 
female or hermaphroditic invertebrates that 
stores sperm after mating.
stomatocyst A vegetative cell produced by 
chrysophytes (golden brown algae belonging 
to the phylum Chrysophyta) with spherical 
walls made of silica.
tunicate A group of often sedentary marine 
invertebrates that belong to the subphylum 
Tunicata, including sea squirts and salps.
upwelling The process by which cooler 
(usually nutrient-rich) deep water rises toward 
the surface.
zooplankton Small animals in the planktonic 
community that cannot swim effectively 
against currents.219
FURTHER READING
Bandara, K., Varpe, Ø., Wijewardene, L., 
Tverberg, V., and Eiane, K. 2021. Two 
hundred years of zooplankton vertical 
migration research. Biological Reviews 96: 
1547–1589
Benedetti, F., Vogt, M., Elizondo, U. H., 
Righetti, D., Zimmermann, N. E., and Gruber, 
N. 2021. Major restructuring of marine 
plankton assemblages under global warming. 
Nature Communications 12: 5226.
Berthold, M., and Campbell, D. A. 2021. 
Restoration, conservation and phytoplankton 
hysteresis, Conservation Physiology 9, coab062.
Brierley, A. S. 2014. Diel vertical migration. 
Current Biology 24: R1074–R1076.
Calbet, A. 2008. The trophic roles of 
microzooplankton in marine systems. ICES 
Journal of Marine Science 65: 325–331.
Castellani, C., and Edwards, M. 2017. 
Marine Plankton: A Practical Guide to Ecology, 
Methodology, and Taxonomy. United Kingdom: 
Oxford University Press.
Chislock, M. F., Doster, E., Zitomer, R. A., 
and Wilson, A. E. 2013. Eutrophication: 
Causes, Consequences, and Controls in 
Aquatic Ecosystems. Available at: www.
nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/
eutrophication-causes-consequences-and￾controls-in-aquatic-102364466/ (Accessed 
September 20, 2023).
Falkowski, P. 2012. Ocean Science: The power 
of plankton. Nature 483: S17–S20.
Hays, G. C., Richardson, A. J., and Robinson, 
C. 2005. Climate change and marine 
plankton. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 20: 
337–344.
Henson, S. A., Cael, B. B., Allen, S. R., and 
Dutkiewicz, S. 2021. Future phytoplankton 
diversity in a changing climate. Nature 
Communications 12: 5372. 
Issac, M. N., and Kandasubramanian, B. 
2021. Effect of microplastics in water and 
aquatic systems. Environmental Science and 
Pollution Research 28: 19544–19562.
Jacques, G., Tréguer, P., and Mercier, H. 
2020. Oceans: Evolving Concepts. United 
States: John Wiley & Sons.
Kennish, M. J. 2019. Practical Handbook of 
Marine Science. United States: CRC Press.
Kilham, P., and Hecky, R. E. 1988. 
Comparative ecology of marine and 
freshwater phytoplankton. Limnology 
and Oceanography 33: 776–795.
MacRae, G. 2020. Will climate change 
threaten Earth’s “other lung”? Available 
at: https://therevelator.org/
phytoplankton-climate-change/
(Accessed September 20, 2023).
Lenz, P., Hartline, D. K., Purcell, J. E., and 
Macmillan, D. L. 2021. Zooplankton: Sensory 
Ecology and Physiology. United Kingdom: 
Routledge.
Lythgoe, J. N. 1979. The Ecology of Vision. 
United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
Matveev, V., and Robson, B. J. 2014. Aquatic 
food web structure and the flow of carbon, 
Freshwater Reviews 7: 1–24.
McEdward, L. R. 2020. Ecology of Marine 
Invertebrate Larvae. United States: CRC Press.
McManus, M. A., and Brock Woodson, C. 
2012. Plankton distribution and ocean 
dispersal. Journal of Experimental Biology 215: 
1008–1016.
Möllmann, C., Müller-Karulis, B., Kornilovs, 
G., and St John, M. A. 2008. Effects of 
climate and overfishing on zooplankton 
dynamics and ecosystem structure: regime 
shifts, trophic cascade, and feedback loops in 
a simple ecosystem. ICES Journal of Marine 
Science 65: 302–310.
Moss, B. 2017. Ponds and Small Lakes: 
Microorganisms and Freshwater Ecology. 
United Kingdom: Pelagic Publishing.
Pereira, L., and Gonçalves, A.M.M. 
2022. Plankton Communities. United 
Kingdom: IntechOpen.
Pomeroy, L. R., leB Williams, P. J., Azam, F., 
and Hobbie, J. E. 2007. The microbial loop. 
Oceanography 20: 28–33.
Portmann, J. E. 1975. Bioaccumulation and 
effects of organochlorine pesticides in marine 
animals. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 189: 
291–304. 
Ratnarajah, L., Abu-Alhaija, R., Atkinson, 
A., Batten, S., Bax, N. J., Bernard, K. S., 
Canonico, G., Cornils, A., Everett, J. D., 
Grigoratou, M., Ishak, N. H. A., Johns, D., 
Lombard, F., Muxagata, E., Ostle, C., Pitois, 
S., Richardson, A. J., Schmidt, K., Reynolds, 
C. S., and Padisák, J. 2013. “Plankton, Status 
and Role of.” Encyclopedia of Biodiversity, 
Second Edition, pages 24–38.
Santhanam, P., Begum, A., and Perumal, 
P. 2019. Basic and Applied Zooplankton 
Biology. Singapore: Springer.
Shen, M., Ye, S., Zeng, G., Zhang, Y., Xing, 
L., Tang, W., Wen, X., and Liu, S. 2020. Can 
microplastics pose a threat to ocean carbon 
sequestration? Marine Pollution Bulletin 150: 
110712. 
Sherr, E., and Sherr, B. 2008. “Understanding 
roles of microbes in marine pelagic food webs: 
a brief history.” Microbial Ecology of the Oceans, 
Second Edition, pages 27–44.
Stemmann, L., Swadling, K. M., Yang, G., and 
Yebra, L. 2023. Monitoring and modelling 
marine zooplankton in a changing climate. 
Nature Communications 14: 564.
Teodósio, M. A. 2020. Zooplankton Ecology. 
United States: CRC Press.
Woodhouse, A., Swain, A., Fagan, W. F., 
Fraass, A. J., and Lowery, C. M. 2023. Late 
Cenozoic cooling restructured global marine 
plankton communities. Nature 614: 713–718.
Yamaguchi, R., Rodgers, K. B., Timmermann, 
A., Stein, K., Schlunegger, S., Bianchi, D., 
Dunne, J. P., and Slater, R. D. 2022. Trophic 
level decoupling drives future changes in 
phytoplankton bloom phenology. Nature 
Climate Change 12: 469–476.220 |INDEX
INDEX
Page numbers in italics indicate 
illustration captions.
A
abyssal plains 68
acidification 186
sea snail (Limacina helicina) 
 212–13
Aequorea victoria (hydrozoan 
jellyfish) 50–1
aeroplankton 139
disease spread 141
algae 14, 35, 160
golden algae (Dinobryon sp.) 
 180–1
marine algae (Chattonella sp.) 
 204–5
Alima sp. (mantis shrimp) 146–7
amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP) 
114
amphipods 106
marine shrimp (Themisto 
 gaudichaudii) 172–3
Phronima sp. 106
Amphiprion ocellaris (clownfish) 
109
Anguilla anguilla (European eel) 
52–3
Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) 
38–9, 131
 feeding and survival 38
 life cycle 38
Antarctica 74, 131, 194, 212
marine shrimp (Themisto 
 gaudichaudii) 172–3
Aphanothece 110
aquaculture 168, 198–9
archaea 16
Arctic 50, 131, 144, 206, 212
arrow worms (Sagitta sp.) 28, 28, 
58, 62
arthropods 20, 26, 28, 140
asexual growth 110
Asterionellopsis sp. 178–9
Asterionellopsis glacialis 178
blooming diatoms 178
Aurelia aurita (moon jellyfish) 56
autotrophism 92
fixing carbon 92–3
Great Oxygenation Event 95
primary production 96–7
B
bacteria 13, 14, 16, 18, 20, 33, 
46, 73, 100, 127, 133, 139, 160, 
 165, 204
bioluminescence 67
carbon cycle 158
chemotrophic bacteria 71, 93
Dinobryon sp. 180
DOM (dissolved organic 
 matter) 162–3
microscopy 154
picoplankton 59
see cyanobacteria
bacteriophages 34, 34
Balaenoptera musculus (whale, 
blue) 105
bannerfish (Heniochus diphreutes) 
60
barnacle nauplius (Semibalanus 
balanoides) 120–1
from nauplius to barnacle 
 120
bears, polar 131, 167
benthic organisms 17, 31, 40, 
106, 132, 166, 202
horseshoe worms (Phoronis sp.) 
 150–1
mantis shrimp (Alima sp.) 26, 
 146–7
Beroe abyssicola 24
bioluminescence 66, 67
hydrozoan jellyfish (Aequorea 
 victoria) 50–1
mauve stinger jellyfish (Pelagia 
 noctiluca) 6, 9, 116–17
biomass pyramids 102
blooms 72, 110, 165, 194, 195, 
199
Asterionallopsis sp. 178
Chattonella sp. 204
Coscinodiscus sp. 44
Dinobryon sp. 180
effect of blooms on food webs 
 164
Emiliana huxleyi 48
fisheries 168
Gloeotrichia echinulata 78
mineral extraction 188
Pseudo-nitzschia australis 114
red tides 17, 46, 165, 204
Thalassiosira rotula 176
blue-green algae see cyanobacteria
Bolinopsis infundibulum 63
Boreomysis sp. (opossum shrimp) 
122–3
box jellyfish 24, 24, 84–5
brachiopods 29
Terebratalia transversa 148–9
breeding 91
plankton life cycles 106–10
broadcast spawning 112
bryozoons 29
buoyancy 56
Bythotrephes logimanus 214
C
Calanus finmarchicus 142–3
food source 142
survival skills 142
Callinecetes sapidus (crab, blue) 
210
Cambrian 13
Cancer productus (crab, red rock) 
210
cannibalism 122
carbon capture 157
carbon cycle 158
biological pump 158–9
sea snail (Limacina helicina) 
 212–13
carbon fixation 92–3
carbon pump 101, 135, 158–9
Carcharhinus brachyurus (shark, 
bronze whaler) 75
Carcharhinus longimanus (shark, 
oceanic whitetip) 65
Carcinus aestuarii (crab, 
Mediterranean green) 210
Carcinus maenas (European green 
crab) 210–211
Cephea cephea (crown jellyfish) 22
Cetorhinus maximus (shark, 
basking) 105
Chattonella sp. 204–5
fish deaths 204
Chelonia mydas (turtle, green) 105
chemotrophes 71, 93
Chironex fleckeri (sea wasp) 84–5
chlorophyll 73, 97, 157, 163
Prochlorococcus marinus 200
chloroplasts 16, 76, 103, 144, 
180
metabolic pathways during 
 photosynthesis 97
chordates 20, 30–1
Chroococcus turgidus 163
ciliates 18
Euplotes 19, 102
Favella sp. 208–9
Paramecium bursaria 102
Stantor 59
cladocerans 127, 137
giant water flea (Leptodora 
 kindtii) 214–15
climate change 184, 216
ocean warming 184–5
Ornithocercus magnificus 76–7
clownfish (Amphiprion ocellaris) 
109
cnidarians 6, 21, 106
body plan 22–4
coccolithophores 135, 158, 186, 
195
Emiliana huxleyi 48–9
comb jellies 24, 25, 63
sea walnut (Mnemiopsis leidyi) 
 170–1
Conchoecissa ametra 174–5
deep dwellers 174
ocean cleaners 174
Conochilus unicornis 42–3
parthenogenetic reproduction 
 42
wide-ranging habitat 42
continental rises 68
continental shelves 68
continental slopes 68
copepods 26, 28, 63, 66, 106, 
166, 167
Calanus finmarchicus 142–3
sea sapphire 6, 26
Coscinodiscus sp. 6, 44–5
C. jonesianus 44
reproduction 44
value in oceanography 44
countershading 65
violet sea snail (Janthina 
 janthina) 80
CPRs (continuous plankton 
recorders) 32–3
crabs 26
crab, blue (Callinecetes sapidus) 
 210
crab, European green (Carcinus 
 maenas) 210–211221
crab, Mediterranean green 
 (Carcinus aestuarii) 210
crab, Pacific rock (Romaleon 
 antennarium) 210
crab, red rock (Cancer productus) 
 210
crown jellyfish (Cephea cephea) 22
crustaceans 9, 18, 20, 26–7, 28, 
32, 58, 106, 128, 132, 160, 166
Antarctic krill (Euphausia 
 superba) 38–9, 131, 184
aquaculture 168
barnacle nauplius (Semibalanus 
 balanoides) 120–1
Conchoecissa ametra 174–5
European green crab (Carcinus 
 maenas) 210–211
mantis shrimp (Alima sp.) 26, 
 146–7
opossum shrimp (Boreomysis 
 sp.) 122–3
organochlorine pollution 190
Scapholeberis sp. 88–9
seasonal migrations 136
cryptomonads 163
crystal jelly (Aequorea victoria) 
50–1
ctenophores 25, 128, 167, 170
cyanobacteria 16
Anabaena cyanobacteria 59
Aphanothece 110
Chroococcus turgidus 163
Gloeotrichia echinulata 78–9
Prochlorococcus marinus 96, 97, 
 200–1
D
Daphnia sp. 128
Darwin, Charles 32, 33
decapods 26, 38, 122, 168
Deep Discoverer ROV (remotely￾operated vehicle) 71
deep-sea mining 188
diapause 131, 137, 142
diatoms 17, 35, 36, 126
Asterionellopsis sp. 178–9
Coscinodiscus sp. 6, 44–5
Neodenticula seminae 206–7
Pinnularia 127
Pseudo-nitzschia australis 
 114–15
Thalassiosira rotula 176–7
Dinobryon sp. (golden algae) 
180–1
dinoflagellates 17
bioluminescence 66, 67
cryptomonads 163
Ornithocercus magnificus 76–7
Protoperidinium sp. 144–5
Tripos muelleri 46–7
disease spread 141
distribution 126
global distribution of 
 phytoplankton 1994–1998 
 193
Protoperidinium sp. 144
zooplankton 194–5
DOM (dissolved organic matter) 
160–3
DVM (diel (diurnal) vertical 
migration) 9, 134–5
E
Echinocardium cordatum (sea 
potato) 20
echinoderms 29, 106, 166
eel, European (Anguilla anguilla) 
52–3
Sargasso Sea 52
Ehrenberg, Christian Gottfried 
118
Emiliana huxleyi 48–9
huge blooms 48
porous skeleton 48
endosymbiosis 15
environmental change 126
environmental indicators 197
euglenids 17
Phacus pleuronectes 17
eukaryotes 14–17
eukaryotic cell structures 14
Euphausia superba (Antarctic krill) 
38–9, 131, 184
Euplotes 19, 102
European green crab (Carcinus 
maenas) 210–11
crab control 210
eutrophication 178, 180, 189
evading detection 65–6
blue water 65–6
clear water 65
staying alive 66
F
Favella sp. 208–9
change indicators 208
Favella ehrenbergii 208
feeding 91
feeding humans 168–9
aquaculture 168, 198–9
potential problems 169
grazers and predators 104
phytoplankton and 
 autotrophism 92–7
zooplankton and heterotrophism 
 98–103
femtoplankton 33, 59, 160
fish 9, 20, 38, 40, 62, 65–6, 86, 
91, 105, 132, 148, 172, 174, 
 212, 214
blooms 164, 204
European eel (Anguilla anguilla) 
 52–3
fish eggs and larvae 30, 31, 32, 
 106, 109, 142, 170, 199
forage fish 166–7
marine algae (Chattonella sp.) 
 204
ocean sunfish (Mola mola) 
 112–13
red tides 46
fisheries 72, 128, 167, 168, 187, 
206
blooms 114, 178, 204
Calanus finmarchicus 142
climate change 194, 195
dinoflagellates 17
European green crab (Carcinus 
 maenas) 210–11
feeding the planet 198–9
plankton in fisheries 168
potential problems 168
sea walnut (Mnemiopsis leidyi) 
 170–1
flagellates 17
food chains 98
biomass pyramids 102
food webs 153, 154
carbon capture 157
carbon cycle 158–9
complex aquatic food web 161
counting microplankton 154
effect of blooms on food webs 
 164
microbial loop 160–3
microplankton 160
molecular innovation 154
nano and micro grazers 165
studying zooplankton 157
trophic pyramids 98–9
foraminifera 18–19, 19
Globigerina sp. 202–3
fossil record 118, 202
freshwater plankton 127
Gloeotrichia echinulata 78–9
fusilier (Caesia lunaris) 65
G
giant tube worm (Riftia pachyptila) 
93
giant water flea (Leptodora kindtii) 
214–15
Bythotrephes logimanus 214
predatory plankton 214
Globigerina sp. 202–3
globigerina ooze 202
Gloeotrichia echinulata 78–9
freshwater inhabitants 78
golden algae (Dinobryon sp.) 180–1
eutrophic blooms 180
mixed diet 180
Grand Prismatic Spring, 
Yellowstone, USA 14
grazers 104
Great Oxygenation Event 95
H
habitats 125
freshwater plankton 127
marine plankton 128–31
plankton distribution 126
through the water column 
 132–3
heterotrophism 98
biomass pyramids 102
marine snow 100–1
mixotrophs 103
pyramids 98–9
HNLCs (high-nutrient, low￾chlorophyll areas) 73
holoplankton 91, 106, 128, 166
Pelagobia longicirrata 40–1
sea snail (Limacina helicina) 
 212–13
horseshoe worms (Phoronis sp.) 
150–1
later life 150
tentacle crown 150222 |INDEX
human impact 183
climate change 184–5, 216
eutrophication 189
feeding humans 168–9, 
 198–9
how plankton are responding 
 192–5
mineral extraction 188
ocean acidification 186
organochlorine pollution 190
overfishing 168, 187
plankton’s role in times of crisis 
 196–9
plastic pollution 191
hydrothermal vents 71
hydrozoan jellyfish (Aequorea 
victoria) 50–1
bioluminescence 50
I
ichthyoplankton 31
invasive species 183
Bythotrephes logimanus 214
European green crab (Carcinus 
 maenas) 210–211
sea walnut (Mnemiopsis leidyi) 
 170–1
J
Janthina janthina (violet sea snail) 
80–1 
jellyfish 22
classifying jellyfish 24
cnidaria body plan 22–4
comb jellies 25
hydrozoan jellyfish (Aequorea 
 victoria) 50–1
life cycle 22
mauve stinger jellyfish (Pelagia 
 noctiluca) 6, 9, 116–17
Portuguese man-of-war 
 (Physalia physalis) 86–7
sea wasp (Chironex fleckeri) 
 84–5
K
krill 9, 26, 44, 48, 58, 52, 105, 
106, 131, 167, 184
Antarctic krill (Euphausia 
 superba) 38–9, 131, 184
reproduction 109
Thysanoessa spinifera 26
L
lanternfish 62
larvaceans 31, 105
latitudinal diversity gradient 131
Leptodora kindtii (giant water flea) 
214–15
life cycles 106
asexual growth 110
blooms 110
breeding systems 106
sex or no sex? 109
Limacina helicina (sea snail) 212–13
lobsters 26, 106
Stereomastis 10
lumpsucker, smooth (Aptocyclus 
ventricosus) 10, 109
M
macroplankton 32, 58, 105
mantis shrimp (Alima sp.) 26, 
146–7
life stages 146
predatory plankton 146
Mariana Trench 71
marine algae (Chattonella sp.) 
204–5
marine plankton 128–31
marine shrimp (Themisto 
gaudichaudii) 172–3
lipid link 172
marine snow 100
carbon pump 101
mauve stinger jellyfish (Pelagia 
noctiluca) 6, 9, 116–17
ocean night-light 116
 polyp-free reproduction 116
meroplankton 78, 91, 128, 146, 
166, 178, 188
reproduction 110
Terebratalia transversa 148–9
mesoplankton 26, 58, 104, 116
mesozooplankton 118, 135, 146
sea snail (Limacina helicina) 
 212–13
metazoa 20–1, 163, 166
microbial loop 160–3
microplankton 38, 58, 88, 160, 
163, 166
counting microplankton 154
nano and micro grazers 165
microplastics 191
microscopes 35–6, 42, 76, 154
migration 134, 136
impact on the carbon pump 
 135
Neodenticula seminae 206
resting stages 137
seasonal migrations 136–7
triggers 134–5
why bother? 135
wider impact 137
mineral extraction 188
deep-sea mining 188
mixotrophs 103
Mnemiopsis leidyi (sea walnut) 
170–1
Mola mola (ocean sunfish) 
112–13
molecular innovation 154
mollusks 9, 13, 20, 28, 29, 91, 
109, 148
shellfish industry 168
violet sea snail (Janthina 
 janthina) 80–1
moon jellyfish (Aurelia aurita) 56
mycoplankton 20
Saprolegnia parasitica 21
N
nanoplankton 58–9, 73, 160, 
163, 166
nano and micro grazers 165
nekton 58, 60, 106, 112, 132, 
192
Neodenticula seminae 206–7
implications of migration 206
traveling to waters new 206
neuston 80, 132
nutrients in water 72
HNLCs (high-nutrient, 
 low-chlorophyll areas) 73
mixing layers 72
O
oceans 55
ocean acidification 186
ocean biomes 128
ocean currents 74–5, 128
ocean light zones 60
ocean mixing 128
rise in global sea surface 
 temperature 185
ocean trenches 71
ocean warming 184–5
ocean zones 69
vertical zones 60–3
Odontodactylus scyllarus (peacock 
mantis shrimp) 26
Oikopleura labradorensis 105
opossum shrimp (Boreomysis sp.) 
122–3
brood chamber 122
cannabalism 122
optical detectors 37
organochlorine pollution 190
Ornithocercus magnificus 76–7
global spread 76
survivors of the deep 76
ostracods 100
Conchoecissa ametra 174–5
overfishing 168, 183, 187
P
Paramecium bursaria 102
peacock mantis shrimp 
(Odontodactylus scyllarus) 26
Pegea confoederata 82–3
growing chains 82
Pelagia noctiluca (mauve stinger 
jellyfish) 6, 9, 116–17
Pelagobia longicirrata 40–1
body plan 40
stages to adulthood 40
penguin, king (Aptenodytes 
patagonicus) 65
phoronids 29
horseshoe worms (Phoronis sp.) 
 150–1
photosynthesis 16, 60, 92, 103, 
128, 133, 153
carbon capture 157, 158, 186
Great Oxygenation Event 95
metabolic pathways in 
 chloroplasts 97
microbial loop 160–2
mixotrophs 180
organochlorine 190
Phronima sp. 106
Physalia physalis (Portuguese 
man-of-war) 86–7
phytoplankton 16–17, 125
autotrophism 92–7
diatoms 17
future of phytoplankton 192
global distribution of 
 phytoplankton 1994–1998 
 193
whiptails 17
picoplankton 59, 160, 165, 186
Prochlorococcus marinus 96, 97, 
 200–1
Pinnularia 127
plankton 6, 9, 55, 132, 216
diversity 13
environmental change 126
guides to the future 10
how plankton are responding to 
 human impacts 192–5
plankton nets 32
planktonic form and function 6
projected changes in diversity 
 2000–2001 193
sizes 58–9
staying afloat 56
study of plankton 6223
taking samples 32–7
unsung heroes 9–10
what are plankton? 9
plankton’s role in times of crisis 
196
environmental indicators 197
feeding the planet 198–9
monitoring challenges 198, 
 199
plastic pollution 191
Pleurobrachia pileus (sea 
gooseberry) 24
polar regions 131
polychaete worms 28
Pelagobia longicirrata 40–1
POM (particulate organic matter) 
160–3
Portuguese man-of-war (Physalia 
physalis) 86–7
living as a colony 86
predators 104–5
primary production 96
no light needed 97
using light 96
primitive life 16
Prochlorococcus marinus 96, 97, 
200–1
species success 200
unusual pigments 200
prokaryotic cell structure 14
protists 17, 18–19, 35, 58, 160
aeroplankton 139
Emiliana huxleyi 48
freshwater 127
HNLCs (high-nutrient, 
low-chlorophyll areas) 73
mixotrophs 103
Protoperidinium sp. 144–5
diverse distribution 144
raptorial feeders 144
protozoa 18–19, 35, 104, 127, 
132, 160, 165
Pseudo-nitzschia australis 114–15
amnesic shellfish poisoning 
 114
R
radiolarians 18, 19
Actinomma delicatulum 19
Theocapsa sp. 118–19
red tides 17, 46, 165, 204
reproduction 91
broadcast spawning 112
opossum shrimp (Boreomysis 
 sp.) 122–3
polyp-free reproduction 116
Riftia pachyptila (giant tube worm) 
93
Romaleon antennarium (crab, 
Pacific rock) 210
rotifers 32, 52, 58, 93, 127, 137, 
160, 166
asexual reproduction 110
Conochilus unicornis 42–3
 rubisco 97
S
Sacculina carcini 210
salps 31, 58
Pegea confoederata 82–3
Salpa fusiformis 10, 31
sampling 32
accurate measurements 32–3
aeroplankton 139
counting microplankton 154
optical detectors in the wild 37
sample analysis 35–6
studying zooplankton 157
Scapholeberis sp. 88–9
aphids of the ocean 88
sea angels 29, 109
sea butterflies 212
sea gooseberry (Pleurobrachia 
pileus) 24
sea potato (Echinocardium 
cordatum) 20
sea snail (Limacina helicina) 
212–13
acidification indicator 212
keystone species 212
sea urchins 29, 91, 106, 139, 166
sea walnut (Mnemiopsis leidyi) 
170–1
ocean invaders 170
sea wasp (Chironex fleckeri) 
84–5
nasty sting 84
trailing tentacles 84
seabirds 9, 40, 82, 114, 164, 167, 
170, 172, 212
seafloor profile 68–71
seals 9, 38, 131, 167, 212
seamounts 71, 75
seasonal vertical migration 
136–7
seed shrimp see ostracods
Semibalanus balanoides (barnacle) 
120–1
sexual reproduction 109
sharks 9, 30, 65, 98, 105, 112, 
132, 134, 160
shark, basking (Cetorhinus 
 maximus) 44, 105
shark, bronze whaler 
 (Carcharhinus brachyurus) 75
shark, oceanic whitetip 
 (Carcharhinus longimanus) 65
shrimp 26, 58
aquaculture 168
mantis shrimp (Alima sp.) 26, 
 146–7
marine shrimp (Themisto 
 libellula) 172–3
opossum shrimp (Boreomysis 
 sp.) 122–3
siphonophores 24
Portuguese man-of-war 
 (Physalia physalis) 86–7
snails 29
sea snail (Limacina helicina) 
 212–13
violet sea snail (Janthina 
 janthina) 80–1
snapper, Bengal (Lutjanus 
bengalensis) 60
Snell’s Window 65
spiders, ballooning 140, 141
sponges 20, 21, 132
squid 9, 20, 29, 133
sunfish, oceanic (Mola mola) 
112–13
broadcast spawning 112
T
Terebratalia transversa 148–9
filter feeding 148
predators 148
Thalassiosira rotula 176–7
hardy bloom 176
Themisto gaudichaudii (marine 
shrimp) 172–3
Theocapsa sp. 118–19
at the dawn of microbiology 
 118
radiolarian fossil record 118
thermohaline circulation 74, 75
Tripos muelleri 46–7
red tides 46
trophic levels 166–7
trophic pyramids 98–9
tunicates 31
turtles 30, 132, 139
turtle, green (Chelonia mydas) 
 105
U
upwellings 75
V
vertical zones 60
midnight zone 63
sunlit zone 60
twilight zone 60–2
violet sea snail (Janthina janthina) 
80–1
countershading 80
hermaphroditic advantage 80
viroplankton 34
viruses 34, 59, 133, 139, 160, 
162
W
water bottles 33
water column 132
plankton zones 133
water fleas 26, 58
giant water flea (Leptodora 
 kindtii) 214–15
Scapholeberis sp. 88–9
water mold disease 
(saprolegniosis) 21
whales 9, 10, 30, 38, 48, 65, 
82, 86, 98, 105, 120, 131, 132, 
160
whale, blue (Balaenoptera 
 musculus) 105
whale fall 100
whale, fin (Balaenoptera 
 physalus) 75
whale, right 105, 142
worms 13, 20–1, 28, 32, 52, 109, 
132, 166
arrow worms (Sagitta sp.) 28, 
 28, 58, 62
giant tube worm (Riftia 
 pachyptila) 93
horseshoe worms (Phoronis sp.) 
 150–1
Pelagobia longicirrata 40–1
Z
zooplankton 18, 125
Chordata 30–1
crustacea 26–7
echinoderms 29
future of zooplankton 
 194–5
heterotrophism 98–103
jellyfish 22–5
metazoa 20–1
mycoplankton 20
protozoa 18–19
small phyla 29
snails 29
studying zooplankton 157
worms 28
tunicates 31224 |PICTURE CREDITS
PICTURE CREDITS
The authors and publisher would like to thank the following 
for permission to reproduce copyright material. All reasonable 
efforts have been made to trace copyright holders and to obtain 
their permission for the use of copyright material. The publisher 
apologizes for any errors or omissions and will gratefully
incorporate any corrections in future reprints if notified. 
Aainsqatsi, K., CC BY (original used as source for adapted diagram): 
60, 69, 163.
Aguilar, 2019, adapted from Buchan et al., 2014 (original used as source 
for adapted diagram): 163.
Alamy/Biosphoto: 33 (left); Blue Planet Archive: 27, 93 (left), 166-167; 
Andrey Nekrasov: 171; Alf Jacob Nilsen: 90; Scenics & Science: 45, 47, 
121, 126; SeaTops: 39; Frank Staples: 140; WaterFrame: 169 (bottom left).
Ardea/Paulo Di Oliviera: 53.
Bandara et al., 2021, https://doi.org/10.1111/brv.12715, CC BY 
(original used as source for adapted diagram): 134, 136.
© Lyse Bérard-Therriault, Maurice Lamontagne Institute, Fisheries 
and Oceans Canada: 207.
Biodiversity Heritage Library/University of California Libraries: 32.
Chisholm Lab: 201.
Dreamstime.com/Illustration 240861957 © VectorMine (original used 
as source for adapted diagram): 131. 
Eawag, Jonas Steiner: 37.
© ESA. Data source: NOAA: 184.
Getty Images/Abstract Aerial Art: 169 (top right); Andalou Agency: 165; 
Philippe Bourseiller: 33 (right); Cavan Images: 169 (bottom); De Agostini 
Picture Library: 151; Albert Lleal Moya: 77; Alexander Semenov: 25 
(bottom), 213; Westend61: 124; Wildestanimal: 87; Sam Yeh: 29 
(bottom); Wong Yu Liang: 100 (top).
Russ Hopcroft, University of Alaska: 41, 173.
Ibarbalz et al., 2019, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.008, CC BY: 
193 (top).
iStock/Felice Placenti: 62.
Jansen et al., 2021, https://doi.org/10.1029/2020JG006237, CC BY 
(original used as source for adapted diagram): 159.
Kelvinsong, CC BY (original used as source for adapted diagram): 15
MARUM—Center for Marine Environmental Sciences, University 
of Bremen, CC BY: 70 (bottom).
NASA/Alex Gerst: 139; Goddard Space Flight Center Scientific 
Visualization Studio: 129 (bottom); Norman Kuring: 54, 197; MIT Darwin 
Project, ECCO2, MITgcm: 193 (bottom); Jeff Schmaltz: 194; Joshua 
Stevens and Lauren Dauphin: 111; USGS/Landsat 7: 156.
Nature Picture Library/Franco Banfi: 51, 132; Gary Bell/Oceanwide: 85, 
105 (top left); Mark Carwardine: 75 (top); Jordi Chias: 191 (bottom left); 
Georgette Douwma: 26 (top), 81; Jurgen Freund: 198; Shane Gross: 117; 
Nick Hawkins: 143; Richard Hermann/Minden: 83; Michael Hutchinson: 
141; Albert Lleal: 167 (right); Magnus Lundgren: 11 (top), 31, 109 (top), 
147; Juan Carlos Munoz: 73; Alex Mustard: 61, 108, 191 (right), 217; 
Alex Mustard/2020 Vision:105 (right); Flip Nicklin/Minden: 130; Kevin 
Schafer/Minden: 64 (bottom left); Scotland: The Big Picture: 25 (top); 
135; David Shale: 123; Henley Spiers: 12, 152, 195; Kim Taylor: 58; Doc 
White: 105 (bottom left); Norbert Wu: 104, 113; Tony Wu: 10, 109 
(bottom); Solvin Zankl: 7, 11 (bottom), 26 (bottom), 107, 175.
NOAA, 2021: data source for adapted graph: 185.
NOAA/Zachary Haslick/Aerial Associates Photography: 164; NOAA 
Ocean Exploration, Voyage to the Ridge 2022: 70 (top); OET, CC BY: 100 
(bottom); Vera Trainer/Climate.gov: 115.
Office of Biological and Environmental Research of the U.S. 
Department of Energy Office of Science, CC BY (original used as 
source for adapted diagram): 101.
Science Photo Library: 31 (top); AMI Images: 34 (bottom); John Clegg: 
35; Michel DeLarue, ISM: 203; Eye of Science: 19 (right), 119; Frank Fox: 
59, 93 (right), 103 (right), 177; Karl Gaff: 129 (top left); Gerd Guenther: 
19 (left), 110, 162 (center); Steve Gschmeissner: 21, 49, 145, 186; Denis 
Kunkel Miscroscopy: 162 (bottom); Hakan Kvarstrom: 181; Marek Mis: 
89; Alexander Semenov: 9, 30, 63; Claire Ting: 96; US Geological Survey: 
71; Wim van Egmond: 18, 28, 29 (top), 36 (right), 43, 103 (left), 106, 179, 
205, 209, 211, 215; M. I. Walker/Science Source: 79; Dirk Wiersma: 94; 
Jannicke Wiik-Neilsen: 20.
Shutterstock/Peter Adams Photo: 14; Choksawatdikorn: 36 (left), 137, 
155, 157; Danita Delimont: 64 (bottom right); Divedog: 56-57; Fujilovers: 
189; Elizaveta Galitckaia: 169 (top left); Eran Hakim: 199; Ekky Ilham: 92, 
127; Irabel8: 72; Levent Konuk: 23; Bell Ka Pang: 190; Lebendkulturen.de: 
16; Brian Maudsley: 138; Mikadun: 188; Nazarii M: 131; Tran MinhTri: 
187; Pawanya Phatarakulkajorn: 24; Nicolas Primola: 74; RugliG: 66-67; 
Saber Photography: 182; Wolfgang Schreibmayer: 64 (top); Vadviz.studio: 
129 (top right); Wildestanimal: 75 (bottom); Diana Will: 162 (top); 
Wonderisland: 191 (top left); Lynn Yeh: 68.
Daniel Thiel, Gaspar Jekely and Jurgen Berger, CC BY: 149.
UK Ocean Acidification research programme, 2017 (adapted from 
University of Maryland) (original used as source for adapted diagram): 186.
United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2021, data source: 
NOAA, 2021 (source of data for adapted graph): 185. 
Unsplash/Ahmed Nishaath: 67 (right).
