PLANNING SUSTAINABLE AND 
RESILIENT FOOD SYSTEMS 
Covid-19 was a canary in a mine. It exposed the vulnerabilities of 21st-century food 
systems but did not create them. Since then, the world has faced a “polycrisis:” a 
cluster of weather-related crop failures, war-induced food and energy shortages, and 
import dilemmas with compounding efects. Going forward, we need to plan for 
more sustainable and resilient food systems that improve environmental outcomes 
and address economic disparities. But food systems planning is a relatively new 
discipline and guidance is scarce.This book flls that gap. 
Where most food systems planning has focused on urban issues, this book takes 
a holistic view to include rural communities and production agriculture whose 
stewardship of the earth is so critical to public and environmental health, as well 
as to ensuring a varied and abundant food supply. Its goal is to inform planning 
practices and follow-up actions for a wide range of audiences—from professional 
planners, planning commissions, and boards to conservation districts and 
Cooperative Extension to the on-the-ground change-makers working to strengthen 
America’s food and farming systems. Embracing the fact that the U.S. is highly 
diverse in its people, places, and politics, the book lifts up principles and successful 
examples to help communities develop strategies based on their unique assets and 
the needs and preferences of their people. 
Julia Freedgood is Senior Fellow and Senior Program Advisor at American Farmland 
Trust, where she focuses on planning, policy, and programs to support farmers and 
ranchers, protect farmland for farming, and advance sustainable and resilient food 
systems. PLANNING SUSTAINABLE AND 
RESILIENT FOOD SYSTEMS 
From Soil to Soil 
Julia Freedgood Designed cover image: Shawn Linehan, Jacob Tosch, David Kosling, 
Preston Keres, and USDA. 
First published 2025 
by Routledge 
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158 
and by Routledge 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
© 2025 American Farmland Trust 
The right of American Farmland Trust to be identifed as author of this work has 
been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs 
and Patents Act 1988. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the 
publishers. 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks, and are used only for identifcation and explanation without intent 
to infringe. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Names: Freedgood, Julia, author. 
Title: Planning sustainable and resilient food systems : from soil to soil / 
Julia Freedgood 
Description: New York, NY : Routledge, 2024 | Includes bibliographical 
references and index 
Identifers: LCCN 2023056945 (print) | LCCN 2023056946 (ebook) | ISBN 
9781032276854 (hardback) | ISBN 9781032276861 (paperback) | ISBN 
9781003293712 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Agriculture and state—United States | Food supply—United 
States | Food security—United States | Sustainable agriculture—United States 
Classifcation: LCC HD9006 .F74 2024 (print) | LCC HD9006 (ebook) | DDC 
338.1/973—dc23/eng/20240405 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023056945 
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023056946 
ISBN: 9781032276854 (hbk) 
ISBN: 9781032276861 (pbk) 
ISBN: 9781003293712 (ebk) 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003293712 
Typeset in Joanna 
by Apex CoVantage, LLC To Peggy Rockefeller, Norm Berg, and Ralph Grossi, 
who individually and together laid the foundation 
and inspired this work. 
And to the unsung heroes: the farmers, ranchers, and farm 
workers who produce our food and the essential workers who 
help get it from feld to fork. CONTENTS 
About the Author ix 
Foreword xi 
Acknowledgments xiii 
About American Farmland Trust xvi 
Section I 
Introduction 3 
1 Why Plan for Food and Agriculture? 25 
2 The Public Framework for Food Systems Planning 51 
3 Principles and Practices to Guide Planning for Food and 
Agriculture 77 
Section II 
4 Federal Policies That Afect Food Systems 105 
5 Land Use Policies That Support Farms, Farmland, and Food 121 viii CONTeNTS 
6 Programs and Policies to Sustain Agriculture 157 
7 Programs and Policies to Support Community Food Security 192 
8 Evolving Issues 217 
Appendix: Organizational Resources 243 
Bibliography 247 
Index 264 ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Julia Freedgood is Senior Fellow and Senior Program Advisor at American 
Farmland Trust, where she focuses on planning, policy, and programs to 
support farmers and ranchers, retain and protect farmland for farming, and 
advance sustainable and resilient food systems. 
Freedgood is a national expert in land use and protection, land tenure 
and access, agricultural viability, and food system planning. Since 1986, 
when she helped launch the seminal Massachusetts farmers market cou￾pon program, she has devoted her career to fnding practical solutions to 
complex problems afecting local and regional food systems, conducting 
research, providing technical assistance, and actively engaging in commu￾nity planning and capacity building. 
She is the author or co-author of many articles and reports; recent work 
includes “Farms Under Threat: The State of the States,” “Fail to Include, 
Plan to Exclude: Refections on Local Governments’ Readiness for Building 
Equitable Community Food Systems,” and “Growing Local: A Community 
Guide to Planning for Agriculture and Food Systems.” 
A longtime member of the American Planning Association, Freedgood 
also is a founding member of North American Food Systems Network 
and serves on the Advisory Board and Editorial Committee of the Journal of x ABOUT THe AUTHOR 
Agriculture Food Systems and Community Development. She has served on numerous 
USDA advisory boards and grant review committees, including USDA￾Secretary Vilsack’s Land Tenure Advisory Committee. She holds a mas￾ter’s degree in urban and environmental planning and policy from Tufts 
University. FOREWORD 
Thirty years ago, in the small Maine town where I  lived, I  found myself 
co-chairing the comprehensive plan committee with a local dairy farmer. 
The State of Maine at the time required every community to develop such 
a plan—and a group of us were intent on crafting a forward-looking vision 
that would enhance our town’s rural character and help retain farms. At a 
time when few people saw a future for farming in northern New England, 
it took dozens of public meetings over several years to educate and build 
consensus. The work was arduous. We often felt that with every step for￾ward, we took two steps back. But the committee soldiered on, and in the 
end, the plan that emerged—which put farming front and center—led the 
community to enact a new land use ordinance that made a diference locally. 
This experience in community planning opened my eyes to farming’s 
potential as both a local economic engine and a powerful tool to achieve 
essential environmental goals, from maintaining open space to protect￾ing wildlife and water supply. It placed me squarely on a professional path 
advancing agriculture. I initially focused on helping Maine farmers improve 
business operations, often by entering new markets.This work inevitably led 
me to realize that farm viability, as important as it is, could not alone coun￾ter mounting development pressures. Motivated by a report on farmland 
loss from American Farmland Trust, a group of us created Maine Farmland 
Trust. Like many other nonprofts organized to save farmland and support xii FORewORD 
land access, Maine Farmland Trust did and continues to do critically impor￾tant work.Yet these strategies by themselves are not enough. 
Since its founding in 1980, American Farmland Trust has stressed how 
agriculture is a system—a system intertwined in the most fundamental 
way with how we sustain ourselves and our planet. For over three dec￾ades, Julia Freedgood has been a stalwart and impassioned advocate of 
this holistic view. In this volume, she explains how agriculture is not only 
essential to a sustainable food system, but to combating climate change. 
She describes the tools needed to incorporate agriculture into state and 
local plans that all too often ignore it. She helps us comprehend why we 
must be thinking of agriculture in all that we do, because, quite simply, our 
future depends on it. 
John Piotti 
President & CEO 
American Farmland Trust  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
To Peggy Rockefeller, Norm Berg, and Ralph Grossi, who individually and 
together laid the foundation and inspired this work. And to the unsung 
heroes: the farmers, ranchers, and farm workers who produce our food and 
to the essential workers who help get it from feld to fork. 
Special thanks to American Farmland Trust President John Piotti for 
visionary leadership, believing in me, and investing in this idea. Humble 
thanks to Otto Doering, who bravely reviewed my frst draft and ofered 
thoughtful, much-needed feedback. And heartfelt appreciation to Jennifer 
Dempsey and Cris Cofn, who contributed ideas, insights, inspiration, and 
lots of information along the way.This book would not have happened with￾out them. 
Thanks also to Farmland Information Center staf: Don Buckloh, Kayla 
Donovan, Kate Rossiter Pontius, and Ariel Looser for research, review, fact 
fnding, fact checking, and so on; to American Farmland Trust colleagues Jim 
Hafner, Jerry Cosgrove, Samantha Levy, Caro Roszell, Bianca Moebius-Clune, 
and Billy Van Pelt for valued input, review, and feedback; Olivia Fuller and 
Kirsten Ferguson for help fnding photos; Ryan Murphy for providing Farms 
Under Threat maps; and Sam Smidt for the rural employment graph. 
Profound gratitude to my partners in two collaborative projects—Growing 
Food Connections and Pathways to Prosperity—who mixed scholarship with practical 
wisdom to reimagine food systems and how to approach planning for them.  
xiv ACKNOwLeDgMeNTS 
The book is infused with years spent percolating, steeping, and ruminating 
with them through monthly Zoom meetings, annual get togethers, research, 
and writing. First to Jill Clark whose game-changing work centers on gov￾ernance, the policy process, and community engagement. To Samina Raja 
and Kim Hodgson for their acumen, aptitude, and illuminating the urban 
perspective, and to Jeanne Leccese for her grounded perspective and for 
moving GFC forward. Likewise to Shoshanna Inwood and Becca Jablonski, 
for inspired scholarship and the fre in their bellies when they contemplate 
what it means to be rural. Finally, to Aiden Irish for his research and master￾ful management of P2P. 
Growing Food Connections was a 5-year research, extension, and edu￾cation project to enhance community food security while ensuring 
sustainable and economically viable agriculture and food production. 
It focused on building local government capacity to remove public 
policy barriers and deploy innovative policy tools, and was supported 
by a USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture Food Systems 
Program award (grant no. 2012-68004-19894). Learn more at https:// 
growingfoodconnections.org/. 
Pathways to Prosperitywas a 4-year applied research and extension project 
focused on collaborative approaches to strengthening the value-added 
food and agricultural sector in rural communities. It was supported 
by Innovation for Rural entrepreneurs and Communities Program 
(grant no. 2019-68006-29681) from the USDA National Institute of 
Food and Agriculture. Learn more at https://localfoodeconomics. 
com/pathways/. 
Sincere thanks for the data, maps, photographs, publications, and every￾thing I learned through emails and interviews with the following dedicated 
and knowledgeable people: 
• Nyssa Entrekin, Caroline Haynes, and Julia Koprak from The Food Trust; 
• Bill Hofman and Ashley Mueller from USDA National Institute of Food 
and Agriculture; 
• Doug Jackson from Ohio State University; 
• Jimmy Kroon and Eric Reid from the Delaware Agricultural Lands 
Preservation Program; 
• Chris Mathias from the Scott County, Iowa, planning department; ACKNOwLeDgMeNTS xv 
• Beth Cawood Overman and Dustin Baker from Lexington-Fayette Urban 
Council of Governments; 
• Susan Payne and Steven Bruder from the New Jersey State Agriculture 
Development Committee; and 
• Susan Whitfeld from No More Empty Pots. 
Last but not least, a huge thank you to Sally Murray James of Cutting Edge 
Design for her fabulous work designing and managing graphic images for 
the book.  
ABOUT 
AMERICAN FARMLAND TRUST 
American Farmland Trust (AFT) works to save the land that sustains us by 
protecting farmland, promoting environmentally sound farming practices, 
and keeping farmers on the land.AFT is the only national agricultural organ￾ization that approaches its work in this comprehensive, holistic manner, 
combining on-the-ground projects with objective research, extension, and 
advocacy.We launched the conservation agriculture movement and continue 
to raise public awareness through our No Farms No Food message. Since our 
founding in 1980, AFT has helped permanently protect about eight million 
acres of agricultural land, advanced environmentally sound farming prac￾tices on millions more acres, and supported a half million farm families. 
Learn more at www.farmland.org. Section I DOI: 10.4324/9781003293712-2 
INTRODUCTION 
Covid-19 was a canary in a mine. It exposed the vulnerabilities of 21st￾century food systems but did not create them. When the pandemic hit, 
American consumers were shocked to fnd empty shelves at supermar￾kets—appalled when packing plant closures caused meat shortages, leaving 
livestock producers without processing alternatives, and still at least 59,000 
meatpacking workers contracted the virus in the pandemic’s frst year. The 
outbreaks disproportionately afected low-wage workers from racial and 
ethnic minorities and led to community spread in rural areas.2
 Meanwhile, 
rising food costs combined with high unemployment increased hunger, 
especially among children. While failing to protect health and safety or to 
fairly compensate their workers, the top meatpacking companies earned 
record profts.3 
These are examples of some of the unintended consequences of decades 
of U.S. food and farm policies. Driven by the “get big or get out” philoso￾phy famously expressed by 1970s Agriculture Secretary Earl Butz, these poli￾cies encouraged specialization and consolidation across food and agricultural  
4 SeC TION I 
sectors. In many ways, they were very successful. They achieved their goal 
of increasing production and distribution efciencies to produce a plentiful 
and cheap food supply, successfully expanding global markets and American’s 
food choices. Total farm output nearly tripled between 1948 and 20194
 and 
food prices fell.Today, on average, most consumers only spend about 10 per￾cent of their disposable personal income on food5
 (see Figure 0.1). However, 
cheap food does not ensure public or environmental health. 
In 2021, nearly 34 million Americans lived in food-insecure households6 
and 61 percent of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) par￾ticipants could not aford to buy healthy food.7
 Driven by economic dispari￾ties and barriers to food access, food insecurity is most prevalent in rural 
areas and large cities and its impacts felt most severely by Black, Hispanic, 
and single-mother households.8
 Rural food insecurity has had an outsized 
impact on Indigenous communities, especially during Covid. One study 
found that 56 percent of American Indian/Alaskan Natives (AIAN) expe￾rienced food insecurity, and nearly a third reported very low food secu￾rity.9
 Further, cheap food is not necessarily nutritious. A Harvard School of 
Public Health meta-analysis found healthier diets cost about $1.50 more 
Figure 0.1 Consumer spending on food fell sharply in the second half of the 20th 
century. INTRODUCTION 5 
per day than unhealthier, likely due to policies focused on producing high￾volume commodities and a supply chain that favors increasing proftability 
for highly processed food products.10 
Farm production efciencies emphasized specialization. This separated 
animal and crop production, increasing the need for synthetic fertilizers 
and pesticides, antibiotics to boost livestock growth, and large lagoons for 
livestock manure.These inputs add costs to agricultural operations, degrade 
the environment, and can harm human health.11 It also drove increased crop 
production for feed and fuels, especially corn. 
Today the U.S. is the world’s largest producer, consumer, and exporter 
of corn. U.S. farmers plant an average of about 90 million acres each year, 
mostly for livestock feed and ethanol. Some also is processed for human 
consumption for cereals, four, grits, and beverage alcohol, and products 
like high fructose corn syrup, glucose, dextrose, corn starch, and oil12 (see 
Figure 0.2). 
Corn—or maize—has been cultivated in the Americas for thousands of 
years.A versatile and valuable crop, its dramatic expansion came with signif￾icant environmental costs,13 which often are used to symbolize agriculture’s 
negative impact on the environment. Corn is not alone. Since 1962, when 
Rachel Carson published Silent Spring, the environmental impacts of modern 
Figure 0.2 Domestic corn increasingly is grown for ethanol along with feed grain use. 6 SeC TION I 
agriculture have been widely documented: degraded soil and water quality, 
elevated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and loss of biodiversity.14 
Farm consolidation accompanied specialization. Where once farmers 
were diversifed and grew multiple crops, today most grow two or three. 
Poultry and livestock operations increasingly rely on purchased feed instead 
of growing their own. Cropland ownership and agricultural wealth are ever 
more concentrated on a smaller number of highly specialized farms in rural 
areas, where less than a fourth of the population lives.15 In 2015 more than 
two-thirds of production came from only 5 percent of farms that had at least 
$1 million of output16 (see Figure 0.3). 
The profound shifts of the 20th century came at the expense of mid￾sized farms, rural communities, and diversifed supply chains. It does not 
have to be this way. But it will take a planning and policy shift as transfor￾mational as “get big or get out” to promote food systems that are at once 
sustainable, resilient, and fair. 
Figure 0.3 Farm production shifted to farms with annual sales of $1 million or more.  
INTRODUCTION 7 
Small and midsized farms typically employ more people, create more 
cohesive communities, and contribute more to local economies than very 
large farms.17They are more likely to be diversifed and to purchase livestock, 
equipment, and supplies locally.18 Over the 20th century, the total number 
of farms fell more than 60 percent, while average farm size increased by 
67 percent,19 hollowing out rural communities and making it harder for 
small commercial and midsized farms to compete. The trend continues. In 
the 2017 Census of Agriculture, all farm numbers declined except for the 
very smallest and very largest.20 Between 2017 and the 2022 Census, small￾and medium-sized farms declined while large farms with sales of $1 million 
or more increased. In 2022, large farms only represent six percent of all 
farms, they sold more than three fourths of all agricultural products.21 
These losses disproportionately harmed racial minorities. In 1920, nearly 
15 percent of farmers were Black, Indigenous, or Asian.22 In the 2022 Census 
of Agriculture, the number of farmers of color is only 4.6  percent
23—a 
striking contrast to the general population, which is increasingly diverse 
and where 42 percent identifes as a race or ethnicity other than “White 
alone.”24 In particular, Black, Hispanic, and Indigenous farmers were pushed 
out of agriculture by redlining, heirs and fractionated property rights dis￾putes,25 direct violence, and discriminatory USDA lending policies, which 
ultimately led to billions of dollars in payouts to settle class-action lawsuits. 
Consolidation has also occurred throughout the supply chain. Food 
industries are increasingly concentrated. A handful of transnational compa￾nies dominate domestic food supplies, with four or fewer frms controlling 
at least 50 percent of the market for 79 percent of common groceries.26 In 
2021, the top four food retailers commanded more than half of all sales27— 
more than doubling their share since 1997.28 This also is true for process￾ing, especially of livestock. In the beef market, four companies control 
85 percent of purchasing and processing; in pork, they control 67 percent.29 
It Is Time to Shift the Paradigm 
The stress the pandemic placed on food supplies exposed the brittleness of 
“get big or get out.” It illuminated the importance of the people who pro￾vide our food—from the farmers, ranchers, and farm workers who grow 
it to the people throughout the supply chain who process, distribute, and 
serve it. It revealed inherent inequities, including that nearly half of the 25  
8 SeC TION I 
lowest-paying jobs in the U.S. are related to food systems.30 And it pointed 
to the need for comprehensive food systems planning. 
Most people talk about THE food system as if it were a single thing. In 
truth, we participate in a myriad of intersecting food systems,31 nested 
together like Matryoshka dolls, operating at many levels from emergency 
food to global supply chains, with community, local, regional, tribal, and 
domestic food systems nestled in between. Each is important; each has a role 
to play. Food systems are multidimensional, social-ecological systems. They 
rely on natural resources like arable land, clean water, sunshine, and various 
microclimates to produce diverse crops and livestock.They are sustained by 
the management and labor of farmers, ranchers, farm workers, and a vast 
assortment of intermediaries who handle food between feld and fork. And 
they are infuenced by many things, including dietary preferences, human 
behavior, public policies, and market forces like supply and demand—the 
COMMUNITY
CULTURE
ECONOMY
NI RF TSA ERUTCUR
POL CI Y
ENV
RI ONMENT
SOCIETY
Producing
Aggregating
Processing
Distributing
Marketing
Acquiring
Consuming
Disposing
Elements and infuences 
on food systems 
Figure 0.4 Food systems encompass the life cycle of food from cultivation through 
consumption to the disposal of waste.  
INTRODUCTION 9 
dynamic push and pull between producers, supply chain frms, and con￾sumers. Impacts afecting one part of the system afect the rest, along with 
the price of food.32 
U.S. food and farm policy largely is driven by the federal government 
with food supplies left to the private market. Recently, state and local gov￾ernments have become more engaged, especially in food systems planning. 
A relatively new discipline, it emerged at the turn of the century after two 
planning professors, Jerome Kaufman and Kami Pothukuchi, wrote a couple 
of seminal articles urging planners to pay more attention to food.33 Since 
then, interest has grown so much that the American Planning Association 
(APA) formed a Food Systems Division (FSD) and Michigan State University 
researchers found that in 2021 nearly 60 percent of states have created some 
kind of food plan or had one under development.34 
Most food systems planning eforts focus on food access, nutrition, and 
urban agriculture. Driven by mounting evidence that the earth has reached 
a tipping point, it is time to take a more holistic approach to address 
food security in the context of smart growth, regenerative agriculture, and 
community resilience. Beyond the pandemic, speculative investment in 
commodity markets, global political unrest, and the impacts of climate 
change are disrupting agricultural production and food supplies at home 
and abroad. 
The U.S. is home to over 10 percent of the planet’s arable land.35 Yet even 
here, in what appears to be a vast agricultural landscape, less than 20 percent 
of the continental U.S. comprises nationally signifcant soils—the farmland 
best suited for sustainable food production36 (see Figure 0.5). 
Poorly planned development threatens the best farmland in every state. 
From 2001 to 2016, the U.S. converted 11  million acres of agricultural 
land—equivalent to all the land planted to fruits, nuts, and vegetables in 
2017.37 Beyond its importance for food production, agricultural land pro￾duces fewer GHG emissions than land converted to housing or commercial 
uses.38 And when managed using regenerative or climate-smart practices, it 
serves as a natural carbon sink by drawing down CO2
 and storing it in plants 
and soils. At a time when growing demands for healthy food are colliding 
with the environmental impacts of a changing climate, the food systems that 
depend on this vital and irreplaceable resource are threatened by competi￾tion for land, market consolidation, and an aging farming population. It is 
time for a more holistic approach to food systems planning. 1 0 Sec tion i 
Since 1988, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has 
documented impacts on food security from rising temperatures, increased 
frequency of extreme weather events, and other impacts of a changing cli￾mate. It projects that without intervention, these patterns will intensify, with 
especially significant impacts on low-wealth and vulnerable communities, 
increasing food insecurity in a world where the population is expected to 
reach nearly 10 billion by 2050.39 And it points to agricultural practices that 
can be scaled up to increase resiliency, including regenerative agriculture, 
diversification, and integrated production systems.40
Extreme weather events are increasing in frequency and intensity,41 and 
the eight years between 2015 and 2022 were the warmest ever recorded.42
In some cases and places, warmer temperatures may increase crop yields, 
but overall the changing climate is projected to reduce food supplies, raise 
food prices,43 and lower important nutrients in crops.44 Fruit and vegetable 
crops are especially sensitive to climatic stressors as heat waves and cold 
snaps lead to lower yields and/or reduced quality, often with devastating 
Range of Productive, Versatile, and Resilient Soils Across the U.S.
Source: American Farmland Trust Farms Under Threat: The State of the States.
Figure 0.5 This ma p identifies nonfederal land best suited for long-term cultivation, 
especially for food crops like fruits, nuts, vegetables, and staple grains.
Source: American Farmland Trust, “Farms Under Threat: The State of America’s 
Farmland.”IntroductIon 11
impacts on profitability. Water shortages and deteriorating water quality pose 
additional threats.45
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, which trap the sun’s heat in the atmos￾phere, are driving these dramatic changes. In the U.S., their main source is 
burning fossil fuels for electricity, heat, and transportation. But food sys￾tems activities also generate GHG emissions from producing, processing, 
refrigerating, transporting, and disposing of food in landfills. Agriculture 
contributes about 10 percent of total U.S. emissions,46 largely due to meth￾ane generated from liquid manure in confined animal feeding operations 
(CAFOs) and certain kinds of cropping systems47 (see Figure 0.6).
For millennia, people have used plows to till or cultivate the soil. Most 
crop production still uses tillage to break up and turn over soil to plant seeds 
and control weeds. But tilling kills beneficial microorganisms that build and 
sustain the soil. We need healthy soils to produce a plentiful and nutritious 
food supply. We also need them to support ecosystem services, from erosion 
Sources of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions in 2021
Transportation
28%
Electric
Power
25%
Industry
23%
Commercial 
& Residential
13%
Agriculture
10%
Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency emission estimates from the Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions and Sinks: 1990–2021.
Figure 0.6 The lar gest source of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions from human activities 
comes from burning fossil fuels for electricity, heat, and transportation. 
Agriculture contributes about 10 percent, mostly from livestock, agricul￾tural soils, and rice production.12 SeC TION I 
and food control to fltering and bufering pollutants, to pollinator and 
wildlife habitats. 
Farming practices that build soil health are vital for continued produc￾tivity and to sequester carbon, thus serving as an immediate, cost-efective 
approach to combating climate change. Some farmers already are adopt￾ing these practices. According to USDA Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (NRCS), voluntary conservation eforts have increased carbon 
stored in cultivated cropland soils by nearly 9 million tons annually.48 If all 
the world’s farmers and ranchers used these practices, it is estimated they 
could sequester enough carbon annually to ofset up to 20 percent of global 
fossil fuel emissions.49 Going forward, communities as well as countries 
must work harder to prepare for, manage, and recover from food systems 
stresses, disruptions, and shocks. Drawing on the 2022 IPCC report, we 
all must improve our capacity for adaptation, learning, and—perhaps most 
importantly—transformation.50 
This book is an attempt to do just that. Its goal is to inform planning prac￾tices and follow-up actions for a wide range of audiences: professional plan￾ners, planning commission and board members, elected ofcials, Extension 
educators, conservation district staf, and all the on-the-ground change￾makers who want to strengthen America’s food and farming systems. It cel￾ebrates planning to lift up the big picture and bring people together to meet 
community goals and ofers guidance on steps we can take and tools we can 
use to transform food systems to improve economic, environmental, and 
social outcomes. 
The book focuses on land-based systems, starting with agriculture’s role in 
ensuring the U.S. can deliver an afordable and nutritious food supply while 
improving environmental outcomes and addressing economic disparities. It 
appreciates—but does not emphasize—the importance of foraging, hunting, 
gathering, and marine and freshwater sources to food security and cultural 
identity. These also are part of the food systems mix. And it recognizes that 
systems solutions are multidimensional, cross-disciplinary, and complex. 
Transforming food systems cannot be solved sector by sector. Yet most 
U.S. food and farm policy is piecemeal, driven by the omnibus federal Farm 
Bill, which addresses the diferent parts of the system largely without con￾necting the whole. Generally reauthorized every fve years, as of this writing, 
Congress has yet to authorize the 2023 Farm Bill, but it is not expected to 
be transformational. The 2018 bill was extended through September 2024 INTRODUCTION 13 
and includes 12 titles. Nutrition receives about three-fourths of direct fund￾ing, followed by agricultural commodities, crop insurance, and conserva￾tion. Less than .01 percent of its total spending goes toward programs that 
connect nutrition and farm production.51 Given its history and the powerful 
interests it serves, federal policy will be hard and slow to change. 
State and local governments can address food systems on their own and 
by tapping federal program support. Food systems planning is a good place 
to start. But it must include production agriculture whose stewardship of the 
earth is so critical to public and environmental health, as well as to domestic 
food supplies.This will require incorporating rural planning and agriculture 
into food systems strategies along with urban. 
Planning with and for rural communities is vital to ensuring nutritional 
security at multiple levels. Most have arable land and working farms and 
ranches that produce most of our staple food crops and livestock. In these 
places, agriculture is the bedrock of rural economies, representing signif￾cant employment and having a far greater impact per employee on the local 
economy than in urban areas (see Figure 0.7). However, the planning pro￾fession was developed largely to guide land use and development in cities. 
Most cities have dedicated planning departments and resources that focus 
on the built environment. When they address food systems, they tend to 
rely on zoning and local land use regulations instead of investing in the 
middle infrastructure needed to connect production with consumption and 
build larger, more diversifed markets.52 On the other hand, rural communi￾ties often lack resources for any kind of planning, much less food systems 
planning. They rarely address food production, food access, or nutritional 
security. Yet the counties with the highest rates of food insecurity are dis￾proportionately rural.53 
One of the challenges with rural planning is knowing how to defne it. 
Federal agencies use a dizzying array of more than two dozen defnitions. 
They have one thing in common: They defne rural by what it lacks rather 
than what it is.The U.S. Census consigns rural to people, housing, and ter￾ritory outside of an urban area. Even USDA defnitions rely on an absence 
of urban features—like population or adjacency to populated areas—instead 
of the presence of rural assets.54 Given low population density, rich natural 
resources, but limited built infrastructure, rural needs and opportunities 
often are diferent from urban. But they are just as important to food sys￾tems planning.  
14 SeC TION I 
2021 Agricultural Employment across 
the Rural-Urban Continuum 
total employed trend 
Total Employed in Agriculture Industry 500 -
450 -
400 -
350 -
300 -
250 -
200 -
- 10 
- 9 
- 8 
- 7 
- 6 
- 5 
- 4 
- 3 
- 2 
- 1 
- 0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
URBAN RURAL 
% of All Employed Labor Force 
% of labor force trend 
Urban–Rural Continuum 
Agricultural employment plays a proportionately higher role in rural than urban 
counties. 
Source: American Farmland Trust Land Use Policy Research using USDA 
Economic Research Service 2021 Atlas of Rural and Small-Town America and 
2013 Urban Infuence Codes 
Figure 0.7 Agricultural employment in rural areas has fewer total jobs than in urban 
areas but refects a greater percentage of all employed and has a greater 
impact per employee on the local economy. 
Source: American Farmland Trust Land Use Policy Research division. 
USDA-ERS’s Rural Urban Continuum (RUC) Codes provide a useful 
framework for understanding these relationships. They classify urban—or 
metropolitan—counties by the population of their entire metro areas, and 
nonmetropolitan counties by degree of urbanization and adjacency to a 
metro area. Many “metro” counties have vibrant agricultural and local food 
economies where most of our local and perishable foods are grown. They 
still have rural features and are a vital link in the food supply chain, sup￾plying two-thirds of direct-to-consumer (DTC) food sales, mostly within a 
100-mile radius of the farm.55 INTRODUCTION 15 
Direct Sales of Food Produced in 
Urban-Infuenced Counties 
By Percent of Market Value 
USDA PHOTO 
Source: American Farmland Trust’s Farmland Information Center, using 
data from USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service 2017 Census 
of Agriculture, and USDA Economic Research Service 2013 Urban 
Infuenced Codes. 
Direct Sales 
to Consumers 
88% 90%
Direct Sales 
to Retail Outlets 
Figure 0.8 Most local and perishable food is grown in urban-infuenced counties. 
Source: American Farmland Trust Farmland Information Center. 
Going forward, agriculture and food production will and must occur in 
all kinds of environments: rural, urban, and along the increasingly urban￾infuenced continuum in between.Thus, planning for food systems requires 
a holistic approach to create regional linkages and support for more diversi￾fed markets and infrastructure.This will lead to healthy symbiotic relation￾ships along the continuum and across the food supply chain. But there are 
very few resources to guide this process. 
This book seeks to fll that gap. It presents pathways to achieve sus￾tainable, resilient, and evenhanded food systems regardless of scale or 
scope. Written with the hope that with better understanding and by 
working together we can bridge the growing urban–rural divide, the 
book embraces the fact that the U.S. is highly diverse: In its people, its  
 
16 SeC TION I 
places, its politics—even in the powers invested through states to local 
governments. Since what is best in one community may be detrimental to 
another, it lifts up principles and successful examples, but eschews “best 
practices.” Strategies and solutions must be specifc to their context, con￾nected to each community’s natural and cultural resources, and to the 
needs and preferences of its people. 
Finally, while policy change is an important lever, transformation is a 
collective process. Planning lays the groundwork; it sets it in motion. To 
be efective, food systems planning must be as inclusive as possible: engag￾ing multiple perspectives, forms of knowledge, and cross-sector approaches. 
Since this requires clear communication, including a shared use of terms, 
let’s start there. 
Common Terms 
People and disciplines often use the same words to mean diferent things— 
or diferent words to mean the same things, like hoagies, subs, and grinders. 
Sometimes words widely used in one discipline are adopted by another. 
For example, a common term in psychology, resilience increasingly is asso￾ciated with climate science. They are equally important. While words can 
bring people together, they also can pull them apart, obscuring meaning 
and opportunities for common ground. To ofer a common denominator, 
what follows are the meanings used for some key terms used frequently in 
this book. 
Agriculture 
Agriculture is a set of activities used to produce crops, poultry, and livestock. 
Commonly associated with food, feed, fber, fowers, and fuel, it also pro￾duces nursery plants and trees; ingredients for pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, 
and industrial alcohol; and other products. Most laws confne it to com￾mercial production, and some states and policies expand the defnition to 
include timber, raising fsh (aquaculture), on-farm education and recreation 
(agritourism), growing plants in water using mineral nutrients (hydropon￾ics), horse breeding, and even riding stables (equine). Beyond cultivation, 
it includes marketing and activities that add value to farm products, like 
processing fruit into jam.56  
 
INTRODUCTION 17 
Organic, Sustainable, and Regenerative Agriculture 
Organic, sustainable, and regenerative agriculture have overlapping goals and 
approaches but are not synonymous. According to USDA, organic agriculture 
involves 
the application of a set of cultural, biological, and mechanical prac￾tices that support the cycling of on-farm resources, promote ecologi￾cal balance, and conserve biodiversity. These include maintaining or 
enhancing soil and water quality; conserving wetlands, woodlands, 
and wildlife; and avoiding use of synthetic fertilizers, sewage sludge, 
irradiation, and genetic engineering.57 
Sustainable agriculture is an integrated system of plant and animal production 
practices with site-specifc applications to achieve long-term social, eco￾nomic, and environmental benefts.These include meeting human food and 
fber needs, enhancing environmental quality, sustaining farm viability, and 
improving the quality of life for farmers and society as a whole.58 USDA has 
not defned regenerative agriculture, but it is generally understood to be a holistic 
suite of practices to restore soil health and ecosystems often based on tradi￾tional Indigenous practices, such as Three Sisters (corn, beans, and squash) 
companion planting.59 
Farm 
The USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) defnes a farm as 
any place that produced and sold—or normally would have produced and 
sold—at least $1,000 of agricultural products during a given year.60 
Food Security 
Food security is the condition “when all people, at all times, have physi￾cal and economic access to sufcient, safe and nutritious food that meets 
their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life.”61 
Community food security extends this to a “condition in which all community 
residents obtain a safe, culturally acceptable, nutritionally adequate diet 
through a sustainable food system that maximizes community self-reliance, 
social justice, and democratic decision-making.”62 18 SeC TION I 
Food Supply Chain 
A food supply chain is the network of people, businesses, and processes 
involved in creating raw food and food products and delivering them to 
consumers: from farm to fork. It begins at the farm or ranch where the food 
is sourced and continues through packing, processing, and distribution. It 
ends with consumption—or eating the food. 
Foodshed 
A foodshed is the spatial relationships between where food is produced and 
where it ultimately is consumed. Similar to a watershed, it describes a geo￾graphic relationship between an area that supplies a population with food 
and the fow of food from its origin to destination. 
Food Systems 
Food systems are multidimensional systems that connect the ecological, eco￾nomic, and social dimensions of food through feedback mechanisms.63 Also 
called food and farming systems, the entire supply chain from production 
through consumption. Sustainable food systems embody the entire life cycle of 
food—from soil to soil. Building on the principles of sustainable agriculture, 
they give equal attention to economic, environmental, and social concerns 
throughout the supply chain and address disposal of food and farm waste.64 
Land Trust 
Land trusts are legal entities—generally nonproft corporations—that man￾age land for conservation, afordable housing, and other public purposes. 
Most are conservation land trusts formed to permanently protect environmental 
resources, like agricultural land, from development. Others are community land 
trusts that hold and steward land for afordable housing and other local assets 
like community gardens. 
Local Food 
Local food is an ambiguous term with various defnitions. It conjures a 
sense of place and values, including authenticity, transparency, farm identity, INTRODUCTION 19 
and relationships between producers and consumers. For the purposes of 
this book, it refers to short, value-based supply chains and direct market￾ing arrangements, including direct-to-consumer (DTC) sales through channels like 
farmers markets and intermediated sales to institutions within states or regions. 
In addition, it includes activities where farmers perform value-added functions 
like packaging, processing, distribution, and promotion.65 
Planning 
Public-sector planning is an international profession and practice. In the 
U.S., it is a dynamic process to maximize the health, safety, and economic 
well-being of people in communities. It occurs at many jurisdictional levels, 
from cities and towns to counties, states, and regions, and encompasses 
a wide range of specialties from transportation and housing to economic 
development, hazard mitigation, historic preservation, and sustainability. 
Planners work in public-sector positions, private and nonproft sectors, and 
in volunteer capacities on planning boards and commissions. Food Systems 
Planning is a set of interconnected, future-oriented activities that support 
food systems development. 
Resilience 
Resilience is both the process and the result of successfully adapting to dif￾fcult or challenging situations and experiences. It is the ability to prepare 
for and respond to hazardous events and disturbances and to withstand and 
bounce back from adversity. 
Sustainability 
Sustainability is the ability to meet current needs without compromising the 
needs of future generations. It balances economic growth, environmental 
care, and social well-being. 
How to Use This Book 
The book is organized into two sections. Section  1 lays the foundation 
for planning practices and policy development. Chapter  1 describes the  
 
 
20 SeC TION I 
transformation that occurred in U.S. food systems during the second half 
of the 20th century and explores opportunities for change. Chapter 2 intro￾duces the structures of government that afect planning and how public 
decisions are made. It covers planning authority and common types of plan￾ning organizations and plans that can play a role in food systems planning, 
pointing to successful examples. Chapter 3 describes principles and prac￾tices to apply when planning for farms and food, whether as stand-alone 
plans or as elements of other types of plans. Building on lessons learned 
from a variety of planning eforts, it ofers basic principles and approaches 
to guide future planning practices. 
Section II focuses on implementation. It is organized around three main 
elements of food systems planning: land use, sustaining agriculture, and food 
security. Chapter 4 provides an overview of key federal agencies and policies 
that infuence food systems and, because of their signifcant roles, goes into 
greater depth about USDA and the Farm Bill. Chapter 5 gives an overview 
of state and local land use policies and discusses a variety of zoning consid￾erations that have an impact on food and agriculture. Chapter 6 covers pro￾grams and policies to sustain farms and farmland, including those that support 
agricultural viability, protect farmland from development, and promote envi￾ronmentally sound farming practices. Chapter 7 focuses on ways to address 
community food security and health disparities by increasing the availability of 
fresh fruits, vegetables, and other nutritious foods—from healthy retail poli￾cies to nutrition education to emergency food programs. Chapter 8 examines 
three issues that afect food production but have not received much plan￾ning attention: Farmland access, solar energy siting, and commercial cannabis 
cultivation. While policy responses are evolving, these issues have yet to be 
included in food systems plans. It also ofers some concluding thoughts. 
Notes 
1. Grant Suneson, “What Are the 25 Lowest Paying Jobs in the US? Women Usually 
Hold Them,” USA TODAY, accessed February 2, 2023. 
2. Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Crisis Majority Staf, “Coronavirus 
Infections and Deaths Among Meatpacking Workers at Top Five Companies Were 
Nearly Three Times Higher Than Previous Estimates,” Congress of the United States, House 
of Representatives, October 27, 2021. 
3. Mike Troy, “Pandemic-Fueled Record Growth in 2020: The PG 100,” Progressive 
Grocer, May  17, 2021; USDA, Economic Research Service, “Food Prices and 
Spending,” Updated June  2, 2021; Megan Boyanton, “Pandemic Meat Shortage  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 21 
Spurs Calls to Shift Slaughterhouse Rules,” October 19, 2020; Lillianna Byington, 
“By the Numbers: Examining the Cost of the Pandemic on the Meat Industry,” 
November 19, 2020; Molly Kinder, Laura Stateler, and Julia Du, “Windfall Profts 
and Deadly Risks,” Brookings Institution, November 2020. 
4. USDA Economic Research Service,“USDA ERS – Farming and Farm Income.” 
5. USDA Economic Research Service, “USDA ERS – Food Prices and Spending,” 
January 6, 2023. 
6. USDA Economic Research Service, “USDA ERS – Food Security in the U.S.: Key 
Statistics & Graphics.” 
7. USDA Food and Nutrition Service, “Barriers That Constrain the Adequacy of 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Allotments (Summary),” USDA 
Food and Nutrition Service, June 2021. 
8. USDA Economic Research Service, “USDA ERS – Food Security and Nutrition 
Assistance,” October 18, 2022. 
9. Sara Usha Maillacheruvu, The Historical Determinants of Food Insecurity in Native Communities | 
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy 
Priorities, October 4, 2022). 
10. Mayuree Rao et al., “Do Healthier Foods and Diet Patterns Cost More than Less 
Healthy Options? A  Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” BMJ Open 3, no. 12 
(December 1, 2013): e004277. 
11. Fred Magdof and Harold van Es, Building Soils for Better Crops, 4th ed., Sustainable 
Agriculture Network Handbook Series, Book 10 (College Park, MD: Sustainable 
Agriculture Research & Education Program, 2021). 
12. USDA Economic Research Service,“USDA ERS – Feed Grains Sector at a Glance.” 
13. D. Pimentel, “Ethanol Fuels: Energy Balance, Economics, and Environmental 
Impacts Are Negative,” Natural Resources Research 12 (2003): 127–34. 
14. Magdof and van Es, Building Soils for Better Crops. 
15. Christine Whitt, Noah Miller, and Ryan Olver, “America’s Farms and Ranches at a 
Glance: 2022 Edition,” USDA Economic Research Service, December 2022. 
16. Whitt et al.,“America’s Farms and Ranches at a Glance.” 
17. Thomas A. Lyson, Robert J.Torres, and Rick Welsh,“Scale of Agricultural Production, 
Civic Engagement, and Community Welfare*,” Social Forces 80, no. 1 (September 1, 
2001): 311–27; Linda M. Lobao, Locality and Inequality: Farm and Industry Structure and 
Socioeconomic Condition (Albany: SUNY Press, 1990); Walter Goldschmidt, Down on the 
Farm, New Style (Yellow Springs, OH: Publisher Not Identifed, 1948). 
18. Calvin Beale, “Salient Features of the Demography of American Agriculture,” in 
The Demography of Rural Life, Publication #64, eds. David Brown et al. (University Park, 
PA: Northeast Regional Center for Rural Development, 1993); Fred Kirschenmann 
et al., “Why Worry about the Agriculture of the Middle?,” in Food and the Mid-Level 
Farm, eds.Thomas A. Lyson, G.W. Stevenson, and Rick Welsh (Cambridge:The MIT 
Press, 2008), 3–20. 
19. James M. MacDonald, Robert A. Hoppe, and Doris Newton, “Three Decades of 
Consolidation in U.S. Agriculture,” USDA Economic Research Service, March 2018. 
20. USDA Economic Research Service,“USDA ERS – Farming and Farm Income.” 
21. 2022 Census of Agriculture Highlights: “Farm Economics.” USDA National Agricultural 
Statistics Service, 2024.  
 
 
22 SeC TION I 
22. U.S. Census Bureau, “1920 Census: Volume 5. Agriculture, Reports for States, 
Chapter 5, Farm Statistics by Race, Nativity, and Sex of Farmer,” 1920. 
23. 2022 Census of Agriculture Highlights: “Farm Producers.” USDA National Agricultural 
Statistics Service, 2024. 
24. Eric Jensen et al.,“The Chance That Two People Chosen at Random Are of Diferent 
Race or Ethnicity Groups Has Increased Since 2010,” Census.gov, August 12, 2021. 
25. Redlining refers to racial discrimination in housing and insurance, originally based 
on government maps that outlined in red areas deemed risky for investment due 
to residents’ racial characteristics. Heirs property is land jointly owned by family 
members of a person who died but whose estate did not clear probate. Heirs may 
use the property but lack clear title, making it hard to obtain loans and federal farm 
benefts and often forcing partition sales by third parties. Fractionation is similar 
but refers to land held by Tribes subject to the General Allotment Act of 1887, 
where reservation land was divided up and allotted to individual Tribal members. 
After the death of the original allottee owner, title ownership is divided up among 
heirs. Over generations, the number of owners can grow exponentially, resulting in 
highly fractionated ownership of much Tribal land. 
26. Nina Lakhani, Aliya Uteuova, and Alvin Chang, “The Illusion of Choice: Five Stats 
That Expose America’s Food Monopoly Crisis,” The Guardian, July  18, 2021, sec. 
Environment. 
27. Food Industry Editorial Team,“Who Are the Top 10 Grocers in the United States?,” 
FoodIndustry.Com, June 7, 2022. 
28. Mary Hendrickson et al., “Consolidation in Food Retailing and Dairy,” British Food 
Journal 103, no. 10 (January 1, 2001): 715–28. 
29. USDA Agricultural Marketing Services, “Packers and Stockyards Division Annual 
Report 2019” (USDA Agricultural Marketing Service, 2019); Lisa Held,“Just a Few 
Companies Control the Meat Industry. Can a New Approach to Monopolies Level 
the Playing Field? | Civil Eats,” Civil Eats; James M. MacDonald et al.,“Concentration 
and Competition in U.S. Agribusiness,” USDA Economic Research Service, EIB-256, 
June 2023. 
30. Suneson,“What Are the 25 Lowest Paying Jobs in the US?” 
31. Julia Freedgood and Jessica Fydenkevez, Growing Local:A Community Guide to Planning for 
Agriculture and Food Systems (Northampton, MA: American Farmland Trust, April 30, 
2017); Cees Leeuwis, Birgit K. Boogaard, and Kwesi Atta-Krah,“How Food Systems 
Change (or Not): Governance Implications for System Transformation Processes,” 
Food Security 13, no. 4 (August 1, 2021): 761–80. 
32. Freedgood and Fydenkevez, Growing Local; Joachim von Braun et al., “Food System 
Concepts and Defnitions for Science and Political Action,” Nature Food 2, no. 10 
(October 2021): 748–50. 
33. Kameshwari Pothukuchi and Jerome L. Kaufman, “The Food System: A Stranger 
to the Planning Field,” Journal of the American Planning Association 66, no. 2 (June 30, 
2000): 113–24; Kameshwari Pothukuchi and Jerome L. Kaufman, “Placing the 
Food System on the Urban Agenda: The Role of Municipal Institutions in Food 
Systems Planning,” Agriculture and Human Values 16, no. 2 (June 1, 1999): 213–24. 
34. Lesli Hoey et al.,“Participatory State and Regional Food System Plans and Charters 
in the U.S.: A Summary of Trends and National Directory,” Michigan State University’s 
Center for Regional Food Systems, August 2021.  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 23 
35. World Population Review, “Arable Land by Country 2023.” 
36. A. Ann Sorenson et al., Farms Under Threat:The State of America’s Farmland (Washington, 
DC: American Farmland Trust, 2018). 
37. Ann Sorenson et al., Farms Under Threat. 
38. American Farmland Trust, Greener Fields: California Communities Combating Climate Change 
(Washington, DC: American Farmland Trust, September, 2018). 
39. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Afairs, Population Division, 
“World Population Prospects 2022: Summary of Results,” United Nations Department of 
Economic and Social Afairs, Population Division, June 11, 2022. 
40. Hans-O. Pörtner et al., eds., “Summary for Policy Makers,” in Climate Change 2022: 
Impacts,Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2022), 3–33. 
41. Jerry M. Melillo, Gary Wynn Yohe, and Terese Richmond, Climate Change Impacts in the 
United States:The Third National Climate Assessment 10.7930/J0z31wj2 OA.Mg (Washington, 
DC: U.S. Global Change Research Program, 2014); Jefrey A. Hicke et al.,“Chapter 14: 
North America,” in Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of 
Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2022), 1929–2042. 
42. Copernicus Climate Change Service, “Global Climate Highlights 2022 | 
Copernicus,” 2022. 
43. Gerald C. Nelson et  al., “Climate Change: Impact on Agriculture and Costs of 
Adaptation.” 
44. Samuel S. Myers et al.,“Increasing CO2Threatens Human Nutrition,” Nature 510, no. 
7503 (June 2014): 139–42. 
45. Charles L. Walthal et  al., Climate Change and Agriculture in the United States: Efects and 
Adaptation, USDA Technical Bulletin 1935 (Washington, DC: USDA ARS, 2012). 
46. United States Environmental Protection Agency, “Agriculture,” in Inventory of U.S. 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–2020, 2022, 5–60. 
47. Christopher L.Weber and H. Scott Matthews,“Food-Miles and the Relative Climate 
Impacts of Food Choices in the United States,” Environmental Science & Technology 42, no. 
10 (May 15, 2008): 3508–13. 
48. USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service,“Conservation Practices on Cultivated 
Cropland: A  Comparison of CEAP I  and CEAP II Survey Data and Modeling – 
Summary of Findings,” USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service, January 2022. 
49. Keith Paustian et  al., “Climate-Smart Soils,” Nature 532, no. 7597 (April  2016): 
49–57. 
50. Hans-O. Pörtner et al.,“Summary for Policy Makers.” 
51. USDA Economic Research Service, “USDA ERS – Farm Bill Spending,” accessed 
February 3, 2023. 
52. Jill K. Clark, Brian Conley, and Samina Raja, “Essential, Fragile, and Invisible 
Community Food Infrastructure: The Role of Urban Governments in the United 
States,” Food Policy, Urban Food Policies for a Sustainable and Just Future 103 (August 1, 2021): 
102014. 
53. Monica Hake, Emily Engelhard, and Adam Dewey, “Map the Meal Gap 2022: An 
Analysis of County and Congressional District Food Insecurity and County Food 
Cost in the United States in 2020,” Feeding America, 2022.  
24 SeC TION I 
54. John Cromartie and Shawn Bucholtz, “USDA ERS – Defning the ‘Rural’ in Rural 
America,” Amber Waves, June 1, 2008. 
55. USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2012 Census of Agriculture Highlights: Direct 
Farm Sales of Food (Washington, DC: USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, 
December 2016). 
56. Sections  9–23 of the United States 2022 Census of Agriculture Form Number: 
22-A100 provide detail on the types of crops and livestock. 
57. USDA National Organic Program Agricultural Marketing Service, “Introduction to 
Organic Practices,” The NOP Organic Insider, September 2015. 
58. “7 U.S. Code § 3103 – Defnitions,” LII/Legal Information Institute. 
59. Emily J. Cole, Regenerative Agriculture for New England: Sustaining Farmland Productivity in a 
Changing Climate (Northampton, MA and Boston, MA: American Farmland Trust and 
Conservation Law Foundation, August 8, 2022). 
60. USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, “2017 U.S. Census of Agriculture, 
Introduction,” USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2017. 
61. FAO Agricultural and Development Economics Division, “Food Security (Policy 
Brief: Issue 2),” FAO Agricultural and Development Economics Division, June 2006. 
62. Anne C. Bellows and Michael W. Hamm, “U.S.-Based Community Food Security: 
Infuences, Practice, Debate,” Journal for the Study of Food and Society 6, no. 1 (March 1, 
2002): 31–44. 
63. Danielle M. Tendall et al., “Food System Resilience: Defning the Concept,” Global 
Food Security 6 (October 1, 2015): 17–23. 
64. Sonja Brodt et  al., “Sustainable Agriculture,” Nature Education Knowledge 3, no. 10 
(2011): 1; C. Clare Hinrichs and Thomas A. Lyson, eds., Remaking the North American 
Food System (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2008); “Foresight 2.0 – Global 
Panel,” May 31, 2019. 
65. Steve Martinez et al., Local Food Systems: Concepts, Impacts, and Issues (ERR 97) (Washington, 
DC: USDA Economic Research Service, May 2010). DOI: 10.4324/9781003293712-3 
 
 
1 
WHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND 
AGRICULTURE? 
Chapter Summary 
This chapter explores the changes to U.S. food systems that occurred during 
the second half of the 20th century.These changes include: 
• A shift to large, specialized, and increasingly consolidated farms and 
food industries, which led to signifcant increases in productivity and 
efciencies; 
• A smaller share of household income spent on food and increased con￾sumption of highly processed foods; and 
• Increasing reliance on global trade and supply chains, which both bol￾stered large-farm profts and increased the variety of foods. 
However positive, these changes came at the expense of environmental 
quality, diet-related disease, and diversifed family farms, which—as Covid 
has shown—leave our current food systems vulnerable to disruptions and 26 SeC TION I 
shocks.To address these unintended consequences, better food systems plan￾ning is needed to increase sustainability, resilience, and fair play throughout 
the food supply chain. 
*** 
Until Covid-19, most planners and policymakers took for granted that a 
wide variety of foods from all over the world would be available to most 
Americans at an afordable price. When the pandemic hit, the U.S. was 
unprepared for disruptions all along the food supply chain and the sudden 
surge in home cooking. While we have emergency systems to prepare for 
and respond to natural disasters and address biohazards and contamina￾tion, emergency preparedness plans generally approach these as relatively 
isolated, short-term events. This was exacerbated by siloed administrative 
responsibilities and lack of public service coordination.1
 Although this 
exposed instability in our dominant food systems, it also revealed opportu￾nities for innovation and change. 
Places with established local and regional food systems (LRFS) pivoted 
quickly to fll gaps and leverage community networks to meet production, 
processing, and marketing needs. LRFS were quick to react, adapt, and inno￾vate, flling gaps in food supply chains at home and abroad.2 
Food hubs adopted elements of Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) 
and shifted markets from intermediaries to consumers. Even the federal 
government adapted aspects of the CSA model and ofered funds to distribu￾tors to create produce boxes and deliver them to community organizations 
to distribute to families in need.3 
Since then the world has faced what the World Economic Forum 
describes as a “polycrisis”: a cluster of weather-related crop failures, war￾induced food and energy shortages, and import dilemmas with compound￾ing efects.”4 Predicting what will come if humanity does not take swift and 
urgent action to mitigate climate change, the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) predicts shifts in food production around the world 
and calls for resilience in food and agricultural systems.5 
Farmers and ranchers have always been at the mercy of unpredictable 
weather, but over the past 40 years the extremity of those events has increased 
in an unprecedented way. Changes in temperature and precipitation have 
increased the risk of food- and water-borne diseases, respiratory distress 
from wildfre smoke, and food and nutritional insecurity.They have reduced 
agricultural productivity, especially in southern and drought-prone regions.6 wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 27 
Mega-droughts leave fallowed felds, withered crops, and livestock sold for 
lack of feed. Scorching heat creates dangerous working conditions.Wildfres 
destroy crops and livestock, ravage communities, and reduce air quality for 
thousands of miles. Pressures increase from pests and pathogens and afect 
when plants and trees bloom and bees and butterfies come out to pollinate 
them. Heavy rains and foods also harm crops and reduce yields by deplet￾ing soil nutrients and increasing erosion. Runof into waterways diminishes 
water quality and leads to depleted oxygen levels—or hypoxia—killing fsh 
and shellfsh. By mid-century, these impacts are projected to have signifcant 
consequences for food security in the U.S. and around the world.7 
Going forward, we need to support more sustainable, resilient, and even￾handed food systems with sufcient fexibility, diversity, and redundancy 
to deter, withstand, and recover from individual disruptions as well as a 
polycrisis. Sustainable because what we do today should meet current needs 
without compromising future generations. Resilient because we must be 
prepared to respond to disruptions and change. And evenhanded because 
communities are healthier when policies are fair and support the needs of 
all their residents. 
How We Got Here 
Twentieth-century “cheap food” policies succeeded in holding food prices 
below the competitive equilibrium price of supply and demand,8
 achieving 
huge gains in productivity through specialization, consolidation, and use of 
fossil fuels. Signifcant investment, both public and private, in intermedi￾ate inputs like chemical fertilizers and pesticides, and capital inputs like 
machinery and farm structures, led to a surge in technological advance￾ment and innovations in animal and crop genetics. Total domestic farm 
output nearly tripled between 1948 and 20199
 and, combined with lib￾eralized global trade policies, increased food availability at lower costs (see 
Figure 1.1). However, agricultural growth has slowed in recent years, with 
wide variations in annual output largely attributed to adverse weather.10 
Over this period, the use of farm inputs was fairly steady but its composi￾tion changed. Inputs like labor and land declined signifcantly—by 74 per￾cent and 28  percent, respectively—while intermediate inputs grew by 
126 percent and capital inputs (excluding land) increased by 79 percent.11 
Agriculture became increasingly specialized, consolidated, and focused on 28 SeC TION I 
Figure 1.1 Total domestic farm output nearly tripled between 1948 and 2019. 
a few highly productive commodity crops well suited to industrial farm￾ing systems—like corn. Grown primarily for livestock feed and ethanol, 
corn is the largest crop in the U.S., accounting for over 95 percent of total 
feed grain production and use, and our largest export crop.12 But this dra￾matic shift came with signifcant environmental costs from degraded soils 
to hypoxia in the Gulf of Mexico.13 
Consolidation—and increasingly concentration—also occurred in agri￾cultural input industries and markets. Sometimes resulting from a desire 
to achieve economies of scale, consolidation can increase productivity. But 
when it becomes highly concentrated into only a few frms, it can slow pro￾ductivity growth, reducing competition, efciency, and innovation. 
Today just two seed companies account for 72 percent of planted corn 
acres. Over 30 years, as the number of companies shrank, the prices farmers 
paid for seed increased by an average of 270 percent—far outstripping com￾modity output prices. Meanwhile, meatpacking shifted to larger plants and 
tighter vertical coordination among production and processing. By 2019,  
wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 29 
four meatpackers accounted for 85 percent of beef and 67 percent of hog 
slaughter.14 During the pandemic, it became clear how vulnerable this kind 
of concentration is to disruptions and sudden closures. Early on, Covid out￾breaks shuttered 25 percent of pork processing.15 
Large packing plants achieve cost savings through economies of scale. 
But these are modest—as little as a one to three percent cost advantage over 
smaller plants.16 And without competition, they can collude to keep wages 
low and food prices high. Over the past few years, a series of lawsuits have 
been settled against meat processing companies for fxing prices and con￾spiring to depress compensation.17 Systems with greater diversity of scales 
disperse the risk of any one plant closing and improve market access for 
sustainable livestock production. 
Finally, since they only achieve economies of scale when operating at or 
near full capacity, consolidated meat packing has contributed to the shift 
toward large, concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs). These cre￾ate severe environmental problems from air and water pollution to GHG 
emissions, not to mention animal welfare concerns. While regulations are 
in place, they are riddled with exemptions and loopholes, so some of their 
true costs are passed on to society.18 
On the retail end, four transnational frms control at least half the mar￾ket for most common groceries.19 In most metropolitan areas, fve to six 
chain stores account for most supermarket sales.20 Walmart alone sells at 
least half of all groceries in one in every ten metropolitan areas and nearly 
one in three “micropolitan” areas.21 These trends reduce marketing outlets 
for small and midsize producers and food processors, and give big proces￾sors and retailers more leverage and power to dictate prices to suppliers and 
consumers. 
Twentieth-century policies also led to a loss of demographic diversity 
in agriculture. In the 1920 Census, nearly 15 percent of U.S. farmers were 
reported as “Negroes,”“Indians,”“Japanese,” or “Chinese.”22 Today,“White” 
farmers represent over 95 percent of all farmers—in striking contrast to the 
overall U.S. population, which is increasingly multiracial and diverse.23 
As these changes occurred in agriculture, Americans’ diets increasingly 
shifted from home-cooked meals created from raw ingredients to reliance 
on processed foods and take-out. With this, the share of the food dollar 
shifted from farmers to supply chain intermediaries. In 2021, U.S. farms 
received only 14.5 cents of every dollar spent on domestically produced  
30 SeC TION I 
food; the rest went to the supply chain. (Note, the farm share jumped slightly 
in 2020 due to a sharp decrease in spending on food-away-from-home early 
in the Covid-19 pandemic.)24 (See Figure 1.2.) 
By 2021, disposable income spent on food comprised only about 11 per￾cent of household budgets,25 even though Americans have signifcantly 
increased food consumption. A Pew Research Center study found that an 
Figure 1.2 ERS uses input-output analysis to calculate the farm and marketing shares 
from a typical food dollar. In 2021, U.S. farms received only 14.5 cents of 
every dollar spent on domestically produced food. wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 31 
average American consumed about 23 percent more calories a day in 2010 
than in 1970.26 
Considering widespread availability and consumer price, cheap food pol￾icies achieved their goals. But they came with unintended consequences: the 
decline of diverse family farms and rural economies, food insecurity and 
diet-related disease, and natural resource degradation.27 
Decline of Diverse Family Farms and Rural Economies 
As farm output rose, farms got larger and farm numbers fell. According to 
the Census of Agriculture, in 1950, 5.4 million farms averaged 215 acres. By 
1997, average farm size had doubled and farm numbers fallen to 2.2 mil￾lion. The decline was so dramatic that USDA described it as a free-fall situ￾ation leading toward trauma.28 The drive for large, technology-dependent, 
specialized farms squeezed small commercial and midsized producers and 
led to substantial consolidation in farm sales. 
The free fall disproportionately afected farmers of color. This has been 
especially well documented for Black/African American (BAA) farmers. 
Between 1920 and 1997, they lost 90 percent of their land—a resource 
valued at roughly $326 billion.29 Several audits, investigations, and lawsuits 
found that USDA county committees denied loans, held up loan approvals, 
and ofered worse terms to farmers of color than to White farmers, forc￾ing many into high debt and foreclosure—even after the 1964 Civil Rights 
Act was supposed to end racial discrimination in federal programs. Forced 
partition sales from heirs property exacerbated the problem, contributing to 
a massive transfer of land and wealth to White farmers. Since 1910, White 
farmers increased farmland ownership by 89 percent, while BAA farmers 
decreased ownership by 80 percent.30 
Two class-action law suits: Pigford vs. Glickman and Brewington vs. Glickman 
(which were consolidated), established that USDA had systematically dis￾criminated on the basis of race. Settled in 1999 for nearly $1 billion, Pigford 
I was the largest civil rights settlement in history and set a precedent for 
future class-action law against USDA. In 2008, Congress directed that all 
pending claims and class actions brought against USDA by socially disadvan￾taged farmers or ranchers, including Hispanics and women, be resolved in 
an expeditious and just manner and established a $1.33 billion settlement 
fund to resolve pending claims. In 2010, USDA settled Pigford II for a record  
32 SeC TION I 
$1.25 billion because so many eligible BAA farmers had been left out of 
the frst settlement. It also settled Keepseagle v. Vilsack, a long-running class￾action suit that awarded a $680 million to eligible Native Americans, plus 
loan forgiveness and tax relief. Keepseagle also established a Native American 
Agriculture Fund to provide business assistance, agricultural education, 
technical support, and advocacy services. 
Today, consolidation persists with a continued shift of production to the 
largest farms. Farm size keeps creeping up while farm numbers decline, just 
not so dramatically. In 2021, 5 percent of large-scale family and nonfamily 
farms supplied 63  percent of production—up from 31  percent in 1991 
(adjusted for infation).31 Cropland also is increasingly concentrated on 
fewer, larger farms. In 1987, farms operating at least 2,000 acres accounted 
for 15 percent of all cropland.Their share more than doubled to 37 percent 
in 2017, and the share of crops from farms with at least 10,000 cropland 
acres quadrupled.32 
Still, small and midsized family farms—where most of the business is 
owned by operators and individuals related to them—comprise 95  per￾cent of all operations and manage nearly two-thirds of America’s agricul￾tural land. They include many kinds of operations, from retirement farms 
to small farms whose principal operators report farming as their primary 
occupation.They also include most local-food farms and farms operated by 
young, beginning, and historically disadvantaged producers. Not counting 
retirement farms, which represent 11 percent of the total but only 1 percent 
of production, small and midsized farms contribute 35 percent of the value 
of production.33 Squeezed between large, consolidated farms and concen￾trated input industries, processors, and markets, they struggle economically 
and need more and better support from planners and policymakers (see 
Figure 1.3). 
Often the backbone of rural communities, these farms have long been 
associated with a civically engaged middle class and more equitable dis￾tribution of income, supporting cohesive communities.34 They tend to be 
innovative, fexible, and produce diferentiated products.They buy livestock, 
equipment, and supplies locally, and employ local people. The decline of 
these farms has hollowed out rural communities and reduced the diversity 
of supply chains.35 Declining employment and economic opportunity has 
led to rural depopulation and the loss of essential social infrastructure such 
as hospitals, schools, and banks.36  
wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 33 
Distribution of farms, land operated, and value 
of production by farm type, 2021 
100 -
80 -
60 -
40 -
20 -
0 -
2 
3 
6 
89 
10 
27 
18 
45 
17 
46 
18 
18 
Percentage of Percentage of Percentage of value 
farms agricultural land of production 
Nonfamily f Large-scale family f Midsize family farms Small family farms 
Notes: Land operated is the sum of owned land and leased land, less leased land to others. Due to rounding, 
numbers may not add to 100 percent. 
Source: USDA, Economic Research Service (ERS) using USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service and 
USDA, ERS, 2021 Agricultural Resource Management Survey data. 
Figure 1.3 Small and midsized family farms are squeezed economically between large, 
consolidated farms and an increasingly concentrated supply chain. 
Food Insecurity and Diet-Related Disease 
The rapid suburbanization that occurred after World War II moved signif￾cant wealth to the suburbs. Combined with agriculture’s dramatic restruc￾ture, urban disinvestment, and discriminatory redlining polices, it led to 
concentrated poverty in both rural communities and the inner city, where 
today people experience the highest degrees of food insecurity. 
In 2021, 32.1  percent of households with incomes below the federal 
poverty line were food insecure—meaning they lacked access, at all times, 
to enough food for an active, healthy life for all household members. Most 34 SeC TION I 
prevalent in large cities and rural areas, it afected 12.5 percent of house￾holds with children, with substantially higher rates for single-mother, Black, 
and Hispanic households37 (see Figure 1.4). 
Even with the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), 
88 percent of participants reported barriers to achieving a healthy diet, and 
61 percent said they could not aford to buy healthy food. Coupled with a 
lack of cooking equipment and/or storage, afordability was most associated 
with household food insecurity.38 
Food insecurity forces households to make choices between buying 
nutritious food and meeting other basic needs, such as housing, electricity, 
health care, and childcare. It was exacerbated by the economic disruptions 
that came with Covid-19. Supply chain disruptions and other challenges led 
to rising food prices and illuminated racial disparities and policy failures.39 
Figure 1.4 Food insecurity rates are highest for single-mother households and house￾holds with incomes below the poverty line.  
wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 35 
The federal response helped keep hunger at bay but was temporary. Since 
then, global unrest and extreme weather events have disrupted supply chains 
and, combined with market concentration, likely will maintain infationary 
food prices. 
While food security is associated with access to afordable food, access 
alone cannot ensure the food is nutritional or will lead to an active, healthy 
life for all household members. Nutritional security prioritizes wholesome 
food that leads to good health. It is important for all members of society. 
Yet nearly half of Americans’ calories now come from processed foods like 
fours, fats, and oils, with rising household expenditures on these and foods 
like frozen and packaged meals. Dairy, meat, fruits, and vegetables comprise 
a smaller share today than 40 years ago.40 Using a machine-learning algo￾rithm to predict the degree of processing for any food, a 2023 study found 
more than 73 percent of the U.S. food supply is ultra-processed and cor￾related this with higher risk of chronic diseases, including diabetes, angina, 
and elevated blood pressure.41 
Mounting evidence links ultra-processed foods to poor nutritional qual￾ity, rising rates of obesity, and chronic diseases.42 Indeed, the prevalence of 
obesity in the U.S. more than tripled from 1960 to 2020.43 Ultra-processed 
foods are cheaper, faster, and more convenient than cooking meals with 
whole foods and ingredients. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the 
relationships between the healthfulness of foods/diet patterns and their 
price, found healthier patterns were more expensive, creating difculties 
for many low-income families. It also found the price diference trivial in 
comparison to the costs of diet-related chronic diseases.44 
Natural Resource Degradation 
Since Rachel Carson exposed the hazards of the pesticide DDT in Silent 
Spring, evidence has mounted about the ecological problems of the “con￾ventional” agriculture common after World War II. The focus on produc￾tivity and specialization signifcantly increased yields, but did so with 
increasing use of fossil fuels and petrochemical inputs. Combined with 
geographic separation between crop and livestock production, it resulted 
in a host of negative environmental impacts: degraded soil and water qual￾ity, elevated GHG emissions, and loss of biodiversity, which have been 
widely reported.45  
36 SeC TION I 
Figure 1.5 The Red River Basin is located in parts of Minnesota, North Dakota, and 
South Dakota. Erosion has caused severe fooding, which has resulted in 
loss of wildlife habitat and increased water quality concerns. 
Source: USDA. Photo by Keith Weston. 
On the crop side, specialization led to dependence on synthetic fertilizers 
and pesticides, which run of into waterways. On the livestock side, it led 
to concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs). These require massive 
manure lagoons, which leak contaminants during extreme rain events and/ 
or due to poor construction.Water pollution from nitrogen and phosphorus 
runof have had signifcant regional efects, as in the case of the Chesapeake 
Bay, and continental impacts, as evidenced by the hypoxia in the Gulf of 
Mexico. Antibiotics, commonly used to promote rapid growth in poultry 
and livestock, also leak into waterways,46 and their overuse in animal feed 
ends up in meat, which has led to bacteria resistance to antibiotics used for 
human health.47 
Conventional agriculture uses soil as a medium to be tilled and amended 
rather than a dynamic living resource. Coupled with the use of large equip￾ment, this has resulted in erosion, topsoil loss, and dry, compacted soils 
with low organic matter, unable to hold water. Further, tilling kills benefcial 
microorganisms in the soil and contributes to GHG emissions. 
Agriculture also contributes to the loss of biodiversity—the variety 
and variability of life on earth. Biodiversity is vital for growing food and wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 37 
delivering fresh water, thus to human health. Losses can impact nutrition, 
the availability of traditional medicines, and patterns of infectious diseases. 
Worldwide, about one million species of animals and plants are threatened 
with extinction from agricultural land use changes and activities like log￾ging, as well as climate change, pollution, and invasive species.48 
Finally, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
domestic agriculture contributes about 10 percent of total U.S. GHG emis￾sions. Much of this comes from liquid manure from CAFO lagoons, but cows 
and other ruminants also produce methane as part of their normal digestive 
processes. In addition, nitrogen fertilizers and nitrogen-fxing crops emit 
nitrous oxide—which also is released by draining organic soils and certain 
irrigation practices.Yet at the same time, EPA reports that agricultural land 
use and forestry have removed more CO2 from the atmosphere than they 
have created in emissions—and thus are considered a net sink.49 
The more farmers and ranchers adopt soil health and other conservation 
practices, the more they will contribute to a healthy environment and help 
to combat climate change. 
Where We Go From Here 
Since 2001, the Environmental Working Group has tracked federal support 
to agriculture. It found that between 1995 and 2021, USDA spent $478 bil￾lion on commodity payments, crop insurance, conservation, and disaster 
relief. Based largely on acreage or production, most of its payments went 
to the largest and wealthiest farms.The top 10 percent of largest recipients 
received nearly 80  percent of federal payments, while 80  percent of the 
smallest recipients only received about 9 percent.50 
Large farms achieve economies of scale through specialization and expan￾sion, but small and midsized farms are more likely to succeed by diversify￾ing and expanding their scope. Given that diversifed systems have ecological 
and community benefts, more research, better planning, and a new policy 
paradigm are needed to support diversifcation strategies both on the farm 
and through local and regional supply chains. 
Planners are uniquely poised to advance sustainable, resilient, and even￾handed food systems. Increasing productivity and maintaining food aford￾ability remain important, but we must achieve these without compromising 
the health of our land, our communities, and our people. Planners generally  
38 SeC TION I 
have a good understanding of public programs and processes, and their 
experience and skills can illuminate the social, economic, and environmen￾tal impacts of public decisions.Yet modern conditions call for a fresh look at 
how to approach planning, including food systems planning. 
The impacts of increasingly severe weather events challenge the frm 
jurisdictional boundaries upon which land use planning and policy rely. 
As a changing climate further disrupts food production and distribution, 
we increasingly will need to plan across—rather than within—jurisdictions. 
Water moves, smoke moves, even soil moves under certain conditions. And 
of course, food moves along the supply chain, afecting many sectors of the 
economy and society. Further, while planning as a profession was developed 
largely to guide land use and development in cities, food systems span a 
rural–urban continuum. While most specialty crops like fruits, nuts, and 
vegetables come from metropolitan counties, rural counties supply most 
of our meat and staple foods like oats, rice, and wheat. Long and short, 
the complex forces that afect food systems transcend traditional bounda￾ries.They are structural not individual sector issues, and must be addressed 
together, interwoven with other planning and preparedness activities. 
It Starts With Land Use and Land Management 
Including public lands, farmers and ranchers manage over a billion acres— 
more than half of the land base of the contiguous U.S. This abundant and 
varied landscape includes crop, pasture, range, woodland, and federal graz￾ing lands that supply food, feed, fber, fuel, and fowers, sustaining millions 
of jobs and the nation’s balance of trade (see Figure 1.6). 
Well-managed agricultural lands support ecological services from car￾bon sequestration to groundwater recharge, erosion and food control, fre 
suppression, wildlife and pollinator habitat, scenic views, and recreational 
opportunities.51 They also supplement the commercial food supply with 
resources for hunting, fshing, foraging, and home and community gardens. 
Despite their importance to food security, economic prosperity, and envi￾ronmental quality, since 1982, the U.S. has lost about 26 million acres of 
farmland to urbanization and poorly planned development—an area larger 
than the state of Kentucky,52 with millions more acres fragmented by low￾density residential development outside of urban limits, which creates con￾ficts with neighbors and threatens the viability of agricultural economies.53  
 
wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 39 
Agriculture is a Dominant Feature of the American Landscape 
Source: American Farmland Trust’s Land Use Policy Research division, summarizing 
data from AFT’s Farms Under Threat the State of the States 
Figure 1.6 Agricultural lands create a mosaic of land covers and uses, including farm￾land, rangeland, and federal lands used for grazing, juxtaposed against 
forests, other federal lands, urbanized areas, and low-density residential 
development. 
Source: American Farmland Trust,“Farms Under Threat:The State of the States.” 
Beyond scattered housing development, high-quality farmland is threatened 
by forces including warehouse development, utility scale solar energy instal￾lations, even environmental preservation. 
Based on 20th-century development patterns, planners developed a 
smart growth toolbox to address urban sprawl. Smart growth is an estab￾lished approach to planning and development that encourages a mix of 
building types, uses, housing, and transportation options. It directs develop￾ment toward existing communities and infrastructure, and balances new 
construction with the protection of farmland, open space, and other natural 
areas. Even without coordinated policy efort, urban sprawl has slowed.54 
But large-lot, low-density residential land use still drives development in 
rural regions, fragmenting the agricultural land base, infating land values, 
and paving the way for urbanization.55 With improved rural internet service 
and more remote work, without more and better rural planning, this likely 
will increase. But so far, scattered rural development has not evoked much 
planning or policy response. 40 SeC TION I 
Rural communities also face the impacts of farm consolidation. Once 
diversifed agricultural landscapes become dominated by monoculture, 
wealth and power shift to fewer and fewer people, populations shrink, and 
communities lose shopping, health care, and other vital services. As farms 
get larger, they bid up land prices and remove land from rental markets, 
making it harder for small and midsized operations to expand and for young 
and beginning farmers to enter agriculture. 
The challenge for smaller operations is exacerbated because the income 
from farming generally does not support farm real estate values—even when 
interest rates are low.56With cropland values rising sharply and interest rates 
at a 30-year high, without better land use planning, access to land will be 
increasingly out of reach for most producers (see Figure 1.7). 
States’ ambitious goals for reducing GHG emissions by expanding renew￾able energy sources add to competition for land. Renewables generate elec￾tricity through natural and recurring processes. Ideally, they provide fnancial 
returns to complement, rather than replace, agricultural production. These 
come through cost savings from generating energy to support the farm 
or ranch operation, or from leasing land to a renewable energy developer. 
However, transitioning to renewable energy requires dramatic increases in 
the number and scale of solar and wind installations.This largely will occur 
Figure 1.7 Cropland values have risen sharply since 2020. wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 41 
on rural lands.Without comprehensive planning to balance competing land 
uses, this threatens to take more land out of agriculture—reducing not only 
food production but the many environmental benefts that well-managed 
farmland can provide. This includes carbon sequestration that itself ofsets 
GHG emissions. In our rush to advance renewable energy to meet climate 
goals, it’s essential to remember the value of farmland to meet similar goals. 
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) predicts that by 2030, 20 percent 
of U.S. energy needs will be met by wind, increasing to 35 percent in 2050.57 
Most land-based wind generation takes place in nine traditional farm states: 
Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Nebraska, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South 
Dakota, and Texas.Turbines only use a small amount of land so farmers can 
farm around them. So long as soils are protected during construction, tur￾bines, relay boxes, and other infrastructure should not signifcantly hamper 
agricultural production and may even improve row crop yields.58 However, 
these critical steps are not always taken because wind energy developers 
seldom understand agriculture or consider strategies that would support it. 
Solar energy also can be compatible with farming. Some farmers and 
ranchers install solar panels on barns and other structures, in ditches or 
Figure 1.8 Windmills on a farm in Audubon County, Iowa. 
Source: USDA. Photo by Cecilia Lynch.  
 
42 SeC TION I 
marginal felds, to generate energy for their own use, or to sell excess power. 
This can support their bottom line when the primary use remains agricul￾ture. Further, some farmers are exploring the fast-evolving feld of agrivolta￾ics (or “dual-use”), where solar panels are spaced strategically to allow crops 
or livestock underneath and between them. However, at present, utility-scale 
solar installations blanket large swarths of fat, open, and well-drained farm￾land without regard to agriculture or food production, taking valuable acre￾age out of production. 
Solar developers buy and lease land to install large-scale arrays, which 
require substantial acreage and often lead to land use conficts. Extensive steel 
infrastructure and a sizeable footprint both use and shadow land, causing 
signifcant land conversion and limiting farm production. (See Chapter 8 for 
a more in-depth discussion of solar siting on farmland.) Communities— 
especially rural communities—need planning support to weigh competing 
priorities and direct development to disturbed and marginal lands while 
protecting arable soils. Otherwise, food production and environmental qual￾ity will be compromised as cultivation is pushed to poor-quality soils that 
achieve lower yields, require more petrochemical inputs, and lead to higher 
GHG emissions, erosion, and pollution. 
Healthy soils produce healthy food and support a healthy environment. 
Farming, when done right, can improve soil health. Yet farming also can 
harm the environment. Growing global and domestic demands to signif￾cantly increase food production could lead more farms to impair soil health. 
Beyond needing farmers and ranchers to grow food and provide for other 
basic needs, we need to promote environmentally sound farming practices. 
This requires attention to land management strategies as well as to land use. 
“The nation that destroys its soil destroys itself.” 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt59 
Science is going through a paradigm shift when it comes to understand￾ing soil. It once was thought that plants consumed soil through their roots 
the way that animals eat with their mouths. Plowing—or tilling—helped 
farmers break soil into tiny bits to “chew” their crops’ food. During the 
“Green Revolution” of the mid-20th century, it was thought that soil absorbs 
nutrients from a soil solution, which could be boosted with chemical ferti￾lizers.Today, scientists recognize that carbon in the soil is flled with living  
wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 43 
Figure 1.9 Healthy soil looks dark, crumbly, and porous, and is home to worms and 
other organisms. 
Source: USDA. 
things: organisms that live on carbohydrates from plant roots and other 
organisms that decompose things. Plants can uptake some nutrients dis￾solved in a soil solution, but they get most of what they need from the sun 
and the soil microbial community. 
Microorganisms that live in soil work together to support crops as well as 
animal and human health, water quality, and climate adaptation and mitiga￾tion. Plants capture CO2
 through photosynthesis and convert it to organic 
carbon compounds in plant tissues. Some of this carbon is stored—or 
sequestered—in the soil.60 Rebuilding carbon stocks in soil is vital both for 
farm productivity and to mitigate climate change. 
Some farmers already are adopting regenerative—or climate smart— 
conservation practices. These include no-till, strip-till, and reduced-tillage; 
cover crops; diversifed rotations; intercropping or double cropping; rota￾tional livestock grazing; and incorporating livestock or agroforestry systems. 44 SeC TION I 
Especially when adopted as whole-farm systems instead of individual prac￾tices, they can stabilize yields while increasing soil health and improving 
water quality and holding capacity to withstand droughts and fooding. 
Diferent types of production require diferent types of soils, provide 
varying degrees of habitat, and rely on other natural assets. Most develop￾ment—whether renewable energy facilities, afordable housing, or super￾markets—can occur on lesser-quality soils. USDA’s Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (NRCS) has data and maps to guide planning natural 
resource management.Available for 95 percent of U.S. counties, they can be 
used in conjunction with its Soil Survey Geographic Database (SSURGO), 
which contains a century of data on yields for diferent agricultural uses, 
water capacity and frequency of fooding, and engineering uses such as lim￾itations on building-site development. 
ALL FARMLAND IS NOT CREATED EQUAL 
The 1981 Farmland Protection Policy Act defned important farmland 
to minimize federal contributions to farmland conversion and ensure 
federal programs are compatible with state, local, and private farmland 
protection programs and policies. These defnitions are often used for 
other statutory purposes. 
• Prime farmland has the best combination of physical and chemical 
characteristics for producing food, feed, forage, fber, and oilseed 
crops. It has the best soil quality, growing season, and moisture sup￾ply to economically produce sustained high yields when managed 
according to acceptable farming practices. 
• Unique farmland is well suited to produce specifc high-value crops, 
such as citrus, tree nuts, olives, fruits, and vegetables. It has a special 
combination of soil quality, location, growing season, and moisture sup￾ply to economically produce sustained high and/or high-quality yields of 
specifc crops when managed with acceptable farming practices. 
• Farmland of statewide importance is in addition to prime and unique 
farmlands. generally, it includes lands that are nearly prime and may 
produce equivalent yields in favorable conditions. State agencies 
determine the criteria for defning and delineating these lands, which 
may include tracts designated for agriculture by state law.  
wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 45 
Building on these categories, American Farmland Trust (AFT) cre￾ated a new framework to assess productivity as well as the versatility and 
resilience (PVR) of agricultural lands for long-term food production. AFT 
mapped PVR and identifed lands of national signifcance, as well as each 
state’s best land for edible food crops like fruits, nuts, vegetables, and 
staple grains. AFT also created web mapping tools to visualize past and 
projected threats and inform land use decisions. 
Factors Used to Determine PVR: 
• Soil suitability uses important farmland categories to assess soil 
capacity to support agricultural production (productivity) and pro￾vides clues to the land’s versatility and resiliency to withstand weather 
extremes. 
• Land cover/use shows where diferent types of agriculture are practiced. 
Land cover includes vegetation or other material that covers the surface 
of the land. Land use is the purpose of human activity on the land. 
• Food production is an important proxy for characteristics that sup￾port specialty crop production, which may require unique soils and 
microclimates. we included 132 individual cropland types divided into 
fve main groups: 1. fruit and nut trees; 2. fruits and vegetables grown 
as row crops; 3. staple food crops (e.g., wheat, rice, potatoes); 4. feed 
grains, forages, and crops grown for livestock feed and processed 
foods; and 5. non-food crops.61 
It Continues Through the Supply Chain 
Disruptions in food supplies threaten food safety, security, and nutrition, 
especially for vulnerable populations. Beyond land use and land manage￾ment, we need to build greater sustainability, resilience, and parity into food 
processing, storing, and distribution systems. Locating more decentralized, 
lower-scale facilities near consumers would reduce storage and transpor￾tation costs and potentially environmental impacts. More medium-sized 
processors would have access to open markets, which would improve trace￾ability and price transparency but still provide efciencies and economies of 
scale. Expanding regional meat processing would encourage more sustain￾able livestock production, reduce agriculture’s GHG emissions, protect small  
 
46 SeC TION I 
and midsized farmers, and protect consumers from price gouging. Paying 
food system workers a living wage would relieve food insecurity. 
Change is starting to happen. In 2023, USDA announced a dozen Regional 
Food Business Centers to bolster LRFS and help small and midsized farms and 
food businesses reach new markets and resources. The centers cover either 
a 400-mile local food radius or parts of at least three states or territories. 
USDA has committed to supporting high-need areas with persistent poverty 
and limited resources to target historically underinvested communities. 
Planning at multiple levels and scales can support keeping farmland in 
farming. It can stimulate the middle infrastructure needed to shorten sup￾ply chains and connect producers with processors, distributors, and the 
growing number of consumers who desire nutritious, traceable food. It can 
ensure alternatives if transportation routes are blocked, conceive ways to 
consolidate deliveries to reduce emissions, encourage storage centers with 
access to markets, and ensure food access for low-income consumers. It can 
address food waste throughout the supply chain, reducing municipal solid 
waste and redirecting edible food to food pantries and kitchens. And it can 
support coordinated emergency response. 
Leading the way, in 2021 the Maryland state legislature passed a Maryland 
Food System Resiliency Council bill to address food insecurity stemming 
from the pandemic and subsequent economic crisis. The Council is tasked 
with developing policy recommendations to advance food system equity 
and sustainability and drafting a plan to increase the production and pro￾curement of Maryland certifed food. 
Building on Maryland’s example, strengthening diversifed local and 
regional food systems is a good place to begin. LRFS supplement rather 
than supplant dominant food systems with shorter supply chains and a 
commitment to local communities. Generally associated with sustainable 
agriculture, they include direct-to-consumer arrangements through farm￾ers’ markets, farm stands, and CSAs, as well as intermediated markets like 
farm to school or restaurants and supermarkets, and hybrid arrangements. 
These relationships are more customer-focused and responsive than whole￾sale operations, and as we learned during Covid, producers can pivot quickly 
to adapt to changing market conditions in the event of disruptions or dis￾asters. They also stimulate local economic activity, generating new jobs and 
businesses directly and indirectly through food processing, distribution, and 
related sectors62 and promote rural economic revitalization.63 Ideally, this  
 
 
 
 
 
wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 47 
will occur within a larger universe of land use planning, smart growth, life￾cycle thinking, emergency preparedness, and so on. 
As the adage goes,“A failure to plan is a plan to fail.”The policies that led 
to profound changes in the 20th century must be retooled for the 21st— 
especially to prepare for the impacts of climate change. We need more and 
better food systems planning to usher in a 21st-century transformation 
before it is too late. 
Discussion Questions 
1. What are the characteristics of agricultural land and land use in 
your community? (Consider development pressure, land values, 
types of agricultural production, soil types, etc.) 
2. Describe the food system or systems that support your commu￾nity. Draw a picture or use a map to identify where key parts of 
your food system take place, from farms to food processors and 
distributors, to food retail and restaurants, to disposal of food and 
agricultural waste. 
3. Who controls the food supply chains in your community, and what 
might happen if one or more steps in the supply chain are dis￾rupted? 
Notes 
1. Shoshanah Inwood et al., Preparing for Food System Resiliency in Ohio: Policy and Planning Lessons 
from COVID-19 (Columbus, OH: College of Food, Agricultural and Environmental 
Sciences & John Glenn College of Public Afairs, January 2022). 
2. James Worstell, “Ecological Resilience of Food Systems in Response to the COVID￾19 Crisis,” Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community Development 9, no. 3 (2020): 
23–30; Angelina Sanderson Bellamy et al., “Shaping More Resilient and Just Food 
Systems: Lessons from the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Ambio 50 (2021): 782–93; Dawn 
Thilmany et al.,“Local Food Supply Chain Dynamics and Resilience during COVID￾19,” Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy 43, no. 1 (2021): 86–104. 
3. Thilmany et  al., “Local Food Supply Chain Dynamics and Resilience during 
COVID-19.” 
4. World Economic Forum, “We’re on the Brink of a ‘Polycrisis’ – How Worried 
Should We Be?,” January 13, 2023. 
5. Pörtner et al., eds.,“Summary for Policy Makers.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 SeC TION I 
6. Rachel Bezner Kerr et al., “Food, Fibre, and Other Ecosystem Products,” in Climate 
Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge and New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2022), 713–906. doi:10.1017/9781009325844.007; 
U.S. Global Change Research Program, Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The 
Third National Climate Assessment (Washington, DC: USGCRP, 2014). doi:10.7930/ 
J0Z31WJ2. 
7. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The 
Fourth National Climate Assessment (Washington, DC: USGCRP, 2018). doi:10.7930/ 
NCA4.2018; M. Rohde Melissa, “Floods and Droughts Are Intensifying Globally,” 
Nature Water 1 (2023): 226–27; Bezner Kerr et al.,“Food, Fibre, and Other Ecosystem 
Products.” 
8. Ronald Knutson et al., Agricultural and Food Policy, 4th ed. (Prentice-Hall, 1998). 
9. USDA Economic Research Service,“USDA ERS – Farming and Farm Income.” 
10. Sun Ling Wang et al., “U.S. Agricultural Output Has Grown Slower in Response to 
Stagnant Productivity Growth,” USDA, Economic Research Service, May 2023. 
11. Wang et al., “U.S. Agricultural Output Has Grown Slower in Response to Stagnant 
Productivity Growth.” 
12. USDA Economic Research Service,“USDA ERS – Feed Grains Sector at a Glance.” 
13. Pimentel,“Ethanol Fuels,” 127–34. 
14. MacDonald et al.,“Concentration and Competition in U.S. Agribusiness.” 
15. Amelia Lucas, “Meatpacking Union Says 25% of US Pork Production Hit by 
Coronavirus Closures.” CNBC, April 23, 2020. 
16. James M. MacDonald et  al., “Consolidation in U.S. Meatpacking,” USDA Economic 
Research Service, AER-785, 2000. 
17. Josh Funk,“Are You Paying Too Much for Bacon? One of the Big Meat Producers Just 
Settled a Price-Fixing Lawsuit for $20 Million,” Fortune, September 20, 2022;Todd 
Neeley, “$10M Settlement Reached in Wages Case Settlement Struck in Antitrust 
Case Alleging Food Companies Suppressed Wages,” Progressive Farmer,August 8, 2023; 
Mike Scarcella,“Pork Consumers’ $75 Million Price-Fixing Accord With Smithfeld 
Approved,” April 12, 2023. 
18. Lindsay Walton and Kristen King Jaiven, “Regulating CAFOS for the Well-being of 
Farm Animals, Consumers and the Environment,” Environmental Law Reporter, 50 ELR 
10485, June 2020. 
19. Lakhani et al.,“The Illusion of Choice.” 
20. MacDonald et al.,“Concentration and Competition in U.S. Agribusiness.” 
21. Stacy Mitchell, “Rep. Walmart’s Monopolization of Local Grocery Markets,” Institute 
for Local Self-Reliance, 2019. 
22. 1920 Census: Volume 5. Agriculture, Reports for States; 1920 Census. Chapter 5: 
Farm Statistics by Race, Nativity, and Sex of Farmer. 
23. N. Jones, R. Marks, R. Ramirez, and M. Rios-Vargas, “2020 Census Illuminates 
Racial and Ethnic Composition of the Country,” U.S. Census Bureau, 2021. 
24. USDA Economic Research Service, “Farm Share of U.S. Food Dollar Reached 
Historic Low in 2021,” 2022. 
25. USDA Economic Research Service, “USDA ERS – Food Prices and Spending,” 
January 6, 2023.  
 
 
 
 
 
wHY PLAN FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe? 49 
26. Drew Desilver, “What’s on Your Table? How America’s Diet Has Changed over the 
Decades,” Pew Research Center, December 13, 2016. 
27. Amanda Wood et al., “Reframing the Local–Global Food Systems Debate through a 
Resilience Lens,” Nature Food 4 (2023): 22–29. 
28. Beale,“Salient Features of the Demography of American Agriculture.” 
29. Dania Francis et al., “Black Land Loss: 1920–1997,” AEA Papers and Proceedings 112 
(May 2022): 38–42. 
30. Bruce McWilliams, “Cost-Beneft Analysis for the Heirs’ Property Relending 
Program Final Rule (FSA-2021-0002-0001),” U.S. Department of Agriculture, Farm Service 
Agency, 2021. 
31. MacDonald et al.,“Three Decades of Consolidation in U.S. Agriculture”; According 
to Whitt et al., “America’s Farms and Ranches at a Glance,” large-scale nonfamily 
farms accounted for 93 percent of all nonfamily farms’ production. They include 
partnerships of unrelated partners, nonfamily corporations, and farms with a hired 
manager unrelated to the owners.The value of their production keeps increasing— 
from 13 percent in 2020 to 17 percent in 2021. 
32. James M. MacDonald, “Tracking the Consolidation of US Agriculture,” Applied 
Economic Perspectives and Policy 42, no. 3 (2020): 361–79. 
33. Whitt et al.,“America’s Farms and Ranches at a Glance.” 
34. Lyson et al.,“Scale of Agricultural Production,” 311–27; Lobao, Locality and Inequality. 
35. Beale,“Salient Features of the Demography of American Agriculture”; Kirschenmann 
et al.,“Why Worry about the Agriculture of the Middle?” 
36. Kenneth M. Johnson and Daniel T. Lichter, “Rural Depopulation: Growth and 
Decline Processes over the Past Century,” Rural Sociology 84, no. 1 (2019): 3–27. 
37. USDA Economic Research Service, “USDA ERS – Food Security in the U.S.”; USDA 
Economic Research Service,“USDA ERS – Food Security and Nutrition Assistance.” 
38. USDA Food and Nutrition Service, “Barriers That Constrain the Adequacy of 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Allotments (Summary).” 
39. Arohi Pathak and Rose Khattar, “Fighting Hunger: How Congress Should Combat 
Food Insecurity Among Low-Income Americans,” Center for American Progress, 2022. 
40. Desilver, “What’s on Your Table? How America’s Diet Has Changed over the 
Decades.” 
41. Giulia Menichetti et  al., “Machine Learning Prediction of the Degree of Food 
Processing,” Nature Communications 14 (2023): 2312. 
42. Filippa Juul et  al., “Ultra-Processed Food Consumption among US Adults from 
2001 to 2018,” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 115, no. 1 (2022): 211–21. 
43. Centers of Disease Control based on the National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey. 
44. Rao et  al., “Do Healthier Foods and Diet Patterns Cost More than Less Healthy 
Options?” 
45. Magdof and van Es, Building Soils for Better Crops. 
46. Ibid; JoAnn Burkholder et  al., “Impacts of Waste from Concentrated Animal 
Feeding Operations on Water Quality,” Environmental Health Perspectives 115, no. 2 
(February 2007). 
47. Magdof and van Es, Building Soils for Better Crops.  
 
 
50 SeC TION I 
48. Ann A. Sorensen and Mitch Hunter, Wildlife on the Working Landscape: Charting a Way for 
Biodiversity and Agricultural Production to Thrive Together (American Farmland Trust, 2020). 
49. United States Environmental Protection Agency, “Agriculture,” in Inventory of U.S. 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–2020 (2022), 5–60. 
50. The Environmental Working Group Farm Subsidy Database tracks farm subsidies 
from commodity, crop insurance, disaster programs, and conservation payments. 
51. Ann Sorensen, Farms Under Threat; Daniel Hellerstein et al.,“Farmland Protection:The 
Role of Public Preferences for Rural Amenities,” Agricultural Economic Report No. 
815. USDA Economic Research Service, October 2002. 
52. USDA, Summary Report: 2017 National Resources Inventory (Washington, DC: Natural 
Resources Conservation Service and Ames, IA: Center for Survey Statistics and 
Methodology, Iowa State University, 2020). 
53. Julia Freedgood et  al., Farms Under Threat: The State of the States (Northampton, MA: 
American Farmland Trust, 2020). 
54. C. Barrington-Leigh and A. Millard-Ball, “A Century of Sprawl in the U.S.,” PNAS 
112, no. 27 (2015): 8244–49. 
55. Freedgood et al., Farms Under Threat. 
56. USDA, Economic Research Service. Farmland Values, Land Ownership, and Returns to Farmland, 
2000–2016 (Washington, DC: USDA-ERS, February 2018). 33 pp. 
57. Department of Energy, “Wind Vision Detailed Roadmap Actions: 2017 Edition.” 
May 2018. 
58. M. Inman, Planting Wind Energy on Farms May Help Crops, Say Researchers (National 
Geographic, December 21, 2011). 
59. Franklin D. Roosevelt, Letter to all State Governors on a Uniform Soil Conservation 
Law. Online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency 
Project. 
60. This explanation is based on information from a presentation made by AFT Soil 
Health Program Manager Caro Roszell, September 19, 2022. 
61. Ann Sorensen,“Farms Under Threat:The State of America’s Farmland.” 
62. Steve Martinez et al., “Local Food Systems: Concepts, Impacts, and Issues,” USDA 
Economic Research Service, 2010. 
63. Andrew Dumont et  al., “Harvesting Opportunity: The Power of Regional Food 
System Investments to Transform Communities,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 
(2017). DOI: 10.4324/9781003293712-4 
 
2 
THE PUBLIC FRAMEWORK FOR 
FOOD SYSTEMS PLANNING 
Chapter Summary 
The U.S. Constitution spells out the roles of and relationship between 
federal, state, and tribal governments. Within this framework, states hold 
planning authority but generally assign it to local governments. Local gov￾ernance varies widely from state to state, forming a highly complex web 
of counties, municipalities, townships, and special districts with varying 
degrees of autonomy. Further, the federal government recognizes  574 
tribes as sovereign, self-governing nations with their own laws and land 
use authority. Citizens of these tribes have dual citizenship in the states 
where they live. 
This chapter provides an overview of the many tiers of government 
that afect food systems planning. It introduces common types of plan￾ning organizations and describes various types of plans that can play 
a role in food systems planning. It ends with a discussion of the need  
52 SeC TION I 
to transcend jurisdictional structures to plan for food systems at a 
regional—or foodshed—scale. 
*** 
Before embarking on a planning process, it is important to understand the 
governing dynamics of the place—or places—the plan will address. These 
dynamics afect the scale and scope of planning eforts and the types of 
actions a plan can suggest. For instance, governance in urban states generally 
is more complex and regulatory than in rural states with small populations 
dispersed across large geographies. 
In the U.S., the role of government is to safeguard the people’s rights 
and freedoms in a democratic republic where citizens elect representa￾tives to direct public actions. This is not as straightforward as it seems; 
diferent people and interest groups interpret rights and freedoms in dif￾ferent ways. Efective planning recognizes and responds to diferent inter￾pretations within the framework of public authority spelled out in the 
Constitution. 
Article I Section 8 lists the federal government’s powers, including 
the power to declare war, maintain armed forces, coin money, and 
establish a post office. It also gives it power to regulate commerce with 
foreign nations, states, and Indigenous tribes. The 10th Amendment 
gives states all powers not expressly granted to the federal government, 
including planning authority. States generally share these powers with 
local governments. Some states are “Home Rule,” which gives local 
governments wide authority and limits the state’s power to intervene 
in local affairs. Others are “Dillon’s Rule,” a narrower, state-centric 
approach. Many are both, allowing local governments various degrees 
of autonomy. 
Further, the nation’s 333 million people are unevenly distributed across 
the states in terms of total population size and racial, ethnic, cultural, and 
socioeconomic characteristics.The largest racial and ethnic group is “White 
alone non-Hispanic” (White) at 58  percent—down from 65  percent in 
2010 as the country becomes more diverse.1 As demographic changes con￾tinue to increase the cultural diversity of communities across the country, it 
is important to get to know the whole population and address any historical 
impacts of discrimination that continue to afect food production and com￾munity food security.  
 
THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 53 
2020 Resident Population for the 50 States Census map 
Figure 2.1 The U.S. population is spread unevenly across the states. Some states have 
large and diverse populations of over 25 million, while others have fewer 
than 1 million people. 
States 
States have their own constitutions and substantial independence to adopt 
laws, policies, regulations, and to determine the form and functions of local 
government.Thus, local governance varies widely from state to state, form￾ing a highly complex web of counties, municipalities, townships, and spe￾cial districts. Regional entities also play some governmental roles, including 
planning, as do sovereign tribes, which have their own planning authorities. 
States often share responsibility with local governments for functions 
like public health or maintaining roads. For example, the interstate highway 
system is administered by the federal government through the Department 
of Transportation, but most states have their own departments to oversee 
intrastate transportation, and local governments maintain local roads. They 
also both engage in planning activities and delegate it to local governments. 
Further, to qualify for federal assistance, most states are required to have 
transportation and hazard mitigation plans.  
 
 
54 SeC TION I 
States also have plans for specifc sectors or cross-cutting issues, such as 
economic and/or workforce development. Twenty-two have climate action 
plans. Thirteen have adopted strategic or growth management plans with 
various degrees of oversight and shared authority. A growing number have 
food plans, although many of these were developed by partnerships and uni￾versities instead of government agencies.2Very few states have plans for agri￾culture, although some, like Oregon and Washington, address agricultural 
land in their state’s growth management plan. However, when it comes to 
food and agriculture policy, states play a larger role.Typically working in the 
nexus between federal and state priorities, they develop their own policies 
and administer, inform, and leverage federal programs like the Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). 
The composition of state legislatures and their legislative processes vary. 
Some have fewer than 100 members, while New Hampshire has more than 
400. Most meet annually, but Montana, Nevada, North Dakota, and Texas 
meet every other year.Ten have full-time legislatures, the rest are part-time. 
Sessions usually start in January but meet for diferent lengths of time. The 
National Conference of State Legislatures website publishes information on 
the number of legislators and their length of term in every state.3 
Except for Nebraska, state legislatures have two chambers similar to the 
federal House and Senate, sometimes called other things. Typically, when 
bills are introduced, they are assigned to a committee that holds hearings 
and decides which bills go to the full chamber. If approved, the bill moves 
to the other chamber, which repeats the process. If the second chamber 
amends the bill, it goes to a conference committee to resolve diferences. 
Once approved by both chambers, it goes to the governor. If signed, it 
becomes law; if vetoed the legislature may either sustain or override it. 
Tribes 
Indigenous tribes are sovereign, self-governing nations that predate coloni￾zation and operate independently from federal, state, or local governments. 
The U.S. ofcially recognizes 574 tribes, each with their own laws, taxing 
authorities, and land use authority. Many have constitutions and separation of 
powers similar to the U.S. and engage in land use and other types of planning. 
The Constitution authorizes the U.S. president to make treaties and for 
Congress to manage relations and regulate commerce with tribes. Some THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 55 
states have compacts and intergovernmental agreements to address issues 
of shared concern and/or have recognition processes related to tribal status. 
Similar to state and local governments, tribes receive—or are supposed to 
receive—federal program assistance. However, their access to federal pro￾grams often is impeded by outdated laws, lack of cultural understanding, 
and bureaucratic red tape.Thus, they often do not receive equal treatment or 
beneft from these programs. 
While states have no authority over tribal governments, citizens of fed￾erally recognized tribes have dual citizenship in the states where they live. 
Subject to the tribal government, they also are subject to the U.S. federal 
government and eligible for federal program assistance. 
Local Governments 
Local self-governance is a cherished American tradition, but in reality, local 
governments have various degrees of autonomy. With powers granted by 
their state constitutions, this also is true of planning authority. Some states 
are “Home Rule,” which gives local governments wide authority and limits 
the state’s power to intervene in local afairs. Others are “Dillon’s Rule,” 
which is a much narrower approach where local governments may only 
employ powers expressly granted by the state or essential to their own exist￾ence. Most states apply both rules in some way. 
Some states are mostly Dillon’s Rule with limited exceptions, while oth￾ers are more fexible. Florida provides optional Home Rule, leaving it up 
to voters to decide whether or not to adopt a county charter. Nebraska and 
Texas are strict Dillon’s Rule states but allow cities with a population of 
more than 5,000 to form Home Rule governments. In Arizona, Home Rule 
only applies to cities with at least 3,500 residents (see Figure 2.2). 
Counties 
Except Connecticut and Rhode Island, all states have some form of county 
government. In Louisiana, they are called parishes. In Alaska, county equiva￾lents include boroughs, municipalities, and census areas. Counties were cre￾ated to help states oversee and implement laws, property assessment, and 
record keeping. As their populations grew, states gave them more authority. 
Today, 3,143 counties and county equivalents are largely independent. In  
56 SeC TION I 
NACo County Explorer Map 
County Authority Profles 
Most Restrictive (Dillon’s Rule) 
Restrictive (Mostly and 
Flexible Dillon’s Rule) 
Flexible (Restrictive and 
Optional Home Rule) 
Most Flexible (Home Rule) 
Source: National Association of Counties (NACo) research as of March 2023. https://explorer.naco.org 
Disclaimer: AFT has received permission from the content owners to post this resource. 
Figure 2.2 This map provides an overview of Dillon’s Rule and Home Rule authorities. 
It is a simplifed version of the National Association of Counties (NACo) 
County Explorer map, a product of a long-term NACO project that provides 
a more detailed view, is updated over time, and is available in an interactive 
format with links to state/county authority fact sheets on the NACo website. 
most states, they serve as a primary legal division, which gives them policy 
authority.4
 Most are governed by a popularly elected board such as county 
commissioners or supervisors.They usually have both executive and legisla￾tive authorities, typically related to budget, taxes, and land use policy. Most 
ofer a range of services, from transportation and infrastructure to health 
care and public safety. Counties also play a statistical role in government and 
other data collection. THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 57 
Table 2.1 Five Smallest U.S. Counties by Population Compared to Surface Area 
County State Population Surface Area 
Kalawao Hawaii 88 53 square miles 
Loving Texas 113 677 square miles 
King Texas 289 913 square miles 
Kenedy Texas 404 1,946 square miles 
Arthur Nebraska 469 718 square miles 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. Population based on 2020 Decennial Census. 
Table 2.2 Five Largest U.S. Counties by Population Compared to Surface Area 
County State Population Surface Area 
Los Angeles California 10,137,915 4,751 square miles 
Cook Illinois 5,203,499 1,635 square miles 
Harris Texas 4,589,928 1,778 square miles 
Maricopa Arizona 4,242,997 9,224 square miles 
San Diego California 3,317,749 4,207 square miles 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. Population based on 2020 Decennial Census. 
Comparing counties is tricky.They vary widely in size—both in popula￾tion and land area (see Tables 2.1 and 2.2.) In four states and Puerto Rico, 
one or more municipalities are independent of county organization but 
are considered “independent cities” for statistical purposes. So the Census 
Bureau treats them—and the District of Columbia—as county equivalents.5 
Municipalities 
States grant municipalities authority to incorporate, provide public services, 
levy taxes, and regulate activities. Geographically within counties, some￾times they cross county lines. Out of nearly 20,000 municipal governments, 
most have populations of fewer than 10,000, although 10 have more than 
1 million residents.6 
The mayor–council form of governance is the oldest and most common. 
It separates power between the mayor, who serves as the executive, and the 
council, which serves as a legislative branch. Mostly in the south and west, 
an increasing number of municipalities have adopted a council–manager  
58 SeC TION I 
governance structure. Here, an elected council serves as the legislative body 
to make policy but appoints a professional manager to administer their poli￾cies, programs, and services. 
Towns and Townships 
Towns and townships are both geographic and political subdivisions of the 
counties in which they are formed. The oldest continuous form of govern￾ment, they operate in 20 states in three regions: New England, Mid-Atlantic, 
and Midwest (see Table 2.3). 
States grant towns and townships legal authority for governance, which 
has led to a variety of defnitions as well as forms and functions. Most are 
unincorporated and serve rural areas, often containing multiple towns, 
Table 2.3 States With Town and Township 
Governments 
Region States 
New England • Connecticut 
• Maine 
• Massachusetts 
• New Hampshire 
• Rhode Island 
• Vermont 
Mid-Atlantic • New Jersey 
• New York 
• Pennsylvania 
Midwest • Illinois 
• Indiana 
• Kansas 
• Michigan 
• Minnesota 
• Missouri 
• Nebraska 
• North Dakota 
• Ohio 
• South Dakota 
• Wisconsin 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau Governments Inte￾grated Directory. See https://www2.census. 
gov/govs/cog/2007/techdocgovorg.pdf  
THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 59 
boroughs, and/or villages. But in New England, towns are the basic unit 
of local government, similar to townships in other states, but incorporated 
so they possess municipal powers. In Minnesota, the terms “town” and 
“township” are used interchangeably. In Iowa, townships have no govern￾ance powers of their own. Within this mix of forms and functions, most 
towns and townships are governed by a small, elected board of supervisors, 
selectmen, or trustees and oversee local functions such as planning and zon￾ing, administering property taxes and elections, public safety/emergency 
services, road maintenance, and so on. 
Special Districts 
Special districts are authorized by state law. Serving as ad hoc entities to pro￾vide a limited set of public functions, they have sufcient autonomy to qualify 
as an independent governmental unit.They can raise revenues through taxes, 
fees, grants, and/or debt fnancing. Also called authorities, boards, and com￾missions, districts typically are created for school, fre, and water services. 
Also established under state law, conservation districts are a little diferent, as they 
are formed to carry out local natural resource management programs and to 
help cooperating land owners and managers protect land and water resources. 
Planning Bodies, Partners, and Plans 
Planning Bodies 
Planning bodies are government authorities responsible for public-sector 
planning.They range from small, sometimes volunteer boards and commis￾sions to formal planning agencies designated by governors and qualifed to 
receive federal funds. Common entities include the following: 
Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs) are formal planning agencies 
required for cities with populations of 50,000 or more to receive federal 
transportation funds.They also address land use issues, energy, economic 
development, environment, and quality of life. They have professional 
planning staf who also provide policy coordination between state and 
local governments. MPOs are designated by the governor and form an 
agreement between state and local governments. Larger urbanized areas  
60 SeC TION I 
with over 200,000 residents are called Transportation Management Areas 
(TMAs). MPOs in TMAs have more sway in setting priorities and are 
responsible for additional planning products. 
Planning commissions and boards typically are advisory bodies that provide citi￾zen review on local planning issues, from comprehensive plans and land 
use regulations to reviewing development proposals. Some have full-time 
employees, but many are served by part-time staf and volunteers. 
Planning departments. Some states, many counties, and most cities have pro￾fessional planning departments. At the state level, they often are part 
of the governor’s ofce or within a department like administration or 
community/economic afairs, although some have independent plan￾ning departments. Most cities have planning departments to develop 
land use and other plans and programs, and to administer zoning. So do 
many counties, although their roles and responsibilities difer. In a strong 
Home Rule state, counties may have planning authority but cities and 
towns hold authority for zoning. 
Regional Planning Commissions/Councils of Government cover multiple juris￾dictions to deliver planning functions, coordination, technical assis￾tance, and administer a variety of federal, state, and local programs. 
They include commissions, councils of government (COGs), regional planning 
organizations (RPOs), and regional purpose authorities (RPAs).They help facili￾tate cooperation among local governments, generally related to infra￾structure, public health, transportation, and increasingly emergency 
management. 
Regional Transportation Planning Organizations (RTPOs) incorporate rural trans￾portation needs into statewide planning processes. They are formed for 
multiple jurisdictions in nonmetropolitan areas that have populations of 
less than 50,000 to identify rural transportation needs and incorporate 
them into the statewide planning process. 
Cooperative Extension 
The Cooperative Extension System (CES) is a national education system 
that operates through state land-grant universities in partnership with fed￾eral, state, and local governments. Authorized in 1914 by the Smith-Lever 
Act, its major program areas include agricultural production and business  
THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 61 
development, community development, emergency preparedness, family 
and consumer sciences, health and nutrition, and natural resources. While 
specifc programs and priorities difer from state to state, CES supports 
communities as well as farmers, ranchers, families, and individuals. 
CES is supported by state and local governments and shares evidence￾based research from state land-grant universities. Extension educators (or 
agents) provide technical assistance to farmers, ranchers, and communities; 
develop partnerships across the food supply chain; and provide support in 
the event of disasters. All these resources combined give CES a vital role in 
food systems planning and development activities. 
The 1862 Morrill Act created the land-grant university system, and the 1887 
Hatch Act directed federal funds to agricultural research.The Morrill Act of 1890 
expanded the system to include historically Black colleges and universities 
(HBCUs) with programs in agricultural sciences. In 1994, land-grant sta￾tus was extended to Native American Tribal Colleges through the Improving 
America’s Schools Act.The 2008 Farm Bill authorized establishment of a group of 
Hispanic-serving agricultural colleges and universities to be eligible for USDA 
Integrated Research, Education, and Extension Competitive Grants Programs. 
Common Types of Plans 
Sometimes states and communities create stand-alone plans for agriculture 
and/or food systems. More often, food and farming issues are infused into 
other planning eforts. What follows are descriptions of types of plans rel￾evant to food systems eforts. 
Land Use Plans 
Land use plans inform how land use decisions are made. They promote 
orderly development to meet residents’ needs and are most often imple￾mented through zoning and subdivision regulations. Typically, they address 
six main land use categories: agricultural, residential, recreational, commer￾cial, industrial, and transportation. 
Two state enabling acts from the 1920s laid the foundation for land￾use planning and zoning. The U.S. Commerce Department published a 
Standard State Zoning Enabling Act (SZEA) in 1926 and a Standard City 
Planning Enabling Act (SCPEA) in 1928.7 The SZEA authorized planning 62 SeC TION I 
commissions, ofered guidance on developing master plans, and provided 
for approval of public improvements and controls over private land subdivi￾sions. The SCPEA included a provision to divide a local government’s ter￾ritory into districts, along with a statement of purpose and procedures for 
establishing and amending zoning regulations. 
Oregon has the strongest state land use planning law. It requires local gov￾ernments, special districts, and state agencies to adopt comprehensive plans 
consistent with 19 Statewide Land Use Planning Goals. States like Arizona 
require counties to form a planning and zoning commission and to adopt 
comprehensive plans but do not require state oversight and consistency. 
Other states, like Georgia and Vermont, do not mandate comprehensive 
plans but ofer incentives through grants and loans. 
Comprehensive or Master Plans 
Local land use plans are commonly called comprehensive (comp), general, 
or master plans, and guide land development and protection at the county 
or municipal level.They have the legal authority to guide community devel￾opment and a history of practice that builds public acceptance of their poli￾cies.The American Planning Association (APA) ofers standards and a set of 
principles and practices to support their preparation. 
Comp plans present a vision for the future and lay the foundation for 
local land use policies.Typically covering from fve to 20 years, they refect 
the big picture of current conditions and future directions and serve as road 
maps to guide local decisions that are enforced by policies, incentives, and 
land use regulations. Some states require them and others do not. Of those 
that do, some also require that they be updated on a regular basis and/or 
require which elements to include. 
While state requirements vary, most comp plans address major land use 
categories, including commercial, industrial, residential, and open space. 
They generally include several key elements: existing conditions, short- and 
long-term goals, maps of present and future land uses, and land use poli￾cies and other implementation strategies. Sometimes they are established 
as unifed development code, where the plan and the zoning components are 
included together as a single document. While most do not address food, 
some include agriculture or at least farmland, although rarely to the degree 
they address other land uses. THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 63 
Agriculture Plans 
Dozens of state and local governments have developed stand-alone plans for 
agriculture, sometimes simply for farmland protection.These plans typically 
have a land use element to steer growth away from quality soils and active 
farming areas and establish a framework to protect and conserve farmland 
and to support agricultural economic development. Maryland’s 2019 stra￾tegic plan for agriculture was spearheaded by the Maryland Department of 
Agriculture (MDA) and included an overview of the state’s farming sectors, 
trends, forces, strengths, and challenges afecting them, and a set of initia￾tive areas with recommended actions. MDA’s top priority was to ensure an 
inclusive process that represented all sectors and stakeholders.Together they 
put forth a vision of high-quality food production, workforce development, 
consumers who understand agriculture, and support for a new generation 
of farmers to continue Maryland’s legacy as a leader in sustainable farming 
practices.8 
A few states have created programs to support local planning for agri￾culture. New York ofers municipal planning grants to protect farmland and 
county planning grants to promote agricultural viability. County planning 
grants also may be used to update local planning documents, including but 
not limited to the agricultural section of comprehensive plans, land use 
regulations, and zoning ordinances to ensure that these documents contain 
clear language and policies to support agriculture.9 Virginia has a planning 
grant program to support agriculture and forestry by funding local eforts 
and encouraging local governments and the ag/forestry community to work 
together to integrate these industries into local economic development.10 
Taking a diferent approach, California ofers Conservation Agriculture 
Planning Grants to help farmers and ranchers identify actions for climate 
change mitigation and adaptation, further environmental stewardship, and 
ensure food security.11 64 SeC TION I 
PLANNING FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMLAND 
PROTECTION IN ERIE COUNTY 
Figure 2.3 Erie County’s plan for agriculture includes an analysis of trends and con￾ditions, a series of maps, and information about the tools the county 
can use to support farms and protect farmland from development. 
Source: Kevin Keenan. 
erie is a fast-growing county located along the shores of the great Lake erie 
in western New York. It is part of the Bufalo–Niagara Falls metropolitan 
area, the state’s second largest metro area. Its innovative Agricultural and 
Farmland Protection Plan includes strategies to identify and protect farm￾land, support new types of farms and attract new farmers, connect farmers 
with consumers and new markets, and increase access to healthy, local food. 
each of its goals is accompanied by specifc implementation actions backed 
up by an analysis of current conditions and trends, a series of maps, and 
information about ways to support farms and protect farmland. 
erie’s plan for agriculture resulted from a nearly two-year, collabora￾tive process that included eight public meetings to facilitate community 
input on goals, strategies, and recommended actions. Committed to 
transparency, results were shared on the county website and in a series 
of summaries included as part of the plan, along with related planning 
documents and a set of appendices.12 THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 65 
Climate Action Plans 
States have begun to adopt climate action plans (CAPs) to mitigate GHG 
emissions and adapt to the impacts of a changing climate. CAPs are strate￾gic documents that include recommendations for policies and actions. The 
Center for Climate and Energy Solutions publishes a map that includes a 
brief description of and links to these plans.13 
Since the causes and impacts of climate change are intertwined with 
land use and transportation, plans generally take a holistic approach to help 
communities prepare for resiliency. California and Massachusetts serve as 
good examples. California’s 2022 Climate Change Scoping Plan lays out 
an aggressive, sector-by-sector roadmap to help the state achieve carbon 
neutrality by 2045. Key strategies include updating the cap-and-trade pro￾gram to align with reduced GHG emission goals, phasing down oil and gas 
operations, and conserving 30 percent of the state’s natural and working 
lands to capture and store emissions while supporting healthy ecosystems.14 
Massachusetts’ Municipal Vulnerability Preparedness (MVP) program pro￾vides support for cities and towns to identify climate hazards, assess vulner￾abilities, and develop action plans to improve their resiliency. Communities 
that complete the program become certifed and eligible for MVP Action 
Grant funding and other opportunities.15 
PLANNING FOR REGIONAL RESILIENCE IN FLORIDA 
The Tampa Bay Regional Resilience Action Plan addresses food systems 
and other community issues in the context of climate change. Cover￾ing seven Florida counties, it is an action plan for coordinated prepara￾tion and adaptation to impacts such as sea level rise, severe hurricanes, 
extreme heat, and other weather-related hazards. within a context of 
addressing complex land use issues, it strives for more sustainable and 
resilient food systems and improved access to healthy foods. Toward 
these ends, it includes strategies such as developing an inventory of 
agriculture lands, number of farms, vacant lots and production outputs, 
developing incentives to increase local food production, processing and 
distribution, and implementing outreach and education eforts to reduce 
food waste.16  
66 SeC TION I 
Emergency Management/Hazard Mitigation Plans 
Hazard mitigation plans minimize the impact of natural disasters by iden￾tifying risks and vulnerabilities and developing long-term strategies to pro￾tect people and property. Underpinned by federal legislation, they are the 
foundation for plans that integrate resilience and long-term risk reduction. 
The Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000 (which amended the 1988 Staford 
Act)17 creates a framework for state, local, tribal, and territorial governments 
to receive federal assistance for hazard mitigation planning. The Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) provides guidance to support its 
requirement that policies are reviewed and revised on a regular basis. Its 
State Mitigation Planning Policy Guide provides state hazard mitigation planning 
requirements. Beyond FEMA, disaster planning and policy are supported by 
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration (OSHA). DHS publishes guidance for public, ani￾mal, and plant health agencies who respond to food and agricultural inci￾dents at all levels of government. OSHA gives information to help farmers 
and others prepare emergency action plans to respond to workplace emer￾gencies and disasters. 
When it comes to food, most emergency planning is directed at indi￾vidual households, not communities. However, the Food and Agriculture 
Defense Initiative: Extension Disaster Education Network (EDEN) provides 
national coordination for outreach to enhance the biosecurity of U.S. agri￾culture and food systems. A collaborative multistate Cooperative Extension 
efort, EDEN’s mission is to reduce the impact of disasters through research￾based education. 
In response to the food supply breakdowns of Covid-19, Ohio State 
University researchers established partnerships with several state agencies to 
study the relationship between food systems and emergency management. 
They found many policies and programs administered by diferent agencies 
and organizations with little or no connection to each other. Their report, 
“Preparing for Food System Resiliency in Ohio: Policy and Planning Lessons 
from COVID-19” includes key takeaways for short-, medium-, and long￾term food system resilience planning.18 Engaging EDEN into food systems 
planning could open opportunities to learn from and build on research 
and extension eforts and include food systems in emergency management 
plans.  
THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 67 
A TEMPLATE FOR EMERGENCY FOOD PREPAREDNESS 
The Alaska Food Policy Council created a Community Food emergency 
and Resilience Template to help communities plan for emergency events. 
Providing a framework to design a community emergency food prepar￾edness response plan and strategy, it outlines procedures and resources 
to address food security in the event of natural disasters, supply chain 
disruptions, production failures, and other emergencies. The template 
serves as a model to help communities identify transportation require￾ments; storage capability; food reserves; and procedures to release, 
obtain, and provide food for community residents and addresses local 
production, hunting, gathering, and fshing.19 
Food Systems Plans 
Food systems plans address a set of interconnected, forward-thinking activi￾ties to strengthen local and regional food systems through policies, pro￾cedures, and public investments. “Eating Here: Greater Philadelphia’s Food 
System Plan” was one of the frst. Released in 2011 by the Delaware Valley 
Regional Planning Commission, it covered nine counties in Pennsylvania 
and New Jersey addressing concerns from securing a supply of farmland to 
grow food to the nutrition and health of the consumers who eat it. 
Vermont’s Farm to Plate (F2P) is a comprehensive state-level plan. Led 
by the Vermont Jobs Fund, its goals are to increase economic development 
and employment in the farm and food sectors, improve the resilience of 
the working landscape, and increase access to healthy local foods. Updated 
in 2019, F2P works to achieve a 2030 vision for Vermont’s food system 
through 15 strategic goals, 87 objectives, and 34 recommended actions. It 
also includes a series of briefs highlighting current conditions, bottlenecks, 
gaps, opportunities, and recommendations.20 In a related efort, the New 
England State Food System Planners Partnership launched a ten-year plan￾ning initiative to prepare the six-state region for system shocks, including 
weather events and public health emergencies. “New England Feeding New 
England: Cultivating A  Reliable Food Supply” lifts up food systems plans 
developed by each of the states to create a regional strategy. 
Municipalities also have created food system plans—although most are 
not comprehensive, focused more on food access than food systems.21 One  
68 SeC TION I 
exception is the City and County of Denver, which developed a strategic 
Denver Food Vision detailing implementation areas with specifc strategies to 
achieve 12 measurable goals by 2030.22 Further, cities like Baltimore and 
Boston also have created food systems resilience plans (see box). 
Food systems plans often are driven by nonproft organizations. For 
example, Arizona’s food policy council released a three-year statewide 
food action plan to inform advocacy and build capacity and investment 
to transform Arizona’s food system. The plan addresses four priorities: 
food access and distribution, land and water access and protection, climate 
smart foodways, and workforce development. Each has a goal with objec￾tives, strategies, and actions to achieve it.23 In Niagara Falls, New York, a 
Healthy Food Healthy People working group spearheaded a resident-based 
planning process to create a Local Food Action Plan that ultimately was 
adopted by the city council. The plan includes four priority areas, includ￾ing agriculture, economic development, education, and healthy neighbor￾hoods, each supported by sub-themes and action steps to improve food 
access and security.24 
RESILIENT FOOD SYSTEMS, RESILIENT CITIES 
Boston, Massachusetts’s “Resilient Food Systems, Resilient Cities” plan 
was developed after two destructive weather events: Hurricane Sandy 
in 2012 and record-breaking snowfall in 2015. Calling for strong public– 
private partnerships and coordination across various city agencies, 
it ofers seven overarching recommendations to build a sustainable 
regional food economy that can withstand weather-related disrup￾tions. each overarching recommendation includes a range of suggested 
actions. examples include: 
• establish a food system resilience committee to strengthen coordina￾tion between local food system initiatives and resilience planning; 
• Diversify the milk supply to retail outlets and review distributors’ con￾tingency plans; 
• encourage the growth of smaller regional suppliers and new process￾ing facilities; 
• Develop neighborhood food availability action plans; and THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 69 
• Commission studies to better understand neighborhood food con￾sumption patterns and revisit the one-mile radius to food retail and 
emergency food outlets after major storms. 
It also has sets of recommendations related to emergency food, food 
storage, road infrastructure, areas prone to fooding, and improving 
coordination between city plans and agencies.25 
Sustainability Plans 
Sustainability plans address issues related to environmental management for 
concerns such as air and water quality, energy, and waste.Typically, they bal￾ance environmental and economic conditions with social equity and other 
community priorities. 
APA outlines objectives for sustainability planning to reduce dependence 
on activities that harm ecosystems. Broader in scope than CPAs, sustain￾ability plans address environmental, economic, and social considerations, 
including and beyond those directly related to climate change. Los Angeles 
is a good example of how to integrate food systems into a local sustainability 
plan. 
INTEGRATING FOOD SYSTEMS INTO SUSTAINABILITY 
PLANNING 
“Our County” is a bold, regional sustainability plan for Los Angeles, 
California. Organized around 12 cross-cutting goals, it outlines what the 
county of 10 million residents and 88 municipal governments can do to 
address compound environmental challenges within a complex tapes￾try of local government authority. Among its goals, it seeks to improve 
healthy-food access by leveraging its capital assets, public services, and 
regulatory authority while optimizing its purchasing power and business 
services to make food production more sustainable. 
Stretching along 75 miles of coastline, LA includes two ofshore islands, 
national forests, and the Mojave Desert. So “Our County” emphasizes 
the importance of its rural communities, ecosystems, habitats, and bio￾diversity along with climate change. Reckoning with the county’s history  
70 SeC TION I 
of exclusionary zoning, racial covenants, and siting toxic land uses in 
communities of color, “Our County” also has economic and equity goals 
and commits to helping communities afected by environmental pollu￾tion and inadequate and unmaintained infrastructure.26 
Planning for Food Systems at a Regional Scale 
Given the structures of governance and planning, it is unsurprising that 
planning for food and agriculture usually occurs at state or local levels. 
However, for sustainability and resiliency, taking a regional—or foodshed— 
approach can return lasting benefts. Drawn from the concept of watersheds, 
foodsheds are metaphors for geographic regions that link agriculture and 
food production to the dietary needs of people in nearby population cent￾ers.27 Like watersheds, they transcend jurisdictional boundaries. 
Operating at a foodshed scale expands production capacity by increas￾ing the diversity of soil, water, microclimate, and other natural resource 
factors. Containing diferent topographies and scales, a foodshed can serve 
large populations and ofer an abundant, varied, and culturally appropriate 
food supply.Taking a regional approach expands access to supply chains and 
markets, leverages urban–rural linkages, reduces the need for imports, and 
keeps and more equitably distributes economic returns within both rural 
and urban communities.28 While it can be hard to overcome territorial bar￾riers, it is a good time to address the challenge and facilitate dialogue to 
address potential tensions and move forward on opportunities. 
During the pandemic, nimble local and regional networks and fexible 
supply chains protected communities from food shortages. Still, rigidity in 
the current policy and regulatory environment constrained a more strate￾gic response.29 These weaknesses can be addressed through foodshed-scale 
planning. 
Regional approaches also can help reconcile cultural diferences between 
urban and rural communities and their attitudes toward planning, policy, and 
the role of government. Most rural residents believe they have diferent values 
from people living in cities,30 and urban planning approaches often do not 
translate well to rural communities.To date, most food systems planning has 
focused on urban areas and implementation has emphasized zoning and land  
THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 71 
use regulations for community gardens, city farms, and local procurement.31 
While these all are valuable, they will not ensure food security much less 
resiliency for urban food supplies, much less food systems generally. More 
and better planning is needed to expand the middle infrastructure to support 
rural agriculture, protect farmland for food production, and incentivize food 
aggregation, processing, and distribution outside of urban centers. 
That said, most descriptions of urban agriculture are more expansive than 
community gardens and inner-city farms.They connect production, processing, 
and distribution of food and other farm products in urban, suburban, and peri￾urban areas with feeding local populations, expanding green spaces, workforce 
development, and fostering community education and engagement.32 Adopting 
this frame for food systems planning would help bridge urban and rural com￾munities, opening the door to more regional or foodshed approaches. 
WHAT IS URBAN AGRICULTURE? 
Figure: 2.4 Bobby Wilson established Metro Atlanta Urban Farming in 2009 to 
address the growing need for afordable food in low-income com￾munities. His fve-acre farm in College Park, Georgia, is just minutes 
from downtown Atlanta. 
Source: USDA. Photo by Preston Keres. 72 SeC TION I 
Urban agriculture is defned diferently in diferent places and policies, 
often dictated by program funding. while it has neither a statutory nor 
formal defnition, a seminal defnition from 2000 provides a useful frame: 
“The growing, processing, and distribution of food and other products 
through intensive plant cultivation and animal husbandry in and around 
cities.”33 USDA has a similar defnition: “The cultivation, processing and 
distribution of agricultural products in urban and suburban areas. Com￾munity gardens, rooftop farms, hydroponic, aeroponic, and aquaponic 
facilities, and vertical production are all examples of urban agriculture. 
Tribal communities and small towns may also be included.”34 
Despite these fairly broad defnitions, urban agriculture often is 
limited to community and rooftop gardens rather than intensive food 
production outside of city centers but within urban-infuenced areas. 
while it may be harder to enact policies that cross municipal and county 
boundaries, taking a broader approach to urban agriculture—especially 
in a food systems planning context—will at once increase food security 
and agricultural viability. 
Urban-infuenced counties produce most of the perishable foods we eat, 
including the vast majority of fruits and vegetables, two-thirds of dairy, and 
more than half of poultry and eggs35 (see Figure 2.5).These places include 
some of the nation’s most abundant farming regions, like California’s San 
Joaquin Valley. They also supply two-thirds of direct-to-consumer food 
sales.36 Some appear more rural than others, but they all possess attributes 
of rural communities. Engaging these communities in food systems plan￾ning is vital to future food security and climate resiliency. 
Rural counties provide most of the country’s staple foods, water, energy, 
and outdoor recreation.37 They produce wheat, rice, barley, and oats, as well 
as feed for poultry and livestock. They also provide grazing on millions of 
acres that otherwise would not sustain food production.And agriculture pro￾vides nearly 17 percent of employment in highly rural and remote areas.38 
While rural America is not homogenous, it has similar traits that afect 
planning practice. Its rich natural resources require land management along 
with land use. Its stakeholders include farmers and ranchers whose sched￾ules are weather-dependent and do not work from 9 to 5. Rural residents 
sufer disproportionate rates of poverty, unemployment, and food insecurity. THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 73 
Food Produced in Urban-Infuenced Counties 
By Percent of Market Value 
55% 66% 81% 90%
Poultry & Dairy Vegetables & Fruits, 
Eggs Melons Tree Nuts & 
Berries 
Source: American Farmland Trust’s Farmland Information Center, using 
data from USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2017 Census 
of Agriculture and USDA Economic Research Service 2013 Urban 
Infuence Codes. 
Figure 2.5 Much of the food we eat comes from urban-infuenced counties. 
Source: American Farmland Trust’s Farmland Information Center. 
Of 310 counties with high and persistent levels of poverty, 86 percent are 
rural. Along with limited access to healthy, afordable food, many face barri￾ers to medical care and internet services. Black and Indigenous populations 
are especially vulnerable.39 
More and better rural planning is needed. But rural communities tend 
to be under-resourced and poorly understood. With small populations and 
limited government, they often lack planning capacity. What planning is 
done often is done by volunteer boards and commissions or by outside 
planning consultants. If they have paid staf, they often have multiple other 
responsibilities unrelated to planning. Further, rural populations often dis￾trust government intervention, so policy—especially regulatory—changes 
can be hard to achieve. 
Taking a foodshed approach can bring resources to the table that may 
otherwise be unavailable to communities planning on their own. For 
rural communities, this could include planning expertise and new market  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 SeC TION I 
opportunities. For urban communities, this could include a fresher, more 
reliable source of food.Taking an assets-based approach like the Community 
Capitals Framework can identify and leverage community resources to build 
wealth and respond to food system needs. Chapter 3 explains this frame￾work and ofers principles and practices to guide food systems planning 
along the rural–urban continuum. 
Discussion Questions 
1. What are the planning and policy dynamics in your state/commu￾nity? 
2. What types of plans already in place in your state/community have 
addressed food systems and how did they do it? 
3. What do you think is needed to foster more sustainable and resil￾ient food systems where you work or live? 
Notes 
1. U.S. Census Bureau, “U.S. Census Bureau QuickFacts: United States,” accessed 
January 29, 2023; Jensen et al.,“The Chance That Two People Chosen.” 
2. Hoey et al., Participatory State and Regional Food System Plans and Charters. 
3. National Conference of State Legislatures, “Number of Legislators and Length of 
Terms in Years,” April 19, 2021. 
4. U.S. Census Bureau, “Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas Population 
Totals and Components of Change: 2020–2021,” Census.gov, accessed January 29, 
2023; GIS Geography, “13 Open Source Remote Sensing Software Packages,” GIS 
Geography, March 15, 2023. 
5. Naya El Nassar, More Than Half of U.S. Population in 4.6 Percent of Counties (Washington, DC: 
U.S. Census Bureau, October 24, 2017). 
6. “Number of U.S. Cities,Towns,Villages by Population Size 2019,” Statista, accessed 
March 18, 2023. 
7. Department of Commerce Advisory Committee on Zoning,“Standard State Zoning 
Enabling Act and Standard City Planning Enabling Act,” American Planning Association, 
1928. 
8. Maryland Department of Agriculture, “Strategic Plan for Maryland Agriculture,” 
Maryland Department of Agriculture, December 1, 2019. 
9. For information about New York’s planning grants programs for agriculture and 
farmland protection visit:“Farmland Protection Planning Grants Program,” New York 
State Department of Agriculture and Markets, accessed March 18, 2023.  
 
 
 
THe PUBLIC FRAMewORK FOR FOOD SYSTeMS PLANNINg 75 
10. For information about Virginia’s Agriculture and Forestry Industries Development 
Fund (AFID) Planning Grant program visit: “AFID Planning Grants,” Virginia 
Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
11. For more information about California’s Conservation Agriculture Planning Grants 
Program, visit:“CDFA – OEFI – Conservation Agriculture Planning Grants Program,” 
California Department of Food and Agriculture. 
12. American Farmland Trust, “Erie County Agricultural and Farmland Protection 
Plan,” Farmland Information Center, October 24, 2012. 
13. Center for Climate and Energy Solutions, “U.S. State Climate Action Plans,” 
December 2022. 
14. California Air Resources Board, “2022 Scoping Plan for Achieving Carbon 
Neutrality,” California Air Resources Board, November 16, 2022. 
15. For information about Massachusetts’ Municipal Vulnerability Preparedness pro￾gram visit:“Municipal Vulnerability Preparedness (MVP) Program,” Mass.Gov. 
16. Cara Serra, Regional Resiliency Action Plan (Pinellas Park, FL: Tampa Bay Regional 
Planning Council, November 2022). 
17. Formally, the Staford Act is known as the Robert T. Staford Disaster Relief and 
Emergency Assistance Act, PL 100–707, and was signed into law on November 23, 
1988, amending the Disaster Relief Act of 1974, PL 93–288. It provides statutory 
authority for most federal disaster response activities, especially those related to 
FEMA programs. 
18. Shoshanah Inwood et al., Preparing for Food System Resiliency in Ohio: Policy and Planning Lessons 
from COVID-19. 
19. Alaska Food Policy Council, “Community Food Emergency and Resilience 
Template,” University of Alaska Fairbanks Cooperative Extension Service, September 27, 2015. 
20. To learn more about Vermont Farm to Plate, visit: Vermont Sustainable Jobs Fund 
(VSJF),“Vermont Farm to Plate Strategic Plan.” 
21. Jane Karetny et  al., “Planning toward Sustainable Food Systems: An Exploratory 
Assessment of Local U.S. Food System Plans,” Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and 
Community Development 11, no. 4 (September 2, 2022): 115–38. 
22. Denver Department of Public Health and Environment, Denver Food Action Plan (Denver, 
CO: Denver Department of Public Health and Environment, June 2018). 
23. Arizona Food Systems Network,“Arizona Statewide Food Action Plan 2022–2024,” 
Arizona Food Systems Network. 
24. Healthy Food Healthy People Work Group, “Niagara Falls Local Food Action Plan,” 
2017. 
25. Kim Zeuli, Austin Nijhuis, and Pete Murphy, Resilient Food Systems, Resilient Cities: 
Recommendations for the City of Boston (Boston, MA: Initiative for a Competitive Inner 
City, May 2015). 
26. Los Angeles County Chief Sustainability Ofce, “Our County – Los Angeles 
Countywide Sustainability Plan,” Our County, August 6, 2019. 
27. Julia Freedgood, Marisol Pierce-Quiñonez, and Kenneth Meter, “Emerging 
Assessment Tools to Inform Food System Planning,” Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, 
and Community Development 2, no. 1 (December 23, 2011): 83–104. 
28. Kathryn Z. Ruhf and Kate Clancy, “A Regional Imperative: The Case for Regional 
Food Systems,” Thomas A. Lyson Center for Civic Agriculture and Food Systems, September 20, 
2022.  
 
 
 
76 SeC TION I 
29. Thilmany et  al., “Local Food Supply Chain Dynamics and Resilience during 
COVID-19.” 
30. Jose A. DelReal and Scott Clement, “Rural Divide: New Poll of Rural Americans 
Shows Deep Cultural Divide with Urban Residents,” The Washington Post, June  17, 
2017. 
31. Clark, Conley, and Raja, “Essential, Fragile, and Invisible Community Food 
Infrastructure.” 
32. Leslie Glover, “Ofce of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Overview.” 
USDA, “Urban Agriculture”; Carolyn Dimitri, Lydia Oberholtzer, and Andy 
Pressman, “Urban Agriculture: Connecting Producers with Consumers,” ed. Fabio 
Verneau and Professor Christopher J. Grifth, British Food Journal 118, no. 3 (January 1, 
2016): 603–17; Martin Bailkey and Joe Nasr, “From Brownfelds to Greenfelds: 
Producing Food in North American Cities,” Community Food Security News, Fall 2000, 
6;Anu Rangarajan and Molly Riordan,“The Promise of Urban Agriculture, National 
Study of Commercial Farming in Urban Areas,” USDA Agricultural Marketing Service and 
Cornell University Small Farms Program, August 2019. 
33. Bailkey and Nasr,“From Brownfelds to Greenfelds.” 
34. USDA, Topics,“Urban Agriculture.” 
35. Freedgood et al., Farms Under Threat, 25–30. 
36. USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2012 Census of Agriculture Highlights: Direct 
Farm Sales of Food (Washington, DC: USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, 
December 2016). 
37. U.S. Census Bureau and America Counts Staf,“What Is Rural America? One in Five 
Americans Live in Rural Areas,” Census.gov, August 9, 2017. 
38. John Newton, “USDA’s Early Look at 2019 Farm Income: USDA’s Next Update Set 
for August 2019,” American Farm Bureau Federation, March 6, 2019. 
39. Tracey Farrigan, Rural Poverty & Well-Being (Washington, DC: USDA Economic Research 
Service, November 29, 2022). DOI: 10.4324/9781003293712-5 
3 
PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES TO 
GUIDE PLANNING FOR FOOD 
AND AGRICULTURE 
Chapter Summary 
Planning is highly decentralized and occurs at many levels of government. 
Building on lessons learned from the various types of plans described in 
Chapter 2, this chapter ofers basic principles and practices to guide plan￾ning for farms and food, whether in stand-alone plans, or as elements of 
other types of plans. 
*** 
As discussed in Chapter  2, states have planning authority but generally 
delegate it to local governments. Food system issues may be infused into 
many diferent types of plans—from comprehensive plans to stand-alone 
plans for food and/or agriculture. Many types of entities address the people, 
processes, and policies responsible for producing, packaging, processing, 
distributing, acquiring, consuming, and disposing of foods and food prod￾ucts. They range from ofcial planning departments, boards, and commis￾sions to “small p” planners from nonproft organizations, Extension, food  
 
78 SeC TION I 
policy councils, and the like.Working with or within the government, plan￾ners address how various public priorities work together and create plans 
to achieve them through policies, programs, and public investments. This 
involves imagining what can happen in the next three to fve years, or as far 
out as 20 or more years into the future. 
Guiding Principles 
Principles drive practices: Who to include in the planning process, how to 
engage them, and what questions to ask, data to analyze, and recommenda￾tions to make. Multifaceted and complex, food systems cut across multiple 
sectors. Thus, planning for food systems benefts from a systems—not indi￾vidual sectors—approach. 
Several organizations have developed principles to guide food sys￾tems planning.The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, American Nurses 
Association, American Planning Association, and American Public Health 
Association drafted seven shared principles to support socially, economi￾cally, and ecologically sustainable food systems. They range from sup￾porting the physical and mental health of all farmers, workers, and eaters 
to accounting for public health impacts across the entire life cycle of 
food. They also include conserving, protecting, and regenerating natu￾ral resources, landscapes, and biodiversity.1 The Global Alliance for the 
Future of Food advances similar principles: renewability, resilience, 
health, equity, diversity, inclusion, and interconnectedness.2
 These prin￾ciples also refect those in the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct 
for certifed planners. 
Together, these point to a shared set of guiding principles: 
• Diversity in size, scale, geography, practices, preferences, and culture; 
• Resilience in the face of challenges and disruptions; 
• Individual, community, and ecological health; 
• Access to food, land, water, and other essential resources; and 
• Transparency and fair treatment throughout the supply chain. 
Along with these overarching principles are a few practical ones to guide 
the planning process. PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 79 
I. Focus on Assets Not Def icits 
Taking an asset-based approach is especially important in rural and 
lower-wealth communities, which typically are defned by what they 
lack—like population or fnancial resources. But they may have other 
valuable assets, like natural resources, close social ties, and cultural her￾itage. As it can be hard for people to identify their assets, the Southern 
Rural Development Center has developed a curriculum to help communi￾ties map their assets.3 
Asset-based strategies marshal community resources to create opportu￾nities and respond to needs. They use informal as well as formal research, 
and engage with local organizations, associations, and networks to identify 
resources and move plans forward in ways that are stakeholder-centered and 
community empowering. The Community Capitals Framework is a trusted 
approach. Created by Cornelia and Jan Flora4
 for use in rural communities, 
it also is a useful way to identify and harness food systems assets across the 
rural–urban continuum. 
THE SEVEN COMMUNITY CAPITALS—OR ASSETS 
1. Financial capital: Banks, community development corporations and 
fnancial institutions, credit unions, funding for loans and venture 
capital, grants, and other resources that contribute to wealth creation. 
2. Built capital: Buildings, roads, bridges, and other supporting infra￾structure from food hubs and markets to public water and sewage 
treatment facilities. 
3. Social capital: Horizontal linkages and relationships between people, 
including bonding activities between people who are close to each 
other through family, work, worship, and other ties, and bridging activ￾ities between people and groups who are not closely tied. Vertical link￾ages harness resources from outside the community to support local 
goals and activities. 
4. Human capital: education, training, workforce development, and 
other activities that lead to knowledge and skills, as well as commu￾nity-based institutions like health care, childcare, and schools that 
support them.  
 
80 SeC TION I 
5. Cultural capital: Beliefs, values, symbols, tastes, and preferences 
refected in things like attitudes, art, customs, clothing, language, and 
food as well as things like fairs, festivals, and museums. 
6. Natural capital: The full range of ecosystem features from land and 
soil to water and microclimates to wildlife habitat and biodiversity. 
7. Political capital: Access to power and the ability to infuence 
decision-making. 
II. Engage Early, Often, and Throughout the Process 
It is often said that change happens at the speed of trust.Trust is built with 
time, respect, and engagement. Many planning eforts fall short because they 
rush to extract information from stakeholders instead of involving them in 
a meaningful way throughout the process.5 
Food systems planning eforts are strengthened and sustained when guided 
by a shared vision and values based on a community engagement process that 
aligns actions with values and celebrates local wisdom and knowledge. The 
heart of the process is recognizing and including a full range of community 
interests, or stakeholders, afected by the plan—from farmers, food-insecure 
populations, and people who represent the middle infrastructure in between. 
Many plans rely on outside consultants, but it still is good to have peo￾ple embedded in the community guide the engagement process. It also is 
important to be inclusive from the start—not just inviting people to a table 
you set, but including them in both building and setting the proverbial table. 
Once key stakeholders are engaged, make sure they feel welcomed, valued, 
and heard, especially when they have opposing perspectives. 
III. Plan With Implementation in Mind 
A good plan serves the community and builds support for action. It has little 
value if it is not implemented. 
Community needs, desires, demands, and opportunities vary widely, 
partly because of governing structures and political attitudes, and also 
because of environmental, economic, and population characteristics. There 
is no silver bullet. Implementation must be grounded in the unique mix of 
strategies and actions that resonate with people in each individual place.  
PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 81 
Building of assets, but recognizing constraints, efective food systems 
plans integrate multiple sectors and interests. Balancing these takes time and 
efort and includes innovative as well as tried-and-true strategies to improve 
economic, environmental, and public health outcomes. 
Planning Practices 
This section is informed by decades of experience working with and learn￾ing from planning processes in a wide range of places, both rural and urban, 
across the U.S. The lessons learned are drawn from the author’s experi￾ence planning for agriculture in states and communities across the U.S. and 
from Growing Food Connections and Pathways to Prosperity both multi￾year, collaborative research and extension food systems projects supported 
by USDA’s National Institute of Food and Agriculture. 
Getting Started 
Before embarking on a planning process, it is good to assess the commu￾nity’s readiness for change and decide on a leadership structure. Together, 
these increase the likelihood that the process will be inclusive and that the 
plan will result in actions. 
Readiness is the extent to which a community is prepared to act on an issue 
or a plan. It tends to be issue specifc: Communities typically are willing 
to address some issues and take certain kinds of actions but not others. For 
example, a rural community may be ready to address agricultural viability 
but not community food security, where an urban community may be the 
other way around. 
Planning processes have various leadership and decision-making struc￾tures. From the outset, it is important for leaders to communicate these 
to the people involved in the process, along with the scope of work, and a 
realistic timeline. Leadership may come from a planning department, plan￾ning board or commission members, outside consultants, Extension, or a 
nonproft or other organization and may include representative stakeholders 
and people with community connections, specifc expertise, or skills like 
Geographic Information System (GIS) mapping. 
It also is important to understand the place or places afected by the 
plan. Food production capacity, population dynamics, and other factors vary  
82 SeC TION I 
widely across the country.With its Mediterranean climate, California is ide￾ally suited for intensive food production. It also is the third-largest state 
geographically, with the largest and second most diverse population in the 
country, and ferce development pressure. In contrast, Alaska is by far the 
largest state geographically.With the third smallest population overall, it has 
the largest Indigenous population. Most of its land is publicly owned, and its 
harsh climate and poor soils limit agriculture to a few regions.6
 Other fac￾tors to consider include population growth, which is signifcant in states like 
Utah and North Dakota, and population decline in states like West Virginia. 
Table 3.1 highlights some key diferences between states to caution against 
cookie-cutter approaches. 
Table 3.1 Population Characteristics, Gross Farm Receipts, and Total Land and Water 
Area by State 
States Total Population 
2020 
Population 
Change 
Percent 
Diversity 
Index* 
Percent 
Gross Farm 
Receipts 2021 
Total Area 
Sq Mi 
Alabama 5,024,279 5.1 53.1 $6,831,141 52,420 
Alaska 733,391 3.3 62.8 $71,191 665,384 
Arizona 7,151,502 11.9 61.5 $4,408,666 113,990 
Arkansas 3,011,524 3.3 49.8 $11,467,018 53,179 
California 39,538,223 6.1 69.7 $54,506,380 163,695 
Colorado 5,773,714 14.8 52.3 $9,528,528 104,094 
Connecticut 3,605,944 0.9 55.7 $658,765 5,543 
Delaware 989,948 10.2 59.6 $1,494,521 2,489 
Florida 21,538,187 14.6 64.1 $8,980,922 65,758 
Georgia 10,711,908 10.6 64.1 $10,942,842 59,425 
Hawaii 1,455,271 7 76 $687,577 10,932 
Idaho 1,839,106 17.3 35.9 $9,068,110 83,569 
Illinois 12,812,508 -0.1 60.3 $25,218,484 57,914 
Indiana 6,785,528 4.7 41.3 $15,496,595 36,420 
Iowa 3,190,369 4.7 30.8 $40,550,005 56,273 
Kansas 2,937,880 3 45.4 $24,472,285 82,278 
Kentucky 4,505,836 3.8 32.8 $7,713,729 40,408 
Louisiana 4,657,757 2.7 58.6 $4,187,292 52,378 
(Continued)  
PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 83 
Table 3.1 (Continued) 
States Total Population 
2020 
Population 
Change 
Percent 
Diversity 
Index* 
Percent 
Gross Farm 
Receipts 2021 
Total Area 
Sq Mi 
Maine 1,362,359 2.6 18.5 $899,573 35,380 
Maryland 6,177,224 7 67.3 $2,838,319 12,406 
Massachusetts 7,029,917 7.4 51.6 $578,263 10,554 
Michigan 10,077,331 2 45.2 $10,521,249 96,714 
Minnesota 5,706,494 7.6 40.5 $24,059,926 86,936 
Mississippi 2,961,279 -0.2 55.9 $6,806,852 48,432 
Missouri 6,154,913 2.8 40.8 $13,818,290 69,707 
Montana 1,084,225 9.6 30.1 $4,481,701 147,040 
Nebraska 1,961,504 7.4 40.8 $29,633,171 77,348 
Nevada 3,104,614 15 68.8 $952,454 110,572 
New Hamp￾shire 
1,377,529 4.6 23.6 $219,784 9,349 
New Jersey 9,288,994 5.7 65.8 $1,492,708 8,723 
New Mexico 2,117,522 2.8 63 $3,508,228 121,590 
New York 20,201,249 4.2 65.8 $6,549,978 54,555 
North Carolina 10,439,388 9.5 57.9 $14,948,590 53,819 
North Dakota 779,094 15.8 32.6 $12,142,319 70,698 
Ohio 11,799,448 2.3 40.0 $12,930,854 44,826 
Oklahoma 3,959,353 5.5 59.5 $8,901,266 69,899 
Oregon 4,237,256 10.6 46.1 $6,172,864 98,379 
Pennsylvania 13,002,700 2.4 44.0 $8,297,124 46,054 
Rhode Island 1,097,379 4.3 49.4 $76,733 1,545 
South Carolina 5,118,425 10.7 54.6 $3,153,893 32,020 
South Dakota 886,667 8.9 35.6 $14,093,947 77,116 
Tennessee 6,910,840 8.9 46.6 $4,765,716 42,144 
Texas 29,145,505 15.9 67.0 $29,278,492 268,596 
Utah 3,271,616 18.4 40.7 $2,233,343 84,897 
Vermont 643,077 2.8 20.2 $887,011 9,616 
Virginia 8,631,393 7.9 60.5 $4,412,950 42,775 
Washington 7,705,281 14.6 55.9 $11,320,197 71,298 
(Continued)  
84 SeC TION I 
Table 3.1 (Continued) 
States Total Population 
2020 
Population 
Change 
Percent 
Diversity 
Index* 
Percent 
Gross Farm 
Receipts 2021 
Total Area 
Sq Mi 
West Virginia 1,793,716 -3.2 20.2 $787,555 24,230 
Wisconsin 5,893,718 3.6 37 $14,506,357 65,496 
Wyoming 576,851 2.3 32.4 $1,944,636 97,813 
Note: * The Diversity Index refers to the percent chance that two people chosen at 
random will be of diferent racial or ethnic groups. 
Sources: U.S. Census Bureau 2010, 2020 for population and land area; USDA ERS for 
farm sector fnancial indicators, state rankings, 2021. 
Planning Process 
Planning is a messy, iterative process. Creating an efective planning pro￾cess starts with refecting on who needs to be involved and in what ways. 
It is important to include representatives who will be most afected by 
the plan and any resulting policies. If it addresses food production, this 
includes farmers, including but not limited to those involved with main￾stream agricultural organizations. If it addresses food security, this includes 
food access advocates and representative eaters, especially people living 
in areas with limited access to supermarkets and other sources of nutri￾tious food. It also includes staf from support institutions like Extension, 
economic development authorities, and lenders, as well as people who 
represent middle infrastructure interests, like food processors, purchasers, 
and distributors. 
Beyond including people and organizations from your own networks, 
consider who is connected to them through other networks. They can help 
you determine and reach out to important interests who may have been 
left out. It helps to create and maintain a stakeholders database to man￾age relationships and streamline engagement. Once you have identifed key 
stakeholders, include them in the planning process to ensure you address 
the whole community’s needs. 
Meaningful engagement takes creativity and commitment to refect on 
the who, what, when, where, and how of public participation so all stake￾holders can contribute. Organizers often complain they have low attendance 
at public meetings because they planned them at their convenience and not PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 85 
with their stakeholders in mind. To be efective, meet people where they 
are—practically as well as symbolically. For example, farmers work from 
sunup to sundown, not from 9 to 5. Their availability is seasonal, afected 
by weather and what kinds of crops and/or livestock they raise. To engage 
them, consider leveraging an existing event, or scheduling a twilight meet￾ing in a familiar place during winter months. 
You can use any of several reliable approaches to solicit input, share infor￾mation, and engage community members. Surveys are a good way to gather 
basic information that also can be used to assess conditions and trends. 
Individual interviews, listening sessions, and focus groups provide opportunities to 
relay as well as gather information. 
While valuable, these approaches do not strengthen community con￾nections and fall short of fully engaging people in the planning process. 
Deeper forms of participation bring people together through sustained 
dialogue. These include various types of public meetings and forums, char￾rettes, and approaches like World Café, which can be pursued together or 
independently. They can include visual techniques and storytelling and 
require going out into the community instead of inviting the community 
to come to you. 
Public meetings or forums foster collaboration and action.They also can edu￾cate. Organizing at least two but preferably three or more forums helps guide 
and inform the planning process.The frst could introduce the process and 
could be used to ground truth data, lift up community values and assets, 
and generate a shared vision and goals. The second could fnalize goals and 
objectives, revisit outstanding issues, fll in gaps, and bring more people to 
the table to generate ideas, actions, and recommendations. The third could 
get feedback on a draft plan, ensure community support, and a path toward 
implementation. 
Public forums are most efective when they are interactive, built around 
participation, and supported with background materials. Creating a web￾site helps foster a responsive, transparent and collaborative process.7
 Your 
planning team can decide what kind of meeting format best serves your 
interests: in person, virtual, or a hybrid combination. For example, meet￾ing in person is best for relationship building but is less accessible. On the 
other hand, online won’t work in places with weak internet access or with 
populations who do not use the internet. Table 3.2 outlines pros and cons 
of diferent approaches. 86 SeC TION I 
Table 3.2 In Person or Virtual: Pros and Cons 
Format Pros Cons 
In person Human connection Hard to schedule 
Relationship building Meeting costs 
Spontaneous interactions Requires transportation 
Body language Weather dependent 
Virtual Often accessible to more 
people 
Relies on internet access and 
bandwidth 
Broader reach Participants must have and know 
how to use technology 
Easier to record and share 
after the event 
Hard to hold attention and build 
relationships 
No need for transportation Hard to work through conficts 
Hybrid Most fexible Most complicated and expensive 
to deliver 
Most accessible Hard to manage in-person and 
virtual participants 
Broadest reach Requires more personnel to 
manage both audiences 
Reduced transportation 
requirements 
Organizers must have high level 
of technical savvy 
Charettes typically are used to engage stakeholders in the physical design of 
a planning or community project.They tend to be intense, multi-day events 
that are carefully designed to promote shared priorities and solutions to 
problems, which might result in conficts between residents, developers, 
and government ofcials. Instead of working toward solutions over weeks 
or months or years, they immerse people in a problem for an uninterrupted 
period of time. Like other engagement strategies, they include cross-sectoral 
participants and engage key stakeholders from beginning to end in a col￾laborative process.8 
World Café is a fexible approach to foster collaborative dialogue, active 
engagement, and generate ideas for action. It involves seating four or fve 
people together and at least three rounds of progressive, short (usually 
20-minute) conversations about issues of common interest or concern. 
Participants can write, draw, doodle, or otherwise express their ideas on  
PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 87 
various surfaces, such as placemats, tablecloths, large index cards, or 5 x 7 
Post-it notes. Because it ofers so many forms of self-expression, this can 
be a good approach for people with limited literacy or where English is not 
their frst language. To foster cross-pollination of ideas, after each round, 
participants travel to other tables while one person remains to host the next 
round. At the end, people share discoveries and insights with the whole 
group. 
Whatever approach you choose, tailor it to the community. Find out as 
much as you can about residents and respect their culture. Dress appro￾priately. For example, wear sturdy, weather-proof shoes to a farm. Business 
casual usually is suitable for a community meeting, but when meeting 
with local ofcials or legislators, consider formal business attire. Practice 
empathy and compassion to build trust through words, tone of voice, 
and body language. Listen to understand and use inviting—rather than 
directive—language. 
Pay attention to local dialect, ofer options and choices, and create oppor￾tunities for joint problem solving. If some have low literacy rates or language 
barriers, adjust your approach.Toward these ends, it helps to use plain lan￾guage to share meaning and build trust. 
People use the same words to mean diferent things. A submarine sand￾wich is a hoagie in Philadelphia, a hero in New York, a Po’ Boy in New 
Orleans, and a grinder in New England. 
In terms of agriculture, some people only consider large and/or com￾modity farms “real” farms, limiting engagement with the whole farm 
community. Or in a more granular example, a “cash deal” is a real estate 
transaction that does not involve fnancing. Not knowing the term, a frst￾time farm buyer with limited English language came to their real estate clos￾ing with a bag full of bills and coins instead of a cashier’s check or electronic 
funds transfer. It helps to defne terms and use familiar language, and espe￾cially when engaging with new Americans, to bring translators—not just to 
translate words but also cultural nuances and diferences. 
Beyond civic engagement, six key steps lead to plans, policies, and pro￾grams that support sustainable and resilient food systems: 
1. Assess conditions and trends affecting food and agriculture. 
2. Envision a future based on community values that result in shared 
goals. 88 SeC TION I 
3. Generate recommendations to move forward priorities and achieve 
goals. 
4. Develop and vet the plan. 
5. Implement actions: policies, programs, public investments, personnel, 
and so on. 
6. Evaluate progress, adjust tactics. 
These steps have a basic trajectory but do not need to follow a prescribed 
order. This is why the graphic is a spiral rather than a line or a circle. For 
example, collecting data can inform goals, but once goals are established, 
you may need more data to inform priorities and recommendations (see 
Figure 3.1). 
Food Systems Planning Process 
ENVISION 
the future 
GENERATE 
goals, ideas, and 
recommendations 
DEVELOP, 
vet and revise 
the plan 
IMPLEMENT 
actions to 
achieve 
the˜plan 
ADJUST 
tactics as 
needed ENGAGE 
ASSESS conditions 
and trends 
Figure 3.1 Civic engagement is at the heart of an inclusive food systems planning 
process that assesses trends and conditions, envisions the future, and gen￾erates goals and recommendations. PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 89 
Assess Trends and Conditions 
Data illuminates trends and conditions. It helps identify assets, opportuni￾ties, and challenges to specifc sectors as well as entire food systems. You 
can collect primary data from surveys and interviews and use federal, state, 
academic, and local sources for secondary data to assess food insecurity, pro￾duction capacity, environmental factors, and so on. Gathering data can be 
expensive, so it is important to prioritize needs based on budget as well as 
community priorities. If you have relationships with a college or university, 
you can tap talented students to help gather and analyze data through an 
internship, independent study, studio, or planning practicum. 
A SWOT analysis assesses strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. 
Examining both internal and external factors, it is a widely used approach to 
understanding business or community conditions. It can help you identify 
issues and inform community discussion.To take an asset-based approach, it 
helps to emphasize resources while recognizing limitations and vulnerabili￾ties. Multiple datasets, metrics, and analytical tools—including qualitative 
analysis can help inform your assessment. 
Common ways to gather primary data include surveys, stakeholder inter￾views, focus groups, and listening sessions. Survey information can be col￾lected in a variety of ways depending on your resources and the nature of 
the community: via internet, telephone, and/or snail mail. Dot Poster Surveys 
are a quick, accessible, and inexpensive way to collect information in public 
settings. Respondents use sticky dots to answer questions on a large poster 
board instead of flling out questionnaires or being interviewed.9 
Lots of secondary data is available, so take the time up front to choose 
sources that are reliable, relevant, widely available, and can be used to iden￾tify trends over time. Local sources include community plans, tax maps and 
records, aerial photography, and GIS data available through government 
entities, universities, and/or planning authorities. State sources come from 
departments of agriculture, economic development, health and human ser￾vices, and so on. Land-grant universities generally have relevant reports and 
information. In some states, they support MarketMaker, a searchable data￾base that serves as a virtual infrastructure to connect food and agriculture 
businesses through the supply chain. 
Federal data is widely available and reliable. Some sources are collected or 
updated annually, others only every fve or ten years. However, even the most 90 SeC TION I 
common and trusted sources have limitations so should be ground-truthed 
locally. Further, each source has its own defnitions and collection methods, 
so if you combine data from diferent sources, it is important to be clear 
about the diferences. See Table 3.3 for common go-to sources of federal 
data for food systems assessments. 
Table 3.3 National Sources of Data to Inform Food Systems Assessments 
Source Type of Data Website 
American Provides annual U.S. Census Bureau data about www.census. Community people, jobs, education, homeownership, gov/programs- (ACS) Survey and more. Includes demographic, social, eco￾nomic, and housing profles, plus population 
profles for many race, ethnic, and ancestry 
groups. It also includes a series of tables 
across 86 key variables, including tables com￾paring counties or congressional districts. 
surveys/acs 
Bureau of Publishes comprehensive U.S. Department www.bea.gov/ 
Economic of Commerce data from 1969 forward at 
Analysis 
(BEA) multiple jurisdictional levels, including eco￾nomic regions, metro and non-metro areas, 
cities, states, counties, and national. Datasets 
include personal income, population trends, 
and food systems concerns, such as farm 
income and expenditures, and SNAP receipts. 
Bureau of Labor Provides annual consumer spending and www.bls.gov/cex 
Statistics consumption data on many things, 
including food by demographic categories 
as well as geographic region from 1989 to 
the present. 
USDA-NASS The most extensive source of data on U.S. www.nass.usda. 
Census of agriculture over time, it includes information gov/Publica- Agriculture by county, state, and U.S. territories and has 
query tools and reports to dig into that data by 
Congressional districts and zip codes. Data is 
available on number of farms by size and type, 
inventory and values for crops and livestock, 
producer characteristics, land in farms, con￾servation practices, commodity and marketing 
data, local food marketing, and more. 
tions/AgCen￾sus/2017/ 
(Continued)  
PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 91 
Table 3.3 (Continued) 
Source Type of Data Website 
North Provided by the Census Bureau, NAICS is www.census.gov/ 
American the standard used by federal and other naics/
Industry 
Classifcation statistical agencies to classify businesses 
System for the purpose of collecting, analyzing, 
(NAICS) and publishing statistical data related to 
the U.S. business economy. 
USDA Economic ERS publishes many reports and datasets www.ers.usda.gov 
Research relevant to food and agricultural sectors, Service including on farm production and the 
farm economy, food and nutrition, food 
choices, and the rural economy. 
Soil Survey The SSURGO database contains a century https://data.nal. 
Geographic of soils information that can be dis- usda.gov/data- Database 
(SSURGO) played in tables or as maps and is avail￾able for most areas in the U.S. and its 
territories. Datasets consist of map data, 
tabular data, and information about how 
the maps and tables were created. Maps 
can be viewed in the Web Soil Survey 
(WSS) or downloaded in ESRI® Shape￾fle format. 
set/soil-survey￾geographic￾database-ssurgo 
Various assessment tools support food systems planning. Asset mapping is 
a good tool to identify resources. It can map physical infrastructure like the 
locations of farms, food retail, processing infrastructure, and waste disposal. 
Or it can map relationships across the food and agriculture community. 
Community food assessments are a systematic approach to analyzing food system 
needs and assets. Cost of Community Services studies and fscal impact analyses evalu￾ate a jurisdiction’s revenue generation in relation to its costs of providing 
public services and facilities. Foodshed analyses focus on food consumption by 
exploring past, present, and/or future sources of food for a specifc place. 
Carrying capacity and foodprint studies investigate the ability of a specifc place 
to feed people, often based on diferent diet scenarios. Finally, Economic Impact 
Assessments evaluate multipliers or spin-ofs to explore total economic impacts— 
or economic ripple efects of a specifc entity or industry—like agriculture 
(see box). 92 SeC TION I 
HOW TO DETERMINE AN ECONOMIC MULTIPLIER 
Multipliers refer to economic factors that, when applied, amplify eco￾nomic impacts. They often are used to provide estimates of employment 
and output efects of farm and food production to capture indirect and 
induced impacts as well as direct impacts of economic activities in the 
sector. 
• IMPLAN is a widely used input-output modeling software that can be 
customized to assess food systems initiatives or the total economic 
contribution of agriculture and/or a food system to a local economy. 
• USDA’s Local Food Economic Development Toolkit provides extensive 
information on secondary data sources as well as multipliers and 
includes a chapter on the use of IMPLAN. 
• eRS has a website with instructions on how to develop Agricultural 
Trade Multipliers that provide annual estimates of employment 
and output efects of trade in farm and food products on the U.S. 
economy. 
• Some land-grant universities provide information on how to develop 
multipliers. Two examples are: 
• New Mexico State University has a webpage on Income Multipliers 
in economic Impact Analysis. 
• The University of Tennessee extension Institute of Agriculture 
published “A Primer in economic Multipliers and Impact Analysis 
Using Input-Output Models.” 
Envision a Desired Future and Set Goals to Achieve It 
Another early and essential step is to bring community members together to 
create an aspirational vision of the future.Visioning often is combined with 
identifying shared values and goal setting. Other times, goal setting occurs 
later in the process.Whatever the order, these activities are best facilitated in 
person to build trust between stakeholders. Even people from very diferent 
cultural and political persuasions share values and goals. Expressing them 
together establishes common ground. 
Schedule meetings for a time and place convenient to residents. Reach 
out to representatives from diferent sectors and populations and ask them PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 93 
to identify people to ensure key stakeholders are included. If possible, serve 
appropriate refreshments and—especially for an evening or weekend meet￾ing—ofer childcare. 
Visioning is a creative, judgment-free process. It often starts by brainstorm￾ing a list of ideas. After that, the group can prioritize, evaluate, and narrow 
down ideas to reach agreement. Small groups can work together to brain￾storm a vision together, or individuals can write down their visions and 
then share with the group. Sharing can occur in many ways, such as posting 
sticky notes on a wall, reading out loud, working in small groups, or compil￾ing into a written document that is brought back to the group.This process 
also works to establish shared values. 
Appreciative inquiry is an asset-based approach. It uses questions and dialogue 
to help participants generate positive ideas.10 It also can be used to uncover 
community assets, strengths, and opportunities. Scenario planning is another 
approach to visioning. Here participants develop alternative visions based 
Figure 3.2 Example of goals from a food systems engagement process.  
94 SeC TION I 
upon diferent conditions.This allows them to imagine what the future will 
look like under “business as usual” and more creative scenarios. Whatever 
approach you choose, it helps to start with a worksheet with a list of key 
questions to focus attention. 
Where visioning is broad and aspirational, goal setting is grounded in 
specifcs. Writing down goals during an interactive process helps facili￾tate community agreement to ensure they are shared. To avoid having too 
many goals, it helps to identify overarching goals with concrete objec￾tives. Communities often strive to set “SMART” goals, which are Specifc, 
Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 
The core planning team can pull information together in a draft of a shared 
statement, which must be vetted before it is fnalized. Ensure everyone’s voice 
is heard and build on this to identify common themes and to set and prior￾itize goals and objectives that can be achieved in a realistic time frame. 
Generate Recommendations to Advance Priorities and Achieve Goals 
Once the community has agreed on a vision and drafted goals, it is ready 
to propose strategies and actions to achieve them. These should address 
assets and opportunities and be based on trends and conditions. This is a 
good time to engage the residents to ensure the actions proposed meet their 
needs and to build a base of support for implementation. 
The best plans tie recommendations to goals and objectives, so each 
solution proposed is a step toward achieving a stated priority. Important 
considerations include urgency, cost, and resource availability. Strong rec￾ommendations include low-hanging fruit—easy wins and short-term strat￾egies, as well as more complex mid- and long-term strategies, like policy 
changes. 
It helps to have a timeline, assigned roles and responsibilities, and 
accountability measures. As part of this, it is wise to identify funding to 
move recommendations forward. Funding may come from private sources 
like foundation grants, as well as federal, state, and local sources. 
Toward these ends, it helps to spend time addressing the fve Ws: 
• Who will do What (how and for whom); 
• Why is it important; and 
• When and Where will they do it? PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 95 
Also, consider dependencies—how one action depends on another. For 
example, implementing a farm-to-school program depends on certifying 
farmers in Good Agricultural Practices (GAP). Farmers must be trained and 
GAP certifed before the school year for the school to buy their products. 
Finally, develop targets, benchmarks, and indicators to measure progress. 
Targets are aspirational and should be aligned with the vision. Benchmarks 
refect existing conditions and are used to measure progress toward specifc 
changes, objectives, or goals. Indicators are measures used to evaluate progress. 
Develop and Vet the Plan 
Once these steps are complete, it is time to pull everything together and 
draft a plan that refects the outcomes of the processes you choose.This usu￾ally is led by the project manager with input and support from the core team 
and advisors. Basic elements include background information based on the 
assessment of current trends and conditions, likely including maps, bench￾marks, and a SWOT analysis. They include the vision, goals, and objectives 
the community set as well as the recommended strategies and actions to 
achieve them. Since plans should be transparent, describe the people, part￾ners, and processes involved in creating the plan and including appendices 
that refect public input. And they should explain the process for evaluating 
the plan, reporting on its implementation, and adjusting over time. 
Once drafted, it is important to bring the draft plan back to the commu￾nity for public comment and input. Make sure to incorporate constructive 
feedback and keep people informed of the timeline for completion, how it 
will be made available to them, and their roles. 
Implement Strategies and Actions 
A plan is only as good as its implementation. So once drafted, work through 
who will take what actions, when, and how. Actions may include new per￾sonnel, partnerships, programs, and both public and private investment. 
They also include creating new—or eliminating outdated—policies. 
It helps to look at what other communities have done to address goals 
and challenges that are similar to yours. However, there is no silver bullet; 
one size does not ft all.The second half of the book introduces a toolbox of 
program and policy options you can adapt to meet your community’s needs. 96 SeC TION I 
Implementation happens over time. Metrics inform how to modify strat￾egies to get where you want to go. Measuring results show if there is a need 
to adjust tactics and targets to achieve goals. Metrics can be based on the 
plan’s initial benchmarks, and indicators and can be changed if new infor￾mation is useful or becomes available. 
METRICS TO MEASURE PROGRESS 
Led by staf from the state economic development authority, Vermont 
Farm to Plate is a holistic food systems plan with 15 strategic goals 
organized into four categories: 
• Sustainable economic Development; 
• environmental Sustainability; 
• Healthy Local Food for All Vermonters; and 
• Racial equity. 
each goal has clear indicators of progress, which are tracked and evalu￾ated over time. Some contain known targets, others need to establish 
baselines. Some include complex analyses. For example, goal 1 is to 
increase food system economic output by $3 billion by 2030, measured 
using economic Census and NASS production data in fve-year intervals. 
The Farm to Plate website has a Data and Outcomes page where users 
can follow progress. 
Various other metrics are used to inform planning and community 
action. These three examples come from organizations that ofer work￾shops and training to use their tools: 
• The Center for whole Communities created a whole Measures to 
assess relationships between land, people, and communities. A fex￾ible approach, it is accessible and adaptable for diferent uses and 
users. 
• The Fiscal Policy Studies Institute developed a Results-Based Account￾ability™ framework to help communities measurably improve the 
well-being of their citizens. 
• Yellow wood Associates has developed a “You get what You 
Measure®” approach to strategic planning. Described as a values￾based approach, it incorporates metrics to use as a framework for 
evaluation.  
PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 97 
PATHWAYS TO PLANNING FOR FARMS AND FOOD IN 
WAYNE COUNTY, OHIO 
Figure 3.3 Wayne County is a rural county with a strong agricultural base 
located roughly halfway between Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio. 
Source: Wayne County Planning Department. 
with a dynamic and diversifed farm economy, wayne County leads Ohio 
in dairy production and local food sales and supports two of the state’s 
12 produce auctions.11 Its Ag Success Team (AST) is an innovative col￾laboration of farm interests created in 2004 by a now retired county 
commissioner as a loose network of local government, extension, Farm 
Bureau, Farm Credit, Soil and water district, and other county institu￾tions. The AST meets monthly to network and identify issues afecting 
county agriculture. Farming is further supported by a vibrant processing 
sector with several local cheese makers, dairy cooperatives, and meat 
processors, plus national frms like Daisy Brands and Smucker’s. Still, 
the county’s food system is threatened by external factors, including 
development pressure, escalating land values, farm consolidation, and a 
disconnect between local production and consumption. 
In 2019 the county adopted an update to its comprehensive plan, 
Wayne County Onward. Its vision and goals include abundant farmland; 98 SeC TION I 
preserving heritage, culture, and natural resources; and supporting a 
diversifed local economy. Typical of many rural plans, it seeks to pre￾serve farmland without connecting farms to economic development or 
food. And it largely ignores the county’s Amish and other Plain commu￾nities, which play a signifcant role in the county’s agriculture. 
As part of a USDA-funded project, wayne County–based Ohio State 
University (OSU) faculty and extension educators led a community 
engagement process to strengthen these connections. The process cen￾tered on building rural wealth through food and agriculture and prepar￾ing the county for future challenges. extension leaders convened a core 
planning group that included American Farmland Trust, Amish farmers, 
county Farm Bureau representatives, local food organizations, OSU 
County extension, and the OSU-Ohio Agricultural Research and Devel￾opment Center (OARDC). 
The planners launched the process with a community forum: “eco￾nomic Opportunities Through Food and Agriculture.” They used Ketso— 
a reusable, hands-on community-engagement toolkit
12—to develop an 
invitation list. The list included diverse types of farmers, both Amish and 
“englisch” (as the Amish refer to residents who are not from a Plain sect), 
and individuals from the business, fnance, government, health, nonproft, 
and educational sectors. Then the team worked together to create the pro￾gram, conduct outreach, and plan a menu comprising mostly local food. 
The event was free, but registration was required. Most participants 
signed up online. To accommodate the large Plain community, team 
members helped register people who did not use the internet. They also 
used the registration list to assign people to tables to ensure interac￾tions across sectors and between people who did not usually talk to each 
other. To emphasize the value of the regional food economy, 90 percent 
of the food that was served at the March event was sourced from wayne 
and its neighbors, Holmes and Ashland counties. 
The forum was the county’s frst cross-over event that included diverse 
food and agriculture perspectives. It convened 75 key stakeholders from 
food, agriculture, economic development, and local government to 
identify opportunities to strengthen the county’s food and agriculture 
economy. The program opened with a review of local trends, conditions, 
and assets. This was followed by presentations from the U.S. Federal 
Reserve and USDA Rural Development to highlight economic develop￾ment opportunities through food and agriculture. PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 99 
Most of the day focused on interactive small group activities. The frst 
was a mapping activity where participants worked at pre-assigned tables 
to identify the county’s food system assets. each table had six to eight 
people from various sectors and points of view. They were given a county 
map and a set of stickers, which represented assets from farms to pro￾cessing facilities to supermarkets to funders to people. Participants were 
asked to introduce themselves and their interest in the county’s food 
system, discuss local farm and food assets, and then put stickers on the 
map to refect the assets’ physical locations. Once fnished, someone 
from each table pinned their map on a cork board for others to see. 
The second activity was a small group brainstorming activity to identify 
and prioritize what was needed to grow economic opportunities through 
food and agriculture. The planners provided ground rules to facilitate the 
conversations and examples of possible next steps. each table was asked 
to discuss three things and record them on a fip chart: 
1. what surprised them and/or what they observed from the mapping 
exercise. 
2. Ideas for growing the county’s food and farming economy. 
3. which two ideas to pursue as concrete next steps and how to make 
them “SMART.” 
groups had half an hour for discussion. Then each table reported out to 
the whole group. 
Based on very positive feedback from the forum, the planning group 
expanded to include county economic development staf. Together, 
they organized a follow-up two-day engagement event six months later 
to showcase the economic contributions of the county’s diverse value￾added food and agriculture enterprises. Participants included members 
of the fnance and banking community, county planning, economic devel￾opment and emergency management staf, the county career center, 
migrant justice staf, nonprofts, farmers, and a state representative. 
The second event started with a narrated bus tour that included stops 
at a local meat processor, a produce auction, a fruit farm, a diversifed 
farm with a farm store, and a local food coop. Participating businesses 
received a $200 stipend and an OSU Certifcate of Appreciation and 
Participation, which they subsequently hung proudly in their stores. To 
build bridges across the Amish and englisch communities, participants 
enjoyed an Amish wedding dinner at a local Amish U-Pick fruit farm. 100 SeC TION I 
Participants learned about the county’s value-added aggregators and 
processors and the important role they play in the local economy. each 
received a gift bag that included a $10 gift certifcate to the local food 
co-op, coupons for participating businesses, and samples of local food 
products. 
The second day included a luncheon presentation and a lively after￾noon workshop for community leaders to build on and expand oppor￾tunities identifed at the prior events. It was held in a historic barn in a 
town neighboring the city of wooster. Again, the menu was largely locally 
sourced. During the event, the P2P team refected on both events and 
encouraged participants to do so as well. Amish and englisch members 
identifed common issues and debunked misconceptions. 
The next day, the planners joined an AST meeting and brought along 
Plain community and direct marketing farmers who generally did not 
attend. Leaders who had participated in the prior days’ events shared 
observations with those who had not, identifed common challenges and 
opportunities, and built greater cross-cultural understanding and energy 
for action. 
Over the next few months, The AST shifted from a loose network to a 
working-group model to promote new markets, land use policy, farmer 
support, and food initiatives. It recruited new members to better rep￾resent the totality of the agricultural community and embarked on a 
process to rewrite its mission and work more closely with county com￾missioners to achieve shared goals. County commissioners created a 
new position in the planning department to carry the work forward and 
hired a core member of the planning team to create a new plan to sup￾port rural wealth creation through diversifed food and agriculture. 
Discussion Questions 
1. Who needs to be included in your planning process? 
2. How will you reach and engage them? 
3. What data will you use to assess trends and conditions? 
4. Who could you ask for help?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRACTICeS TO gUIDe PLANNINg FOR FOOD AND AgRICULTURe 101 
Notes 
1. “Principles of a Healthy, Sustainable Food System,” American Planning Association, 
accessed March 6, 2023. 
2. Global Alliance for the Future of Food,“Principles for Food Systems Transformation: 
A Framework for Action,” Global Alliance for the Future of Food, June 2021. 
3. Lionel J. Beaulieu,“Mapping the Assets of Your Community: A Key Component for 
Building Local Capacity,” Southern Rural Development Center. 
4. Cornelia Butler Flora, Jan L. Flora, and Susan Fey, Rural Communities: Legacy and Change, 
2nd ed. (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2004). The book is the companion text to 
a PBS college-level telecourse and television series entitled “Rural Communities: 
Legacy and Change” which portray the experiences of ffteen rural communities 
across the U.S. 
5. Jill K. Clark et al.,“Fail to Include, Plan to Exclude: Refections on Local Governments’ 
Readiness for Building Equitable Community Food Systems,” Built Environment 43, no. 
3 (September 1, 2017): 315–27. 
6. U.S. Census Bureau, “State Population Totals and Components of Change: 2020– 
2022,” Census.gov, accessed January 29, 2023. 
7. To learn more about conducting public forums with farmers: Maria Pippidis et al., 
Engaging Communities Through Issues Forums: A How-To Guide for Onsite and Online Community 
Engagement (Kansas City, MO: Extension Foundation, 2022). 
8. To learn more about conducting a charette: Bill Lennertz and Aarin Lutzenhiser, The 
Charrette Handbook, 2nd ed. (New York: Routledge, 2017). 
9. Larry Lev and Garry Stephenson, “Dot Posters: A Practical Alternative to Written 
Questionnaires and Oral Interviews,” Journal of Extension,Tools of the Trade 37, no. 5 
(October 1999). 
10. Muriel A. Finegold, Bea Mah Holland, and Tony Lingham,“Appreciative Inquiry and 
Public Dialogue:An Approach to Community Change,” Public Organization Review 2, no. 
3 (September 1, 2002): 235–52. 
11. USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service,“2017 Census of Agriculture, County 
Profle:Wayne County, Ohio,” 2017. 
12. For information on Ketso,“Workshops & Engagement | Ketso | Ketso Workshops,” 
Ketso, accessed July 2, 2023. Section II DOI: 10.4324/9781003293712-7 
 
4 
FEDERAL POLICIES THAT 
AFFECT FOOD SYSTEMS 
Chapter Summary 
A wide range of federal agencies and policies afect food systems, from the 
Clean Water Act to the Farm Bill to the Federal-Aid Highway Act.This chap￾ter provides an overview of major agencies and policies that infuence food 
systems and—because of their signifcant roles—goes into greater depth 
about USDA and the Farm Bill. It also sets up subsequent chapters that ofer 
promising cases and examples of what state and local governments can do to 
address food systems challenges and implement food systems plans. 
*** 
Plans must be implemented, at least in part, with programs, policies, and 
public investments.The federal government largely plays an indirect role in 
land use planning, as it owns and manages about 30 percent of the nation’s 
total surface area—and nearly half of western states. 
It plays a more direct role in food, agriculture, and environmental pol￾icy. Driven by competing interests, its agency-by-agency approach has led 
to uncoordinated, and in some cases contradictory, actions—even within 106 SeC TION II 
agencies. It is beyond the scope of this book to unravel this. But some groups 
and agencies have made the case for a national food strategy. 
The U.S. General Accountability Ofce has called for a government-wide 
approach to address fragmentation in the federal food safety oversight sys￾tem.1 The Harvard Food Law and Policy Clinic partnered with Vermont Law 
School’s Center for Agriculture and Food Systems to create a food strategy 
blueprint to inspire more coordinated federal food and agricultural law and 
policymaking.2
 Given the lack of coordinated federal policy, it is important to 
understand the underlying impact of federal policies on food systems eforts. 
The Federal Role in Land Use Policy 
The federal government owns and manages about 650 million acres of land 
in the U.S. Nearly a third of this is controlled by two agencies, the Bureau of 
Land Management (BLM) and USDA’s Forest Service.They both manage land 
for multiple, sustainable uses, which include grazing.3
 But all federal land 
management agencies must balance competing interests from state, local, and 
tribal governments both to increase the use and protection of these resources. 
Outside of the lands it owns, the federal government lacks power to afect 
land use planning, but policies often intended for other purposes infuence 
who uses land and how and where those uses occur. For example, the inter￾state highway system and federal tax regulations, like the mortgage interest 
deduction, spur sprawl.4
 Further, the U.S. has signed treaties that infuence 
land use on tribal lands, and it provides fnancial incentives to state and local 
governments for development projects. 
One of its largest infuences is the National Interstate and Defense 
Highways Act of 1956 (Federal-Aid Highway Act), which created the inter￾state highway system. With the subsequent Highway Act of 1958, it drove 
suburban development. Fueling farmland conversion, it fundamentally 
changed land use patterns across the U.S. As superhighways cut through 
urban neighborhoods, they demolished afordable housing and spurred the 
growth of suburbs. By the turn of this century, sprawl had become a domi￾nant feature of the American landscape.5 
The impacts of highway development on farmland continue to be felt 
today. Between 2017 and 2021, the Department of Transportation (DoT) 
alone generated a third of federal project proposals to convert agricultural 
land6
 (see Figure 4.1). Federal Policies ThaT aFFecT Food sysTems 107
USDA and the Farm Bill
The Farm Bill is complex legislative package that is periodically renewed 
(generally every five years). It authorizes policies and programs and funds 
many of them through direct or mandatory funding, which is authorized 
through the bill, or through discretionary funding, which must be approved 
through annual Congressional appropriations. Programs like crop insurance 
have permanent authority. Others require reauthorization, most notably 
nutrition assistance and commodity support programs.
Historically, the Farm Bill focused on commodity program support for 
a handful of staple crops: corn, soybeans, wheat, rice, peanuts, dairy, sugar, 
Federal Impact on Agricultural Land Conversion
436,076
acres
proposed for
conversion
Dept. of 
Transportation 
(DOT) 
137,244
31%
Dept. of Agriculture 
(USDA) 107,487 
25%
Dept. of 
Defense
(DOD) 
95,880
22%
All Other 
Agencies
95,465
22%
Source: Source: American Farmland Trust’s Farmland Information 
Center using data from USDA NRCS.
DOI 8%
 EPA 3%
 HUD 3%
 DOC 2%
 All Others 6%
 Partnerships
Including 
State Entities and
Public-Private 
Partnerships
Figure 4.1 Congr ess enacted the Farmland Protection Policy Act (FPPA) in 1981 to 
minimize the extent to which federal programs contribute to the unneces￾sary conversion of farmland to non-agricultural uses. NRCS tracks farm￾land conversion proposed by federal agencies. After DoT, it found USDA is 
the second greatest driver of conversion, followed by the Department of 
Defense.
Source: American Farmland Trust Farmland Information Center. 
 
108 SeC TION II 
and cotton. Over time it expanded to support nutrition, conservation, crop 
insurance, rural development, and specialty crops, among other things.7 
Specialty crops include fruits and vegetables, tree nuts, horticulture, fori￾culture, and nursery crops. 
The Agricultural Improvement Act of 2018 is a sweeping bill with 12 Titles 
(see box). Due for reauthorization in 2023, the bill was extended through 
September 30, 2024.The nutrition Title receives the most support, followed 
by crop insurance, commodity programs, and conservation. Less than 1 per￾cent of direct funding goes to the other eight titles.Thus a bit of a misnomer, 
the Farm Bill is really more of a food bill. It is also a signifcant piece of 
environmental legislation. 
THE AGRICULTURAL IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2018 
Projected Outlays under the 2018 Farm Act, 2019–23 
Nutrition 
76.1%
Crop insurance 
8.9%
Commodities 
7.3%
Conservation 
6.8%
Other 
0.8%
Source: USDA, Economic Research Service based on Congressional Budget Office, Direct Spending Effects for 
the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018, December 11, 2018. 
Figure 4.2 Most Farm Bill spending is for nutrition assistance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FeDeRAL POLICIeS THAT AFFeCT FOOD SYSTeMS 109 
1. Title I, Commodities: Supports major commodity crops and disaster 
assistance. Major commodities include corn, soybeans, wheat, rice, 
peanuts, dairy, and sugar. 
2. Title II, Conservation: Supports environmental stewardship, improved 
agricultural land management, and conservation easement programs. 
These include both working lands and land retirement programs. 
3. Title III, Trade: Supports agricultural exports and international food 
assistance. 
4. Title IV, Nutrition: Provides nutrition assistance to children and low￾income households and includes 15 programs. SNAP is by far the largest. 
5. Title V, Credit: Provides government loans and guarantees to produc￾ers to buy land and operate farms and ranches. 
6. Title VI, Rural Development: Supports rural housing, community 
facilities, business, and utility programs through grants, loans, and 
loan guarantees. 
7. Title VII, Research and Extension: Supports agricultural research and 
extension programs to expand academic knowledge and to support 
food safety and nutrition, farmers and ranchers, farming practices, 
and production systems. 
8. Title VIII, Forestry: Supports USDA Forest Service’s management 
programs. 
9. Title IX, Energy: Promotes farm and community renewable energy sys￾tems through various programs, including grants and loan guarantees. 
10. Title X, Horticulture: Supports specialty crop production, USDA-cer￾tifed organic and locally produced foods, and authorizes a regulatory 
framework for industrial hemp. 
11. Title XI, Crop Insurance: Supports risk management through a Fed￾eral Crop Insurance Program. 
12. Title XII, Miscellaneous: Includes programs and assistance for live￾stock and poultry production, support for beginning farmers and 
ranchers, and other miscellaneous and general provisions. 
Food and Nutrition 
President Johnson signed the Food Stamp Act of 1964 as a cornerstone of 
his War on Poverty. Over the next decade, states and counties added it to 
their portfolio of services for low-income residents. By 1974 it was avail￾able nationwide. Currently called the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 110 SeC TION II 
Figure 4.3 SNAP logo. 
Program (SNAP), it is the centerpiece of the nutrition Title. Refecting pan￾demic demand and administrative adjustments, the Congressional Research 
Service projected that for 2022, nutrition comprised 84 percent of the Farm 
Bill baseline.8 
SNAP is administered by states, which set eligibility criteria. Recipients 
apply where they live and must meet income and resource requirements, 
which are updated annually. Benefts are delivered monthly on an Electronic 
Beneft Transfer (EBT) card, which works like a debit card and can be used to 
buy groceries at authorized food stores and retailers. Other signifcant Farm 
Bill food programs include: 
• The Emergency Food Assistance Program, which provides food commodities 
through states to food banks and pantries; 
• The Commodity Supplemental Food Program, which provides supplemental 
food packages primarily to low-income elders; and 
• The Senior Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program, which provides vouchers to 
low-income seniors to buy fresh produce at farmers’ markets and other 
direct-to-consumer venues. 
In lieu of SNAP, the Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations provides food to 
low-income households on reservations and to Indigenous families living in 
or near designated areas in Oklahoma. 
Two grant programs support food access and security. Community Food 
Projects (CFPs) fund competitive grants to food service providers from public FeDeRAL POLICIeS THAT AFFeCT FOOD SYSTeMS 111 
agencies, tribal organizations, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) 
to address food and nutrition insecurity, especially among vulnerable popula￾tions. First authorized in the 1996 Farm Bill to meet the needs of low-income 
individuals, CFPs support community outreach, food distribution, and local 
responses to meet state, tribal, and local food access and agricultural needs. 
The Gus Schumacher Nutrition Incentive Program (GusNIP) is a competitive grant pro￾gram authorized through 2023. It funds projects to help low-income consum￾ers buy fresh produce by providing incentives at SNAP points of purchase or 
providing produce prescriptions to SNAP/Medicaid participants. It includes 
three programs. The Nutrition Incentive Program (NIP) provides point-of-purchase 
incentives for fruits and vegetables to SNAP benefciaries and other income￾eligible consumers. The Produce Prescription Program (Veggie Rx) demonstrates and 
evaluates the impact of fresh fruit and vegetable prescriptions on human 
health.The third program ofers grants for training, technical assistance, eval￾uation, and information center cooperative agreements. Together, GusNIP 
brings stakeholders together from across the food and health care sectors to 
Figure 4.4 The Child Nutrition Act authorizes all federal school meal and child nutri￾tion programs, including the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for 
Women, Infants, and Children (WIC). 
Source: USDA. Photo by Preston Keres. 112 SeC TION II 
foster understanding and work together to improve public health, facilitate 
growth in underrepresented communities and geographies, and aggregate data 
to identify and improve best practices on a broad scale. 
The Child Nutrition Act was signed into law in 1966. It authorizes all federal 
school meal and child nutrition programs, including the Special Supplemental 
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC). Primary programs include 
School Breakfast and Lunch. All children may participate in a school that oper￾ates the programs, but most schools target children certifed to receive 
free or reduced-price meals. Other programs include summer feeding and 
after-school meals.The 2008 Farm Bill directed the Secretary of Agriculture 
to encourage institutions operating child nutrition programs to purchase 
unprocessed, locally grown and raised farm products.This opened the door 
to a furry of state and local activity. USDA’s 2019 Farm to School Census 
found that about two-thirds of all school food authorities participated in 
one or more farm-to-institution activities and that local foods accounted for 
about 20 percent of overall food purchases, excluding entitlement spending.9 
WIC provides nutritious foods, nutrition education, and access to health 
care to pregnant women, new mothers, infants, and children up to age fve 
living in low-income households. Supplementing WIC, the Farmers Market 
Nutrition Program issues coupons to WIC recipients to buy fresh, locally grown 
fruits and vegetables at participating farmers’ markets. FNS awards grant 
funding to state agencies and tribal organizations to administer the program. 
Eligible WIC participants receive FMNP coupons on top of regular benefts 
to buy fresh produce from farmers, farmers’ markets, and roadside stands. 
WIC’s Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program promotes nutrition education and ofers 
free produce to children at eligible elementary schools during the school day. 
Food Safety 
Food safety is governed by a complex system of at least 30 laws administered 
by 15 federal agencies. USDA Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS), the 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) have primary oversight. While they work together, 
FSIS and FDA have overlapped authority. For example, the FDA regulates 
the safety of eggs in the shell, while USDA regulates safety for eggs removed from 
the shell and runs an egg marketing program for eggs in the shell.10 FSIS has 
jurisdiction over meat and poultry, and FDA for everything else.  
FeDeRAL POLICIeS THAT AFFeCT FOOD SYSTeMS 113 
The 2011 Food Safety Modernization Act (FSMA) gave FDA responsibility for 
enforcing most of the nation’s food supply. It was an efort to address the 
fragmentation of federal food safety oversight, which shifted FDA’s focus from 
responding to foodborne illness to preventing it. FSMA rules afect human 
food and animal feed, produce safety, third-party certifcation, foreign com￾pliance, and requirements for food facilities and transportation. FDA’s Food 
Traceability Final Rule establishes additional traceability recordkeeping require￾ments for anyone who manufactures, processes, packs, or holds foods included 
on the Food Traceability List (FTL) to allow for faster identifcation and rapid 
removal of potentially contaminated food from the market, resulting in fewer 
foodborne illnesses and/or deaths. As important as FSMA is to preventing 
foodborne illness, its rules do not consider the ecological impacts of the farm 
management adjustments it requires. For example, they discourage natural veg￾etation and compost, which attract pollinators, reduce soil erosion and runof, 
improve downstream water quality, and sequester carbon. If FDA-approved fer￾tilizers enter local water ways, they are predicted to have signifcant environ￾mental and public health consequences that may not be apparent for years.11 
Agriculture and the Environment 
Figure 4.5 A great “roller” moves across the land during the Dust Bowl of the 1930s. 
Source: USDA.  
114 SeC TION II 
Congress passed the Soil Conservation Act of 1935 in response to the 
Dust Bowl—the legendary period when severe dust storms ravaged the Great 
Plains. Starting in 1932, a severe drought, coupled with soil erosion, caused 
widespread crop failures. In March 1935, a series of intense and frequent 
storms swept the Plains and blew dark clouds of fne particle dust all the way 
to Washington, D.C. President Roosevelt signed the Act in April, creating the 
Soil Conservation Service (SCS). 
The Act led to the creation of local conservation districts. Today nearly 
3,000 districts coordinate assistance from local, state, federal, and pri￾vate sources to develop locally driven solutions to a wide range of natural 
resource concerns. Established under state law, they are called various things 
from conservation to soil and water to resource conservation districts or 
committees. 
Over time, SCS’s role expanded to include surveys and food control plans, 
land use, farm forestry, and water concerns to become USDA’s leading private 
lands conservation agency. In 1994, it was renamed the Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (NRCS). Today, NRCS and the Farm Services Agency 
(FSA) administer a complex portfolio of Farm Bill programs incorporated 
into the conservation title.The conservation title was added to the Farm Bill in 
1985, advocated by a newly formed coalition of agriculture and environmen￾tal groups, including American Farmland Trust. Initially focused on prevent￾ing erosion,Title II has been expanded over the years to include programs that 
build soil health, enhance farm viability, and protect farmland and ranchland 
from development. Current programs can be categorized as follows: 
Easement programs pay landowners to use conservation easements to limit 
non-farm development and protect land and wetland resources. NRCS 
administers the Agricultural Conservation Easement Program (ACEP). ACEP has 
two components: agricultural land easements (ALE), and wetland reserve easements 
(WRE). ALE provides matching funds to state and local governments, 
tribes, land trusts, and other conservation entities to purchase agricul￾tural conservation easements on working farms and ranches. WRE helps 
private and tribal landowners protect, restore, and enhance wetlands that 
have been damaged by agricultural uses. Additionally, through its Wetland 
Reserve Enhancement Partnership, NRCS enters into agreements with eligible 
partners to carry out high-priority wetland protection, restoration, and 
enhancement, and improve wildlife habitat. FeDeRAL POLICIeS THAT AFFeCT FOOD SYSTeMS 115 
Land retirement programs authorize USDA to pay private landowners for tempo￾rary changes in land use and management to achieve environmental ben￾efts. The Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) is its signature program. Managed 
by FSA, CRP provides annual rental payments to remove environmentally 
sensitive land from farm production and plant species to improve soil 
and water quality and provide wildlife habitat.Voluntary lease agreements 
typically last for 10–15 years. CRP has several subprograms. 
• Grassland CRP protects rangeland, pastureland, and other lands while 
maintaining them for grazing; 
• The Farmable Wetlands Program is designed to restore up to 1 million acres 
of previously farmed wetlands and wetland bufers to improve vegeta￾tion and water fow; 
• The State Acres for Wildlife Enhancement (SAFE) establishes wetlands, grasses, 
and trees to create critical habitat and food sources to enhance impor￾tant wildlife populations; and 
• The CRP Transition Incentives Program (TIP) provides annual payments for 
two years beyond a CRP contract expiration to sell or lease land to a 
beginning, veteran, or socially disadvantaged farmer or rancher. 
In addition, the Conservation Reserve Enhancement Program (CREP) authorizes USDA 
to enter into agreements with states to target areas to address specifc 
environmental objectives. It typically provides additional fnancial incen￾tives beyond annual rental payments to eligible partners. 
Conservation Cost Share Programs keep private land in production while provid￾ing participants with planning, technical assistance, and fnancial support 
to defray some of the costs of installing or maintaining conservation prac￾tices. NRCS administers two main programs: the Environmental Quality Incentives 
Program (EQIP) and the Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP). Combined, they 
account for more than half of all conservation program funding. 
EQIP is NRCS’s fagship program to help farmers, ranchers, and forest land￾owners integrate conservation into working lands. It provides fnancial 
and technical assistance to plan and install land management practices 
that lead to cleaner water and air, healthier soil, and better wildlife habitat 
while improving agricultural operations. It also supports initiatives that 
target fnancial assistance to specifc kinds of projects in some states, 
including for high tunnels to extend the growing season and organic and 
on-farm energy initiatives.  
 
116 SeC TION II 
Figure 4.6 Rice harvest at 3S Ranch, near El Campo,Texas.The ranch used EQIP cost 
share funding to make efcient use of water on irrigated land. 
Source: USDA Media by Lance Cheung 
CSP provides fnancial and technical assistance to producers to maintain 
and improve existing conservation systems and to adopt comprehensive 
conservation activities on entire operations.These include crop rotations, 
cover crops, advanced grazing management, and support to help produc￾ers develop a comprehensive conservation plan. 
Partnership and grant programs leverage nonfederal funding.Among them, NRCS 
manages the Regional Conservation Partnership Program (RCPP) and Conservation 
Innovation Grants (CIG). RCPP leverages federal conservation funding for 
partner-defned projects. Piloted in the 2014 farm bill, it was reauthor￾ized in 2018 as a stand-alone program to fund activities related to USDA 
programs, including EQIP,ACEP, and CRP. CIG awards competitive grants 
to state and local agencies, NGOs, tribes, and individuals to implement 
innovative conservation practices. 
Beyond USDA, other federal agencies and several pieces of historic legisla￾tion afect agriculture and food systems. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and 
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s National Marine Fisheries Service FeDeRAL POLICIeS THAT AFFeCT FOOD SYSTeMS 117 
jointly administer the Endangered Species Act of 1973, which protects threatened 
or endangered fsh, wildlife, and plants. All federal agencies are required to 
comply and ensure their actions will not jeopardize listed species or damage 
critical habitat. ESA also prohibits agricultural practices from contributing 
to habitat and biodiversity loss on private lands. Beyond ESA, the Bureau 
of Land Management (BLM), within the Department of the Interior (DoI), 
plays an important role in grazing leases. And the Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) plays a multifaceted role protecting food as well as water and 
environmental quality. 
Bureau of Land Management 
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (FLPMA) authorized the fed￾eral government to retain ownership and prevent degradation of most 
public lands. BLM has a planning process to inventory lands and resources 
and develop management plans to protect habitat, promote conservation 
and recreation, and allow energy and mineral extraction. Finally, FLPMA 
requires federal agencies to coordinate planning and management processes 
with local and state governments and plans. 
Through FLPMA, BLM administers grazing permits and leases, mostly for 
cattle and sheep, on more than 21,000 allotments. These generally cover a 
ten-year period and are renewable if the agency determines that the terms 
and conditions of the expiring permit or lease are being met.12 The Public 
Rangelands Improvement Act of 1978 requires the Secretaries of both the Interior 
and Agriculture to develop, update, and maintain an inventory of range con￾ditions and to track the condition of public rangelands. It also established 
a formula for setting livestock grazing fees, including on rangeland BLM 
leases to ranchers. 
Environmental Protection Agency 
The EPA plays several roles in food systems. On the food side, it works to 
ensure that pesticides used on food meet strict safety standards under the 
Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA). It promotes a systematic approach to the 
sustainable management of food to reduce food waste and its associated 
impacts, starting with the use of natural resources and progressing through 
the life cycle of food to recovery or fnal disposal, including composting. 118 SeC TION II 
Toward these ends, it teams up with USDA through the U.S. Food Loss and 
Waste 2030 Champions group—businesses and organizations that have 
made a public commitment to reduce food loss and waste in their own 
operations by 50 percent by the year 2030. 
EPA administers numerous regulations afecting agricultural impacts on 
air and water quality, pesticide use, storage, and disposal, animal feeding 
operations (AFOs), land contamination, and so on.The most signifcant is the 
Clean Water Act (CWA). Passed in 1972, it regulates quality standards for surface 
waters and pollution discharges into U.S. waters. CWA gave EPA authority to 
implement measures such as setting wastewater standards for industries and 
requiring permits for pollutants discharged from a point source into naviga￾ble waters. Many agricultural activities are exempt if they follow best man￾agement practices, but as part of the CWA/Safe Drinking Water Act, farms must 
obtain permits for some activities, including discharges from animal feeding 
operations, pesticide applications that contaminate water, and a series of 
regulations related to storage, discharge, and use of oil and oil products. 
Through Nonpoint Source Management Program Section 319, EPA provides grants 
to states, territories, and tribes for fnancial and technical assistance, mon￾itoring of nonpoint source implementation projects, and other things. It 
addresses nonpoint source pollution from excess fertilizers, herbicides, and 
insecticides from residential as well as agricultural lands, urban run-of, 
nutrients from livestock, pet wastes and faulty septic systems, and more. 
EPA also provides resources to help communities protect the environ￾ment, improve health, and strengthen local economies. It encourages renew￾able energy development on current and formerly contaminated lands, 
landflls, and integrates smart growth, environmental justice, and equitable 
approaches to develop healthy and sustainable neighborhoods. Since 2014 
it has teamed up with multiple federal, state, regional, and local partners to 
sponsor Local Foods, Local Places to support community-driven eforts to pre￾serve open space and farmland, boost economic opportunities for local 
farmers and businesses, improve access to healthy local food, and promote 
childhood wellness.13 
The following chapters cover a wide range of state and local policy options 
that can be used to advance resilient and sustainable food systems.They are 
not meant to be prescriptive but instead to lift up and share examples so 
people can adapt, borrow, and learn from each other.  
 
FeDeRAL POLICIeS THAT AFFeCT FOOD SYSTeMS 119 
Chapter 5 addresses land use planning with an emphasis on local poli￾cies, especially zoning. It highlights various kinds of zoning as well as things 
to consider in zoning ordinances. It also addresses subdivision and other 
ordinances, and a few broader approaches to land use that hold promise 
for food systems eforts. Chapter 6 focuses on policies to sustain farms and 
farmland. Recognizing the tension between new neighbors and agriculture, 
every state has done something to address competition for land, nuisance 
complaints, and farmland conversion. Most have programs to permanently 
protect farmland and to lease state-owned land for agriculture. Many sup￾port the economics of farming and ranching, legislate water rights, and 
address agriculture’s environmental impacts. Chapter 7 covers food policies 
to overcome barriers to securing ingredients for a nutritious diet. While 
SNAP is the bedrock, many state and local governments support healthy 
retail policies to provide more nutritious food to residents who lack grocery 
stores close to where they live.They provide nutrition education and promo￾tion and have programs to give away surplus food through food banks and 
other feeding sites. Chapter 8 takes a look at a few evolving issues, includ￾ing farmland access, solar siting, and cannabis regulations, and ofers some 
concluding thoughts. 
Discussion Questions 
1. What roles does the federal government play in food systems? 
2. Which federal agencies might you engage in a food systems plan￾ning process? 
3. Which nutrition assistance programs are likely to have the most 
impact on local and regional food systems? 
4. How can conservation district staf help advance sustainable and 
resilient food systems? 
Notes 
1. Federal Food Safety Oversight: Additional Actions Needed to Improve Planning and Collaboration 
(Washington, DC: U.S. General Accountability Ofce, December 2014). 
2. Vermont Law School Center for Agriculture and Food Systems and Harvard Food 
Law and Policy Clinic, Blueprint Project.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 SeC TION II 
3. Congressional Research Service, “Federal Land Management Agencies: Background 
on Land and Resources Management,” EveryCRSReport.com, February 9, 2009. 
4. Richard Barrows and Lawrence W. Libby, “The Federal Role in Land Use Policy: 
Arguments For and Against Federal Involvement,” 1982. 
5. James Howard Kunstler, Geography of Nowhere (New York: Free Press, 1994). 
6. Farmland Information Center,“Farmland Protection Policy Act Fact Sheet,” American 
Farmland Trust, July 2022. 
7. Renée Johnson and Jim Monke, Farm Bill Primer:What Is the Farm Bill? (IF12047,Version 4, 
Updated) (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, February 22, 2023). 
8. Renée Johnson and Jim Monke,“Farm Bill Primer:What Is the Farm Bill? (IF12047, 
Version 4, Updated).” 
9. USDA Food and Nutrition Service’s Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, 
“Farm to School Census and Comprehensive Review,” July 15, 2021. 
10. Federal Food Safety Oversight: Additional Actions Needed to Improve Planning and Collaboration 
(Washington, DC: U.S. General Accountability Ofce, December 2014). 
11. Donnie F. Williams, Ellie Falcone, and Brian Fugate, “Farming Down the Drain: 
Unintended Consequences of the Food Safety Modernization Act’s Produce Rule on 
Small and Very Small Farms,” Business Horizons 64, no. 3 (May 1, 2021): 361–68. 
12. U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Land Management, “Livestock Grazing on 
Public Lands,” accessed March 23, 2023. 
13. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Local Foods, Local Places,” Overviews and 
Factsheets, June 6, 2014. DOI: 10.4324/9781003293712-8 
 
5 
LAND USE POLICIES THAT 
SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, 
AND FOOD 
Chapter Summary 
States grant local governments authority for land use planning, but some 
retain strong land use authority themselves. Local governments rely on poli￾cies like zoning and local ordinances to manage growth and development, 
and sometimes to support local farms, foster food production, protect the 
environment, and increase access to healthy food. 
This chapter provides an overview of state and local land use policies. It 
describes diferent kinds of zoning and zoning considerations relevant to 
food systems, and other policies that can keep farmland in farming and sup￾port fair, sustainable, and resilient food systems. 
*** 
As outlined in Chapter 2, most land use decisions are made at the local 
level. States grant local governments authority for land use planning, and 
local governments rely on policies like zoning and subdivision regulations to 
manage development and encourage—or discourage—agriculture and food 
systems activities. 122 SeC TION II 
At the state level, strong land use planning authority is a cost-efective way 
to balance community priorities such as housing and transportation with 
retaining land for food and other farm production. According to American 
Farmland Trust’s Agricultural Land Protection Scorecard,1
 between 2001 
and 2016, states with low planning scores converted fve times as much 
land per new resident as states with high scores. 
Eighteen states require communities—at least communities of a certain 
size—to develop comprehensive plans, but only 12 have land use goals 
related to compact growth or farmland protection. Programs that success￾fully support agriculture have three important features: 
1. Goals to protect agricultural land and to promote compact growth; 
2. Requirements to create comprehensive plans and adopt local policies to 
protect agricultural land; and 
3. Consistency between state goals and local plans either through plan￾ning requirements or incentives to encourage conformance. 
ALIGNING STATE AND LOCAL GOALS IN OREGON 
Figure 5.1 Willamette Valley around 1970. 
Source: Oregon State Parks Department.  
 
LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 123 
Figure 5.2 Willamette Valley 2023. 
Source: Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development. Google Earth. 
Oregon has a leading land use planning law that has guided development 
since being approved by voters in 1973. Among many achievements, it 
has retained more than 16 million acres of farmland while Oregon’s pop￾ulation more than doubled. A key to its success was requiring counties 
to inventory farmland and adopt zoning and other policies to protect it.
2 
Table 5.1 Average Annual Percent Population Change: Oregon vs. U.S. 1970–2020. 
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 
Oregon 39.6% 16.3% 2.26% 0.80% 1.98% 1.16% 1.02% 0.36% 
U.S. 14.5% 18.5% 1.10% 0.95% 1.23% 0.95% 0.74% 0.25% 
Diference 25.1% -2.2% 1.16% -0.15% 0.75% 0.21% 0.28% 0.11% 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau,“Historical Population Change Data (1910–2020),” 
April 26, 2021. 
After world war II, rapid population growth triggered Oregonians’ 
concern about the future of agriculture and forestry and the impacts of 
sprawling development on the cost of community services. This led to 
the passage of the Land Conservation and Development Act, a power￾ful partnership between the state and local governments. It requires 124 SeC TION II 
local governments to adopt comprehensive plans and state agencies to 
comply with them, sets standards to guide planning and development, 
and imposes penalties on communities that do not conform, including 
suspension of local revenue support.3 It explicitly calls for farmland pres￾ervation and addresses other natural resources like water and forests, 
along with housing, transportation, and economic development.4 
Today, all Oregon counties have adopted comprehensive plans, rep￾resenting years of efort to build consensus between citizens and local 
ofcials. Plans include background information on each of the state’s 19 
planning goals and a policy element describing the community’s own long￾term goals and implementation measures to achieve them. Implementation 
measures include urban growth boundaries to accommodate 20 years of 
projected growth, and efective farm use (eFU) zoning. eFU zoning requires 
minimum parcels of at least 80 acres for farmland and 160 acres for range￾land, although counties may adopt a lower minimum in some cases.
5
 In 
exchange, landowners get lower property taxes and nuisance protections. 
Oregon’s law has curbed land speculation and staved of land use 
conficts by emphasizing coordination between local plans and statewide 
goals. To ensure consistency, communities submit a package of materials 
to the state, which includes proposed ordinances and other policy tools 
to achieve the statewide planning goals. Once approved, the package 
is acknowledged by the Land Conservation and Development Commis￾sion—a body comprising seven appointed volunteers from diferent parts 
of the state responsible for establishing the program’s goals and policies. 
Land use planning and zoning are related but often confated. Land use 
planning is a structured process; zoning is a regulation.They are best done 
together but often are not. Much of this chapter focuses on zoning because 
it is so widely used. But communities also use subdivision regulations and 
other tools, so we will start there. 
Subdivision Regulations 
Subdivision regulations guide the division of land into lots, blocks, streets, 
and neighborhoods for the purposes of a legal sale. They establish stand￾ards to ensure adequate infrastructure for new developments, including 
utilities, road access, water, sewer, and so on.They usually require an overall LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 125 
map called a subdivision plat, which must be approved by a local plan￾ning authority. Once approved, it is recorded and becomes public record. 
Sometimes they require rezoning. 
Zoning and subdivision regulations may be used at the same time. Both 
are governed by state law, but subdivision regulations tend to be more tech￾nical and less political than zoning. Best known for creating standards for 
housing developments, subdivision regulations also can address community 
connectivity by limiting or prohibiting dead-end streets or requiring road 
or sidewalk connections between adjoining subdivisions.They also are used 
to guide repurposing industrial sites; to encourage walkable communities, 
biking, and public transit; and to protect natural resources such as wetlands, 
foodplains, and open land. Some subdivision regulations address agri￾culture and conservation developments, including Agrihoods and Cluster 
Developments. 
Agrihoods 
Agrihoods—aka Development Supported Agriculture—are an innovation in mas￾ter-planned communities (MPC). MPCs are large residential communities 
typically built by a single developer around a theme like senior living or 
recreational amenities like a golf course. In the case of Agrihoods, they are 
built around small, often organic farms. 
A 2015 study found that 73 percent of U.S. residents consider access to 
fresh, healthy foods a high priority when deciding where to live.6
 Agrihoods 
respond to this demand by setting aside land for farming and protecting it 
with a conservation easement or other property covenant. Residents may 
farm land themselves, lease land for farming, and/or own shares in the farm 
so it operates like a CSA.The farm may include a U-Pick operation or other 
ways to engage residents, or residents may hire a farm manager to live on￾site and manage the farm on their behalf. 
Prairie Crossing was one of the frst. It was created in the Chicago suburb 
of Grayslake, Illinois, in the mid-1990s to advance responsible development 
practices, conserve open land, and provide commuters easy access to rail 
services. It includes 100 acres of protected farmland used by the Prairie 
Crossing Farm, a nonproft that supports multiple independent farm busi￾nesses, ofers educational programming, and provides residents as well as 
the general public with produce, eggs, and other farm products.7 126 SeC TION II 
Cluster Development 
Cluster development—aka Conservation or Open Space Development—requires 
houses to be grouped on small lots and protects the remaining open land 
for recreation, gardening, and occasionally small-scale agriculture.The pro￾tected land often is owned by the developer or a homeowner’s association 
and sometimes leased to a farmer. In this case, it is most efective when 
open space requirements are mandatory and the open land is protected by 
a conservation easement. 
Cluster developments work best for agriculture in transitional areas 
and when they create a bufer between residential development and 
working farms. Often used with zoning, they generally require updating 
ordinances and redefning frontage, lot size, setbacks, and other zoning 
regulations. 
Transfer of Development Rights 
Transfer of development rights (TDR) programs—aka Transfer of Development 
Credits and Transferable Development Units—pay landowners to limit development 
on some or all of their land.They combine planning and zoning to advance 
a community’s goals for growth and development in tandem with resource 
protection goals. 
TDR programs leverage the private marketplace to shift development 
away from farmland and other resources identifed for protection (send￾ing areas) to designated growth zones (receiving areas). Private devel￾opers buy development rights within the sending area in exchange for 
development incentives in the receiving area. Incentives include density 
or intensity bonuses, reduced parking requirements, and other regulatory 
fexibility. 
Some programs allow developers to make monetary payments, leaving 
it to the local government to buy development rights, often in partnership 
with a public Purchase of Agricultural Conservation Easement (PACE)—aka Purchase 
of Development Rights program—(see Chapter  6) and/or a local land trust. 
Others buy and retire the rights to stimulate the market and/or reduce over￾all building potential. Still others establish TDR banks to buy development 
rights with public funds and then sell them to developers.  
LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 127 
Tying TDR to zoning gives local governments control over where and 
how growth will occur and reduces the windfalls and wipeouts in prop￾erty values often associated with zoning changes. A well-known example 
is Montgomery County, Maryland, which has protected over 50,000 acres 
with TDR and over 20,000 acres using county funds for PACE. Combined, 
its eforts have resulted in the highest percentage of farmland protected by 
agricultural conservation easements of any county in the country.8 
TDR IN CHESTERFIELD TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY 
In southern New Jersey, Chesterfeld Township has a population of about 
7,500. It combined TDR with state and county PACe funding to protect 
nearly 8,000 acres—most of its farmland and over half of its total land area. 
In 1998, Chesterfeld adopted a new Land Development Ordinance 
that enabled TDR, downzoned farmland in agricultural zones to 10-acre 
lots, and added a clustering option to give developers a density bonus 
in exchange for protecting 50  percent of the property as open space. 
Launching the program involved extensive public engagement and active 
participation from the development community (see Figure 5.3). 
Based on community input, the township created a new neighbor￾hood called Old York as a receiving area. Today Old York is a walkable, 
traditional community with density comparable to its historic neighbor, 
the village of Crosswicks. Development allowances are graduated based 
on the type of housing, and 6  percent of its units are low–moderate￾income housing.9 Its sending areas contain nearly 7,500 acres of farm￾land. TDR credits are based on soil quality and on-site septic systems 
and allocated using a formula that considers preexisting zoning and 
environmental constraints, using computerized soils data to determine 
how many TDRs to allow on each parcel. Future development on pro￾tected farms is limited to one dwelling per 50 acres. 
The county’s Development Credit Bank facilitates transfers by buy￾ing TDRs at competitive prices and selling them when there is unmet 
demand from the private marketplace. As of 2022, the program has pre￾served 46 farms on 2,772 acres, along with another 48 farms on 5,043 
acres, through a variety of traditional PACe programs.10  
128 SeC TION II 
Figure 5.3 Chesterfeld Township TDR receiving/sending areas and farmland 
properties permanently protected with TDR and PDR. 
Source: Map courtesy of the New Jersey State Agriculture Development Committee. 
Urban Growth Boundaries 
Urban growth boundaries (UGBs) or urban service boundaries promote efcient and 
orderly land use and development. Their purpose is to identify areas to 
encourage urban development and areas to protect and support rural land 
uses. Higher density and mixed-use developments take place inside the 
boundary, along with supporting amenities like parks and a full suite of 
public services provided. Agriculture and other low-density land uses occur 
outside the boundary and receive limited public services.  
LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 129 
UGBs are designated on land use maps and used to guide decisions on 
infrastructure and other development, especially the extension of roads 
and services like public water and sewer. They are set for a specifed time 
period—usually 20 years—to accommodate projected population growth 
and land use needs.They can be renewed at the end of the period or adjusted 
if conditions change. Oregon’s UGBs are well known and often studied, but 
the frst was enacted in Lexington, Kentucky (see box). 
GROWING IN NOT OUT IN KENTUCKY 
Figure 5.4 For over 60  years, Lexington, Kentucky, has grown sustainably 
through compact development within its USB, while Fayette County 
has preserved farmland, natural resources, and rural character. 
Source: Map courtesy of the Lexington-Fayette Urban County Government GIS 
Section. 130 SeC TION II 
Fayette County is part of the Bluegrass Region, considered the horse cap￾ital of the world. Famous for rolling hills and deep residual soils, its farm￾land is rich in calcium and phosphorous, which naturally fortify plants 
and animals, including strong bones for horses. It is home to the city 
of Lexington and the nation’s frst urban service boundary (USB), cre￾ated in 1958 to control sprawl and limit the costs of community services. 
Nearly a third of its land base and about 97 percent of the population 
lives within the USB. 
In 1964 the city established a 10-acre minimum lot size in the rural 
district. A  decade later, the city and county created a merged govern￾ment, which led to a unifed approach to land use planning and coordi￾nated municipal/county actions to achieve shared goals. 
It took time to get things right. while growth was concentrated within 
the USB, by 1997, almost 5,000 acres of farmland had been developed 
for housing in the rural area. The spread of large residential lots led Lex￾ington’s mayor, Pam Miller, to appoint an ad hoc committee to develop 
a Rural Land Management Plan. They made two recommendations that 
changed the course of new development: Increase the minimum lot size to 
40 acres and create a Purchase of Development Rights (PDR—aka PACe) 
program. In 2000, Lexington/Fayette passed the frst PDR legislation in 
the state. Since then it has permanently protected more than 30,000 acres 
of its 50,000-acre goal. The ad hoc committee became a quasi-governmen￾tal, nonproft corporation, Fayette County Rural Land Management Board, 
Inc., which now purchases and holds agricultural conservation easements. 
This integrated approach has saved infrastructure costs, enhanced con￾nectivity, created vibrant businesses, and supported a vibrant agricultural 
sector responsible for one out of 12 jobs, $2.3 billion in annual output, and 
about $8.5 million of revenue to the local tax base.11 
Current zoning defnes agricultural use broadly to mean: 
the use of a tract of land of at least fve (5) contiguous acres for 
the production of agricultural or horticultural crops, including, 
but not limited to, livestock; livestock products; poultry; poul￾try products; grain; hay; pastures; soybeans; tobacco; timber; 
orchard fruits; vegetables; fowers or ornamental plants; includ￾ing provision for dwellings for persons and their families who 
are engaged in the above agricultural use on the tract, but not 
including residential building development for sale or lease to 
the public.12 LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 131 
It defnes urban agriculture within the USB and includes community 
gardens and agritourism so long as they are subordinate to and directly 
associated with principal agricultural production. The ordinance also 
includes an Agricultural Market Overlay Zone, which allows sales facili￾ties, racetracks, stables, and accessory uses with large facilities often at 
least 40 acres in size. Agricultural markets are designated exclusively 
for the purpose of buying and selling farm products, including a stock￾yard, and include any products grown, raised, or made by agricultural 
producers13 (see Figure 5.4). 
Local leaders continue to innovate. In 2014, the ofce of economic 
Development created Bluegrass Farm to Table, which convenes a Local 
Food Systems Stakeholder group and facilitates coordination and col￾laboration within the local food economy. It maintains strategic partner￾ships and supports agricultural economic development from farmers 
markets and farm-to-school to aggregation, distribution, and processing 
infrastructure for local farm and food products. Key stakeholders include 
farmers, processors, distributors, buyers, community groups, and poli￾cymakers. Further, in 2022, the county Health Department began ofer￾ing CSA vouchers to employees interested in signing up for farm shares. 
Zoning 
Zoning regulates the what, where, and how of diferent land uses. Based 
on the purpose and power granted in 1926 by the Standard State Zoning 
Enabling Act, it divides jurisdictions into districts and sets standards for 
development, including lot sizes, setbacks, signage, and parking. Enacted to 
protect health, safety, and general welfare, it is a powerful tool but can be 
preempted if it conficts with state or federal law. 
There are various forms of zoning. Mostly used to guide growth and 
development, they also can protect agriculture and promote food produc￾tion, marketing, and retailing. 
• Euclidean zoning is the most familiar and traditional form. It is named for 
the 1926 Supreme Court decision Village of Euclid, Ohio v. Ambler Realty Co., 
which upheld zoning codes as a valid extension of a city’s right to reg￾ulate land uses. It separates incompatible uses by dividing them into 
broad categories, typically residential, commercial, and industrial devel-132 SeC TION II 
opment, often also including institutional land uses and rural, agricul￾tural, and/or open space. 
• Form-based zoning is a modern alternative to Euclidean zoning. Instead of 
focusing on land use, it addresses the physical forms and relationships 
of buildings to streets, sidewalks, and other aspects of the public realm. 
• Incentive zoning provides a reward system to encourage certain kinds of 
development rather than relying on regulations. 
• Intensity zoning is based on how much density is allowed, such as number 
of residential or commercial units. 
• Mixed-use zoning allows multiple uses within one district that otherwise 
would be confned to separate zones. This can strengthen community 
food systems by supporting local food production while increasing 
access to grocery stores and supermarkets. 
• Performance zoning is market oriented and uses efects-based criteria to 
guide proposed developments. It addresses private property rights, 
especially in terms of environmental protections. 
Zoning ordinances defne the scale, scope, and intensity of allowable uses. They 
include a defnition of terms, maps, and text that outlines their authority 
and intent, jurisdictional reach, uses and restrictions, development stand￾ards, and administrative procedures.When defning terms like “farm,”“food 
production,” and “healthy food retail,” proactive ordinances use broad def￾nitions to include activities like farmers markets, retail sales, urban agricul￾ture, and enterprises that process and add value to raw agricultural products. 
To increase local food production, consider allowances for season-extending 
facilities, such as greenhouses, hoop houses, and high tunnels. To promote 
healthy food retail, consider exemptions and incentives to encourage siting 
stores in underserved communities (see Chapter 7). 
Ideally, zoning is tied to the vision and goals of comprehensive and other 
relevant plans. Implementation relies on community support. Zoning can be 
a dirty word if community members believe it infringes on their property 
rights rather than protecting their quality of life. 
Agricultural Zones 
Many suburban and rural communities use rural-residential, or rural-agricul￾tural zones, which allow but do not prioritize agriculture. Except sometimes LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 133 
by name, this is not agricultural zoning. In fact, the resulting large-lot, low￾density residential development consumes more acres for fewer, often larger 
houses.This tends to fragment the agricultural land base and infate property 
values beyond what most producers can aford. 
Between 2001 and 2016, agricultural land in low-density residential 
areas was 23 times more likely to urbanize than other agricultural land, 
driving farmland conversion in the short term and paving the way to more 
urbanized development.14 Large houses on dispersed lots have an outsized 
impact on climate change, requiring more energy to heat and cool than 
other residential developments and leading residents to drive more because 
they have less access to services.A study of 93 million U.S. households found 
that due to larger homes, wealthier Americans have per capita footprints 
∼25 percent higher than those with lower incomes, and emissions from 
afuent suburbs can be 15 times higher than nearby neighborhoods with 
smaller homes.15 
Agricultural zoning addresses these issues by designating farming and/ 
or ranching as the preferred land use. It limits activities that do not support 
agriculture and sets performance standards for accessory and ancillary uses. 
Some agricultural zones limit activities to those conducted by farm families 
or employees, or to uses that will not impede transfer to a bona fde farmer. 
Purpose, more than lot size, makes the diference. With strong nuisance 
protections, vegetative bufers, setbacks, and other farm-friendly ordinances 
(see Chapter 6), large-lot residential zones can be retooled to support agri￾culture and food production. 
Agricultural Protection Zones 
Agricultural Protection Zones (APZ) stabilize the land base by directing new 
development toward community facilities and away from farms and ranches. 
While each APZ states its own intent, their overall purpose is to support the 
agricultural economy and ensure that important agricultural soils remain 
available for farming and/or ranching. Often, APZs have the added benefts 
of fending of nuisance complaints and maintaining rural character. 
Zoning that limits density may reduce property values, while zoning that 
limits farm labor housing or the size of farm structures may restrict opera￾tions so much they no longer are viable. The best way to avoid unintended 
consequences is to engage the agricultural community before imposing new 134 SeC TION II 
regulations and to allow fexibility to modify ordinances to support new 
approaches to agriculture and food production. 
APZs take several forms. Fixed density, often based on existing land use, lim￾its non-farm development, for example, allowing one dwelling for every 25, 
40, 80 or more acres.The challenge is determining the appropriate lot size 
for diferent kinds of agriculture and ensuring that lots do not get turned 
into estates that drive up land values and threaten agricultural viability. 
Area-based allocations are a creative solution to these problems. Allowing some 
residential development while achieving agricultural protection, allocations 
may be based on acreage or percentages of the total parcel—for example, 
a 90/10 ratio of farmland to development. Sliding-scale zoning is a common 
form of area-based allocation. It is based on farm size to provide more fex￾ibility on new buildings and acreage allowances, so the larger the parcel, 
the greater the number of buildings allowed. For example, a 40-acre parcel 
might be allowed one or two dwellings, while a 400-acre parcel might be 
allowed ten.To retain as much farmland as possible, ordinances often adjust 
road frontage requirements, require clustering to achieve a specifc ratio, or 
tie to soil quality. 
Efective or exclusive agricultural zoning limits land uses to farming and/or 
ranching and to operations that support it. For example, in Wisconsin, lands 
within an exclusive agricultural zone must be within a county agricultural 
preservation plan and the ordinance must both be consistent with the plan 
and—to qualify for tax credits—certifed by the Wisconsin Land and Water 
Conservation Board. All structures and conditional uses within the district 
must be consistent with defned agricultural uses so that the zoning cannot 
be challenged in court as exclusionary. Intensive agricultural zones go further to 
separate residential development likely to confict with agricultural opera￾tions and restrict dwellings to those related to agriculture. They are appro￾priate in places with intensive agriculture uses such as vineyards or CAFOs, 
especially when combined with bufers and/or setbacks. In areas where the 
zone supports local food farms and specialty crops, smaller lot sizes may be 
allowed along with commercial and industrial uses that are compatible with 
and enhance agriculture. LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 135 
ZONING FOR AGRICULTURE IS IN SCOTT COUNTY’S 
BLOODSTREAM 
Figure 5.5 Corn for grain is Scott County, Iowa’s leading crop. 
Source: USDA. Photo by Preston Keres. 
with strong political support and policy enforcement, agricultural pres￾ervation zoning has secured a land base for farming in Scott County, 
Iowa’s third-most-populous county. Located 165 miles west of Chicago, it 
hosts the global agricultural equipment company John Deere and other 
major agribusiness employers, including Tyson Fresh Meats and Oscar 
Mayer/Kraft. 
Settled before Iowa became a state in 1846, agriculture has always 
been important to Scott County’s culture and economy. Its soils are some 
of the most fertile in the country. Despite strong development pressure, 
it has 220,000 acres of farmland in production, mostly in corn and soy￾beans, but also livestock and poultry, led by hogs and pigs. Average net 
cash farm income per farm is healthy at $176,328,16 and the county ranks 
tenth in the state for nursery, greenhouse, foriculture, and sod.17 
The county has used strong land use policies to support agriculture 
since 1980 when it created an Agricultural Preservation (A-P) zoning dis￾trict and strong subdivision policies. The A-P zone furthers the goals of 136 SeC TION II 
the county’s comprehensive plan to protect highly-quality soils and agri￾cultural operations from urban development.18 Inclusion is based on soil 
quality. Metrics are determined by prime farmland as defned by NRCS’s 
soil surveys and a Corn Suitability Rating (CSR) of sixty (60) or greater as 
a weighted average per quarter section of land. On farmland with a CSR 
of 60 or higher, only construction of farm-related housing and buildings 
is allowed. Once a Plat of Survey is recorded, no land or lots may be sub￾divided into smaller lots without rezoning, and rezoning requires county 
planning staf and NRCS to conduct in-depth soils studies. This carries 
over to subdivision applications to split existing housing from a farm.19 
The A-P district allows farm processing. For example, County Supervi￾sors allowed a farmer with 2,000 acres of row crops and more than 2,000 
cattle to install a digester to convert manure and cover crop biomass 
into electricity and digestate fertilizer. working together, these increase 
organic matter and improve soil health, generating both economic and 
environmental value. 
The county also has other zones for agriculture. Its less restrictive 
Agricultural-general (A-g) district acts as a holding zone until a compat￾ible development proposal is approved through special use permits or 
rezoning. It allows a limited number of public and private uses, such as 
churches and schools, and some commercial or industrial uses through 
overlay districts. It also has an Agriculture Commercial Service Floating 
(ACS-F) district to serve the farm community. This zone allows farm￾related businesses and services to locate in certain unincorporated 
areas. Permitted uses include livestock auctions and large animal veteri￾narians; feed mixing and blending; grain handling; retail sales of seeds 
and inputs; and logistics businesses involving local transportation of 
agricultural inputs, commodities, and livestock. 
In 2022, the county approved a solar ordinance to encourage renew￾able energy production but to limit utility-scale solar development to 
lower-quality soils. Individuals and farms can generate solar for their 
own use, but only utility-scale solar installations are allowed on soils 
below the CSR-60 threshold. The county also allows wind power but has 
not had much demand. 
elected ofcials have supported strong land use policies for decades. 
They understand their history and the importance of agriculture to the 
county. The community’s values for protecting their valuable soils are in 
their bloodstream.20 LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 137 
Agricultural Overlay Zones 
Overlay zones are a fexible tool used to modify zoning by adding new 
standards or regulations to accomplish specifc goals and/or encourage cer￾tain kinds of development. Housing overlay zones are used to incentivize 
developers to build afordable housing by increasing density bonuses, reduc￾ing parking requirements, or streamlining permits. Overlays also are used to 
protect sensitive resources like aquifers and food plains by limiting or even 
prohibiting development to protect water quality and groundwater recharge, 
and/or to provide foodwater storage capacity. 
Agricultural overlay zones apply this popular tool to reduce conficts 
between farmers and non-farm neighbors and/or to identify priority areas 
to support farming by waiving, instituting, and/or strengthening zoning 
provisions without having to redraft entire ordinances. Typically designed 
to protect quality soils and contiguous areas of working farms or ranches, 
they support the agricultural economy and maintain farmland afordability. 
They also can be used as a TDR sending zone to remove barriers for urban 
agriculture in districts where it is not expressly allowed or to support the 
economics of agriculture by supporting compatible commercial, marketing, 
and light industrial uses.These generally allow the same uses as agricultural 
zones while encouraging support industries like auctions, stockyards, and 
farm equipment rental and sales. 
Urban Agriculture Zones 
Zoning for agriculture in cities is diferent from zoning in rural areas. 
Urban agriculture often involves public land, occurs on small parcels, and 
may include backyards, vacant lots, rooftops, and indoor settings. California 
passed legislation in 2013 to create urban agriculture incentive zones (see 
Chapter  8), but most cities do not zone for it, thus existing codes may 
impede food production and distribution. 
To encourage urban agriculture, local governments can follow California’s 
lead and create incentive zones or overlay zones and special districts for 
urban farms and gardens. They also can include enabling language to indi￾cate where and what kinds of agricultural activities are allowed in diferent 
zones. Considerations are similar to other kinds of agricultural zoning and 
extend to charitable, educational, and other non-commercial activities.  
 
138 SeC TION II 
Figure 5.6 Taqwa Community Farm in the Highbridge neighborhood of the Bronx, 
New York City. 
Source: USDA/FPAC. Photo by Preston Keres. 
ZONING FOR URBAN AG IN TWO CITIES 
Cleveland, Ohio, and Somerville, Massachusetts, both address urban 
agriculture through zoning. Cleveland allows community gardens, bee￾keeping, livestock, and greenhouses as a conditional use in all zoning 
districts, subject to certain regulations. It also created a special Urban 
garden District that allows agriculture, community, and market gardens 
by right. The zones allow the sale of crops produced on-site, along with 
a series of permitted accessory uses: season-extending structures; sig￾nage; raised beds, compost bins, seasonal farm stands, fences, chicken 
coops, and beehives; and buildings including tool sheds, barns, and 
planting preparation houses.21 
Somerville amended its zoning bylaws to add an Urban Agriculture 
Ordinance that allows hens, honey bees, and yard farms, including sea￾son-extending accessory structures. It also permits commercial farms 
and greenhouses, including hydroponic and aquaponic farms, on munic￾ipal land, buildings, and rooftops. Accessory uses are subject to build￾ing code requirements and public health regulations. Products from LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 139 
commercial farms may be sold on-site subject to a series of provisions. 
Two of these include an allowance for farmstands and proof of annual 
soil testing, which must be posted when produce sales occur.22 
Zoning Considerations 
Accessory and Ancillary Uses of Agricultural Land 
Accessory uses serve but are subordinate to a zone’s principal permitted 
uses. Examples include greenhouses and farm stands. Ancillary uses are sec￾ondary uses that should not interfere with the farming operation. Examples 
include renting ofce space in an outbuilding or leasing land to hunters. 
Zoning ordinances defne whether uses like agritourism, wine tasting 
rooms, and horse stables are agricultural, accessory, or ancillary. They spell 
out when uses are conditional and require special permitting. They often 
address farm-related services, such as equipment repair or commercial 
composting, and whether to permit non-farm activities. Once these are 
defned, ordinances usually include performance standards to certify uses 
are of a nature, intensity, scope, size, and appearance to conform to existing 
structures, and require they will not hinder future farming activities or limit 
the amount of land and/or structures allowed for specifc purposes. 
Eagle Mountain, Utah’s zoning code defnes agriculture to include row 
crops, livestock boarding, grazing, and associated activities, but does not 
allow CAFOs or animal by-product businesses. Accessory uses and struc￾tures are allowed if they do not substantially alter the character of the prin￾cipal uses of structures and facilities like barns, greenhouses, and silos. 
Farm stands are allowed, but only to market products grown on the farm, 
and only if structures are 300 square feet or less. Conditional uses include 
value-added processing and equestrian facilities. Conditional ancillary uses 
include religious or cultural meeting halls, transmission towers, commercial 
hunting, and home businesses and accessory dwellings.23 
Agritourism 
Agritourism (aka agrotourism or agritainment) combines traditional agricultural 
activities with on-farm entertainment and/or education. Usually pursued to 140 SeC TION II 
diversify farm income and stimulate rural tourism, its revenue more than 
tripled between 2002 and 2017, reaching nearly $950 million, not includ￾ing wineries.24 
Common forms include U-Pick activities where customers harvest various 
types of farm products themselves, for example, apples, berries, Christmas 
trees, and pumpkins. Some operations ofer corn mazes, hayrides, and pet￾ting zoos. Others ofer on-farm demonstrations, rent farm facilities for wed￾dings and festivals, or operate farm-stay bed-and-breakfasts or dude ranches. 
Thus, agritourism is not always considered agriculture. 
Most states have enacted statutes to address agritourism issues.These include 
zoning defnitions and standards for activities allowed by right and other 
requirements. Some list agritourism as an accessory or ancillary use, with con￾ditions and limitations. Others create stand-alone ordinances or overlay zones, 
often limited to authentic accessory uses that support and promote working 
farms and ranches rather than supplant them.25 Issues to address include mini￾mum parcel and maximum facility sizes, setbacks, parking allowances, signage, 
noise, nuisances, and hours of operation. In cases where heavy uses are allowed, 
like festivals, they address trafc control and neighborhood impacts as well. 
Buffers and Setbacks 
Setbacks and bufers separate land uses within zones. They are a useful tool 
to create space between farmers and non-farm neighbors to stave of con￾ficts, reduce trespass and vandalism, and protect natural resources. 
Setbacks refer to the distance between a building and a property line, a 
natural resource like a wetland, or a road or other area that needs protection 
from new development. Bufers take many forms but usually are vegetative 
and designed to shield neighbors from objectionable smells, noise, dust, 
sounds, and so on. Some zoning ordinances require a minimum width, 
while others vary the requirement based on the type of bufer. 
Bufers also are an important tool to protect soils, waterways, and sensi￾tive habitats from agricultural runof. Conservation bufers include wildlife cor￾ridors, greenways, windbreaks, and flter strips. Riparian bufers are adjacent to 
waterways and contain a combination of perennial plants, shrubs, and/or 
trees.They also can be managed to produce a harvestable crop. 
Local ordinances take many approaches to setbacks and bufers. They 
may require one, the other, or both between existing farms and abutting  
 
LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 141 
new development. They may limit requirements to certain types of farms 
or development. Some combine them and require a bufer within a setback, 
while others simply require a minimum bufer distance. 
Butte County, California, requires clear delineations for all lands zoned 
for agriculture, performance standards and land use transitions, setbacks, 
and bufers between residential development and agricultural uses.To pro￾tect farms, it requires 300-foot boundaries for bordering zones where 
boundaries abut agricultural zones.26 Clark County, Washington, takes a 
more nuanced approach. It requires new buildings to comply with set￾backs that range from 100 feet for livestock grazing or pasture to 300 feet 
for row crops and vegetables, with setbacks for other types of agriculture 
in between. It allows use of 8-foot berms to satisfy part of the setback 
requirement so long as they are contoured at three to one (3:1) slopes and 
include shrubs, trees, or grasses and achieve a fnished height of 15 feet. 
Vegetative screens also may be planted continuously along the parcel line. 
Trees must be at least six feet high when planted and reach an ultimate 
height of at least 15 feet.27 
Composting 
Compost is created by combining organic wastes into piles, rows, or vessels. 
It can include leaves and other yard waste, uneaten food, manures, and bulk￾ing agents such as wood chips. It has many benefts: 
• Compost can be added to soil to improve its fertility, promoting higher 
yields, and limiting petrochemical inputs; 
• It provides carbon sequestration and improves water retention in soils; 
• It reduces methane emissions by keeping organic waste out of landflls; 
and 
• It improves contaminated and otherwise compromised soils, which aids 
reforestation, wetlands restoration, and habitat revitalization.28 
Composting occurs on farms and in backyards as well as commercially. 
Zoning can address both scales, for example, by allowing it by right for 
farm-generated waste and through permit requirements for businesses. Most 
ordinances limit what types of wastes can be composted and have policies to 
mitigate odors and pests. They also set size allowances. Rural communities  
 
142 SeC TION II 
Figure 5.7 Trent Deans, Veteran Compost D.C. works organic composting operations 
at the Arcadia Center for Sustainable Food and Agriculture in Virginia. 
Source: USDA. Photo by Tom Witham. 
are likely to have more fexible policies than urban, like allowing farmers to 
compost municipal leaves and other of-site materials. 
Commercial composting generally is regulated by state as well as local 
governments. The U.S. Composting Council tracks legislation and cre￾ated a Model Compost Rule Template for states to adopt.29 Commercial 
facilities have larger impacts and generally require plan approval and 
setbacks, especially if in or near residential zones. Local governments 
also may consider regulations to prevent stormwater runoff, screen 
large sites from public view, and address neighborhood issues like dust, 
pests, and odors. 
Farm Labor Housing 
Safe and suitable lodging for farm labor is important, especially for dairy 
and specialty crop operations. Zoning ordinances vary widely but generally 
are fairly fexible so long as standards comply with public health and safety 
laws.They may allow mobile homes, cabins, or other temporary housing for LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 143 
seasonal workers, or allow building a second or third house without trigger￾ing subdivision regulations. 
Burlington County, New Jersey, has a model farm labor housing ordi￾nance for municipalities to use to support sectors like equine, nursery, and 
local food production, which require signifcant and/or specialized labor. 
For permanent structures, it considers impacts on farm operations and the 
size, number, and type of workers to be housed. It requires parcels to be at 
least ten contiguous acres and for occupants to use the same driveway as 
the farm operation or principal residence. Seasonal housing is allowed as a 
conditional use, subject to setbacks, bufers, and additional requirements.30 
Healthy Food Retail 
Zoning can be used to increase the availability of healthy food options and/ 
or to limit fast food establishments, especially near schools. New York City 
uses zoning exemptions in its Food Retail Expansion to Support Health 
(FRESH) program. Created in 2009, FRESH was a response to a citywide 
study that highlighted a shortage of fresh food options in several neighbor￾hoods. It ofers a suite of zoning and fnancial incentives to support stores 
in underserved communities that provide a full range of grocery products, 
including fresh meat, fruit, and vegetables. Zoning incentives include larger 
building allowances and reduced parking requirements in mixed residential 
and commercial districts.31 
Local governments also use zoning to limit fast food outlets. Often enacted 
for aesthetic reasons, some aim to improve health outcomes.32 Cities like 
Arden Hills, Minnesota, and Detroit, Michigan, have regulations requiring 
at least 500 feet between fast food outlets and schools.33 Others regulate the 
density of fast food restaurants, while others restrict the development of fast 
food restaurants altogether (see Chapter 7 for other healthy retail policies). 
Local Food 
In June 2022, USDA announced a framework to shore up supply chains to 
transform food systems to be more resilient, competitive, and fair. It called 
for more regional processing and for food systems to become more distrib￾uted and localized. Achieving this will depend, at least in part, on zoning 
and other local land use regulations.  
144 SeC TION II 
Zoning ordinances are rarely explicit about local food but still address it in 
several ways.Approaches vary, especially between urban and rural communi￾ties, but both can use zoning to expand production, aggregation, processing, 
marketing, and distribution.34 In rural and peri-urban areas, this could mean 
adjusting ordinances to support smaller acreage farms, like those producing 
fruits and vegetables and supporting value-added processing, on-farm mar￾keting, and associated activities from cooling to composting. 
On-Farm Marketing 
Zoning ordinances often allow local food sales through farm stores, stands, 
and other forms of on-farm direct marketing by right or as an accessory 
use. Either way, it is important to determine whether this is a broad right or 
limited to seasonal produce. 
Farm stands and stores range from seasonal and temporary, like a covered wagon 
with a cash box, to year-round, full-service stores that sell farm-themed 
Figure 5.8 Tracy Potter-Fins and Bethany Stanbery grow fresh, high-quality, certifed 
organic, Montana homegrown produce and fowers for their community 
through their farm stand and other markets. 
Source: USDA/FPAC. Photo by Preston Keres.  
 
LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 145 
items along with farm-grown products. Efective farmstand ordinances 
have clear defnitions to distinguish between the scale and scope of dif￾ferent types of operations. A small, seasonal farm stand does not require 
the same development standards as a store with a commercial kitchen that 
serves food and has bathrooms and parking facilities. Beyond scale, scope, 
and seasonality, zoning considerations include market permanence, along 
with issues such as road setbacks, parking, lighting, and signage. Ordinances 
often stipulate that most—if not all—of the products must be grown on the 
farm where they are sold, or that 50 percent or more of what is sold must be 
grown in the state or region.They also may limit, or even prohibit, the sale 
of products like garden gnomes and other decorations. 
Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) farms are supported by selling shares 
in a farm’s yield for the length of a growing season. In exchange, members 
typically receive a weekly distribution of seasonal products. Some zoning 
regulations allow CSAs in residential neighborhoods, while others confne 
them to agricultural zones. Zoning may address permitted and accessory 
uses, as well as parking and infrastructure requirements to handle weekly 
pick up of farm shares. 
Farmers’ Markets 
Farmers’ markets are community places where farmers come together to sell 
their products directly to consumers. Supporting farm viability and community 
food security, they attract foot trafc to downtown areas and increase social 
cohesion. Usually located in or near a large town or city, they often are managed 
by a government agency, civic organization, or other local entity. Depending on 
their location, size, and frequency, they may take place seasonally in a facility 
like a park or parking lot, or year-round in a permanent structure. 
Zoning can designate where farmers’ markets operate and the conditions 
under which they are allowed. Some communities have a straightforward per￾mitting process and allow farmers’ markets by right across all or multiple zones. 
Others require a special permit and restrict them to commercial, mixed-use, or 
other specifed zones. Ordinances typically address when and how the market 
may operate, which products may be sold, signage, parking, and transportation 
issues. Some require 100 percent of the products sold to be grown by the farm 
that is selling them, while others only require 50 percent. Many allow music 
and other entertainment, and some allow the sale of local crafts.  
146 SeC TION II 
ZONING TO PROMOTE FARMERS’ MARKETS IN FRESNO, 
CALIFORNIA 
Figure 5.9 Moua Farms sells farm-fresh vegetables to folks at the Brentwood 
Farmer’s Market in Fresno, California. 
Source: Eddie Ledesma/Contra Costa Times/ZUMA Press, Inc./Alamy Stock 
Photo. 
Fresno County, California, is one of the nation’s top agricultural counties. 
Supplying national and global markets, it produces hundreds of crops, 
including fruits, nuts, vegetables, dairy, poultry, and livestock. Still, until 
2008, it was hard for people living in Fresno to fnd fresh, local food. 
Fresno has very high rates of poverty and food insecurity, especially 
among minority households, including its farming populations. Health 
advocates became concerned about the relationship between food inse￾curity and rising rates of diet-related diseases. working with the city of 
Fresno’s planning department, community members and farmers, they 
gained unanimous support from City Council to change the zoning code 
to recognize farmers’ markets. 
Today, Fresno’s Citywide Development Code has a full set of stand￾ards to guide where farmers’ markets may be located, developed, and 
operated. It allows several types of markets. They range from permanent LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 147 
indoor markets that are regulated as Healthy Food grocers to tempo￾rary farmers’ markets in of-street locations using portable structures. 
It requires unprocessed farm products to occupy at least 60 percent of 
retail space, but products like bread and cheese are allowed—and beer 
and wine if vendors are licensed and have obtained required approvals 
from other city and state departments. Site plans must show the location 
of market stands, restrooms, and parking and require a trafc control 
plan showing street closures, detour routes, barricade locations, and traf￾fc control signage. Other requirements address operation times, insur￾ance, public notice, site development standards, layout, and signage.35 
Mobile markets are essentially farmers’ markets on wheels, where fresh local 
produce is transported in a bus, van, or other large vehicle to communities 
with limited fresh food options. Models vary widely: some represent a sin￾gle operation, others aggregate produce from multiple farms, and still oth￾ers procure from wholesalers, produce auctions, and food donations. Often 
subject to farmers’ market and parking lot regulations, some are allowed on 
private property by right, while others are considered conditional use or 
require a special permit. Some ordinances dictate the size or grade of allow￾able vehicles, but usually they are allowed in parking lots of facilities with 
public access, like places of worship, community centers, and schools. Some 
require that a percent of the foods sold are WIC-approved. 
Incubators and Shared Facilities 
Finally, zoning can support community kitchens and incubators, which allow for 
shared use of food processing equipment to add value to local food and farm 
products. Some ordinances allow these uses by right in all zoning districts, 
others limit them to commercial or industrial zones. Food innovation districts 
are a novel approach. They include a range of services from food business 
incubators and shared facilities to food hubs, which connect producers with 
institutional buyers. Traverse City, Michigan, developed one on a former 
hospital campus. It includes a commercial kitchen, cold storage, a food hub, 
processing facilities, and a year-round farmers’ market, along with housing, 
restaurants, and retail outlets. It has several zoning designations, including 
brownfelds, historic district, and a Michigan tax-free Renaissance Zone.36  
 
148 SeC TION II 
On-Farm Energy Production 
Wind turbines, solar arrays, and methane digesters are valuable sources of 
renewable energy to support agricultural operations and can be sold to utili￾ties for additional income. These may use or adapt existing land and struc￾tures without competing with the primary agricultural purpose. Utility-scale 
energy production, especially solar, is a more complex issue that generally 
competes with agriculture and food production. Thus, zoning often allows 
energy production for agricultural use by right but is more restrictive about 
commercial installations. 
Strong ordinances are clear about these defnitions. They include both 
permitted and conditional uses, where and under what circumstances 
renewable energy production is appropriate on agricultural land and in agri￾cultural zones, and address setbacks and visibility issues. They can require 
Figure 5.10 A free stall heifer barn with 720 photovoltaic solar panels at Brubaker 
Farms in Mount Joy, Pennsylvania, makes it both a dairy and green energy 
producer. The farm also has a methane digester, which can handle more 
than 41,859 metric tons of organic waste and which fuels a low-emission 
generator producing 225 kW that powers the digester and farm opera￾tions. Excess power is sold to the local power grid, allowing the commu￾nity to beneft from a green energy source. 
Source: USDA. Photo by Lance Cheung. LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 149 
utility-scale facilities to be planned, developed, and decommissioned to 
limit adverse impacts on agricultural soils and to encourage continued agri￾cultural use. Further, they can direct these projects to marginal and dis￾turbed lands, like parking lots, brownfelds, and landflls, and encourage 
developers to create and maintain pollinator habitats by planting fowers 
and native grasses around facilities, which also serves to reduce erosion and 
improve soil health. (See Chapter 8 for a deeper discussion of solar siting.) 
Manure contains organic matter and useful nutrients, including nitrogen 
and phosphorus, which plants need to grow. When properly managed, it 
can be recycled and used as a fertilizer, soil amendments, and renewable 
energy. Anaerobic digester systems convert manure into biogas to generate 
electricity. Sometimes digesters are considered part of a farming operation 
and allowed in an agricultural zone, as in Scott County, Iowa. Other times 
they are considered a conditional or accessory use with strict guidelines. 
Lowville, New York, prohibits large anaerobic digesters but allows small 
digester systems as an accessory use on lots of ten acres or more in any zone 
that allows agriculture. It requires a permit, 100-foot setbacks from side and 
rear property lines and public road rights-of-way, and 300-foot setbacks 
from any residential structure other than that of the property owner.37 
Poultry and Livestock 
Most states have livestock regulations that supersede local zoning. Still, many 
communities have developed additional ordinances to address local nui￾sance, environment, and animal welfare issues. These vary widely between 
urban and rural areas based on type of operation and scale, but often have 
guidelines for site suitability, bufers and setbacks, and generally accepted 
agricultural (GAP) practices. Key considerations include the number of ani￾mals allowed per acre based on conditions like soil quality, water availability, 
and the space needed to provide shelter and avoid crowding. 
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations 
CAFOs are regulated by federal laws such as the Clean Water Act and state 
laws, including Right to Farm Laws (see Chapter 6). Local governments use 
zoning to further regulate animal waste, which can impair water bodies, con￾taminate drinking water, produce GHG, and smell bad. Some communities 150 SeC TION II 
use siting and permitting standards to guide where and to what extent 
CAFOs are allowed. Others create moratoriums to study their impacts, and 
some simply prohibit them. 
Beyond siting requirements, some ordinances require operators to post 
bond, while others empower local boards of health to monitor CAFOs and 
create policies to protect public health. Ordinances that address siting typically 
use density requirements, odor controls, bufers, and setbacks to limit negative 
impacts. Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, requires siting CAFOs and commercial 
feedlots at least one-quarter mile from residential and commercial districts, 
and storage lagoons at least 200 feet from a property line or road right-of-way.38 
CAFOs also are associated with animal cruelty due to close confnement 
and crowding, which create boredom and stress in the animals and lead 
to physical and mental illnesses. However, these issues largely have been 
addressed through state ballot measures rather than zoning. 
PERMITTING CAFOS IN BAYFIELD, WISCONSIN 
Bayfeld County, wisconsin, developed a careful permitting process for 
CAFOs along with licensing and setback requirements. They are based 
on but exceed the state Department of Natural Resources’ regulations. 
Intended primarily to protect water quality, the state does not regulate 
facility siting, odor control, hazardous emissions, or animal welfare. So 
Bayfeld’s ordinance spells out a series of conditions to protect human and 
animal health, prevent pollution and nuisances, and preserve the quality 
of life, environment, and small-scale livestock and other farm operations. 
Bayfeld’s ordinance uses the state’s defnition of livestock opera￾tions with 1,000 animal units or more. It includes provisions for two 
similar smaller operations if they operate together. Operations meeting 
this threshold go through an extensive permitting and approval process, 
including a public hearing. Applicants also must fle a fnancial assur￾ance in case they need to clean up environmental contamination, and/or 
abate public nuisances caused by operations—including but not limited 
to testing and replacement of contaminated wells and water supplies— 
and to ensure proper closure if for any reason the applicant decides 
to shut down. It also requires a nutrient management plan, and while 
largely focused on environmental quality, it also addresses animal and 
employee welfare and emergency management.39 LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 151 
Urban Chickens, Bees, and Livestock 
Most communities regulate poultry and livestock through animal codes 
instead of through zoning, but cities and towns increasingly are amending 
zoning codes to allow poultry, small livestock, and honey bees. Usually their 
goal is to strengthen community food security by increasing a local supply 
of eggs and honey, and sometimes meat or milk. Most distinguish between 
small and large animals and animals kept as pets, although this can be dif￾fcult, especially with animals like rabbits, which may be raised for meat and 
pets.They also indicate conditions and if, when, and what kinds of permits 
are needed. 
Zoning for urban livestock generally limits the number and types 
of animals allowed and addresses noise, odor, and waste management 
issues, as well as animal welfare concerns like crowding, shelter, and 
on-site water. It also regulates the types of structures allowed and set￾backs from property lines and sidewalks. Beekeeping codes often require 
permits and “flyway barriers” to stop bees from flying to neighboring 
properties. 
Figure 5.11 Urban chickens. 
Source: USDA/FPAC. Photo by Preston Keres.  
 
152 SeC TION II 
Seattle, Washington, allows most livestock, poultry, and bees in all zones 
as an accessory use. Standards are based on lot sizes. Neither roosters nor 
swine are allowed, except for miniature potbelly pigs. Miniature goats are 
allowed if they are dehorned and the bucks are neutered. Only one animal is 
allowed for every 10,000 square feet, and both the animals and their shel￾ters must be kept at least 50 feet from other lots in residential zones. Limits 
on fowl are extended for community gardens, urban farms, and lots over 
10,000 square feet, and farm animals including cows, sheep, and horses 
are permitted on lots of 20,000 square feet or more. Beekeeping must be 
registered with the state Department of Agriculture and is limited to four 
hives of one swarm each on lots less than 10,000 square feet with setback 
requirements.40 
Signage 
Signs are an important way to promote local farms, especially those that 
are engaged in agritourism and retail sales. Of-farm directional signs are 
especially important in rural areas and less traveled roads where farms and 
ranches are hard to fnd. Zoning regulations address both permanent and 
seasonal signs and generally specify their size, placement, and sometimes 
what materials can be used. They often allow farms to display permanent 
signs to advertise the business and temporary signs to advertise seasonal 
products. 
Wineries, Breweries, and Distilleries 
Wineries, breweries, and distillers can be a hot zoning topic. In cities, they 
often require a conditional use permit, especially if they are larger than 
10,000 square feet. In rural areas, they may be regulated separately or as part 
of an agritourism ordinance. 
Growing and harvesting grapes and grains to produce wine, beer, cider, 
and spirits generally falls under agricultural production. However, process￾ing, sales, tasting, and events related to creating and marketing alcoholic 
beverages often are regulated separately. Sometimes some or all of these 
activities are permitted by right or as an accessory use; other times they 
require a special permit, especially if the operation hosts large events.  
 
LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 153 
ZONING FOR WINERIES AND BREWERIES IN ALBEMARLE, 
VIRGINIA 
Figure 5.12 Grape vines and photovoltaic panels rely on the sun at Cooper 
Vineyards in Louisa, Virginia, the frst East Coast winery to be 
awarded Platinum certifcation by Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design (LEED).The tasting room collects rainwater 
from the roof and heats and cools the entire building using a geo￾thermal system. Much of the construction materials are from local 
and recycled material sources. 
Source: USDA. Photo by Lance Cheung. 
Albemarle County, Virginia’s zoning ordinance has a detailed treatment 
of breweries and wineries. Activities tied to agricultural production are 
mostly allowed with a complex set of regulatory provisions. Some opera￾tional uses are allowed by right, others require a special permit. Helicop￾ter rides and restaurants are prohibited. 
Uses permitted by right include: 
• Production and harvesting of fruit and other agricultural products; 
• Sales, consumption, and tasting of wine and beer; 
• Sales of incidental gifts such as corkscrews, bottle openers, glasses, 
or T-shirts; and 
• Private personal gatherings by the owner, provided beverages are not 
sold or marketed. 154 SeC TION II 
So long as they are in accordance with state and federal regulations, 
the code allows direct and wholesale sales and shipment of wine and 
beer, storage and warehousing, and uses and sales related to agritour￾ism like hayrides, catering, picnics, and tours, so long as they are limited 
to 200 or fewer people and do not create a substantial impact on public 
health, safety, or welfare. 
Larger events, such as weddings and receptions, are allowed when 
clearly associated with agritourism but generally require a special use per￾mit. Considerations include whether the operation has facilities like on￾site fermentation, bottling, a tasting room, and a minimum of fve acres 
of agricultural products planted on-site—or on abutting land under the 
same ownership. events are subject to zoning clearance if the property is 
less than 21 acres or if visitors will generate more than 50 vehicle trips/day. 
events with more than 200 people require a special use permit. Con￾siderations include the number of people, the frequency and duration of 
proposed events, parking availability, a trafc management plan, light￾ing, and whether there is a stage or structure where music is performed. 
Finally, the ordinance requires a minimum of 125-foot setbacks in rural 
districts for structures including tents and portable toilets, as well as of￾street parking areas.41 
Some wineries have gone further to integrate renewable energy sys￾tems into their operations. This vineyard (see Figure 5.12) installed pho￾tovoltaic panels and collects rainwater from the roof of its tasting room, 
heating and cooling the entire building using a geothermal system. It 
even used local and recycled materials for much of its construction. 
Discussion Questions 
1. Does your state require and/or incentivize comprehensive plan￾ning? 
2. What kind of zoning and other land use policies are in place in 
your community? 
3. Are they working to protect farmland and/or to support food sys￾tems? 
4. What other policies or programs are needed?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LAND USe POLICIeS THAT SUPPORT FARMS, FARMLAND, AND FOOD 155 
Notes 
1. Freedgood et al., Farms Under Threat. 
2. Ibid. 
3. Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development, “Oregon Statewide 
Planning Goals and Guidelines,” Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development, 
July 2019. 
4. Oregon Legislative Assembly, “Chapter 215 – County Planning; Zoning; Housing 
Codes, 2021 Edition,” accessed March 15, 2023. 
5. “ORS 215.780 – Minimum Lot or Parcel Sizes,” Pub. L. No. Oregon Laws, Oregon 
Administrative Rules, Oregon Revised Statutes, Volume 6, Title 20, Chapter 215, 
Section 215.780, accessed March 15, 2023. 
6. Urban Land Institute, ed., America in 2015:A ULI Survey of Views on Housing,Transportation, 
and Community (Washington, DC: Urban Land Institute, 2015). 
7. “Prairie Crossing | A  Conservation Community in Grayslake, Illinois,” accessed 
January 29, 2023. 
8. Ofce of Agricultural Services, Montgomery County, MD, “Agricultural Land 
Preservation,” accessed March 15, 2023. 
9. Township of Chesterfeld, Burlington County, New Jersey,“Township of Chesterfeld, 
NJ: Article XVII Voluntary TDR Program Procedural Requirements,” Township of 
Chesterfeld, NJ Code, accessed March 15, 2023. 
10. Steven M. Bruder and New Jersey State Agriculture Development Committee,“Data 
on the TDR Program,” December 22, 2022. 
11. Alison Davis and Simona Balazs, “The Infuence of the Agricultural Cluster on the 
Fayette County Economy,” Community and Economic Development Initiative of Kentucky College 
of Agriculture, Food, and Environment University of Kentucky, May 2017. 
12. “Zoning Ordinance of Lexington-Fayette County, Kentucky, Ordinance No. 122– 
2022, Supp. No. 7, Update 1” (2022). 
13. “Zoning Ordinance of Lexington-Fayette County, Kentucky, Ordinance No. 122– 
2022, Article 1 – General Provisions and Defnitions” (2022). 
14. Freedgood et al., Farms Under Threat. 
15. Benjamin Goldstein, Dimitrios Gounaridis, and Joshua P. Newell, “The Carbon 
Footprint of Household Energy Use in the United States,” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 117, no. 32 (August 11, 2020): 19122–30. 
16. USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service,“Table 1. County Summary Highlights: 
2022,” 2024. 
17. USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, “2017 Census of Agriculture County 
Profle: Scott County Iowa,” 2017. 
18. Scott County Iowa,“Zoning Ordinance for Unincorporated Scott County” (2016). 
19. “2007 Scott County Comprehensive Plan,” Scott County, Iowa, July 17, 2015; Scott 
County Iowa,“Zoning Ordinance for Unincorporated Scott County.” 
20. Chris Mathias, Interview with Chris Mathias, Scott County IA Planning Director, 
December 12, 2022. 
21. “Chapter 336 – Urban Garden District,” Ord. No. 208-07 Cleveland Ohio Municipal 
Code Chapter 336 § (2007). 
22. City of Somerville, “City of Somerville Urban Agriculture Zoning Amendment,” 
August 16, 2012.  
 
 
156 SeC TION II 
23. “Chapter  17.20 Agriculture Zone,” Eagle Mountain Municipal Code Ordinance 
O-33-202 § (2023). 
24. Anders Van Sandt, Sarah A. Low, and Dawn Thilmany, “Exploring Regional Patterns 
of Agritourism in the U.S.: What’s Driving Clusters of Enterprises?,” Agricultural and 
Resource Economics Review 47, no. 3 (December 2018): 592–609. 
25. National Agricultural Law Center Research Staf, Agritourism – National Agricultural Law 
Center: States’ Agritourism Statutes (Fayetteville, AR: National Agricultural Law Center, 
February 9, 2021). 
26. “Butte County, CA Code of Ordinances: Division 7. – Agricultural Bufers,” 
Chapter 24, Article III, Division 7 §, accessed March 17, 2023. 
27. Clark County Washington, “Clark County Code: 40.240.130 Agricultural Bufer 
Zones in the General Management Area,” Title 40: Clark County, Washington, 
Unifed Development Code, October 26, 2022. 
28. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Reducing the Impact of Wasted Food by 
Feeding the Soil and Composting,” Overviews and Factsheets, August 12, 2015. 
29. U.S. Composting Council, “Model Compost Rules Template (MCRT) Version 2.0,” 
accessed March 15, 2023. 
30. Burlington County Agriculture Development and Board, Burlington County Comprehensive 
Farmland Preservation Plan (2022 Update) (Burlington County, NJ: Burlington County 
Agriculture Development Board, 2022). 
31. New York City Department of City Planning, “Zoning Districts & Tools: Rules for 
Special Areas: FRESH Food Stores -DCP,” accessed March 15, 2023. 
32. Laura Nixon et al., “Fast-Food Fights: News Coverage of Local Eforts to Improve 
Food Environments Through Land-Use Regulations, 2000–2013,” American Journal of 
Public Health 105, no. 3 (March 2015): 490–96. 
33. Julie Samia Mair, Matthew W. Pierce, and Stephen P. Teret, “The City Planner’s 
Guide to the Obesity Epidemic: Zoning and Fast Food,” The Center for Law and the 
Public’s Health at Johns Hopkins & Georgetown Universities, October 2005. 
34. Anna L. Haines,“What Does Zoning Have to Do with Local Food Systems?,” Journal of 
Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community Development 8, no. B (October 17, 2018): 175–90. 
35. City of Fresno the Development and Resource Management Department, “Fresno 
Municipal Code Chapter 15: Citywide Development Code” (2016). 
36. Hillsborough County City-County Planning Commission, Food Innovation Districts:A Best 
Practices Guide to Supporting Locally Produced Agriculture and Food Related Businesses in Hillsborough 
County (Tampa, FL: Hillsborough County City-County Planning Commission, n.d.). 
37. “Town of Lowville, NY: Anaerobic Digesters” (2013). 
38. North Iowa Area Council of Governments, “Cerro Gordo County Ordinance 
Number 15: Zoning Ordinance of Cerro Gordo County, Iowa: Revised through 
December 13, 2022,” accessed March 15, 2023. 
39. Bayfeld County Wisconsin, “Bayfeld County, Wisconsin Ordinances Title 5, 
Chapter 6: Large-Scale Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations” (2016). 
40. City of Seattle, “Urban Agriculture Ordinance 123378,” Ordinance 123378 § 
(2010). 
41. “Albemarle County Code: Chapter 18. Zoning, Section 5: Supplementary Regulations” 
(2019). DOI: 10.4324/9781003293712-9 
6 
PROGRAMS AND POLICIES TO 
SUSTAIN AGRICULTURE 
Chapter Summary 
Beyond land use planning and zoning, state and local governments have 
developed a suite of policies and programs to sustain agriculture and protect 
agricultural land from urbanization and suburban sprawl. Most states have 
programs to support agricultural conservation and improve environmental 
outcomes, including support for local conservation district staf. A handful 
of states have explored ways to support farm viability and access to land.This 
chapter describes the types of programs and policies used to protect farm￾land, support farmers and ranchers, and address farm-related soil, water, 
and increasingly climate concerns. 
*** 
Beyond land use planning and local regulations like zoning (see Chapter 5), 
state and local governments plan for and have policies to protect farm￾land, promote agricultural conservation, and sustain their agricultural sec￾tor. However, while the Farm Bill is a comprehensive bill that addresses 158 SeC TION II 
most aspects of food and agriculture, state policies tend to be piecemeal. 
Pennsylvania is an exception. It created the frst state farm bill in 2019. Fully 
funded for a fourth time in 2022, it allocated millions of dollars of fed￾eral American Rescue Plan funds to agricultural conservation and business 
development eforts, and provides funding to respond quickly to agricultural 
disasters, whether animal health, plant health, or foodborne illness. 
Every state and many local governments have taken steps to protect farm￾land from non-farm development. The most common approach is prop￾erty tax relief. In addition, more than half the states and nearly 100 local 
governments invest in programs to purchase agricultural conservation ease￾ments (or development rights). Some bundle incentives to protect farmland 
and/or require mitigation if farmland is converted to more developed use. 
They also support soil and water conservation, composting and reducing 
food waste, and address water rights. Finally, every state and many local gov￾ernments provide nuisance protections for generally accepted agricultural 
practices, and many have taken steps to support agricultural leadership and 
business planning. 
Farmland Protection Policies 
In 1981, farmland conversion achieved national recognition with the land￾mark National Agricultural Lands Study. NALS documented the causes and extent 
of farmland loss and what state and local governments were doing about 
it. It found development was consuming as much as three million acres 
of agricultural land annually—nearly a third of which was irreplaceable 
cropland.1 While its fndings were controversial, few disputed the overall 
trend: Farmland was rapidly being converted out of agriculture. Since then, 
state and local governments have stepped up eforts to protect farmland and 
ranchland for farming and ranching. This section outlines the main farm￾land protection tools. 
Property Tax Relief 
Responding early to the pressures of non-farm development, Maryland 
passed the frst law to tax farmland at its current use instead of its specula￾tive value in 1956. Since then, all 50 states and some local governments 
have enacted agricultural property tax relief. Most have authorized use value PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 159 
or current use assessment policies to mitigate high land values and property taxes. 
A few have created circuit breaker or other supplemental tax relief policies. 
Use-Value Assessment 
Forty-nine states tax agricultural land at its current use value for farming or 
ranching instead of its potential use for non-farm development. Each pro￾gram has its own participation requirements and ways to addresses issues 
like ownership, size, income, and management. Some are stronger than 
others. 
Efective programs have criteria and independent verifcation to ensure 
enrolled land remains in agricultural production. In Oregon, landowners are 
disqualifed if their land is removed from an efective-farm-use zone. Other 
programs assess rollback penalties or require landowners to pay a conver￾sion tax when land is disenrolled or no longer farmed. In Wisconsin, the 
conversion penalty kicks in when farmland is sold out of agriculture, and a 
percentage charge is assessed based on how many acres are converted and 
the market value of the sale. States like Delaware, Maryland, Michigan, and 
Pennsylvania dedicate a portion of their conversion penalties to permanent 
farmland protection; in New Hampshire, this is left up to towns. Other 
programs include provisions to protect and conserve farmland. California, 
Michigan, and Hawaii require landowners to restrict the use of their land 
for a specifed term, while Massachusetts has a right of frst refusal. A few 
states require conservation adoption or compliance. For example, Vermont 
can remove farmland and farm buildings if a farm violates state water quality 
requirements. 
Other Tax Relief Policies 
Michigan and New York have circuit breaker tax programs, which tie property tax 
relief to income instead of to property values. They provide most relief to 
farmers with the greatest need. In Michigan, eligible landowners receive 
a state income tax credit in the amount of property tax paid in excess of 
3.5 percent of their total household income. New York ofers qualifed farm￾ers a state income tax credit for local school taxes. Iowa’s Ag Land Credit 
program partially ofsets school taxes by allowing a credit for any general 
school fund tax in excess of $5.40 per $1,000 of assessed value. 160 SeC TION II 
Leasing Development Rights 
Some local governments reduce property tax assessments by allowing 
landowners to lease development rights by placing a term easement on their 
land.This approach complements other property tax relief programs, espe￾cially for part-time farmers who do not qualify for agricultural assessment. 
Southampton, New York, invites landowners to enroll farms of ten acres or 
more in a local agricultural district and protects them with a ten-year agri￾cultural easement.2
 In exchange, the town grants density and open space set￾asides and helps landowners secure economic development funds. Enrolled 
land also can be used as a sending area for TDR. In Maine, towns can develop 
a Voluntary Municipal Farm Support Program and grant 20-year agricultural 
easements in exchange for a tax reimbursement on farmland and farm build￾ings.The town of Winslow adopted the frst VMFSP ordinance in 2016.3 
Other Exemptions 
Some communities provide additional property tax exemptions for farm 
buildings, forgiving increases in assessed value, which may result from 
improvements like greenhouses, grain storage, farm labor housing, or 
value-added processing. Some go so far as to exempt farm equipment and 
machinery. Others provide sales tax exemptions for specifc kinds of farm 
purchases. New York exempts items from state and local sales and use taxes 
if they are used “predominantly” for agriculture, including things like build￾ing materials, services to install, maintain, or repair farm buildings or struc￾tures, motor vehicles, and energy or refrigeration. 
Agricultural District/Security Laws 
Agricultural districts—aka agricultural security areas—package benefts to retain 
farms and farmland. Created at the state level, some local governments have 
augmented state programs with their own ordinances. Not to be confused 
with agricultural zoning (see Chapter 5), agricultural district programs are a 
comprehensive, incentive-based response to development pressure. Fifteen 
states and a handful of local governments have active programs with varying 
acreage requirements and terms of enrollment. Most have links to local plan￾ning and are most efective when planning bodies have a role in ensuring their PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 161 
alignment with comprehensive plans.A few include restrictive agreements to 
protect farmland and/or link to other policies like PACE (see Figure 6.1). 
Common benefts include: 
• Restrictions on non-farm development, including the use of term ease￾ments; 
• Use assessment to tax agricultural land at its value for agriculture; 
• Protection from public conversion, including actions to limit or prevent 
eminent domain takings of enrolled land; and 
• Protections from nuisance suits and unreasonable local regulations. 
Agricultural District Provisions by Outcome 
Create a Secure 
Climate for 
Agriculture 
17%
Protect 
Agricultural 
Resources 
63%
Increase 
Agricultural 
Viability 
20%
Source: American Farmland Trust’s Farmland Information Center 
Figure 6.1 Agricultural district programs bundle benefts to retain farms and farmland. 
Source: American Farmland Trust Farmland Information Center. 
California’s Williamson Act was the frst program, passed in 1965, to pro￾tect agricultural resources, preserve open space, and promote efcient urban 
growth. Local governments enter into rolling, ten-year contracts with landown￾ers in locally designated agricultural preserves. Landowners receive agricultural 162 SeC TION II 
use assessments in exchange for keeping their land in agriculture or related 
uses.4
 In 1971, New York followed with Act 25AA, which provides right-to￾farm protections for landowners enrolled in state-certifed agricultural districts. 
It also authorizes counties to form agricultural and farmland protection boards 
to advise local legislative bodies and planning boards on agricultural issues, and 
to request the commissioner of agriculture to review state agency rules or regu￾lations that afect farming within an agricultural district.5
 Delaware’s law, passed 
in 1991, is linked both to planning and to the state’s PACE program (see box). 
Purchase of Agricultural Conservation Easements 
A Purchase of Agriculture Conservation Easement (PACE)—aka Purchase of 
Development Rights (PDR), among other names—pays agricultural landowners to 
protect their land from development. First conceived as an incentive-based 
alternative to zoning, over time PACE programs have been found to support 
and even strengthen local land use regulations.6 
Pioneered by Sufolk County, New York, in 1974, by 2022 30 states and 
nearly 100 local governments had authorized PACE to secure a perma￾nent supply of land for working farms and ranches (see Figure 6.2). Most 
PACE Programs as of January 2023 
Local Programs 
State Programs 
State and Local Programs 
No PACE Activity 
Source: American Farmland Trust’s Farmland Information Center 
Figure 6.2 Thirty states and nearly 100 local governments have authorized PACE pro￾grams to protect farmland.  
PROgR AMS AND P OLICIeS TO SUS TAIN AgRICULTURe 163 
programs prioritize properties based on soil quality, threat of non-farm 
development, and future farm viability. Private conservation organizations, 
like land trusts, also use PACE, often leveraging public funds to support 
protection. Together, public and private eforts have protected about eight 
million acres of farmland and ranchland across the U.S.7 
Traditional easements allow access to or use of someone else’s property. 
They typically are granted to utility companies to provide services like 
electricity and subdivisions for shared driveways or access to public roads. 
Conservation easements are diferent, as they allow landowners to limit develop￾ment to protect natural resources.Voluntary and fexible deed restrictions, 
they are based on the principle that landowners have a set of property 
rights that can be donated, transferred, or sold.These include the rights to 
develop and to limit development on their land (see box). Agricultural conser￾vation easements specifcally protect land for farming and ranching. 
PROPERTY RIGHTS ARE LIKE A BUNDLE OF STICKS 
Access rights 
Development rights 
Surface rights 
Transfer rights 
Base art by Patrick Guenette/Alamy 
Figure 6.3 Bundle of sticks. 
Property rights often are described as a “bundle of sticks” that guide a 
landowner’s legal rights to their property. each “stick” is associated with 
a diferent right, including the rights to use, lease, sell, subdivide, pro￾tect, and bequeath property however they like within the limits of local, 
state, and federal laws. Specifcally, these rights include: 164 SeC TION II 
• The right of possession: when someone holds title to a property, 
legally it is theirs with all the rights and responsibilities of ownership. 
• The right of control: Owners control the use of their property within 
the limits of local zoning, state, and federal laws. 
• The right of access or exclusion: Owners decide who to allow or pre￾vent from using or entering their property (except for law enforcement 
if they have a warrant). 
• The right of enjoyment: Owners can design, develop, use, and live 
on their property pretty much however they please so long as they 
respect the rights of neighbors and other community members. 
• The right of disposition: Owners can sell, rent, gift, or otherwise trans￾fer ownership or use of the property however they want. 
In addition, air rights allow landowners to occupy vertical space above 
their property. In rural areas these may be limited to prevent drones or low￾fying planes from disturbing poultry and livestock. In urban areas they may 
be used to regulate the height of buildings or development over highway 
corridors. Development rights give property owners control over whether or 
how they will develop their land so long as they comply with applicable land 
use regulations. Depending on state and local legislation, these can be sold 
separately from the full property, typically using a conservation easement. 
Mineral rights give landowners access to soil and geological formations 
beneath the land’s surface, including metals like copper, gold, iron, and sil￾ver, and energy resources like oil, gas, coal, and uranium. Surface rights give 
landowners control over the surface of their land to build, plant crops and 
graze livestock, produce timber, use water, and so on. In mineral-rich states, 
landowner’s rights are divided between surface and mineral rights. In these 
cases, landowners may own whatever is on the land but not what is beneath 
it, although they are allowed to dig wells or build underground storage. 
Successful PACE programs enjoy strong public support.They have clear pur￾pose statements, designated funding mechanisms, and make consistent invest￾ments in farmland protection. Many are funded through bonds or general 
appropriations, but funding sources also include lottery proceeds in Colorado; 
a cigarette tax, municipal landfll fees, and gas-well impact fees in Pennsylvania; 
and a corporate business tax in New Jersey.8
 NRCS provides matching funds to 
eligible entities through its Agricultural Land Easements (ALE) program.  
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 165 
Three states and a couple of local programs have augmented their programs 
by adding mechanisms to keep protected land afordable and in active agricul￾tural use. Massachusetts and Vermont have instated an Option to Purchase at Agricultural 
Value (OPAV). OPAVs require that when protected land is sold, it is sold for a price 
that refects its value for farming, not estate or other values infuenced by non￾farming demand. New York has instated pre-emptive purchase rights. Similar to 
OPAVs, these are meant to ensure that protected land is sold to qualifed farmers. 
Afrmative easements go a step further to limit land only to agricultural use. 
DELAWARE TAKES A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO FARMLAND 
PROTECTION 
Figure 6.4 This area of rural Kent County shows how the Delaware Agricultural 
Lands Preservation Program has achieved landscape-scale preserva￾tion through multiple easement purchases over time.The map shows 
134 individual easements purchased since 1996, protecting 43 per￾cent of the land in view on the map. Easements were selected through 
a voluntary process and prioritized by discounting ofered by land￾owners.The program’s success is having a permanent impact on the 
local landscape and providing land for future generations of farmers. 
Source: Map provided by the Delaware Agricultural Lands Preservation Program. 166 SeC TION II 
Delaware is the second smallest state, but it ranks frst for the value 
of agricultural sales per acre and second behind California in per-farm 
sales.9 To save farmland for food and other products, the state legis￾lature created the Agricultural Lands (Aglands) Preservation Program 
in 1991, combining farmland protection and land use planning. Pro￾fessional planning staf advise and support the AgLands Preservation 
Foundation, which uses PACe and agricultural districts to retain farm￾land and support farm enterprises at a landscape level. Together, these 
programs have permanently protected more than 25  percent of the 
state’s farmland and enrolled 400 farms in districts, totaling more than 
40,000 acres. 
Landowners participate through a two-phase process. In Phase I, 
they sign a ten-year agreement to enroll in an Agricultural Preserva￾tion District and commit their land to farming. Farming is defned 
broadly. It includes traditional crop, livestock, and poultry production, 
but also agritourism, equine, forestry, and non-commercial hunting, 
trapping, and fshing. enrolled landowners receive nuisance protec￾tions and notifcation requirements for adjacent landowners, and their 
unimproved land is exempt from county, school, and real estate trans￾fer taxes. Farms must be zoned for agriculture, meet income require￾ments, and achieve a minimum farm viability score of 170 using an 
automated Land evaluation and Site Assessment (LeSA) model. LeSA 
is NRCS’s numeric rating system used to evaluate a parcel’s long-term 
viability based on soil type, surrounding land use, zoning, and other 
attributes. 
After a year, landowners may apply to Phase II to sell an agricul￾tural conservation easement through the state’s Aglands Preservation 
program. If sold, the district agreement is replaced by a permanent 
easement. easements are selected through a voluntary process and 
prioritized by discounting offered by landowners. Funding permit￾ting, the Aglands Program selects one round of farms to protect each 
year.10 
Farmland Mitigation 
A handful of state and local governments require developers to ofset the 
impacts of developing farmland by protecting an equal or greater amount of  
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 167 
comparable land. Mitigation can be achieved by requiring contributions to a 
PACE program, purchasing land in fee, and/or dedicating funds to a quali￾fed conservation entity. 
In Massachusetts and Vermont, if there is no feasible alternative to 
developing high-quality farmland, developers must contribute funds to 
their state PACE programs. In California, more than a dozen local gov￾ernments require farmland mitigation. Yolo County requires developers 
whose projects convert prime farmland in specifed zones to protect at 
least three acres of farmland for every acre converted. Projects that convert 
lesser-quality soils must protect a minimum of two acres, and projects 
that convert a combination must mitigate at a blended ratio. Afordable 
housing developments are exempt, as well as public uses, such as parks 
and schools, that do not generate revenue. California also has a program 
that provides grants to buy agricultural easements in counties surrounding 
railway corridors.11 
Promote Conservation 
Agricultural conservation includes land management practices that maintain 
or improve land and water resources for the future to advance sustainable 
environmental and economic use. Beyond Farm Bill programs administered 
by FSA and NRCS, state and local governments have programs to support soil 
health, water quality and quantity, on-farm conservation programs, com￾posting, and reducing food waste. Increasingly, they also are confronting a 
changing climate. 
In 2014, California took agricultural conservation a step further by 
combining it with farmland protection and land use planning to combat 
climate change through its Sustainable Agricultural Lands Conservation 
Program (see box). It also created a Tribal Government Challenge plan￾ning grant program to invest in tribal efforts to support climate-related 
feasibility studies, planning activities, and auditing to advance trib￾ally tailored solutions to reduce GHG emissions and improve access to 
clean energy while advancing climate adaptation and resiliency on tribal 
lands.12  
168 SeC TION II 
CALIFORNIA’S SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL LANDS 
CONSERVATION PROGRAM UNITES PLANNING AND 
PROTECTION 
Figure 6.5 Chino, California, agricultural landscape. 
Source: USDA. 
California Senate Bill (SB) 862 established the Afordable Housing and 
Sustainable Communities (AHSC) Program “to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions through projects that implement land use, housing, trans￾portation, and agricultural land preservation practices to support infll 
and compact development.”13 Led by the cabinet-level Strategic growth 
Council, AHSC is funded by proceeds from the state’s cap-and-trade 
emissions reduction program. Its farmland component, Sustainable 
Agricultural Lands Conservation (SALC)14 supports land use planning 
and permanent farmland protection to promote smart growth, reduce 
vehicle miles traveled, and increase community food security. 
SALC is administered by California’s Department of Conservation and 
the Natural Resources Agency. They fund communities to protect farm￾land and encourage compact, transit-oriented development with three 
types of awards: 
1. Planning grants to support local and regional land use policies, 
economic development strategies, and plans to protect critical agri￾cultural land. Plans also may support environmental co-benefts of 
protecting farmland and ranchland.  
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 169 
2. Agricultural Conservation Acquisition grants to buy conservation 
easements on or fee titles to agricultural land. 
3. Capacity and Project Development grants to expand organizational 
capacity to develop agricultural conservation acquisition projects. 
SALC has had signifcant impacts. By the end of 2022, it had protected 
196,000 acres of farmland and ranchland, provided planning grants to 
30 communities, and capacity grants to 20 more. And it estimates that 
so far, its gHg reductions (over 30 years) will be over 20.6 million metric 
tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.15 
Soil Health Policies 
The Dust Bowl stimulated the frst generation of soil conservation.As under￾standing of the benefts of soil health have evolved, the focus is shifting from 
solving erosion to enhancing ecological performance and climate resilience. 
As of 2022, 20 states had passed soil health resolutions or legislation.16 Many 
initiatives provide producers and landowners with technical and fnancial 
assistance to implement and/or demonstrate conservation practices to 
Figure 6.6 Healthy soil has a rich, deep color. Use of a diverse blend of crops, grasses, 
and cover crops creates a protective blanket that feeds and nurtures the soil. 
Source: USDA-NRCS. Photo by Catherine Ulitsky.  
170 SeC TION II 
improve soil health, sequester carbon, and reduce GHG emissions. Some 
fund capacity building for conservation districts, local governments, and 
other service providers to help farmers and landowners advance soil health. 
California has taken the most comprehensive approach. Beyond SALC, its 
Healthy Soils Initiative is a collaboration of state agencies and departments 
that work together to promote soil health on farmland and ranchland. It 
ofers fnancial assistance to producers to implement soil health practices 
and funds demonstration projects to showcase results. A handful of states 
have created soil health tools, as well as soil health testing and moni￾toring programs. For example, Illinois’s Saving Tomorrow’s Agricultural 
Resources (STAR) program ofers a voluntary framework to assign points 
for best management practices. States like Colorado have adopted STAR 
and created state soil health testing and monitoring programs (see box). 
TWO STAR PROGRAMS IN COLORADO PROMOTE SOIL 
HEALTH 
Figure 6.7 Improving soil health on America’s rangeland can yield signifcant 
water quality improvements, sequester more carbon, and improve for￾age for livestock. 
Source: USDA. PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 171 
In 2021, the Colorado state legislature established a voluntary Agricultural 
Soil Health Program. It authorizes the Colorado Department of Agricul￾ture to establish a soil health testing program and monitoring system, 
and to provide grants and loans to farmers and ranchers to advance soil 
health practices. It also creates a diverse 11-member soil health advisory 
committee comprising conservation district board members, farmers 
and ranchers, a tribal member, water users, and three ex ofcio members. 
The program is supported by state stimulus funds and grants from 
the state Department of Public Health and the environment, the Colo￾rado water Conservation Board, National Fish and wildlife Foundation, 
and NRCS. It has two main parts: 
• Saving Tomorrow’s Agricultural Resources (STAR) is a simple frame￾work originally developed by the Champaign County Soil and water 
Conservation District in Illinois. It helps farmers and ranchers assess 
their current systems, identify ways to improve soil health, measure 
progress, and share success. It assigns points for management activi￾ties. Scores are converted to a 1–5 STAR Rating, with 5 STARs demon￾strating commitment to a suite of practices that improve soil health, 
water quality, and water availability. 
• STAR+ provides fnancial and technical assistance to producers to 
adopt new practices on one feld over three years and to consider 
expanding them across their entire operations. It also provides capac￾ity support, equipment grants, training, and other incentives to con￾servation districts and eligible entities to provide technical assistance 
to producers and landowners.17 
In September 2022, USDA awarded Colorado a $25 million Climate 
Smart Commodities grant to expand the reach of the STAR+ program and 
help other interested western states adopt the STAR evaluation system.18 
On Farm Conservation Programs 
American Farmland Trust’s Farmland Information Center found 37 states 
have programs to encourage conservation adoption. Many are administered 
by state departments of agriculture or conservation commissions, often in 
partnership with local conservation districts. Most ofer technical assis￾tance, including direct consultations and technical expertise on developing 172 SeC TION II 
conservation plans and applying conservation practices. Some provide 
training and support to help producers and landowners comply with envi￾ronmental regulations (see box). Many provide public funds to farmers, 
ranchers, and agricultural landowners to implement practices to improve 
soil and water quality. Funding sources range from general state funding, 
real estate transfer taxes, cap-and-trade proceeds, and grants from public 
and private sources. 
While these programs increasingly address soil health practices to mit￾igate climate change, given strict Clean Water Act requirements, on-farm 
conservation programs generally address livestock management. For exam￾ple, the North Carolina Agricultural Cost Share Program is a typical volun￾tary, incentive-based program to address nonpoint source pollution. Local 
conservation district staf work with agricultural landowners and renters to 
develop and approve conservation plans, identify and design practices to 
ensure longevity, and acquire approval of a cost share agreement to install 
best management practices.19 
LOUISIANA MASTER FARMERS LEARN TO IMPROVE 
WATER QUALITY 
The Louisiana Master Farmer Program is a multi-agency efort to help 
farmers address environmental concerns while enhancing production 
and resource management skills. After ePA placed several of the state’s 
water bodies on its impaired waters list, the state legislature enacted the 
program to reduce pollution entering its rivers and streams, empower￾ing the commissioner of agriculture and forestry to certify individuals as 
master farmers. 
Farmers must complete a training program and implement a com￾prehensive soil and water conservation plan that meets the standards 
and specifcations of the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and For￾estry, afected soil and water conservation districts, and NRCS.20 LSU 
AgCenter, the state’s land-grant university, developed the voluntary 
program in collaboration with key partners. Available to all Louisiana 
farmers on a watershed-by-watershed basis, it teaches environmental 
stewardship, conservation-based production, and sustainability through 
classroom instruction and a hands-on feld day and workshop.  
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 173 
Building Capacity to Support On-Farm Conservation 
Along with direct support to landowners and producers, states build the 
capacity of technical service providers like conservation districts, local 
governments, and other entities. Capacity-building programs fund staf, 
program delivery, and in some cases ofer specialized training. For exam￾ple, New Mexico’s Healthy Soil Act supports agricultural systems and 
other land management to improve the health, yield, and proftability of 
the soils of the state. The state’s Department of Agriculture awards grants 
to conservation districts and other qualifed entities, including Extension 
and land-grant universities, Acequias, Pueblos, tribes, and nations to 
implement on-the-ground projects to achieve soil health principles.21 
Kansas’s Water Resources Cost-Share Program allocates funds to coun￾ties to address locally determined water resource concerns. Funding can 
be used for a range of approaches, including terraces and waterways to 
address soil erosion. It also can be used to create new springs and other 
water sources to keep cattle away from streams and rivers. New York’s 
Climate Resilient Farming Grants program awards competitive grants to 
conservation districts in three project categories: agricultural waste stor￾age cover and fare for methane reduction, on-farm water management, 
and soil health systems.22 
Clean Water Indiana (CWI) supports technical and fnancial assistance 
to both landowners and conservation groups. Under the direction of the 
State Soil Conservation Board, it is funded by a portion of the state’s ciga￾rette tax. It provides grants to conservation districts to address priorities like 
nonpoint sources of water pollution. Districts use these funds for locally 
driven education and capacity-building programs, including cost share pro￾grams, stafng for technical assistance, equipment, feld days and outreach 
programs. Grants also support regional specialists to help counties address 
invasive species concerns. Many projects target farmers who currently are 
not served by other conservation programs.23 
Water Quality Policies 
The Clean Water Act requires states to set water quality standards to 
ensure waterways are safe for drinking, recreation, and other designated 
uses. Waterways that fail to meet the standards are listed as impaired and  
174 SeC TION II 
the maximum amount of a pollutant allowed in a waterbody—or Total 
Maximum Daily Load (TMDL)—must be developed to bring them into 
compliance. 
EPA has authority to regulate point pollution from sources like CAFOs, 
but states have authority over nonpoint pollution, such as nutrient runof 
from farmland. They use a series of approaches to minimize the impacts 
of nonpoint pollution on water quality. These include limiting applica￾tion of agricultural nutrients, nutrient management plans, tracking and 
reporting, and fnancial incentives like water quality trading or income 
tax credits. 
Most states regulate applications of manure, fertilizers, and other agri￾cultural nutrients and limit how, where, and when producers may apply 
nutrients to land. Some restrictions are based on weather conditions and 
time of year, others on setbacks and bufers, and still others on application 
methods.24 
Snow and frozen ground increase the risks of manure runof and water 
contamination. So Iowa passed a law that prohibits CAFOs with more than 
500 animals from applying liquid manure in certain winter conditions. 
These include on ground covered with 1 inch of snow or 0.5 inches of ice 
from December 21 to April 1, and on frozen ground from February 1 to 
April 1, unless soil is frozen to a depth of 2 inches or less.25 Texas law for￾bids applying nutrients when the ground is frozen or saturated, including 
heavy rainfall events. It requires CAFOs to base application on soil analyses 
and apply them uniformly to suitable land at appropriate rates and times 
according to specifc crop needs. It also requires bufers to protect water 
supply wells used for irrigation, and between application areas and sink￾holes or water—with exceptions for alternative conservation practices or 
feld-specifc conditions.26 
Pennsylvania’s Resource Enhancement and Protection (REAP) program 
takes an incentives-based approach. It provides state income tax credits to 
farmers, landowners, and businesses to ofset implementation costs of prac￾tices to reduce nitrogen, phosphorus, and sediment pollution. REAP ofers 
farmers tax credits of 50–75 percent of a project’s eligible out-of-pocket 
costs; 90  percent for farmers who operate in a watershed with an EPA￾mandated TMDL. In 2019, REAP was amended to allow farmers to earn 
up to $250,000 in tax credits to buy equipment or cover crop seed, or to 
conduct soil health testing.27  
 
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 175 
VERMONT RAPs TO ADDRESS NONPOINT SOURCE 
POLLUTION 
Figure 6.8 This Vermont dairy conserved sensitive riparian areas on their farm 
by establishing forested bufer zones and installing high-tensile 
fence, stream crossings, and other water handling equipment. 
Source: USDA. 
Vermont’s Clean water Act—Act 64—requires the state’s department of 
agriculture to set Required Agricultural Practices Rules (RAPs) with farm 
management standards to address nonpoint source pollution and nutri￾ent losses and set construction and siting requirements for farm struc￾tures in foodplains, foodways, river corridors, and food hazard areas. 
Act 64 governs a wide range of practices from livestock management 
and crop production to storage and handling of agricultural wastes and 
fuel. It also regulates things like ditching and subsurface drainage, con￾struction and maintenance of farm infrastructure, and the stabilization 
of farm felds adjacent to banks of surface water.28 
RAPs apply to farmers who meet a low bar of minimum threshold cri￾teria. Criteria include producing an average of $2,000 or more of gross 
annual agricultural income, and/or farming 4.0 contiguous acres or 
more, and/or managing specifed numbers of livestock (e.g. four horses  
176 SeC TION II 
or 250 broilers). They require both vegetated bufer and riparian bufer 
zones. Bufers must maintain 10–25 feet of perennial vegetation between 
croplands and adjacent surface waters and ditches. Tillage and mechani￾cal application of agricultural wastes are prohibited in the zones. 
Operations that meet the criteria and manage manure, other agricul￾tural wastes, or fertilizers must implement a nutrient management plan.29 
For other operations, nutrient application rates must be accounted for 
and based on current university recommendations and standard farming 
practices. Fields that receive mechanical application of manure, fertiliz￾ers, and other nutrients must be soil sampled at least once every fve 
years and operators must maintain records showing compliance.30 
Nutrient Management Plans 
Almost every state has laws and regulations requiring producers to develop writ￾ten nutrient management plans to address the impacts of point and nonpoint 
source pollution. Nutrient management plans address the type, amount, tim￾ing, and application of manures, fertilizers, and other soil amendments.They 
typically include results from soil tests to determine crop needs, an inventory 
of nutrient sources, and best management practices for applying manure and 
minimizing run of. Most of these laws focus on animal feeding operations 
to respond to the Clean Water Act’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination 
System (NPDES). Some require plans for all agricultural nutrients, and some 
have established independent programs.Virginia’s Pollution Abatement Permit 
Program regulates animal waste and other discharge to surface waters that 
fall beneath the state’s NPDES permit thresholds.Animal feeding operations— 
including poultry—must implement an approved nutrient management plan, 
including a site map showing where applications occur, a site evaluation and 
assessment of soil types, a description of activities, application schedules, land 
requirements, soil and waste monitoring, and annual reporting.31 
Water Quality Trading 
The federal Clean Water Act caps how much pollution can fow into water￾ways.This has led several states to develop trading programs to buy and sell 
pollution reduction credits.Water quality trading is a market-based approach 
that allows pollution dischargers to buy nutrient reductions from other PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 177 
PROTECTING WATER QUALITY IN THE CHESAPEAKE BAY 
Figure 6.9 Chesapeake Bay Watershed. 
Source: Edwin Remsberg/USDA-SARE. 
Maryland has several agricultural conservation programs to protect and 
restore the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries. Its Agricultural Nutrient Man￾agement Program is the most comprehensive, requiring certifed prepar￾ers to develop nutrient management plans for most farms in the state. 
Plans include all farming practices related to nutrient use, identify what 
and how nutrients will be used and disposed of, and recommend ways 
to manage fertilizers and other nutrient inputs. Operators fle annual 
reports explaining what they did and certifying they will follow the plan 
the next year. Plans are updated every three years, with some exceptions, 
and Maryland’s Department of Agriculture conducts on-farm audits to 
verify that farmers are following their plans.33 
Maryland’s Agricultural Certainty Program gives farmers a ten-year 
exemption from new environmental laws and regulations in exchange 
for installing best management practices that meet TMDLs ahead of 
schedule. A certifed verifer inspects farm applicants every three years 
to determine compliance with local, state, and federal environmental 
requirements. The Chesapeake Bay watershed water quality trading pro￾gram provides a public market for nitrogen, phosphorus, and sediment 178 SeC TION II 
reductions. Farms that meet nutrient reduction requirements can gener￾ate credits from practices such as cover crops, reduced nutrient applica￾tion, and riparian bufers. Credits can be purchased by point sources and 
other interested buyers through a nutrient trading market. 
sources. Cities, farms, and facilities that discharge wastewater to waterways 
can meet regulatory requirements by buying equivalent or larger pollution 
reductions from another source or by protecting or restoring foodplains, 
riparian areas, and wetlands. 
The Ohio River Basin Water Quality Trading Project is the largest water 
quality trading program. Led by the Electric Power Research Institute and 
a diverse group of collaborators, it funds farm conservation practices in 
Ohio, Indiana, and Kentucky. It is supported by watershed modeling, on￾the-ground project verifcation, and a credit registration that includes state 
agency verifcation. Credits are given for verifed nitrogen or phosphorous 
reduction, which counties can sell. They also can be purchased as a bundle 
of benefts that include nutrient reductions and other ecosystem benefts, 
such as GHG reductions and pollinator or endangered species protections.32 
Water Rights 
Agriculture depends on water and often requires irrigation. Farms with 
some form of irrigation account for more than half the value of U.S. crop 
sales.34 Irrigation accounted for 42 percent of U.S. freshwater withdrawals 
in 2015.35 
Producers source water from surface water—rivers, lakes, streams, and 
ponds—and from groundwater stored in aquifers. Water quantity—or allo￾cation—is mostly governed by the states. Policies address uses such as with￾drawal from aquifers and water bodies, and transfers between watersheds. 
Typically, they regulate water based on its source, addressing surface and 
groundwater separately, and creating a complex tapestry of rules, regula￾tions, and interstate competition. 
Diferent regions use diferent allocation systems to determine private 
water rights.The eastern U.S. generally relies on riparian rights, the west on  
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 179 
prior appropriation, while a handful of states like California and Oklahoma 
use a hybrid approach. 
Riparian rights are broad but limited to landowners adjacent to the water body 
they plan to use. Landowners may make “reasonable use” of the water 
as long it does not interfere with rights of other riparian landowners. 
Irrigation and other agricultural uses are considered reasonable uses 
under most laws. Most riparian states use a permitting system to plan 
and optimize water use.A state agency issues the permits and controls the 
who, how much, and when of water usage. In many states, agriculture is 
exempt from permit requirements. 
Prior appropriation is a “frst-in-time, frst-in-right” seniority system. Priority 
is given to the longest-standing appropriator who gets their water frst. 
Water users can take their full appropriative right until the water is gone, 
even during times of drought. While these laws vary from state to state, 
they all are based on diverting water from a natural course and include 
general requirements about applying water to benefcial uses, including 
agriculture.As with riparian rights, most states use a permitting system.36 
Groundwater allocation policies often difer from surface water and rely on multiple 
legal doctrines.They generally diferentiate between on-tract use where water 
is sourced where it is located, and of-tract use where it is not. Many western 
states use prior appropriation for groundwater as well as for surface waters. In 
most New England and a few other states, landowners are allowed to use as 
much ground water as they want without regard to neighboring users. Some 
states have tempered this with correlative rights to distribute water more 
equitably. Other states require water to be put to reasonable use on overlying 
land but do not allow it to be transported. Some states combine approaches. 
Finally, some states allow and even encourage rainwater collection by ofering 
tax credits or exemptions for the purchase of harvesting equipment, while 
others, especially western states, regulate rainwater collection. 
In regions where irrigation is prevalent, local irrigation and groundwater 
organizations often manage on-farm water withdrawals and help manage 
irrigation pumping from local groundwater resources. For most, deliver￾ing water to farms is their primary function, but they have dual functions 
as well. Some perform drainage and groundwater management functions, 
others address wildlife management and food retention (see Figure 6.10). 180 SeC TION II 
Figure 6.10 Irrigation organizations have various functions, but the main one is deliv￾ering water. 
Composting and Food Waste 
USDA estimates that between 30 and 40 percent of food is wasted annually 
in the U.S.37 Most of it ends up in landflls where it produces methane, a 
noxious greenhouse gas.38 States have begun to address this with compost￾ing policies. Compost is created by combining organic wastes from food, 
manure, yard trimmings, and other organic matter into containers, piles, 
or rows. When managed in the right ratios, it creates nutrient-rich humus, 
which can be used in place of fertilizers to promote higher crop yields and 
remediate damaged soils. It also helps sequester carbon. 
Vermont was the frst state to ban food waste in landflls. Composting 
was found to be the main disposal method used to comply with the law.39 
California’s Senate Bill 1383 was enacted to lower methane emissions 
from landflls and to rescue food for people to eat. It set targets to reduce 
organic waste disposal 75  percent and rescue 20  percent of currently  
 
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 181 
disposed surplus food by 2025. Local governments are required to col￾lect food and other organic waste from residents and businesses and to 
produce clean streams of organic feedstock that can be recycled into 
compost, renewable natural gas, electricity, and paper. The law includes 
manure, biosolids, digestate, and sludges, plus green material, landscape 
and pruning waste, organic textiles and carpets, lumber, wood, and paper 
products.40 
Other states have composting rules that address basic operating and loca￾tion requirements to protect water quality and prevent nuisance complaints. 
These tend to be geared toward large-scale operations and address manage￾ment issues such as turning piles or windrows and measuring temperature. 
Some states exempt farms from these restrictions. In Wisconsin, farms com￾posting crop residue, manure, and on-site farm animal carcasses are exempt 
from most state composting requirements.41 
Increasingly, local governments are adopting composting programs. 
Most operate like municipal trash and recycling services with curbside 
pickup. Some support backyard and community programs and educate 
residents on how to compost on their own. Others require composting 
for supermarkets and other businesses that produce quantities of organic 
waste. Portland, Oregon, requires businesses that assemble, cook, process, 
serve, or sell food to compost food scraps.This includes stores, restaurants, 
hotels, and cafeterias, food and beverage manufacturers, hospitals, corpo￾rate and college campuses, and starting in 2024, elementary and secondary 
schools engaged in food preparation. Exceptions are made for businesses 
that donate food to a charitable organization, such as a food bank or pantry. 
They also are made for scraps used to feed animals in facilities regulated by 
the state’s Department of Agriculture and collected for rendering or bio￾fuel production.42 
Support Agricultural Viability 
Agricultural viability builds on the concept of “farm viability,” or an indi￾vidual farm’s ability to sustain long-term production and succession. It goes 
a step further to consider a jurisdiction’s ability to maintain economically 
sustainable farm enterprises, support wealth creation, and retain land in 
agricultural production for future generations. State and local governments 
have developed a suite of policies to enhance agricultural viability and 182 SeC TION II 
sustain their agricultural sectors. Some support agricultural leadership and 
farm business planning. Others protect farmers from conficts with new 
neighbors. Still others ofer bonds to help beginning farmers get started. 
Right-to-Farm Laws and Ordinances 
Since 1963, when Kansas enacted the frst law to protect feedlots from 
litigation, all 50 states have passed Right-to-Farm laws to protect farmers 
from unreasonable regulations and nuisance complaints. Nuisance protec￾tions are especially important when new residents move into agricultural 
areas with unrealistic expectations of country living and then object to the 
routine noises, dust, smells, and practices associated with commercial farm 
production. 
Right to Farm provisions also may be included in zoning enabling laws 
and agricultural district programs. Some local governments have enacted 
their own ordinances to strengthen and clarify language in state law and to 
educate residents about agricultural activities. For example, Sonoma County, 
California’s states: 
No agricultural operation conducted or maintained on agricultural 
land in a manner consistent with proper and accepted customs and 
standards, as established and followed by similar agricultural opera￾tions in the county, shall be or become a nuisance . . . if it was not a 
nuisance when it began, provided that such operation complies with 
the requirements of all applicable federal, state, and county statutes, 
ordinances, rules, regulations, approvals and permits. The provi￾sions of this section shall not apply where a nuisance results from the 
negligent or improper management or operation of an agricultural 
operation.43 
New Unit Notifications 
New unit notifcation ordinances warn prospective buyers and new resi￾dents of the types of farming activities they should expect.They direct real￾tors or landowners to notify potential buyers of properties next to or near 
farms of right to farm or other policies that might afect them. Some require 
the ordinance be placed in public areas and/or periodically mailed to resi￾dents to illustrate local support for agriculture. PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 183 
LOCAL AG DISTRICT’S ORDINANCE REQUIRES PUBLIC 
NOTIFICATION 
To protect farming areas for local food and fber production, Northamp￾ton County, North Carolina, requires certifed properties to change their 
titles to state that the property is located within one-half aerial mile 
of an agricultural district. Developers and others applying for building 
permits must sign a statement indicating that they have reviewed the 
agriculture district map and that they understand the types of activi￾ties that take place in these districts. Agricultural district maps must 
be posted along with a public notice in key county ofces, including 
the Register of Deeds and the Planning Department, and include the 
following language: 
Northampton County has established Voluntary Agricultural 
Districts to protect and preserve agricultural lands and activi￾ties. These districts have been developed and mapped by the 
county to inform all purchasers of real property that certain 
agricultural and forestry activities, including but not limited 
to pesticide spraying, manure spreading, machinery and truck 
operations, livestock operations, sawing, and other common 
farming activities may occur in this district any time during the 
day or night.44 
Agricultural Advisory Boards and Commissions 
Many communities have created formal or informal advisory boards to serve 
as the voice of agriculture in local afairs. These may be created at the local 
or regional level and used to serve as ambassadors to the public, identify 
and resolve issues of concern to farmers, and ensure local policies value and 
support agriculture. 
Some states have created voluntary Agricultural Commissions to provide a 
voice and engage farmers in developing local policies and programs to sup￾port agriculture, protect farmland, and encourage agricultural businesses. 
Typically, these are advisory boards to give farmers a voice in community 
decision-making. However, in California they play a formal and regulatory 
role. There, commissioners are charged with protecting the environment 
and public health and safety, while advisory boards play a role similar to  
 
184 SeC TION II 
commissions in other parts of the country. In addition, several California 
counties have created a Farmbudsman position to help farmers navigate the 
regulatory process. 
The size and composition of these commissions and boards vary by loca￾tion and may include members of other local boards with related inter￾ests, such as a planning commission, zoning board, conservation district, 
or economic development commission. In Connecticut, most agricultural 
commissions have fve to seven members who are either farmers or involved 
in farm-related businesses. In King County, Washington, the Agricultural 
Advisory Committee comprises nine people appointed by the county Board 
of Supervisors from various agricultural industries, the county Farm Bureau, 
and interests including water, small farms, processing, agricultural equip￾ment, agricultural chemicals, and petroleum. 
Aggie Bonds 
Sixteen states ofer aggie bond programs to help beginning farmers 
acquire land, pay for improvements, and buy things like equipment and 
livestock.45 Aggie bonds are established through a federal–state partner￾ship and generally run by a state department of agriculture or fnancing 
authority. They allow private lenders to receive federal and/or state tax￾exempt interest on loans made to beginning farmers. This makes it pos￾sible for local lenders to ofer lower interest rates on loans. The interest 
the beginner pays on the loan is exempt from federal—and in some cases, 
state—income taxes. 
Agricultural Economic Development Authorities 
Some state and local governments have created economic development 
authorities to make capital, loans, and other fnancial support available to 
producers. Most programs are run out of state departments of agriculture, but 
some are independent authorities. For example, the Maryland Agricultural 
and Resource-Based Industry Development Corporation (MARBIDCO) is a 
quasi-public corporation. It was broadly authorized in 2004 by Maryland’s 
governor and general assembly to develop agricultural industries and mar￾kets; support commercialization of agricultural processes and technol￾ogy; assist with rural land preservation eforts; and alleviate the shortage  
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 185 
of nontraditional capital and credit available at afordable interest rates for 
investment in agricultural and resource-based businesses. At the local level, 
Polk County, North Carolina, created an Agricultural Economic Development 
ofce to encourage and expand the county’s agricultural enterprises. Staf 
assist in training and scaling up agricultural businesses, identify trends and 
support services, create marketing opportunities, and connect new farmers 
to mentors. Building on the county’s comprehensive plan, it also works to 
protect farmland to support a viable agricultural economy. 
Cooperative Extension 
The Smith-Lever Act established the Cooperative Extension System in 1914 
to educate rural Americans about advances in farming practices and technol￾ogy. It is a cooperative partnership between federal, state, and local govern￾ments to share scientifc research from land-grant universities and—among 
other things—support farmers and ranchers with production and business 
technical assistance. 
Extension is funded through annual Congressional appropriations 
administered through USDA’s National Institute for Food and Agriculture. 
Federal dollars must be matched with state and local appropriations as well 
as grants, contracts, and fees. Federal funds cover anywhere between 10 and 
Figure 6.11 Cooperative Extension empowers farmers, ranchers, and communities 
to meet the challenges they face, adapt to changing technology, improve 
nutrition and food safety, prepare for and respond to emergencies, and 
protect our environment. 186 SeC TION II 
50 percent of its services, states between 20 and 50 percent, and counties 
up to 20 percent. 
Farm Viability Programs 
Four states have programs that provide teams of experts to help produc￾ers with business planning, and in some cases farm transfer planning and 
funding for capital improvements. Enacted in 1996, the Massachusetts Farm 
Viability Enhancement Program was the frst. It ofers one-on-one busi￾ness planning, technical assistance, and implementation grants of up to 
$150,000 to improve farm viability and to preserve and support the stew￾ardship of agricultural resources. Funding can be used for capital projects 
such as building or renovating barns, farmstands, and other retail structures; 
increasing food storage and processing capacity; wash-pack facilities; and 
so on. It also may be used for farm equipment and/or improving farm 
infrastructure, such as wells or fencing. Farmers who receive grant funding 
must sign a term easement to keep their land in agricultural use for a ten- or 
15-year contract. 
Market Support 
State and local governments have many ways to promote agriculture and 
expand market opportunities. Most have procurement policies to encour￾age schools and sometimes other institutions to give preference for pur￾chasing products from local farms. Many spearhead campaigns like Jersey 
Fresh or Kentucky Proud, which support state-wide marketing eforts, and 
produce maps and websites to help consumers fnd local food, agritourism, 
and U-Pick operations. Some provide grants to cover producers’ marketing 
expenses or create, invest in, and staf facilities like farmers’ markets and 
food hubs. 
“Buy Local” Branding Campaigns 
Many states and regions have developed “buy local” and other branding cam￾paigns to encourage consumers to buy more food and farm products from 
the state or region where they live.These campaigns add value to local prod￾ucts and bolster local economies. They use a variety of branding messages  
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 187 
and communication tools, from billboards to social media to events, and 
often publish annual directories to connect consumers with local farms. 
Some states provide grants to support these campaigns. 
Farmers’ Markets 
Farmers’ markets are organized, often temporary places where farms can sell 
products directly to consumers. In 2022, nearly 10,000 farmers’ markets 
operated in communities across the U.S.,46 supporting a growing demand 
for local food while improving the viability of small and mid-sized farms 
and addressing food insecurity by bringing fresh produce to underserved 
communities. Many state and local governments make grants to support 
farmers’ markets, invest in infrastructure to start or maintain markets, or 
license and handle permitting of vendors. 
Food Hubs 
Food hubs are middle-market infrastructure to manage aggregation, dis￾tribution, and marketing of local and regional farm products. Generally, 
private businesses and organizations as well as state and local govern￾ments have supported their development to strengthen local agricul￾ture and address food insecurity, often using USDA local food marketing 
funds. Hawaii went further and in 2022 passed legislation requiring its 
Department of Agriculture to establish a fve-year food hub pilot program. 
It provides grants to establish or expand a food hub or provide technical 
assistance. Local governments also support food hubs with grants, loans, 
and tax rebates, streamline permitting processes, and work with agriculture 
to support certifcation standards. 
Geographic Preference Procurement Policies 
Farm-to-school programs catalyzed many state and local governments to 
create geographic preference procurement policies to support farm viability 
and increase access to local food in public institutions like schools, hospitals, 
and prisons.Today, most states have farm-to-school policies with programs 
to advance core elements, including local procurement, school gardens, and 
food and agriculture education.47 188 SeC TION II 
Figure 6.12 Girls promoting a farm-to-school program in New York. 
Source: Josh Baldo. 
Some places have gone further to require public agencies to purchase a 
specifed amount of food from local farms. Others create pilot programs or 
take a hybrid policy/program approach. Cleveland, Ohio, gives 2 percent 
bid discounts to businesses that are sustainable, locally based, or purchase 
20 percent of their food locally. These can be combined for a maximum 
discount of 4 percent.48 New York City directs city agencies to give prefer￾ence to products grown, produced, or harvested in the state. Guidelines 
apply to solicitations valued at more than $100,000 for food or food-related 
services, and for social services through which more than $100,000 of food 
would be purchased annually in fulfllment of the contract.49 
Discussion Questions 
1. What kind of support does agriculture need in your community? 
2. What kinds of policies or programs might contribute to that sup￾port? 
3. Who from the agriculture community might you engage in your 
planning process?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 189 
Notes 
1. U.S. Department of Agriculture and President’s Council on Environmental Quality, 
National Agricultural Lands Study (Washington, DC: National Agricultural Lands Study, 
January 1, 1981). 
2. “Southampton, NY: Lease of Development Rights Enabling Ordinance – 
(Southampton, NY, Code § 330–248G (2023),” Farmland Information Center. 
3. Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry, “Voluntary Municipal 
Farm Support Program: Farmland Protection Program: M.R.S. 7 Ch2-C,” accessed 
March 23, 2023. 
4. For more information about the Williamson Act, visit: “Williamson Act Program 
Overview.” 
5. For more information about New York’s agricultural districts law, Act 25AA, visit: 
“Chapter  69: Agriculture and Markets, Article 25-AA: Agricultural Districts,” 
Consolidated Laws of New York § (2017). 
6. Thomas L. Daniels, “Assessing the Performance of Farmland Preservation in 
America’s Farmland Preservation Heartland: A  Policy Review,” Society  & Natural 
Resources 33, no. 6 (June 2, 2020): 758–68. 
7. Farmland Information Center, Local and State Purchase of Agricultural Conservation Easement 
Fact Sheets and 2022 Land Trust Survey (American Farmland Trust, 2023). 
8. Julia Freedgood et al.,“Farms Under Threat.” 
9. “Delaware: A Small State That Is Big in Agriculture.” 
10. “Aglands Preservation Program,” Delaware Department of Agriculture – State of 
Delaware, and Julia Freedgood et al.,“Farms Under Threat.” 
11. “Sec. 8–2.404. Agricultural Conservation and Mitigation Program.,” Title 8, 
Chapter 2, Section 8–2.404 Yolo County Code of Ordinances §. 
12. State of California Governor’s Ofce of Planning and Research and California 
Strategic Growth Council, “Grant Funding Opportunity: Tribal Government 
Challenge Planning Grant Program,” March 13, 2020. 
13. Committee on Budget and Fiscal Review,“Senate Bill 862,” Pub. L. No. 862 (2014). 
14. Committee on Budget and Fiscal Review, “Senate Bill 862”; California Strategic 
Growth Council,“Afordable Housing and Sustainable Communities.” 
15. Shanna Atherton-Bauer, “California Climate Investment Programs and Farmland 
Protection,” December  23, 2022; California Climate and Action Network, 
“Sustainable Agricultural Lands Conservation Program (SALCP).” 
16. Nerds for Earth,“State Healthy Soil Policy Map,” Nerds for Earth, August 27, 2019. 
17. Colorado Department of Agriculture,“Soil Health.” 
18. John A. Miller, email March 17,2023. 
19. North Carolina Department of Agriculture  & Consumer Services, “Soil  & Water 
Conservation Division – Cost Share Programs: Agricultural Cost Share Program 
(ACSP).” 
20. “RS 3:304 Master Farmer Certifcation,” Louisiana Laws – Louisiana State 
Legislature § (2008). 
21. New Mexico Department of Agriculture,“Healthy Soil Program.” 
22. New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets,“Climate Resilient Farming.” 
23. Clean Water Indiana,“Clean Water Indiana: 2023 Competitive Grants,” October 25, 
2022.  
190 SeC TION II 
24. Peggy Kirk Hall and Ellen Essman, State Legal Approaches to Reducing Water Quality Impacts 
from the Use of Agricultural Nutrients on Farmland (Fayetteville, AR: National Agricultural 
Law Center, May 2019). 
25. Iowa Department of Natural Resources, “Winter Manure Application: Guide to 
Frozen and Snow-Covered Ground Rules,” May 2021. 
26. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, “Subchapter B: Concentrated 
Animal Feeding Operations §§321.31–321.47,” Chapter 321 – Control of Certain 
Activities by Rule § (2014). 
27. Pennsylvania General Assembly, “Act of Jul. 25, 2007, P.L. 373, No. 55 Cl. 72 – 
Tax Reform Code of 1971 – Omnibus Amendments” (2007); Pennsylvania State 
Conservation Commission,“PA REAP FY 2019 Annual Report.” 
28. Vermont General Assembly, “Title 6: Agriculture, Chapter 215: Agricultural Water 
Quality, Subchapter 2: Water Quality; Required Agricultural Practices and Best 
Management Practice Including §§ 4810, 4810a, and 4811.” 
29. USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service, “Conservation Practice Standard 
Nutrient Management (Code 590),” May 2019. 
30. Vermont Required Agricultural Practices Rule for the Agricultural Nonpoint Source Pollution Control 
Program (Act 64 of the Vermont General Assembly, 2015 Session) (Montpelier, VT: Vermont 
Agency of Agriculture, Food & Markets, November 23, 2018). 
31. “Virginia Administrative Code – Title 9. Environment – Agency 25. State Water 
Control Board – Chapter 32.Virginia Pollution Abatement (VPA) Permit Regulation.” 
32. Jessica Fox,“Trading Up:The Ohio River Basin Water Quality Trading Project Is the 
World’s Largest Water Quality Credit Program,” Water Technology, November 2, 2019. 
33. Maryland Department of Agriculture,“Agricultural Nutrient Management Program,” 
Maryland.gov Enterprise Agency Template. 
34. USDA Economic Research Service,“Irrigation & Water Use,” May 6, 2022. 
35. Cheryl A. Dieter et  al., “Estimated Use of Water in the United States in 2015,” 
USGS Numbered Series, Estimated Use of Water in the United States in 2015, vol. 1441, Circular 
(Reston,VA: U.S. Geological Survey, 2018). 
36. For a more detailed overview of water law, visit the National Ag Law Center: 
National Agricultural Law Center,“Water Law Overview.” 
37. U.S. Department of Agriculture,“Food Waste FAQs.” 
38. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Reducing the Impact of Wasted Food by 
Feeding the Soil and Composting,” Overviews and Factsheets, August 12, 2015. 
39. Emily Belarmino et al., “Impact of Vermont’s Food Waste Ban on Residents and 
Food Businesses,” College of Agriculture and Life Sciences Faculty Publications, January  30, 
2023. 
40. For more information about California’s law, visit:“California’s Short-Lived Climate 
Pollutant Reduction Strategy,” CalRecycle. 
41. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, “Composting Rules and Regulations 
in Wisconsin.” 
42. City of Portland, OR,“Business Food Scraps Requirement,” April 3, 2022. 
43. “Sonoma County, California. CHAPTER 30 – AGRICULTURE. Article II. – Right to 
Farm,” Ord. No. 5203 § 5, 1999 §. 
44. “Northampton County, NC Voluntary Agricultural District Ordinance.” PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUSTAIN AgRICULTURe 191 
45. Council of Development Finance Agencies,“CDFA – CDFA Spotlight:Aggie Bonds,” 
CDFA. 
46. National Farmers Market Directory,“Find a Local Farmers Market Near You.” 
47. National Farm to School Network, “State Farm to School Policy Handbook 2002– 
2020” (National Farm to School Network, Vermont Law School’s Center for 
Agriculture and Food Systems, July 2021). 
48. Growing Food Connections, “Cleveland, OH Local Purchasing, Ordinance No. 
1660-A-09 |,” Growing Food Connections Policy Database. 
49. New York City Mayor’s Ofce of Contract Services,“New York State Food Purchasing 
Guidelines, 2012 (Revised April 7, 2015).” DOI: 10.4324/9781003293712-10 
 
 
7 
PROGRAMS AND POLICIES 
TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY 
FOOD SECURITY 
Chapter Summary 
Most funding for nutrition assistance comes from federal Farm Bill pro￾grams but is administered by states. Many states have augmented federal 
programs with nutrition incentives to support healthy food choices for peo￾ple in need. State, local, and tribal governments also support healthy retail 
policies, nutrition education and promotion, and emergency food programs 
that give away surplus food through food banks, pantries, soup kitchens, 
and other feeding sites.This chapter ofers examples of various policies and 
programs that address food insecurity and improve access to healthy foods. 
*** 
As discussed in Chapter 1, food insecurity is most widespread in rural areas 
and large inner cities. Most funding for nutrition assistance comes from federal 
Farm Bill programs, primarily SNAP with highest participation in rural areas. 
SNAP is administered by states. States determine eligibility, issue monthly 
benefts, and otherwise direct implementation. Some have expanded participation,  
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 193 
while others have passed laws to limit it by adding eligibility rules and disquali￾fying people for things like failing to pass a drug test.1
 States also cover healthy 
meals under Medicaid. 
Local governments generally act as on-the-ground representatives to 
explain how SNAP works and help eligible recipients apply. Ten states have 
delegated SNAP administration to counties so they assume a larger role.2 
Many states and several tribes augment federal programs like FMNP, 
SFMNP, and GusNIP to supplement the purchasing power of low-income 
households and increase consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables (see 
Chapter 4). USDA Food and Nutrition Service reported more than 3,100 
farmers markets accepted SNAP3
 in 2022 and several state as well as local 
governments require farmers’ markets to accept EBT. 
In 2020, an average SNAP benefciary received about $121 per month— 
about $4.00 per day4
—often too little to support a well-balanced diet. States 
have responded in various ways: 
• Ofering farmers’ markets no-cost EBT equipment to increase SNAP re￾demption; 
• Extending benefts to additional populations, such as income-eligible 
students; 
• Staggering beneft distribution to attract retailers to neighborhoods 
where SNAP is widely used; 
• Contributing state dollars to increase recipients’ purchasing power; and 
• Partnering with SNAP-Ed to educate recipients about healthy food 
choices. 
Beyond their roles with federal nutrition programs, state, local, and 
tribal governments support other policies and programs to increase 
access to fresh fruits, vegetables, and other nutritious foods. Increasingly 
they are considering ways to ensure food availability in the event of 
supply chain disruptions—especially those that occur during pandem￾ics, weather disasters, and other emergencies. While planning depart￾ments often are involved, these efforts also are supported by Cooperative 
Extension, health departments, civic organizations, and Food Policy Councils 
that convene government agencies and diverse food system stakeholders 
to promote public health and the social and economic benefits of local 
and regional food systems.  
194 SeC TION II 
Most policies aim to increase food access to priority populations who 
experience barriers to securing ingredients for a healthy diet.They support 
farmers’ markets and other outlets for supplying fresh produce, including 
mobile markets, produce carts, and government-supported food stalls.They 
enact geographic preference policies to purchase local food for institutions 
(see Chapter 6), fund food pantries and school meal programs, and pro￾vide land for urban agriculture and community gardens. Several have either 
eliminated food taxes or begun to tax junk food and soda. Healthy retail poli￾cies address the needs of residents who lack grocery stores and other retail 
outlets close to where they live. They include several kinds of programs, 
including healthy food fnancing. Nutrition Incentive Programs augment federal 
benefts under WIC and SNAP and promote consumption of fruits and veg￾etables. Nutrition education and promotion programs help residents select and pre￾pare foods to improve health outcomes. Finally, emergency food programs give 
surplus food away through food banks, pantries, soup kitchens, and other 
feeding sites.5 
Food Policy Councils 
The Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future’s Food Policy Networks 
project maintains a comprehensive online directory of food policy coun￾cils across North America. Also called alliances and networks, food policy 
councils build capacity and convene stakeholders to address food-related 
issues and needs, including food access, food security, and food procure￾ment. Some go further to address economic development, food production 
and processing, and even land use planning. Typically, they operate at the 
municipal or county level, some at the regional (municipal-county, multi￾county, or multi-state), and the rest at state or tribal levels.6 
Food policy councils sometimes are created by legislation, but most 
are quasi-independent, with public agency staf playing a role. Some or all 
members may be appointed by a government agency, involve agency per￾sonnel, or the council may receive fnancial support from a state or local 
government.Thus, some councils are embedded in or sanctioned by a gov￾ernmental body, but many operate independently. 
Most often, they play educational and networking roles.They collect and 
share knowledge and data with public ofcials, inform the public, and lead 
community engagement eforts.This was especially evident during Covid-19 PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 195 
when 82 percent reported facilitating connections across sectors to match 
food and farm resources, tapping their knowledge and networks to share 
information widely on food systems’ needs.7 Some work to start new pro￾grams, improve coordination between existing programs, and/or advocate 
for public policies. 
Councils generally focus on locally important issues. Sometimes their 
proposals are included in comprehensive plans. In Sarasota County, Florida, 
a food policy council collaborated with the county planning department 
to facilitate seven public meetings. Using a World Café activity, participants 
generated 39 food policy recommendations.Access to healthy food and sup￾port for sustainable agriculture were later incorporated into the county’s 
comp plan recommendations and adopted by County Commissioners.8 The 
Arizona Food System Network successfully advocated a statewide “Double 
Up Food Bucks” nutrition incentives program. During Covid, the council 
worked to gain additional emergency funding for Double Up Arizona as well 
as the local farm–to–food bank program. It also released Arizona’s frst state￾wide Food Action Plan to help guide decision-making and inform policy 
opportunities.9 
Healthy Retail Programs 
ERS estimates that in 2021, 34 million Americans lived in food-insecure 
households without ready access to fresh, healthy, and afordable food.10 
Most of them were low income and lived in low-resource communities 
that lacked full-service grocery stores or supermarkets.This has costly pub￾lic health implications. According to the CDC, leading causes of prevent￾able diseases include poor nutrition, tobacco, and excessive alcohol use. 
Communities as well as individuals are harmed when stores do not carry 
fresh fruits, vegetables, and other healthy foods but make cigarettes, highly 
processed “junk” food, and alcohol widely available. 
Health disparities are especially harsh for Black/African American com￾munities, especially in urban census tracts where they have the fewest super￾markets of any racial or ethnic population.11 Various social and economic 
factors discourage groceries from locating in low-resource areas, including 
a history of redlining, lack of viable sites, costly development procedures, 
and negative perceptions about community residents and their spending 
power.12 196 SeC TION II 
Healthy retail policies address these barriers to improve access to nutri￾tious food in underserved communities. They use a range of tactics and 
strategies to attract supermarkets, create new grocery stores, and help exist￾ing stores stock, market, and sell fresh produce, low-fat milk, whole grains, 
and other healthful foods.Among other things, they use nutrition incentives 
to increase buying power and tools like taxes, licensing, and zoning to bal￾ance the ratio of healthful to junk food in these communities. 
Healthy Retail Programs improve public health outcomes and strengthen 
local economies. Stores that accept SNAP and WIC bring federal dollars to 
communities. Stocking a variety of healthful food options gives storeowners 
a competitive edge. Further, supermarkets and groceries attract other busi￾nesses, creating jobs, increasing tax revenues, and stabilizing home values.13 
Healthy Corner Store Initiatives 
Convenience and corner stores are intended for quick stops to pick up food, 
drinks, household supplies, and personal care products. However, in many 
Figure 7.1 Nyssa Entrekin, a registered dietician with The Food Trust, delivers nutri￾tion education at Olivares Food Market in Philadelphia. 
Source: Dave Tavani for the Food Trust. PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 197 
underserved communities they are the primary food outlet: 15 percent of 
SNAP purchases are made at these stores.14 Mostly independently owned, 
they have limited physical space, available inventory, and refrigeration, so 
they rarely supply the full range of foods necessary to support a healthy diet. 
Given the need for refrigeration, it can be prohibitively expensive for 
small stores to stock fresh produce and other perishable items. Healthy Corner 
Store initiatives address this barrier by helping retailers pay for infrastruc￾ture improvements to increase the availability of healthier food choices in 
underserved communities.They use several approaches to encourage bode￾gas, corner stores, and other small convenience stores to stock fresh fruits 
and vegetables, low-fat dairy products, lean proteins, and other healthy food 
options. Incentives include funding for equipment, purchasing subsidies, 
training and technical assistance, and marketing and consumer incentives to 
drive customers to revitalized stores. 
San Francisco, California’s Healthy Food Retailer Incentives Program 
is administered by the city’s Economic and Workforce Development 
Department. It provides stores with targeted technical assistance, consul￾tation, business development tools, and access to programs to strengthen 
their operations.15 Healthy Food Retailers are broadly defned to include 
grocery stores, corner and convenience stores, farmer’s market, and other 
retailers whose business mostly comprises sales of food and other groceries. 
It supports retailers who devote at least 35 percent of their selling area to 
fresh produce, whole grains, lean proteins, and low-fat dairy products, but 
no more than 20 percent to tobacco and alcohol products, and satisfes the 
minimum wage requirements for employees.16 
Some places go further than food to promote active living. Through its 
Mass in Motion Healthy Market Program, the Massachusetts Department of 
Public Health works with local governments and community-based organi￾zations to help people eat better and move more. It ofers grants to cities and 
towns to create policies, systems, and environments to promote wellness 
and healthy living. Its Municipal Wellness and Leadership Grant Program 
provides grants and technical assistance to cities and towns to engage in 
community-based obesity prevention eforts. These include increasing 
access to local fresh foods through farmers’ markets and working with food 
retailers to ofer healthy, afordable food and beverage options, creating safer 
neighborhoods with bike lanes and walkable paths, and expanding parks, 
playgrounds, and other places to be active.17 198 SeC TION II 
HEALTHY CORNER STORE INITIATIVES 
Figure 7.2 The Food Trust logo. 
The Food Trust is a Philadelphia-based nonproft and nationally rec￾ognized leader in healthy retail initiatives. It piloted a Healthy Corner 
Store Initiative (HCSI) in 2004. Subsequently partnering with the Phil￾adelphia Department of Public Health, the program expanded rapidly, 
frst throughout the city, then to Camden, New Jersey, and by 2014 it 
had grown to 11 more cities supported by city, state, federal, and private 
funding sources. Today, nearly 100 stores participate. The program was 
so successful it has been replicated across the country and USDA pub￾lished a Healthy Corner Stores guide as part of its ongoing eforts to 
help SNAP recipients make healthy food choices.18 
Nearly a third of Philadelphia’s residents participate in SNAP.19 Many 
sufer from food insecurity and rely on corner stores to buy their food. 
HCSI’s goal is to increase food access and encourage consumption of 
fresh fruits, vegetables, and other nutritious choices in low-income com￾munities afected by health disparities. It achieves this by increasing 
awareness and availability of healthy foods in corner stores through a 
multifaceted approach: 
• expanding store capacity to sell and market healthy items; 
• Ofering training and technical assistance to store owners; 
• Promoting health messages and providing nutrition education; 
• Linking corner store owners to community partners, local farmers, 
and fresh food suppliers; and 
• Ofering free blood pressure checks and referrals by health care providers 
to customers in select corner stores enrolled in the Trust’s companion 
“Heart Smarts” program. The stores also receive in-store nutrition edu￾cation lessons that include cooking demonstrations and free taste tests. 
A peer-reviewed evaluation found HCSI increased store capacity to 
market and sell healthy food. It signifcantly increased the availability PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 199 
of fruits, vegetables, and low-fat milk, especially in stores that received 
upgraded infrastructure, such as refrigeration, shelving, and kiosks to 
make fresh produce the focal point of the store. It also had economic 
development impacts. Stores reported increased customer trafc and 
weekly profts. It was estimated that the HCSI’s overall economic impact 
over 30 months was more than $1  million of earnings, $140,000 of 
added tax revenue, 38 jobs, and increased property values in neighbor￾hoods with participating stores.20 
Healthy Food Financing Initiatives 
Healthy food fnancing initiatives (HFFI) are public–private partnerships 
used to attract retail food establishments and invest in food-access infra￾structure in underserved communities. They provide one-time grants and 
loans to develop or renovate outlets such as bodegas, corner stores, gro￾cery stores, farmers markets, and mobile markets. Usually seeded with state 
funding, they are administered with a Community Development Financial 
Institution (CDFI) and a Food Access Organization (FAO). 
The Food Trust spearheaded the frst HFFI in Pennsylvania in 2004 with 
support from a state representative and a CDFI called the Reinvestment 
Fund. It showed that food retailers could overcome the high costs of land, 
infrastructure, and workforce development to operate proftable healthful￾food retail businesses in underserved communities. Launched with a three￾year, $30  million state appropriation to the Pennsylvania Department of 
Community and Economic Development, it provided grants and loans to 
food retailers to build or expand healthy food markets in lower-income, 
underserved urban and rural communities. The original program operated 
until 2010, supporting close to 90 projects across the state, creating or 
retaining nearly 5,000 jobs and improving access to healthful food for an 
estimated half a million residents. Pennsylvania reinvested in the program in 
2018 and it continues today.21 
Pennsylvania’s success has been replicated in other states and cities and 
led to the creation of two federal programs. One is funded through the 
CDFI Fund at the Department of the Treasury. The other was authorized in 
2014 and 2018 Farm Bills and is administered by the Reinvestment Fund 
on behalf of USDA Rural Development. It provides capacity building and  
200 SeC TION II 
fnancial resources to eligible healthy food retail projects and food supply 
chain enterprises to overcome high costs and barriers to entry. It expanded 
signifcantly with $22.6 million from the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 
and other relief legislation as part of a new USDA framework to transform 
the food system. 
HFFI programs operate at the local level, as well.The New Orleans Fresh 
Food Retailer Initiative (FFRI) is a partnership between the city, the HOPE 
Enterprise Corporation, and the Food Trust to stimulate supermarket and 
grocery store development in underserved communities of Orleans Parish. 
It provides forgivable and interest-bearing loans for capital, real estate, 
and related expenses to encourage supermarkets and other retail outlets 
to expand healthy food oferings in low- or moderate-income neighbor￾hoods. FFRI is partially funded by a $7 million grant to the city and state 
from HUD’s Disaster Community Development Block Grant program and 
matched one-to-one by HOPE, a credit union. Funds can be used to cre￾ate, renovate, or expand retail outlets to sell fresh produce while provid￾ing underserved neighborhoods with opportunities for employment and 
revitalization.22 
Healthy Retail Licensing 
Some communities take a regulatory approach to food retailer licensing. 
Commonly used to curtail tobacco sales, the approach also has been used 
to establish a baseline of healthy products that food retailers are required 
to carry. For example, Minneapolis, Minnesota, created an ordinance that 
requires licensed grocers to carry specifed food items to improve the city’s 
health outcomes (see box). Licensing also may include incentives to reward 
stores that surpass minimum stocking requirements.23 
A NOVEL STAPLE FOODS ORDINANCE IN MINNEAPOLIS 
Recognizing the correlation between food insecurity, low consumption of 
fruits and vegetables, and poor health outcomes, the city of Minneapolis 
adopted a Staple Foods Ordinance to help ensure that all city residents 
had access to healthy foods no matter where they shopped. It required 
licensed grocers to carry an assortment of healthful foods and bever- 
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 201 
ages to better align with the CDC’s dietary guidelines.24 Licensed grocers 
included supermarkets and groceries, corner stores, and co-ops, as well as 
most gas stations, dollar stores, and pharmacies, with some exemptions. 
Approved in 2008, the City Council amended the ordinance in 2014 
to set clearer and more complete standards. It amended it again in 2018 
to align with cultural dietary preferences and to require stores to stock 
a specifed minimum of specifed dairy, fruits, vegetables, whole grains, 
proteins, and other healthy food options on a continuous basis.25 Based 
on stakeholder feedback, the changes reduced the number of required 
food categories as well as some quantities while expanding varieties and 
package sizes in others. 
City staf provide training and resources to help stores understand the 
regulation and supply the required foods. They ofer merchandising and 
marketing trainings, in-store promotional supplies, and consultations 
with retail and marketing experts. They also help connect retailers with 
procurement options and ofer low-interest loans for coolers and freezers. 
Beyond providing incentives, city health inspectors monitor compliance 
as part of routine inspections. If a store is out of compliance, inspectors 
write a violation order and instruct store owners to fx the problem. In 
instances of ongoing non-compliance, they may issue a formal citation 
and monetary fne, after which a business’s license may be revoked.26 
Mobile Food Vending Allowances 
Mobile vending involves selling food out of buses, carts, trailers, trucks, 
roadside kiosks, and other portable vehicles.27 Common in urban and rural 
communities alike, and commonly regulated, mobile vendors supply all 
kinds of foods—some of it healthy, some of it not. However, with the right 
allowances and regulations, mobile markets are a convenient way to increase 
access to healthy foods while both responding to and expanding a commu￾nity’s food culture. 
Mobile vending allowances can supply underserved neighborhoods long 
before a supermarket can overcome cost and regulatory barriers. It can be tar￾geted to areas with large numbers of SNAP and WIC recipients to take advan￾tage of nutrition incentives. Mobile vending can bring food to areas where 
people commonly congregate. Kansas City, Missouri, has instituted guidelines 
to increase access to healthier food and beverages in their parks. They have 202 SeC TION II 
two categories of vendors: “Healthier” and “Healthiest,” which must comply 
with a set of nutritional standards. Healthier vendors receive a 50 percent 
discount in the cost of a mobile vending permit if half their food meets nutri￾tional guidelines. Healthiest vendors receive a “roaming” permit for the cost 
of a standard permit if 75 percent of the food they sell meets those guidelines. 
Vendors are routinely monitored by KC Parks to assure full compliance.28 
A ROLLING FARMSTAND BRINGS HEALTHY FOOD TO 
UNDERSERVED NEIGHBORHOODS IN WASHINGTON, D.C. 
The Arcadia Center for Sustainable Food and Agriculture launched a “roll￾ing farmstand” in an old school bus in 2012. A decade later, its mobile 
market has sold about $1.5 million worth of afordable, high-quality, local 
food in underserved neighborhoods in washington, D.C., providing over 
$1 million of wholesale revenue to local farms. every week the bus brings 
fruits, vegetables, eggs, dairy, meat, and bread to neighborhoods with 
low car ownership located at least a mile from a supermarket or fully 
stocked grocery store. To expand food access further, the program dou￾bles the face value of SNAP, FMNP, and Senior FMNP.29 
Nutrition Incentive Programs 
Thirty states have established fruit and vegetable incentive and produce pre￾scription programs to increase the ability of low-income consumers to buy 
fresh fruits and vegetables at farmers’ markets, other direct marketing out￾lets, and increasingly grocery stores. A trailblazing Massachusetts program 
laid the foundation for nutrition incentive policies. Spearheaded by August 
(Gus) Schumacher, then commissioner of agriculture, the Massachusetts 
Farmers’ Market Coupon program ofered coupons to WIC recipients to 
purchase fresh produce at farmers markets. Piloted in 1986 as a partner￾ship between the state Department of Agriculture and the Federation of 
Massachusetts Farmers’ Markets, it expanded in 1987 to include senior citi￾zens at nutritional risk.30 In 1992, Congress authorized the federal Farmers 
Market Nutrition Program (FMNP) to provide fresh, locally grown fruits 
and vegetables to WIC participants and to expand sales at farmers’ markets.  
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 203 
Schumacher went on to work for the World Bank, served as a USDA undersec￾retary, and co-founded the Wholesome Wave Foundation.Throughout his life, 
he championed programs to serve the needs of local farmers and low-income 
populations with limited access to healthy food. Today, the Gus Schumacher 
Nutrition Incentive Program (GusNIP) and other nutrition incentive pro￾grams address food insecurity, improve health outcomes, and strengthen local 
agriculture in nearly every state as well as several tribes and U.S. territories. 
Building on this approach, the Fair Food Network launched a pilot “Double 
Up Bucks” program to match SNAP dollars in fve Detroit farmers’ markets 
Figure 7.3 Gus Schumacher. 
Source: TedXMahhatten. 204 SeC TION II 
in 2009. As of 2021, Double Up was available at more than 1,325 grocers 
and farmers’ markets across 30 states, including 826 sites where farmers sold 
produce directly to consumers.31 SNAP recipients are automatically eligible. 
Honoring Schumacher’s legacy, Massachusetts created a Healthy Incentives 
Program (HIP) to provide a dollar-for-dollar reimbursement when SNAP users 
buy fresh local food directly from Massachusetts farmers to support. A state￾funded nutrition beneft, HIP is operated by the Massachusetts Department of 
Transitional Assistance. Between 2017 and 2022, over 175,000 SNAP house￾holds purchased more than $42 million of fresh produce from local farmers. 
Of these, 44 percent of the families included seniors, 30 percent included 
children, and another 30 percent included a person with a disability.32 
DOUBLE UP BUCKS TAKES OFF IN OKLAHOMA 
In 2020, Hunger Free Oklahoma received a $500,000 gusNIP grant to 
expand Double Up Oklahoma (DUO) in farmers’ markets, and to pilot a 
grocery store program in rural areas. It matched the gusNIP grant with 
foundation support and added more than $400,000 from the state’s 
Tobacco Settlement endowment Trust. 
The program was so successful that in 2022, DUO spent nearly 
$3  million helping more than 14,000 households purchase fruits and 
vegetables each month. It fnalized a new, industry-leading Learning 
Management System for SNAP enrollment assistance training. And it 
received another gusNIP grant—this time for $14.2 million—to expand 
DUO to 44 counties over the next four years. TSeT continues to sup￾port the program, and the state legislature stepped in with a $1.1 million 
annual appropriation.33 
Produce prescription programs—or Veggie Rx—encourage healthy eating to pre￾vent and manage chronic disease. Health care professionals provide “pre￾scriptions” along with EBT or coupons to buy fresh fruits and vegetables. 
Often, they are facilitated by local health departments or community-based 
organizations; some states, like Washington, have formally established pro￾grams. In 2019, Washington’s state legislature established defnitions and 
eligibility and appropriated funds to support a Veggie Rx subprogram under 
its broader fruit and vegetable incentives program. PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 205 
The Marion County Public Health Department in Indiana has a county￾wide Veggie Rx program to prevent and manage chronic diseases while 
improving nutrition security. It issues electronic benefts called Healthy 
Savings, which participants can spend at local Kroger, CVS, and Walgreen 
stores. During Covid it incorporated virtual nutrition and chronic disease 
management education.34 Navaho Nation has a similar Fruit and Vegetable 
Prescription Program (FVRx) and partners with health care providers and 
local retailers to promote healthy eating. Eligible families receive a monthly 
prescription in the form of a voucher to buy fruits and vegetables at stores 
on Navajo Nation.These stores are encouraged to ofer a variety of fruits and 
vegetables, including locally grown produce from Navajo farmers. It also has 
a Healthy Navajo Stores Initiative to increase the amounts of fruits, vegeta￾bles, and traditional Diné foods available in small stores on Navajo Nation.35 
Nutrition Education and Promotion 
The federal government has a long history of helping citizens and institu￾tions make informed decisions about food both eaten and served. USDA 
Figure 7.4 Elementary student showing classmates how carrots grow. 
Source: USDA. 206 SeC TION II 
and the U.S. ofce of Health and Human Services (HHS) review and update 
national Dietary Guidelines for Americans every fve years.These guidelines inform 
many federal food provision and nutrition education initiatives, includ￾ing WIC, the National School Lunch Program, and the Expanded Food and 
Nutrition Education Program (EFNEP). 
State, local, and tribal governments can reinforce or supplement these 
guidelines by providing their own mechanisms for encouraging and pro￾moting healthy dietary choices. County Extension ofces deliver local nutri￾tion education programs. For example, North Carolina’s Flagship Program 
educates people to increase food security and improve health outcomes and 
works to foster economic development through local and regional food and 
farming systems. Among other programs, it trains Extension agents about 
cultural awareness in cooking, how to open food donation stations and con￾nect with a SNAP-Ed so agents can use resources like garden kits, a $500 
garden start-up fund, and the Color Me Healthy curriculum to provide gar￾den and local food training.36 Outside of Extension programming, the most 
common ways local governments support healthy eating behaviors is by 
establishing local nutrition guidelines, food marketing policies, or school 
wellness programs. 
Indian Tribal Organizations (ITOs) or state government agencies admin￾ister USDA’s Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations, which pro￾vides USDA Foods to income-eligible households living on reservations and 
to Native American households living in approved areas near reservations or 
in Oklahoma. Many Indigenous households participate as an alternative to 
SNAP because they lack easy access to SNAP ofces or authorized food stores. 
ITOs and other administering agencies determine applicant eligibility, store 
and distribute food, and provide nutrition education. USDA provides the 
administering agencies with funds for program administrative costs. 
Nutrition Guidelines 
State and local governments can promote healthy eating and increase access 
to healthful foods by developing nutrition guidelines for public agencies, 
partner organizations, schools, childcare centers, and health care provid￾ers. Generally, these are based on the USDA/HHS Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans, but they also use other guidelines, like the Harvard Healthy 
Eating Plate37 or even their own.  
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 207 
Figure 7.5 The Choctaw Nation ofers cooking classes to demonstrate healthy meals 
that may be prepared with food available through the USDA FNS Food 
Distribution Program on Indian Reservations. 
Source: USDA. Photo by Bob Nichols.  
208 SeC TION II 
Cleveland, Ohio’s Healthy Eating Committee partners worked with the 
American Heart Association to develop a set of Healthy Cleveland Nutrition 
Guidelines, which the city adopted in 2014. Spearheaded by the city’s 
Department of Public Health, community partners included the Cleveland 
Foodbank, Children’s Hunger Alliance, Hunger Network of Greater Cleveland, 
City of Cleveland, Healthy Cleveland, Cuyahoga County, Cleveland Clinic, Ohio 
State University Extension, and The Cleveland Cuyahoga County Food Policy 
Coalition.Their goal was to align with USDA Dietary Guidelines and consumer 
recommendations to improve healthy eating and the health and well-being of 
greater Cleveland residents by creating clear nutritional guidelines.The guide￾lines are meant to inform which food will be purchased, donated, prepared, 
and served by individuals and families as well as by local government, agen￾cies, and organizations. Organizations that receive public food program funding 
must follow the guidelines, and Healthy Cleveland partner organizations also 
use them as a framework when they promote and provide food to their clients.38 
Regulating Food Marketing and Sales 
State and local governments can regulate food marketing and sales to pro￾mote healthy eating and infuence dietary choices. Many places now require 
calorie information on menus. Some tax sodas and junk food. Still others 
ban or restrict trans fats or marketing junk food to children. Generally used 
to discourage negative behaviors, some also fund healthy eating incentives. 
New York City was the frst local government to enact a calorie labeling 
law in 2008.The state of California quickly followed in 2009. Subsequently, 
a provision of the federal Afordable Care Act requires restaurant chains with 
20 or more U.S. locations to post the calorie content of prepared foods on 
menus alongside the item’s price. A handful of localities levy taxes on sugar￾sweetened beverages—aka “soda taxes”—which generally apply to beverages 
other than sodas like iced teas and sports drinks. In 2014, the Navaho Nation 
passed the Healthy Diné Nation Act, which levies a 2 percent tax on junk 
foods of minimum to no nutritional value sold on Navajo Nation. Proceeds 
are used to support community wellness programs.39 Seattle, Washington, 
started taxing sugar-sweetened beverage products in 2018. Instead of charg￾ing a sales tax directly on consumers, its Sweetened Beverage Tax makes dis￾tributors pay a tax (of 1.75 cents per ounce) on sugar-sweetened beverage 
products they distribute within the city.40 PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 209 
School Wellness Policies 
The Child Nutrition and WIC Reauthorization Act of 2004 has a Local 
School Wellness Policy requirement. This was strengthened by the sub￾sequent Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010. Schools that participate 
Figure 7.6 School lunch staf preparing food. 
Source: Josh Baldo. 210 SeC TION II 
in the National School Lunch Program and/or School Breakfast Program 
must develop a local school wellness policy to promote student health and 
address childhood obesity. Responsibility for developing the wellness policy 
is placed at the local level but must meet basic standards. Policies must be 
developed by a collaborative community process, contain nutrition guide￾lines, be monitored and evaluated regularly, and contain goals for nutrition 
education, nutrition promotion, and physical activity. 
BURLINGTON VERMONT PROMOTES HEALTH MEALS FOR 
BETTER LEARNING 
School districts have the authority to ensure that children in their juris￾dictions have access to food and knowledge of nutrition. However, not 
all have the same capacity or give it the same priority. Burlington, Ver￾mont, takes a comprehensive approach. The city school district part￾nered with three key community organizations to form the Burlington 
School Food Project. with a motto of “healthy meals for better learning,” 
it provides local food to district schools, educational opportunities in 
school gardens, cooking contests for middle and high school students, 
and cooking classes for both students and food service staf—all with a 
focus on fresh, local ingredients. For students, these educational oppor￾tunities are often integrated with the core curriculum, such as math and 
geography. And its leading educational program, Fork in the Road, is a 
student-run food truck that serves free school breakfast, lunch, and sum￾mer meals to all students in the district.41 
Local governments also play a role in ensuring that schools have strong 
school wellness policies. For example, the Washington, D.C., Council unani￾mously passed the Healthy Schools Act in 2010.This landmark legislation is 
meant to improve the health, wellness, and nutrition of District children by 
helping schools, students, and families eat healthy, stay active, learn healthy 
habits, care for the environment, and create healthy school communities. 
Meals must meet the USDA nutrition guidelines, and all public schools are 
required to serve free breakfast to all students and free lunch to all students 
who qualify for federal assistance.The program solicits input from students, 
faculty, and parents to design nutritious meals, and posts information about 
food served in the school ofce and on the school website. Schools that  
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 211 
meet these requirements receive fnancial assistance to ofset costs, and 
schools that source food from local farms are eligible to receive an extra fve 
cents extra for each lunch served that contains at least one locally grown, 
unprocessed meal component.42 
Emergency Food Systems 
In the midst of Covid-19, Feeding America estimated that 53 million people 
turned to food banks and community programs to put food on their tables. 
The largest hunger-relief organization in the U.S., Feeding America is a net￾work of 200 food banks and 60,000 food pantries and meal programs that 
provide food and services to people in need.43 These organizations provide 
emergency food free of charge to low-income populations through pub￾lic and private hunger relief programs. Outlets include food banks, soup 
kitchens and pantries, homeless shelters, and Meals on Wheels. Although 
emergency food providers usually are private, local governments can help 
Figure 7.7 In the wake of Hurricane Harvey, a pallet of disaster food boxes leave the 
Houston Food Bank commodity warehouse for delivery to food pantries to 
help those in need in Houston,TX, on September 22, 2017. 
Source: USDA. Photo Lance Cheung.  
 
 
212 SeC TION II 
to ensure that these services are available, well-coordinated, and provide 
wholesome foods. 
Funding for Emergency Food 
USDA’s Emergency Food Assistance Program (TEFAP) provides food at no 
cost to low-income people through state distributing agencies.Administered 
by FNS,TEFAP provides food to states based on the number of residents and 
unemployed people who have incomes below the state poverty level. In turn, 
states provide food to local agencies, usually food banks, which distribute 
it to local organizations, like soup kitchens and food pantries. TEFAP also 
provides administrative funds to support storage and distribution of USDA 
Foods.These funds must—at least in part—be passed down to local agencies. 
State and local governments can fund their own or build on TEFAP to fund 
or operate distribution programs. Many support publicly operated services like 
Meals on Wheels, which feeds senior citizens through home distribution and 
senior meal sites. Some fund private nonproft agencies to provide emergency 
feeding services. For example, in 2022 Seattle awarded $2.8 million to sup￾port 22 community-led projects through its Department of Neighborhoods’ 
Food Equity Fund.These projects created new food pantries, community meal 
programs, intergenerational nutrition workshops, and more.The Food Equity 
Fund was developed in 2021 to increase investments in community work led 
by those most impacted by food and health inequities. It is supported by the 
city’s Sweetened Beverage Tax and City Council funds.44 
During Covid-19, local governments became more involved in emer￾gency food provision. Cities including Atlanta, Georgia; Columbus, Ohio; 
and Madison, Wisconsin, used general or special funds to support distri￾bution eforts. Others used funding from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and 
Economic Security (CARES) Act. Dekalb County, Georgia, invested $2.8 mil￾lion to create a mobile farmers’ market paired with a wellness clinic. The 
county also used a grant from a regional commission to provide meals to 
senior citizens who had been placed on a waitlist for food assistance.45 
Coordinating Emergency Food 
Some local governments work to ensure coordinated procurement and dis￾tribution of emergency food. They organize food reclamation, streamline  
 
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 213 
service provisions, and connect food resources. The City of Portland and 
Multnomah County, Oregon, streamlined emergency food provision 
through a Schools Uniting Neighborhoods (SUN) Service System. The city 
and county partner with local school districts, nonprofts, and businesses to 
coordinate an integrated set of services for youth, families, and community 
members through a network of SUN schools across multiple county school 
districts.The SUN network partners with the Oregon Food Bank to provide 
3–5 days of nutritious food to families for weekend, evening, vacation, and 
other non-school days when food is hard to come by. Once a month, the 
SUN Community School Free Food Markets distribute fruits and vegetables, 
also in partnership with Oregon Food Bank.46 
BALTIMORE INITIATIVE ADDRESSES FOOD IN ALL 
POLICIES 
Baltimore, Maryland, takes a comprehensive “Food in All Policies” 
approach to address economic, environmental, and health disparities 
in neighborhoods with high food insecurity. Adapting the “Health in All 
Policies” framework advanced by the American Public Health Associa￾tion and the CDC, the city created the Baltimore Food Policy Initiative 
(BFPI) in 2009. The initiative takes a systems approach to integrate food 
across government agencies, strategic planning, and policy co-creation 
with afected community residents. It includes three pillars: 
• Interagency Collaboration; 
• Food Policy Action Coalition; and 
• Resident Food equity Advisors. 
BFPI brings together multiple perspectives to fnd policy solutions. These 
range from modifying practices within organizations and institutions to 
changing city regulations to advocacy. Lead agencies include the city’s 
Department of Planning, Health Department, Ofce of Sustainability, and 
the Baltimore Development Corporation (BDC). It addresses acute food 
insecurity while building long-term food resilience and advancing equity, 
seeking to right power imbalances and strengthen the local food econ￾omy. Toward these ends, it proposes agricultural and land use policies, 
including making suitable city-owned land available for food production 214 SeC TION II 
and developing pathways to land ownership, promoting sustainable agri￾culture, and supporting growers to create fnancially viable urban agricul￾ture. It has supported zoning changes to exempt hoop houses and allow 
poultry, small livestock and bees, food truck legislation, healthy vending 
machine procurement, and policies to support school wellness, nutri￾tion, and physical activity. 
BFPI created a Food Desert Retail Incentive Area concept. The city 
now gives property tax credits to supermarkets that locate or renovate in 
specifed incentive areas and meet certain requirements for the amount 
of healthy food they provide. Implemented by the Baltimore Develop￾ment Corporation, the tax credit also supports small loans for stores in 
underserved neighborhoods to invest in equipment and infrastructure, 
and funding for the Maryland Fresh Food Financing Initiative. Further, 
working with leadership of the Baltimore City Managerial and Profes￾sional Society (MAPS) and the Labor Commissioner, BFFI allows CSAs 
as an approved use of the existing Health Reimbursement Policy so 
MAPS employees can be reimbursed if they participate in a CSA. 
BFPI also has advocated for changes to SNAP. State-level eforts 
included support for bills to provide additional SNAP benefts to children 
during summer and winter breaks, to extend the SNAP Issuance period 
from 10 to 20 days to smooth out retail cycles, and to provide a dollar￾for-dollar match for purchases of fresh produce made using federal food 
assistance at participating farmers markets throughout the state. During 
Covid, it advocated for Maryland to expedite Online SNAP implementa￾tion in Baltimore City to make it possible for more to shop for groceries 
at home. It also advocated to HFFI to include underserved cities that fall 
outside of the federal food desert defnition.47 
Discussion Questions 
1. What kinds of issues afect food security and health disparities in 
your community? 
2. What policies or programs do you have to address them? 
3. How are they working? 
4. What more—if anything—is needed?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROgRAMS AND POLICIeS TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY FOOD SeCURITY 215 
Notes 
1. Kate Fitzgerald,Anne Palmer, and Karen Banks,“Understanding the SNAP Program 
for Food Policy Councils,” Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future, n.d. 
2. Rachel Mackey, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Reauthorization and 
Appropriations [Policy Brief ] (Washington, DC: National Association of Counties, 
February 1, 2023). 
3. For an updated list, visit the USDA FNS website,“Farmers’ Markets Accepting SNAP 
Benefts.” 
4. Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, A Quick Guide to SNAP Eligibility and Benefts 
(Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, March 2023). 
5. The Uconn Rudd Center for Food Policy and Health has tracked hundreds of local 
policies passed since 2010 on issues ranging from obesity and diet-related diseases 
to food access and assistance, package labeling, and food and beverage taxes. Visit 
their website under Research, Food Policy and Environment, Local Policy. 
6. Johns Hopkins University Center for a Livable Future has a directory of food poli￾cies councils. 
7. Rachel Santo et  al., “Pivoting Policy, Programs, and Partnerships: Food Policy 
Councils Response to the Crises of 2020,” Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future, 2021. 
8. Sarasota County Florida, “The Sarasota County Comprehensive Plan: A Planning 
Tool for the Future of Sarasota County. Volume 1: Goals, Objectives, & Policies,” 
2016. 
9. Arizona Food Systems Network,“Arizona Statewide Food Action Plan 2022–2024,” 
2022. 
10. USDA ERS Key Statistics & Graphics, “Food Security Status of U.S. Households in 
2021.” 
11. Kelly M. Bower et  al., “The Intersection of Neighborhood Racial Segregation, 
Poverty, and Urbanicity and Its Impact on Food Store Availability in the United 
States,” Preventive Medicine 58 (January 2014): 33–39. 
12. Desiree Siderof, “Getting to Grocery: Tools for Attracting Healthy Food Retail to 
Underserved Neighborhoods,” Change Lab Solutions, 2012. 
13. Michael E. Porter,“New Strategies for Inner-City Economic Development,” Economic 
Development Quarterly 11, no. 1 (February 1, 1997): 11–27. 
14. USDA Food and Nutrition Service’s Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, 
“Healthy Corner Stores: Making Corner Stores Healthier Places to Shop,” USDA, 
2016. 
15. The City and County of San Francisco,“The Healthy Food Retailer Ordinance,” No. 
193-13, Chapter 59, American Legal Publishing. 
16. San Francisco Administrative Code SEC. 59.3. DEFINITIONS. 
17. Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Bureau of Community Health and 
Prevention,“Mass in Motion.” 
18. USDA Food and Nutrition Service’s Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, 
“Healthy Corner Stores: Making Corner Stores Healthier Places to Shop,” USDA, 2016. 
19. U.S. Census Bureau, SNAP Benefts Recipients in Philadelphia County/City, PA 
[CBR42101PAA647NCEN], Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
20. The Food Trust,“Healthier Corner Stores: Positive Impacts and Proftable Changes,” 
The Food Trust, 2014. Information also provided by Nyssa Entrekin, Caroline Harries, 216 SeC TION II 
and Julia Koprak in an interview on January 6, 2023, and a series of emails between 
January 3, 2023, and March 3, 2023. 
21. Data supplied by Caroline Harries of the Food Trust on February 23, 2023. 
22. New Orleans Fresh Food Retailer Initiative. Information Sheet. 
23. Change Lab Solutions, “Licensing for Lettuce: A  Guide to the Model Licensing 
Ordinance for Healthy Food Retailers,” 2013. 
24. City of Minneapolis. Minneapolis Code of Ordinances. Title 10. Chapter  203. 
Grocery Stores.“Staple Foods Ordinance Fact Sheet.” 
25. Amending Title 10, Chapter 203 of the Minneapolis Code of Ordinances relating to 
Food Code: Grocery Stores. 
26. City of Minneapolis website, Government Programs and Initiatives, Healthy Living, 
Healthy Eating,“Staple Foods Ordinance.” 
27. ChangeLab Solutions, “Healthy Mobile Vending Policies: A Win-Win for Vendors 
and Childhood Obesity Prevention Advocates,” The National Policy & Legal Analysis Network 
to Prevent Childhood Obesity, ChangeLab Solutions, 2013. 
28. City of Kansas City, Missouri Parks and Recreation Department website, “Mobile 
Vending Policy.” 
29. Arcadia Center for Sustainable Food and Agriculture website, Our Programs, 
“Mobile Market.” 
30. David Webber et al.,“The Massachusetts Farmers’ Market Coupon Program for Low 
Income Elders,” American Journal of Health Promotion, no. 4 (March 1, 1995): 251–53. 
31. Fair Food Network,“Double Up Food Bucks 2021 Annual Impact Report.” 
32. Massachusetts Healthy Incentives Program website, “Massachusetts Healthy 
Incentives Program (HIP) Fact Sheet.” 
33. Hunger Free Oklahoma website, “The Work Continues into 2023,” Hunger Free 
Oklahoma Update, January 25, 2023. 
34. Fresh Bucks website, “Produce Prescription (RX) Program, Marion County Public 
Health Department.” 
35. Community Outreach  & Patient Empowerment Program, Food Access, “Fruit  & 
Vegetable Prescription Program,” 2022. 
36. Morgan Marshall, “NC State Extension Local Food Program Team Annual Report 
2021–2022.” NC State Extension Local Food Program, 2022. 
37. School of Public Health. Harvard Healthy Eating Plate. Harvard University. 
38. Health Cleveland website,“Nutrition Guidelines.” 
39. Navaho Epidemiology Center, “Understanding the Healthy Diné Nation Act of 
2014,” Navaho Nation, 2019. 
40. City of Seattle website,“Sweetened Beverage Tax.” 
41. Burlington School Project website. 
42. D.C. Health Schools Act brochure. 
43. Feeding America,“Charitable Food Assistance Participation in 2021.” 
44. Seattle Department of Neighborhoods. Food Equity Fund. 
45. Healthy Food Project. Municipal Policies to Support Food Access During 
Emergencies. 
46. Multnomah County, Department of County Human Services, SUN Service System 
webpage. 
47. City of Baltimore Department of Planning. Food Policy webpage. DOI: 10.4324/9781003293712-11 
8 
EVOLVING ISSUES 
Chapter Summary 
This chapter explores three issues that afect food production but have not 
received much planning attention: farmland access, solar energy siting, and 
commercial cannabis cultivation.While policy responses are evolving, these 
issues have not yet been integrated into food systems planning.This chapter 
is a step toward providing some guidance. It concludes with some thoughts 
about where we go from here. 
*** 
Chapter 3 discussed the need to plan for food systems as systems—not indi￾vidual sectors. Systems thinking can help communities manage compet￾ing land uses by balancing priorities for agricultural vitality, food security, 
renewable energy, and economic development. 
Access to arable and afordable land is a signifcant barrier to domestic 
food production, especially in the urban-infuenced areas responsible for 
producing most of our dairy, poultry, and specialty crops. Land prices have 
reached record highs, and there is a very tight supply of suitable farmland  
 
 
218 SeC TION II 
to rent or to buy, making it hard for a new generation to enter agriculture 
and for small and midsized farms to expand. State and local governments 
are stepping up eforts to increase access to farmland, often for local food 
production. At the same time, states are passing Unifed Partition of Heirs 
Property Acts to protect heirs’ property owners from forced partition sales 
and, building on the federal example, to restore ownership of tribal lands. 
Exacerbating the land access problem, more than half the states have set 
goals for reducing GHG emissions and dramatically increasing generation of 
renewable energy, especially solar. This is an important step toward environ￾mental sustainability and resiliency. But if it happens in a vacuum without vision 
and planning, it will come at the expense of our farmland and food systems. 
Ambitious renewable energy targets require dramatic increases in the number 
and scale of utility solar installations, largely planned for rural lands. While the 
U.S.Department of Energy reports that solar needs could be met with the equiv￾alent of less than 10 percent of potentially suitable disturbed lands,1
 without 
planning and policy intervention, most solar development will occur on farm￾land because it is cheaper and easier to develop than disturbed or marginal lands. 
Finally, now legalized in some form in most states, cannabis cultivation also 
is competing for land and challenging communities with siting considerations. 
Most communities are unprepared for a green rush and its added pressure on 
the land base. Going forward, these issues will command more attention, with 
solar siting and cannabis production especially afecting rural communities. 
Access to Farmland 
Nearly 40 percent of all farmers and ranchers are aged 65 and older, four 
times as many as those under age 352
 (see Figure 8.1). Including nonopera￾tor landlords, seniors own more than 40 percent of American farmland.3 
Many are aging in place, which contributes to a tight agricultural land sup￾ply: Very little acreage is available to rent or to buy, especially on the open 
market.4
 Competition for land is ferce given a farm consolidation, rapidly 
appreciating land values, and a diminishing supply due to farmland conver￾sion.These factors align to favor large farms and established operators.5 
In the past, farmland mostly transferred from generation to generation 
within a farm family through cradle, alter, or grave. Today most produc￾ers do not inherit their land.6 Even when families want to pass down their 
land, interpersonal dynamics and issues like fractionated ownership and 
heirs property rights complicate transfers between relatives. With little land Evolving issuEs 219
Source: USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2017 Census of Agriculture
Ratio of producers over 65
to producers under 35
2-3 times as many
3-4 times as many
4-5 times as many
>5 times as many
America’s Senior Producers Far Exceed Young Producers
Figure 8.1 S tates average over four times as many senior producers as young produc￾ers—a stark contrast to the general workforce, where more than six times 
as many people under age 35 are employed than people over 65.
available to rent or to buy, and land values at an all-time high, land access 
is a major challenge, especially for a diverse new generation of young and 
beginning farmers entering the field.7
Several states and some communities have addressed these issues through 
tax and other policy incentives, leasing land, and supporting LandLink pro￾grams. Others have passed Unified Partition Heirs Property Acts to address 
land dispossession through forced sales. And a few are working with tribes 
to restore consolidated ownership of fractionated tribal lands.
Land Access Policy Incentives
Nebraska passed the first Beginning Farmer Tax Credit Act in 1999. Since 
then, a handful of states have developed financial incentive programs to help 
young and beginning farmers gain access to land.8 Beginning Farmer Tax Credit
programs give agricultural landowners a credit on their state income taxes in 
exchange for renting and/or selling farmland and other agricultural assets to 
beginning farmers. Nebraska’s law gives asset owners state income tax cred￾its for entering into three-year rental agreements with beginning farmers. 
Assets include land, livestock, buildings, and machinery. Iowa’s program is 
similar, while Kentucky only incentivizes sales. Minnesota, Pennsylvania, and 
Ohio offer credits for both sales and rentals. Farm Purchase and Protection programs 
220 SeC TION II 
use a PACE framework mostly to help young and/or beginning farmers buy 
farmland.They use various mechanisms: 
• Maryland’s program is a fast-moving farmland conservation easement 
option purchase program. Selected applicants receive down-payment 
funds to buy farmland and subsequently protect it (see box). 
• Delaware provides a zero-interest loan in exchange for an easement on 
farmland purchased through the program. 
• Pennsylvania adopted an exemption from the state’s realty transfer tax if 
a protected farm is conveyed to a beginning farmer. 
• Washington state created a tax-exempt bond program to help beginners 
and historically underserved farmers and ranchers acquire farmland at 
lower interest rates. 
• Rhode Island has a Buy Protect Sell program, which purchases farmland 
from willing landowners at fair-market value, restricts it with an agri￾cultural conservation easement, and then sells it to a qualifed farmer at 
restricted agricultural value. 
MARYLAND’S NEXT GEN PROGRAM SUPPORTS FIRST￾TIME FARM BUYERS 
Figure 8.2 Maryland’s Next Gen program helps young and beginning farmers 
acquire and protect farmland. 
Source: USDA/FPAC. Photo by Preston Keres. eVOLVINg ISSUeS 221 
Maryland’s Next gen Farmland Acquisition Program grew out of recom￾mendations from the 2006 Statewide Plan for Agricultural Policy and 
Resource Management. It addresses two challenges: 1. helping young 
and beginning farmers acquire farmland and 2. protecting that land from 
future development. enacted as part of the Maryland Agricultural Stew￾ardship Act of 2006, due to the great Recession, funds were not allo￾cated until 2018. 
Next gen is administered by the Maryland Agricultural & Resource 
Based-Industry Development Corporation (MARBIDCO), a state eco￾nomic development authority. MARBIDCO provides down-payment 
funding to qualifed frst-time farm seekers who then have several years 
to sell an easement to a county or state PACe program. Once the ease￾ment is sold, they repay MARBIDCO, plus a modest administrative fee. 
If they cannot sell an easement within the time frame, the option is exer￾cised and the easement assigned to a county program or a private land 
trust. MARBIDCO also has a Small Acreage Next generation Program 
to help qualifed young or beginning farmers purchase small farmland 
properties between ten and 49 acres that are ineligible for the original 
Next gen Program. 
Land Banks 
Land banks are governmental, quasi-governmental, or nonproft authori￾ties created to acquire vacant, abandoned, and foreclosed properties. Once 
acquired, they maintain these properties until they can be transferred to 
other entities which return them to productive use. Created under state ena￾bling legislation and enacted by local ordinances, their functions and struc￾tures vary widely, but generally they authorize local governments to acquire 
properties, eliminate tax liens, provide clear title to foreclosed properties, 
and foster community development. Land banks are diferent from land 
trusts, which hold properties in perpetuity for a community purpose, such 
as afordable housing, environmental conservation, or farmland protection. 
Land banks can play an important role in redeveloping degraded areas. 
They also can be used to facilitate land access for local food production, 
especially in urban areas. For example, the Kansas City, Kansas land bank is 
authorized to lease land for community gardens, urban farms, and farmers’ 
markets.The Ingham County Land Bank in Michigan has a garden program 222 SeC TION II 
which leases land for larger-scale urban agriculture as well as for household 
and community gardens. And the Hartford Connecticut Land Bank part￾nered with a local nonproft to create an urban farming initiative in a feder￾ally designated Promise Zone to produce fresh produce while fnding new 
uses for vacant lots. 
LandLink Programs 
LandLink—or FarmLink—programs facilitate farm transfer by connecting 
retiring landowners with farmland seekers.9 Most programs are operated 
by NGOs, but ten states implement and/or invest public dollars in these 
programs. Eight are managed by Councils of Government or Cooperative 
Extension; only three have state authority.10 
LandLink programs have websites with resources, including sample leases 
and searchable databases, to facilitate connections. Successful programs have 
personnel dedicated to help with transactions and provide technical assis￾tance. For example, staf in Connecticut’s program ofer site assessments, 
help develop leases and purchase and sale agreements, and provide advice 
on issues ranging from production to protecting land with an agricultural 
easement.Along with access to land and high-quality land tenure, California 
FarmLink supports farmers and ranchers with access to fnancing and busi￾ness education. New York’s program is a partnership between the state and 
American Farmland Trust. Its farmland fnder website includes listings of 
farm properties and farmers seeking land, on-farm jobs, events, and other 
resources.The program also supports a statewide network of partner organi￾zations with dedicated staf who provide training and support for farmers 
and landowners. 
Leasing Public Lands 
Many public agencies lease land to farmers and ranchers.They include natu￾ral resource and parks departments to BLM and the Department of Defense: 
BLM alone manages grazing on 155 million acres of public land.11 States 
also make trust lands available—lands Congress gifted mostly to western 
states to support public institutions, including agricultural colleges. 
While most states allow leasing of state-owned lands, few prioritize agri￾culture. Nine allow it on land managed as wildlife habitat with restrictions eVOLVINg ISSUeS 223 
on activities. For example, in Iowa’s lease to beginning farmers program, the 
state Department of Natural Resources (DNR) leases wildlife habitat lands 
to certifed beginning farmers. Leases run for up to seven years and may be 
renewed, with preference given to beginners who have not yet participated. 
DNR may require conservation systems and adoption of generally accepted 
farming or soil conservation practices as long as they are compatible with 
resource management and outdoor recreation policies.12 
Only fve states give farms and ranches preference over other kinds of 
land use. Hawaii’s Agricultural Parks Program leases land to small, diver￾sifed farmers to improve local agricultural viability. To ensure the land is 
conserved for long-term production, lessees must be established farmers or 
qualifed beginners. California passed legislation to create Urban Agricultural 
Incentive Zones. It authorizes local governments to contract with landown￾ers to restrict their land to small-scale production in exchange for agricul￾tural tax rates. Contracts cover vacant, unimproved, or otherwise blighted 
lands, must be for a term of no less than fve years, and restrict property that 
is at least 0.10 acres and no more than three acres in size. 
Local governments also lease land for food and farm production. They 
address issues such as allowing public access, investments in soil health and 
farm infrastructure, water access, equipment storage, manure spreading, 
and so on. Some manage extensive public land resources. Boulder County, 
Colorado, leases 25,000 acres to operations ranging from small market gar￾dens to large commodity farms, including 7,000 acres for grazing livestock. 
Over 90 percent of crops grown on its land end up in the food system. 
Leases are both cash payments and crop shares where the farmer and the 
county split portions of the harvest.13 Other communities have smaller pro￾grams that often prioritize food production. Lawrence, Kansas’s Common 
Ground program leases under-utilized properties to residents for free or at 
a very low cost for community gardening and urban agriculture. Madison, 
Wisconsin, has ordinances for community gardens and to encourage edible 
landscaping on city-owned land. 
Urban Agriculture Tax Credits 
Some state and local governments ofer tax credits and other incentives for 
urban farms. California was one of the frst, passing legislation in 2013 to 
create urban agriculture incentive zones. Assembly Bill No. 551 authorized  
224 SeC TION II 
Figure 8.3 The City of Ontario, California, received a $1 million grant from the Kaiser 
Permanente Healthy Eating Active Living (HEAL) Zone initiative. Some 
of this went to scale up food production at Huerta del Valle, a four-acre 
organic Community Supported Garden and Farm. The city supported the 
project beyond the grant by providing a vacant piece of land next to a resi￾dential park and community center. 
Source: USDA. Photo by Lance Cheung. 
cities and counties to enter into ten-year contracts with landowners to dedi￾cate vacant, unimproved, or otherwise blighted parcels of at least 0.10 acres 
to small-scale agriculture.14 The following year, Maryland updated its tax 
code to allow for tax credits for urban agriculture.15 More recently, Missouri 
approved tax credits to establish or improve urban farms and community 
gardens that produce food for public distribution. Taxpayers may receive 
state income tax credits for up to 50  percent of eligible expenses up to 
$5,000.The credit is not refundable, but any excess can be carried forward 
and applied to the succeeding three years.16 
To encourage continuous agricultural use and maintenance of otherwise 
vacant land, Baltimore gives farmers 90 percent of their property taxes if 
their land is used for urban agriculture for fve years and produces a minimum 
threshold of value. San Francisco’s program requires applicants to demon￾strate they will beneft the larger community through produce distribution  
eVOLVINg ISSUeS 225 
and/or sales, open house days, educational tours, or other public programs. 
Eligibility is limited to property owners located in zones that allow agricul￾tural uses. Parcels must be vacant land between 0.10 and three acres in size 
and may only include structures that are accessory to the agricultural activ￾ity, including but not limited to toolsheds, greenhouses, produce stands, or 
educational space.17 Washington, D.C., ofers up to a 90 percent property 
tax abatement for properties actively used as urban farms up to a maximum 
annual abatement of $20,000.18 
Heirs Property and Fractionated Lands 
Properties transferred to heirs without a will are called tenancy-in-com￾mon—or heirs’ property. When a landowner dies without a will, their 
property passes down to heirs as undivided shares—or fractional interests. 
Over generations, legal title to this land becomes increasingly ambigu￾ous with dozens—sometimes hundreds or thousands—of potential heirs. 
Predominant among Black/African Americans in the South, heirs’ property 
afects other populations, including Appalachian and Hispanic producers, 
and tribes as fractionated lands.19 
Without clear title, heirs may use their family property but have trouble 
borrowing money and until recently could not participate in federal farm 
programs and disaster relief. (The 2018 Farm Bill remedied this by author￾izing alternative documentation so heirs’ property owners could establish a 
farm number to become eligible for USDA programs.) Further, since any one 
heir can sell their share, heirs’ property owners are vulnerable to third-party 
partition sales. Without due process, partition sales have been exploited by 
real estate speculators who acquire a small share to force the sale of an entire 
property—often against the wishes of the majority owners.They also have paid 
delinquent taxes and obtained a deed to a property without the owners’ knowl￾edge or consent.20 Forced partition sales have been a major contributor to the 
$326 billion estimate of Black land loss over the course of the 20th century.21 
The Uniform Partition of Heirs Property Act (UPHPA) addresses dispossession of 
land through forced sale. It creates a fairer—if still complex—partition pro￾cess, protecting the right of co-inheritors to sell their interests while pro￾viding other family members with due process to protect their interests. 
Protections include notice, appraisal, and right of frst refusal. Since 2010, 
23 states have passed UPHPA statutes, with several more pending.22 226 SeC TION II 
Land Buy Back programs restore ownership of tribal lands.The 1887 General 
Allotment (Dawes) Act divided up reservation land and allotted it to indi￾vidual tribal members. It allowed 60 million acres of “surplus” lands to be 
sold or transferred to white settlers and led to the loss of another 30 million 
acres through forced sales and other takings. These lands remained within 
reservation boundaries but outside of tribal ownership and control.23 
Similar to heirs’ property, when the allottee of the original Dawes Act 
died, ownership was distributed among heirs as undivided interests.Through 
many generations, this led to highly fractionated ownership of tribal lands. 
The U.S. government holds some of these lands in trust, with restrictions on 
use and disposition of the land. Other land is “restricted,” meaning a tribe 
or tribal member holds title but the federal government still can impose 
restrictions on its use and/or disposition. These lands are eligible for buy￾back purchases. 
A federal Land Buy-Back Program for Tribal Nations provided a $1.9 bil￾lion Trust Land Consolidation Fund. Authorized from 2012 to 2022, it was 
used to purchase fractional interests and restore the consolidated interests to 
tribal ownership. It was available to landowners who owned mostly small, 
fractional interests.24 Tribes continue to work with NGOs and state govern￾ments to reclaim lands in other ways. For example, in 2020 the Esselen Tribe 
bought back 1,200 acres of ancestral land near Big Sur, California, with help 
from a $4.5 million grant from the California Natural Resource Agency and an 
Oregon-based environmental group. So far, these eforts have focused on land 
used for things other than farm and food production, but tribes are building 
capacity to engage in many types of real estate transactions. The Indian Land 
Capital Company is a Native-owned, Certifed Native Community Development 
Financial Institution (CDFI) that provides alternative loan options to Native 
Nations for tribal land acquisition and economic development projects, includ￾ing to help tribes consolidate undivided interests in fractionated land. 
Solar Energy Siting 
Solar energy is a key to energy independence and to reducing GHG emis￾sions. But without proper planning and land use regulations, it develops 
farmland and is a threat to agricultural viability. While pursuing renewable 
energy goals, communities must balance the impacts of solar energy devel￾opment on food production. eVOLVINg ISSUeS 227 
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) posits that with supportive poli￾cies, aggressive cost reductions, and large-scale electrifcation, solar could 
account for as much as 40 percent of the nation’s electricity supply by 2035 
and 45 percent by 2050. To achieve this, solar deployment must grow by 
four times its current rate—with 90 percent occurring on rural lands.25 
DOE projects that solar needs could be met with the equivalent of less 
than 10 percent of potentially suitable disturbed lands.26 It even has a guide 
to help local governments evaluate opportunities to site community-scale 
solar projects on landflls and other contaminated sites.27 But developing 
brownfelds, landflls, and other disturbed lands is costly, complicated, and 
time consuming. On the other hand, developing farmland is cheap, easy, and 
fast because the land is fat, cleared, unshaded, and drained. It also is more 
likely to have high solar radiation and to be close to existing transmission 
infrastructure.28 
Rural communities have fewer land use regulations to constrain or direct 
development. AFT modeling suggests that without intervention, by 2040, 
83 percent of solar development will take place on farmland, with nearly 
Figure 8.4 Without better planning, by 2040 as much as 40 percent of solar develop￾ment could occur on our most productive cropland. 
Source: iStock photo by freedom-naru. 228 SeC TION II 
half on our most productive cropland.29 With the most extensive solar 
development projected to occur in three of the largest agricultural states 
(California, Florida, and Texas), what will be the impact on domestic food 
production? 
In theory, if a solar array is installed to be sensitive to future agricultural 
use, the conversion is temporary. It would require construction, operation, 
and decommission standards to protect soil health and productivity. But 
leases often are for 35 years or more, and many give an option to renew 
with a right of frst refusal for the developer. Given the cost of infrastructure 
investment and the fact that a good site for solar today will be a good site for 
solar tomorrow, it is unlikely farmland developed for utility solar arrays will 
be restored to full productivity. 
Beyond the actual conversion of farmland, developing large expanses of 
farmland for utility solar infates land values and threatens agricultural viabil￾ity. It displaces farmers who currently rent land and increases barriers to land 
access, especially for young, beginning, and historically disadvantaged pro￾ducers. It also can destroy pollinator habitat. Some communities have devel￾oped zoning ordinances to address these threats. Scott County, Iowa, with its 
rich agricultural resources and strong land use policies, created a special zon￾ing district to achieve smart solar siting (see Chapter 5), but most have not. 
Incentivizing Solar on Disturbed and Developed Sites 
With efective planning, communities can protect farmland and encour￾age solar development at the same time. Along with brownfelds and other 
disturbed sites like parking lots, they can incentivize solar development on 
warehouses, large agricultural structures, non-farmable ditches, and so on, 
advancing renewable energy while protecting valuable agricultural land. 
Parking lots ofer a huge, and as yet barely tapped, potential for solar 
development. The U.S. Geological Survey calculated the proportion of each 
county’s land that is covered by parking lots. It estimated they cover 13,778 
square miles—0.47 percent of the nation’s contiguous land area.30 Other 
studies have found that parking takes up about one-third of land area in 
American cities alone.31 Using parking lots for solar arrays ofers multiple 
benefts: shade in summer, shelter from inclement weather, and charging 
stations for electric vehicles. Recognizing this potential, in 2022 France 
approved a measure to require large parking lots to include solar canopies.  
eVOLVINg ISSUeS 229 
Figure 8.5 Heidel Hollow Farms is a 1,800-acre operation in Germansville, PA.With 
help from USDA, they installed an 896-panel solar array on diversion 
ditches that could not be farmed, providing up to 70 pecent of the farm’s 
electrical needs. 
Source: USDA. Photo by Lance Cheung. 
The law applies to all parking lots with surface areas more than 1,500 square 
meters (80 spaces or more) and will be phased in over a fve-year period.32 
New York State’s Build Ready program partners with local communities 
to identify and advance under-utilized land for renewable energy projects, 
including parking lots. To make these sites attractive, the state’s Energy 
Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) ofers a de-risked pack￾age for developers to construct and operate projects, including contracts 
for renewable energy payments. NYSERDA takes difcult sites and makes 
them “build-ready,” reducing barriers to developing solar on brownfelds, 
landflls, parking lots, commercial, industrial, and other underutilized sites. 
Mitigation Fees 
In cases where alternatives to developing farmland are not available, state and 
local governments can impose mitigation fees. These can be used to fund PACE 
programs. New York requires a mitigation fee on solar projects that receive state  
230 SeC TION II 
solar incentives in designated agricultural districts. Developers pay higher fees 
for more productive soils. Fees are paid to the state’s Agricultural and Farmland 
Viability Protection Fund to support farmland protection projects across the 
state. In California, mitigation is a common requirement for projects that con￾vert farmland to non-agricultural uses, including solar.The California Council 
of Land Trusts ofers guidance to communities to develop and refne their pro￾grams.33 Beyond mitigation, policies can incentivize topsoil retention, which 
is mutually benefcial for agriculture and pollinators.34 Seven states have passed 
legislation to allow solar projects to claim that they are pollinator friendly.35 
Community Guidance 
Some states issue solar siting guidance to communities. Rhode Island’s Solar 
Energy Systems Ordinance Template was developed to help municipalities 
address solar energy systems in their zoning ordinances. It provides defni￾tions and addresses a variety of solar development forms so communities 
can decide what is appropriate and compatible with their comprehensive 
plans. And it ofers guidance on where to allow solar arrays for primary or 
accessory use in each zoning district, along with development standards, 
such as bufers, height, and storm water control, related to scale and land use 
context, including development of farmland.36 
NRCS’s Land Evaluation and Site Assessment (LESA) model is a useful tool for 
identifying disturbed and marginal lands for utility-scale solar installations. It 
provides a technical framework to rank land parcels based on resource evalu￾ation and site considerations. In evaluation, soils are rated and grouped based 
on their suitability for a specifc agricultural use. Site assessment assigns a 
range of values to landscape factors related to development pressure, non-soil 
factors related to a site’s agricultural use, and other public values. Each fac￾tor is assigned a range of values based on local needs and objectives to pro￾vide a sound and consistent basis for making land use decisions. Other tools 
include fnancial incentives and providing guidance on “smart solar” siting. 
Taking a landscape approach and prioritizing land uses also help to avoid 
conficts with solar development. Beyond using tools like LESA, communities 
beneft from engaging stakeholders in a prioritization process. For example, a 
team of planners and conservationists in California’s San Joaquin Valley facili￾tated a six-month stakeholder-led process and successfully identifed land 
with the least amount of confict to develop for solar installations (see box). eVOLVINg ISSUeS 231 
STAKEHOLDERS IDENTIFY LEAST-CONFLICT LANDS FOR 
SOLAR DEVELOPMENT 
California’s San Joaquin Valley (the Valley) is vital to the nation’s food 
supply. Responsible for hundreds of crop and livestock products, the 
breadbasket of the nation is one of the world’s most productive agricul￾tural regions. It also is one of the fastest growing and contains some of 
the state’s most threatened natural habitats. 
More than half of the Valley’s high-quality farmland is threatened 
by low-density housing development.37 with high solar insolation and 
a temperate climate, it is under increased development pressure to 
achieve California’s aggressive renewable energy goals. with hun￾dreds of proposed projects, each averaging about 500 acres in size, 
appropriate siting is essential to the future of its agriculture and food 
production. 
Identifying suitable locations for solar installations was controversial. 
Conservation organizations advocated for “smart from the start” plan￾ning to encourage developers to locate solar projects near existing trans￾mission corridors and in areas with low environmental value38 while farm 
organizations pushed to avoid lands in agricultural production. with 
input from the governor’s Ofce of Planning and Research, a project 
team of planners and conservationists initiated a stakeholder-led pro￾cess to identify least-confict lands for solar photovoltaic development. 
The team included Conservation Biology Institute, Berkeley Law Center 
for Law, energy and the environment, and Terrell watt Planning Associ￾ates. Diverse stakeholders included farmers and ranchers, environmen￾talists, and the solar industry. 
The team used advanced mapping software to generate a series of 
maps, created a San Joaquin Valley Data Basin Gateway website39 and 
used these to work with each stakeholder group to identify their highest￾and lowest-priority areas. After all the groups met, the team combined 
the results to identify 470,000 acres of least-confict land, about 5 per￾cent of the study area. This provided a credible snapshot to inform future 
planning and policy eforts to balance renewable energy with agricultural 
and conservation interests. The gateway is still live and includes a val￾uable data library with hundreds of relevant datasets to inform future 
planning. 232 SeC TION II 
Smart Solar℠ Siting 
Smart Solar℠ addresses competing needs to contain solar development on 
high-quality farmland. The concept, as developed by AFT, borrows from 
smart growth principles to guide solar development onto land where it has 
the least negative impact on soils and farm production and encourages agriv￾oltaic projects to support compatible farming systems. 
Still largely untested, agrivoltaic projects are considered dual use for solar 
and agriculture. Under the right conditions, they can work well on mar￾ginal lands suitable for grazing poultry and small livestock (see Figure 8.6), 
although they still limit most agricultural production. Smart Solar℠ projects 
have three goals: 
1. Accelerate solar energy development; 
2. Strengthen farm viability; and 
3. Retain high-quality farmland. 
To achieve these goals, projects prioritize development on disturbed lands 
and within the built environment and avoid high-quality agricultural soils. 
Figure 8.6 Sheep graze under solar panels in a Smart Solar℠ project. 
Source: Photo courtesy of NCAT’s Solar Clearinghouse.  
eVOLVINg ISSUeS 233 
If a project must involve farmland, it directs siting to marginal soils and 
modifes solar arrays to be as compatible as possible with farming on the 
same land. Arrays are planned, developed, and ultimately decommissioned 
to allow for continued agricultural use and to limit adverse impacts, includ￾ing soil disruption. 
New techniques are being tested to install poles with minimal soil distur￾bance, adjust panel heights, and create wide enough space between panels to 
accommodate equipment, grazing, and shaded vegetable production. Only 
modest amounts of land are needed for posts, relay boxes, or other infra￾structure, to keep most of the land available for production. 
Agrivoltaic approaches warrant continued experimentation and proof-of￾concept research in diferent climates and with diferent farming systems. 
More research is needed to identify the types and scales of cropping and 
livestock systems that are compatible for dual use, and their impacts on farm 
yields and regional economies. 
Cannabis Cultivation 
The cannabis plant includes hemp and marijuana. Legally, the diference 
between them is the amount of tetrahydrocannabinol content (THC), which 
causes the “high” associated with its use. Laws limit hemp’s THC content to 
0.3 percent or less by dry weight; marijuana is anything more. Both are used 
medicinally, primarily non-intoxicating cannabidiol (CBD). Hemp generally 
contains more CBD and marijuana more THC. 
Humans have cultivated hemp for millennia for all kinds of products. 
In the 17th century, it was considered an important fber crop in the New 
England colonies. Peak U.S. production occurred in the 19th century but 
decreased in the early 20th century as other fber crops and synthetic fb￾ers led to declining demand and as Congress began to regulate marijuana. 
Hemp production increased during World War II to produce raw materials 
for rope and canvas, but quickly declined until 1970, when the Controlled 
Substances Act listed “marihuana” as an illegal Schedule 1 narcotic, making 
no distinction between the drug and hemp. 
The 2018 Farm Bill legalized hemp production.While four states still ban 
it, it is now legal under federal law and eligible for many USDA programs. 
Since 1996, when California passed the frst statewide medical marijuana 
law, 37 states, three territories, and the District of Columbia have followed  
234 SeC TION II 
Figure 8.7 Jef Garland (right) gives Indiana NRCS district conservationist Lee Schnell 
a tour of high tunnels on Papa G’s Organic Hemp Farm in Crawford 
County, IN. 
Source: NRCS. Photo by Brandon O’Connor. 
suit. Colorado passed the frst recreational law in 2014. By 2023, 23 states, 
two territories, and the District of Columbia have enacted measures to regu￾late cannabis for adult non-medical use.40 
Marijuana remains illegal under federal law. In states where it is legal, it 
must be grown within the state where it is sold and cannot be transported 
across state lines. Since its acreage is not tracked, it is unclear how much 
impact it has on land use. But with farmland already in short supply, com￾munities are ill prepared for a new green rush. Guidance is scarce, mostly 
focused on use, distribution, and sales but not on land use. Where hemp 
generally is allowed as an agricultural use, only some states classify mari￾juana as agriculture; others consider it a recreational land use. Contradictory 
laws and classifcations add to the confusion. However it is classifed, can￾nabis cultivation is similar to other agricultural crops and communities 
are developing zoning and other land use regulations to address it. These 
often vary based on whether production takes place indoors, outdoors, or 
in greenhouses.  
eVOLVINg ISSUeS 235 
Table 8.1 Considerations for allowing cannabis cultivation. 
Indoor Production: Large scale in Provides most environmental control; 
warehouses and similar facilities Reduces use of pesticides and other 
inputs; 
Largest environmental impact; 
Requires substantial energy use for 
lighting, climate control, and auto￾mated equipment; 
Highest potential for light pollution; 
Requires good ventilation to minimize 
strong odors from leaving the prem￾ises; and 
Best suited to urban environments and 
industrial or manufacturing zones. 
Greenhouse Production: Small scale in Lower environmental impacts than 
greenhouses or hoop houses large warehouse facilities; 
Reduces use of pesticides and other 
inputs; 
Requires ventilation, climate control, 
and other equipment; 
Can be managed to minimize noise, 
light, and odors; and 
Most compatible with other land uses 
in a variety of settings. 
Outdoor Production Requires rich soil with organic matter, 
good drainage, and ample water 
supplies; 
Cheaper than indoor alternatives; 
Creates a smaller carbon footprint; 
Produces strong odors at some times 
of the year; 
Often requires irrigation, pesticides, 
and other inputs; 
Security can be a problem; and 
Best suited to rural areas with distance 
from residential neighbors. 
Some communities allow production in certain areas, for example, 
indoor production in industrial zones, outdoor in agricultural. Others 
require a conditional use permit and regulate issues like light pollution, 
water use, or odors. Requiring site plan review or an Environmental Impact 236 SeC TION II 
Statement helps to ensure operations meet local standards. Siting consid￾erations include where production may occur, minimum lot or parcel size, 
hours of operation, trafc or road use, parking and loading, landscaping and 
screening, and environmental impacts. Common considerations include: 
Bufers and Setbacks: Most marijuana regulations require setbacks from places 
where children congregate, like schools, childcare centers, and play￾grounds. Setbacks generally range from 500 to 1,000 feet. Setbacks from 
residences and other land uses may be as little as 25 feet but more often 
between 50 and 200 feet. For outdoor cultivation, fences and other site 
screenings can reduce vandalism and conficts with neighbors.Vegetative 
bufers and bufer zones create visual and/or physical distance from other 
land uses. Requirements address distance from incompatible land uses, 
the size and type of materials and/or vegetation used for bufer strips or 
screening. 
Canopy: Some state and local governments regulate the canopy—or surface 
area used to produce mature cannabis plants. Minimum lot size, setbacks, 
and bufers work well to regulate where production is allowed and how 
close an operation can be to neighboring property lines. Minimum lot 
sizes generally range from fve to 20 acres, including setback and bufer 
requirements. 
Energy and Light: Indoor production requires substantial energy use. Some 
communities address scheduling to avoid times of peak demand and 
create lighting standards. Lighting standards include requiring energy￾efcient lighting, limiting the use of grow lights to daytime hours, or 
requiring “Dark Sky” compliance to meet the International Dark Sky 
Association’s requirements for reducing waste of ambient light. IDA pro￾vides information on lighting ordinances and approved a model light￾ing ordinance template to help communities develop standards to reduce 
glare, light trespass, and skyglow.41 
Odors: Whether for hemp or marijuana, cannabis releases strong odors dur￾ing parts of the growing season. Some communities require ventilation 
and/or air fltration systems for indoor operations to neutralize airborne 
odors. For example, as part of its special permit process, the Olivette 
Missouri City Council requires an odor mitigation plan and for medical 
marijuana facilities to use odor control systems to prevent unpleasant 
smells from leaving the premises.42 eVOLVINg ISSUeS 237 
Siting: Like other crops, cannabis requires arable soil, water, and light. 
Communities may limit production to certain areas or types of land to 
protect high-quality soils for food or other crop production. They also 
may protect cultural resources, especially if site preparation requires sub￾stantial land clearing, as this may unearth archeological resources, human 
remains, and sites of cultural value to tribes. 
Water Use and Disposal: Cannabis is a water-intensive crop that leads to con￾cerns about environmental management.43 Regulations can address water 
use, potentially including a water management plan.To prevent depleting 
public water supplies and neighboring wells, some regulations require 
operations to have sufcient fow rates in gallons per minute or a water 
insurance policy or escrow account. Communities also address waste￾water, including requirements on disposal methods and containment of 
contaminants or hazardous materials. 
Concluding Thoughts 
This chapter summarizes three pressing and evolving issues, but history 
suggests that other issues will soon emerge. The best way to prepare for 
what is coming is through good planning that includes agriculture and food 
systems as a forethought, not a footnote. 
With vision and planning, communities can set in motion a transfor￾mation as profound as the one that occurred in the 20th century. State, 
local, and tribal governments can address farms and food in land use plans, 
develop stand-alone plans for food and/or agriculture, and address food 
systems in climate action and emergency management plans.They can step 
up support for farmers and ranchers, encourage a new generation, promote 
soil health and environmental management, and advance food and farming 
systems that are sustainable, resilient, and fair. Ideally, this will occur within 
a larger universe of smart growth and life-cycle thinking. 
Food systems issues are structural—they must be addressed as systems 
without pitting people or sectors against each other. By lifting up civic 
engagement and taking a systems approach, communities can plan for 
renewable energy and protect valuable soils for food and other farm produc￾tion.They can confront the historic causes of land dispossession and advance 
fair and just access to arable land. They can create bufers and setbacks to  
238 SeC TION II 
protect residents from odors and environmental conficts, protect farmers 
from frivolous nuisance complaints, and so on. 
Still, planning alone will not be enough. It also will take collective action 
and policy change to retool domestic and global food systems to achieve the 
diversity, fexibility, and redundancy needed to prepare for polycrisis, espe￾cially climate change. Supporting local and regional food systems is a good 
place to begin—not to replace but to enhance our dominant food systems. It 
is something we can do individually, voting with our forks as well as our votes. 
And it can be achieved through private markets and at all levels of government. 
As we learned through Covid-19, LRFS are highly responsive: Producers 
pivoted quickly to adapt to disruptions and changing market conditions.They 
stimulated local economies, creating new businesses and jobs through food 
processing, distribution, and other enterprises. For LRFS to be most efective, 
urban and rural communities must work together to achieve economies of 
scale at the foodshed level, ensuring farmland is available for food produc￾tion, expanding markets and infrastructure for small and mid-sized produc￾ers, and improving food access in rural communities as well as in cities. 
Going forward, we must consider how the actions we take today will 
meet current demands without compromising future generations.We must 
consider how to prepare for sudden disruptions, especially their impacts 
on vulnerable people. And we must determine how to balance food sys￾tems actions so they refect the full spectrum of sustainability and resiliency 
needs in our communities.This is no easy task. But with foresight, commu￾nity engagement, and a commitment to action, it is possible. So let’s begin. 
Discussion Questions 
1. What forces afect competition for land in your community, and 
what can be done to address them? 
2. How would you balance competing demands for high-quality 
soils? 
3. Does your community value local/regional food production? If so, 
why? If not, why not? 
4. What other issues are emerging that afect planning for agriculture 
and food systems?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eVOLVINg ISSUeS 239 
Notes 
1. U.S. Department of Energy, Ofce of Energy Efciency and Renewable Energy, 
“Solar Futures Study.” 
2. USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2022 Census of Agriculture – National Data. 
Table 52: Selected Producer Characteristics (Washington, DC: USDA-NASS, February 2024). 
3. USDA, Economic Research Service, 2014 Tenure, Ownership, and Transition of Agricultural 
Land Survey (Washington, DC: USDA-ERS, November 2015). 
4. USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2012 Census of Agriculture Highlights: 
Farmland Ownership and Tenure (Washington, DC: USDA-NASS, September 2015). 
5. Christopher Burns et al., Farmland Values, Land Ownership, and Returns to Farmland, 2000– 
2016, Economic Research Report (Washington, DC: USDA Economic Research Service, 
February 2018). 
6. Ani L. Katchova and Mary Clare Ahearn, “Dynamics of Farmland Ownership and 
Leasing: Implications for Young and Beginning Farmers,” Applied Economic Perspectives 
and Policy 38, no. 2 (2016): 334–50. 
7. USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, “Direct Farm Sales of Food: Results 
from the 2020 Local Food Marketing Practices Survey,” April 2022. 
8. Julia Valliant and Julia Freedgood, “Land Access Policy Incentives: Emerging 
Approaches to Transitioning Farmland to a New Generation,” Journal of Agriculture, Food 
Systems, and Community Development 9, no. 3 (May 15, 2020): 71–78. 
9. Julia Valliant et al.,“Fostering Farm Transfers from Farm Owners to Unrelated, New 
Farmers: A Qualitative Assessment of Farm Link Services,” Land Use Policy 86 (July 1, 
2019): 438–47. 
10. Julia Freedgood et  al., Farms Under Threat: The State of the States (Northampton, MA: 
American Farmland Trust, May 13, 2020). 
11. U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Land Management, “Livestock Grazing on 
Public Lands.” 
12. Iowa State Legislature,“§456A.38 Lease to Beginning Farmers.” 
13. “Agricultural Lands on Open Space,” Boulder County. 
14. “AB-551 Local Government: Urban Agriculture Incentive Zones.,” Pub. L. No. 
Assembly Bill No. 551, Chapter 406. 
15. “HOUSE BILL 223: Property Tax Credit – Urban Agricultural Property – 
Applicability,” Pub. L. No. 223. 
16. “SB717 – Authorizes a Tax Credit for Urban Farms” (2022). 
17. City and County of San Francisco Department of Public Health,“Application Packet 
for an Urban Agriculture Incentive Zone,” February 20, 2015. 
18. District of Columbia Department of Energy and Environment, “Urban Farm Tax 
Abatement Program | Doee.” 
19. Cassandra J. Gaither et al.,“Heirs’ Property and Land Fractionation: Fostering Stable 
Ownership to Prevent Land Loss and Abandonment,” E-Gen. Tech. Rep. SRS-244. 
Asheville, NC: U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service, 2019: 1–105. 
20. American Bar Association, “Restoring Hope for Heirs Property Owners: The 
Uniform Partition of Heirs Property Act,” October 1, 2016. 
21. Dania V. Francis et al.,“Black Land Loss: 1920−1997,” AEA Papers and Proceedings 112 
(May 2022): 38–42.  
240 SeC TION II 
22. The Uniform Law Commission Tracks UPHA legislation: “Partition of Heirs 
Property Act – Uniform Law Commission.” 
23. “Land Tenure Issues,” Indian Land Tenure Foundation. 
24. U.S. Department of Interior, “Land Buy-Back Program for Tribal Nations: 
Fractionation,” February 25, 2019. 
25. U.S. Department of Energy, Ofce of Energy Efciency and Renewable Energy, 
“Solar Futures Study,” 2021. 
26. Ibid. 
27. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Community Solar: An Opportunity to 
Enhance Sustainable Development on Landflls and Other Contaminated Sites,” 
December 2016. 
28. Travis Grout and Jennifer Ift, Approaches to Balancing Solar Expansion and Farmland 
Preservation: A Comparison across Selected States (Ithaca, NY: Charles H. Dyson School of 
Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University, March 2018). 
29. Mitch Hunter et al., Farms Under Threat 2040: Choosing an Abundant Future (Washington, 
DC: American Farmland Trust, June 29, 2022. 
30. James A. Falcone and Michelle A. Nott, Estimating the Presence of Paved Surface Parking Lots 
in the Conterminous U.S. from Land Use Coefcients for 1974, 1982, 1992, 2002, and 2012 (U.S. 
Geological Survey, 2019). 
31. Daniel Baldwin Hess and Jefrey Rehler, “Parking Reform Could Reenergize 
Downtowns – Here’s What Happened When Bufalo Changed Its Zoning Rules,” The 
Conversation, June 10, 2021. 
32. Projet de loi n°443, 16e legislature, adopté par le Sénat relatif à l’accélération de la 
production d’énergies renouvelables, November 8, 2022, www.assemblee-nation￾ale.fr/dyn/16/textes/l16b0443_projet-loi#D_Article_11 
33. Kate Kelly and Darla Guenzler, Editor, Dawn Van Dyke, “Conserving California’s 
Harvest: A  Model Mitigation Program and Ordinance for Local Governments,” 
California Council of Land Trusts, 2014. 
34. Leroy J. Walston et  al., “Examining the Potential for Agricultural Benefts from 
Pollinator Habitat at Solar Facilities in the United States,” Environmental Science  & 
Technology 52, no. 13 (July 3, 2018): 7566–76. 
35. Georgena Terry,“State Pollinator-Friendly Solar Initiatives,” Clean Energy States Alliance, 
January 2020. 
36. Rhode Island Ofce of Energy Resources and The Division of Statewide Planning, 
“Rhode Island Renewable Energy Guidelines: Solar Energy Systems (SES) Model 
Ordinance Templates, Zoning and Taxation,” February 2019. 
37. American Farmland Trust and Conservation Biology Institute, San Joaquin Land and Water 
Strategy: Exploring the Intersection of Agricultural Land & Water Resources in California’s San Joaquin 
Valley (American Farmland Trust and Conservation Biology Institute, July 2018). 
38. Kate Kelly and Kim Delfno, “Smart from the Start: Responsible Renewable Energy 
Development in the Southern San Joaquin Valley,” 2012. 
39. The San Joaquin Valley Gateway website is a tool to help planners and resource 
managers develop and implement integrated multiple-beneft solutions for long￾term environmental and economic sustainability. https://sjvp.databasin.org/ 
40. National Conference of State Legislatures, “State Medical Cannabis Laws,” Updated 
June 2023. eVOLVINg ISSUeS 241 
41. Dark Sky website, Resources, Guides and How-to,“Lighting Ordinances.” 
42. Ordinance 2760 amending the Olivette Municipal Code by enacting a new 
Chapter  450 Medical Marijuana Facilities, as adopted by the City Council on 
November 8, 2022. 
43. Jennifer K. Carah et al., “High Time for Conservation: Adding the Environment to 
the Debate on Marijuana Liberalization,” Bioscience 65, no. 8 (2015): 822–29.  
Appendix 
ORGANIZATIONAL RESOURCES 
American Farmland Trust (AFT) is a national nonproft organization that 
works to save the land that sustains us by protecting farmland, promot￾ing sound farming practices, and keeping farmers on the land. See www. 
farmland.org 
AFT’s Farmland Information Center is a clearinghouse for information 
about farmland protection and stewardship. It has a stafed answer ser￾vice and searchable website with extensive resources to support plan￾ning activities. See www.farmlandinfo.org 
American Planning Association (APA) is a national organization that ele￾vates and unites the planning profession to help communities, their lead￾ers, and residents anticipate and navigate change. See www.planning.org 
APA’s Food Systems Division is a coalition of planners and allied pro￾fessionals who advance food systems planning. The division serves as 
a platform for collaboration, information, and leadership to integrate 
food systems planning with other areas of community and regional 
planning for the beneft of present and future generations. 
APA’s Sustaining Places: Best Practices for Comprehensive Plans provides a 
framework to turn principles into a plan and score the results, provid￾ing processes and pointers for communities to use. 244 APPeNDIX: ORgANIZATIONAL ReSOURCeS 
ChangeLab Solutions is a nonproft organization that uses the tools of law 
and policy to advance health equity. Staf partners with communities across 
the nation to improve health and opportunity by changing laws, policies, 
and systems, sharing resources, and ofering practical policy tools, plan￾ning expertise, and technical assistance. See www.changelabsolutions.org/ 
CivicWell (formerly the Local Government Commission) supports leaders 
responding to the climate crisis and its impact on their communities. It 
is a nonproft organization that equips, connects, and cultivates leaders 
working toward a more sustainable and resilient future through policy 
guidance, collaborative partnerships, and direct assistance. See https:// 
civicwell.org/about-us/ 
Cooperative Extension is a nationwide research and education system that, 
among other things, supports agriculture, natural resources, health and 
nutrition, community development, and emergency preparedness. It 
operates through state land-grant universities in partnership with federal, 
state, and local governments, and the USDA National Institute of Food and 
Agriculture. Extension agents provide technical assistance and translate 
science to farmers, ranchers, and the general public.To fnd an Extension 
ofce near you, visit: http://nifa.usda.gov/partners-and-extension-map? 
state=All&type=Extension&order=title&sort=asc 
International City/County Management Association (ICMA) is an asso￾ciation of professional city and county managers and other employees 
who serve local governments dedicated to creating and sustaining thriv￾ing communities throughout the world. See https://icma.org/ 
The Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future (CLF) engages in research, 
policy analysis, and technical assistance to advance food system change 
in local, tribal, institutional, state, federal, and international policy. 
Operating out of the Bloomberg School of Public Health, it builds the 
capacity of partner organizations and food policy councils to advocate for 
a healthy, equitable, resilient, and sustainable food system. See https:// 
clf.jhsph.edu/ 
National Agricultural Law Center has a library of subject-based reading 
rooms each with a comprehensive list of electronic resources for an agri￾cultural or food law topic. Links are provided to major statutes, regula￾tions, case law, articles, publications, and other research resources. See 
https://nationalaglawcenter.org/research-by-topic/ APPeNDIX: ORgANIZATIONAL ReSOURCeS 245 
 
National Association of Conservation Districts (NACD) is a nonproft 
organization that represents America’s 3,000 conservation districts 
and the people who serve on their governing boards. NACD promotes 
responsible natural resources management and conservation by repre￾senting locally led conservation districts and their associations through 
grassroots advocacy, education, and partnerships. See www.nacdnet.org/ 
about-nacd/ 
National Association of Counties (NACo) serves county elected ofcials 
and employees to advocate for county priorities, promote exemplary 
county policies and practices, nurture leadership skills and expand knowl￾edge networks, optimize county resources, and enrich public understand￾ing of county government. See www.naco.org/what-we-do/about-naco 
National Association of Development Organizations (NADO) provides 
advocacy, education, research, and training for the nation’s regional 
development organizations. The association and its members promote 
regional strategies, partnerships, and solutions to strengthen the eco￾nomic competitiveness and quality of life across America’s local com￾munities. See www.nado.org/about/ 
The National Association of Local Boards of Health (NALBOH) informs, 
guides, and serves as the national voice for local boards of health through 
education, technical assistance, and advocacy. Its mission is to strengthen 
and improve public health governance. See www.nalboh.org/page/About 
National Association of Towns and Townships (NATaT) serves more than 
13,000 towns and townships across the U.S. to enhance the ability of 
smaller communities to deliver public services, economic vitality, and 
good government to their citizens. See www.natat.org/ 
National Association of Regional Councils (NARC) serves as the national 
voice for regions by advocating for regional cooperation to address com￾munity planning and development opportunities and issues. NARC mem￾bers include regional councils, councils of governments, regional planning 
and development agencies, Metropolitan Planning Organizations, and 
other regional organizations. See http://narc.org 
North American Food System Network is a professional association of 
people working together to strengthen local and regional food systems 
through networking, access to practitioner tools, career guidance, stu￾dent chapters, webinars, and a curated jobs board. See http://foodsys￾temsnetwork.org/ 246 APPeNDIX: ORgANIZATIONAL ReSOURCeS 
The UConn Rudd Center for Food Policy and Health has a policy database 
that has tracked hundreds of food-related local policies on issues ranging 
from obesity and diet-related diseases to food access and assistance, farms 
and gardens, school nutrition menu and package labeling, and food and 
beverage taxes. See https://healthyfoodpolicyproject.org/policy-database 
The Sustainable Development Code is an online source of information on 
community development that provides resources to help communities 
develop and amend codes to make them more sustainable. See https:// 
sustainablecitycode.org/about/ 
United States Conference of Mayors is the ofcial non-partisan organiza￾tion of cities with populations of 30,000 or more. Members set organ￾izational policies and goals, share information and best practices, and 
otherwise contribute to the development of urban policy. See www. 
usmayors.org/ 
Vermont Law School Center for Agriculture and Food Systems works to 
address food systems challenges, provides legal services, and develops 
resources to empower the communities it serves. See www.vermont￾law.edu/academics/centers-and-programs/center-for-agriculture-and￾food-systems BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AB-551 Local Government: Urban Agriculture Incentive Zones. Pub. L. No. Assembly 
Bill No. 551, Chapter 406. 
Agha, Mickey, Jefrey E. Lovich, Joshua R. Ennen, and Brian D. Todd. “Wind, Sun, and 
Wildlife: Do Wind and Solar Energy Development ‘Short-Circuit’ Conservation in 
the Western United States?” Environmental Research Letters 15, no. 7 (June 2020): 075004. 
Aguilar, Krysten, Lorenzo Alba, Jef Anderson, Patricia Biever, Jorge Castillo, David 
Kraenzel, Claudia Mares, and Karim Martinez. “Profles of Communities of 
Opportunity: Doña Ana County, New Mexico.” Growing Food Connections, May 2016. 
Alaska Food Policy Council. “Community Food Emergency and Resilience Template.” 
University of Alaska Fairbanks Cooperative Extension Service, September 27, 2015. 
Albemarle County Code: Chapter 18. Zoning, Section 5: Supplementary Regulations, 2019. 
Alkon, Alison Hope, and Teresa Marie Mares. “Food Sovereignty in US Food Movements: 
Radical Visions and Neoliberal Constraints.” Agriculture and Human Values 29, no. 3 
(September 1, 2012): 347–59. 
Allison, Taber D., Jay E. Difendorfer, Erin F. Baerwald, Julie A. Beston, David Drake, 
Amanda M. Hale, Cris D. Hein, et al. “Impacts to Wildlife of Wind Energy Siting 
and Operation in the United States.” Issues in Ecology, Report No. 21. Washington, DC: 
Ecological Society of America, Fall 2019. 
Alshawaf, Mohammad, Ellen Douglas, and Karen Ricciardi. “Estimating Nitrogen Load 
Resulting from Biofuel Mandates.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health 13, no. 5 (May 9, 2016): 478. 
American Farmland Trust. “Erie County Agricultural and Farmland Protection Plan.” 
Farmland Information Center, October 24, 2012. 
———. 2022 Land Trust Survey. Northampton, MA: American Farmland Trust, forthcoming. 
———. About Planning for Agriculture. Farmland Information Center. 
———. “Farms Under Threat.” 248 BIBLIOgRAPHY 
———. “Protected Agricultural Lands Database.” 
American Farmland Trust and Conservation Biology Institute. “San Joaquin Land and 
Water Strategy: Exploring the Intersection of Agricultural Land & Water Resources 
in California’s San Joaquin Valley.” American Farmland Trust and Conservation Biology Institute, 
July 2018. 
American Legal Publishing. “San Francisco Administrative Code: Chapter 59: Healthy 
Food Retailer Ordinance.” 
American Planning Association. “Agritourism.” 
———. Comprehensive Plan Standards for Sustaining Places. American Planning Association. 
———. “Principles of a Healthy, Sustainable Food System.” 
A Quick Guide to SNAP Eligibility and Benefts. Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy 
Priorities, March 3, 2023. 
“Arcadia Center for Sustainable Food and Agriculture.” 
Arizona Food Systems Network. Arizona Statewide Food Action Plan 2022–2024. Arizona Food 
Systems Network. 
Atherton-Bauer, Shanna. “California Climate Investment Programs and Farmland 
Protection.” December 23, 2022a. 
———. “Information from Land Conservation Programs Manager.” California Department 
of Conservation, December 23, 2022b. 
Bailkey, Martin, and Joe Nasr. “From Brownfelds to Greenfelds: Producing Food in 
North American Cities.” Community Food Security News (Fall 2000): 6. 
Bayfeld County Wisconsin. “Bayfeld County, Wisconsin Ordinances Title 5, Chapter 6: 
Large-Scale Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations.” 2016. 
Beale, Calvin. “Salient Features of the Demography of American Agriculture.” In The 
Demography of Rural Life, Publication #64, edited by David Brown et al. University Park, PA: 
Northeast Regional Center for Rural Development, 1993. 
Beaulieu, Lionel J. “Mapping the Assets of Your Community: A Key Component for 
Building Local Capacity.” Southern Rural Development Center. 
Belarmino, Emily, Claire Ryan, Qingbin Wang, Meredith Niles, and Margaret Torness. 
“Impact of Vermont’s Food Waste Ban on Residents and Food Businesses.” College of 
Agriculture and Life Sciences Faculty Publications, January 30, 2023. 
Bellows, Anne C., and Michael W. Hamm. “U.S.-Based Community Food Security: 
Infuences, Practice, Debate.” Journal for the Study of Food and Society 6, no. 1 (March 1, 
2002): 31–44. 
Béné, Christophe. “Resilience of Local Food Systems and Links to Food Security – 
A  Review of Some Important Concepts in the Context of COVID-19 and Other 
Shocks.” Food Security 12, no. 4 (August 1, 2020): 805–22. 
“Benefcial Uses of Manure and Environmental Protection.” U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, National Cattlemen’s Beef Association, U.S. Poultry  & Egg 
Association, United Egg Producers, National Pork Producers Council, National Milk 
Producers Federation, August 2015. 
Bernard, Chris. “The Work Continues into 2023 | Hunger Free Oklahoma.” January 
25, 2023. 
Boulder County. “Agricultural Lands on Open Space.” 
Bower, Kelly M., Roland J. Thorpe, Charles Rohde, and Darrell J. Gaskin. “The Intersection 
of Neighborhood Racial Segregation, Poverty, and Urbanicity and Its Impact on Food 
Store Availability in the United States.” Preventive Medicine 58 (January 2014): 33–39. BIBLIOgRAPHY 249 
Boyanton, Megan. “Pandemic Meat Shortage Spurs Calls to Shift Slaughterhouse Rules.” 
October 19, 2020. 
Braun, Joachim von, Kaosar Afsana, Louise Ottilie Fresco, Mohamed Hassan, and 
Maximo Torero. “Food System Concepts and Defnitions for Science and Political 
Action.” Nature Food 2, no. 10 (October 2021): 748–50. 
Brodt, Sonja, Johan Six, Gail Feenstra, Chuck Ingels, and David Campbell. “Sustainable 
Agriculture.” Nature Education Knowledge 3, no. 10 (2011): 1. 
Bruder, Steven M., and New Jersey State Agriculture Development Committee. “Data on 
the TDR Program.” December 22, 2022. 
Bult, Laura. “How 4 Companies Control the Beef Industry.” Vox, September 29, 2021. 
Burlington County Agriculture Development and Board. Burlington County Comprehensive 
Farmland Preservation Plan (2022 Update). Burlington County, NJ: Burlington County 
Agriculture Development Board, 2022. 
Burlington School Food Project. “Healthy Meals for Better Learning!” 
Burns, Christopher, Nigel Key, Sarah Tulman, Allison Borchers, and Jeremy G. Weber. 
Farmland Values, Land Ownership, and Returns to Farmland, 2000–2016. Economic Research Report. 
Washington, DC: USDA Economic Research Service, February 2018. 
Butte County, CA Code of Ordinances: Division 7.—Agricultural Bufers, Chapter 24, 
Article III, Division 7 §. 
Byington, Lillianna. “By the Numbers: Examining the Cost of the Pandemic on the Meat 
Industry.” November 19, 2020. 
California Air Resources Board. “2022 Scoping Plan for Achieving Carbon Neutrality.” 
California Air Resources Board, November 16, 2022. 
California Climate and Action Network. “Sustainable Agricultural Lands Conservation 
Program (SALCP).” 
California Department of Food and Agriculture. “CDFA—OEFI—Conservation 
Agriculture Planning Grants Program.” 
California Strategic Growth Council. “Afordable Housing and Sustainable Communities.” 
CalRecycle. “California’s Short-Lived Climate Pollutant Reduction Strategy.” 
Center for Climate and Energy Solutions. “U.S. State Climate Action Plans.” 
December 2022. 
ChangeLab Solutions. “Licensing for Lettuce: A Guide to the Model Licensing Ordinance 
for Healthy Food Retailers.” ChangeLab Solutions, 2013. 
Chapter 17.20 AGRICULTURE ZONE, Eagle Mountain Municipal Code Ordinance O-33– 
202 §, 2023. 
Chapter 336 – Urban Garden District, Ord. No. 208-07 Cleveland Ohio Municipal Code 
Chapter 336 §, 2007. 
Chapter 69: Agriculture and Markets, Article 25-AA: Agricultural Districts, Consolidated 
Laws of New York §, 2017. 
Chief Executive Ofce County of Los Angeles. Fiscal Year 2022–23 Supplemental Budget at a 
Glance. Los Angeles, CA: County of Los Angeles. 
City and County of San Francisco Department of Public Health. “Application Packet for 
an Urban Agriculture Incentive Zone.” February 20, 2015. 
City Council of Minneapolis. Amending Title 10, Chapter 203 of the Minneapolis Code 
of Ordinances relating to Food Code: Grocery Stores. 
City of Baltimore Department of Planning. “Food Policy.” March 29, 2016.   
250 BIBLIOgRAPHY 
City of Fresno Planning and Development. Fresno General Plan: Chapter 10 Healthy Communities. 
Fresno, CA: City of Fresno, December 2014. 
City of Fresno the Development and Resource Management Department. Fresno 
Municipal Code Chapter 15: Citywide Development Code, 2016. 
“City of Kansas City, Missouri Parks and Recreation Department Mobile Vending Policy.” 
City of Minneapolis. “Healthy Living.” 
———. Staple Foods Ordinance Fact Sheet: Minneapolis Code of Ordinances. Title 10. Chapter  203. 
Grocery Stores. Minneapolis, MN: Minneapolis Department of Health. 
City of Portland, OR. “Business Food Scraps Requirement,” April 3, 2022. 
City of Seattle. Urban Agriculture Ordinance 123378, Ordinance 123378 §, 2010. 
“City of Seattle Sweetened Beverage Tax,” 2019. 
City of Somerville. “City of Somerville Urban Agriculture Zoning Amendment.” 
August 16, 2012. 
Claeys, Priscilla. From Food Sovereignty to Peasants’ Rights. New Haven, CT: Transnational 
Institute, 2013. 
———. “Food Sovereignty and the Recognition of New Rights for Peasants at the UN: 
A Critical Overview of La Via Campesina’s Rights Claims over the Last 20 Years.” 
Globalizations 12, no. 4 (July 4, 2015): 452–65. 
Clark County Washington. Clark County Code: 40.240.130 Agricultural Bufer Zones in the 
General Management Area (Title 40). Clark County, WA: Unifed Development Code, 
October 26, 2022. 
Clark, Jill K., Brian Conley, and Samina Raja. “Essential, Fragile, and Invisible Community 
Food Infrastructure: The Role of Urban Governments in the United States.” Food Policy 
103 (August 1, 2021): 102014. 
Clark, Jill K., Julia Freedgood, Aiden Irish, Kimberley Hodgson, and Samina Raja. “Fail 
to Include, Plan to Exclude: Refections on Local Governments’ Readiness for Building 
Equitable Community Food Systems.” Built Environment 43, no. 3 (September 1, 2017): 
315–27. 
Clean Water Indiana. “Clean Water Indiana: 2023 Competitive Grants.” October 25, 2022. 
Cole, Emily J. Regenerative Agriculture for New England: Sustaining Farmland Productivity in a 
Changing Climate. Northampton, MA and Boston, MA: American Farmland Trust and 
Conservation Law Foundation, August 8, 2022. 
Coleman-Jensen, Alisha, Matthew P. Rabbitt, Christian A. Gregory, and Anita Singh. 
Household Food Security in the United States in 2021 (Economic Research Report). Washington, 
DC: USDA Economic Research Service, 2021. 
Colorado Department of Agriculture. “Soil Health.” 
Committee on Budget and Fiscal Review. Senate Bill 862, Pub. L. No. 862, 2014. 
COPE: Community Outreach and Patient Empowerment. “COPE Program | Food 
Access.” 
Copernicus Climate Change Service. “Global Climate Highlights 2022.” Copernicus, 2022. 
Council of Development Finance Agencies. “CDFA – CDFA Spotlight: Aggie Bonds.” 
Cromartie, John, and Shawn Bucholtz. “USDA ERS—Defning the ‘Rural’ in Rural 
America.” Amber Waves, June 1, 2008. 
Daniels, Thomas L. “Assessing the Performance of Farmland Preservation in America’s 
Farmland Preservation Heartland: A Policy Review.” Society & Natural Resources 33, no. 6 
(June 2, 2020): 758–68. BIBLIOgRAPHY 251 
Davis, Alison, and Simona Balazs. “The Infuence of the Agricultural Cluster on the 
Fayette County Economy.” Community and Economic Development Initiative of Kentucky College of 
Agriculture, Food, and Environment University of Kentucky, May 2017. 
D.C. Hunger Solutions. “D.C. Healthy Schools Act Brochure.” August 1, 2010. 
“Delaware: A Small State That Is Big in Agriculture.” 
Delaware Department of Agriculture—State of Delaware. “Aglands Preservation 
Program.” 
DelReal, Jose A., and Scott Clement. “Rural Divide: New Poll of Rural Americans Shows 
Deep Cultural Divide with Urban Residents.” The Washington Post, June 17, 2017. 
Dempsey, Jennifer, and Laura Barley. “Status of State Purchase of Agricultural 
Conservation Easement Programs.” American Farmland Trust: Farmland Information Center, 
October 25, 2022. 
Denver Department of Public Health and Environment. Denver Food Action Plan. Denver, 
CO: Denver Department of Public Health and Environment, June 2018. 
Department of Commerce Advisory Committee on Zoning. A Standard State Zoning 
Enabling Act Under Which Municipalities May Adopt Zoning Regulations, 1928a. 
———. “Standard State Zoning Enabling Act and Standard City Planning Enabling Act.” 
American Planning Association, 1928b. 
Department of Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. “Healthy Eating 
Plate.” The Nutrition Source, September 18, 2012. 
Dieter, Cheryl A., Molly A. Maupin, Rodney R. Caldwell, Melissa A. Harris, Tamara I. 
Ivahnenko, John K. Lovelace, Nancy L. Barber, and Kristin S. Linsey. “Estimated Use 
of Water in the United States in 2015.” In USGS Numbered Series. Estimated Use of Water in 
the United States in 2015. Vol. 1441. Circular. Reston, VA: U.S. Geological Survey, 2018. 
Dillemuth, Ann, and Kimberley Hodgson. “Incentivizing the Sale of Healthy and Local 
Food.” Growing Food Connections, February 2016. 
Dimitri, Carolyn, Lydia Oberholtzer, and Andy Pressman. “Urban Agriculture: 
Connecting Producers with Consumers.” Edited by Fabio Verneau and Professor 
Christopher J. Grifth. British Food Journal 118, no. 3 (January 1, 2016): 603–17. 
District of Columbia Department of Energy and Enviornment. “Urban Farm Tax 
Abatement Program | Doee.” 
Drewitt, Allan L., and Rowena H. W. Langston. “Assessing the Impacts of Wind Farms 
on Birds.” Ibis 148, no. s1 (2006): 29–42. 
“Economic Impacts of Supermarkets and Other Healthy Food Retail.” 
Electricity Markets and Policy Group. “Land-Based Wind Market Report.” 
El Nassar, Naya. More Than Half of U.S. Population in 4.6 Percent of Counties. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Census Bureau, October 24, 2017. 
“Emergencies, Disasters and Ohio’s Food System | Center for Community and Working 
Landscapes.” 
Entrekin, Nyssa. “Information Provided by Nyssa Entrekin, Associate Director, Healthy 
Food Retail at the Food Trust.” January 2023. 
Executive Ofce, County of Los Angeles. “Board of Supervisors.” 
“Facts About Los Angeles | Discover Los Angeles.” 
Fair Food Network. “Double Up Food Bucks: 2021 Annual Impact Report.” 
Falcone, James A., and Michelle A. Nott. “Estimating the Presence of Paved Surface 
Parking Lots in the Conterminous U.S. from Land Use Coefcients for 1974, 1982, 
1992, 2002, and 2012.” U.S. Geological Survey, 2019. 252 BIBLIOgRAPHY 
FAO Agricultural and Development Economics Division. “Food Security (Policy Brief: 
Issue 2).” FAO Agricultural and Development Economics Division, June 2006. 
Farmland Information Center. “Farmland Protection Policy Act Fact Sheet.” American 
Farmland Trust, July 2022. 
———. Southampton, NY: Lease of Development Rights Enabling Ordinance. Southampton, NY: 
Code § 330-248G, 2023. 
Farrigan, Tracey. Rural Poverty & Well-Being. Washington, DC: USDA Economic Research 
Service, November 29, 2022. 
Federal Food Safety Oversight: Additional Actions Needed to Improve Planning and Collaboration. 
Washington, DC: U.S. General Accountability Ofce, December 2014. 
Federal Register. “Geographic Preference Option for the Procurement of Unprocessed 
Agricultural Products in Child Nutrition Programs.” April 22, 2011. 
Feeding America. “Charitable Food Assistance Participation in 2021.” June 2022. 
Finegold, Muriel A., Bea Mah Holland, and Tony Lingham. “Appreciative Inquiry and 
Public Dialogue: An Approach to Community Change.” Public Organization Review 2, no. 
3 (September 1, 2002): 235–52. 
Fitzgerald, Kate, Anne Palmer, and Karen Banks. “Understanding the SNAP Program for 
Food Policy Programs.” Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future, n.d. 
Flora, Cornelia Butler, Jan L. Flora, and Susan Fey. Rural Communities: Legacy and Change. 2nd 
ed. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2004. 
Food Industry Editorial Team. “Who Are the Top 10 Grocers in the United States?” 
FoodIndustry.Com, June 7, 2022. 
“Food Systems—Programs | MU Extension.” Michigan State University, Center for 
Regional Food Systems. https://www.canr.msu.edu/foodsystems/ 
“Foresight 2.0—Global Panel.” May 31, 2019. 
Fox, Jessica. “Trading Up: The Ohio River Basin Water Quality Trading Project Is the 
World’s Largest Water Quality Credit Program.” Water Technology, November 2, 2019. 
Francis, Dania V., Darrick Hamilton, Thomas W. Mitchell, Nathan A. Rosenberg, and 
Bryce Wilson Stucki. “Black Land Loss: 1920–1997.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 112 (May 
2022): 38–42. 
Freedgood, Julia, and Jessica Fydenkevez. Growing Local: A Community Guide to Planning for 
Agriculture and Food Systems. Northampton, MA: American Farmland Trust, April  30, 
2017. 
Freedgood, Julia, Mitch Hunter, Jennifer Dempsey, and Ann Sorenson. Farms Under Threat: 
The State of the States. Northampton, MA: American Farmland Trust, May 13, 2020. 
Freedgood, Julia, Marisol Pierce-Quiñonez, and Kenneth Meter. “Emerging Assessment 
Tools to Inform Food System Planning.” Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community 
Development 2, no. 1 (December 23, 2011): 83–104. 
Friedman, Diana. “Clean Energy Farming: Cutting Costs, Improving Efciencies, 
Harnessing Renewables. Opportunities in Agriculture.” Sustainable Agriculture Research and 
Education, 2012. 
Gaither, Cassandra J., Ann Carpenter, Tracy Lloyd McCurty, and Sara Toering. “Heirs’ 
Property and Land Fractionation: Fostering Stable Ownership to Prevent Land 
Loss and Abandonment.” E-General Technical Report SRS-244. Asheville, NC: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture Forest Service, 2019: 1–105. 
Game, Ibrahim, and Richaela Primus. “GSDR 2015 Brief: Urban Agriculture.” https:// 
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/5764Urban%20Agriculture.pdf BIBLIOgRAPHY 253 
Garfeld, Katie, Emma Scott, Kristin Sukys, Sarah Downer, Rachel Landauer, Julianne 
Orr, Rebecca Friedman, Margaret Dushko, Emily Broad Lieb, and Robert Greenwald. 
“Mainstreaming Produce Prescriptions: A Policy Strategy Report.” The Center for Health 
Law and Policy Innovation of Harvard Law School, 2021. 
GISGeography. “13 Open Source Remote Sensing Software Packages.” GIS Geography, 
March 15, 2023. 
Global Alliance for the Future of Food. “Principles for Food Systems Transformation: 
A Framework for Action.” Global Alliance for the Future of Food, June 2021. 
Goldschmidt, Walter. Down on the Farm, New Style. Yellow Springs, OH: Publisher Not 
Identifed, 1948. 
Goldstein, Benjamin, Dimitrios Gounaridis, and Joshua P. Newell. “The Carbon 
Footprint of Household Energy Use in the United States.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 117, no. 32 (August 11, 2020): 19122–30. 
Grout, Travis, and Jennifer Ift. Approaches to Balancing Solar Expansion and Farmland Preservation: 
A  Comparison across Selected States. Ithaca, NY: Charles H. Dyson School of Applied 
Economics and Management, Cornell University, March 2018. 
Growing Food Connections. “Cleveland, OH Local Purchasing, Ordinance No. 1660-A￾09.” Growing Food Connections Policy Database. 
Haines, Anna L. “What Does Zoning Have to Do with Local Food Systems?” Journal of 
Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community Development 8, no. B (October 17, 2018): 175–90. 
Hake, Monica, Emily Engelhard, and Adam Dewey. “Map the Meal Gap 2022: An 
Analysis of County and Congressional District Food Insecurity and County Food Cost 
in the United States in 2020.” Feeding America, 2022. 
Hall, Peggy Kirk, and Ellen Essman. State Legal Approaches to Reducing Water Quality Impacts 
from the Use of Agricultural Nutrients on Farmland. Fayetteville, AR: National Agricultural Law 
Center, May 2019. 
Harries, Caroline. “Data on the Pennsylvania Program Supplied by Caroline Harries of 
the Food Trust.” February 23, 2023. 
“Healthy Cleveland Nutrition Guidelines.” https://farmlandinfo.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/sites/2/2019/09/healthy_cleveland_nutrition_guidelines.pdf 
Healthy Food Healthy People Work Group. “Niagara Falls Local Food Action Plan.” 2017. 
Healthy Food Policy Project. “Municipal Policies to Support Food Access During 
Emergencies.” February 2, 2021. 
Held, Lisa. “Just a Few Companies Control the Meat Industry. Can a New Approach to 
Monopolies Level the Playing Field?” Civil Eats. July 4, 2021. https://civileats.com/ 
2021/07/14/just-a-few-companies-control-the-meat-industry-can-a-new-approach-to￾monopolies-level-the-playing-feld/ 
Hendrickson, Mary, William D. Hefernan, Philip H. Howard, and Judith B. Hefernan. 
“Consolidation in Food Retailing and Dairy.” British Food Journal 103, no. 10 (January 1, 
2001): 715–28. 
Hess, Daniel Baldwin, and Jefrey Rehler. “Parking Reform Could Reenergize 
Downtowns—Here’s What Happened When Bufalo Changed Its Zoning Rules.” The 
Conversation, June 10, 2021. 
Hicke, Jefrey A., Lucatello Lucatello, Linda D. Mortsch, Jackie Dawson, Mauricio 
Domínguez Aguilar, and Carolyn A. F. Enquist. “Chapter  14: North America.” In 
Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the 254 BIBLIOgRAPHY 
Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 1929–2042. Cambridge 
and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2022. 
Hillsborough County City-County Planning Commission. Food Innovation Districts: A Best 
Practices Guide to Supporting Locally Produced Agriculture and Food Related Businesses in Hillsborough 
County. Tampa, FL: Hillsborough County City-County Planning Commission, n.d. 
Hinrichs, C. Clare, and Thomas A. Lyson, eds. Remaking the North American Food System. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2008. 
Hoey, Lesli, Lilly Fink Shapiro, Kathryn Colasanti, Alex Judelsohn, Mrithula Shantha 
Thirumalai Anandanpillai, and Keerthana Vidyasagar. “Participatory State and 
Regional Food System Plans and Charters in the U.S.: A  Summary of Trends and 
National Directory.” Michigan State University’s Center for Regional Food Systems, August 2021. 
House Bill 223: Property Tax Credit—Urban Agricultural Property—Applicability, Pub. 
L. No. 223. 
Hunter, Mitch, Ann Sorenson, Theresa Nogeire-McRae, Scott Beck, Stacy Shutts, and 
Ryan Murphy. Farms Under Threat 2040: Choosing an Abundant Future. Washington, DC: 
American Farmland Trust, June 29, 2022. 
Indian Land Tenure Foundation. “Issues: Land Tenure Issues.” https://iltf.org/land￾issues/issues/ 
Information Provided by Nyssa Entrekin, Caroline Haynes, and Julia Koprak in an inter￾view on January 6, 2023, and a Series of Emails between January 3, and March 3, 2023. 
Inman, Mason. “Wind Turbines May Help Crops on Farms, Research Says.” National 
Geographic, December 21, 2011. 
Inwood, Shoshanah, Zoë Plakias, Jill K. Clark, Nicole Wright, Aiden Irish, and Josh D. 
Vittie. Preparing for Food System Resiliency in Ohio: Policy and Planning Lessons from COVID-19. 
Columbus, OH: College of Food, Agricultural and Environmental Sciences & John 
Glenn College of Public Afairs, January 2022. 
Iowa Department of Natural Resources. “Winter Manure Application: Guide to Frozen 
and Snow-Covered Ground Rules.” May 2021. 
Iowa State Legislature. §456A.38 Lease to Beginning Farmers. 
Jensen, Eric, Nicholas Jones, Megan Rabe, Beverly Pratt, Lauren Medina, Kimberly 
Orozco, and Lindsay Spell. The Chance That Two People Chosen at Random Are of Diferent 
Race or Ethnicity Groups Has Increased Since 2010. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau, 
August 12, 2021. 
Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future. “Food Policy Councils Directory.” Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health. https://clf.jhsph.edu/projects/food-policy-networks 
Johnson, Renée, and Jim Monke. Farm Bill Primer: What Is the Farm Bill? (IF12047, Version 4, 
Updated). Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, February 22, 2023. 
Karetny, Jane, Casey Hoy, Kareem Usher, Jill Clark, and Maria Conroy. “Planning Toward 
Sustainable Food Systems: An Exploratory Assessment of Local U.S. Food System 
Plans.” Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community Development 11, no. 4 (September 2, 
2022): 115–38. 
Katchova, Ani L., and Mary Clare Ahearn. “Dynamics of Farmland Ownership and 
Leasing: Implications for Young and Beginning Farmers.” Applied Economic Perspectives and 
Policy 38, no. 2 (2016): 334–50. 
Kelly, Kate, and Kim Delfno. Smart from the Start: Responsible Renewable Energy Development in the 
Southern San Joaquin Valley. Washington, DC: Defenders of Wildlife, 2012. BIBLIOgRAPHY 255 
Ketso. “Workshops & Engagement | Ketso | Ketso Workshops.” https://ketso.com/ 
Kinder, Molly, Laura Stateler, and Julia Du. “Windfall Profts and Deadly Risks.” Brookings 
Institution, November 2020. 
Kirschenmann, Fred, G. W. Stevenson, Frederick Buttel, Thomas A. Lyson, and Mike 
Dufy. “Why Worry About the Agriculture of the Middle?” In Food and the Mid-Level Farm, 
edited by Thomas A. Lyson, G. W. Stevenson, and Rick Welsh, 3–20. Cambridge: The 
MIT Press, 2008. 
Kuethe, Todd H., Jennifer Ift, and Mitch Morehart. “The Infuence of Urban Areas on 
Farmland Values.” Choices Quarter 2 (2011). 
Kunstler, James Howard. Geography of Nowhere. New York: Free Press, 1994. 
Lakhani, Nina, Aliya Uteuova, and Alvin Chang. “The Illusion of Choice: Five Stats That 
Expose America’s Food Monopoly Crisis.” The Guardian, July 18, 2021, sec. Environment. 
Leeuwis, Cees, Birgit K. Boogaard, and Kwesi Atta-Krah. “How Food Systems Change 
(or Not): Governance Implications for System Transformation Processes.” Food Security 
13, no. 4 (August 1, 2021): 761–80. 
Lennertz, Bill, and Aarin Lutzenhiser. The Charrette Handbook. 2nd ed. New York: 
Routledge, 2017. 
Lev, Larry, and Garry Stephenson. “Dot Posters: A  Practical Alternative to Written 
Questionnaires and Oral Interviews.” Journal of Extension, Tools of the Trade 37, no. 5 
(October 1999). 
LII/Legal Information Institute. “7 U.S. Code § 3103—Defnitions.” 
Lobao, Linda M. Locality and Inequality: Farm and Industry Structure and Socioeconomic Condition. 
Albany: SUNY Press, 1990. 
Los Angeles County Chief Sustainability Ofce. “Our County—Los Angeles Countywide 
Sustainability Plan.” OurCounty, August 6, 2019. 
Lyson, Thomas A., Robert J. Torres, and Rick Welsh. “Scale of Agricultural Production, 
Civic Engagement, and Community Welfare*.” Social Forces 80, no. 1 (September 1, 
2001): 311–27. 
MacDonald, James M., Robert A. Hoppe, and Doris Newton. “Three Decades of 
Consolidation in U.S. Agriculture.” USDA Economic Research Service, March 2018. 
Mackey, Rachel. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Reauthorization and Appropriations 
(Policy Brief). Washington, DC: National Association of Counties, February 1, 2023. 
Magdof, Fred, and Harold van Es. Building Soils for Better Crops. 4th ed. Sustainable 
Agriculture Network Handbook Series, Book 10. College Park, MD: Sustainable 
Agriculture Research & Education Program, 2021. 
Maillacheruvu, Sara Usha. The Historical Determinants of Food Insecurity in Native Communities. 
Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, October 4, 2022. 
Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry. “Voluntary Municipal Farm 
Support Program: Farmland Protection Program: M.R.S. 7 Ch2-C.” 
Mair, Julie Samia, Matthew W. Pierce, and Stephen P. Teret. “The City Planner’s Guide 
to the Obesity Epidemic: Zoning and Fast Food.” The Center for Law and the Public’s Health 
at Johns Hopkins & Georgetown Universities, October 2005. 
———. “The City Planner’s Guide to the Obesity Epidemic: Zoning and Fast Food,” n.d. 
Marshall, Morgan. “Extension Local Food Program Team LFPT Annual Report 2021– 
2022.” NC State Extension Local Food Program.  
256 BIBLIOgRAPHY 
Martinez, Steve, Michael Hand, Michelle Da Pra, Susan Pollack, Katherine Ralston, 
Travis Smith, Stephen Vogel, et al. Local Food Systems: Concepts, Impacts, and Issues (ERR 97). 
Washington, DC: USDA Economic Research Service, May 2010. 
Maryland Agriculture  & Resource-Based Industry Development Corporation. “Next 
Generation Farmland Acquisition Program.” https://www.marbidco.org/_pages/pro￾grams_land_preservation/rural_land_preservation_programs_nextgen_ngfap.htm 
Maryland Department of Agriculture. “Agricultural Nutrient Management Program.” 
Maryland.gov Enterprise Agency Template. https://mda.maryland.gov/resource_conservation/ 
Pages/nutrient_management_overview.aspx 
———. “Strategic Plan for Maryland Agriculture.” Maryland Department of Agriculture, 
December 1, 2019. 
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Bureau of Community Health and Prevention. 
“Mass in Motion | Mass.Gov.” https://www.mass.gov/about-mass-in-motion 
Mathias, Chris. Interview with Chris Mathias, Scott County IA Planning Director, 
December 12, 2022. 
Melillo, Jerry M., Gary Wynn Yohe, and Terese Richmond. Climate Change Impacts in the 
United States: The Third National Climate Assessment 10.7930/J0z31wj2OA.Mg.” Washington, DC: 
U.S. Global Change Research Program, 2014. 
Mittal, Anuradha. The 2008 Food Price Crisis: Rethinking Food Security Policies (Research Papers 
for the Intergovernmental Group of Twenty-Four on International Monetary Afairs 
and Development). New York and Geneva: United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development, June 2009. 
Moorman, Christopher E., Steven M. Grodsky, and Susan P. Rupp. Renewable Energy and 
Wildlife Conservation. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2019. 
Multnomah County, Department of County Human Services, SUN Service System. 
“SUN Food Sites.” Multnomah County, December 23, 2016. 
“Municipal Vulnerability Preparedness (MVP) Program | Mass.Gov.” https://www. 
mass.gov/municipal-vulnerability-preparedness-mvp-program 
Myers, Samuel S., Antonella Zanobetti, Itai Kloog, Peter Huybers, Andrew D. B. Leakey, 
Arnold J. Bloom, Eli Carlisle, et al. “Increasing CO2 Threatens Human Nutrition.” 
Nature 510, no. 7503 (June 2014): 139–42. 
National Agricultural Law Center. “Water Law Overview.” https://nationalaglawcenter. 
org/overview/water-law/ 
National Agricultural Law Center Research Staf. Agritourism – National Agricultural Law 
Center: States’ Agritourism Statutes. Fayetteville, AR: National Agricultural Law Center, 
February 9, 2021. 
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (NCCDPHP). 
“About Chronic Diseases.” CDC, July 21, 2022. 
National Conference of State Legislatures. “Number of Legislators and Length of Terms 
in Years.” April 19, 2021. 
National Farm to School Network. “State Farm to School Policy Handbook 2002–2020.” 
National Farm to School Network, Vermont Law School’s Center for Agriculture and Food Systems, 
July 2021. 
National Farmers Market Directory. “Find a Local Farmers Market Near You.” and 
another: https://nfmd.org/browse/ BIBLIOgRAPHY 257 
National Policy  & Legal Analysis Network to Prevent Childhood Obesity. “Healthy 
Mobile Vending Policies: A Win-Win for Vendors and Childhood Obesity Prevention 
Advocates.” National Policy & Legal Analysis Network to Prevent Childhood Obesity, 2013. 
Navajo Epidemiology Center. “Understanding the Healthy Diné Nation Act of 2014.” 
Nelson, Gerald C., Mark W. Rosegrant, Jawoo Koo, and Robertson. Climate Change: Impact 
on Agriculture and Costs of Adaptation. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research 
Institute, 2009. 
Nerds for Earth. “State Healthy Soil Policy Map.” Nerds for Earth, August 27, 2019. 
New Mexico Department of Agriculture. “Healthy Soil Program.” and another: https:// 
nmdeptag.nmsu.edu/healthy-soil-program.html 
New Orleans Fresh Food Retailer Initiative: Information Sheet. New Orleans, LA: City of New 
Orleans, n.d. 
New York City Department of City Planning. “Zoning Districts & Tools: Rules for Special 
Areas: FRESH Food Stores-DCP.” 
New York City Mayor’s Ofce of Contract Services. “New York State Food Purchasing 
Guidelines, 2012 (Revised April 7, 2015).” 
New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets. “Climate Resilient Farming.” 
https://agriculture.ny.gov/soil-and-water/climate-resilient-farming 
———. “Farmland Protection Planning Grants Program.” https://agriculture.ny.gov/ 
land-and-water/farmland-protection-planning-grants-program 
Nixon, Laura, Pamela Mejia, Lori Dorfman, Andrew Cheyne, Sandra Young, Lissy C. 
Friedman, Mark A. Gottlieb, and Heather Wooten. “Fast-Food Fights: News Coverage 
of Local Eforts to Improve Food Environments Through Land-Use Regulations, 
2000–2013.” American Journal of Public Health 105, no. 3 (March 2015): 490–96. 
North Carolina Department of Agriculture  & Consumer Services. “Soil  & Water 
Conservation Division—Cost Share Programs: Agricultural Cost Share Program 
(ACSP).” 
North Iowa Area Council of Governments. Cerro Gordo County Ordinance Number 15: 
Zoning Ordinance of Cerro Gordo County, Iowa: Revised through December 13, 2022. 
Northampton County, NC Voluntary Agricultural District Ordinance. 
Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development. “A Summary of Oregon’s 
Statewide Planning Goals.” 
———. “Oregon Statewide Planning Goals and Guidelines.” Oregon Department of Land 
Conservation and Development, July 2019. 
Oregon Legislative Assembly. Chapter 215—County Planning; Zoning; Housing Codes, 
2021 Edition. 
ORS 215.780—Minimum lot or parcel sizes, Pub. L. No. Oregon Laws, Oregon 
Administrative Rules, Oregon Revised Statutes, Volume 6, Title 20, Chapter 215, 
Section 215.780. 
“Partition of Heirs Property Act—Uniform Law Commission.” https://www.uniformlaws. 
org/committees/community-home?CommunityKey=50724584-e808-4255-bc5d￾8ea4e588371d 
Paustian, Keith, Johannes Lehmann, Stephen Ogle, David Reay, G. Philip Robertson, and 
Pete Smith. “Climate-Smart Soils.” Nature 532, no. 7597 (April 2016): 49–57. 258 BIBLIOgRAPHY 
Pearce, Dustin, James Strittholt, Terry Watt, and Ethan Elkind. A Path Forward: Identifying 
Least-Confict Solar PV Development in California’s San Joaquin Valley. Berkeley, CA: University of 
California, Berkeley Law, May 1, 2016. 
Pennsylvania General Assembly. Act of July  25, 2007, P.L. 373, No. 55 Cl. 72—Tax 
Reform Code of 1971—Omnibus Amendments, 2007. 
Pennsylvania State Conservation Commission. “PA REAP FY 2019 Annual Report.” 
Pippidis, Maria, Bonnie Braun, Jesse M. Ketterman, Shoshanah Inwood, and Nicole 
Wright. Engaging Communities Through Issues Forums: A  How-to Guide for Onsite and Online 
Community Engagement. Kansas City, MO: Extension Foundation, 2022. 
Porter, Michael E. “New Strategies for Inner-City Economic Development.” Economic 
Development Quarterly 11, no. 1 (February 1, 1997): 11–27. 
Pörtner, Hans-O., Debra C. Roberts, Helen Adams, Elvira Poloczanska, and Katja 
Mintenbeck, eds. “Summary for Policy Makers.” In Climate Change 2022: Impacts, 
Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 3–33. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2022. 
Pothukuchi, Kameshwari, and Jerome L. Kaufman. “Placing the Food System on 
the Urban Agenda: The Role of Municipal Institutions in Food Systems Planning.” 
Agriculture and Human Values 16, no. 2 (June 1, 1999): 213–24. 
———. “The Food System: A  Stranger to the Planning Field.” Journal of the American 
Planning Association 66, no. 2 (June 30, 2000): 113–24. 
“Prairie Crossing | A Conservation Community in Grayslake, Illinois.” https://prairie￾crossing.com/ 
“Produce Prescription (Rx) Program – Fresh Bucks Indy.” https://freshbucksindy. 
org/produce-rx/#:~:text=Produce%20Rx%20is%20a%20partnership,diseases%20 
while%20improving%20nutrition%20security. 
Rangarajan, Anu, and Molly Riordan. “The Promise of Urban Agriculture, National 
Study of Commercial Farming in Urban Areas.” USDA Agricultural Marketing Service and 
Cornell University Small Farms Program, August 2019. 
Rao, Mayuree, Ashkan Afshin, Gitanjali Singh, and Dariush Mozafarian. “Do Healthier 
Foods and Diet Patterns Cost More Than Less Healthy Options? A Systematic Review 
and Meta-Analysis.” BMJ Open 3, no. 12 (December 1, 2013): e004277. 
Regulation and Funding: Natural Resources Department, §456A.38: Lease to Beginning 
Farmers Program. 
“Residents: County of Los Angeles.” https://lacounty.gov/residents/ 
Rhode Island Ofce of Energy Resources and The Division of Statewide Planning. “Rhode 
Island Renewable Energy Guidelines: Solar Energy Systems (SES) Model Ordinance 
Templates, Zoning and Taxation.” February 2019. 
RS 3:304 Master Farmer Certifcation, Louisiana Laws – Louisiana State Legislature 
§, 2008. 
Ruhf, Kathryn Z., and Kate Clancy. “A Regional Imperative: The Case for Regional Food 
Systems.” Thomas A. Lyson Center for Civic Agriculture and Food Systems, September 20, 2022. 
Saitone, Tina L., and Patrick W. McLaughlin. “Women, Infants and Children (WIC) 
Program Redemptions at California Farmers’ Markets: Making the Program Work for 
Farmers and Participants.” Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems 33, no. 4 (August 2018): 
334–46. BIBLIOgRAPHY 259 
Sandt, Anders Van, Sarah A. Low, and Dawn Thilmany. “Exploring Regional Patterns of 
Agritourism in the U.S.: What’s Driving Clusters of Enterprises?” Agricultural and Resource 
Economics Review 47, no. 3 (December 2018): 592–609. 
Santo, Raychel, Caitlin Misiaszek, Karen Bassarab, Darriel Harris, and Anne Palmer. 
“Pivoting Policy, Programs, and Partnerships: Food Policy Councils Response to the 
Crises of 2020.” Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future, 2021. 
“SB717 – Authorizes a Tax Credit for Urban Farms.” 2022. https://www.senate.mo.gov/ 
22info/BTS_Web/Bill.aspx?SessionType=R&BillID=71259647#:~:text=Current%20 
Bill%20Summary&text=The%20tax%20credit%20shall%20not,%24100%2C000%20 
in%20any%20calendar%20year. August 8, 2022 
Schilling, Brian J., J. Dixon Esseks, Joshua M. Duke, Paul D. Gottlieb, and Lori Lynch. 
“The Future of Preserved Farmland: Ownership Succession in Three Mid-Atlantic 
States.” Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community Development 5, no. 2 (February 24, 
2015): 129–53. 
Scott County, Iowa. “2007 Scott County Comprehensive Plan.” July 17, 2015. 
———. “Scott County Iowa Economy & Market,” June 7, 2016a. 
———. Zoning Ordinance for Unincorporated Scott County, 2016b. 
Seattle Department of Neighborhoods. “Food Equity Fund – Neighborhoods | 
Seattle.Gov.” 
Sec. 8 – 2.404. Agricultural Conservation and Mitigation Program., Title 8, Chapter 2, 
Section 8 – 2.404 Yolo County Code of Ordinances §. 
Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Crisis Majority Staf. “Coronavirus Infections 
and Deaths Among Meatpacking Workers at Top Five Companies Were Nearly Three 
Times Higher than Previous Estimates.” Congress of the United States, House of Representatives, 
October 27, 2021. 
Serra, Cara. Regional Resiliency Action Plan. Pinellas Park, FL: Tampa Bay Regional Planning 
Council, November 2022. 
Siderof, Desiree. “Getting to Grocery: Tools for Attracting Healthy Food Retail to 
Underserved Neighborhoods.” ChangeLab Solutions, 2012. 
Sonoma County, California. Chapter 30 – Agriculture. Article II. – Right to Farm, Ord. 
No. 5203 § 5, 1999 §. 
Sorenson, Ann, Julia Freedgood, Jennifer Dempsey, and David Theobald. Farms Under 
Threat: The State of America’s Farmland. Washington, DC: American Farmland Trust, 2018. 
State of California Governor’s Ofce of Planning and Research, and California Strategic 
Growth Council. “Grant Funding Opportunity: Tribal Government Challenge 
Planning Grant Program.” March 13, 2020. 
Statista. “Number of U.S. Cities, Towns, Villages by Population Size 2019.” 
Suneson, Grant. “What Are the 25 Lowest Paying Jobs in the US? Women Usually Hold 
Them,” USA TODAY, accessed February 2, 2023, https://www.usatoday.com/story/ 
money/2019/04/04/25-lowest-paying-jobs-in-us-2019-includes-cooking-cleaning/ 
39264277/. 
Takle, Gene, and Ed Adcock. “Iowa State University Research Finds Wind Farms Positively 
Impact Crops.” Iowa State University College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, March 5, 2018. 
Tendall, Danielle M., J. Joerin, B. Kopainsky, P. Edwards, A. Shreck, Q. B. Le, P. Kruetli, 
M. Grant, and J. Six. “Food System Resilience: Defning the Concept.” Global Food 
Security 6 (October 1, 2015): 17–23. 260 BIBLIOgRAPHY 
Terry, Georgena. “State Pollinator-Friendly Solar Initiatives.” Clean Energy States Alliance, 
January 2020. 
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. Subchapter B: Concentrated Animal 
Feeding Operations §§321.31–321.47, Chapter 321 – Control of Certain Activities by 
Rule §, 2014. 
The Food Trust. Healthier Corner Stores: Positive Impacts and Proftable Changes. Philadelphia, PA: 
The Food Trust, 2014. 
The New York City Administrative Code: § 17–307 Licenses, Permits Required; 
Restrictions; Term. 
“The Sarasota County Comprehensive Plan: A Planning Tool for the Future of Sarasota 
County. Volume 1: Goals, Objectives,  & Policies.” Sarasota County Board of County 
Commissioners, October 25, 2016. 
Thilmany, Dawn, Elizabeth Canales, Sarah A. Low, and Kathryn Boys. “Local Food 
Supply Chain Dynamics and Resilience during COVID-19.” Applied Economic Perspectives 
and Policy 43, no. 1 (2021): 86–104. 
Town of Lowville, NY: Anaerobic Digesters, 2013. 
Township of Chesterfeld, Burlington County, New Jersey. “Township of Chesterfeld, 
NJ: Article XVII Voluntary TDR Program Procedural Requirements.” Township of 
Chesterfeld, NJ Code. 
Troy, Mike. “Pandemic-Fueled Record Growth in 2020: The PG 100.” Progressive Grocer, 
May 17, 2021. 
“UConn Rudd Center for Food Policy and Health.” https://uconnruddcenter.org/ 
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Afairs, Population Division. “World 
Population Prospects 2022: Summary of Results.” United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social Afairs, Population Division, June 11, 2022. 
United States Environmental Protection Agency. “Agriculture.” Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–2020 5–60 (2022). 
Urban Land Institute, ed. America in 2015: A ULI Survey of Views on Housing, Transportation, and 
Community. Washington, DC: Urban Land Institute, 2015. 
U.S. Census Bureau. “1920 Census: Volume 5. Agriculture, Reports for States, Chapter 5, 
Farm Statistics by Race, Nativity, and Sex of Farmer.” U.S. Census Bureau, 1920. 
———. “Historical Population Change Data (1910–2020).” Census.gov, April 26, 2021. 
———. “Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas Population Totals and 
Components of Change: 2020–2021.” Census.gov. 
———. “SNAP Benefts Recipients in Philadelphia County/City, PA.” FRED, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis. FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
———. “State Population Totals and Components of Change: 2020–2022.” Census.gov. 
———. “U.S. Census Bureau QuickFacts: United States.” 
———, and America Counts Staf. “What Is Rural America? One in Five Americans Live 
in Rural Areas.” Census.gov, August 9, 2017. 
U.S. Composting Council. “Model Compost Rules Template (MCRT) Version 2.0.” 
https://www.compostingcouncil.org/page/ModelRuleTemplate 
U.S. Department of Agriculture. “Food Waste FAQs.” https://www.usda.gov/foodwaste/ 
faqs 
———, and President’s Council on Environmental Quality. National Agricultural Lands Study. 
Washington, DC: National Agricultural Lands Study, January 1, 1981. BIBLIOgRAPHY 261 
U.S. Department of Energy, Ofce of Energy Efciency and Renewable Energy. “Solar 
Futures Study.” 2021. 
U.S. Department of Interior. “Land Buy-Back Program for Tribal Nations: Fractionation.” 
February 25, 2019. 
U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Land Management. “Livestock Grazing on Public 
Lands.” 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. “Community Solar: An Opportunity to Enhance 
Sustainable Development on Landflls and Other Contaminated Sites.” December 2016. 
———. “Local Foods, Local Places.” Overviews and Factsheets, June 6, 2014. 
———. “Reducing the Impact of Wasted Food by Feeding the Soil and Composting.” 
Overviews and Factsheets, August 12, 2015. 
USDA. “Urban Agriculture.” 
USDA Agricultural Marketing Services. “Packers and Stockyards Division Annual Report 
2019.” USDA Agricultural Marketing Service, 2019. 
USDA Economic Research Service. “Food Security Status of U.S. Households in 2021.” 
USDA ERS Key Statistics & Graphics. 
———. “Irrigation & Water Use.” May 6, 2022a. 
———. “USDA ERS – Food Security and Nutrition Assistance.” October 18, 2022b. 
———. “USDA ERS – Food Prices and Spending.” January 6, 2023. 
———. “USDA ERS – Farm Bill Spending.” 
———. “USDA ERS – Farming and Farm Income.” 
———. “USDA ERS – Feed Grains Sector at a Glance.” 
———. “USDA ERS – Food Security in the U.S.: Key Statistics & Graphics.” https:// 
www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-u-s/key￾statistics-graphics/ Last updated October 25, 2023 
USDA Food and Nutrition Service. “Barriers That Constrain the Adequacy of 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Allotments (Summary).” USDA 
Food and Nutrition Service, June 2021. 
———. “Farm to School Census.” March 19, 2022. 
USDA Food and Nutrition Service’s Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. 
“Healthy Corner Stores: Making Corner Stores Healthier Places to Shop.” USDA Food 
and Nutrition Service’s Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, 2016. 
———. “Farm to School Census and Comprehensive Review.” July 15, 2021. 
———. “Farmers’ Markets Accepting SNAP Benefts | Food and Nutrition Service.” 
January 5, 2023. 
USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service. 2012 Census of Agriculture Highlights: Direct 
Farm Sales of Food. Washington, DC: USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, 
December 2016. 
———. “2017 Census of Agriculture County Profle: Scott County Iowa.” USDA National 
Agricultural Statistics Service, 2017a. 
———. “2017 Census of Agriculture, County Profle: Wayne County, Ohio.” 2017b. 
———. “2017 U.S. Census of Agriculture, Introduction.” USDA National Agricultural Statistics 
Service, 2017c. 
———. “Direct Farm Sales of Food: Results from the 2020 Local Food Marketing 
Practices Survey.” April 2022. 
———. “2022 Census of Agriculture Highlights: ‘Farm Economics’.” USDA National 
Agricultural Statistics Service, 2024. 262 BIBLIOgRAPHY 
USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2022 Census of Agriculture – National Data. 
Table 52: Selected Producer Characteristics (Washington, DC: USDA-NASS, February 2024). 
USDA National Organic Program Agricultural Marketing Service. “Introduction to 
Organic Practices, The NOP Organic Insider.” September 2015. 
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. “Conservation Practice Standard Nutrient 
Management (Code 590).” May 2019. 
———. “Conservation Practices on Cultivated Cropland: A Comparison of CEAP I and 
CEAP II Survey Data and Modeling – Summary of Findings.” USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, January 2022. 
———. “M_310_523_C_April 2013 – Subpart C – Important Farmland Soils.” 
Valliant, Julia, and Julia Freedgood. “Land Access Policy Incentives: Emerging Approaches 
to Transitioning Farmland to a New Generation.” Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and 
Community Development 9, no. 3 (May 15, 2020): 71–78. 
Valliant, Julia C. D., Kathryn Z. Ruhf, Kevin D. Gibson, J. R. Brooks, and James R. 
Farmer. “Fostering Farm Transfers from Farm Owners to Unrelated, New Farmers: 
A Qualitative Assessment of Farm Link Services.” Land Use Policy 86 (July 1, 2019): 
438–47. 
Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation. “Clean Water Initiative.” 
Vermont General Assembly. Title 6: Agriculture, Chapter 215: Agricultural Water Quality, 
Subchapter 2: Water Quality; Required Agricultural Practices and Best Management 
Practice including §§ 4810, 4810a, and 4811. 
Vermont Required Agricultural Practices Rule for the Agricultural Nonpoint Source Pollution Control Program 
(Act 64 of the Vermont General Assembly, 2015 Session). Montpelier, VT: Vermont Agency of 
Agriculture, Food & Markets, November 23, 2018. 
Vermont Sustainable Jobs Fund (VSJF). “Vermont Farm to Plate Strategic Plan.” 
“Virginia Administrative Code – Title 9. Environment – Agency 25. State Water Control 
Board – Chapter 32. Virginia Pollution Abatement (VPA) Permit Regulation.” 
Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. “AFID Planning Grants.” 
Walston, Leroy J., Shruti K. Mishra, Heidi M. Hartmann, Ihor Hlohowskyj, James 
McCall, and Jordan Macknick. “Examining the Potential for Agricultural Benefts 
from Pollinator Habitat at Solar Facilities in the United States.” Environmental Science & 
Technology 52, no. 13 (July 3, 2018): 7566–76. 
Walthal, Charles L., Jerry Hatfeld, P. Backlund, Laura Lengnick, E. Marshall, M. Walsh, 
S. Adkins, et al. Climate Change and Agriculture in the United States: Efects and Adaptation (USDA 
Technical Bulletin 1935). Washington, DC: USDA ARS, 2012. 
Webber, David, Alan Balsam, and Bonita Oehlke. “The Massachusetts Farmers’ Market 
Coupon Program for Low Income Elders.” American Journal of Health Promotion 9, no. 4 
(March 1, 1995): 251–53. 
Weber, Christopher L., and H. Scott Matthews. “Food-Miles and the Relative Climate 
Impacts of Food Choices in the United States.” Environmental Science & Technology 42, no. 
10 (May 15, 2008): 3508–13. 
Whitt, Christine, Noah Miller, and Ryan Olver. “America’s Farms and Ranches at a 
Glance: 2022 Edition.” USDA Economic Research Service, December 2022. 
“Williamson Act Program Overview.” 
“Wind Vision Detailed Roadmap Actions: 2017 Update.” U.S. Department of Energy, Ofce of 
Energy Efciency and Renewable Energy, May 2018. BIBLIOgRAPHY 263 
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. “Composting Rules and Regulations in 
Wisconsin.” 
Wood, Dustin A., Amy G. Vandergast, Kelly R. Barr, Rich D. Inman, Todd C. Esque, 
Kenneth E. Nussear, and Robert N. Fisher. “Comparative Phylogeography Reveals 
Deep Lineages and Regional Evolutionary Hotspots in the Mojave and Sonoran 
Deserts.” Diversity and Distributions 19, no. 7 (2013): 722–37. 
World Population Review. “Arable Land by Country 2023.” 
Zeuli, Kim, Austin Nijhuis, and Pete Murphy. Resilient Food Systems, Resilient Cities: 
Recommendations for the City of Boston. Boston, MA: Initiative for a Competitive Inner City, 
May 2015. 
Zoning Ordinance of Lexington-Fayette County, Kentucky, Ordinance No. 122-2022, 
Article 1 – General Provisions and Defnitions, 2022.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
Note: Page numbers in italics indicate a fgure and page numbers in bold indicate 
a table on the corresponding page. Page numbers followed by “n” with numbers 
refer to notes. 
Afordable Housing and Sustainable 
Communities (AHSC) Program 168 
Agricultural Conservation Easement 
Program (ACEP) 114, 116, 163; 
Agricultural Land Easements 
(ALE) 114, 164 
agricultural districts (agricultural 
security areas) 160 
Agricultural Improvement Act of 
2018 108–109, 108 
Agricultural Overlay Zones 131, 137 
Agricultural Protection Zones (APZ) 
133–136 
agricultural viability support and 
conservation policies/programs 
181–182; aggie bond programs 
184; agricultural advisory 
boards and commissions 
183–184; agricultural economic 
development authorities 
184–185; “buy local” branding 
campaigns 186–187; conservation 
promotion 167; cooperative 
extension 185–186, 185; farmers’ 
markets 187; farm-to-school 
programs 187–188, 188; farm 
viability programs 186; food 
hubs 187; Hawaii’s Agricultural 
Parks Program 223; market 
support 186–188, 188; new unit 
notifcation 182; right-to-farm laws 
and ordinances 182; and solar 
energy siting 226–228 
Agrihoods (Development Supported 
Agriculture) 125 
agritourism (agrotourism/ 
agritainment)139–140 
AHSC see Afordable Housing and 
Sustainable Communities 
Alaska Food Policy Council 67, 75n19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 265 
ALE see Agricultural Land Easements 
American Farmland Trust (AFT) 
23n38, 45, 75n12, 98, 114, 222, 227, 
232, 243 
American Farmland Trust’s Farmland 
Information Center/Farmland 
Information Center (FIC) 
171–172, 243; Agricultural District 
Provisions by Outcome 161; 
Direct Sales of Food Produced 
om Urban-Infuenced Countries 
15; Federal Impact on Agricultural 
Land Conversion 107; Food 
Produced in Urban-Infuenced 
Counties 73 
American Planning Association 
(APA) 9, 62, 78, 243 
American Public Health Association 
78, 213 
animal cruelty 150 
animal feeding operations (AFOs) 
118, 176; see also concentrated 
animal feeding operations 
(CAFOs) 
animal welfare 29, 149–151 
appreciative inquiry 93 
APZ see Agricultural Protection Zones 
Baltimore Food Policy Initiative (BFPI) 
213–214 
biodiversity 6, 17, 36, 78, 117 
Brewington vs. Glickman 31 
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) 
106, 117, 222 
CAFOs see concentrated animal 
feeding operations 
California’s San Joaquin Valley 72, 
230, 231 
cannabis, commercial 20, 217; 
cannabis plant 233–237, 234, 235; 
canopy 236; community guidance 
230–231; energy and light 236 
Carson, Rachel, Silent Spring 5, 35 
CDFI see Community Development 
Financial Institution 
CFPs see Community Food Projects 
ChangeLab Solutions 216n27, 244 
Chesapeake Bay Watershed water 
quality 177–178, 177 
Child Nutrition Act 111, 112 
CIG see Conservation Innovation 
Grants 
CivicWell 244 
Clean Water Act (CWA) 11, 149, 
173–176 
Clean Water Indiana (CWI) 173, 
189n23 
climate action plans (CAPs) 65 
climate change 9, 12, 26, 37, 43, 47, 
65, 172, 238 
cluster development (Conservation/ 
Open Space Development) 126 
Colorado Department of Agriculture 
171, 189n17 
Commodity Supplemental Food 
Program 110 
community/ies: capitals 79–80; 
cohesive 7; cultural diversity of 
53; engagement 238; gardens 18, 
38, 72, 131, 152, 194, 221–224; 
guidance 230; Indigenous 4; rural 
see rural community; tribal 72; 
underserved 196–197, 199–200; 
urban 70–71, 74, 81, 199 
Community Capitals Framework 74, 
79 
Community Development Financial 
Institution (CDFI) 199, 226 
Community Food Projects (CFPs) 
110–111 
community food security 17, 20, 
53, 81, 145, 151; coordinating 
emergency food 212–214; 
emergency food systems 
211–214, 211; food marketing and  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
266 INDEX 
sales 208; food policy councils 
194–195; funding for emergency 
food 212; healthy corner store 
initiatives 196–199, 196; healthy 
food fnancing initiatives (HFFI) 
199–200; healthy retail licensing 
200–201; healthy retail programs 
195–205; mobile food vending 
allowances 201–202; nutrition 
education and promotion 205–211; 
nutrition guidelines 206–208, 
207; nutrition incentive programs 
202–205; school wellness policy 
209–211, 209 
community land trusts 18 
Community Supported Agriculture 
(CSA) 26, 46, 125, 131, 145, 214 
competition for land 9, 40, 119, 218 
composting and food waste 180–181 
concentrated animal feeding 
operations (CAFOs) 149–150, 174 
conservation policies/programs: 
bufers 140; conservation 
promotion 167; exemptions 160; 
on farm conservation programs 
171–173; irrigation organizations 
179, 180; soil health policies 
169–171, 169–170; water quality 
policies 173–176, 175; water quality 
trading 176–178, 177; water rights 
178–179 
Conservation Innovation Grants 
(CIG) 116 
conservation land trusts 18 
Conservation Reserve Enhancement 
Program (CREP) 115 
Conservation Reserve Program 
(CRP) 115–116 
Conservation Stewardship Program 
(CSP) 115–116 
consolidation 7, 27–28; farm 6, 40, 
97, 218; market 9 
cooperative extension 60–61, 
185–186, 185, 222, 244 
Corn Suitability Rating (CSR) 136 
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and 
Economic Security (CARES) Act 
212 
Covid-19 3, 25–26, 34, 67, 194–195, 
211–212, 238 
CSA see Community Supported 
Agriculture 
CWA see Clean Water Act 
Delaware 165–166 
Department of Health and Human 
Services, the (HHS) 112, 206 
Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) 66 
Department of Natural Resources 
(DNR) 222 
Department of Transportation (DoT) 
53, 106–107 
Dillon’s Rule state 53, 55 
Direct-to-Consumer (DTC) 14, 19 
Double Up Bucks program 203–204 
Double Up Oklahoma (DUO) 204 
economic development 19, 59, 67–68, 
89, 98, 206; agricultural 63, 131; 
funds 160; staf 99 
efective farm use (EFU) zoning 124 
Electronic Beneft Transfer (EBT) 110, 
193, 204 
Emergency Food Assistance Program 
(TEFAP) 20, 110, 194, 212 
emergency management/hazard 
mitigation plans 66 
employment 13, 32, 67, 72, 200 
Endangered Species Act of 1973 117 
engagement 71, 80, 86–87, 88, 128, 
237 
Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) 37, 117–119, 172, 174  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 267 
Environmental Quality Incentives 
Program (EQIP) 115–116 
Environmental Working Group 37–38 
EQIP see Environmental Quality 
Incentives Program 
Erie County 64, 64 
Expanded Food and Nutrition 
Education Program, the (EFNEP) 
206 
Extension Disaster Education 
Network (EDEN) 66 
Fair Food Network 203, 216n31 
Farmable Wetlands Program 115 
Farm Bill 20, 112, 114, 199; 1996 111; 
2008 61; 2014 116, 199; 2018 199, 
233; 2023 12; food programs 110; 
for nutrition assistance 108; USDA 
and 107–108 
Farmers Market Nutrition Program 
(FMNP) 110, 112, 193, 202 
farmers markets 19, 112, 132, 145–147, 
187; incubators and shared 
facilities 147 
farming 166; farmland in 46; 
and food system 18, 206, 237; 
practices 12, 185; and ranching 
119, 133, 158–159, 163 
farm labor housing 142–143 
farmland access 20, 119; access to 
farmland 218–219, 219; bufers 
and setbacks 236; heirs property 
and fractionated lands 225–226; 
land access policy incentives 
219–220; land banks 221–222; 
Land Buy Back Program for Tribal 
Nations 226; LandLink/FarmLink 
program 222; leasing public lands 
222–223; Maryland’s Next Gen 
program 220–221, 220; mitigation 
fees 229–230; urban agriculture 
tax credits 223–225, 224 
farmland conversion 106, 119, 133, 158 
farmland of statewide importance 44 
farmland conservation: irrigation 
organizations 179, 180; nutrient 
management plans 176; soil 
health policies 169–171, 169–170; 
water quality policies 173–176, 175; 
water quality trading 176–178, 177; 
water rights 178–179 
farmland protection policies/ 
programs 157–158; agricultural 
conservation easements 163; 
agricultural district programs 
160–162, 161; conservation 
easements 163; farmland 
mitigation 166–167; leasing 
development rights 160; property 
tax relief 158–159; purchase 
of agriculture conservation 
easement (PACE) 162–166, 
162–163, 165; tax relief policies 159; 
use-value assessment 159; see also 
agricultural viability support and 
conservation policies/programs 
Farmland Protection Policy Act 
(FPPA) 107 
Farm Purchase and Protection 
programs 219–220 
FarmLink programs 222 
farms 17; city 71; family 25, 31–32; 
hydroponic and aquaponic 138; 
large 7, 37; midsized 6–7, 32, 
33, 218; planning for 97; rooftop 
72; small commercial 7, 32, 33, 
138–139, 218; urban 152, 221, 
223–225; U.S. 29 
farms and food plan 25–27; 
cropland 32; disruptions in food 
45–47; diverse family farms 
and rural economies 31–33, 33; 
food insecurity and diet-related 
disease 33–35, 34; huge gains  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
268 INDEX 
in productivity 27–31, 28; land 
use and land management 
38–44, 39–43; natural resource 
degradation 35–37, 36 
farms and food planning, principles 
and practices to: asset-based 
approach 79; asset mapping 91; 
carrying capacity and foodprint 
studies 91; community food 
assessments 91; developing and 
vetting the plan 95; Dot Poster 
Surveys 89; economic impact 
assessments 91; fve Ws 94–95; 
foodshed analyses 91; food 
systems engagement process 
93; food systems planning 80; 
future and set goals 92–94, 93; 
eforts guiding principles 78; 
goals and objectives 94–95; 
implement strategies and actions 
95–96; in person or virtual 86; 
planning practices 81; planning 
process 84–88, 88; plan with 
implementation 80; readiness 
81–82, 82–84; seven community 
capitals 79–80; “SMART” goals 
94; trends and conditions 89–91, 
90–91 
Farm Services Agency (FSA) 114–115, 
167 
farm viability 17, 114, 145, 163, 181, 
186, 187 
Fayette County 130–131 
FDA see Food and Drug 
Administration 
federal agencies 13, 20, 112, 116–117 
Federal-Aid Highway Act 105–106 
Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA) 66 
federal government 9, 26, 53, 55, 106, 
117, 205, 226 
Federal Land Policy and Management 
Act of 1976 (FLPMA) 117 
FFRI see Fresh Food Retailer Initiative 
Fish and Wildlife Service 116 
FLPMA see Federal Land Policy and 
Management Act 
food access: Arizona’s food policy 
council and 68; California, healthy￾food access 69–70; in cities 13, 
67–68, 238; Philadelphia’s Food 
Trust 198; grant programs 110–111; 
for priority populations 194; in 
rural communities 4, 238 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
112–113 
Food Distribution Program on Indian 
Reservations 110, 206 
food insecurity 10, 13, 31, 187, 192; 
and diet-related disease 33–35, 34; 
poverty and 146; rural 4 
Food Quality Protection Act 
(FQPA) 117 
Food Retail Expansion to 
Support Health (FRESH) 
program 143 
food safety: conservation cost share 
programs 115–116; Conservation 
Reserve Program 115; easement 
programs 114; land retirement 
programs 115; partnership and 
grant programs 116–117 
Food Safety and Inspection Service 
(FSIS) 112 
Food Safety Modernization Act 
(FSMA) 113 
food security 4, 9–10, 20, 71–72, 
206; and cultural identity 12; 
defnition 17; see also community 
food security 
foodshed 18, 31, 70–71; analyses 91 
food supply chain 18, 26, 61, 200 
food systems: defnition 18; 
emergency 211–212; issues 
237–238; life cycle of food 8; 
planning 19, 67–69; planning  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 269 
for 70–74; plans 67–68; into 
sustainability planning 69–70; 
sustainable 18 
food systems, agencies and policies 
105–106; Bureau of Land 
Management 117; Environmental 
Protection Agency 117–119; federal 
role in land use policy 106, 107; 
food and nutrition 109–112; food 
safety 112–117; USDA and the 
Farm Bill 107–109, 108; see also 
food safety 
food systems planning, overview 
of governmental levels 51–53; 
agriculture plans 63; climate 
action plans 65; common types 
of plans 61–74; comprehensive 
or master plans 62; cooperative 
extension 60–61; counties 55, 
56, 57; emergency management/ 
hazard mitigation plans 66; food 
systems plans 67–68; Indigenous 
tribes 54–55; land use plans 
61–62; local self-governance 
55; metropolitan planning 
organizations 59; municipalities 
57; planning bodies 59; planning 
commissions and boards 60; 
planning departments 60; 
planning for food systems at 
regional scale 70–74; regional 
planning commissions/councils 
of government 60; regional 
planning organizations 60; 
regional purpose authorities 60; 
regional transportation planning 
organizations 60; special districts 
59; State Mitigation Planning 
Policy Guide 66; States 53–54; 
sustainability plans 69–70; towns 
and townships 58–59, 58 
food systems resiliency plans 68–69 
Food Trust 198–199, 198 
fractionated lands 7, 218–219, 
225–226 
Fresh Food Retailer Initiative (FFRI) 
200 
Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program 112 
Fresno County, California 146 
Fruit and Vegetable Prescription 
Program (FVRx) 205 
FSMA see Food Safety Modernization 
Act 
General Allotment (Dawes) Act 226 
Geographic Information System 
(GIS) 81, 89 
Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) 95 
government structures 20 
Grassland CRP 115 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 6, 
11, 11, 40–42, 45, 65, 218, 226 
Gus Schumacher Nutrition Incentive 
Program, (GusNIP) 111, 193, 
203–204 
health 78; care 34, 40, 56; disparities 
20, 195, 198; environmental 4, 13; 
human 5, 36–37, 43, 111; public 4, 
13, 53, 112, 150, 183, 193; soil see soil 
health 
Health and Human Services (HHS) 
206 
healthy corner store initiatives 
196–197, 196 
healthy food fnancing initiatives 
(HFFI) 199–200 
Healthy Food Healthy People 
working group 68, 75n24 
healthy food retail 132, 143, 200 
Healthy Incentives Program (HIP) 
204 
Healthy Savings 205 
Heidel Hollow Farms 229 
heirs property 7, 22n25, 31, 218–219, 
225–226  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
270 INDEX 
HFFI see healthy food fnancing 
initiatives 
historically Black colleges and 
universities (HBCUs) 61 
“Home Rule” state 53, 55 
housing 34, 39, 122; afordable 18, 
44, 106, 137; farm labor 133, 
142–143; seasonal 143 
Hunger Free Oklahoma 204, 216n33 
hypoxia 27–28, 36 
Improving America’s Schools Act 61 
Indian Tribal Organizations (ITOs) 206 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) 10, 12, 26 
International City/County Management 
Association (ICMA) 244 
The Johns Hopkins Center for a 
Livable Future (CLF) 194, 244 
Kaufman, Jerome 9 
Keepseagle v. Vilsack 32 
land banks 221–222 
Land Buy Back program 226 
LandLink program 222 
Land Evaluation and Site Assessment 
(LESA) 153, 166, 230 
landscapes 67, 78, 181, 230; 
agricultural 9, 40, 168; American 
106 
land trust 18, 114, 163, 221, 230 
land use planning 38, 47, 61–62, 
105–106, 122, 124, 167, 194 
legislation 137, 142, 169, 187, 194, 
221, 223, 230; environmental 108; 
federal 66; historic 116 
local and regional food systems 
(LRFS) 26, 46, 67, 193, 238, 
245–246 
local food 18–19, 98, 147, 186–187, 
194; coop 99–100; organizations 
98; production 65, 218, 221; 
sales 97 
local governments 55; community￾scale solar projects 227; 
mitigation fees 229–230; nutrition 
guidelines for public agencies 
206–208; PACE programs 
162–163; and states 53–54; on 
TEFAP 212 
Louisiana Master Farmer Program 172 
LRFS see local and regional food 
systems 
Managerial and Professional Society 
(MAPS) 214 
Marion County Public Health 
Department, Indiana 205 
Maryland Agricultural and Resource￾Based Industry Development 
Corporation (MARBIDCO) 184, 
221 
Maryland Department of Agriculture 
(MDA) 63, 74n8, 190n33 
Massachusetts Department of Public 
Health 197, 215n17 
Metropolitan Planning Organizations 
(MPOs) 59 
mobile markets’ 147, 194, 199, 201 
mobile vending allowances 201–202 
Morrill Act of 1890 61 
Municipal Vulnerability Preparedness 
(MVP), Massachusetts 65, 75n15 
National Agricultural Lands Study 
(NALS) 158 
National Agricultural Law Center 
244–245 
National Agricultural Statistics 
Service (NASS) 17, 96 
National Association of Conservation 
Districts (NACD) 245 
National Association of Counties 
(NACo) 56, 245  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 271 
National Association of 
Development Organizations 
(NADO) 245 
National Association of Local Boards 
of Health, The (NALBOH) 245 
National Association of Regional 
Councils (NARC) 245 
National Association of Towns and 
Townships (NATaT) 245 
National Conference of State 
Legislatures 54, 74n3, 240n40 
National Institute of Food and 
Agriculture 81, 244 
National Interstate and Defense 
Highways Act of 1956 106 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration’s National Marine 
Fisheries Service 116 
National Pollutant Discharge 
Elimination System (NPDES) 176 
National School Lunch Program, the 
206, 210 
natural resource degradation 35–37, 
36 
natural resources 8, 60, 78–79, 117, 
125, 163 
Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (NRCS) 12, 44, 114–116, 
136, 164 
Navaho Nation 205, 208 
New York State Energy Research 
and Development Authority 
(NYSERDA) 229 
Nonpoint Source Management 
Program 118 
nonpoint source pollution 118, 172, 
175–176 
North American Food System 
Network 245–246 
NRCS see Natural Resources 
Conservation Service 
nuisance complaints 119, 133, 
181–182, 238 
nutrition 9, 13, 37, 45, 108; guidelines 
206–208, 207; incentives 196, 
201–203; insecurity 26; security 
13, 35, 205; see also nutrition 
education and promotion 
nutritional security 13, 35 
nutrition education and promotion 
119, 194, 205–211 
Nutrition Incentive Program (NIP) 
111, 194, 202–205 
nutritious food 17, 34, 84, 196, 213 
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) 66 
Ohio River Basin Water Quality 
Trading Project 177 
Option to Purchase at Agricultural 
Value (OPAV) 165 
organic agriculture 17, 117, 125, 144, 
224 
“Our County” —Los Angeles 
Countywide Sustainability Plan 
69–70 
PACE see purchase of agricultural 
conservation easement 
pesticides 5, 27, 36, 117 
Pigford vs. Glickman 31 
planning authority 20, 51, 53, 55, 77, 
122, 125 
planning organizations 20, 51 
polycrisis 26–27, 238 
Pothukuchi, Kami 9 
Prairie Crossing Farm 125, 
155n7 
prime farmland 44, 136, 167 
Produce Prescription Program 
(Veggie Rx) 111, 204 
property rights 163–164; air rights 
164; development rights 164; 
mineral rights 164; surface 
rights 164 
public health 53, 60, 112, 150  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
272 INDEX 
Public Rangelands Improvement Act 
of 1978 117 
purchase of agricultural conservation 
easement (PACE)/purchase of 
development rights (PDR) 126–127, 
130, 162–166, 162–163, 165 
REAP see Resource Enhancement and 
Protection 
regenerative agriculture 9, 10, 17 
Regional Conservation Partnership 
Program (RCPP) 116 
regional planning organizations 
(RPOs) 60 
regional purpose authorities (RPAs) 60 
regional transportation planning 
organizations (RTPOs) 60 
Reinvestment Fund 199 
resilience 10, 26, 78, 218, 238; 
climate 72, 169; community 9; 
defnition 19 
Resource Enhancement and 
Protection (REAP) program 174 
riparian bufers 140, 178 
Roosevelt, Franklin D. 42, 50n59, 114 
rural community 42; and agricultural 
viability 81; attributes of 72; food 
access in 238; impacts of farm 
consolidation 40; underserved 
199 
rural planning 13, 39, 73 
Rural Urban Continuum (RUC) 
Codes 14 
Safe Drinking Water Act 118 
SALC see Sustainable Agricultural 
Lands Conservation 
Saving Tomorrow’s Agricultural 
Resources (STAR) program 170, 
171 
scenario planning 93 
School Breakfast and Lunch program 
112, 210 
Schumacher, Gus 202–204, 203 
SCPEA see Standard City Planning 
Enabling Act 
SCS see Soil Conservation Service 
setbacks 140, 236 
“SMART” goals 94 
smart growth 9, 39, 47, 118, 168, 237 
Smart Solar℠ 232–233, 232; solar on 
disturbed and developed sites 
228–229, 229 
Smith-Lever Act 60, 185 
SNAP see Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program 
Soil Conservation Service (SCS) 114 
soil health: and ecosystems 17; and 
environmental management 
237; investments in 223; policies 
169–171, 170; and productivity 228 
soil suitability 45 
Soil Survey Geographic Database 
(SSURGO) 44, 91 
solar energy 226–228, 227 
Sonoma County, California 182, 
190n43 
Special Supplemental Nutrition 
Program for Women, Infants, and 
Children (WIC) 112, 206 
Standard City Planning Enabling Act 
(SCPEA) 61–62 
Standard State Zoning Enabling Act 
(SZEA) 61, 131 
State Acres for Wildlife Enhancement 
(SAFE) 115 
subdivision regulations 124–126; 
Agrihoods 125; cluster 
development 126 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program (SNAP) 4, 34, 54, 
109–111, 110, 192–194, 196–198 
Sustainable Agricultural Lands 
Conservation (SALC) Program 
168–170 
sustainable agriculture 17, 20, 46, 195  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 273 
Sustainable Development Code 246 
sustainable food systems 18, 78, 87, 
121 
sustainability 19; plans 69–70 
Sweetened Beverage Tax 208, 212 
SWOT analysis 89, 95 
Tampa Bay Regional Resilience Action 
Plan 65 
TEFAP see Emergency Food 
Assistance Program 
The UConn Rudd Center for Food 
Policy and Health 215n5, 246 
The Sustainable Development Code 
246 
Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) 174 
towns and townships governments 
58–59, 58 
transfer of development rights 
(TDR) programs (Transfer 
of Development Credits and 
Transferable Development Units) 
126–128, 127, 137, 160 
transformation 12, 16, 20, 47, 237 
Transition Incentives Program (TIP) 
115 
transportation 11, 53, 61, 122; rural 60 
Transportation Management Areas 
(TMAs) 59 
Uniform Partition of Heirs Property 
Act (UPHPA) 225 
unique farmland 44 
United States Conference of Mayors 
246 
UPHPA see Uniform Partition of 
Heirs Property Act 
urban agriculture 9, 71–72, 71, 194, 
214 
urban agriculture zones 137–139, 138 
urban growth boundaries (UGBs)/ 
urban service boundaries 
128–131, 129 
USDA Food and Nutrition Service 
21n7, 49n38, 120n9, 193, 215n14, 
215n18 
USDA’s Forest Service 106, 109 
U.S. Composting Council 142, 
156n29 
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) 
41, 50n57, 218, 227, 239n1, 240n25 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 116 
Vermont Farm to Plate (F2P) 67, 96 
Vermont Law School Center for 
Agriculture and Food Systems 
119n2, 246 
Vermont’s Clean Water Act (Act 64) 
175 
Vermont Sustainable Jobs Fund 
(VSJF) 75 
visioning 93 
water quality policies 173–176, 175 
water quality trading 176–178, 177 
water rights 178–179 
Wayne County, farms and food in 
97–100, 97 
wetland reserve easements (WRE) 
114 
Wetland Reserve Enhancement 
Partnership 114 
World Café 85–87 
zoning: accessory and ancillary uses 
of agricultural land 139; agricultural 
132–133; agricultural preservation 
135–136; agricultural protection 
zones 133–134; for agriculture 
in Scott County 135–136, 135; 
agritourism 139–140; composting 
141–142, 142; concentrated 
animal feeding operations 149; 
considerations 139; efective/ 
exclusive agricultural 134; 
Euclidean zoning 131–132; farmers’ 274 INDEX 
markets 145–147, 146; farm labor 
housing 142–143; form-based 
zoning 132; healthy food retail 143; 
incentive zoning 132; incubators 
and shared facilities 147; intensity 
zoning 132; intensive agricultural 
134; local food 143–144; mixed￾use zoning 132; on-farm energy 
production 148–149, 148; on-farm 
marketing 144–145, 144; ordinances 
132; overlay 137; performance 
zoning 132; poultry and livestock 
149–150; setbacks and bufers 
140–141; signage 152; sliding-scale 
134; and subdivision regulations 
124–125; urban agriculture 137–139, 
138; urban chickens, bees, and 
livestock 151–152, 151; wineries, 
breweries, and distillers 152–154, 
153; zoning ordinances 132 
