The MIT Press Essential Knowledge Series
A complete list of books in this series can be found online at https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/series/mit
-press-essential-knowledge-series.PLASTICS
IMARI WALKER-FRANKLIN AND JENNA
JAMBECK
The MIT Press    |    Cambridge, Massachusetts    |    London, England© 2023 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without
permission in writing from the publisher.
The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided comments on drafts
of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential for establishing the authority and
quality of our publications. We acknowledge with gratitude the contributions of these otherwise
uncredited readers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Walker-Franklin, Imari, author. | Jambeck, Jenna, author.
Title: Plastics / Imari Walker-Franklin and Jenna Jambeck.
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, [2023] | Series: The MIT press essential
knowledge series | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022055535 (print) | LCCN 2022055536 (ebook) | ISBN 9780262547017 | ISBN
9780262377065 (epub) | ISBN 9780262377058 (pdf)
Subjects: LCSH: Plastics—Environmental aspects. | Plastic scrap—Environmental aspects. |
Substitute products.
Classification: LCC TD195.P52 W35 2023 (print) | LCC TD195.P52 (ebook) | DDC 620.1/9230286
—dc23/eng/20221129
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022055535
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022055536
d_r0publication supported by a grant from
The Community Foundation for Greater New Haven
as part of the Urban Haven ProjectCONTENTS
Series Foreword
1   Introduction
2   Plastic Production and Use
3   Managing Plastic Waste
4   Discovery of Plastic Debris
5   Chemicals in and Associated with Plastic
6   Environmental Impacts of Plastic
7   Plastics’ Impact on Society
8   Plastic Policies
9   Alternatives and Interventions for Plastic
Glossary
Further Reading
Index
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 The use of the word “plastic” over time, according to Google Books.
Figure 2 The production of olefins from oil and natural gas and subsequent related production of
chemicals and polymers from the monomer ethylene.
Figure 3 a) The “singing” waste and recycling collection trucks in Taipei. b) Source separated
collection of waste in Oslo. c) Women sorting imported plastic film by hand in Southeast Asia. d)
Hand sorting recyclables at a kabadiwalla shop in India.
Figure 4 (a) Microplastic that has washed up on the shore in the strand line on the beach in Bermuda.
(b) Close-up of plastic debris on the coastline.
Figure 5 Diagram of the many ways that plastics can interact with the environment.LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 A list of interventions used to address plastic pollution around the world.SERIES FOREWORD
The MIT Press Essential Knowledge series offers accessible, concise,
beautifully produced pocket-size books on topics of current interest. Written
by leading thinkers, the books in this series deliver expert overviews of
subjects that range from the cultural and the historical to the scientific and
the technical.
In today’s era of instant information gratification, we have ready access
to opinions, rationalizations, and superficial descriptions. Much harder to
come by is the foundational knowledge that informs a principled
understanding of the world. Essential Knowledge books fill that need.
Synthesizing specialized subject matter for nonspecialists and engaging
critical topics through fundamentals, each of these compact volumes offers
readers a point of access to complex ideas.1
INTRODUCTION
Wherever you are right now, look around. Do you perhaps have the book in
one hand and your phone made of various metals, plastics, and glass in the
other? Are you possibly perched on a park bench made of recycled plastic
bags or on your polyurethane mattress? Did you recently flip on a light
switch to read this? We come into contact daily with many items made of
plastics—such as your phone (or parts of your phone), carpet, furniture, and
light switches. Some plastic items might not be obvious including multi￾materials containing plastic. For example, your clothing might be a
polyester blend or fleece, a disposable coffee cup is paper lined with
polyethylene, and metallic-looking snack bags are plastics with a very thin
layer of aluminum.
While “plastic” is still used as an adjective in soil science, it is now a
noun that is most known as “any of numerous organic synthetic or
processed materials that are mostly thermoplastic or thermosetting
polymers of high molecular weight and that can be made into objects, films,
or filaments.”1 According to Google, the use of the word plastic correlates
with the timeline of the history and development of the common material
we use today (figure 1). Since it was discovered in the 1860s and then
brought to the public marketplace in the 1950s in numerous forms, plastic
has become ubiquitous in our everyday lives.Figure 1   The use of the word “plastic” over time, according to Google Books.
Before the word plastic became what
we know it as today, it was used as an
adjective to describe something
“easily shaped or molded.”
Plastic, as the name of the material we now know, literally exploded
onto the marketplace when humans were looking for a replacement for
natural materials like ivory. The feedstock for most plastics today is fossil
fuels, oil, and gas, but the invention of plastics came from a raw plant
material, cellulose. Cellulose is the most prevalent organic compound on
earth, as it is found in wood and cotton. It is composed of a chain of sugar
molecules and makes up green plant cell walls. Paper derived from wood is
made flexible by cellulose. Other natural materials that can be molded or
shaped are amber and rubber (made from tree sap).
A German chemistry professor, Christian Friedrich Schönbein, found
that the cellulose in cotton, when mixed with sulfur and nitric acid, became
highly flammable and was termed “guncotton” or nitrocellulose. Partially
nitrated cellulose was a bit more stable, termed pyroxylin, and was the basis
for two plastic materials invented in the early 1860s—Parkesine and
Xylonite—neither of which remained in the marketplace long. However,when dissolved in organic solvents, nitrocellulose became a very thick
liquid termed collodion, which was also flammable and not very useful yet.
The addition of camphor to the mixture resulted in a more stable moldable
plastic-like material. John Wesley Hyatt, an American inventor, named this
mixture “celluloid” and submitted it as an entry to win a $10,000
competition for finding a replacement for ivory in billiard balls. John won
the competition, even though he never collected the prize money. These
materials began to rapidly replace ivory. And while celluloid, popular in
billiard balls, combs, and more, was more stable than nitrocellulose, the
celluloid billiard balls could still be explosive while in use. Additionally,
nitrocellulose was a biobased polymer originating from cellulose plant
material; full synthetic oil and gas-sourced plastic materials came later.
In the early 1900s, like several other scientists, Leo Baekeland was
developing new materials using phenol and formaldehyde mixtures. During
this process, he added various temperatures and pressures. In 1909, he
publicly announced his invention Bakelite, the world’s first synthetic plastic
material. Leo describes the polymerization process as akin to biological
processes that take after the “phenolic nature of resinous substances” found
in plants like Japanese Lacquer. In what is now an ironic twist, the process
of making the first fully synthetic plastic material was, in his words,
mimicking nature through biomimicry.
Bakelite had advantages over celluloid in that, once molded, the
product maintained its shape when exposed to heat or chemicals. Since this
thermoset plastic was heat tolerant, chemical resistant, and nonconductive,
Bakelite was quickly implemented in many applications in the electrical
and automotive industry, technological infrastructure (telephones, washing
machine parts, etc.), and novelty items (jewelry, cosmetic containers, etc.).
However, Bakelite could not be colored easily, and in some cases, sawdust
was a filler used to make it opaque. And, as a thermoset, it could not be
melted and remolded again. Eventually, thermoplastic materials that could
be molded and remelted, like polystyrene and nylon, were invented. And
these plastic materials had better aesthetics and became more widely used.
Plastics, as a new material, were quickly taken up for use by the
military, especially in World War II when parachutes, helmet parts, gun
pieces and housings, aircraft components, and even the combs issued to
soldiers were all made of new plastic materials.2 After the war, companieslike DuPont that were making plastic materials were eager to see the
products adopted by civilian society as well. And they got their wish
through marketing a new disposable society to the public, as the infamous
cover of Life Magazine showed in August 1955: “Throwaway Living.”
There was no denying the usefulness of plastic materials (moldable,
durable, and light), and they expanded quickly to household goods, initially
replacing those natural materials like ivory and rubber. A great example is
cellophane that was invented in the early 1900s and used to store food.
The packaging sector has been the most significant sector of plastics
use since 1950. Several factors drive the use in this sector. First, the world
has become increasingly globalized. Since the quantity of goods and food
that are transported globally is significant, the packaging sector has
especially embraced plastic as a functional material. It is durable to protect
goods and food, yet light (decreasing transport costs), and can be easily
formed into shapes, colored and designed for both loss protection and
marketing purposes. Another driving factor is food distribution and
protection. Plastic materials have brought us convenience through packaged
items that are easy to grab and go and can also provide portioned food or
drink when needed. In terms of food protection and packaging, there is not
another material (yet) that has provided the advantages of plastic. However,
some would say we have gone too far when foods that are naturally
protected by their skins are wrapped in plastic. Plastic as a material for food
packaging has had an economic advantage allowing companies to market
effectively, designing appealing-looking and feeling packages, packages
that prevent loss from store shelves, and making transportation less
expensive with lighter weight materials.
But as the disposable culture for plastics grew, so did the concern over
waste management. How would our waste management system handle a
material it had never seen before? Even the industry knew this might be an
issue as they discussed it at meetings where the information never saw the
light of day in those time periods.3 When plastics began to “leak out” of the
system in the United States onto roadsides and into the environment, an
extensive campaign to prevent litter began with an industry-funded
organization called Keep America Beautiful (KAB). While it was important
for the companies to provide resources to clean up a problem they were
contributing to, it also misled the public into thinking it was their burdenalone to keep the environment clean. Not only were companies not
contributing resources upstream to infrastructure or prevention of waste
and, therefore, litter in the first place, they also actively fought policies such
as requirements for reusables and deposit-return schemes. They placed the
responsibility for leakage and cleanup squarely on the shoulders of cities
and community members. To this day, we continue to try to play catch-up
with the problems that plastic pollution has caused.
This book covers plastics production and use, plastic waste generation
and management, and environmental and societal impacts of plastic debris.
We will cover policies and interventions to reduce the pollution caused by
the use of plastic. In chapter 2, we will cover the rapid growth and use
through time, including statistics on production. Since so many plastics are
used quickly and discarded, waste management has also been an issue since
its early use. In chapter 3, we will discuss challenges with managing plastic
waste, from why recycling plastic has been so challenging to how a material
that is so valuable to companies from an economic standpoint has so little
value after it is used. Chapter 4 will discuss where and how much plastic
has been found in our environment.
Next, plastics are not just a polymer but also contain additives and
modifiers that can be released into the environment, as discussed in chapter
5. Chapter 6 will examine the environmental impacts of plastic pollution.
Chapter 7 will address the impacts of plastics on different aspects of
society. Because of the many headlines and echoed concerns about plastic
pollution around the world, many governments acted. Chapter 8 discusses
policies and regulations designed to address plastics. Chapter 9 will discuss
interventions to reduce the quantity of plastics entering our environment
and ocean, and the actions we can take to address this issue personally and
collectively as we ponder what our future looks like with plastics.
In the 1999 movie American Beauty, a plastic bag danced around in a
video with the characters discussing beauty. The scene wasn’t really about
how beautiful the plastic bag was, but it begged us to look closer at
mundane things, everyday things, to appreciate the fact that there is an
entire life behind objects. This book is about the entire life cycle of plastic
things. We can’t imagine our life without plastics. Yet, their contamination
of our environment is just as evident—we see it nearly everywhere we go.
Blame is often placed on the consumer or community member for pollution,but they are a part of a system with limited choices. This book can arm
people with knowledge and information about plastics to make thoughtful
choices when possible, influence change of the larger system, and spark
inspiration.
Notes
1. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/plastic.
2. Susan Freinkel, Plastic: A Toxic Love Story (Boston: Mariner Books, 2011).
3. Laura Sullivan, “How Big Oil Misled the Public into Believing Plastic Would Be Recycled,”
National Public Radio, September 11, 2020, https://www.npr.org/2020/09/11/897692090/how-big-oil
-misled-the-public-into-believing-plastic-would-be-recycled.2
PLASTIC PRODUCTION AND USE
It can be very difficult to imagine our lives without plastic as a material for
use. Plastic can be molded into any shape, flexibility, and color and is used
in sectors that have made tremendous progress, like transportation,
medicine, and electronics. However, what society finds so useful about it,
the sheer variety of things we can do with it, is precisely what often makes
it so challenging to capture and manage after its use. When considering how
to keep plastic out of the environment, we need to consider when, where,
and how we use it. And the extent of this use became highly evident during
the COVID-19 pandemic. During the early months of the pandemic, many
of us were at home, often more than we had ever been in our recent lives,
realizing the amount of plastic we use daily and how this use increased the
waste we generated. People weren’t necessarily generating more waste
overall, but both the types of waste we were generating and where we were
generating it were different. As of 2015, 8.3 billion metric tons of plastic
had been produced globally since 1950, when only 2 million metric tons of
plastic were produced.1
Plastics are a type of polymer, a large chain consisting of thousands of
interlinked molecular units known as monomers. Plastics come from
feedstocks like natural gas and oil, refined into components like propane
and ethane. High heat applied to this feedstock will form the monomers
propylene and ethylene, two common olefins (a double-bonded
hydrocarbon) used to produce plastics and chemicals. Olefins are producedby fluid-catalytic cracking (oil) or by steam-cracking natural gas. The
olefins ethylene and propylene are the building blocks of polymers and
other chemicals (figure 2, polymers are highlighted in gray and other
specialty chemicals are in white) and, after polymerization but before
extrusion, will be in granular form. An extruder combines additives and the
polymer, compounding and pelletizing the plastics for use to then
manufacture their final plastic products.Figure 2   The production of olefins from oil and natural gas and subsequent related production of
chemicals and polymers from the monomer ethylene.
The goal of cracking and producing olefins is not just for polymers, but
numerous other chemicals as well. Typically, specialty chemicals generate
higher profit for the petrochemical industry than refined gasoline, but there
is only a finite amount of demand for these chemicals, like ethylene glycol.
Any excess ethylene produced beyond that used for chemicals can be easily
polymerized and made into plastic pellets for manufacturing, whether the
plastics are immediately needed or not. Plastics are sometimes referred to as
a by-product of oil or gas refining, since they are just one component of the
petrochemical process and are made with excess monomers that are not
used for higher-profit chemicals directly. Because of this, polymers’ sheer
existence and potential to add profit have pushed their use into more than
what could be considered necessary.
Because of this, polymers’ sheer
existence and potential to add profit
have pushed their use into more than
what could be considered necessary.
While there are now over 5,300 polymer formulations commercially
available, some of the most common polymers are polyethylene,
polypropylene, polyvinyl chloride, polyethylene terephthalate,
polyurethane, and polystyrene. Fossil-fuel-based plastics dominate the
industry. Biobased plastics use alternate feedstocks such as wood pulp,
sugars, crops, or fungi instead of oil or natural gas. Although biobased
plastics make up less than 1% of the market, their demand is expected to
increase.Globally, 367 million metric tons of plastics were produced in 2020.2
China produces most plastics (32%), followed by the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) countries of Canada, the USA, and Mexico
(19%). The rest of Asia produces 17%, followed by the EU at 15% and
other regions of the world at less than 10% each. Both polymer feedstocks
(e.g., oil and gas) and polymerized plastics are traded globally. The US
supplies 22.8% of the plastic manufacturing feedstocks to the EU, followed
by imports from the UK, South Korea, Saudi Arabia, and China.3 The most
significant plastic processing imports to the EU are from China (33.8%),
followed by the USA (11.7%). Plastics processing exports from the EU go
to the UK (18.4%), followed by the US, Switzerland, China, and Russia.
The global production of plastics in 2020 decreased slightly from 2019,
likely due to COVID. However, each year before that had been a steady
increase since the recession in 2008, when production dropped fourteen
million metric tons and bounced back the following year. The economy
slowed down during COVID, but the use of plastic in several areas (e.g.,
medical and packaging) saw an increase in use, so the drop in production
was minimal. The years 2020 through 2022 were “non-normal” during the
height of the COVID-19 pandemic, with global supply shortages of many
goods. Up to this point, in places like the US, consumption of items was at
an all-time high.
Medical uses of plastic were critical for lifesaving uses in hospitals all
over the world, but managing waste became an issue. Policies and
regulations that had been already implemented or were about to be
implemented to reduce plastic consumption (e.g., plastic bag bans, taxes,
etc.) were officially rolled back. At that time, simple reusable mug, bag, and
refillable product policies changed. Both governmental and industry policy
changes resulted in more use of plastics because plastics are considered
disposable. A great example is personal protective equipment and supplies
like masks, gloves, and sanitation wipes made of single-use plastics.
Demand for these plastic products outstripped supply at the beginning of
the pandemic, but supply eventually caught up. Additionally, demand for
packaged items and delivery of groceries, food, and other items increased,
so more waste was generated at home. The increase in household waste
resulted in a drop in commercial waste (waste at work) generation.It might seem like durable items made with plastics take up the largest
fraction of plastic produced overall, like cars, electronics, and building and
construction materials. However, these are not the sectors of highest use for
plastic globally; it is the packaging sector at 40.5% by mass.4 That’s right.
Every product that is transported to its final destination for use is
overwhelmed by plastic bagging, films, containers, tape, and padding (foam
or air-filled plastic pillows). Building and construction is the subsequent
highest use at 20.4%, followed by automotive use at 8.8%. Although it
seems like every electronic device contains plastic, only 6.2% of plastic is
used in the electrical and electronics sector. Household goods, leisure, and
sports are a small percentage of use (4.3%), followed by agriculture (3.2%),
and a combination of other uses at 16.6%. When considering where we use
the most plastic, it is not surprising that it is in the packaging sector.
Packaging provides for the transport and delivery of goods and products,
but it enters the waste stream very quickly after goods are obtained or a
product is consumed—and it often has no other use at that point. Think of
all the packaging that accumulates in trash cans after holidays or birthdays.
Plastic packaging often has no other value after its single use, which is why
this is the sector of materials that most often end up leaking into the
environment (chapter 4).
When considering how long a product stays in use, the US
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) sorts goods into three categories
that use lifetimes in a material flow analysis to estimate waste quantities
generated for a particular year. These categories are durable goods (stay in
use more than three years), nondurable goods (stay in use fewer than three
years), and containers and packaging (typically enter the waste stream the
same year they are purchased). Examples of durable goods include
appliances and furniture. Examples of nondurable goods include disposable
diapers, trash bags, cups, utensils, medical devices, and household items
such as shower curtains.5 Packaging is what our food and other products
come in at the store or when they arrive on our doorstep.
We now know that we can’t start to reduce plastic pollution without a
reduction of production. And plastic pollution starts at production,
especially for surrounding communities (see chapter 7). In the past, plastics
that were targeted for reduction were single-use plastics. Single-use was
defined as something that had one use and could not be reused, likepackaging, a disposable coffee cup, a beverage cup lid, a straw, etc. These
were items most often found in the environment, in waterways, and in the
ocean.6 However, a new focus on plastic pollution reduction is to consider
unnecessary, avoidable, and problematic plastics (UAPs).7 There is a need
for policy makers to be able to determine which plastics may be
unnecessary, avoidable, or problematic in their context. For example,
bottled water might be necessary in some contexts if clean drinking water is
unavailable. Bottled water could be considered unnecessary in other places
where refilling stations are free and available. Additionally, green plastic
bottles, or any color instead of clear or blue, could be problematic for
increasing recycling capabilities (e.g., clear and a few blue bottles are the
only two colors that can be recycled bottle-to-bottle). As a community
member, it is often difficult to avoid plastics—there is frequently no choice.
And it can be a privilege to be able to avoid plastics when making
purchases. Upstream and systemic change is needed, enabling more
thoughtful decisions about where, when, and how plastics are used, if at all.
Notes
1. Roland Geyer, Jenna R. Jambeck, and Kara Lavender Law, “Production, Use, and Fate of All
Plastics Ever Made,” Science Advances 3, no. 7 (2017): e1700782.
2. Plastics Europe, Plastics—the Facts 2020, September 2021, https://plasticseurope.org/knowledge￾hub/plastics-the-facts-2020/.
3. Plastics Europe, Plastics—the Facts 2020.
4. Data only recorded in the EU27+3 (UK, Norway, and Switzerland) by Plastics Europe. Plastics
Europe, Plastics—the Facts 2020.
5. United States Environmental Protection Agency, “Advancing Sustainable Materials Management:
2017 Fact Sheet Assessing Trends in Material Generation, Recycling, Composting, Combustion with
Energy Recovery and Landfilling in the United States,” Washington, DC, 2020.
6. Ocean Conservancy, The Beach and Beyond: International Coastal Cleanup 2019 Report,
September 2019, https://oceanconservancy.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/Final-2019-ICC-Report
.pdf; Ocean Conservancy, Together, We Are Team Ocean—2020 Report, October 2020, https://
oceanconservancy.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/FINAL_2020ICC_Report.pdf; Kathryn
Youngblood, Sheridan Finder, and Jenna Jambeck, Mississippi River Plastic Pollution Initiative 2021
Science Report, September 2021, https://www.unep.org/resources/report/mississippi-river-plastic￾pollution-initiative-2021-science-report.
7. Australia Packaging Covenant Organization (APCO), Single-Use, Problematic and Unnecessary
Plastic Packaging, October 2020, https://documents.packagingcovenant.org.au/public-documents
/Single-Use%20Problematic%20and%20Unnecessary%20Plastic%20Packaging; U.S. Plastics Pact,
Problematic and Unnecessary Materials Report, January 2022, https://usplasticspact.org/wp-content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2022/01/U.S.-Plastics-Pact-Problematic-Unnecessary-Materials-Report-1.25
.2022.pdf.3
MANAGING PLASTIC WASTE
Trashed. Thrown away. Discarded. No longer “useful.” When does plastic
become “waste”? Some cultures do not recognize the concept of waste—the
Tongan culture is one example. The word “waste”—and its related
concepts, like landfill or trash bin—does not even exist in the Tongan
language. What is waste? Is it something that is not (or no longer) useful?
Or is it, as organizational guru Marie Kondo says, something that no longer
“sparks joy”? And how should we get rid of something that we consider
waste? In the context of plastics, these are challenging questions that we
must grapple with as humans.
For thousands of years longer than we have been using trash cans and
engineered landfills, we have been putting unwanted materials in our
environment. Waterways such as rivers and the ocean historically were used
as waste management systems because they transported waste away from
our location. This was an act of management, when waste was initially all
food waste or waste from our bodies. When metal and paper were
discovered, they remained valuable materials because they could be
recycled or easily burned, respectively. It wasn’t until the age of plastics
and “disposable” goods that solid waste became the management crisis it is
today. Now, the traditional methods of managing waste have led to the
plastic problem of today.
For this discussion, waste is defined as a substance or item that is
discarded and either composted, recycled, disposed of, or placeduncontrolled in the environment.
Let’s consider typical options for getting rid of waste generally, and
items made of plastic, specifically:
•  Sell or donate the item to someone else who might (still) find it of value.
•  Compost it if it’s biodegradable. Although plastics are carbon-based,
they are often not biodegradable or compostable unless specifically
designed to be so, as we’ll explain later.
•  Recycle it. This is what most people try to do with plastics. All the things
that make plastics useful—they can be thin like a plastic bag, thick and
rigid like a bottle, or any color of the rainbow—also make them difficult to
recycle. Some plastics are recyclable, but some are not, so the majority end
up in landfills, and, increasingly often, in unspoiled habitats and waterways.
The challenge of disposing of plastics is so overwhelming to consumers that
some innovators are stepping in. For example, to address one of the most
common questions asked of us, one of the authors of this book (Jambeck)
and a startup at the University of Georgia developed “Can I Recycle This”
(CIRT), a technology platform that can give on-demand, location-specific
information about what can, and can’t be, reused, recycled, or composted
locally. Nonetheless, we are all now obligated to manage plastic properly,
with the assumed responsibility placed upon us by companies when we
obtain an item made or packaged with plastic.
Generation of Waste and Discarded Plastic
According to World Bank data, globally more than two billion metric tons
of waste are generated annually.
1 Along with a steep increase in the
production of synthetic materials, we have seen a resulting increase in
plastic in the waste stream globally to an average of 12%. And from 0.4%
in 1960 to 13.2% in 2017 in the United States alone. These percentages are
all based upon mass, but to really visualize plastic in the waste stream, we
can convert it to volume. A pile of trash often looks primarily plastic, but
that is because plastic weighs very little compared to the space it takes up.
For example, plastic bags, which are film plastics, spread out and look largebecause of their surface area but weigh very little. Rigid plastic containers
are designed to hold products and, when empty, still take up the space
reserved for the product.
Since the 1950s, more than six billion metric tons of plastic have been
used and have become waste around the world.2 Converting this quantity to
volume, you’d be walking ankle-deep through plastic blanketing the entire
state of Texas. With cumulative quantities projected to reach twenty-six
billion metric tons of waste globally by 2050,3
the need for reducing and
managing plastic in the waste stream is only continuing to grow.
Management of Waste and Discarded Plastic
The US approached formalizing solid waste management by passing the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) in 1976, which required
the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to regulate solid and
hazardous waste. “Open dumping” became prohibited and replaced by
engineered and regulated landfills, composting, and recovery systems.
Because of the RCRA and similar regulations globally, many solid waste
management programs have been formalized. However, waste management
remains a complex issue for many reasons, with environmental justice
being one of the most pressing components.4 No one wants a waste
management facility in or near their community. As a result, facilities are
often built in lower-income and historically marginalized communities.
A large, informal waste management sector operates around the world;
about 20 million people count on picking, collecting, sorting, processing,
and selling recycled materials for their livelihood. While the sector is
significant in south and southeast Asia and Africa, waste collectors operate
in greater Asia, North and South America, and parts of Europe as well.
However, they are not often respected or recognized for their work. Waste
pickers frequently have no protections for health and safety and no
infrastructure for operation. Communities of waste collectors can live near
dumpsites collecting valuable items under extremely hazardous conditions.
This community has expertise in materials, recycling, and economics, and
they are an essential stakeholder in policy and infrastructure discussions.
Governments do not often account for their work. Still, they continue to
provide waste collection and recycling, keeping plastic out of theenvironment despite all the challenges they face. In some cases, the
informal waste sector has been able to form unions and negotiate with
governments for recognition, pay or benefits, and improved working
conditions and infrastructure. In Ho Chi Minh City, the (semiformal)
independent waste collectors successfully worked with an NGO and
negotiated a higher pay rate (paid by residents) for their daily collection and
sorting activities, and an improved relationship with the government. There
continue to be global efforts by many advocates and activists to improve
working conditions and recognize this sector’s contributions to keeping
plastics out of the environment.
Reuse
If a plastic-based material retains some value, even if not for its intended
(or initial) purpose, it can be reused, thus eliminating the energy cost of
disposing or recycling it. For example, if you purchase a plastic yogurt or
margarine tub, you can repurpose the empty and clean tub for storage. But
you’ll have too many tubs at some point, leading to clutter! Other formal
reuse scenarios exist at stores and restaurants, and refill and reuse options
are expanding thanks to organizations specifically focused on this work.
Technology is facilitating this growth of reuse and refill with radio
frequency identification (RFID) tracking, electronic payments, and more.
These reuse and refill options prevent waste from being generated in the
first place. The “best” waste is no waste at all.
Collection
Out of sight, out of mind. Most people want a system for quickly getting rid
of their waste. Collection is often an expensive stage of the waste
management process. The economics for collecting and hauling plastic
waste can be tied to the waste generation of consumers who are not often
disincentivized by the cost of managing plastics and other trash—the
mindset may be, if you pay for a can to be collected each week, why not fill
it up? In the US, a lack of curbside collection, more often in rural areas, can
lead to increased illegal dumping and littering.5 However, urban waste
collection is also extremely challenging. For example, in New York City,bagged trash is just set out for trucks and workers to come by to collect in
the wee hours of the morning to avoid disruption of daily life. Setting out
bagged trash comes with challenges like animals (e.g., rats) getting into the
garbage or liquids leaking out; however, lack of space for bins limits
logistics. In Chile, small trash bags hang off of hooks on power poles or
other posts so that they are not on the ground—and the collectors are
familiar with taking them from their higher locations. And collection varies
around the world, with many places collecting source-separated materials
for recycling and recovery, as will be further discussed in the recycling
section. But one of the most famous collection methods in the world is the
singing collection trucks in Taiwan. The trucks arrive daily in
neighborhoods announcing themselves with ice-cream-truck-esque music,
like “Für Elise” by Beethoven. Community members bring trash and
recycling to the trucks, where the truck operators meet them. They throw
their own, already separated and bagged, waste into the trash truck. And
then, the operators help them put their source-separated recycling into
different bins on the recycling truck with precise separation that includes
different bins for cooked and raw residual food waste. Collection in India
may mean that a private waste collector, often called a “kabadiwalla,” may
come to your house to take certain materials you might even get paid for
(figure 3). In a section of Beijing, China, there is a high-tech on-demand
waste collection system, like Uber for waste.Figure 3   a) The “singing” waste and recycling collection trucks in Taipei. b) Source separated
collection of waste in Oslo. c) Women sorting imported plastic film by hand in Southeast Asia. d)
Hand sorting recyclables at a kabadiwalla shop in India.
Composting
The composting process often involves having microbial colonies process
biodegradable carbon. Just like us, microbes feed on carbon-based material
for energy; they need moisture (water), and if they are aerobic, they respire
oxygen. Microbes in anaerobic environments process carbon into methane.
Unfortunately, most plastics are nonbiodegradable because they are highly
crystalline and their molecular chains are so long, making it difficult or
impossible for microbes to digest them. Compostable plastics require
formal composting facilities that can provide high temperatures (at least 40
degrees Celsius), control for oxygen, and curate microbial communities best
suited for degradation. While some polymers that can compost or
biodegrade at lower temperatures exist and are growing in popularity, their
use is not yet widespread, and they still need to be managed properly. If
they do not get composted and are landfilled instead, they will emit
greenhouse gases like methane. When traditional plastic waste ends up in a
compost pile and doesn’t biodegrade, it contaminates the compost with
small pieces of plastic.
Recycling
Globally, on average, we have only recycled about 9% of all plastic ever
made.6 How often have you thought or heard someone say, “I could recycle
this, but I am not convinced that the items actually get recycled.” What
drives this general distrust of recycling? Cities bothering to recycle
typically do what they can to get the materials recycled. There is potential
money to be made compared to disposal, so outside of the trust, most are
financially motivated. But recycling is not the answer to all our problems.
One key component to recycling is local context. Since waste is collected
and managed at the municipal level, local circumstances influence what can
and cannot be recycled, and how recycling takes place.Since waste is collected and managed
at the municipal level, local
circumstances influence what can and
cannot be recycled, and how
recycling takes place.
Recycle bins full of mixed items—bottles, cans, paperboard, paper, etc.
—go to recovery facilities designed by engineers to separate what we all
put in the bins. Some separation is done by hand. Other times the separation
is automated via mechanical, optical, or magnetic methods. Japan and
European countries (e.g., Norway) often have highly specialized and
complex designed material recovery systems, although they often still
require some source separation for collection. For example, in Oslo, there
are different bins for paper, glass, residual, “dangerous waste,” as well as
return vending machines for polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles at
stores. In Japan, there are reportedly up to twelve different categories for
sorting waste in the home, although public waste sorting is simpler with
cans, PET bottles being separated from combustible items. Although Japan
reports an 84% recycle rate for plastics, 67% of that is combusted for
energy recovery instead of being mechanically recycled.7 Recent sorting
technologies incorporate artificial intelligence and machine learning. The
final step at a recovery facility is to compress similar plastics (milk jugs, for
example) into “bales” of the smallest volume and highest density possible
for efficient transport to a processing facility. The bales are cut open,
washed, and then shredded at the processing plant. The shredded plastic is
often used to make pellets, similar to the ones produced during virgin
plastic production described in chapter 2. Recycled pellets still retain their
original pigmentation; that’s why mixed-color recycled plastics are usually
dark gray. This process is typically known as mechanical recycling.Recycling plastics has become a global trade issue as the World Trade
Organization (WTO) encouraged trade in the 1990s, and China became the
manufacturing hub of the world, but eventually, the country had enough. At
the end of 2017, China implemented import restrictions so strict it became a
ban on the import of plastic scrap for recycling. Before this restriction,
China took over half the world’s exported plastic scrap. And most exported
materials were going from Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) and higher-income countries to non-OECD and
lower-income countries,8 which were overwhelmed with the quantities
coming in, especially the contamination that many countries included in
their exports. This ban brought cascade impacts through the entire recycling
value chain—material recovery facilities (MRFs) limited accepted materials
or even closed for some time, and many people felt the impact on their
kitchen recycle bins. Other countries followed China’s lead, and, eventually,
the Basel Convention was amended to require prior notice for the export of
plastic scrap meant for recycling. And nearly 1 Mt of plastic scrap exported
by the US was attributed to US leakage into the environment.9
In general, plastic is often “downcycled,” meaning it is recycled into
items that do not have the same use as the polymer’s initial use, and this is
often influenced by the previous additives and other chemical constraints
that dictate what the recycled plastic is allowed to be made into. Beverage
bottles can become bottles again, but often do not. Plastic bottles typically
become new shoes or athleisure wear. Grocery bags and other film plastic
sometimes get recycled into outdoor decking materials. Communities
around the world have adopted creative ways of downcycling plastics. In
Batangas, Philippines, where plastic regularly washes up on their shores,
the community collects and separates the plastics, then melts them down
and shapes them into stepping stones, garden edging, and other landscaping
materials. In Kenya, recycled plastic is made into construction bricks.
Chemical and thermal recycling are currently expensive and energy￾intensive processes that have not been able to be scaled. Thermal recycling
uses heat, with or without oxygen, in processes of gasification or pyrolysis
to transform the polymers into gasses and oils that could potentially be
utilized for fuels. Chemical recycling breaks the bonds of the polymer to
recover the monomers that can again be repolymerized. Although chemical
recycling allows for a pure monomer to be utilized again, plastics, made upof polymers and additives, are a complex feedstock and need to be
separated in this process. In addition, the energy consumption required
makes these processes expensive. While development continues, chemical
and thermal recycling technologies remain unproven.
It is easy to assume that more recycling, like in these examples, would
reduce environmental plastic pollution. However, that’s only true if there’s
value in recycling the material—as is the case for materials like aluminum
or copper. For plastics, there’s just too much of them, which reduces their
value, and it’s difficult to manage once they escape into the environment.
Landfills
Roughly 79% of all plastics have ended up in landfills or dumpsites around
the world.10 Landfills today are large, complex feats of engineering. In some
locales, the peaks of the huge mounds eclipse buildings and natural hills. In
its most basic form, the base of a landfill is a combination of geomembrane,
a plastic liner about a half-inch thick, placed on top of clay. This composite
layer is intended to capture any liquid that flows to the bottom of the
landfill, called leachate. Similar to the sloped bottom of the basket holding
coffee grounds that create a single stream of coffee that flows into a cup, the
liner system of a landfill is sloped to one side, where the leachate is pumped
out of the landfill. Leachate is not allowed to infiltrate the ground and is
managed as wastewater. The landfill also generates gas, which is composed
of about 50% methane and 50% carbon dioxide, which is actively collected
through a network of gas pipes and blowers, and either burned at a flare to
convert it to carbon dioxide or utilized as a fuel to create electricity or heat.
Engineered landfills are heavily regulated and must be sited after
extensive environmental and geotechnical assessments. Plastics can be a
challenging material in a landfill because they do not biodegrade and often
end up in the leachate as microplastics.11 Also, plastic films like grocery
bags can be challenging because they are lightweight, get caught in the
wind, and may blow out of the landfill. Landfills themselves can get fined
for littering.Combustion
Combustion is a process that uses heat to burn waste into ash and
volatilized chemicals. Globally, 12% of the plastic that has been produced
has been combusted and no longer exists in its original physical form on our
planet.12 Combustion of plastic is a very controversial waste management
method, and understandably so. When waste is combusted and oxidized by
the burning, it creates combustion byproducts. These chemical compounds
are released based upon the temperature of combustion, the type of material
burned, and other factors. Uncontrolled open burning of waste is illegal in
many locations, but that is very hard to enforce on private land.
And in some cases, open burning is a chosen method of “management”
in more remote areas around the world. Of the 2.4 billion metric tons of
waste generated globally, an estimated 972 million metric tons (41%) of
waste is openly burned at both residential and dumpsite locations. Open
burning creates some of the most hazardous air pollutants, including the
very small particulate matter of 10 and 2.5 microns in size, less than one￾tenth of the width of human hair, benzene, PCBs, and dioxins in significant
quantities. These emissions have not typically been included in air
emissions inventories previously, and health impacts are substantial and not
well understood.
13 This and other impacts of plastics will be discussed in
chapters 6 and 7.
Industrial combustion is often regulated tightly because operations can
impact emissions. Industrial combustion can create electricity and/or heat to
be utilized, but if trash becomes a community energy source, an incentive
for making waste can be realized. This is also known as “feeding the beast,”
which goes against many current movements to reduce waste generation
rates. While combusting trash in a controlled and monitored setting reduces
the volume of the waste by about 90%, there is still residual ash to manage.
Ash captured in the gas management system is called fly ash, and ash left
over after combustion is called bottom ash. Ash is a concentration of
particles and elements that don’t combust, like metals, and needs to be
managed in a landfill system. While the ash landfill should theoretically not
create any gases (all the usable carbon has been oxidized and should not
biodegrade), the ash leachate can be quite high in metal concentrations. Theleachate must be collected and managed in ways that protect human health
and the environment.
Summary
The question of how we manage our plastic waste is complex, but the more
we know about the plastic waste management process, the more we can
work with all stakeholders to improve it. In some ways, managing our trash
is not that different from our need to separate ourselves from our bodily
waste. Environmental engineers have designed systems to make body waste
“disappear” relatively quickly and easily. One fundamental difference
between body waste and plastics is that most plastics are not biodegradable,
and getting rid of them as quickly as possible is “wasteful” at best and
harmful at worst. Engineered solutions to dispose of or recycle plastics
create a false sense of security that we can endlessly use and discard plastic
products. Historically, companies have avoided the cost of waste
management related to the management of plastic waste related to their
products—but more public awareness and government policies like
extended producer responsibility (EPR) offer one way to change this.
Notes
1. Silpa Kaza et al., What a Waste 2.0: A Global Snapshot of Solid Waste Management to 2050
(Washington, DC: World Bank Group, 2018), https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986
/30317.
2. Roland Geyer, Jenna R. Jambeck, and Kara Lavender Law, “Production, Use, and Fate of All
Plastics Ever Made,” Science Advances 3, no. 7 (2017): e1700782.
3. Geyer, Jambeck, and Law, “Production, Use, and Fate.”
4. Eileen Maura McGurty, “Warren County, NC, and the Emergence of the Environmental Justice
Movement: Unlikely Coalitions and Shared Meanings in Local Collective Action,” Society & Natural
Resources 13, no. 4 (2000): 373–387; Robert D. Bullard, Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and
Environmental Quality (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1990); Clare Cannon, “Examining Rural
Environmental Injustice: An Analysis of Ruralness, Class, Race, and Gender on the Presence of
Landfills across the United States,” Journal of Rural and Community Development 15, no. 1 (2020):
89–114; Omolade Erogunaiye, “Environmental Justice and Landfills: Application of Spatial and
Statistical Analysis for Assessing Landfill Sites in Texas,” (PhD diss., Texas Southern University,
2019).
5. Kenneth D. Tunnell, “Illegal Dumping: Large and Small Scale Littering in Rural Kentucky,”
Journal of Rural Social Sciences 23, no. 2 (2008): 29–42.
6. Geyer, Jambeck, and Law, “Production, Use, and Fate.”7. Plastics Waste Management Institute, An Introduction to Plastic Recycling 2019, January 2020,
https://www.pwmi.or.jp/ei/plastic_recycling_2019.pdf.
8. Amy L. Brooks, Shunli Wang, and Jenna R. Jambeck, “The Chinese Import Ban and Its Impact on
Global Plastic Waste Trade,” Science Advances 4, no. 6 (2018): eaat0131.
9. Kara Lavender Law et al., “The United States’ Contribution of Plastic Waste to Land and Ocean,”
Science Advances 6, no. 44 (2020): eabd0288.
10. Geyer, Jambeck, and Law, “Production, Use, and Fate.”
11. Pinjing He et al., “Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Landfill: A Source of Microplastics? Evidence
of Microplastics in Landfill Leachate,” Water Research 159 (2019): 38–45.
12. Geyer, Jambeck, and Law, “Production, Use, and Fate.”
13. Christine Wiedinmyer, Robert J. Yokelson, and Brian K. Gullett, “Global Emissions of Trace
Gases, Particulate Matter, and Hazardous Air Pollutants from Open Burning of Domestic Waste,”
Environmental Science & Technology 48, no. 16 (2014): 9523–9530; Brian K. Gullett et al.,
“Emissions of PCDD/F from Uncontrolled, Domestic Waste Burning,” Chemosphere 43, no. 4
(2001): 721–725; Costas A. Velis and Ed Cook, “Mismanagement of Plastic Waste through Open
Burning with Emphasis on the Global South: A Systematic Review of Risks to Occupational and
Public Health,” Environmental Science & Technology 55, no. 11 (2021): 7186–7207.4
DISCOVERY OF PLASTIC DEBRIS
The next time you are on an excursion to a national park, lake, or beach,
take a moment to look around. You might encounter an errant bottle or a
crumpled snack wrapper lying on the ground or in the water. You might
consider it a nuisance or aesthetically displeasing on your getaway from the
confines of modern technology and advancement. However, plastic trash in
the environment is more than just an eyesore. It’s a human-made artifact
likely to outlive multiple generations of parkgoers. And believe it or not,
plastic wasn’t always in our waterways, soils, or falling from the sky. Yes,
plastic rain is now real.
The 1950s brought in the era of large-scale plastic manufacturing along
with minimal effort into handling the associated plastic waste products.
This increase in production led to the rise in plastic not only in our landfills,
but also on our roads, sidewalks, national parks, and waterways. Unlike an
apple which can take days to decompose, some plastics can now maintain
their form for hundreds of years. Unfortunately, it was unlikely that those
manufacturing plastic or the general public utilizing these products in the
early years were aware of the actual length of time these plastics could
endure in these environments. This meant that plastics were treated like all
other waste and could end up as litter in any environment. Therefore, it took
multiple years before organizations and scientists took notice of this plastic
buildup in the environment.In 1956, an organization known as Keep America Beautiful began
public relations campaigns to prevent littering. By 1971, plastic fragments
were noted on the surface of the Sargasso Sea. And with time, more
research slowly began to record plastic pollution on the ocean surface,
coastline and seafloor. While roadside litter was a common concern to the
American public, the outrage about plastic in the marine environment
became much more prominent. This may be due to the idea that what you
typically find on a walk down the road is usually something that is
commonly used in your region. However, plastic waste in waterways can
travel much further distances to new locations. And because the ocean is
one large proverbial blender, even the most remote places like Midway
Atoll, uninhabited islands in the middle of the sea, can now encounter
international trash. So, the idea that local garbage is in contact with a global
environment and people that never even generated that waste became
problematic. Additionally, imagery surrounding the harm caused by plastic
to marine animals like turtles, whales, and seabirds pulled on the public’s
heartstrings (chapter 6).
The Ocean Conservancy (formerly The Center for Marine
Conservation) hosted the first International Coastal Cleanup in 1986.1 The
first cleanups typically gathered fragments of plastic and foam from
coastlines; plastic cups, spoons, forks, and straws; metal beverage cans;
foam cups; and glass beverage bottles. But it took some time for people to
realize that this debris is not just primarily accumulating on shorelines. In
1997, Captain Charles Moore discovered the “great garbage patch” on the
surface of the southern Pacific Ocean. Many of you readers likely have
heard of the great garbage patch; however, the imagery you may have in
your head is typical of an island of trash you can walk on and build a tiny
home. However, the great garbage patch is not a walkable landmass. It is
generally a location where the North Pacific Gyre tends to aggregate
plastics and other floatable waste, including fishing gear, that has often
started to weather and break into smaller pieces. Miles of floating debris
and plastic can converge at ocean fronts, where two currents meet.2 It took
nearly two decades before scientists could begin predicting the sheer
quantity of plastic used and disposed of in the environment (chapters 1 and
2).Every new finding of plastic debris in our environment has led to an
influx of organizations, nonprofits, and campaigns geared towards
researching, cleaning, and remediating plastic waste in the ocean. In
addition to the volunteer activities in cleaning up roadside or national park
plastic debris, there are campaigns, nonprofit organizations, and social
media influencers geared towards removing plastic waste from beaches and
coastlines. As a result, the top debris items commonly found on the beach
have evolved. By 2017, most of the top items found during the international
coastal cleanup were plastic. These findings were not only plastics
commonly used in households but also single use plastics. Top examples
included cigarette butts (filters are made of plastic), food wrappers, plastic
beverage containers, plastic bottle caps, plastic grocery bags, other plastic
bags, straws and stirrers, plastic takeout containers, plastic lids, and foam
takeout containers. Some of the most unusual plastics now found on
beaches include dental floss picks, tampon applicators, band-aids, and pre￾production plastic pellets. However, the most common human waste item
on the coastlines now are plastics that can be smaller than a grain of sand.
In 2005, this class of plastics was coined microplastics by noted plastic
researcher, Dr. Richard Thompson.
Microplastics are pieces of plastic smaller than a pencil eraser (5
millimeters) that can be intentionally manufactured at those size ranges
(primary microplastics) or be sourced from larger plastic debris that has
fragmented (secondary microplastics). Nanoplastics are an even smaller
size range of plastics discovered as they are typically smaller than 1
micrometer and go down to roughly 1 nanometer (a micrometer is roughly
one-hundredth the width of a human hair, and one nanometer is one￾thousandth the width of a micrometer). Primary microplastics include
microbeads in body wash products, industrial paints, pre-production pellets,
and glitter. The most common release of secondary microplastics comes
from our own homes. Microplastic fibers (microfibers) are cylindrically
threaded microplastics that can be found in our clothing, carpets, furniture,
and single-use flushable wipes. Every moment we interact with these
synthetic textiles or other plastic products causes some form of shedding or
release of microfibers/microplastics (e.g., chewing straws, washing clothes
or plastic food containers, vacuuming carpets, etc.). Even indoor and
outdoor dust comprises a small fraction of microplastics and microfibers. Itwasn’t until 2010 that scientists measured microplastics in the outdoor
environment quantitatively.
3 But by 2014, models had predicted over five
trillion microplastics were floating on the ocean’s surface.4 Microplastics
have now gained a bevy of public scrutiny as these tiny particles have been
discovered in the highest points above sea level (Mt. Everest),5
the deepest
part on earth (Mariana trench),6 and traveling to even the most remote
islands in the world (Henderson Island).Figure 4   (a) Microplastic that has washed up on the shore in the strand line on the beach in
Bermuda. (b) Close-up of plastic debris on the coastline.
There is currently no governmental action plan for mitigating
microplastics flowing into our environment. The way we unintentionally
deal with microplastics is an exercise of musical chairs. When our clothes
are washed, or a synthetic wipe is flushed, millions of tiny microfibers flow
into our water treatment systems. These water treatment plants usually can
remove up to 97% of microfibers in solution. However, even a fraction as
small as 3% of microfibers releases a relatively large quantity into receiving
waters like our rivers and lakes.7
Additionally, these microfibers removed from our water treatment
processes could be aggregated with other biological waste (sludge) and
commonly applied as fertilizer for our agriculture. This creates a problem
because these microfibers can then be released back into aquatic
environments after rain events causing them to flow into stormwater runoff.
And this means that the food we consume is growing in soils covered by
plastic lining and mixed with an abundance of microplastics. Even plastics
collected from the environment or water treatment facilities are disposed of
in landfills. The plastic in the landfill can fragment microplastic into landfill
leachate, where it is transported to a wastewater facility for treatment and
continues the cycle of traveling microplastics.
Determining the fate of plastics in the environment can be tricky, but it
all comes down to whether it will float, flow, or sink. And the basic
principles determining this answer depend on the material properties of the
plastic and its size. Light and small particles like microplastic and
microfibers can easily float on the surface of the water or be carried by
local and global air currents. For example, sea spray deposits 136,000 tons
per year of microplastics on shorelines and into the air.
8 These microplastics
that have been suspended in the air can travel regionally (fragments) or
even globally (fibers). Western United States Parks have now predicted that
over 1,000 tons per year of microplastics are deposited in remote wilderness
areas from rain and dry deposition.9 The aggregation of smaller plastic
particles and microbial growth on the polymer surface will allow for the
debris to become heavier. This change in weight means this plastic can sink
and settle out of surface waters into deeper water and underlying sediment.Microplastic settling in the form of marine snow makes the ocean one large
snow globe. Denser, larger plastic debris is more likely to sink and remain
closer to the initial source of disposal. The determination of the density of a
plastic relates to its polymer type: polystyrene (0.96–1.05 grams per cubic
centimeter) plastics are similar to floating ice (0.9 grams per cubic
centimeter) and are much lighter than sinking polyvinyl chloride (1.1–1.35
grams per cubic centimeter) plastics in water.
Determining the fate of plastics in the
environment can be tricky, but it all
comes down to whether it will float,
flow, or sink.
Plastic will interact with its surrounding environment no matter the
location of this material in air, water, or soil. Plastic can be chemically
degraded by water, air, and UV light exposure that will oxidize the polymer
surface and create chain reactions that fragment the polymer chain. Physical
degradation of these materials can be seen every day in plastic bags
becoming brittle and breaking with the lightest touch, waves slamming into
water bottles left on the beach, and tires on our cars losing tread. The most
apparent visual of plastic deterioration can be seen in white and dark green
outdoor chairs that, when left outside for too long, begin to lose their
coloring, yellow, crack and eventually give out on us while we are sitting.
The degradation of these polymers exacerbates the release of plastic
fragments and chemicals associated with plastic into environmental
systems.
Notes
1. Ocean Conservancy, “Fighting for Trash Free Seas: International Coastal Cleanup,” accessed May
2022, https://oceanconservancy.org/trash-free-seas/international-coastal-cleanup/.2. Laurent Lebreton et al., “Evidence that the Great Pacific Garbage Patch Is Rapidly Accumulating
Plastic,” Scientific Reports 8, no. 1 (2018): 1–15.
3. Kara Lavender Law et al., “Plastic Accumulation in the North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre,” Science
329, no. 5996 (2010): 1185–1188.
4. Marcus Eriksen et al., “Plastic Pollution in the World’s Oceans: More Than 5 Trillion Plastic
Pieces Weighing over 250,000 Tons Afloat at Sea,” PLoS ONE 9, no. 12 (2014): e111913.
5. Steve Allen et al., “Atmospheric Transport and Deposition of Microplastics in a Remote Mountain
Catchment,” Nature Geoscience 12, no. 5 (2019): 339–344.
6. X. Peng et al., “Microplastics Contaminate the Deepest Part of the World’s Ocean,” Geochemical
Perspectives Letters 9, no. 1 (2018): 1–5.
7. Oisín Ó. Briain et al., “The Role of Wet Wipes and Sanitary Towels as a Source of White
Microplastic Fibres in the Marine Environment,” Water Research 182 (2020): 116021.
8. Steve Allen et al., “Examination of the Ocean as a Source for Atmospheric Microplastics,” PLoS
ONE 15, no. 5 (2020): e0232746.
9. Janice Brahney et al., “Plastic Rain in Protected Areas of the United States,” Science 368, no. 6496
(2020): 1257–1260.5
CHEMICALS IN AND ASSOCIATED WITH
PLASTIC
We all know that combining butter, eggs, flour, vanilla extract, baking soda,
salt, and chocolate chips creates magical chocolate chip cookies. But did
you know that a chocolate chip cookie is very similar to making plastic?
Key ingredients added to a plastic make it look and taste (yes, some
organisms can taste differences in plastics) different. Some common
ingredients in plastic include monomers, catalysts, lubricants, flame
retardants, biocides, UV inhibitors, and antioxidants.1 The plastic building
block, monomers, are like the flour, sugar, and egg that react and mold
together with heating processes. Flame-resistant chemicals are similar to
baking powder. Surfactants are the kinds of butter and oils added to keep
the polymer from sticking while making it. Plasticizers are like the water
added to a cookie to make the polymer more flexible and stretch out. Dyes
and colorants are added to plastic to make a polymer aesthetically pleasing
in the same way you would add chocolate chips or sprinkles to a cookie.
Biocides are incorporated into plastic to keep microbial organisms from
growing on the surface of the plastic (like how raisins are added to keep
people from enjoying a perfect chocolate chip cookie).
The earliest formulations of plastics produced were not as stable as the
products we interact with today. Some plastics, like Bakelite, would easily
fall apart from exposure to hot water. Some would catch fire. Others weretoo rigid to do much with. Many simply weren’t as pretty to look at. History
museums preserving and displaying plastic artifacts from the 1900s use
Raman spectroscopy and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
technology to identify the polymer types and provide specialized care in
maintaining the integrity of the artifacts. The most common methods for
protecting aging plastic artifacts include keeping them cool, dry, in the dark,
and sometimes away from oxygen. Some museums are now experimenting
with applying chemical “sunscreens” to items that go on lighted displays.2
However, plastics today have a variety of chemicals incorporated within the
polymer and on the surface to aid in the material’s functionality, aesthetics,
and longevity. Now, plastic materials can be as flexible as a bendy straw, as
durable as a water pipe, as resistant to wear and tear as a pair of yoga pants,
and as aesthetically pleasing as glitter.
All chemicals are used for a particular purpose and can be slightly
varied to make a different product. Examples include using a different
chemical structure that is more environmentally friendly that can have the
same function in the product as the previous version, adding other colorants
to change the color scheme of the product, or adding new chemicals to
protect the product from constant sunlight exposure. Therefore, even though
a plastic is labeled polypropylene, it doesn’t mean that it is the exact same
product as another polypropylene, because different companies utilize
various substances to process and protect that plastic during its use.
Complete information on the quantity and type of chemicals used in an
individual product are kept as proprietary business information. Privatized
ingredient lists create a problematic continuous siloed feedback loop
because each competing company has a different recipe to make the same
product, leading to many types of chemicals associated with plastics.
In chemical commerce, there are roughly 350,000 substances registered
globally. Many chemicals are used for agriculture, automotive, personal
care products, and other uses. However, approximately 10,000 are used to
make both synthetic and biobased plastics.3 In comparison to similar
materials, the number of entities associated with plastic takes up a sizable
portion of chemical commerce: paper (5%) > plastics (3%) > wood (1%) >
textiles (0.3%). Considering the total amount of material produced, 22% of
the 820 million tons of global chemical demand per year is used for
monomers of plastics, and 2.2% is used for plastic additives likeplasticizers. The vast number and production volume of these substances
highlight their importance in making the plastic products we see and use
today.
The earliest glimpse into the chemical complexity of plastic can be
seen in a plastic additive review paper published in 1975 by Deanin. Deanin
defined plastic additives under the categories of “reinforcing fibers, fillers,
and coupling agents; plasticizers; colorants; stabilizers (halogen stabilizers,
antioxidants, ultraviolet absorbers, and biological preservatives); processing
aids (lubricants, others, and flow controls); flame retardants; peroxides; and
antistats.”4 Over the following decades, the categorization of these
chemicals has evolved. Chemicals associated with plastics have been
defined as 1) processing aids in the production and manufacturing of
plastics, 2) plastic additives, and 3) manufacturing or environmental
contaminants and degradants.
Processing aids include substances like lubricants. Lubricants are waxy
or fatty compounds that can be applied to the machine parts and the exterior
or interior of the polymer to aid in the molding process as it reaches
temperatures above its glass transition state. These lubricating compounds
have the added benefit of making a plastic item like a polyvinyl chloride
pipe appear smooth on the surface and help equally distribute plastic
additives like fillers and colorants across the polymer. Lubricants consist of
0.5 to 4% of the polymer weight in polyvinyl chloride. Instead of fat￾derived lubricants, polyolefins like polyethylene use processing aids like
fluoroelastomers that are incorporated to prevent the fracturing of the
polymer while it is being melted by high heat. Typically, processing aids are
compounds used during the melting and molding process of the plastic
product. However, additional processing aids and polymer additives are
added when recycling plastic materials into new products.
Plastic additives, also called functional additives, are used to improve
plastic by taking on specific roles for the polymer. The prominent families
are fillers, stabilizers, plasticizers, flame retardants, colorants, antistatic
agents, and foaming agents. All these compound classes provide a function
for the polymer: fillers strengthen the material; flame retardants offer fire
resistance; stabilizers like antioxidants prevent aging and yellowing on the
surface of the plastic; colorants dye the material, plasticizers increase
flexibility; and antistatic agents reduce the potential for static electricityfrom contact with the item. While these are some of the significant classes
of polymer additives, many other substances are used in lower production
volumes that are equally important to get the final products we see today.
For example, adhesives hold together the multilayer thin films used in
products like your favorite bag of chips and sauce packets. While each
compound in plastic usually serves one function, some chemicals can have
multiple functionalities. For example, Bisphenol A, known as BPA, is a
known antioxidant in plastics and serves as a monomer in making epoxy
and polycarbonate plastics.5 In general, the exact formula of which
chemicals and in what quantities for making each plastic are not available
to the public as they are proprietary. But we do know that additives can take
up as much as 7% of the weight of the polymer.
Non-intentionally added substances, NIAS for short, are precisely as
they sound. NIAS are chemicals not meant to be in the plastic; this includes
impurities, degradation of other compounds used in making the plastic,
residual monomers, and anything else that is along for the ride.6 If we go
back to our chocolate chip cookie example, NIAS is like finding clumps of
flour, expired butter, or even hair in a cookie. These compounds are
challenging because it then becomes difficult to backtrack the source of
contamination or concentrations within the plastic when no one is reporting
the use of an impurity in a product, let alone some companies don’t even
know they have this issue. Furthermore, once the plastic is recycled into a
new item, the previous chemicals associated with the original object are
now non-intentionally added substances to the new plastic product that are
mixed with more processing aids and polymer additives.7 As this is a class
of substances that is widely under-studied and will increase in complexity,
NIAS will be an essential part of the discussion for future plastic risk
assessments.
Another group of chemicals unintentionally associated with plastic
post-processing and manufacturing the plastic product are sorbed
environmental contaminants. Commonly known as hydrophobic organic
chemicals, these contaminants are chemicals that preferentially attach
themselves to solid substances like plastics in the environment. This
sorption process is just like how spaghetti sauce stains attach to plastic food
containers or how the flavor of a cookie that has been left in the fridge too
long starts to taste like the fridge itself. Examples of these kinds ofchemicals include pharmaceuticals, pesticides, polyaromatic hydrocarbons,
polychlorinated biphenyls, etc. While some of these sorbed compounds
include toxic legacy chemicals long banned from production, the desorption
of the chemical from the plastic into a liquid, solid, or gas environment
becomes very difficult, along with overall degradation of the chemical.
However, chemicals associated with plastic during processing have
every opportunity to leave the plastic the moment that it is made because
they are not physically bound to the material. They can be emitted by
vaporizing into the air, similar to the whiff of new car smell you get when
opening a new package or getting new tires. They can also migrate into
solids or liquids like our food and water. The time spans of chemical release
can range from years to billions of years.8 Release rates of the chemical
depend on chemical properties, material properties, and the local
environment surrounding the material containing the chemical. Chemicals
closest to the surface have the easiest time to leave compared to those
deeper in the polymer. Chemicals that are more polar, less bulky in
structure, and with small, low molecular weight tend to have a shorter time
for release into the water. Plastics that are built like Swiss cheese tend to
have more pores and free space within them, making them rubbery and
amorphous. These large spaces allow for more accessible pathways for
chemicals to escape. Accelerated release due to environmental factors can
best be seen in surface layers of soils and water because of the extended UV
light, temperature, biological organism abundance, etc. As more chemicals
migrate out of the polymer from environmental degradation, the plastic
becomes more brittle and worn. This cyclical process creates new cracks
and extends the pathway for more chemicals to be released from the
polymer.
Release rates of the chemical depend
on chemical properties, material
properties, and the local environmentsurrounding the material containing
the chemical.
As chemicals migrate out of the polymer, they can also undergo
transformations based on environmental conditions. Chemical
transformation can occur by exposure to heat, light, air, water, or biological
organisms. These processes usually cause the addition of oxygen or water
and can fragment the chemical or polymer chain leading to the loss of
monomers. Some of these chemicals, like perfluorinated compounds, can
persist for long periods in the environment and accumulate in soil or body
fat deposits of organisms. The release, occurrence, and transformation of
these chemicals call into question the potential of these compounds to be
toxic substances before, during, and after the use of plastic.
Notes
1. Hans Zwiefel, Ralph D. Meier, and Michael Schiller, Plastics Additives Handbook, 6th ed.
(Cincinnati, OH: Hanser Publications, 2009).
2. Sam Kean, “When Plastics Are Precious,” Science 373, no. 6550 (2021): 40–42.
3. Helene, Wiesinger, Zhanyun Wang, and Stefanie Hellweg, “Deep Dive into Plastic Monomers,
Additives, and Processing Aids,” Environmental Science & Technology 55, no. 13 (2021): 9339–
9351.
4. Rudolph D. Deanin, “Additives in Plastics,” Environmental Health Perspectives 11 (1975): 35–39.
5. Jaromir Michałowicz, “Bisphenol A–Sources, Toxicity and Biotransformation,” Environmental
Toxicology and Pharmacology 37, no. 2 (2014): 738–758.
6. Ksenia J. Groh et al., “Overview of Known Plastic Packaging-Associated Chemicals and Their
Hazards,” Science of the Total Environment 651 (2019): 3253–3268.
7. John N. Hahladakis et al., “An Overview of Chemical Additives Present in Plastics: Migration,
Release, Fate and Environmental Impact During Their Use, Disposal and Recycling,” Journal of
Hazardous Materials 344 (2018): 179–199.
8. Emma L. Teuten et al., “Transport and Release of Chemicals from Plastics to the Environment and
to Wildlife,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 364, no. 1526
(2009): 2027–2045.6
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF PLASTIC
Plastics are considered a novel entity on our planet, as they are
anthropogenic and have only existed on a short geological time scale.
Plastic debris in its macro, micro, and nano size scales has been emitted
worldwide and has traveled nearly the entire planet. This movement of
plastic waste has allowed for accumulating chemical and biological
constituents on a polymer surface while simultaneously releasing polymer￾associated contaminants into the surrounding environment. Due to the
magnitude and scale of global plastic pollution, plastic recovery is no
longer readily reversible, as it would be impossible to retrieve all plastic or
associated chemicals produced since the 1900s. Because of this ubiquity in
the environment and the still unknown large-scale disruption to organisms
and geophysical processes, plastic pollution is considered a potential
planetary boundary threat.1 To explore the impact plastic pollution has on
the planet, it is vital to understand the influence plastic has on wildlife
populations and biodiversity, environmental air and water quality, and
biogeochemical processes (figure 5).Figure 5   Diagram of the many ways that plastics can interact with the environment.
Wildlife Interactions
Media and even plastic pollution campaigns often use imagery to convey
the physical impact of plastic pollution on wildlife. Iconic videos include
Samaritans dislodging a disposable plastic straw from the nose of a turtle,
freeing birds from fishing nets, taking off plastic bags wrapped around a sea
lion’s neck, and cutting off plastic six-pack can holders wrapped around a
dolphin’s mouth. Unfortunately, due to the large quantity of plastic in the
environment, wildlife is increasingly observed becoming entangled by nets,
ropes, fishing lines, and other plastic debris. Ghost gear, such as nets, traps,
and strings, are derelict fishing gear that captures fish and other marine life.
Common injuries from plastic debris entanglement include limited mobility,
physical scarring, strangulation, loss of limb, and sometimes death. Loss in
marine biodiversity is harmful to the population dynamics and the food web
and can lead to reduced fish populations vital for fishing industries and
communities that rely predominantly on fish for sustenance.
Marine life has been observed using plastic debris to form their
habitats. Birds have stuffed their nests with plastic bags and netting to
insulate new eggs before they hatch. New habitats for marine species have
been observed underneath marine plastic docks that host species of
barnacles, algae, microbes, and fish communities. But while plastic debriscan create new habitats, it can also destroy habitats for others.
Phytoplankton and coral reefs have experienced habitat loss and
displacement when plastic debris and particles cover the ocean’s surface
and prevent photosynthesis, a necessary function for their life to continue.
Marine or microbial communities can also attach themselves to plastic
surfaces buoyant enough to travel with the currents to new locations
worldwide. The large-scale movement of marine debris not only displaces
the organisms but also introduces these species as invasive to the new
environments they inhabit.
The earliest interaction of an organism with plastic was recorded in
1969 when seabirds were observed ingesting plastic.2 Decades and many
research articles later, plastic consumption has been reported within 1,288
marine species and 277 terrestrial and freshwater species.3 Even today,
households provide pet birds, dogs, and cats with bright, colorful plastic
toys to chew and sometimes accidentally consume. Ingestion of plastic by
wildlife is proposed to occur if plastic is in the environment, the animal is
hungry or lacking some form of nutrition, or their prey resembles plastic.
An example of this is loggerhead sea turtles, often mistaking plastic bags
for jellyfish. Birds target plastics due to the variety of colors they display,
such as their attraction to bottle caps.
Additionally, chemicals released from plastics can impact sensory
signals and lead to the increased appeal of an organism to plastic. Hermit
crabs and sea anemones have been observed to consume plastic like
chewing gum until the “flavor” wears out. Microbial communities utilize
chemical nutrients on plastic surfaces as an energy source and prefer aged
plastic to form large gatherings on the polymer surface. Microbial colonies
can also engulf the surface of smaller plastic particles and lead to the
formation of biocoronas. This biofouling alters the biological interactions of
the plastic with other organisms like sea urchins. This relationship with
plastic eventually leads to the mineralization and eventual biodegradation of
plastic into fragments and microplastics. But to continue this cycle of
consumption, microbial growth can, in turn, signal for larger organisms to
consume the plastic.
Implications of ingestion of plastic include nutritional dilution in the
gut as organisms no longer consume as much of the typical nutrients as they
would without plastic in their diets. Dietary dilution is defined as animalswith plastic in their stomachs consuming smaller quantities of food or
feeding frequency compared to animals who have not consumed plastic.
This result could be a decreased gut volume available for food and plastics
affecting hunger and satiety. In addition, depending on the size of plastic
debris, ingestion can cause choking or clogging in the gastrointestinal tract.
Examples of increased mortality rates related to plastic consumption have
been observed in elephants grazing on plastic in landfills4 and camels
accumulating plastic in their “polybezoar.”5 And if you are wondering what
a polybezoar is, it’s sort of like all the swallowed gum you ate as a child
that a parent told you would never leave your digestive tract clumped
together. (P.S. Most of that gum is also plastic.)
Particle size determines the uptake, body retention, and effect plastic
has on the organism. Plastic fragments, while incredibly small, can be
ingested and inhaled from the air. And if the particle is in the nanometer
size range like a nanoplastic, it would be small enough to migrate into the
bloodstream and accumulate into different tissues. The harm from its size
differs by its location in the body. Nanoplastics in the intestine can increase
inflammation and oxidative stress. Microplastics in the liver can increase
oxidative stress and lipid metabolism disorders. However, both
microplastics and nanoplastics have the potential to induce neurotoxicity,
downregulated gene expression, and decreased reproductive health.6
Chemical Toxicity
In chapter 5, we uncovered that chemicals and materials are added to a
polymer to enhance the properties of the desired product and that plastics
can release these substances into various environmental and biological
matrices. Chemicals released from weathered plastic can potentially be
ecotoxicological hazards, including carcinogenic, persistent, mutagenic,
bioaccumulative, neurotoxic, endocrine disrupting, or aquatic toxicants.7
A typical case study of harm caused by polymer-associated chemicals
to wildlife is via analysis of the chemical Bisphenol A, also called BPA.
BPA is a monomer and antioxidant used in plastics that are shown to mimic
or block a body’s hormones. BPA has been proven to be able to be released
from plastic into various environmental matrices and is exacerbated by the
degradation of plastic products like food and beverage containers. BPA hasbeen detected in wastewater, marine and freshwaters, agricultural biosolids,
landfill leachates, soils, and the atmosphere. In addition, animal studies
have found that high concentrations of BPA impacted sexual and neural
development in mammals, birds, amphibians, aquatic reptiles, and fish.
Some effects included depletion in attraction to the opposite sex mate, sex
reversal of males to females, and declined sperm quality.
8 Because of these
many findings and public concern, many products have removed BPA from
the plastic used in their products and include the label “BPA free.”
Depending on the chemical associated with the plastic, the gut is a
much more energetically favorable environment for the release of the
chemicals from plastic compared to the water in which the plastic might
have been floating in before ingestion. For example, the presence of
nonylphenol and triclosan associated with ingested microplastics was found
within the tissues of lugworm guts after ingestion. Those lugworms
subsequently had a reduced ability to remove pathogenic bacteria,
diminished ability to engineer sediments, and a mortality increase.9
Ingestion of plastics has also been found to increase the liver concentrations
of metals like aluminum (Al), manganese (Mn), iron (Fe), cobalt (Co),
copper (Cu), and zinc (Zn) in the Slender-billed prion seabird.10
Databases have found that 68 of the 906 chemicals likely used in
plastic packaging are listed as environmental hazards, and 34 of the 906
chemicals as known or potential endocrine-disrupting chemicals like BPA.11
However, most polymer-associated chemicals have not been thoroughly
tested for their potential toxicity. There is also concern about the toxicity of
chemical mixtures released from polymers due to additive, synergistic, or
antagonistic effects. Laboratory studies have found that some plastic
extracts from consumer products can induce a toxic response as a chemical
mixture. Polyurethane and polyvinylchloride extracts are the most toxic
plastic-type, containing hundreds to thousands of chemicals. Even extracts
of bioplastics have been shown to contain complex mixtures of chemicals
that can cause oxidative stress, baseline toxicity, antiandrogenicity, and
estrogenicity.
12 In the environment, it is more difficult to determine the
environmental impact on species from chemical mixtures already present
and those mixtures being released from plastics.
Similar to the chemicals intentionally placed into plastics,
environmental transformation products of these chemicals have thepotential to be harmful. For example, a chemical known as 6PPD (N-(1,3-
dimethylbutyl)-N’-phenyl-p-phenylenediamine) is used in tire production as
an antioxidant used to protect the rubber from cracking and degrading when
exposed to air. However, particles that come off from losing tread on tires
accumulate on roadsides and are washed into our freshwater streams and
lakes during storms. The presence of tire rubble in the environment results
in the release of 6PPD and environment transformation via ozonation into
6PPD-quinone. This compound, 6PPD-quinone, has been directly linked to
acute toxicity and death of Coho salmon in the Pacific Northwestern United
States after exposure to urban runoff.13
In addition to water quality, scientists are exploring the impact of
plastic on the soil environment. The majority of plastic produced stays on
land during use and after use in landfills and the terrestrial environment. In
the UK, up to 200,000 credit cards worth of microplastics are dumped
monthly onto agricultural land coming from wastewater treatment
facilities.14 Questions still being pondered include the uptake of micro and
nanoplastics into plant life and accumulation in the vegetables and fruits we
consume, changes in the nitrogen and carbon cycling in soils, and changes
in the microbial communities and microfauna in soils. Even the very
presence of microplastics in sand creates temperature variations on the
ground that loggerhead turtles lay eggs in and has been shown to alter the
sex of the species.15
This warming of the surface due to increased plastic concentrations can
also be directly related to the impact of plastic on climate change. The
production of plastic requires raw materials harvested from the earth and
leads to methane leakage into the atmosphere. The process of distilling and
manufacturing the final product will release greenhouse gases. During use,
plastic is known to degas greenhouse gases methane and ethylene,
especially when exposed to sunlight. Plastic disposed of in the environment
and allowed to fragment into microplastics can cover the ocean’s surface
and affects phytoplankton’s ability to complete photosynthesis, which can
alter the ocean’s ability to store carbon.16Environmental Quality
Plastics and their associated chemicals introduce an array of contaminants
to environmental matrices like water, soil, and air, and call into question
their safety. Ecological quality of air, water, or soil is defined as a chemical
(PH, dissolved oxygen, etc.), physical, and biological (algae,
phytoplankton, etc.) measurement of suitability for a particular use.
Suitability includes clean water for drinking, air for breathing, or soil for
plant growth. Safe conditions include clean air for birds to fly in, water for
organisms to live in, and air and water for agriculture. An example of
regulation for water quality in the United States can be seen in the
elimination of DDT, which was thinning eggshells in birds, and the
limitation on mercury use after heavy mortality of fish and birds in the
water. In addition, the Environmental Protection Agency reframed air
quality standards after intense acid rains in the northeastern United States.
Evidence has shown the physical and toxicological impacts of plastic not
only have the potential to impact an individual but entire food webs.
However, there is currently no benchmark for the amount of plastic and
microplastics or polymer-associated chemicals allowed in air or water, even
though some government agencies are fervently working to address this.
Furthermore, research is still early in quantifying the scale of pollution
of these contaminants in the environment and determining the systemic
consequences of these quantities of plastic. Therefore, it has been difficult
for policymakers to decide how to determine risk and limitations adequate
to limit plastic pollution. And while large-scale impacts have not been
entirely resolved, there is enough urgency for research and policy changes
to be implemented to protect the environment.
Notes
1. Matthew MacLeod et al., “The Global Threat from Plastic Pollution,” Science 373, no. 6550
(2021): 61–65.
2. Karl W. Kenyon and Eugene Kridler, “Laysan Albatrosses Swallow Indigestible Matter,” The Auk
86, no. 2 (1969): 339–343.
3. Robson G. Santos, Gabriel E. Machovsky-Capuska, and Ryan Andrades, “Plastic Ingestion as an
Evolutionary Trap: Toward a Holistic Understanding,” Science 373, no. 6550 (2021): 56–60.
4. Marcus Eriksen et al., “The Plight of Camels Eating Plastic Waste,” Journal of Arid Environments
185 (2021): 104374.5. Associated Press, “Elephants Are Dying from Eating Plastic Waste in Sri Lankan Dump,” New
York Post, January 14, 2022, https://nypost.com/2022/01/14/elephants-dying-from-eating-plastic￾waste-in-sri-lankan-dump/.
6. Roman Lehner et al., “Emergence of Nanoplastic in the Environment and Possible Impact on
Human Health,” Environmental Science & Technology 53, no. 4 (2019): 1748–1765.
7. Hans Zwiefel, Ralph D. Meier, and Michael Schiller, Plastics Additives Handbook, 6th ed.
(Cincinnati, OH: Hanser Publications, 2009).
8. Charles Staples et al., “A Review of the Environmental Fate, Effects, and Exposures of Bisphenol
A,” Chemosphere 36, no. 10 (1998): 2149–2173.
9. Mark Anthony Browne et al., “Microplastic Moves Pollutants and Additives to Worms, Reducing
Functions Linked to Health and Biodiversity,” Current Biology 23, no. 23 (2013): 2388–2392.
10. Lauren Roman et al., “Plastic, Nutrition and Pollution; Relationships between Ingested Plastic
and Metal Concentrations in the Livers of Two Pachyptila Seabirds,” Scientific Reports 10, no. 1
(2020): 1–14.
11. Ksenia J. Groh et al., “Overview of Known Plastic Packaging-Associated Chemicals and Their
Hazards,” Science of the Total Environment 651 (2019): 3253–3268.
12. Lisa Zimmermann et al., “What Are the Drivers of Microplastic Toxicity? Comparing the
Toxicity of Plastic Chemicals and Particles to Daphnia magna,” Environmental Pollution 267 (2020):
115392.
13. Zhenyu Tian et al., “A Ubiquitous Tire Rubber-Derived Chemical Induces Acute Mortality in
Coho Salmon,” Science 371, no. 6525 (2021): 185–189.
14. Daisy Harley-Nyang et al., “Investigation and Analysis of Microplastics in Sewage Sludge and
Biosolids: A Case Study from One Wastewater Treatment Works in the UK,” Science of the Total
Environment 823 (2022): 153735.
15. Valencia Beckwith and Mariana M. P. B. Fuentes, “Microplastic at Nesting Grounds Used by the
Northern Gulf of Mexico Loggerhead Recovery Unit,” Marine Pollution Bulletin 131 (2018): 32–37.
16. Helen V. Ford et al., “The Fundamental Links between Climate Change and Marine Plastic
Pollution,” Science of the Total Environment 806 (2022): 150392.7
PLASTICS’ IMPACT ON SOCIETY
The harm caused by plastics to wildlife, as highlighted in chapter 6, is
informative to how humans may be impacted by the plastic that fills their
daily lives. Many individuals and environmental justice groups consider
humans a part of Nature and that all people, human and non-human, are
intertwined. However, this chapter dives deeper into how human society
benefits but is also hindered by plastics.
Human Health
Plastics were initially perceived as an “inert” material and therefore
considered minimal concern to human health. The discovery of
microplastics and plastic additives in food products began to alter that story.
Microplastics come in various sizes that have the potential to be transported
globally around the world and internally in the body. These fragments can
have sharp edges or be charged on the surface, which can directly impact
neighboring cells in the body. But in an exciting twist, the medical
community has been investigating for years the use of micro- and nano￾polymeric spheres as a pharmaceutical method for drug delivery which
might even inform us how similar micro-sized polymers from sources like
food packaging will interact with the body on a cellular level.1 Many
scientists and organizations have called for an investigation of the direct
impact of plastics on the human body. However, research is years behindthe media frenzy for answers. Why? Because it would be very difficult (and
ethically questionable) to do a controlled dosing study of plastics on
humans. Scientists have to rely on observations, correlations, animal
studies, and mathematical models to create human health risk assessments
for plastics.
Some of the first human health-related research observations
discovered microplastics in the drinking water, food, and air we breathe. We
can witness this in the media headlines for microplastics found in beer, salt,
seafood, tea, honey, soft drinks, bottled water, and tap water. The evidence
of plastic particles in what we eat and drink indicates that microplastics are
a regular part of our diets. Models have now estimated that adults are
consuming and inhaling more than 70,000 particles a year.
2 Further
observations confirmed this by detecting microplastics in adult and toddler
feces. But some key age difference is that there are ten times more
microplastics excreted from young children compared to adults. Outside of
life-saving plastics used in the medical field, childhood exposure to
microplastics raises scientists’ concerns for future generations. One
proposed explanation for increased microplastic exposure might be that
young children interact with a larger quantity of plastic via baby bottles,
feeding utensils and containers, and toys. For example, polypropylene baby
bottles have been shown to release thousands to millions of microplastics
into the heated formula. These findings introduce more significant concern
for human health as fecal microplastic concentrations are correlated with
irritable bowel disease (IBS).3
Depending on the size of the plastic fragment consumed, some
microplastics can migrate into the bloodstream and accumulate in different
tissues. For example, studies of pregnant rats that inhale microplastics have
found plastic particles rapidly migrating from the lungs into the heart, brain,
and portions of the fetus.4 Further confirmation of this phenomenon is
observed in studies that have found microplastics in human blood, lung
tissues, digestive tract, and the placenta.5 This is concerning because even
smaller size ranges of plastics, nanoplastics, are also predicted to be able to
enter human tissues and produce inflammation. A direct example of these
risks can be seen in the sleep apnea machines recalled in 2021 for the risk
of causing asthma, lung irritation, or cancer.
6 This recall was due to the
polyester-polyurethane foam that could degrade with use over time. Thedegraded foam could then release chemicals and microplastics directly into
the air the users were breathing at night. Previously in 1975, occupational
exposure of workers to fibrous and nonfibrous synthetic particles in
factories was linked to outbreaks of interstitial lung disease and suggested
to increase the risk of lung cancer.
7 While correlations from occupational
exposure epidemiology studies do not reflect exposure to the general
population, this information can be helpful in identifying hazards after
elevated long term exposure to microplastics.
Models have now estimated that
adults are consuming and inhaling
more than 70,000 particles a year
Chemical Exposure
Additionally, there are human health concerns from chemical exposure
originating from plastic particles acting as a vector for released adsorbed
chemicals and chemicals added to the polymer during processing. Some of
the most common plastic-associated chemicals include Bisphenol A
(previously discussed in chapter 6), styrene, perfluorinated compounds, and
brominated flame retardants. Styrene is a monomer of polystyrene foams
associated with the potential to cause cancer and is found to migrate into the
food it contains.8 There is an increased risk of styrene migration with
increased fat content and temperature. Additionally, it is very difficult to
successfully recycle polystyrene containers and products. Because of these
findings, legislation has increased to eliminate foam food takeout containers
and polystyrene egg cartons, including denoting polystyrene as
“problematic” in several frameworks, one being the US Plastics Pact.9
Perfluorinated chemicals like PFAS have been titled “forever chemicals”
due to their longevity in the environment and the body. They have been
linked to cancer and other toxic responses but are still used as surfactants
and to form non-stick surfaces for food wrappers at major fast-foodrestaurants, carpets, furniture, nonstick pans, and other commercial
products.10 Brominated flame retardants were a class of chemicals used to
inhibit the flammability of a product. Brominated flame retardants were
commonly applied to couch cushions, synthetic textiles, and electronics.
These persistent chemicals have been discovered in remote parts of the
world, such as the tissues of arctic animals, closer to home in our house
cats, and can bioaccumulate in breast milk. Brominated flame retardants are
of concern due to the potential for these chemicals to cause cancer and are
linked with cognitive decline and reduced fertility.
11
Based on these observations, studies on model species and
mathematical models predict that harmful chemicals have the potential to
be released from microplastics into the stomach and intestine. Furthermore,
these chemical mixtures are correlated to mechanisms that influence fat
buildup in cells.12 In addition to the possible hazards of the physical plastic
particles and the chemicals associated with these polymers, plastics can also
harbor pathogenic bacteria. However, this has not been as widely
investigated. Conversely, to this point, plastic can also protect food from
both oxygen and bacteria, which will prevent bacterial infections in food
products like Salmonella and other foodborne diseases.
Health impacts from plastic use and fragmentation are challenging to
determine cause and effect because there are other pollutants we are
exposed to daily. While correlations of plastic pollution or plastic￾associated chemical exposure to harmful effects exist, it is difficult to
directly determine the level of impact and relationship to diseases and
ailments. However, without more research and risk assessment studies,
there is no definitive answer to every possible consequence of plastic
ingestion and inhalation into the human body. The World Health
Organization concluded in 2022 that research evidence for impacts of
microplastics and nanoplastics on human health is insufficient to determine
harm. However, they also stated that this lack of evidence does not mean
that plastic particles are safe.
Environmental Justice
In addition to the concern about the health impacts of plastic exposure on
the population, there is a significant environmental justice issuesurrounding plastic production and pollution. If we think about
environmental justice from the perspective of distributive justice, it would
be defined as the inequitable distribution of harm to communities, usually
highlighted by differences in geography, race, ethnicity, education, or
socioeconomic factors. An example of this type of inequitably distributed
harm from plastic is shown in fence-line communities near where oil is
extracted, refined, distilled, and manufactured into plastic products. These
communities are disproportionately exposed to large quantities of toxic
chemicals released into the neighboring air and water. Cancer Alley in
Louisiana, USA, in particular, is one place where communities are exposed
to these pollutants and are burdened with higher incidences of asthma,
cancer, and other health disparities.13 Additionally, the lack of affordable
and accessible alternatives to the abundance of plastic packaging often
leaves communities with no agency to make their own choice in plastic
exposure. This can be noted in food deserts historically prevalent in
neighborhoods of color only containing gas stations, fast food, and dollar
stores as substitutes for grocery stores. Because of this, most food is plastic
wrapped, and more products have higher ratios of plastic packaging to
product. However, plastic-wrapped food also means that food takes longer
before it spoils and allows for the transport of food much longer distances
around the world.
At the stage of plastic disposal, fence-line communities can also be
surrounded by incinerators and landfills that continue to expose their
families to more plastic and chemical pollution. Plastic imported to
countries like Vietnam, Turkey, and India, is placed in a catch-22. This
plastic waste provides work for waste pickers that filter through the trash
for high-value plastics like polyethylene terephthalate (PET). However,
these workers and communities in greatest proximity to plastic waste are at
risk of potentially getting sick, and the “low value” trash tends to pollute
their communities and waterways. To counteract the accumulation of waste
on limited available land and in waterways, some communities openly burn
their trash as a part of their daily life habits. Open-burning plastic is linked
to asthma and cancer as it commonly releases microplastics in sizes readily
available to be inhaled into the lungs and releases potentially harmful
plastic additives and their degradants like dioxins. Incineration also causes
the release of greenhouse gasses into the environment, which exacerbatesclimate change. If we assume that plastic production continues to increase,
by 2050, plastics could contribute around 13% of the global carbon
budget.14 The plastic lifecycle’s contribution to climate change will thus
exacerbate the number of climate refugees forced to leave their homes due
to rising sea levels and temperatures.
Some locations are not intentionally importing trash but are seeing the
massive accumulation of plastic debris and particles in their waterways and
lands, such as Midway Atoll, Canary Islands, Henderson Island, Easter
Island, and Tonga. The accumulation of plastic waste on Indigenous lands
infringes on Indigenous sovereignty, defined as “Indigenous peoples’ rights
to govern their lands, waters, and lives.”15 Water and ice in Arctic locations,
including Inuit Nunangat (Inuit homelands), contain concentrations of
plastic particles likely sourced from both regional and long-range
transport.16 This also includes microplastics found in fish used for
sustenance in local diets. Approximately three billion people in the world
rely on fish (farmed or wild caught) as a primary protein source that can
now contain plastic particles.
Internationally, governments are working on setting limits to allowable
quantities of plastic/microplastics in the environment and drinking water.
Still, some argue that any waste in the environment is not safe.
Developmental justice is defined as the right of an industry to continue its
growth trajectory and not be impeded by its economic goals. So if we apply
a developmental justice model framework, enterprise and capitalism will
continue to make plastic for progress, indicating that harm to previously
highlighted communities will continue to be perpetuated. New policies
implemented locally, nationally, and globally are vitally necessary to create
real changes that address the harm caused by plastic pollution.
Notes
1. Neelesh K. Varde and Daniel W. Pack, “Microspheres for Controlled Release Drug Delivery,”
Expert Opinion on Biological Therapy 4, no. 1 (2004): 35–51.
2. Sarah Gibbens, “You Eat Thousands of Bits of Plastic Every Year,” National Geographic, June 5,
2019, https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/article/you-eat-thousands-of-bits-of-plastic￾every-year.
3. Zehua Yan et al., “Analysis of Microplastics in Human Feces Reveals a Correlation between Fecal
Microplastics and Inflammatory Bowel Disease Status,” Environmental Science & Technology 56,
no. 1 (2021): 414–421.4. Sara B. Fournier et al., “Nanopolystyrene Translocation and Fetal Deposition after Acute Lung
Exposure during Late-Stage Pregnancy,” Particle and Fibre Toxicology 17, no. 1 (2020): 1–11.
5. Damian Carrington, “Microplastics Found in Human Blood for First Time,” The Guardian, March
24, 2022.
6. Joshua Brockman, “Breathing Machine Recall Over Possible Cancer Risk Leaves Millions
Scrambling for Substitutes,” New York Times, August 17, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08
/17/health/cpap-breathing-devices-recall.html.
7. World Health Organization, Dietary and Inhalation Exposure to Nano- and Microplastic Particles
and Potential Implications for Human Health (Geneva: World Health Organization, 2022).
8. Zahra Pilevar et al., “Migration of Styrene Monomer from Polystyrene Packaging Materials into
Foods: Characterization and Safety Evaluation,” Trends in Food Science & Technology 91 (2019):
248–261.
9. U.S. Plastics Pact, Problematic and Unnecessary Materials Report, January 2022, https://
usplasticspact.org/wp-content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2022/01/U.S.-Plastics-Pact-Problematic￾Unnecessary-Materials-Report-1.25.2022.pdf.
10. Danni Cui, Xuerong Li, and Natalia Quinete, “Occurrence, Fate, Sources and Toxicity of PFAS:
What We Know So Far in Florida and Major Gaps,” Trends in Analytical Chemistry 130 (2020):
115976.
11. Liza Gross, “Flame Retardants in Consumer Products Are Linked to Health and Cognitive
Problems,” Washington Post, April 15, 2013.
12. Johannes Völker et al., “Adipogenic Activity of Chemicals Used in Plastic Consumer Products,”
Environmental Science & Technology 56, no. 4 (2022): 2487–2496.
13. United Nations Environment Programme, Neglected: Environmental Justice Impacts of Marine
Litter and Plastic Pollution (Nairobi: United Nations Environment Programme, 2021).
14. Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL) et al., Plastic and Climate: The Hidden Costs
of a Plastic Planet, May 2019, https://www.ciel.org/plasticandclimate/.
15. Meg Parsons, Lara Taylor, and Roa Crease, “Indigenous Environmental Justice within Marine
Ecosystems: A Systematic Review of the Literature on Indigenous Peoples’ Involvement in Marine
Governance and Management,” Sustainability 13, no. 8 (2021): 4217; Max Liboiron, Rui Li, Elise
Earl, and Imari Walker-Franklin, “Models of Justice Evoked in Published Scientific Studies of Plastic
Pollution,” Facets. 2023.
16. Max Liboiron et al., “Abundance and Types of Plastic Pollution in Surface Waters in the Eastern
Arctic (Inuit Nunangat) and the Case for Reconciliation Science,” Science of the Total Environment
782 (2021): 146809.8
PLASTIC POLICIES
Collecting plastic and paper bags since 1975, Heinz Schmidt-Bachem of
Germany holds the record for keeping 150,000 of them,1 but if you opened
a cabinet, drawer, or pantry in your kitchen, how many plastic bags might
you find? We use, and try to keep and reuse, so many plastic bags that
companies make holders that stick to cabinet doors, organize drawers, and
other containers that bags can be squished into, specifically to contain the
multitude of plastic bags that seem never-ending in our lives. While we
make every attempt to reuse them, the uses do not typically keep up with
the sheer quantity we can be given. Plastic bags use is estimated to range
from billions to trillions per year, equaling about one to two million per
minute, the most ubiquitous consumer item in the world.2
Some people still recall a time without plastic bags. They were not
invented until 1965 when the Swedish company Celloplast patented the first
plastic bag to save trees from being made into paper bags. Use quickly
spread to the USA and other countries when in 1979, plastic bags held 80%
of the bag market in Europe. In 1982, two of the biggest supermarket chains
in the USA, Safeway, and Kroger, switched to plastic bags. By the end of
the 1980s, plastic bags had become the norm throughout the world.3
Besides the sheer overwhelming quantities, it didn’t take long for
people to see the downside of so many plastic bags. The first documented
entangled plastic item after fishing gear was reported to be a plastic bag
captured by a Continuous Plankton Recorder off northwest Ireland in 1965,4and the deepest litter ever found in the ocean was a plastic bag at 10,898
meters depth in the Mariana Trench. Plastic bags are challenging to recycle
as they cannot be put in the curbside bin, get tangled in the conveyor and
screening systems at material recovery facilities, blow out of trash cans,
trucks, and away from landfills easily, and clog drainage systems causing
flooding.
It’s no wonder the earliest and most frequently enacted plastic policies
pertain to plastic bags. The first plastic bag ban in the world came from
Bangladesh in 2002, recognizing the harm they were causing to drainage
systems in the country. The first tax on plastic bags was implemented in
Denmark in 1994. It is estimated that Danes use about four single-use
plastic bags a year while people in the USA use three to five hundred. Other
countries have followed these examples. As of July 2018, the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) documented that out of 192
countries reviewed, 127 have enacted some form of policy to address
plastic bags. In other countries, like the USA, where no federal policy was
in place and with much plastic use and waste management activities
occurring at the city and community-level scale, regulations often first
occurred at that level before becoming state or nationwide. The Surfrider
Foundation mapped over 1,000 existing city or state plastic reduction
policies within the USA, including bans or taxes on plastic bags, straws,
and expanded polystyrene.5 But it has been a policy war, often pitting
communities against industry through plastic bans versus preemptive bans
and small business against big business. Six plastic bag manufacturers sued
reusable bag company, Chico Bag, in 2011 for data misrepresentation that
was actually accurate and the bag manufacturers lost and had to make
labeling changes.
The number of country-level plastic pollution policies has been
increasing over time. The Plastics Policy Inventory held at the Nicholas
Institute for Environmental Policy Solutions at Duke University houses a
large subset of policies adopted from the early 2000s until 2020 to reduce
plastic pollution.6 Patterns in these policies emerged through their analysis.
A large subset of the policies targets more than one plastic type using bans,
with macroplastic items being the most common and 89% of the bans and
regulations targeting plastic bags. The most common policies include either
a ban, fee, or return policy on plastic items. A ban is described as alimitation or restriction of an item sold or given out at stores. A ban was
most commonly used for items like foam packaging and plastic bags,
known for their inability to be recycled, their longevity in the environment,
and their potential deleterious impacts on human health and the
environment. A tax or fee is used to encourage the reduction of the amount
of plastic used by consumers but still make it available, and it is most often
used in the context of bags, where fees are in the range of five to ten US
cents per bag. After the introduction of a plastic bag tax or fee, consumers
may have to purchase bags for the applications for which they were using
the free bags. However, there has been some evaluation of policies two
years or more out where a reduction of more than 50% of plastic bag use
was observed.7 With the plastics industry lobbying efforts, some states,
eighteen as of 2022, have put into effect preemptive bans of policies to ban
or tax plastic items. So in those locations, no bans or taxes on items like
bags can be enacted.
Education and outreach were found to enhance compliance with either
bans or economic incentives, and funds from taxes, for example, can be
used for these campaigns. Interestingly, education and outreach alone were
unlikely to change behavior.
8 Bottle deposit-return schemes are also
commonly implemented and often for more than just plastic materials.
Historically, deposit-return schemes were used for refillable containers like
glass milk and soda bottles. Bottle deposit systems typically give the
consumer money back for the bottle ranging from five to ten US cents.
Compared to what leaks into the environment, policies like a deposit return
scheme on plastic beverage bottles result in 40% fewer bottles ending up in
the environment where these policies are implemented.9
The only national ban in the USA is a ban on plastic microbeads in
cosmetics, which had a direct input of microplastic to waterways. This ban
was passed with bipartisan support in 2015 and implemented in phases from
2017—2019.10 Similar prohibitions exist in Canada, France, India, New
Zealand, Sweden, Taiwan, and the United Kingdom. Another regulation
implemented in the USA regarding plastic, as of March 1, 1994, is that all
plastic six-pack rings must be photodegradable, known as the Degradable
Plastic Ring Carrier Rule. While it did mean that seals and other animals
being killed by plastic six-pack rings would be saved, it also meant that any
six-pack rings ending up in our environment would degrade into plasticfragments faster than ever before. In early 2022, California became the first
state to enact a Statewide Microplastics Strategy, put into place by the
California Ocean Protection Council.11 This strategy has a two-pronged
approach, one of them being proactively pursuing solutions the state can act
upon immediately while the scientific knowledge of microplastics specific
to California further develops. And then secondly, to invest in and advance
scientific understanding of microplastics to develop and refine future
solutions.12
But despite finding plastics just about everywhere we look,
concentrations of plastics in our environment are not regulated at any level.
Plastic trash items would be included in US Total Maximum Daily Loading
(TMDL) regulations, but these are for all trash and not specific to plastic in
our environment. TMDLs are also not necessarily implemented as a strict
limit, they can be voluntary guidelines and are often aspirational goals for
zero trash in the specified waterway. While there have been previous calls
for plastics to be considered a hazardous material to qualify for cleanup as a
pollutant,13
these proposals have not been advanced. However, in 2021
Canada classified plastics as a “toxic substance” under the Canadian
Environmental Protection Act of 1999. This ban means Environment and
Climate Change Canada (ECCC) has the authority to enact regulations to
ban or limit the use of certain plastic products and implement pollution
prevention plans and environmental codes of practice. Items previously
identified by the government for bans are checkout bags, cutlery, food
service ware made from or containing problematic plastics (as outlined in
chapter 2), ring carriers, stir sticks, and straws. Many countries around the
world have been more proactive and aggressive than the US in addressing
plastic pollution with policy. In Kenya, the highest penalty for possessing a
plastic bag exists: imprisonment of up to four years plus a fine of $40,000,
and countries on the African continent are leading the world in plastic bag
regulations, with thirty-one bans passed in sub-Saharan Africa alone.14 And
Indonesia was the first country to write a National Plan of Action for marine
litter (focusing on plastic), with at least eleven countries following to
develop their own.15
In 2017, a regulation on plastics was felt around the world when the
import ban China implemented on scrap plastics for recycling hit many of
us at our kitchen recycle bin. Globally half of all scrap plastics used to beexported to China, and when China stopped taking them, the effects were
felt in many locations—high-income countries in the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) were shipping plastic
scrap to lower-income, non-OECD countries. Countries in South and
Southeast Asia and Eastern Europe thought they were now the market for
these materials. However, some countries, like the Philippines and
Malaysia, refused or shipped the materials back.16 In some cases, countries
still take plastic scrap, but it may get burned and illegally dumped, like the
example of UK’s plastic scrap in Turkey.
17 The practice of exporting plastic
scrap led to one of the fastest treaty amendments ever implemented. The
Basel Convention controls international shipments of hazardous waste and
waste destined for recycling or disposal (e.g., electronic waste). As of
January 1, 2021, the treaty was amended to include most plastic scrap
transboundary movements, requiring prior notice to and consent from the
receiving country. Not all countries have ratified the Basel Convention,
though, including the USA.
Based upon parallel studies in Science Magazine (2020), we know that
“downstream” policies and interventions are not enough, the quantity of
plastics entering the ocean is set to triple by 2040 in a business-as-usual
scenario.18 For example, 500,000 people per day would need to connect to
waste collection alone to close the collection gap by 2040—this is
impossible. Even with all the government and company policy
commitments in place as of 2020, there would only be a 7% reduction of
plastics entering our ocean. No one approach can do it, but upstream
interventions, including reduction, reuse, and redesign, cannot be ignored
while only focusing on collection, recycling, disposal, and leakage.
The public has begun realizing this as well and demanding better
packaging and information from companies. Several lawsuits have shown
that making claims and promises about goals to reduce plastic pollution,
especially by simply increasing recycling, are not enough. Even expanding
recycling for the sake of being more circular has to provide accurate
information to the public. Lawsuits saying recyclability claims have been
overstated or are not transparent have successfully gotten settlements
against Dr. Pepper-Keurig and Terracycle. These resulted in label changes
by Dr. Pepper-Keurig on their K-cups, Terracycle, and eight companies
about recyclability claims: Coca-Cola, Procter & Gamble, Late July Snacks,Gerber, L’Oreal, Tom’s of Maine, Clorox, and Materne. These suits helped
garner support for and pass the California Truth-In-Labeling Law (SB343)
in 2021. But California has gone further in getting to the root of spurious
claims. In April 2022, in a first-of-its-kind investigation, the Attorney
General of California announced an investigation into the fossil fuel and
petrochemical industries for their role in causing and exacerbating the
global plastics pollution crisis.19 Specifically, the investigation will target
companies that have caused and exacerbated the global plastics pollution
crisis, investigate these companies’ role in perpetuating myths around
recycling and the extent to which this deception is still ongoing, and
determine if these actions violate the law. Attorney General Bonta
subpoenaed ExxonMobil seeking information relating to the case.20 Both
governments and the public are tired of carrying the burden of plastic waste
management and pollution.
The worldwide patchwork of plastic policies has influenced the calls
for a global agreement. A historic moment at the United Nations
Environment Assembly (UNEA) 5.2 in March 2022 was witnessed around
the world as the United Nations Environment Assembly broadcast the
announcement of the plastic pollution resolutions live. It was titled the
“Resolution to End Plastic Pollution: Towards an International Legally
Binding Instrument.” It was the first step for the member states to agree to
create a legally binding agreement to address plastic pollution. The room
erupted in applause. The numerous late nights of negotiations paid off as
193 countries agreed upon this resolution.
The UNEA plastics resolution builds on the foundation of other global
initiatives. For example, in 2015, when Germany held the presidency of the
G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK, USA), the countries
passed an action plan to combat marine litter. This was a first for the seven
countries to agree to address this issue together. The action plan was for
“Marine Litter” and not yet even defined plastic pollution. The first-of-its￾kind G7 action plan included calls for international assistance, sharing best
practices, and utilizing existing platforms like the Global Partnership on
Marine Litter (GPML), created in 2012, promoting individual and corporate
behavior change recognizing prevention is key, and supporting a broad
range of available policies and instruments.The UNEA resolution covers the entire life cycle of plastics from
production to use, to the management of waste, and, finally, leakage. It
mentions waste reduction as one component. It also mentions recycling in
the context of a circular economy, keeping materials in the economy for as
long as possible. This goal is broader than just recycling; it means upstream
changes before recycling so that it would reduce waste generation in the
first place. It then takes into account the design of products and materials
for circular management at the end of their cycle. The resolution is also
inclusive to the global informal collection and recycling community, which
currently provides significant materials management and recycling
worldwide, but often goes unrecognized while working in conditions that
are not protective of their health and environment.
The reduction and prevention of plastic pollution go beyond the marine
environment in the resolution; it applies to all environments. The UNEA
resolution declares that policies and activities should be informed by
science, including socioeconomic information as well. The resolution also
allows for the flexibility for the future legally binding agreement to be
applied in the national context of each member state—recognizing that
there are differences between them. For example, what actions might make
sense in one state, like a ban on single-use water containers, may not make
sense in another. Resources for the member states were mentioned so that
the burden does not entirely fall on the countries or local communities for
implementation. A comprehensive framework seems to be in the resolution,
but both assessing the effectiveness and progress of it require standardized
data collection and monitoring, which is not happening at the required
spatial or temporal scales as of 2022. As described by Inger Andersen,
executive director of UNEP after UNEA, “Today marks a triumph by planet
Earth over single-use plastics. This global agreement is the most significant
environmental multilateral deal since the Paris accord. It is an insurance
policy for this generation and future ones, so they may live with plastic and
not be doomed by it.”21 We hope that by the time you read this, we have a
legally binding framework for countries around the world to sign on to, that
will finally reduce plastics entering our land and ocean, protecting human
health and our environment.Notes
1. Guinness World Records, “Largest Collection of Paper and Plastic Bags,” accessed May 2022,
https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/68623-largest-collection-of-paper-and-plastic￾bags.
2. Guinness World Records, “Most Ubiquitous Consumer Item,” accessed May 2022, https://www
.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/89873-most-ubiquitous-consumer-item.
3. United Nations Environment Program (UNEP), “From Birth to Ban: A History of the Plastic
Shopping Bag,” December 20, 2021, https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/story/birth-ban-history￾plastic-shopping-bag.
4. Guinness World Records, “First Documented Case of Plastic Entanglement,” accessed May 2022,
https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/645219-first-documented-case-of-plastic￾entanglement.
5. Jennifer Romer, “The Surfrider Foundation Releases Interactive Map of U.S. Plastic Reduction
Policies,” March 30, 2021, https://www.surfrider.org/coastal-blog/entry/the-surfrider-foundation￾releases-interactive-map-of-u.s-plastic-reduction-policies.
6. Nicholas Institute for Environmental Policy Solutions, “Plastic Policy Inventory,” Duke
University, 2022, https://nicholasinstitute.duke.edu/plastics-policy-inventory.
7. Zoie Diana et al., “The Evolving Global Plastics Policy Landscape: An Inventory and
Effectiveness Review,” Environmental Science & Policy 134 (2022): 34–45.
8. Guinness World Records, “Most Ubiquitous Consumer Item.”
9. Qamar Schuyler et al., “Economic Incentives Reduce Plastic Inputs to the Ocean,” Marine Policy
96 (2018): 250–255.
10. United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), “The Microbead-Free Waters Act: FAQs,”
February 25, 2022, https://www.fda.gov/cosmetics/cosmetics-laws-regulations/microbead-free￾waters-act-faqs.
11. California Ocean Protection Council, Statewide Microplastics Strategy: Understanding and
Addressing Impacts to Protect Coastal and Ocean Health, February 2022, https://www.opc.ca.gov
/webmaster/ftp/pdf/agenda_items/20220223/Item_6_Exhibit_A_Statewide_Microplastics_Strategy
.pdf.
12. Romer, “The Surfrider Foundation Releases Interactive Map.”
13. Chelsea M. Rochman et al., “Classify Plastic Waste as Hazardous,” Nature 494, no. 7436 (2013):
169–171.
14. Ephrat Livni, “Africa Is Leading the World in Plastic Bag Bans,” Quartz Africa, May 18, 2019,
https://qz.com/africa/1622547/africa-is-leading-the-world-in-plastic-bag-bans/; Laura Parker, “Plastic
Bag Bans Are Spreading. But Are They Truly Effective?,” National Geographic, April 17, 2019,
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/article/plastic-bag-bans-kenya-to-us-reduce￾pollution.
15. Global Partnership on Marine Litter (GPML), “Action Plans,” United Nations Environment
Programme, accessed May 2022, https://www.gpmarinelitter.org/what-we-do/action-plans.
16. Reality Check Team, “Why Some Countries Are Shipping Back Plastic Waste,” BBC News, June
2, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-48444874.
17. Kathryn Snowdon, “UK Plastic Waste Being Dumped and Burned in Turkey, Says Greenpeace,”
BBC News, May 17, 2021, https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-57139474
18. Pew Charitable Trusts and SYSTEMIQ, Breaking the Plastic Wave: A Comprehensive Assessment
of Pathways Towards Stopping Ocean Plastic Pollution, 2020, https://www.pewtrusts.org/-/media
/assets/2020/10/breakingtheplasticwave_mainreport.pdf.19. State of California Department of Justice, Office of the Attorney General, “Plastics,” accessed
May 2022, https://oag.ca.gov/plastics.
20. California Ocean Protection Council, Statewide Microplastics Strategy.
21. “Nations Sign Up to End Global Scourge of Plastic Pollution,” UN News, March 2, 2022, https://
news.un.org/en/story/2022/03/1113142.9
ALTERNATIVES AND INTERVENTIONS FOR
PLASTIC
In the previous chapters of this book, we covered the rapid increase in
plastic production and environmental pollution. We discussed the
implications of plastic pollution on the environment and society. And at this
point, you might be wondering what can be done to remediate or “solve”
this problem. Many people have thought the same thing. Over the decades,
multiple approaches have been utilized to address plastic production, use,
and waste management, including policy interventions, industry
innovations, and community organizing (Table 1). Policy interventions are
when local, national, and global governments implement guidance, laws,
and regulations to reduce plastic production, use, or disposal. Many of these
policies were discussed in chapter 8. Industry interventions include making
alternate/reformulated/recycled materials, new waste management
solutions, or buy back /reuse/refill programs. One example is Recyclebank,
an industry-based rewards system for residents making green choices like
recycling. Communities and nonprofit groups often organize people, raise
resources and encourage collective action to address the plastic pollution
crisis. To fully conceptualize all the work currently being done to address
plastic pollution from production to leakage, it is best to walk through some
commonly employed intervention methods.Table 1   A list of interventions used to address plastic pollution around the
world.
Intervention Explanation Example
Policy (chapter 8) Local, national, and global governments put in
place policies to regulate or reduce plastic
production, use, or disposal.
Plastic bag
bans/taxes
Microbead bans
Recycling
programs
Industry Industry is driven by market demand to create
alternatives and solutions to plastic pollution.
Product buyback
programs
Bioplastics
Biodegradable
plastics
Recycling
innovation
Community/Nonprofits Consumers are organizing to drive market demand,
policy, and cleaning up their communities.
Wastepickers
Community
cleanups
Reduction of
plastic use
Refill/reuse
schemes
Cleanup
Because the impacts on the environment and animals are so evident, our
first instinct to address the plastic pollution crisis is to clean up the plastic
and remove the debris from the environment. In the 1950s, beverage
corporations and tobacco companies founded the non-profit Keep America
Beautiful (KAB) to “promote a clean environment.” However, as referenced
in the introduction to this book, a significant controversy over their true
motivations ensued when they refused to promote beverage bottle return
schemes, which are proven to reduce bottle litter in the environment, but
were not supported by their corporate funders. KAB started its “People start
pollution. People can stop it,” campaign in 1971 with an incredibly
greenwashed and inappropriate ad, “the crying Indian.” This ad placed the
blame for litter squarely on the shoulders of the public while putting the
industry in a position only to offer the public disposable items thatmaximize their profits.1 KAB then asks the public to volunteer to clean up
litter, including plastics, in terrestrial environments. The industry provided
funding for work that KAB would do to reduce waste, promote recycling
and “beautify” neighborhoods, primarily with volunteers. Although KAB
affiliates often have locally positive impacts, the funding was ultimately
self-serving, allowing the industry to continue in a business-as-usual
setting, even increasing the quantities of disposable items making it into the
marketplace. Other than more recently publishing periodic litter reports,
which have now been used in scientific studies, there was previously little
data collected to illustrate what was being found in the environment by
KAB.
One of the first coastal cleanups to log data on each item collected was
held in Texas in 1986. This annual one-day global cleanup and data
collection event began to be known as the International Coastal Cleanup
(ICC), organized by Ocean Conservancy for over three decades. As time
went by, thousands of nonprofits and community organizations began to
implement massive and small cleanups around the globe, sometimes in
collaboration with scientists (academic and community based). But most of
these cleanups require large numbers of local volunteers to manually pick
up and sort trash to be recycled or landfilled. Both community members and
scientists work to characterize the garbage collected to help with the
upstream implementation of more interventions and alternatives to plastic
waste. One such study from the organization Break Free from Plastic
identifies the top company products that are most littered around the world,
which in 2021 are, by rank, 1) Coca-Cola, 2) PepsiCo, 3) Unilever, 4)
Nestle, and 5) Proctor and Gamble.2 This activism has led to some
commitments from these companies to address the plastic pollution crisis;
however, very little to none of these commitments include the reduction of
producing single-use plastics. For example, in 2018, Coca-Cola created the
World Without Waste initiative promising to collect and recycle the
equivalent of a bottle or can for every one they sell by 2030, to make 100%
of packaging recyclable by 2025, and to use 50% recycled material in
bottles and cans by 2030. On-the-ground activism has begun to hold
corporations accountable for the entire life cycle of their product, and data
has given some power to the people. However, the downfall of utilizingonly cleanups as an intervention for change is that it takes massive amounts
of time and effort from volunteers who should not carry the burden.
Initially, the main focus was on the cleanup of litter on land, even along
the coast, and less from fresh and marine waters. This shifted with the
increasing images of plastics causing harm to marine animals through
entanglement, accumulation of waste in their gut, and strangulation.
Organizations also implemented more common strategies from land-based
cleanups in water systems, including capturing floating debris on the
surface. River cleanups are less often initiated than coastal and terrestrial
litter cleanups, but freshwater streams and rivers are both a sink and a
source of plastics bound for the sea. “Trash traps” are booms and containers
that float in fresh waterways to capture the debris that floats on the surface.
The deployment of trapping technology has prevented waste from flowing
downstream that could have been bound for the ocean. But the caveat of
this technology is that it requires infrastructure, operation, and maintenance
to regularly remove the waste from the trash trap before the trash begins to
accumulate, settle into the sediment, release chemicals into the water, or
fragment into microplastics. These devices also need to be placed in a
location with access to waste management infrastructure after collecting the
plastic. If there is no waste management infrastructure on land to manage
the waste collected, the pollution is just getting transferred from water to
the ground—with the potential to get back into the water again.
Additionally, automated technologies have emerged, including
autonomous robots that can pick up trash and solar- or water-powered
stationary systems that skim surface water trash and deposit it directly into
a dumpster. Beach sweepers are driven on the beach to comb through the
shorelines to pick up more significant plastic trash. But, very few
technologies exist to clean up microplastics in the environment. The Hula
One is a vacuum that relies on the buoyancy of plastics to remove
microplastics from sand, but it’s time-intensive and not very efficient. Water
treatment facilities do remove a majority of microplastics from wastewater,
but then they end up in the sludge that remains. In the case of nanoplastics,
there is currently no feasible technology to remove them from the
environment.
Cleaning plastics from any water source is more complicated than in
terrestrial environments because not all the plastic will stay on the surface.Some polymers float on the surface, some immediately sink, and others will
sink after weathering or becoming small enough to be dropped by a
changing density from the size or microbial growth. Suggestions to clean
the oceans at the surface and other depths have not been practical. The sea
is very, very deep. So deep that we have yet to map the world’s seafloor
fully. Yes, plastic has likely seen more than humankind has seen of the
ocean. Cleanups are a very downstream solution to plastic pollution that
puts the onus on consumers and volunteers to fix instead of the producers
that make the products to sell. It is like trying to mop up the bathroom floor
before you turn off the tap of an overflowing bathtub.
Change the Material and Design
So can we use a different material than plastic and redesign our packaging?
The most straightforward idea is to return to the natural materials we started
with, like metals, glass, and wood, to replace plastic. However, plastic has
filled a vital need in various industries that these materials would not be
able to efficiently or effectively replace, including medical and research
supplies, consumer products, construction, and transportation. While
medical and research supplies have minimal alternatives for plastic
materials, the packaging industry and consumer products are essential for
developing other options and solutions.
As discussed in chapter 6, we have seen extensive imagery of wildlife
being strangled and entangled in six-pack rings. An extensive public
information campaign made the public aware of the problem and
encouraged them to cut up the plastic rings that had choked so many seals.
Because of this campaign, millions of people still cut up the six-pack rings
to this day. The harm of six-pack rings to wildlife led to a regulation that
required the rings to fragment in the environment. However, in many cases,
six-pack rings are a thing of the past. As a redesign, cans began to be
wrapped entirely in a sturdy film plastic or just come in paperboard boxes,
which used to be just for twelve-packs but now can be for six- or eight￾packs of beverages. There are now rigid plastic can holders that can be
reused, and even just adhesive that holds the cans together, reducing
material and plastic use by 76% (adhesives are plastic).3 There is even a
biodegradable six-pack ring that, at its origin, was made from barley andwheat remnants from the brewing process, but now it is made from “fiber,”
which was touted as fish food (we don’t recommend this!). Still, as a fiber
product, similar to paper, it should biodegrade in a landfill or compost
system and in the environment.
The six-pack ring is an example of redesign and material substitution.
However, there may be tradeoffs to some of these choices, including energy
and water use and carbon emissions for various points along production and
distribution. However, avoiding the extraction, processing, and refinement
of fossil fuels, as well as protecting the environment from plastic pollution,
is often enough motivation to make these changes—and there is not a very
good way to compare these tradeoffs to each other.
Another successful redesign example also had to do with aluminum
beverage cans. Aluminum cans used to have a tab that had to be entirely
removed to get it open to consume the beverage. But these tabs we found in
the environment and could easily cut someone if stepped on because of
their shape and sharpness of the material. The tabs were redesigned to open
the can but remain on the can as we see today, allowing cans to remain the
packaging of choice for many beverages. Although once polyethylene
terephthalate (PET) was invented and was strong enough to hold carbonated
liquids, as well as the membrane in the cap to keep the carbonation in,
plastic took over the market share in many cases. Now, plastic caps are
more often found than bottles in the environment, begging the question of
innovations to alter bottle design to keep them attached to the bottle,
something Coca-Cola is now implementing by 2024 in Great Britain.
While many materials scientists are working hard on materials that
serve similar purposes to plastics but are not made of fossil fuels or don’t
have persistence in the environment, they have yet to be a large part of the
market. Compostable plastics, like polylactic acid (PLA), will not
biodegrade if mismanaged but are not made of fossil fuels and will compost
in an industrial setting (not your home compost). In other cases, there are
now polymers that will biodegrade in soils and your home compost, like
Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA). However, biodegradability in ocean
environments is still challenging since the microbial activity there can be
limited or significantly different from the microbes in soils. Petroleum￾based plastics that are not recyclable, like thin-film plastics used to make
food wrappers, could be a logical application for biodegradable plastics.If designing for recycling, in an ideal world, all plastics would be
standardized with just a few primary polymer types with minimal colors
and chemical additives that are nontoxic. Layered and hybrid materials that
can’t be recycled would be restricted. If we had followed Green
Engineering Principles like this in the first place, we could have avoided
many of the consequences that we now see.4 For example, the material
should be able to be easily recycled multiple times, shouldn’t fall apart into
microplastics, shouldn’t contain harmful chemicals, should be easily
recycled with other plastics, and should be used for a specific need and not
just for the sake of using raw materials to make plastic. If needed, using
plastic as a material should be done with intention, taking an “output
pulled” versus “input pushed” approach, limiting what is made from
plastics.
There are essential drivers to some plastic use. The best example comes
from a plastic straw redesign campaign that tried to make straws of metal or
paper. The disability activism community immediately educated others that
some people can only have plastic straws. In some cases, reusable silicone
straws may work, but straws are now one of the first use cases for PHA,
which have the flexibility and mouth feel of plastic but are biodegradable.
In addition, large facilities, including major movie theater chains, wanted to
move to alternative material straws. In terms of redesign, major companies
like PepsiCo and Unilever have committed to making all their packaging
recyclable or compostable, requiring both product redesign and potentially
compostable or biodegradable materials. The key to all of these
commitments is the definitions of “recyclable” and “biodegradable” versus
“compostable”—all of which have to be matched with the materials
management infrastructure geographically. Other redesign examples include
to-go containers that are not expanded polystyrene (EPS) and party cups
that are aluminum and not plastic.5 In some coastal areas, a certification for
“ocean-friendly” restaurants has helped establishments in communities
reduce the use of plastic and procure alternative materials, like reusable to￾go container products. But alternative materials are often more expensive,
and not all businesses or people can afford them, nor does everyone have
access to reuse schemes or choices in materials at the store.
One major drawback of alternative materials and redesign is that it
could continue the disposable norms that we currently have, just withdifferent materials. And there is even a possibility that switching to
materials that people perceive as more “environmentally friendly” and not
an issue for plastic pollution means they feel free to use more than they
would otherwise, resulting in overconsumption of new material instead of
reducing the use of an unnecessary product. This is known as Javon’s
paradox, which found that people would drive more with an electric car that
they felt was better for the environment while they avoided driving or
combined trips, etc., with a gas car. An example with plastic is if people
avoid getting plastic utensils by bringing a reusable set with them, they may
then stop doing that when the utensils become nonplastic or biodegradable.
Circular Economy
The subsequent intervention commonly suggested to deal with the
accumulation of plastic waste is to better manage it in ways that prevent it
from ending up in the environment. This concept is commonly associated
with creating a circular economy and is related to the previous section on
alternative materials and redesign since a fully circular economy would
require both. A circular economy is an idea of avoiding waste creation and
then sustainably recirculating goods produced and consumed via sharing,
reusing, refurbishing, and recycling. If properly implemented, it would
equate to zero waste in communities. It could also indicate the decline in
the need for raw materials to make new products because we would be
reusing the products already in circulation. This concept has been
popularized in a variety of ways. The first is via the influence of the media.
Social media influencers are known to post about their zero waste lifestyles
or new thrifting hauls. The Disney live-action Cruella movie displays the
idea of reusing fabrics for fashion. However, the plastic pollution portrayal
in Hollywood media needs to be improved based on a study by the USC
Annenberg Norman Lear Center.
6 They found that single-use plastics were
common on TV, appearing in every single episode, with an average of 28
single-use plastic items per episode, 93% of which were not disposed of on￾screen, lending to the “waste just disappears” mentality. When waste
disposal was shown, a whopping 80% was shown to be littered, often the
most common items found in our environment, like Carrie Bradshaw’scigarette in “And Just Like That …” Media should not illustrate that it is
stylish or acceptable to litter anything.
Companies are also embracing this idea. For example, Starbucks coffee
offers reusable options made from recycled materials and encourages
patrons to bring their reusable mugs. But a deeper case study can be seen in
Ikea. Ikea is often purchased as furniture for a college experience where it
is used for relatively short periods and sometimes even within just a few
months of summer. At the end of every dorm move-out, Ikea furniture can
be seen haphazardly accumulating in trash receptacles. Ikea is known to be
affordable and potentially disposable since it is reported to be easy to put
together, take apart, and dispose. Ikea recognized the short-term nature of
their furniture compared to other brands and saw this as an opportunity to
keep the furniture out of the environment and their furniture in circulation
by creating a buy back and resell program.7
We have briefly discussed some of the difficulties with waste
management in previous chapters, including chemical and mechanical
recycling. While there have been recent goals set to further develop the
technology for advanced chemical and mechanical recycling, plastics are
not like other materials, like metals, that can be infinitely recycled. Virgin
materials are still needed to make a product with similar integrity as the
original product. The other issue with recycling lies in the types of products
that can be recycled which is relatively limited by plastic type and the size
of the plastic as nothing smaller than a deck of cards will be recycled by
waste management systems. Some industry producers have stepped up to
address the recyclability issue of their plastics by changing the material
design (sprite bottles are now clear instead of green) and creating specific
collection systems to recycle their products. In addition, some companies
accept back their products to be recycled, including K-cups, Taco Bell
sauce packets, and Biotrue contact lenses; however, the onerous duty is on
the public to return those items to drop-off centers or ship them back.
One of the more significant issues arising from creating a truly circular
economy lies in the packaging industry, which uses a large proportion of
plastic produced to transport goods globally. Most often, the packaging,
other than cardboard boxes, is used once and is not often recycled. Some
industries have worked to grant a second life use for these products in items
for infrastructure, like using single-use plastic bags to make bricks in Kenyaand outdoor patio decks. However, it doesn’t reinforce a circular economy
because it requires those bags to be replaced, so their source of the material
should be avoided or come from a recycled source as well. Some industries
like Amazon have tried new packaging envelopes using smaller quantities
of plastic, but these aren’t recyclable everywhere.
In 2022, a Department of Energy report and a report by The Last Beach
Cleanup and Beyond Plastics both showed that the US recycling rate
dropped from 8.7% in 2018 to 5–6%.8 We still still confused about which
plastics to recycle wherever we are, when in reality, the Beyond Plastics
report says the material itself can’t be realistically recycled because of the
many challenges along the way also outlined in chapter 3.9 A 2022 analysis
conducted by Eunomia Research & Consulting found that if the top five
beverage companies meet their pledges on recycling (which remains to be
seen), these pledges would only reduce aquatic pollution from single-use
plastic bottles by 7%. While plastic materials management and recycling
will be a part of the zero-waste future, they will not even come close to
solving the plastic pollution crisis alone.
Full Stop: Plastic Avoidance
And while the first three solutions could and are being implemented today,
they still have yet to bear fruit in reducing the amount of plastic waste
produced or emitted into the environment. At this point, recycling has not
reduced virgin production. And all the commitments made to date only
project a growing quantity of plastic entering our environment and
waterways in the next ten to thirty years.
The most thought-provoking solution is to stop the use of plastic
entirely. Now, what would that look like? Does that mean we end capitalism
and consumerism as we know it today? Do we go back to the 1940s
ceramic pots and hand-woven cotton clothing? Do we abandon our life￾saving medical supplies and transportation options? NGOs and some
scientists believe that the only way we reduce plastic pollution is to place a
cap on plastic production. With most plastics used for packaging, at least
removing as much of this as possible could be a start (see the unnecessary,
avoidable, and problematic plastics section in chapter 2). Durable and life￾saving plastics might be another story. How would we meet people’s needsand get products to them without plastics? This concept is currently being
piloted within cities by an organization called Perpetual Use—overcoming
the burdens and exploring how to scale reuse to be inclusive and accessible.
Imagine walking into a town where every packaging item, whether plastic
or not, is continuously reused.
What Can We Do?
The most effective method to address the issue of plastic pollution is to
have complete systems-based solutions that require technologies, company
investment, policy changes, and population-driven changes. This includes
first determining products/polymers that are unnecessary, avoidable, and
problematic. Once these polymeric materials and polymer-associated
chemicals are determined, they should be locally or globally banned in the
marketplace. A product ban will also spur the demand for creating or
utilizing alternative materials and products. However, to make these
alternatives competitive, governments must remove incentives for using
fossil fuels for nondurable plastics to give an alternative feedstock a chance.
Second, we must develop infrastructure and policies to support a reuse
system of delivery of food and products that don’t produce waste in the first
place. And finally, we need more robust waste infrastructure development
for collection, disposal, recycling, composting, and environmental cleanup
of garbage. All of these choices must be made collectively in locations
where plastic production, use, and disposal are significant.
Imagine walking into a town where
every packaging item, whether plastic
or not, is continuously reused.
In addition to systemic changes, individual actions have an essential
effect on driving change. So what can we do? Here are a few ideas. First,you can make feasible decisions for your lifestyle via how you spend your
money, how you use your voice, and how you get involved in government
systems (dollar, voice, and vote). If you are concerned about your health or
the environmental impacts of plastic, you can make decisions to limit
unnecessary plastic exposure. You can do this by purchasing reusable or
refillable plastic-free items. Suppose you want companies to create more
reusable, biodegradable, or fewer plastic-containing options. In that case,
you can use your voice by talking with people about plastic pollution,
writing emails to industries asking for change, or working with local
businesses to encourage more reusable or biodegradable take-out options.
You can also work with local governments to request improved recycling
and compost facilities that accept biodegradable/compostable plastics. Start
a community garden or farmers market to avoid packaged products. Join a
local cleanup and provide that data to Debris Tracker and international
cleanup campaigns. Talk to everyone you know about this issue or send
them this book and we can all change our mindset on plastic. You can make
many small changes to make this plastic pollution issue heard and
addressed.
The alternatives and solutions for the plastic pollution issue are just as
complicated as the thousands of formulations and forms plastic can take on.
So while there is not one simple solution, there is a vast community of
eager people working to address the issues created by plastic production
and pollution.
Notes
1. Ginger Strand, “The Crying Indian,” Orion Magazine 20 (2008).
2. Break Free From Plastic, Brand Audit Report 2021, October 2021, https://www
.breakfreefromplastic.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/BRAND-AUDIT-REPORT-2021.pdf.
3. Rachel Arthur, “Shrinking Away from Shrink Wrap: How Carlsberg Developed Its Six-Pack Glue
Technology,” Beverage Daily, September 28, 2021, https://www.beveragedaily.com/Article/2018/11
/20/Shrinking-away-from-shrink-wrap-How-Carlsberg-developed-its-six-pack-glue-technology.
4. Paul T. Anastas and Julie B. Zimmerman, “Peer Reviewed: Design through the 12 Principles of
Green Engineering,” Environmental Science & Technology 37, no. 5 (2003): 94A–101A.
5. Jesse Klein, “Should You Swap Plastic for Aluminum Packaging? It’s Complicated,” Green Biz,
March 19, 2021, https://www.greenbiz.com/article/should-you-swap-plastic-aluminum-packaging-its
-complicated.
6. Plastic Pollution Coalition, “Flip the Script on Plastics,” accessed May 2022, https://www
.plasticpollutioncoalition.org/flipthescript.7. Parija Kavilanz, “Ikea Will Pay You to Get Its Old Furniture Back,” CNN Business, March 31,
2022, https://www.cnn.com/2022/03/31/cars/ikea-furniture-buyback-permanent/index.html.
8. Anelia Milbrandt et al., “Quantification and Evaluation of Plastic Waste in the United States,”
Resources, Conservation and Recycling 183 (2022): 106363.
9. Beyond Plastics, The Real Truth about the U.S. Plastic Recycling Rate: 2021 U.S. Facts and
Figures, May 2022.GLOSSARY
Polymer
Also known as plastic. Polymers are made of up individual monomeric compounds that are linked
together to form a chain. Polymers are used to make a variety of plastic products and have many
different physical chemical properties and functions that are dependent on the monomer used.
Polymer-associated chemicals
Sometimes referred to as plastic additives. These are chemicals incorporated into plastic products
intentionally to fulfill a specific function or aesthetic for the material or unintentionally due to the
breakdown of other chemicals during processing or contamination.
Bisphenol A (BPA)
A polymer-associated chemical used as either a monomer or plastic additive (antioxidant) in some
plastics. This chemical is found to be released from plastics into the human body and environment.
BPA is also determined to be an endocrine-disrupting chemical and linked to some forms of cancer.
Environmental justice
The equitable treatment and involvement of all people with respect to the development,
implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations and policies.
Entanglement
For an organism to become wrapped and twisted into a mass sometimes by marine litter and debris
including plastic fishing line, balloons, or plastic bags.
Bioplastic
Plastics derived from natural polymers found in organisms with plastic-like properties.
Synthetic plastic
Plastics that use fossil fuels as the feedstock to make their materials.
Biodegradable plastic
Plastics that can be decomposed by the action of living organisms, such as microbes into water,
carbon dioxide, and biomass. These plastics can be bioplastics, synthetic plastics, or a combination of
the two. Some degradation also requires specific conditions such as compostable facilities that
provide high heat, varied oxygen levels, and pressure to accelerate the process.
Planetary boundary threat
Human-derived perturbations of earth systems that do not fit within the bounds of the environmental
boundaries of the planet come at risk of causing serious and abrupt environmental changes. An
example of this can be seen in climate change.
MicroplasticMicroplastics are plastics smaller than 5 millimeters in size but larger than 1,000 micrometers.
Microplastics can be produced to be these size ranges (primary) or form from degradation of
macrosized plastics (secondary). Plastics smaller than this size range are defined to be nanoplastics.
Single-use plastic
Plastic materials designed to be used only once and then discarded. Examples are plastic cups,
utensils, food wrappers, plastic bottles, etc.
Great Pacific Garbage Patch
A misnomer, it is not an “island” in the Pacific, but the accumulation of plastic located in the Great
Pacific Gyre (the circulation of currents in the northern Pacific Ocean). The accumulation does not
look like an island. Some plastic objects may be observed, but much of the plastic is in broken up
pieces and is so microscopic (microplastics) that it can’t be seen until it is pulled out of the water
with a sampling net.
Municipal solid waste
This is waste that community members generate at the household level. It includes waste generated at
the workplace and at restaurants as well. It does not include waste generated from construction,
demolition, manufacturing, or industrial processes.
Litter
Waste that is uncontrolled in the environment. Land-based litter is often called “litter”—while litter
in the marine environment is called “marine litter.” It does not imply responsibility.
Marine debris
The US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) definition of marine debris is
anything that does not naturally belong in the water. It includes plastics and lost or abandoned fishing
gear.
Circular economy
According to the Save Our Seas 2.0 Act in the United States, the circular economy refers to an
economy that uses a systems-focused approach and involves industrial processes and economic
activities that are restorative or regenerative by design, enable resources used in such processes and
activities to maintain their highest value for as long as possible, and aim for the elimination of waste
through the superior design of materials, products, and systems (including business models).
Plastic bans/fees
Plastic bans prohibit a particular type or form of plastic from being sold or used in a certain
jurisdiction. Plastic fees impose a fee for use or tax when a particular type or form of plastic from
being sold or used in a certain jurisdiction.
Deposit/return scheme
People who purchase an item pay a small deposit which can be refunded upon return of the
packaging to a convenient location, like a store or redemption center. They are most often used for
glass or plastic beverage bottles.FURTHER READING
Beiras, Ricardo. Marine Pollution: Sources, Fate and Effects of Pollutants in Coastal Ecosystems.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2018.
Bergmann, Melanie, Lars Gutow, and Michael Klages. Marine Anthropogenic Litter. Berlin: Springer
Nature, 2015.
Cobb, Allison. 2014. Plastic: An Autobiography. Aufgabe: 356.
Freinkel, Susan. Plastic: A Toxic Love Story. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2011.
Geyer, Roland. 2021. The Business of Less: The Role of Companies and Households on a Planet in
Peril. London: Routledge.
Humes, Edward. 2012. Garbology: Our Dirty Love Affair with Trash. New York: Avery.
Liboiron, Max. 2021. Pollution Is Colonialism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Meikle, Jeffrey. 1995. American Plastic: A Cultural History. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University
Press.
Weis, Judith S., De Falco, Francesca, and Mariacristina Cocca. 2022. Polluting Textiles: The Problem
with Microfibres. London: Routledge.
Zweifel, Hans. 2001. Plastic Additives Handbook. Hanser Gardner Publications.IN
D
E
X
Additives, plastic, 55–56
Alternatives and interventions for plastic, 95–114
changing materials and design, 101–106
circular economy and, 106–110
cleanup, 97–101
effective methods for, 
1
11–114
plastic avoidance, 
110–1
1
1
Amber, 
3
Antioxidants, 51
Ash, 39
Automated technologies, 100 Avoidance, plastic, 110–111
Baekeland, Leo, 
5
Bags, plastic, 83–85
Bakelite, 5–6, 52
Basel Convention, 32
Beverage rings, 62–63, 87, 102–103
Biobased plastics, 15
Biocides, 51, 52
Biodegradable plastics, 103–104
Bisphenol 
A (BPA), 55–56, 66–67
Bottle deposit systems, 86–87
Bottled water, 19
Break Free from Plastic, 98–99
California 
Truth-In-Labeling Law of 2021, 91
Canadian Environmental Protection Act of 1999, 88
Cancer Alley, 80
“Can I Recycle This” (CIRT), 23
Catalysts, 51
Celluloid, 
5, 
6
Cellulose, 
3, 
5
Chemicals in and associated with plastics, 51–59
categorization of, 54
lubricant, 54–55
non-intentionally added substances (NIAS), 56
plastic additive, 55–56
purpose of various, 52–53release of, 57–59
sorbed environmental contaminants, 57
vast number of, 53–54
wildlife interactions with, 64–65
Chemical toxicity of plastics, 66–70
Circular economy, 106–110
Cleanup, 97–101
Climate change, 69–70
Coca-Cola, 99, 103
Collection of plastic waste, 27–28, 35–36
Combustion, 37–39, 81
Composting, 22, 28–29, 103–104
Cotton, 3
COVID-19 pandemic, 11, 16–17
Cracking process, 12, 13
DDT, 70
Deanin, 54
Debris, plastic, 41–50. See also Environmental impacts of plastic
great garbage patch and, 43
interactions with surrounding environment, 49–50
microplastics, 44–49
organizations focused on, 42–44
wildlife interactions with, 62–66
Debris Tracker, 113
Degradable Plastic Ring Carrier Rule, 87
Degradation, plastics, 49–50, 103–104
Design and material changes, 101–106
Dioxins, 81
Disposable culture, 6, 8
Downcycled plastic, 33
Dr. Pepper-Keurig, 90–91
DuPont, 6
Durable goods, 18
Dyes and colorants, 51–52
Environmental impacts of plastic, 61–71. See also Debris, plastic
chemical toxicity, 66–70
climate change and, 69–70
environmental quality and, 70–71
on water, 67–68
wildlife interactions and, 62–66
Environmental justice, 79–82
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC), 88
Ethylene, 12, 13
Extended producer responsibility (EPR), 40
ExxonMobil, 91
Flame retardants, 51Food and drink packaging, 7
Formaldehyde, 5
Functional additives, 55–56
Global Partnership on Marine Litter (GPML), 92
Green Engineering Principles, 104
Greenhouse gases, 69–70
Hula One, 100
Human health impacts of plastics, 73–77
Hyatt, John Wesley, 5
Industrial combustion, 38–39
Ingestion of plastics, 65–67
International Coastal Cleanup, 43, 44, 98
Javon’s paradox, 106
Keep America Beautiful (KAB), 8, 42–43, 97–98
Kondo, Marie, 21
Landfills, 21, 34, 37, 41–42
Last Beach Cleanup and Beyond Plastics, 109
Leachate, 37
Life Magazine, 6
Lubricants, 51, 54–55
Material and design changes, 101–106
Material recovery facilities (MRFs), 32
Mechanical recycling, 32
Medical uses of plastic, 16–17
Microbeads, bans on, 87
Microbes, 28–29
Microfibers, 45, 47, 49
Microplastics, 44–49, 66
in the body, 73–77
environmental justice and, 81–82
trash traps, 100
Monomers, 51
Moore, Charles, 43
Nanoplastics, 45, 66, 100
in the body, 74–75
Nicholas Institute for Environmental Policy Solutions, 85
Nitrocellulose, 3, 5
Nondurable goods, 18
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), 26, 110
Non-intentionally added substances (NIAS), 56
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), 15
Ocean Conservancy, 43, 98
Olefins, 12, 13Open burning, 38, 81
Open dumping, 24
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 32
Packaging sector, 7, 17–18
categories of goods in, 18
toxicity of chemicals used in, 67–68
Paper, 3
Paris Accord, 94
Pellets, recycled, 31–32
PepsiCo, 105
Perpetual Use, 111
Phenol, 5
Plasticizers, 51, 54
Plastics
alternatives and interventions for (see Alternatives and interventions for plastic)
chemicals in and associated with, 51–59
during the COVID-19 pandemic, 11, 16–17
definition of, 1–3, 12
disposable culture for, 6, 8
early formulations of, 3–6, 52
in the environment (see Debris, plastic)
environmental impact of (see Environmental impacts of plastic)
increased use during World War II, 6
packaging sector, 7
policies regulating (see Policies, plastic)
post-World War II use of, 6–7, 41–42
production and use of (see Production and use, plastic)
single-use, 18–19
societal impact of (see Societal impacts of plastic)
use of word, 3, 4
waste management system and (see Waste management, plastic)
widespread use of, 1, 6–7
Plastics Policy Inventory, 85
Policies, plastic, 83–94
bottle deposit systems, 86–87
common, 85–86
in different countries, 88–89
downstream, 90
education and outreach on, 86–87
international agreements on, 89–94
microbead bans, 87
packaging and information regarding recycling, 90–91
plastic bags and, 83–85
Total Maximum Daily Loading (TMDL) regulations, 88
Polybezoar, 65
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), 31, 81, 103
Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA), 104Polylactic acid (PLA), 103–104
Polymerization, 5, 12–13
Polypropylene, 53
Polystyrenes, 77–78, 105
Production and use, plastic, 11–19
as by-product of oil or gas refining, 13, 15
changes in global, 12, 15–16
during the COVID-19 pandemic, 16–17
cracking process in, 12, 13
early, 3–6, 52
for medical uses, 16–17
olefins in, 12, 13
for the packaging sector, 17–18
reducing, 18–19
Propylene, 12
Pyroxylin, 3
Rain, plastic, 41
Recyclebank, 96
Recycling, 22–23, 29–34, 104
policies regarding packaging and information on, 90–91
Release of chemicals in plastics, 57–59
Repolymerization, 33–34
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 24–25
Reuse, 26
Rubber, 3
Schmidt-Bachem, Heinz, 83
Schönbein, Christian Friedrich, 3
Science (magazine), 90
Selling or donating of unwanted items, 22
Single-use plastics, 18–19
Six-pack beverage rings, 62–63, 87, 102–103
6PPD (N-(1,3-dimethylbutyl)-N’-phenyl-p-phenylenediamine), 68–69
Societal impacts of plastic, 73–82
chemical exposure and, 77–79
environmental justice and, 79–82
human health and, 73–77
Sorbed environmental contaminants, 57
Starbucks, 107–108
Straws, plastic, 104–105
Styrenes, 77–78, 105
Surfactants, 51
Surfrider Foundation, 85
Terracycle, 90–91
Thompson, Richard, 44
Total Maximum Daily Loading (TMDL) regulations, 88
Toxicity of plastics, 66–68Trash traps, 99–100
Unilever, 105
United Nations Environment Assembly (UNEA), 91–94
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 85
Unnecessary, avoidable, and problematic plastics (UAPs), 19
US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 18, 24, 70
UV inhibitors, 51
Waste management, plastic, 8, 21–40. See also Debris, plastic
collection in, 27–28, 35–36
combustion in, 37–39
composting in, 22, 28–29, 103–104
as crisis, 22
early use of waterways for, 21–22
generation of waste and discarded plastic and, 23–24
landfills for, 21, 34, 37, 41–42
recycling in, 22–23, 29–34, 104
reuse in, 26
systems for, 24–26
typical options for, 22–23
Water quality, 68–69
human health and, 74–75
Water treatment processes, 47, 100–101
Wildlife interactions with plastics, 62–66
World Bank, 23
World Health Organization, 79
World Trade Organization (WTO), 32
World Without Waste, 99DR. IMARI WALKER-FRANKLIN is a research scientist at the nonprofit RTI International in RTP, North
Carolina.
DR. JENNA JAMBECK is the Georgia Athletic Association Distinguished Professor in Environmental
Engineering at the University of Georgia.
