SERIES ON 
Water: Emerging Issues and Innovative Responses
 
PLASTIC POLLUTION
 
Nature Based Solutions and 
Effective Governance
 
Editors 
Gail Krantzberg 
McMaster University
 
Hamilton, ON
 
Canada
 
Savitri Jetoo 
Adjunct Professor
 
Abo Akademi University
 
Turku, Finland
 
Velma I. Grover 
McMaster University
 
Hamilton, ON
 
Canada
 
Sandhya Babel 
Professor
 
School of Bio-Chemical Engineering and Technology (BCET)
 
Sirindhorn International Institute of Technology (SIIT)
 
Pathum Thani, Thailand
 
A SCIENCE PUBLISHERS BOOK Cover credit:
 
Cover illustrations reproduced by kind courtesy of Dr. Gail Krantzberg and Dr. Sandhya Babel.
 
First edition published 2023 
by CRC Press 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 
and by CRC Press 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
© 2023 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and 
publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of 
their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material 
reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this 
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write 
and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, 
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access 
www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact 
mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are 
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data (applied for) 
ISBN: 978-0-367-68480-8 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-0-367-68481-5 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-003-13774-0 (ebk) 
DOI: 10.1201/9781003137740 
Typeset in Times New Roman 
by Radiant Productions Preface to the Series
 
Water is the lifeline for all life on the planet and is intricately linked with food 
security, energy security and sustainable development. Water is the core of sustainable 
development and thus maintaining water quality is important for maintaining life 
on the planet. To support our ongoing development and provide comforts, we have 
developed many chemical substances that are harmful to the environment and one 
such product is plastic. The focus of this “water series” is to explore innovative 
solutions of treating water pollution, better governance structure and other 
institutional framework, good legal structure, in addition to increased investment in 
water sector. 
Plastic products are widely used in our daily life due to their unique properties, 
ease, and convenience. When we look around, their presence is felt almost everywhere 
in our life such as plastic bottles (less risk for breaking and are lightweight), plastic 
bags, toys, kitchen utensils (Styrofoam cups, trays, food storage and packaging that 
preserves the shelf life of food), fishing nets, micro plastics in cosmetics, toothpaste 
and now disposable masks from the Covid-19 pandemic. As such, plastic has become 
one of the most pressing environmental threats of our time. The focus of this book 
in the water series is to explore nature based solutions and effective governance for 
anthropogenic plastic pollution. 
Velma I. Grover Preface
 
Plastics are lightweight polymers made from petro-chemical base. It is used in most 
of the things we use starting from toothpaste, clothes, makeup, computers, cars, 
etc., and is used is most of the things we do: building and construction, agriculture, 
healthcare, food distribution, transport, textile, electronics, communications and the 
list goes on. Unfortunately, it takes decades to breakdown and most plastic products 
do not fully degrade. With nearly a century of use of plastics, they have been detected 
in the air we breathe and water we drink (even in the deepest parts of ocean and 
Arctic Sea ice). 
Generally when one hears the word plastic waste, the image of plastic bottles 
come to mind but when one talks about plastic waste (and microplastic waste) the 
list is longer as it includes synthetic fibres, disposable cups, plates, cutlery, straws, 
cigarette butts, plastic bags, packaging, protective mesh, and disposable health care 
instruments such as syringes and gloves. Although plastics have become foundational 
in our lives and have revolutionized the way live, we are continually vulnerable to 
plastics due to many shortfalls in the recycling process. The focus of this book is 
not just to highlight the problem of plastics, its definition, and how plastic pollution 
is impacting human health and environment but also to look at some best practices 
in both natural solutions and in the field of law and policies. The first section of 
the book focuses on plastic pollution—it’s origin, relationship to climate change, 
linear/circular economy, followed by sustainable plastics, scientific solutions, and 
how policies can address plastic pollution. The main message in the end is that 
plastic waste is a complex problem and needs to be addressed more holistically. This 
includes looking at better designs, more sustainable feedstocks, and partnerships 
between various stakeholders, including the production industry, packaging industry, 
users, academicians/researchers, policymakers, and waste management industry. 
The principle is to have improved plastic design and products to facilitate reuse, 
repair, and recycling as suggested in the “European Strategy for Plastics in Circular 
Economy”. 
Velma I. Grover 
Gail Krantzberg 
Savitri Jetoo 
Sandhya Babel Preface to the Series iii
 
Preface v
 
 1.Plastics: Nature-Based Solutions and Effective Governance 1 
Velma I. Grover, Gail Krantzberg, Savitri Jetoo and Sandhya Babel 
 2.Driver, Trends and Fate of Plastics and Micro Plastics Occurrence	 8 
in the Environment
 
Emenda Sembiring 
 3.The Correlation Between Plastic and Climate Change	 27
 
Negin Ficzkowski and Gail Krantzberg 
 4.Plastics and Circular Economy	 46
 
Greg Zilberbrant and Eric Kassee 
 5.Seeing Is Believing: Educational and Volunteer Programming to 65
 
Address Plastic Pollution in Hamilton Harbour
 
Steven Watts, Christine Bowen and Chris McLaughlin 
 6.The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup: An Effective Approach to	 77 
Addressing Plastic Pollution in the Great Lakes
 
Melissa DeYoung, Mark Fisher and Christopher Hilkene 
 7.Microplastic Sources, Contamination, and Impacts on Aquaculture	 93 
Organisms
 
H.U.E. Imasha and S. Babel 
 8.Occurrence and Source of Microplastics Contamination in	 114 
Drinking Water and Performance of Water Treatment Plants 
in Removing Microplastics
 
Yubraj Dahal and Sandhya Babel 
 9.Regulating the Export of Plastic Waste in Canada	 144
 
Ryder LeBlanc and Gail Krantzberg 
 10.Nature-Based Solutions to Address the Plastics Problem:	 149 
Biomimicry
 
Negin Ficzkowski and Gail Krantzberg 
Contents
 viii Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. Microplastic Research in India: Current Status and Future 
Perspectives 
Arunbabu V. and E.V. Ramasamy 
161 
12. Forging Plastic Litter Governance: Addressing Acute Plastic Litter 
Pollution in Korea 
Youngjin Choi 
176 
13. The Role of International Water Law in the Management of Marine 
Plastic Pollution: The Case of China and Its Transboundary Rivers 
David J. Devlaeminck 
190 
14. The Plastic Vote: Referendum as a Governance Tool to Combat 
Plastic Pollution 
Nanuli Silagazde and Savitri Jetoo 
207 
15. Plastic Pollution Treaty: Way Forward 
Neha Junankar 
218 
Index 225 
About the Editors 227  
Chapter 1 
Plastics
 
Nature-Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Velma I. Grover,
1,* Gail Krantzberg,
1 Savitri Jetoo2 
and Sandhya Babel3 
INTRODUCTION
Plastic products are widely used in our daily life due to their unique properties, ease, 
and convenience. When we look around, their presence is felt almost everywhere 
in our life such as plastic bottles (less risk for breaking and are lightweight), plastic 
bags, toys, kitchen utensils (Styrofoam cups, trays, food storage and packaging that 
preserves the shelf life of food), fishing nets, micro plastics in cosmetics, toothpaste 
and now disposable masks from the Covid-19 pandemic. While plastics production is 
just over a century old, it was ramped up after World War II, transforming medicine, 
space travel, and safety gear (helmets, incubators, and clean drinking water equipment) 
(Parker, 2019). However, there has been an exponential increase in production from 
2.3 million tonnes in 1950 to 448 million tonnes by 2015 (Parker, 2050). This 
skyrocketing production and poor waste management have led to between 4 million and 
12 million metric tonnes of plastic entering the ocean each year; visually, this is enough 
to cover every foot of coastline on the planet, projected to triple its coastline cover 
over the next 20 years (Ocean Society, 2022). Now plastics are found in undesirable 
places,such as in drinking water, rivers, oceans, soil, inside aquatic animals and 
impacting our environment, human health, and the health of other living organisms. 
As such, plastic has become one of the most pressing environmental threats 
of our time. The rapidly increasing production rates of plastic only exacerbate the 
harmful effects and yet never-ending presence. Plastic is not only a climate change 
accelerator throughout its life cycle, but it is also responsible for nearly CAD 
8 billion in lost economic opportunity for Canada in 2019 (Wuennenberg and Tan, 
2019). Years of research and remediation efforts have highlighted the intersectional 
multidisciplinary complex nature of the plastic problem that requires solutions beyond 
1 McMaster University. 2 Åbo Akademi University. 
3 Thammasat University. 
* Corresponding author: velmaigrover@yahoo.com 2 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
waste capture. Emissions attributed to the life cycle of plastic are partly related to 
the upstream emissions from extraction and refinement of oil and gas derivatives 
feedstock as well as manufacturing processes of resin and additive plastic products; 
also partly resulting from downstream emissions from end-of-life management 
practices, be it incineration, landfill, or faulty recycling and afterlife breakdown 
events (Hamilton et al., 2019). The low economic cost of fossil-based feedstock, its 
familiar functional capabilities,and its availability are foundational in its ubiquitous 
utilization in the production of over 380 million tons annually. If continued with 
no change, the production of plastic is projected to triple by 2050 (Ellen Macarthur 
Foundation, 2016), meaning over 56 gigatons of annual global carbon emissions 
(Hamilton et al., 2019). 
The numbers tell a dire story of our relationship with plastics, e.g., every 
hour Americans throw away 2.5 million plastic bottles, totaling enough per year 
to circumnavigate the earth four times (MassDep, 2022). These plastics end up in 
undesirable places such as in drinking water sources, oceans, inside aquatic animals, 
impacting our environment, human health and the health of the environment. 
Although a lot of attention has been focused on the marine environment (the sink for 
plastic waste), the focus is now also shifting to terrestrial environments and major 
pathways of plastics or microplastics in rivers or freshwater systems to oceans. This 
book is an attempt to reveal many of these issues in a more scientific way, discuss 
the impact of plastics on human health and the health of the environment, including 
aquatic animals, and finally look at some global policy responses and technical 
solutions. It also highlights a research agenda for future work on this important topic. 
Road map 
The book is divided into three sections: a general introduction/science section, 
case studies, and policies followed by a conclusion. This chapter is followed by an 
introductory chapter to plastics, “Driver, Trends and Fate of Plastics and Microplastics 
Occurrence in the Environment”, in which the author Emenda Sembiring discusses 
the origin and types of plastics followed by some models of transport and fate of the 
microplastics that help in understanding the sources and distribution of plastics. This 
information helps the stakeholders/decision makers to develop solutions/policies to 
deal with plastic waste and microplastic problems in the environment. 
Most of the plastic-related research focuses on biodiversity and ecosystem 
degradation and the impact of both plastic production and plastic waste, while 
the contribution of plastic to the cumulative climate-relevant trace gases is often 
unrecognized. The problem of conventional plastic feed stocks is the core issue of the 
linear economy and its associated climate change stressors. The third chapter in the 
book, “The Correlation between Plastic and Climate Change” by Negin Ficzkowski 
and Gail Krantzberg explores the life cycle impacts of plastics on cumulative 
greenhouse gas emissions. It then investigates the cyclical nature of plastic pollution 
and extreme weather events. The chapter also illustrates, in brief, the impacts of 
plastic pollutants on the largest carbon sinks on earth (oceans) and investigates the 
adverse effects on global food supplies. Finally, the authors discuss landfill gas 
emissions and other land-related complications as they relate to plastic. Plastics: Nature-Based Solutions and Effective Governance 3 
Waste recycling, reuse, and other similar practices might slow down the amount 
of waste produced, but waste is still being produced; the focus is now shifting toward 
a circular economy where the idea is to eliminate waste. Instead of cradle-to-grave, 
the new designs should focus on cradle-to-cradle. The next chapter in the book, 
“Plastics and Circular Econom” focuses on circular economy principles and their 
application to the plastics sector. Authors, Greg Zilberbrant and Eric Kassee, discuss 
how valued products and services need to be redesigned to eliminate plastic pollution 
and waste. The authors also look at the problem of plastics that are destined for 
disposal or already in the natural environment and the need to recover it followed by 
a section on how policies must be established to incentivize actions that eliminate or 
recovers plastic waste and clearly disincentivizes the opposite. 
Just like anywhere else, plastic pollution is a big problem across the Laurentian 
Great Lakes. Plastic waste that ends up in these lakes originates primarily as litter on 
land and streams, rivers that provide inputs to the lakes, including Hamilton Harbour. 
Steven Watts, Christine Bowen,and Chris McLaughlin in “Seeing Is Believing: 
Educational and Volunteer Programming to Address Plastic Pollution in Hamilton 
Harbour” discuss the importance of understanding ‘plastic litter budgets’ for the 
success of future management strategies to reduce plastic litter in surface water 
bodies and avoid the negative consequences of the waste on aquatic environments. 
The authors discuss how poor public understanding of the relationship between the 
personal usage of plastics and the growing problem of plastic waste reaching surface 
waters presents a significant challenge to reducing the plastic problem. However, 
using Hamilton Harbour as a case study, the authors also show that a variety of 
community engagement activities and programs can improve public understanding 
and consequently create opportunities to advance behavioral and policy changes. 
As discussed by authors in the chapter, Hamilton Harbour has improved in terms 
of access to the waterfront, better water quality, etc., resulting from efforts to 
engage the broader community with programs and activities that provide teaching 
opportunities and tangible experiences for the public. Although it is easier to work 
on issues that are readily seen and sometimes readily sniffed,such as algae blooms 
and sewage bypasses,issues that are not as tangible, such as the extent and impacts 
of microplastics, require more focused efforts to educate and engage community 
members. The authors describe how the Bay Area Restoration Council is working 
toward providing and translating scientific research on microplastics and improving 
understanding of microplastics, a problem that will require multiple avenues to 
eradicate. 
An estimated 10,000 metric tonnes of plastic waste flows into the Great Lakes 
annually, which is primarily due to ineffective waste diversion and recovery. A suite 
of coordinated actions is required to address the systemic causes of plastic pollution 
and its impacts on our critical freshwater ecosystems. This chapter, “The Great 
Lakes Plastic Cleanup: An Effective Approach to Addressing Plastic Pollution in the 
Great Lakes”, introduces the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup, an initiative of Pollution 
Probe and the Council of the Great Lakes Region with support from a network of 
collaborators aimed at addressing plastic pollution through the use of innovative 
plastic capture technologies to collect plastic before it enters the lakes and cleans 
up that which has already found its way there. The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup 4 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
 
 
uniquely combines a focus on removing plastic from the environment, community 
outreach and engagement, and the collection of locally-relevant data that can further 
inform regulatory and policy decisions. Framed as a case study, the authors (Melissa 
De Young, Mark Fisher, and Christopher Hilkene) present initial data and program 
strategies in the context of exploring how to effectively address plastic pollution and 
identifying areas where further research and action are needed. 
Plastics are extensively used by the aquaculture sector from packaging to the 
manufacturing of various equipment. A considerable portion of equipment and other 
materials that are used in aquaculture culminate in marine and other aquaculture 
environments as waste. A variety of aquatic organisms, across different trophic levels, 
can absorb or consume microplastics (MP) readily. The next chapter “Microplastics 
Sources, Contamination and Impacts on Aquaculture Organisms” summarizes 
the current status of research that has been carried out on the detection of MPs in 
aquaculture organisms; MP pollution in mussels, MP sources in an aquaculture 
environment, mechanisms of interactions with organisms, contamination and effects 
on biota. The authors considered how various aquaculture organisms, such as mussels, 
sourced from farmed, wild environments and markets from around the world were 
reported to be polluted with MPs. As explained by authors, H.U.E. Imasha and 
S. Babel, the annual dietary intake of MPs through European shellfish can be high as 
11,000 MPs per year. These findings show that the consumption of seafood can be a 
direct way of human exposure to MPs. Exposure of biota to MPs results in adverse 
physical damages and cellular and molecular level toxic effects, sometimes even 
leading to death. MPs’ toxicity experiments on humans are still at an infancy level, 
making it hard to accurately determine the adverse effects on human health. This 
chapter argues for the necessity of more research regarding the toxicological effects 
of MP pollution on human health, which is still at nascent levels. 
Yubraj Dahal and Sandhya Babel in “Occurrence and Source of Microplastics 
Contamination in Drinking Water and Subsequent Performance of Water Treatment 
Plants”present an overview of the occurrence and source of MPs in drinking water 
(tap water and bottled water). The abundance of the small-sized MPs has been 
observed to be considerably higher in bottled and treated water compared to larger 
plastic fractions. The authors also discuss the efficacy of drinking water treatment 
plants in removing the MPs. 
The next section of the book focuses on what is being done in terms of 
governance and policy aspects to control/regulate plastic waste. The first chapter 
of this section is a case study of Canada, “Regulating the Export of Plastic Waste 
in Canada”, by Ryder LeBlanc and Gail Krantzberg. Despite Canada’s municipal 
recycling programs and the best intentions of its environmentally conscious citizens, 
plastic waste continues to be a serious issue both at home and internationally. News 
coverage in recent years has revealed how much waste has been shipped abroad, 
especially to Southeast Asia, where it continues to cause widespread pollution and 
threaten human health. In January 2021, Canada agreed to amendments to the Basel 
Convention, which made it nearly impossible to ship plastic waste overseas. The 
United States (US), though a signatory to this convention, has not ratified it and the 
plastic waste trade between Canada and the US lacks the regulations required to 
prevent the US from acting as a loophole for Canadian exporters. Therefore, a policy Plastics: Nature-Based Solutions and Effective Governance 5 
gap exists in this area. Based on current political trends in the US, it is unlikely that 
they will ratify the Basel Convention or support any legally binding agreements with 
Canada, so it is recommended that Canada revoke its agreement with the U.S. to 
ensure it can meet its international and domestic commitments on plastic waste. 
The advent of plastic addressed many immediate needs for human society, 
incrementally creating a culture wherein eliminating it from the market is difficult 
to envision. Most of the efforts to deal with the adverse effects are focused on 
replacing its feedstock rather than rethinking the underlying design. As discussed 
by NeginFiczkowski and Gail Krantzberg in, “Nature Based Solutions to Address 
the Plastics Problem: Biomimicry”, there has been a shift toward using renewable 
biomass sources, such as corn, cassava, sugar beet, sugar cane, or cellulose, that offer 
potentials for reducing the overall environmental impacts of the produced waste. The 
increasing appetite for solutions in this category has created a market that is nearly 
saturated with what is commonly known as ‘bioplastics’ which, contrary to popular 
belief, does not inherently address the emissions or pollution issues attributed to 
conventional fossil-based plastic. From a design standpoint, the pattern continues 
to follow the linear model of take-make-use-dispose, resulting in burden shifting 
throughout the life cycle of these products. In the case of the plastic crisis, any 
effective solution should simultaneously consider the environmental and climate 
costs resulting from systemic complexities and failures of the plastic industry over 
the past century. This chapter investigates the opportunities this shift provides for 
Canada, the existing barriers, and the changes required within the Canadian landscape 
to allow for such innovative ventures to become mainstream. 
In line with the international scenario, microplastic research in India has 
also gained momentum during the last few years, as evidenced by the increasing 
number of publications. In this context, in the next chapter “Microplastic Research 
in India: Current Status and Future Perspective” authors Arunbabu V. and 
E.V. Ramasamy review the scientific data related to microplastic research in India. 
This chapter summarizes the data on microplastics from various environmental 
matrices, such as marine, freshwater, and terrestrial. Microplastics in biota and 
food items destined for human consumption were also given due importance. The 
contaminants commonly adsorbed on the surface of microplastics and the additives 
used in plastics are discussed with respect to their impact on living organisms. 
The authors have examined the existing policies and regulations in India and have 
proposed some solutions to control microplastics. The chapter also identifies the 
major challenges facing microplastic research in India and identifies the priority 
areas for future research. 
Just like anywhere else in the world, daily living in South Korea also involves 
the use of a lot of plastic products, such as straws, cups and drinking bottles, and 
meal boxes and parcels wrapped in plastics ordered on line. The increasing use of 
plastic (leading to more waste) and the ban on exporting this waste to China and other 
Southeastern countries have led to rising trash mountains in the countryside. This has 
also led the legal enforcement in the country to become more stringent. The resulting 
increase in plastic waste in the environment compelled the Korean government 
to commit to cutting plastic waste by 2030. Youngjin Choi in, “Forging Plastic 
Governance: Addressing Acute Plastic Pollution in Korea”, examines plastic use and 6 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
suggests solutions on how to reduce plastic waste, such as the use of biodegradable 
plastics, while demonstrating environmental politics and forging multilayered plastic 
governance on plastic use and recycling in South Korea. 
Since the plastics problem (especially in oceans) is global, solutions will require 
a multifaceted approach with cooperation at all levels, including the State-State 
level. International law provides one such framework which can enable state-state 
cooperation on issues of international concern, in this case, both the law of the sea 
and the law of international watercourses. Mostly 10 river systems are blamed for 
transporting plastics into oceans and eight of these are in Asia; each of which flows 
partially through China’s territory. Four of them are trans boundary and therefore 
fall under international law. In the next chapter “The Role of International Water 
Law in the Management of Marine Plastic Pollution: The Case of China and its 
Trans boundary Rivers”, David J. Devlaeminck explores the role of international 
law in the governance of marine plastics from rivers with a focus on China and its 
neighbors, highlighting pathways for China, which sent shock waves through the 
plastics industry with a ban on plastic waste imports in 2018 to play a leading role in 
combatting marine plastic in regards to its transboundary rivers. 
There are various policy tools that can be used to combat plastic pollution. 
Nanuli Silagazde and Savitri Jetoo explore one such governance tool, referendum, in 
“The Plastic Vote: Referendum as a Governance Tool to Combat Plastic Pollution”. 
Direct democracy is a vital element of governance in the United States that has 
been applied to resolve a wide range of policies. In recent decades over a hundred 
environmental issues have been put on popular vote addressing issues,such as energy, 
forests, natural resources and water. Despite the widespread use of referendums 
in this domain, there have been only two popular votes on plastic—in the state of 
California in 2016 and the city of Seattle in 2009. Both referendums were sponsored 
by the industry to overturn the previously imposed ban on single-use plastics with 
two contrasting outcomes. This chapter investigates why these referendums occurred 
in the first place, the narrative used in the campaigns and other factors contributing 
to their adoption or rejection by the public. Most importantly, it examines whether 
referendums can be viewed as an effective tool of governance in combatting the 
problem of plastic pollution. All these aspects gain additional weight amid COVID-19 
since hard-won plastic bag bans have been suspended in various communities and 
the plastics industry is seizing the moment and lobbying for further changes in the 
legislation. 
Considering the current global plastic waste situation, there are two urgent issues 
to be addressed: one is to reduce the volume of uncontrolled or mismanaged waste 
streams going into the water bodies (including oceans) and the other is to increase 
the level of recycling (UNEP 2021). There is also a need for a legally binding global 
treaty. In the final chapter of the book, “Plastic Pollution Treaty: Way forward”, 
Neha Jununkar looks at some of the existing treaties, such as the Basel Treaty and 
its amendment, and discusses the most recent treaty to deal with plastic waste, “End 
Pollution Treaty”, its draft form and the way forward to a better future. Plastics: Nature-Based Solutions and Effective Governance 7 
Conclusion 
As can be seen from the discussion above, plastic waste is a complex problem and 
needs to be addressed more holistically. This includes looking at better designs, more 
sustainable feedstock,and partnerships between various stakeholders, including 
the production industry, packaging industry, users, academicians/researchers, 
policymakers, and waste management industry. The idea is to have improved plastic 
design and products to facilitate reuse, repair, and recycling as suggested in the 
“European Strategy for Plastics in Circular Economy”. 
References 
MassDep. 2022. News. Plastics. Presented by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of 
Environmental Protection. Accessed online on Aug 16, 2022 at 8:30 am at (https://thegreenteam. 
org/recycling-facts/). 
Ocean Society. 2022. The Ocean Plastic Pollution Problem. The Ocean Society. Accessed online on 
Aug 16, 2022, at 10:00 am at (https://www.oceanicsociety.org/resources/7-ways-to-reduce-ocean￾plastic-pollution-today/). 
Parker, L. 2019. The World’s plastic pollution crisis explained. National Geographic June 7, 2019. 
Accessed online Aug 16, 2022 at 9:57 am at( https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/ 
article/plastic-pollution).Chapter 2
 
Driver, Trends and Fate of Plastics 
and Micro Plastics Occurrence in 
the Environment
 Emenda Sembiring 
BACKGROUND
Plastics and microplastics (MPs) have become one of the world’s significant 
environmental issues in this decade; this condition occurs because of the massive 
usage of plastic-based products. Plastics are not only widely distributed but are 
also persistent in the environment. Plastics and MP sources are mostly diverted 
from the land and are transported into the ocean through the freshwater system. A 
comprehensive understanding of the source, fate, transport of plastics, and MPs is 
needed. Models of transport and fate of the MPs can be complementary information 
to understand the source and distribution of this polymer and help the stakeholders to 
overcome the plastic waste and MPs problem in the environment. 
Before the definition of modern plastic, the term ‘plastics’ referred to anything 
that could be easily molded; the name is derived from the Latin plasticus and the 
ancient Greek plastikos. Recently, plastic materials have frequently been described 
by their physical qualities, owing to their lightweight, persistence, and durability as 
well as their capacity to efficiently insulate heat and electricity (Thompson et al., 
2009). 
Plastics are polymer compounds that are made from naphtha. Naphtha is a 
product of distilled crude oil to form a simpler molecule structure, like ethylene 
and propylene. Then the molecules are chemically bound to form a polymer, such 
as polyethylene and polypropylene, which is called synthetic resin. Before it can be 
used to form plastic products, it needs to be melted and added to some additives to 
Air and Waste Management Research Group, Faculty of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Institute 
Technology Bandung, Jalan Ganesha 10, Bandung, Indonesia. 
Email: emenda@itb.ac.id Driver, Fate, Microplastics 9 
form a pellet. From this point onward the pellet can be called plastic. The plasticscan 
then be shipped to manufacture to form a plastic product. 
Plastics are defined chemically as synthetic organic polymers which are 
generated from the polymerization of monomers taken from crude oil or natural gas. 
Celluloid is often regarded as the first man-made plastic substance, even though it 
is composed entirely of nitrocellulose. Currently, the type of plastics includes bio￾based plastics. Bio-based polymers differ from synthetic organic polymers only in 
their isotopic made-up of oil-based polymers. Even if this bio-based polymer is 
biodegradable, it should still be classified as plastic. 
Plastics are engineered to be persistent and are designed as durable materials 
so that they will degrade very slowly up to a thousand years. If plastic consumption 
increases overtime, eventually there will be a need for more space to dispose of plastic 
waste. Burning plastic is not recommended as it will emit toxic fumes. Despite all 
benefits of using plastic materials, the manufacturing of plastics often creates large 
quantities of chemical pollutants as plastics production consumes 4% of crude oil, 
and it still consumes nonrenewable resources. 
Plastic mass manufacture began in the 1950s, and it has risen 200-fold since 
then. Now, the yearly worldwide plastic output is projected to be 300 million tons 
(Napper et al., 2015), while total global production has reached 8.3 billion metric 
tons (Geyer et al., 2017). Over half of all plastic is used for single-use disposable 
products, mostly packaging (Xanthos and Walker, 2017). The plastics industry uses 
resin identification codes (RICs) to define and classify polymers; this categorization 
enables more efficient plastic recycling. This method was pioneered by the Society of 
the Plastics Industry (SPI) (The Plastics Industry Trade Association 2015). Figure 1 
depicts the many types of plastics classified by their code and polymer composition. 
Fig. 1. Plastic Category.  
 
 
 
 
 
10 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
The types of plastics commonly used for daily activities and industry are generally 
described as follows. 
1. PET is a polymer composed of linear polyesters (PES). Polyester is a very 
versatile plastic polymer with the same ester bond as vinyl chloride (–COO). 
These bonds account for a very little portion of the molecule’s chemical 
structure. PET was patented in 1941, even though polyester resins were first 
synthesized in 1883. PET is the fundamental constituent of synthetic polyester 
fibers; therefore, it is widely used in clothes, ropes, and carpet fibers. PET is 
used in almost all mineral water bottles. 
2. Polyethylene (PE) is the simplest organic polymer with a simple linear polymer. 
PE was initially marketed in 1933 and has been extensively used ever since 
owing to its cheap cost, superior electrical insulating characteristics, high 
chemical resistance, simplicity of manufacturing, high durability, flexibility, 
and transparency in thin film forms. Additionally, high-density polyethylene 
(HDPE) is extensively utilized in a variety of applications, including insulating 
electrical equipment and bottles. Meanwhile, low-density polyethylene (LDPE) 
bags are extensively utilized. 
3. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is a vinyl chloride polymer that is synthesized through 
a copper catalyst reaction with oxygen and hydrogen chloride. The method 
of vinyl chloride polymerization was developed in 1872. PVC is a colorless, 
rigid substance that is brittle and unstable. As a result, additional chemicals are 
required to convert them into useable plastic materials. These polymers are then 
utilized in a variety of everyday and industrial applications, including pipes. 
4. Polypropylene (PP) is formed when propylene is polymerized; this method 
was discovered in 1954 but commercial usage began in 1957. PP is typically 
a durable material. Additionally, this substance has the lowest density of any 
plastic. Plasticized polypropylene is extensively used in packaging, textile fibers 
(textiles, ropes, and carpets), and films. 
5. Since the early 1930s, polystyrene (PS) has been marketed. This is because 
this type of plastic is inexpensive to manufacture, is transparent, has excellent 
electrical insulating qualities, and is stiff and simple to shape. These aromatic 
polymers are available in solid or foamed forms and are utilized in a broad 
range of applications, including packaging, food containers, and construction 
materials. 
6. Other kinds of plastic (O), this category includes plastics produced from a 
variety of sources that are not classified as other types of plastic throughout the 
codification process. Examples of plastics classified as “O” include polyamide 
(PA) and polycarbonate (PC) as well as other kinds of plastic that have seen 
increased usage in recent years, such as PUR or polyurethane. 
Driver and Trends 
There are several factors that drive the increase in plastic usage. The drivers can be 
divided into two types, namely intrinsic property, and external influences. The intrinsic Driver, Fate, Microplastics 11 
property relates to the beneficial property of plastics, such as versatility, lighter than 
other substitutes, durability, ability to tailor to meet specific technical needs, resistance 
to some chemicals, especially water, and to some extent good safety and hygiene 
property for food package and has excellent thermal insulation. It can be predicted 
that the intrinsic property will only explain the gradual pattern of consumption, not 
the dramatic increase in consumption. Currently, most countries consume plastics 
20 times higher than in the past 50 years ago (Waste Watch, 2006). The presumption 
is that external influences, such as economic growth, lifestyle, urbanization,and 
technological process contribute more to the pattern of the dramatic increase. 
Economic growth is the major factor to boost plastics usage. By using the 
GDP as an indicator of economic growth, it is found that the higher the GDP per 
capita, the more plastic consumption per capita (Fig. 2) (Ritchie, 2018). The other 
concern related to economic growth is the rise of the middle-class groups in the 
Asia Pacific region. The young middle-class population will be the driving force in 
Asian countries. The arrival of a billion more middle-class consumers will speed up 
the shift of East Asian economies from focusing on export-led development to more 
consumption-driven growth (McKinsey Report, 2007). The rise of middle class in 
China and India is most likely to enjoy the same lifestyle as in developed countries 
(McKinsey Report, 2007). This consumption-hungry group has the financial ability 
and desire to spend their growing income on luxurious products, not only to survive 
with enough food but also on high-quality food, a comfortable living environment, 
and personal beauty. This middle-class group asked for a more sophisticated lifestyle 
and quality of life (QoL).Unfortunately, the increase in QoL usually relates to more 
consumption and a change in lifestyle to be more practical. For example, nowadays 
in most Asian countries, more urban societies prefer to shop at the supermarket where 
most of the food is wrapped in plastics, instead of going to a traditional market which 
hardly uses plastic materials to wrap food. It is convenient, but it contributes to more 
plastics package used in the environment. 
Fig. 2. Plastics Consumption Versus GDP. 12 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
The improvement in financial ability and the availability of a wider range of 
products led to a change in the consumption pattern. In other words, people’s lifestyle 
has changed and the quality of life (QoL) has improved. China, for example, follows 
this pattern. In 1978, China was dominated by the agricultural sector and since 1842, 
it shifted to be a more industrial country (Guan and Hubacek, 2004). This period 
showed only a slight change in people’s demands and lifestyles. On the contrary, 
since 1978, because of the policy and infrastructure support, economic development 
has increased dramatically. The production of a wider range of products and the 
high purchasing power of consumers led to dramatic changes in lifestyle in China. 
Fig. 3 (Zhixin et al., 2002) shows that increase in purchasing power will increase the 
expenditure on food and clothes. Again,more consumption of food and clothes will 
contribute toward more packaging waste, especially if it is followed by changes in 
lifestyle. 
Most Asian countries have transformed their economy from depending on the 
agriculture sector to the industrial sector. Shifting structure affects the occupational 
of people. More rural peasants come to the urban area seeking jobs. It is expected 
that more rapid urbanization will occur in the next 25 years in most Asian countries. 
More people will live in urban cities, which have their lifestyles and characteristics. 
As a consequence, the urban lifestyle consumes more food and clothes than the 
rural lifestyle (Fig. 4) (Zhixin et al., 2002). According to Huang and Bouis (2001), 
urbanization has significant influences on food demand. Changes in marketing 
systems and occupational changes are closely linked with increasing GNP per 
capita and also may influence the demand for food. Similarly, Korea demonstrated 
that structural changes in food demand because of the changing income has been a 
significant factor for the rapid changes in dietary patterns in East Asia over the past 
three decades (Huang and Boui, 2001). 
Based on the three above-mentioned paragraphs, the drivers of both intrinsic 
factors and external properties change the consumption pattern. People consume 
more, especially food in this case. The relation of change in food consumption habit 
and plastics waste relate to the current trend in how manufacturers, producers, and 
retailers use wrapping materials. The current trend of technology in food processing 
leads to more plastics that are used as packaging materials. More processed food, 
ready-made food, and fast food are readily available in the market. Because of the 
availability of these convenient foods and changes in the food consumption habit, 
Fig. 3. The Rural expenditure on food and cloth pattern. Driver, Fate, Microplastics 13 
Fig. 4. The comparison of rural and urban expenditure on food and cloth. 
more and more packaging waste will be thrown away in the environment. A similar 
case occurred during the Covid-19 pandemic that led to changes in consumer 
behavior toward the online market. More buying from the online marketplace means 
more packaging waste will be generated. 
In addition, the improvement of injection molding and extrusion machines and 
high-speed food processing machinery increases the possibility of various foods being 
processed and wrapped with packaging material, especially plastics. For example, an 
increase in the technology and characteristics of plastic film that film can balance the 
respiration of oxygen (O2
) and carbon dioxide (CO2
) so that it will increase the food’s 
life span. The food wrapper, especially for vegetables and fruits, can exchange gases 
better and in turn, it will enhance their life span. If this technology is applied, the 
food life span can be increased. However, as a consequence, more plastic waste will 
introduce into the environment. 
Global Plastic Debris and MP Models in The Ocean Studies 
Plastic and MPs have become one of the world’s biggest environmental issues in this 
decade. This condition occurs because of the massive usage of plastic-based products 
being widely distributed, and this polymer is persistent in the environment. In 2015, 
a global model shows countries that diverted plastic waste into the ocean. Countries 
such as China, Indonesia,and the Philippines were identified as three major countries 
responsible for releasing plastics wastes into the ocean (Jambeck et al., 2015). Most 
of the studies show that the source of plastic debris and MPs were mainly coming 
from land. A current study on global MPs’ mass balance shows hundred to thousands 
of plastic debris in the ocean (Lebreton et al., 2019). It takes time before the plastics 
emission from the land bases can accumulate in the ocean. Most of the global 
plastics debris model input was based on population density, level of urbanization 
and industrialization, and source of plastics/MPs (GESAMP, 2015; Jambeck, 2015). 
The current model has been refined to include hydrological information, such as 
topography information, rainfall, and catchment area (Lebreton, 2016). The river 
located in Asia accounted for 67% of the global total of plastic debris in the ocean. 14 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Table 1. Global Plastics Waste Debris. 
Study Generation of Plastics Debris Remarks 
Jambeck et al., 
2015 
4.8–12.7 million MT/year Population density and economic status are 
the main input of the model. Population 
size and quality of solid waste management 
determine the country’s contribution to plastic 
and marine debris. 
Lebreton et al., 
2016 
1.15–2.41 million MT/year from the 
river to the ocean. 
Runoff plays a significant role in plastic waste 
emissions into the ocean. Significant sources 
are wastewater and tributaries, while the 
significant sink is weirs. 
Lebreton et al., 
2019 
There is 65% of global plastics 
production. Clarifies the global 
prediction gap; hundreds to 
thousands of MT plastics have been 
accumulated in the ocean. 
Mitigation: (1) reduces emissions and 
(2) removes the accumulation in the 
environment. 
A typical model based on Lebreton et al. (2019) not only shows the source of 
waste based on population density but also includes the mismanaged waste from solid 
waste facilities (PPC). The model improvement now also includes the hydrological 
data. 
Plastics in the ocean are present not only in the form of debris but also in the 
form of MPs. MPs are generally defined as synthetic polymers less than 5 mm (Klein 
et al., 2015; Thompson et al., 2009). These pollutants can be distributed by various 
routes of transport, including river flow, wastewater discharge, wind, and runoff 
(Gall and Thompson, 2015). In addition, MPs can also come from various sources 
but in general, the main source of these MPs is human activities in terrestrial and 
aquatic environments. The terrestrial environment is the main source, based on the 
percentage of MPs from this source, which is around 80%, while marine activities 
contribute only about 20% (Andrady, 2011). Based on the process of formation of 
MPs, it can be divided into two types. The first is primary MPs, the plastics that are 
already in micro-size and usually found in cleaning and cosmetic products (Cole et 
al., 2011b). The second source is secondary MP, and this type is formed from bigger 
plastics in the environment and fragmented into micro-sized plastic (Browne et al., 
2011). 
This pollutant is widely distributed, and MPs have been found almost in every 
freshwater system in the world (Eerkes-Medrano et al., 2015) and even in Antarctica 
(Isobe et al., 2017; Lusher et al., 2015) and spreads from the surface water to the 
sediment (van Cauwenberghe et al., 2013). The very wide distribution pattern is 
strongly influenced by the flow and circulation of water, yet the characteristics of 
MPs, such as density, shape, and size, also affect the distribution of MPs (Ng and 
Obbard, 2006). A recent study shows that the freshwater system in Southeast Asia 
is also polluted by MPs. A review of marine MPs’ abundance in the ASEAN ocean 
was conducted and showed that almost all countries in this region are polluted by 
this polymer (Curren et al., 2021). MPs are also found in the river in ASEAN region; 
for example, in the Chao Phraya River (Thailand) (Ta and Babel, 2020) and Citarum Driver, Fate, Microplastics 15 
River (Sembiring et al., 2020), a recent study found that this contaminant polluted 
one of the biggest reservoirs in Indonesia (Ramadan and Sembiring, 2020). 
MP is found in all areas of the freshwater system based on this condition, and 
there is a need to systematically understand the fate of transportation of MPs in 
the freshwater system. The current study of MPs’ abundance and characteristics can 
become the baseline for the development of MP models. 
MPs’ Conceptual Model for the Fate and Transport in 
Freshwater System
 
The abundance of MPs in freshwater systems originates from various types of 
sources, such as effluent from waste water treatment plants, direct disposal of plastic 
into water bodies, storm water runoff, plastic leakage from solid waste management, 
and atmospheric deposition (Fig. 1) (Lu et al., 2021). When primary MPs enter 
the water bodies,density, polymer type (Browne et al., 2011), and shape (He et al., 
2019; Khatmullina and Isachenko, 2017) impact the dispersion of MPs. Secondary 
MPs will have different dispersion mechanisms due to the occurrence of these MPs 
which originate from the fragmentation of bigger plastic. The fragmentation process 
of MP in the environment is affected by the physical abrasion photo degradation 
and biodegradation by weakening the surface of MPs (Song et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 
2020). Transport and fate processes in the freshwater system have been affected by 
many processes; for example, in the water, advection, dispersion, and diffusion will 
make the MPs’ distribution varied (Daily and Hoffman, 2020; Kooi et al., 2017). 
Based on the source, MPs can be divided into primary and secondary sources. 
Primary sources are micro-sized plastic polymers which are found in cleaning and 
cosmetic products, such as scrubbers as well as pellets that are produced for use as 
raw materials for plastic production (Cole et al., 2011a; Fendall and Sewell, 2009). 
The secondary source of MPs is in the form of fibers or fragments resulting from the 
fragmentation of larger plastics (Browne et al., 2011). MPs from these secondary 
sources are often associated with areas of high population density (Ballent et al., 
2013; Desforges et al., 2014). In addition, according to (Hidalgo-Ruz et al., 2012) 
secondary sources are the largest source that causes an abundance of MPs in the 
marine environment (Fig. 5). 
MP transports in lotic ecosystems, such as reservoirs and lakes,which have a 
different mechanism to the MP model in the lentic ecosystem, such as rivers. The 
mechanism in this environment tends to distribute slowly and the mechanism, such 
as sinking and wind-affected movements, tends to make this ecosystem different 
from lotic ecosystems, such as rivers. Furthermore, mixing processes in lakes are 
often complex to model because of vertical stratification and the lake geometry or 
bathymetry. Moreover, in rivers, the flow is substantially faster than in lakes and 
will contribute to the advection flow component value which is typically above the 
dispersion value (Ji, 2008). 
Several modeling efforts are conducted in recent years, the model includes an 
emission-based model, a global model, a spatial-temporal model, and hydrodynamic 
models in lakes or reservoirs. 16 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Fig. 5. Plastics and MPs’ Transport and Fate Scheme. 
Emission-based model 
The emission model was conducted in several studies; for example, the study in the 
Netherlands (van Wezel et al., 2016) estimated the MPs’ emission from the WWTP 
effluent. Emissions were calculated based on the known usage of MPs in cosmetics 
and personal care items, cleaning agents, and paints and coatings. Data on product 
use, market penetration, and MP content in the product were gathered for each 
product category. During the wastewater treatment process, it was calculated that 
between 40 and 96% of the MPs would be retained by the WWTP. The predicted 
concentration of MPs in a WWTP effluent was calculated as the product of the 
MPs’ concentration in a product, the daily usage of that product, the fraction of MPs 
removed during wastewater treatment and the market penetration of the products 
that is divided by the volume of wastewater produced by the model. When ‘big and 
heavy’ particles, i.e., particles with a relatively high density, large size, and large 
volume were supposed to be observed, the model best-matched data. The observed 
concentrations, on the other hand, comprise both primary and secondary plastics, but 
the model only included primary plastics which might result in a higher error to the 
claimed validation. 
Moreover, the recent study about emissions conducted by Kawecki and Nowack 
(2020) utilized geographical information on land-use statistics, traffic and population 
densities, wastewater treatment facilities, and combined sewer overflows as proxies 
to regionalize macroplastic (MaP) and MP emissions for soil, freshwater, and air. 
The emission data for seven commonly used polymers (low-density polyethylene, 
high-density polyethylene (HDPE), polypropylene (PP), polystyrene, expanded 
polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride, and polyethylene-terephthalate) were used to create 
high-resolution maps of emissions for MPs and macroplastics. 
Spatiotemporally explicit models in rivers 
In recent years, the development of spatiotemporal MP models in the river took 
into consideration the river characteristics and particle process in the surface water. Driver, Fate, Microplastics 17 
The first model developed by Besseling et al. (2017) for Dommel River used the 
NanoDUFLOW hydrological model that comprises an advective method of transport, 
homo aggregation and heteroaggregation of particles, biofouling, sedimentation/ 
resuspension, plastic degradation, and sedimentary burial. The model is not yet 
formally validated due to the limited monitoring data. This model is the continuation 
of a model by Quik et al. (2015) for nanomaterials in neutral waters. 
The second study of spatiotemporal also conducted by Nizzetto et al. (2016) 
was entirely theoretical as no empirical data on emissions and concentrations of MPs 
were available. The model is based on the current multimedia hydrobiogeo chemical 
model, INCA contaminants with a transport sediment module, a rainfall-runoff 
module, and the option of adding inputs of direct effluents, such as the WWTPs. 
It is a lumped model because it assumes a uniform distribution of rainfall and 
temperature. Surface runoff and effluent inputs, as well as reentry into the system 
via resuspension, were all factored into the model. The amount of MP accessible for 
mobilization, the transport capacity of the overland flow for both MPs and sediments, 
and the detachment of plastics through splash erosion and flow erosion all had a role 
in whether particles were carried by surface runoff. 
The latest MPs’ model used estimation in tire wear particles and transportation 
to the Göta River, Sweden, uses hydrodynamic modeling (Bondelind et al., 2020). 
The goal of this study was to see how the size and density of tire wear particles in 
road run-off affected their fate in Sweden’s Göta River. MIKE 3 FM software was 
used to create a model of the river, Sweden’s largest river, going through Gothenburg 
(Sweden’s second-largest city) and out to the sea. The following MP parameters 
were defined using literature data: storm water concentrations, prevalent particle 
sizes, the density of MP typically found in road run-off and settling velocities. The 
vertical water density gradient generated by salt water from the Kattegat strait has a 
significant impact on the river’s mixing processes and MPs’ concentrations. While 
most MP with a greater density and bigger size settle in the river, smaller MP with 
a density of less than 1.0 g/cm3 do not and therefore reach the Kattegat strait and 
marine region. 
Spatiotemporally explicit models in lakes 
The recent study of MP modeling, the three-dimensional transport, and distribution 
of multiple MP polymer types, in Lake Erie was conducted by Daily and Hoffman 
(2020). The model simulated the motion of plastic pollution in Lake Erie affected by 
advection, density-driven sinking, and turbulent mixing using a Lagrangian transport 
model to explore the distribution of plastic in the water column and sediment. The 
model tracks particles that hit the bottom to represent deposition, and it includes 
nine polymer types that account for over 75% of predicted global plastic waste. To 
calibrate the model and derive estimates for the mass of plastic in the lake volume and 
the flux of plastic into the sediment, the model’s spatial distributions are compared 
to surface samples. The mass estimate of 381 ± 204 metric tons is two orders of 18 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
magnitude higher than earlier surface estimates, although it is still a small proportion 
of the annual inflow expected. The findings represent a step toward resolving the 
plastic mass balance in Lake Erie and gaining a better understanding of plastic transit 
into the sediment. 
Plastic Leakage from Land to the Waterways 
Plastics enter the marine environment through a number of routes, including river 
and atmospheric transmission, beach littering, and direct discharge at sea through 
aquaculture, shipping, and fishing (GESAMP Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific 
Aspects of Marine Environmental Protection, 2015). However, in comparison to 
marine-based sources, land-based sources are regarded to be the primary source 
of plastics in the seas (Jambeck et al., 2015). The origins of plastic waste in and 
around freshwater systems are directly connected to human activity since the 
amount of plastic in rivers is highly correlated with population density, urbanization, 
wastewater treatment, and waste management (Best, 2019). Additionally, landfills, 
the most prevalent method of disposing of solid waste, are the primary repository 
and disperser of plastic. MPs, including primary and secondary MPs, are also 
generated in landfills (He et al., 2019a). Numerous natural processes (e.g., rain and 
wind) contribute to the spread of landfilled MPs into surrounding ecosystems such 
as aquatic systems (Yadav et al., 2020). 
Plastic waste enters river systems by natural transport mechanisms or direct 
dumping as a result of a lack of MSW or inappropriate community behavior. Once 
plastic enters the river, hydrological parameters like water level, flow velocity, 
and discharge impact plastic transport (van Emmerik et al., 2018). The fate of 
macroplastics that enter freshwater systems remains a major uncertainty in studies 
on river plastic transport. Generally, it is thought that all plastics found in rivers 
end up in the ocean. However, a substantial portion of plastic pollution (99%) is 
never discovered afloat in the seawater and is therefore deemed “lost” (Gigault et 
al., 2018; van Sebille et al., 2018). Recent research indicates that these plastics sunk 
under the water surface (Choy et al., 2019). Additionally, the polymer type, shape, 
and size of plastic are essential factors in the fate of plastics or MPs. It has been 
discovered that the characteristics of plastic have a significant effect on how plastics 
are distributed in the environment (Schwarz et al., 2019). Plastics’ fates in freshwater 
systems are highly reliant on three processes: (1) transport, (2) accumulation, and (3) 
the degradation processes that all plastics develop in the environment. A secondary 
stream of micro- and nano-plastics is generated, while the macro-plastic degrades 
(Andrady, 2017). 
According to Browne et al. (2011), plastic waste in the aquatic environment 
can be degraded by various processes, including biological, ultraviolet (UV), 
thermal, physical and thermo-oxidizing hydrolysis. For most types of LDPE and 
HDPE, polypropylene (PP) and nylon are degraded by a photo-oxidation process 
using UV-B light which is followed by thermal oxidation degradation. When plastic 
is exposed to UV-B light, chemical polymer bonds become unstable, resulting in 
structural damage. This degradation process might result in macromolecular particles Driver, Fate, Microplastics 19 
Fig. 6. The Effect of Fragmentation and the Sorption of Toxic Organic Compounds Onto Plastic 
Fragments on Marine Organisms. 
degrading into micromolecules and even nanomolecules (Cole et al., 2011a; Galgani 
et al., 2013). The fragmentation process is shown in Fig. 6 (Masry et al., 2021). 
Additionally, these fragments are often degraded biologically by the metabolism 
of particular bacteria and/or fungi which degrade the polymer structure via enzymes 
or secretory secretions. Moreover, oligomers and monomers will enter the cytoplasm 
where they will undergo mineralization, converting the plastic pieces into energy 
and structural components of the cell (carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur, etc.) 
(Andrady, 2011). The process of plastic mineralization is predicted to take hundreds 
to thousands of years (Barnes et al., 2009). Pressure, friction, and stress contribute to 
the brittleness, fracture, or damage of MPs, such as fiber decay during the washing 
process, pressure forces on waves, and wind friction forces (Barnes et al., 2009). 
Potential Solution to the Plastics Waste Problem 
Based on the discussion above, it is clear how important waste management is, 
especially plastic waste management to prevent plastic waste leakage into the ocean 
(Lebreton et al., 2017; 2019; Best, 2019). Some plastics waste management practices 
include as following. 
Plastic bag management 
There are numerous examples of how plastic bag policy is applied in several 
countries with varying degrees of outputs/outcomes. The policy instruments range 
from the traditional approach [such as command and controls (CACs)], capital 
approaches[such as economic instruments (EIs)], or more related to ethics and 
behavior [such as voluntary action (VAs)]. The command-and-control instruments 
include product bans or fines on littering plastic bags, and the EIs include taxes and 20 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
levies of products at producers, retailers, or consumers, whereas the voluntary actions 
include of promotion of alternative bags or following a certain code of conduct. 
Tackling the Issue of Plastic Waste Explosion 
Plastics are resistant, durable, and very slow degradable materials that take more than 
a hundred or even thousand years to degrade naturally. It means since the first time 
plastics were invented in the mid-1800s, there have been more plastics accumulated 
in the environment. 
Some countries have been trying to tackle the issues of the plastics explosion. 
Numerous policies have been formulated. Nevertheless, the policy instruments 
can be divided into three types, namely command and controls (CACs), economic 
instruments (EIs), and voluntary action (VAs). The policies range from the end-of￾pipe approach to more avoidance approaches,such as sustainable consumption and 
production. 
Australia, for example,has implemented voluntary action since 1999. It has 
introduced the National Packaging Covenant that required the signatory parties and 
in this case between the government and the packaging supply chain to reduce the 
impact of consumer packaging including waste avoidance at the early stage of the 
product. Each party was required to submit the 3–5 years plan to meet the covenant 
obligation and contribute an annual fee that will use for funding the recycling project. 
Singapore also implemented voluntary action that asked packaging industries to sign 
the agreement on the promotion of the saving and recycling Act and ‘The Singapore 
Packaging Agreement’. Both examples relate to EPRs as the producers are liable for 
the cost of managing their product at the end of their life cycle. 
Most European countries applied the EIs, such as Austria, Denmark, Ireland, 
Netherlands, and the UK. In Austria, for example, producers, fillers, and importers 
are responsible for ensuring the collection of their used packaging or they can transfer 
the responsibility to a third party. In Denmark, the business sectors are responsible 
to separate their waste, and the local authority that ensures the implementation of a 
recovery program. Ireland introduced a levy on all plastic bags, except for those used 
for fresh products. The UK focused more on the possibility of a recyclable product 
as it aimed at meeting the target of recovery and recycling by means of tax and 
levy on products. Similarly,the Netherlands also focused on measures to reduce the 
quantity of packaging, for example, by using as little material as possible or using 
more recyclable content and avoiding the creation of litter. 
The EIs usually affects either producers/business entity or consumers. Taxes 
can be collected from producers (brand owners, fillers, packers, and importers) 
or consumers. Product banned is the most prominent example of the CACs. 
Bangladesh, China, India, and Korea banned plastic bags as well. India, for example, 
banned the manufacture of plastic bags thinner than 20 microns in Bombay, whereas 
Bangladesh banned all polyethylene bags in the capital, Dhaka. Mainland China 
banned lightweight plastic bags thinner than 25 microns. Driver, Fate, Microplastics 21 
Most of the EIs are backed up by the CACs as the EIs work effectively if the 
regulatory standard and enforcement capacity are available. For example, Denmark 
also introduced a tax on packaging material, and it is regulated on the Consolidated 
Act No. 726 of 7 October 1998 (as amended by Act No. 912 of 16 December 1998, 
Section 9 of Act No. 380 of 2 June 1999, Section 23 of Act No. 165 of 15 March 
2000, Section 13 of Act No. 1029 of 22 November 2000 and Act No. 1292 of 20 
December 2000). The act describes the standard and application of packaging tax. 
The results of instruments vary from country to country based on the socio￾cultural, political, and capacity of enforcement of the country. In Asia, a strong CACs 
instrument is still used as the main measure to deal with the used plastic material. 
However, the effectiveness of the CACs instrument depends on the availability and 
capacity of the enforcement institution. Most of the EU countries set the CACs 
instrument to enforce the application of the EIs. The voluntary action may only be 
successful where environmental awareness is high, and the economic driver has met 
its target. 
Most of the instruments are government driven at both national and local 
levels. On the contrary, some voluntary actions may be initiated by business entities. 
However, some voluntary actions may also be driven by the CACs. For example, in 
Indonesia, the retail business read the trend and prepare for the application of the new 
Act relating to solid waste management. In Act No 18/2008 of Indonesia Regulation, 
the extended producer responsibility is introduced, even though the application and 
the extent to which it should be followed are still in question. Most of the articles 
are too general to be applied as the operational details have not been regulated at 
the scale of Peraturan Pemerintah, PP (government regulation), KepMen (Ministry 
decree), and Perda (municipality or LAs regulation). It was stated that the detailed 
regulation will be introduced in 2009. 
In article 14, Act No 18/2008 of Indonesia Regulation, every producer should put 
a label or information that relates to the reduction and waste management of products 
on packaging or products. In article 15, the producers must manage the packaging 
that they produce, especially if the packaging is difficult to degrade naturally. Based 
on Act no 18/2008, the producers must take responsibility if their products become 
waste. Article 40 describes that if any producers mismanage their waste or if they 
are not following the norm, standard, procedure, or criteria, the sanction includes jail 
for up to 10 years or a fine of up to 5 Billion Rupiah. The launch of Act 18/2008 is 
a little bit shocking to producers and retailers. Besides, there are some barriers that 
the retailers find difficult to apply Act No 18/2008: (1) no details application and 
sanction to the omission of the act; (2) competition among retailers that most retailers 
focus on and prefer the consumers’ convenience; (3) consumers’ lifestyle that prefer 
plastic bag instead of bringing their bags; (4) the possibility of the traditional 
market is not included in the act (Adiwijaya M, 2008). Recently, the Government 
of Indonesia, under the Ministry of Environment and Forestry, regulated the road 
map of waste reduction from producers (KepmenLHK P.75/MENLHK/SETJEN/ 
KUM.1/10/2019). It shows how regulation can lead to more solid waste management 
system development. 22 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Causal Evidence: A Case of EU Countries and Reflection 
of Indonesian Case 
In order to see the future packaging waste management, especially plastics, this 
paper discusses the causal evidence of an additional policy based on the facts of 
EUs countries. The reason to pick the EU case as an analogy is that the author has 
observed in Asian developing countries, especially in the urban areas, their society 
follows the same pattern of consumption, even though the level of consumption 
is different. The goal of the policy is to achieve an effective policy to protect the 
environment. Packaging waste is a growing waste stream, even though the packaging 
directive has been in place for a decade in the EU. It shows that packaging waste has 
increased despite the goal of waste prevention. In the EU, the amount of packaging 
waste increased by 7% over the period 1997–2001. According to McGlade 2004, this 
trend is continuing if the business as usual is applied. Why has the amount of waste 
increased despite the application of the packaging directive? The general answer is 
that packaging waste is closely related to production and consumption. An effective 
policy to prevent more environmental impact should be related to decoupling waste 
generation from growth. A more specific factor in the EU is that a large percentage 
of packaging waste relates to the consumption of food. Consumer needs more 
pre-prepared foods which require more packaging. This trend is also observed in 
Asian developing countries, such as China (see again Fig. 4). This increasing trend is 
cause for concern because the generation of waste always has environmental impacts 
and represents a loss to society in terms of energy and materials. 
All of the studies indeed show that recycling creates less impact on the 
environment than its disposal. But the fact remains that the environmental impact 
of packaging does not occur only in the waste handling but also in the production, 
transportation, and use of packaging. Therefore, the achievement of the recycling and 
recovery target is good for the environment. But how good is good? It is important 
to achieve more efficient policies to reduce the impact on the environment, such as 
addressing the broader objective of waste prevention. The other idea is that from 
an economic perspective, the marginal economic cost of increasing recycling is 
generally higher than what has been recycled (McGlade, 2004). 
Reflecting on the EU case, it can be concluded that most developing countries, 
especially Indonesia in this case should propose additional policies besides the 3Rs 
strategy (in progress). The frog leap policy solely focuses on the national 3Rs strategy 
to be more production and consumption approach is justified. 
References 
Adiwijaya, M., Peran Pemerintah, IndustriRitel, dan Masyarakat dalam Membatasi Penggunaan 
Kantong Plastik Sebgai Salah satuupayapelestarianlingkungan. http://74.125.155.132/ 
search?q=cache:4omcjaN0y8oJ:fportfolio.petra.ac.id/user_files/04-013/ARTIKEL-MICHAEL. 
ADIWIJAYA-UK.PETRA. doc+pengaruh+uundang+undang+no+18,+2008+buat+produsen+dan+ 
retailandcd=2andhl=jaandct=clnkandgl=jp. 
Andrady, A.L. 2011. Microplastics in the marine environment. Marine Pollution Bulletin 62(8): 
1596–1605. Driver, Fate, Microplastics 23 
Andrady, A.L. 2017. The plastic in microplastics: A review. Marine Pollution Bulletin 119(1): 12–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MARPOLBUL.2017.01.082 
Ballent, A., Pando, S., Purser, A., Juliano, M.F. and Thomsen, L. 2013. Modelled transport of benthic 
marine microplastic pollution in the Nazaré Canyon. Biogeosciences 10(12): 7957–7970. https:// 
doi.org/10.5194/bg-10-7957-2013. 
Barnes, D.K.A., Galgani, F., Thompson, R.C. and Barlaz, M. 2009. Accumulation and fragmentation of 
plastic debris in global environments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences 364(1526): 1985–1998. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0205. 
Besseling, E., Quik, J.T.K. and Sunand, M. Koelmans, A.A. 2017. Fate of nano- and microplastic in 
freshwater systems: A modeling study. Environmental Pollution 220: 540–548. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.10.001 
Best, J. 2019. Anthropogenic stresses on the world’s big rivers. In Nature Geoscience (12(1): 7–21). 
Nature Publishing Group. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-018-0262-x. 
Bondelind, M., Sokolova, E., Nguyen, A., Karlsson, D., Karlsson, A., and Björklund, K. 2020. 
Hydrodynamic modelling of traffic-related microplastics discharged with stormwater into the Göta 
River in Sweden. Environmental Science and Pollution Research 27(19): 24218–24230. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s11356-020-08637-z. 
Browne, M.A., Crump, P., Niven, S.J., Teuten, E., Tonkin, A., Galloway, T. and Thompson, R. 2011. 
Accumulation of microplastic on shorelines woldwide: Sources and sinks. Environmental Science 
and Technology 45(21): 9175–9179. https://doi.org/10.1021/ES201811S. 
China statistics press, 2009. Retrieved at http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/statistical data/yearly data/ 
YB2002e/ml/indexE.htm. 
Choy, C.A., Robison, B.H., Gagne, T.O., Erwin, B., Firl, E., Halden, R.U., Hamilton, J.A., Katija, K., 
Lisin, S.E., Rolsky, C. and S. Van Houtan, K. 2019. The vertical distribution and biological transport 
of marine microplastics across the epipelagic and mesopelagic water column. Scientific Reports 
9(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-44117-2. 
Citizen information. 2008. Plastic bag environmental levy in Ireland. http://www.citizensinformation.ie/ 
categories/environment/waste-management-and-recycling/plastic_bag_environmental_levy. 
Cole, M., Lindeque, P., Halsband, C. and Galloway, T.S. 2011a. Microplastics as contaminants in 
the marine environment: A review. In Marine Pollution Bulletin. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
marpolbul.2011.09.025. 
Cole, M., Lindeque, P., Halsband, C. and Galloway, T.S. 2011b. Microplastics as contaminants in the 
marine environment: A review. Marine Pollution Bulletin 62(12): 2588–2597. 
Curren, E., Kuwahara, V.S., Yoshida, T. and Leong, S.C.Y. 2021. Marine microplastics in the ASEAN 
region: A review of the current state of knowledge. In Environmental Pollution (Vol. 288). Elsevier 
Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117776. 
Daily, J. and Hoffman, M.J. 2020. Modeling the three-dimensional transport and distribution of multiple 
microplastic polymer types in Lake Erie. Marine Pollution Bulletin 154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
marpolbul.2020.111024. 
Desforges, J.P.W., Galbraith, M., Dangerfield, N. and Ross, P.S. 2014. Widespread distribution of 
microplastics in subsurface seawater in the NE Pacific Ocean. Marine Pollution Bulletin 79(1–2): 
94–99. 
Economic Instrument. 2008. Plastic bag.http://www.economicinstruments.com/index.php/solid-waste/ 
article/188­
Eerkes-Medrano, D., Thompson, R.C. and Aldridge, D.C. 2015. Microplastics in freshwater systems: A 
review of the emerging threats, identification of knowledge gaps and prioritisation of research needs. 
Water Research 75: 63–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.WATRES.2015.02.012. 
EU, European Union, European Parliament and council directive 94/62/EC on Packaging and packaging 
waste. 
Fendall, L.S. and Sewell, M.A. 2009. Contributing to marine pollution by washing your face: Microplastics 
in facial cleansers. Marine Pollution Bulletin 58(8): 1225–1228. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
MARPOLBUL.2009.04.025. 
Galgani, F., Hanke, G., Werner, S. and de Vrees, L. 2013. Marine litter within the European Marine 
Strategy Framework Directive. ICES Journal of Marine Science 70(6): 1055–1064. https://doi. 
org/10.1093/ICESJMS/FST122. 24 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Gall, S.C. and Thompson, R.C. 2015. The impact of debris on marine life. Marine Pollution Bulletin 
92(1–2): 170–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MARPOLBUL.2014.12.041. 
GESAMP Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Environmental Protection. 2015. 
Sources, fate and effects of microplastics in the marine environment: a global assessment. Reports 
and Studies GESAMP, 90, 96. issn: 
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J.R. and Law, K.L. 2017. Production, Use, and Fate of all Plastics Ever Made. 
https://www.science.org. 
Gigault, J., Halle, A. ter, Baudrimont, M., Pascal, P.Y., Gauffre, F., Phi, T.L., elHadri, H., Grassl, B. 
and Reynaud, S. 2018. Current opinion: What is a nanoplastic? Environmental Pollution 235: 
1030–1034. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.01.024. 
Guan, D. and Hubacek, K. 2004. Lifestyle changes and its influence on energy and water consumption in 
China, University of Leeds. Retrieved at http://homepages.see.leeds.ac.uk/~leckh/leeds04/6.5final￾gdb-march%20conference.pdf 
He, P., Chen, L., Shao, L., Zhang, H. and Lü, F. 2019a. Municipal solid waste (MSW) landfill: A source of 
microplastics? -Evidence of microplastics in landfill leachate. Water Research 159: 38–45. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/J.WATRES.2019.04.060. 
He, P., Chen, L., Shao, L., Zhang, H. and Lü, F. 2019b. Municipal solid waste (MSW) landfill: A source of 
microplastics? -Evidence of microplastics in landfill leachate. Water Research 159: 38–45. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/J.WATRES.2019.04.060. 
Hidalgo-Ruz, V., Gutow, L., Thompson, R.C. and Thiel, M. 2012. Microplastics in the marine environment: 
A review of the methods used for identification and quantification. Environmental Science and 
Technology 46(6): 3060–3075. https://doi.org/10.1021/ES2031505. 
Hwang, B.B. 2007. Unpacking the Packaging Problem: an international solution for environmental impact 
of packaging waste. Unpublished paper. University of Baltimore. 
Huang, J. and Boui, H. 2001. Structural changes in the demand for food in Asia: empirical evidence from 
Taiwan. Agricultural Economic 26(1): 57–69. 
ICN. 2007. http://www.datacon.co.id/Plastic%20Resin.html 
Imhoff, D. 2005. Paper or plastics: searching for solutions to an over packed worldhttp://www. 
watershedmedia.org/pop_abstract.html. 
INCPEN, the Industry Council for Packaging and the Environment, Responsible Packaging, code of 
practice to optimizing packaging and minimizing waste, 2003. Retrieved at http://www.incpen.org/ 
pages/data/CodeofPractice.pdf. 
Isobe, A., Uchiyama-Matsumoto, K., Uchida, K. and Tokai, T. 2017. Microplastics in the Southern Ocean. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin 114(1): 623–626. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MARPOLBUL.2016.09.037. 
Jambeck, J.R., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T.R., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., Narayan, R. and Law, 
K.L. 2015. Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. Science 347(6223): 768–771. https://doi. 
org/10.1126/science.1260352. 
Jambeck, J.R., Ji, Q., Zhang, Y.-G., Liu, D., Grossnickle, D.M. and Luo, Z.-X. 2015. Plastic waste inputs 
from land into the ocean. Science 347(6223): 764–768. http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/ 
science.1260879. 
Ji, Z.-G. 2008. Hydrodynamics and Water Quality. John Wiley and Sons, Inc. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/9780470241066. 
Kawecki, D. and Nowack, B. 2020. A proxy-based approach to predict spatially resolved emissions of 
macro- and microplastic to the environment. Science of The Total Environment 748: 141137. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2020.141137. 
Khatmullina, L. and Isachenko, I. 2017. Settling velocity of microplastic particles of regular shapes. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin 114(2): 871–880. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.11.024. 
KepmenLHK P.75/MENLHK/SETJEN/KUM.1/10/2019 . Peta Jalan Pengurangan Sampah oleh Produsen. 
Peraturan Menteri Lingkungan Hidup dan Kehutanan. 
Klein, S., Worch, E. and Knepper, T.P. 2015. Microplastics in the Rhine-Main area in Germany: 
Occurrence , spatial distribution and sorption of organic contaminants. Environmental Science and 
Technology 49(0): 2–3. 
Kooi M, Besseling E., Kroeze, C., van Wezel, A.P. and K.A. 2017. Modeling the Fate and Transport of 
Plastic Debris in Freshwaters: Review and Guidance. Springer, Heidelberg 125–152. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-319-61615-5_14. Driver, Fate, Microplastics 25 
Lebreton, L. and Andrady, A. 2019. Future scenarios of global plastic waste generation and disposal. 
Palgrave Communications 5(1). https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-018-0212-7. 
Lebreton, L.C.M., van der Zwet, J., Damsteeg, J.W., Slat, B., Andrady, A. and Reisser, J. 2017. River plastic 
emissions to the world’s oceans. Nature Communications 8. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15611. 
Lu, H.C., Ziajahromi, S., Neale, P.A. and Leusch, F.D.L. 2021. A systematic review of freshwater 
microplastics in water and sediments: Recommendations for harmonisation to enhance future study 
comparisons. In Science of the Total Environment (Vol. 781). Elsevier B.V. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2021.146693. 
Lusher, A.L., Tirelli, V., O’Connor, I. and Officer, R. 2015. Microplastics in Arctic polar waters: The first 
reported values of particles in surface and sub-surface samples. Scientific Reports 5. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/srep14947. 
Masry, M., Rossignol, S., Gardette, J., Therias, S., Bussière, P. and Wah-Chung, P.W. 2021. Characteristics, 
fate, and impact of marine plastic debris exposed to sunlight: A review, Marine Pollution Bulletin 
171, 112701. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2021.112701 
McGlade, J.2004. European Packaging Waste Trends and the Role of Economic Instruments.https://www. 
eea.europa.eu/media/speeches/01-03-2004 
Napper, I.E., Bakir, A., Rowland, S.J. and Thompson, R.C. 2015. Characterisation, quantity and sorptive 
properties of microplastics extracted from cosmetics. Marine Pollution Bulletin 99(1–2): 178–185. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MARPOLBUL.2015.07.029. 
Ng, K.L., Obbard, J., Privalence of Microplastoics in Singapore Coastal Marine Environment, Marine 
Pollution Bulletin 52(7): 761–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2005.11.017 
Nizzetto, L., Bussi, G., Futter, M.N., Butterfield, D. and Whitehead, P.G. 2016. A theoretical assessment 
of microplastic transport in river catchments and their retention by soils and river sediments. 
Environmental Science: Processes and Impacts 18(8): 1050–1059. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
c6em00206d. 
Quik, J.T.K., de Klein, J.J.M. and Koelmans, A.A. 2015. Spatially explicit fate modelling of nanomaterials 
in natural waters. Water Research 80: 200–208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.05.025.
 
Ramadan, A.H. and Sembiring, E. 2020. Occurrence of Microplastic in surface water of Jatiluhur 
Reservoir. E3S Web of Conferences 148: 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202014807004.
 
Reuters. 2009. China’s plastic bag ban kicks in to mixed response. http://www.reuters.com/article/ 
latestCrisis/idUSPEK210811. Accessed 13 October 2009. 
Ritchie, H. 2018. How much plastics and waste do we produce? Ourworldindata.org.https://ourworldindata. 
org/faq-on-plastics#how-much-plastic-and-waste-do-we-produce. 
Rochman, C.M. 2013. Plastics and priority pollutants: A multiple stressor in aquatic habitats. Environmental 
Science and Technology 47(6): 2439–2440. https://doi.org/10.1021/es400748b. 
Rochman, C.M., Hoh, E., Kurobe, T. and Teh, S.J. 2013. Ingested plastic transfers hazardous chemicals to 
fish and induces hepatic stress. Scientific Reports 3: 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep03263. 
Schwarz, A.E., Ligthart, T.N., Boukris, E. and van Harmelen, T. 2019. Sources, transport, and accumulation 
of different types of plastic litter in aquatic environments: A review study. Marine Pollution Bulletin 
143: 92–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MARPOLBUL.2019.04.029 
Sembiring, E. and Fareza, A.A., Suendo, V. and Reza, M. 2020. The Presence of Microplastics in Water, 
Sediment, and Milkfish (Chanoschanos) at the Downstream Area of Citarum River, Indonesia. 
Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 231: 7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-020-04710-y. 
Song, Y.K., Hong, S.H., Jang, M., Han, G.M., Jung, S.W. and Shim, W.J. 2017. Combined Effects of 
UV Exposure Duration and Mechanical Abrasion on Microplastic Fragmentation by Polymer Type. 
Environmental Science and Technology 51(8): 4368–4376. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b06155. 
Ta, A.T. and Babel, S. 2020. Microplastics pollution with heavy metals in the aquaculture zone of the 
Chao Phraya River Estuary, Thailand. Marine Pollution Bulletin 161 (October): 111747. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2020.111747. 
The Vietnamese plastic industry. http://74.125.153.132/search?q=cache:cwDxC8kcQVwJ:www.ambhanoi. 
um.dk/NR/rdonlyres/20C16B40-53AD40139F66503944D9706B/0/TheVietnamesePlasticsIndusty. 
doc+afpi+plasticsandcd=10andhl=jaandct=clnkandgl=jp. 
Thompson, R.C., Moore, C.J., Saal, F.S.V. and Swan, S.H. 2009. Plastics, the environment and human 
health: Current consensus and future trends. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences 364(1526): 2153–2166. https://doi.org/10.1098/RSTB.2009.0053. 26 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
van Cauwenberghe, L., Vanreusel, A., Mees, J. and Janssen, C.R. 2013. Microplastic pollution in deep-sea 
sediments. Environmental Pollution 182: 495–499. 
van Emmerik, T., Kieu-Le, T.C., Loozen, M., Oeveren, K. van, Strady, E., Bui, X.T., Egger, M., Gasperi, 
J., Lebreton, L., Nguyen, P.D., Schwarz, A., Slat, B. and Tassin, B. 2018. A methodology to 
characterize riverine macroplastic emission into the ocean. Frontiers in Marine Science 5(OCT): 
1–11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2018.00372. 
van Sebille, E., Griffies, S.M., Abernathey, R., Adams, T.P., Berloff, P., Biastoch, A., Blanke, B., 
Chassignet, E.P., Cheng, Y., Cotter, C.J., Deleersnijder, E., Döös, K., Drake, H.F., Drijfhout, S., 
Gary, S.F., Heemink, A.W., Kjellsson, J., Koszalka, I.M., Lange, M., … Zika, J.D. 2018. Lagrangian 
ocean analysis: Fundamentals and practices. Ocean Modelling 121(October 2017): 49–75. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ocemod.2017.11.008. 
van Wezel, A., Caris, I. and Kools, S.A.E. 2016. Release of primary microplastics from consumer products 
to wastewater in the Netherlands. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 35(7): 1627–1631. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.3316. 
Wang, G., Lu, J., Li, W., Ning, J., Zhou, L., Tong, Y., Liu, Z., Zhou, H. and Xiayihazi, N. 2021. Seasonal 
variation and risk assessment of microplastics in surface water of the Manas River Basin, China. 
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 208: 111477. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.111477. 
Waste Watch, Waste on line, 2006. Retrieved at http://www.wasteonline.org.uk/resources/ 
InformationSheets/Packaging.htm. 
Wrap that in plastic? Not in Taiwan, unless you pay. http://www.csmonitor.com/2004/0615/p07s02-woap. 
html. 
Xanthos, D. and Walker, T.R. 2017. International policies to reduce plastic marine pollution from single￾use plastics (plastic bags and microbeads): A review. Marine Pollution Bulletin 118(1–2): 17–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MARPOLBUL.2017.02.048. 
Yadav, V., Sherly, M.A., Ranjan, P., Tinoco, R.O., Boldrin, A., Damgaard, A. and Laurent, A. 2020. 
Framework for quantifying environmental losses of plastics from landfills. Resources, Conservation 
and Recycling 161: 104914. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RESCONREC.2020.104914. 
Zhixin, Z., Keng, H., Xiaoua, Q., Xianyu, L., Xiandong, Z. et al. 2002. China Statistical Year Book. China 
Statistics Press. http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/statisticaldata/yearlydata/YB2002e/ml/inde 
Zhu, K., Jia, H., Sun, Y., Dai, Y., Zhang, C., Guo, X., Wang, T. and Zhu, L. 2020. Long-term photo￾transformation of microplastics under simulated sunlight irradiation in aquatic environments: 
Roles of reactive oxygen species. Water Research 173: 115564. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
WATRES.2020.115564. Chapter 3 
The Correlation Between Plastic 
and Climate Change
 Negin Ficzkowski and Gail Krantzberg* 
INTRODUCTION
While biodiversity and ecosystem degradation are often the focus of plastic-related 
research, the contribution of plastic to the cumulative climate-relevant trace gases 
is often unrecognized. As such, the plastic crisis is much less commonly viewed as 
a contributor to climate change. The compounding impact of plastic production and 
waste is only expected to increase as more plastic is produced and accumulated in the 
environment. The problem of conventional plastic feedstocks is the core issue of the 
linear economy and its associated climate change stress ors. This chapter primarily 
explores the lifecycle impacts of plastics on cumulative greenhouse gas emissions. 
It then investigates the cyclical nature of plastic pollution and extreme weather 
events. The chapter also illustrates, in brief, the impacts of plastic pollutants on the 
largest carbon sinks on earth and investigates the adverse effects on global food 
supplies. Finally, it discusses landfill emission contributions and other land-related 
complications as they relate to plastic. 
Decades of observations, research, and scientific learning about climate change 
have proven the significant risks that climate change holds for people, ecosystems, 
and natural resources (National Research Council, 2010). Current concentrations of 
greenhouse gases are the result of progressive ecosystem degradation, acidification 
of oceans, and species extinctions (Webb, 2012). Increases in atmospheric carbon 
have been associated with temperature rises and abrupt changes in climate, land, and 
water resources (Webb, 2012). Climate change also interacts in complex ways with 
other ongoing changes within ecological ecosystems, such as land use, agriculture, 
and food production, which are all bidirectionally interconnected with climate change 
(National Research Council, 2010). Similarly, there is growing evidence proving 
that the global plastic crisis and climate change exacerbate one another (Ford et al., 
McMaster University, 1280 Main St. W., Hamilton ON L8S 4K1. 
* Corresponding author: krantz@mcmaster.ca 28 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
2021). The inherent link between the climate crisis and plastics in society should lead 
scientists and policymakers to tackle them in unison and use a holistic approach as 
opposed to viewing them as distinct issues (Ford et al., 2021). 
Often plastics become waste for landfills after a comparatively brief usage in 
their lifetime, and macroplastics, which are conventional plastic waste larger than 
25 mm, find their way to surface waters, eventually accumulating in aquatic systems 
intact for a long time or breaking down into microplastics (MPs) over time (van 
Reenen, 2020). Ultraviolet (UV) radiation plays a key role in plastic fragmentation. 
Because UV light is absorbed rapidly by water, plastics generally take much longer 
to degrade at sea than on land (Andrady, 2015). 
Absorbing around 23 ± 5% of annual greenhouse gas emissions generated by 
human activities over the 2009–2018 decade and more than 90% of the excess heat 
in the climate system, oceans are one of the most essential ecosystems in mitigating 
the impacts of climate change (United Nations 2020). Earth’s oceans have already 
absorbed 20% to 40% of all anthropogenic carbon emitted since the dawn of the 
industrial era (Webb, 2012). Phytoplankton and zooplankton play a critical role in the 
biological carbon pump that captures carbon at the ocean’s surface and transports it 
into the deep oceans (Fig. 1), preventing it from re-entering the atmosphere (Hamilton 
et al., 2019). Furthermore, phytoplankton has a critical and foundational role as the 
first link in the global food web of all species, feeding other species like zooplankton, 
which then feed much larger species like fish, sea birds, and whales. Today, we know 
that not only are MPs outnumbering the zooplanktons in some areas but also some 
of the additives used to modify the properties of plastics are biologically active, 
destroying aquatic systems, and affecting the development and reproduction in many 
species (Oehlmann et al., 2009; Meeker et al., 2009). 
Fig. 1. Simplified Mechanism of Ocean Biological and Physical Carbon Pump. Image Modified From 
Adaptation of a New Wave of Ocean Science (NASA) and Ocean & Climate Platform.
 The Correlation Between Plastic and Climate Change 29 
In addition to endangering aquatic biodiversity, plastic pollution impacts the 
livelihood of those relying on marine resources and causes a range of health issues for 
those consuming seafood infested with toxic micro- and nanoplastics (World Health 
Organization, 2019). Women, in particular, suffer from plastic-related toxicity risk 
due to higher aggregate exposure to plastics in various ways, including feminine 
care and hygiene products which places them at a high risk of miscarriages and 
cancer (UNEP, 2021). The analysis of the MPs also reveals pollution from fabrics 
and polyester clothing which breaks off and enters the water supply after each wash 
cycle (Hou et al., 2021); it is difficult to see, yet it shows the destructive impact of 
plastic. 
Despite numerous well-published studies about the destructive terrestrial and 
marine effects of plastic, nearly 367 million metric tons of conventional plastic are 
produced per annum globally (Fig. 2). Every year, an estimated 5 to 12 million metric 
tons of plastic enters the oceans, 89% of which are single-use items (UNEP, 2020). 
Up to 80% of the plastics found in marine systems originate from rivers that transport 
plastics from land to ocean (Kosior and Crescenzi, 2020). Recent studies suggest that 
the levels of plastic pollution in freshwater sources are comparable to those found in 
oceans (Dris et al., 2015; Earn et al., 2021). 
As Fig. 3 illustrates, less than only 10% of all plastic waste is recycled annually, 
while on average 8 million tons are being disposed of into landfills (van Reenen, 
2020). While better than landfilling, recycling can be hardly viewed as the golden 
standard of combating plastic waste as it introduces relatively lower quality polymer￾based materials back into the system which not only breaks down into MPs easier than 
the virgin plastics but is also not cost- and energy-comparative with the production of 
new, virgin plastic (Tolinski, 2012). 
This chapter offers a critical evaluation of the bidirectional interlink between 
plastic crises and climate change to inform global and domestic policy for devising a 
Fig. 2. Annual Production of Plastics Worldwide From 1950 to 2020 (Statistica, 2022).  
 
 
 
 
30 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Fig. 3. Global Plastic Production and Its Fate (1950–2015). Source: Our World in Data. 
joint solution for addressing both problems (Ford et al., 2021). The interconnection 
is discussed in five major areas based on the threats of climate change which are as 
follows: 
1. Cumulative greenhouse gas emissions of the plastic lifecycle 
2. The impacts of extreme weather events associated with the changing climate 
3. Ocean acidification, pollution, and biodiversity loss 
4. Health impacts and ecosystem vulnerability to the effects of climate change as 
well as plastic pollution 
5. Land-use implications 
Cumulative Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Carbon Budgets 
Increasing temperatures and GHG concentrations are the main drivers of the multitude 
of changes observed in the earth system, including decreases in the amounts of ice 
stored in mountain glaciers and polar regions, increases in sea level, changes in ocean 
chemistry, and changes in the frequency and intensity of heat waves, precipitation 
events, and droughts (Webb, 2012). Projections of future climate change indicate that 
earth will continue to warm unless we not only significantly limit the activities that 
release heat-trapping greenhouse gases into the atmosphere but also retroactively 
mitigate the current state through carbon sequestration. Over the last several decades, 
the chemical signature of the excess carbon dioxide (CO2
) in the atmosphere has The Correlation Between Plastic and Climate Change 31 
been linked to the composition of the CO2 in emissions from the burning of fossil 
fuels (coal, oil, and natural gas), marking it the single largest human driver of climate 
change (Webb, 2012). 
Plastics play a key role in the petrochemical and oil industries since the primary 
feedstock for conventional plastic production is fossil fuel derivates (Hamilton et al., 
2019). According to International Energy Agency (IEA), plastics (thermoplastics and 
textiles combined) can make up to two-thirds of the demand for oil in the sector and 
the entire demand growth for oil by 2015 (IEA, 2018). According to BP (2019), on 
average between 2015 and 2020, the total amount of oil used in the petrochemical 
sector on average was 15 million barrels per day (mbpd), the total oil demand for 
plastics was around 10 mbpd (~67%), and it will rise over time to 77% in 2040. 
This fact positions plastic production as a major threat to future climate change 
projections. Most emission reports highlight five different contributing stages to 
the plastic lifecycle: a) fossil fuel extraction and transport (also known as cradle￾to-resin); b) refinement and manufacturing (both resin manufacturing and plastic 
product manufacturing); c) usage and consumption; d) end-of-life management; and 
e) after-life emissions or the ongoing impacts of plastic in the environment as it 
degrades (Ford et al., 2021). 
In 2015, the primary production of plastic emitted the equivalent of more than 
a billion metric tons of carbon dioxide (Geyer, 2020).1
 It is estimated that by 2050, 
the greenhouse gas emissions from plastic could reach over 56 gigatons, accounting 
for 10 to 13% of the entire remaining carbon budget globally (Hamilton et al., 2019). 
Limitations in the availability and accuracy of by-sector data make it challenging 
to obtain accurate emission amounts per lifecycle stage per sector; however, it is 
conservatively estimated that amongst all stages, extraction and refining are the most 
Fig. 4. GHG Emission Profile for Plastic Lifecycle (Ford et al., 2021). 
1 Geyer takes the most comprehensive definition of plastics in 2017 at 438 mt and notes that 93% of 
finished plastics are from polymers (almost all from feedstocks defined as oil) and 7% from additives. 32 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
GHG-expensive stages, followed by end-of-life management (Hamilton et al., 2019). 
Figure 4 illustrates this distribution. The emissions from the use phase vary based 
on the functional unit, volume, and weight as well as the functions of the plastic 
product, and they are not typically accounted for in high-level analyses (Ford et 
al., 2021). Further, indirect emissions or potential savings during the lifecycle may 
be considered where GHG savings are enabled due to the lightweight properties of 
plastic that result in lower emissions during transport which are relative to other 
materials, such as glass, wooden, or metal items (Ford et al., 2021). 
From a carbon budget standpoint, according to the Ocean Conservancy, high￾income countries, including those in Europe and North America, have been exporting 
their plastic waste to the top plastic emitting countries (namely China, Indonesia, 
the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam) for recycling and to reduce their annual 
emissions from waste handling processes (Fig. 5). In these countries, much of the 
soft plastic is burned illegally as a cheap fuel source of energy or sold to cement 
plants for the same purpose; any material that is of little use to businesses will be lost 
from the underdeveloped waste management system by entering the ocean (Ocean 
Conservancy, 2015). 
Efforts to quantify emissions from plastic degradation are still in the early stages, 
but they already demonstrate the continual release of methane and other greenhouse 
gases at the ocean’s surface, and the increase of these emissions as the plastic breaks 
down further (Hamilton et al., 2019). Further, Royer et al. (2018) have demonstrated 
that plastic on coastlines, riverbanks, and landscapes releases greenhouse gases. 
Biodiversity Loss, Ocean Acidification, and Impacts on the 
Largest Carbon Sink on Earth 
Plastic pollution is a significant driver of marine biodiversity loss and so are the 
impacts of climate change (Fig. 6). The reefs and other vulnerable habitats are 
suffering from ocean warming and acidification (Ford et al., 2021), while the 
ecosystem is continuously exposed to an influx of harmful plastic pollutants. By 
2012, scientists have documented various harmful impacts of marine plastic pollution 
on 800 different marine species, including all known species of sea turtles, half of 
all species of marine mammals, and one-fifth of all species of seabirds (Secretariat 
of the Convention on Biological Diversity, 2012). Globally, at least 23% of marine 
mammal species, 36% of seabird species, and 86% of sea turtle species are known to 
be affected by plastic debris (Stamper et al., 2009). In addition, MP in the oceans can 
contaminate the phytoplankton community and interfere with the oceans’ capacity 
to sequester carbon dioxide through photosynthesis and nutrient cycling (Royer et 
al., 2018). Laboratory experiments suggest that plastic pollution can also reduce the 
metabolic rates, reproductive success, and survival of zooplankton that transfer the 
carbon to the deep ocean (Hamilton et al., 2019). Zooplankton ingestion of MPs can 
also result in more algal growth leading to more organic particle remineralization and 
a decrease in water column oxygen inventory loss (Kvale et al., 2021). The Correlation Between Plastic and Climate Change 33
 
Fig. 5. Global Trade in Plastic Waste (Marin, 2021). 34 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Fig. 6. The Cycle of Plastic Disturbance in the Ecosystem (Created Using Information Obtained From 
(Ocean and Climate Platform, n.d.; Ford et al., 2021; Royer et al., 2018; Kvale et al., 2021; Kosior and 
Crescenzi, 2020). 
MPs have also been identified as an emerging threat to much larger organisms, 
like whales that are exposed to MP ingestion as a result of their filter-feeding activity 
(Kosior and Crescenzi, 2020). Macro-plastics (plastic objects larger than 25 mm) are 
just as big of a problem as micro- (less than 5 mm) and meso-plastics (between 5 to 
25 mm). In many locations, dead animals are found with stomachs full of plastic, 
choked by packaging remains, entanglement, or starved from reduced appetite 
resulting from plastic ingestion (Fig. 7). Other harmful effects are blockage of the 
digestive tract and internal injuries that are particularly evident in sea turtles that 
tend to eat plastic bags mistaking them for jellyfish (Kosior and Crescenzi, 2020). 
Records of marine turtles ingesting plastic bags date back to the late 1950s followed 
by a series of discoveries and reported evidence between 1960 to 1974 (Ryan, 2015). 
During the 1970s, various instances of plastic fragments were reported in marine 
habitats, resulting in the first scientific journal publication on wildlife entanglement 
(Thompson et al., 2009). In 1984, the Honolulu Strategy was introduced as a framework 
document to internationally reduce plastic waste and devise a management structure 
to meet the specific needs of different countries including Canada (Ryan, 2015). The Correlation Between Plastic and Climate Change 35 
Fig. 7. Number of species with documented records of entanglement in and ingestion of marine debris, 
figure created by Maphoto/Riccardo Pravettoni based on data from Kuhn et al. 2015, obtained from 
GRID-Arendal. 36 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Adverse Effects of Plastic on Global Food Supplies, 
Global Health, and Economy
 
The impact of plastic on the nutrient cycle is not limited to the plankton community in 
the ocean (Jâms et al., 2020). Plastic particles can attract insoluble organic chemicals 
in the ocean (including many known toxic substances) (Kuhn et al., 2015), introducing 
persistent organic pollutants (POPs) into marine foodwebs (Cole et al., 2011; Ivar 
do Sul and Costa, 2014) and resulting in subsequent health issues for humans and 
other predatory terrestrial species consuming them (Kosior and Crescenzi, 2020). 
The geographic distribution of MP debris available for this involuntary ingestion 
is strongly influenced by the entry points and transport pathways, which are in turn 
determined by the density of plastic debris coupled with prevailing ocean currents, 
wind, and waves (van Sebille et al., 2015). Ocean currents are created largely by 
surface winds and partly by temperature and salinity gradients, the earth’s rotation, 
and tides. Gradual sea level rise resulting from the changing climate progressively 
worsens the impacts of high tides, surges, and waves resulting from storms, freshwater 
floods, and coastal mountain catchments (Cayan et al., 2008). 
Due to their hydrophobic nature, MPs absorb polybrominated diphenyl esters, 
pharmaceuticals and personal care products with polychlorinated biphenyls, and 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons with concentrations that are 105
–106
 times higher 
than in the surrounding water column (Krantzberg, 2020). When consumed through 
water, MPs containing plasticizers, such as bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates 
(commonly found in plastics ranging from food storage containers and metal can 
liners to baby bottles and sippy cups), have been found to be endocrine-disrupting 
and therefore affect the sexual development of children born to exposed mothers, the 
hatching success in animals as well as the development and reproduction in wildlife 
and humans (Klaper and Welch, 2011). Through waves and ocean currents or having 
been ingested by marine biota in one region, plastic debris distributes non-native 
and potentially harmful organisms to new locations (Kosior and Crescenzi, 2020), 
directly impacting the livelihood of communities reliant on fisheries and haunting as 
well as the economy of their surrounding regions. 
In addition to the health and traditional economy of these regions, the floating 
plastic debris interferes with the chemical, physical, and biological processes within 
blue carbon ecosystems comprising tidal marshes, mangrove forests, kelp forests, 
seagrass meadows, and coastal wetlands and downgrading their capacity for global 
climate change adaptation and mitigation goals for at least 28 countries globally 
(Adyel and Marcreadie, 2022) as well as interferes with climate resilience in these 
communities (Fig. 8). Conserving, protecting, and restoring Blue Carbon ecosystems 
should not only be an integral part of climate action plans at all levels of governance 
globally (Hilmi et al., 2021) but should also be interjoined with global action to stop 
the release of plastics into the environment (Fig. 9). The Correlation Between Plastic and Climate Change 37 
Fig. 8. Illustration of Climate Resilience Through Blue Carbon Ecosystems. Image Acquired From the 
Policy Brief for Urging G20 to Strengthen the Role of Blue Carbon in Climate Action (Mansouri et al., 
2020). 
Fig. 9. Global Distribution of Blue Carbon Ecosystems (Top) Compared With Mass of Plastic-Carbon 
Discharged to Global Oceans Through Rivers and Coastal Areas (Bottom) (Adyel and Marcreadie, 2022).
 38 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Extreme Weather Events, Warmer Temperatures, 
Droughts, and Storms
 
As functionally designed for lightweight properties, loose plastic parts can be carried 
and moved around quite easily. Even during a regular windy waste collection day in 
a Canadian municipality, household plastic waste can be spotted dispersed down the 
street (Fig. 10). Extreme weather events associated with climate change (including 
flooding, tropical storms, stronger winds, more frequent rain events, and sea level 
rise) influence the distribution of mismanaged plastic waste and MP pollution into 
remote areas and between terrestrial, freshwater, and marine environments (Ford et 
al., 2021). 
Various examples in the literature illustrate the bidirectional impacts of extreme 
weather events and mismanaged plastic waste globally. For instance, a typhoon in 
Sanggou Bay, China, increased the abundance of MPs within seawater and sediments 
by as much as 40% (Wang et al., 2019). Similarly, increased rainfall, associated with 
monsoons, is estimated to increase the MP concentration entering the Bay of Bengal 
from the Ganges at approximately 1 billion MPs per day during the pre-monsoon 
season and 3 billion post-monsoon seasons (Napper et al., 2021). Further inputs of 
terrestrial plastic into aquatic environments may release plastics trapped in coastal 
sediments and increase the risk of flooding (Sebille et al., 2020). The floating waste 
can clog the drainage system during heavy rain and cause flooding and consequential 
damages (Galgani et al., 2015; Welden and Lusher, 2017). 
There are potentially infinite loops created by the linkage between climate change 
and plastic pollution. For instance, it has been shown that lower perceptions of the 
quality of tap water increase the probability of purchasing bottled water which is one 
of the leading sources of plastic pollution (Zapata, 2021). The same study illustrates 
that the increase in temperature due to global warming is associated on average with 
an increase of almost one-fifth of a water bottle (Zapata, 2021). Another aspect is the 
insufficient infrastructure and proper water supply system in rural areas, creating a 
disorganized management network that fails to meet the demand for drinking water 
Fig. 10. Illustration of plastic waste dispersed by wind in Halton region (left) and city of Hamilton (right). The Correlation Between Plastic and Climate Change 39 
and consequently increasing dependency on water transportation methods using 
plastic bottles (Zapata, 2021). Lacking a solid waste management system, putting 
this and similar plastic waste into the system blocking drainage, and exacerbating 
flooding during heavy rainfall. Waste wash-off into roads and waterways, leachate 
and polluted waters requiring excess processes, sewage overflow, and significant 
demolish waste generated from damages are only a few foreseeable impacts of water 
disasters and sea-level rise within coastal areas. 
Plastics do not only end up in the sea but on the beaches of some of the remotest, 
uninhabited islands in the Pacific, such as Henderson Island in the Pitcairn group 
(Kosior and Crescenzi, 2020). In the Cilician Basin located in the Northeastern 
Mediterranean Sea, plastic items comprise more than 80% of the dominant material 
type in the coastal environments up to 4.23% of which was transboundary litter 
transported with currents from neighboring countries (Aydın et al., 2016). 
In 2015, scientists at the University of Utrecht in the Netherlands used sparse 
data from drifting buoys to estimate the amount of plastic at the surface ocean and 
compared this to World Bank estimates. Nearly 99% of the plastic is no longer on the 
surface of the ocean, rather it is found in the icy mountain peaks, at the bottom of the 
ocean, inside various marine species, or broken down into MPs (van Sebille et al., 
2015). The melting of sea ice due to climate change has been linked to an increase in 
plastic pollution, as the ice works as a trap for MPs that when melted release them all 
into the earth’s oceans (Ford et al., 2021). 
Land Management Interference 
According to the 2019 special report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC), the land is critically important in the discussions of climate action, 
both as a source of greenhouse gas emissions and as a solution for climate change 
(IPCC, 2019). About 23% of global human-caused greenhouse gas emissions 
come from agriculture, forestry, and other land uses. Additionally, 44% of recent 
human-driven methane, a potent greenhouse gas, came from agriculture, peatland 
destruction and other land-based sources (IPCC, 2019). That said, well-managed 
land-based emissions-reduction efforts, such as afforestation, reforestation, or 
wetland rehabilitation, have great potential in carbon sequestration and other 
co-benefits for the ecosystem in face of the climate change (IPCC, 2019), provided 
that the continuous flow of plastic waste generation does not overwhelm GHG 
abatement measures. 
The plastic crisis like many other destructive human activities starts on land, 
leaking into soil and water bodies following a series of inefficient and underdeveloped 
end-of-life management activities (Kosior and Crescenzi, 2020). Before 1988, 
plastic waste was partially disposed of directly into the ocean leading to enforced 
restrictions on dumping of garbage from ships by the International Convention for 
the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL 73/78) as of December 31, 1988. 
Over the last two decades, according to a 2015 global study, less than 20% of the 
annual 8 million tons of marine plastics come from ocean-based sources, like fisheries 
and fishing vessels (Jambeck et al., 2015); the remaining 80% originates from land￾based sources, as illustrated in Fig. 11 (GESAMP, 2015). According to the Ocean 40 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Fig. 11. Plastic Waste Inputs From Land to the Oceans (Jambeck et al., 2015). 
Conservancy (2015), 75% of ocean plastic debris that originates from land-based 
sources comes from uncollected waste directly deposited into and around rivers and 
other water bodies that function as direct pathways into marine ecosystems. The 
waste that is collected is either recycled (9%), incinerated, and/or combusted with 
energy recovery (5% in Canada and 12% in the US), or landfilled (80% or more).2 
The amount of plastic material in the environment exposed to full sunlight exceeds 
the quantity of submerged plastic (Royer et al., 2018). 
In addition to the well-known contribution of landfills to the release of greenhouse 
gasses (particularly methane emissions), the creation of landfills to accommodate the 
increasing amount of plastic waste typically means destroying natural habitats for 
wildlife or the ecosystem functioning as a carbon sink (such as wetlands, parks, 
green corridors, etc.), directly impacting climate change mitigation interventions. 
Over 3,000 active landfills in the United States alone have contributed to 1,800,000 
acres of natural ecosystem loss by 2021 (Vasarhelyi, 2021). 
In addition to changes in land use, the production and release of toxic chemicals 
from the landfilled plastic have affected the health of the fertile soil and the entire 
landscape. Factors and conditions within landfills, such as light, heat, moisture, 
chemical oxidation, and biological activity, can cause changes in the physical and 
chemical structure of the polymer, resulting in the toxic composition becoming 
readily available to the environment (Royer et al., 2018). Particularly, the warming 
of the climate increases the rate of hydrocarbon production for terrestrial plastic 
waste compared to those in aquatic environments (Royer et al., 2018). If the leachate 
produced by plastic waste in landfill sites finds a pathway to the environment (e.g., 
the case with all open landfills), it contaminates nearby water sources, damages 
nearby ecosystems, and further exacerbates climate change. Duration of active 
post-closure operations of a landfill (known as the “aftercare” period) varies in 
countries around the world based on landfill conditions, but on average it is estimated 
2 Numbers indicate average statistics for US and Canada. The Correlation Between Plastic and Climate Change 41 
to be 140 years only after which the land is usable again (Heyer et al., 2005). A 
2020 study of spatial patterns of mesoplastics and coarse MPs in floodplain soils 
has also indicated an overall widespread but spatial heterogeneous contamination 
in floodplain soils resulting from land use and fluvial processes (Weber and Opp, 
2020). These adverse effects have been raised by indigenous communities globally 
for many years; notably, the Māori land guardians in New Zealand link plastic 
pollution to land and food sovereignty issues and believe that the trauma associated 
with the colonial nature of plastic pollution is similar to the climate change effects 
on indigenous oceanic territorial rights, economic injustice, and enduring imperial 
entitlement in the science and political sectors (Liboiron, 2020). 
Conclusion 
The crisis of plastic is closely tied to climate change. Over the last few decades 
efforts have been focused on reducing the use of fossil fuel resources as feedstock by 
replacing them fully or in part with renewable biomass resources, primarily to address 
the pollution problem in the ecosystem. With a global market of $17 billion in 2017, 
covering approximately 10–15% of the total plastic market and without a universally 
standard definition, unfortunately, what is widely known as “bioplastics” in North 
America and Europe present many of the same issues as traditional fossil fuel-based 
plastics (Bartolo et al., 2021). Defined as a plastic material that is either biobased, 
biodegradable, or features both properties, bioplastics are currently commercialized 
and are not only considered resource-intensive but are also for the most part rely on 
fossil fuels for production (European Bioplastics, 2016). The small proportion of 
bioplastics that are completely made from renewable materials typically results in 
perplexity during disposal and end-of-life management. In this category of materials, 
some are compostable which means they do not have any additive toxins that are 
left as a residue in the environment after biodegradation in a compost site. However, 
due to their different chemical composition, if mixed into the recycling streams, 
compostable plastics can contaminate the recycling system and reduce the value of 
recycled material, making recycling practices even less effective than it ever was 
(Cho, 2017). Moreover, due to limited infrastructure and industrial composting 
facilities that can produce the high temperature needed to break down compostable 
(or biodegradable) plastics, they are often disposed of in landfills causing them to be 
deprived of oxygen and may lead to releasing methane (Cho, 2017). That said, many 
researchers believe a new standardized generation of bioplastics has the potential to 
contribute to a circular economy and encourage further development of compostable 
bioplastics in targeting plastic packaging where recycling is challenged by food￾contaminated layers (Kakadellis and Harris, 2020). 
A bigger issue in the context of climate change is comparable GHG emissions 
during the lifecycle of alternative plastic products (Rosenboom et al., 2022). Figure 
12 by Kakadellis and Harris (2020) illustrates an example of a flow diagram 
representing system boundaries during a lifecycle assessment. Considering a scenario 
wherein any fossil fuel-based plastic is identified as toxic material and completely 
banned from the global trades system, in 2010 the researchers at the University of 
Pittsburgh conducted a study that determined bioplastics produce much lower GHG 42 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Fig. 12. LCA Flow Diagram Representing Packaging Process Using (a) Conventional Plastic; (b) 
Biodegradable and Bio-Based Bioplastic Material (Kakadellis and Harris, 2020). 
emissions throughout their lifecycle due to the carbon dioxide which is offset during 
the growth phase of their raw materials, excluding the petroleum fuel used to run the 
farm machinery (Tabone et al., 2010). Further, switching from traditional plastic to 
corn-based polylactic acid (PLA) was shown to cut U.S. greenhouse gas emissions 
by 25% (Posen et al. 2017). This value can be further reduced by 50% to 75% if 
traditional plastics are still produced using renewable energy sources instead of fossil 
fuels (Posen et al., 2017). However, the production of bioplastics has shown a greater 
impact on ozone depletion and higher amounts of environmental pollutants due to 
the fertilizers and pesticides used during growing the crops as well as the chemical 
processing needed to turn organic material into plastic (Tabone et al., 2010). Hybrid 
plastics were also investigated and found to have the highest potential for toxic 
effects on ecosystems and the most carcinogens throughout their lifecycle due to 
the combination of the negative impacts of both agriculture and chemical processing 
(Cho, 2017). 
In addition to comparable GHG emissions, bioplastics require extensive land 
use which competes with the land required for food production (Tabone et al., 2010). 
The Plastic Pollution Coalition (2017) projected that by 2019 more than 1.4 million 
hectares (3.4 million acres) of land would be needed to grow crops required to meet 
the growing global demand for bioplastics. 
The problem with plastic is multifaceted and deeply interconnected with the 
changing climate. If addressed separately, each remains a competing problem within 
the policy space. The interconnection of the two issues needs to be integrated into the The Correlation Between Plastic and Climate Change 43 
early stages of development to ensure joint solutions wherein solving one issue does 
not exacerbate the other. Many researchers around the world are developing novel 
production processes, alternative materials, or innovative business models to reduce 
the footprint of plastic substances and commercialize solutions without enormous 
GHG consequences. Many others propose policy directives that systematically 
prevent waste by disincentivizing the use of non-durable plastics and are independent 
of their feedstock or biodegradability claims (Plastic Pollution Coalition, 2017). 
More optimistically, global initiatives offer strong encouragement to existing and 
new climate actions by all societal actors. The inclusion of plastics in the agenda of 
the 26th United Nations Climate Change Conference of the Parties (COP26) in 2021 
was a long overdue but positive step toward acknowledging the role of plastic in 
the global climate crisis. Nonetheless, reducing the climate cost of plastic needs far 
stronger global commitments. The United Nations Environment Assembly (UNEA) 
progress toward an internationally legally binding agreement to end plastic pollution 
is promising and fundamental in creating an evolving bottom-up polycentric 
system of governance to facilitate the introduction of a unique framework, policy 
interventions, and financial support for better management of conventional plastic 
in the economy, gradual reduction of plastic production toward full eradication, and 
ultimately restoration of our natural ecosystem. 
References 
Adyel, T.M. and Marcreadie, P.I. (2022, January 1). Plastics in blue carbon ecosystems: a call for global 
cooperation on climate change goals. Planetary Health 6(1): E2–E3. 
Andrady, A.L. 2015. Persistence of Plastic Litter in the Oceans. pp. 57–72. In: Bergmann, M., Gutow, L. 
and Klages, M. (eds.). Marine Anthropogenic Litter. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978­
3-319-16510-3_3. 
Aydın, C., Güven, O., Salihoğlu, B. and Kıdeyş, A.E. 2016. The Influence of Land Use on Coastal Litter: 
An Approach to Identify Abundance and Sources in the Coastal Area of Cilician Basin, Turkey. 
Turkish Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 16: 29–39. 
Bartolo, A.D., Infurna, G. and Dintcheva, N.T. 2021. A Review of Bioplastics and Their Adoption in the 
Circular Economy. Polymers 13(8): 1229. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13081229. 
BP. (2019, February 14). BP Energy Outlook 2019 (Press Release). Retrieved from https://www.bp.com/ 
en/global/corporate/news-and-insights/press-releases/bp-energy-outlook-2019.html 
Cayan, D.R., Bromirski, P.D., Hayhoe, K., Tyree, M., Dettinger, M.D. and Flick, R.E. 2008. Climate 
change projections of sea level extremes along the California coast. Climate Change 87: 57–73. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-007-9376-7. 
Cho, R. 2017. The Truth About Bioplastics. State of the Planet. 
Dris, R., Gasperi, J., Rocher, V., Saad, M., Renault, N. and Tassin, B. 2015. Microplastic contamination 
in an urban area: a case study in Greater Paris. Environmental Chemistry 12(5): 592–599 https://doi. 
org/10.1071/EN14167. 
Earn, A., Bucci, K. and Rochman, C.M. 2021. A systematic review of the literature on plastic pollution 
in the Laurentian Great Lakes and its effects on freshwater biota. Journal of Great Lakes Research 
47: 120–133. 
European Bioplastics. 2016. Bioplastics Factsheet. Retrieved from European Bioplastics: https://docs. 
european-bioplastics.org/2016/publications/fs/EUBP_fs_what_are_bioplastics.pdf. 
Ford, H.V., Jones, N.H., Davies, A.J., Godley, B.J., Jambeck, J.R., Napper, I.E., Suckling, C.C., Williams, 
G.J., Woodall, L., Koldewey, H.J. 2021. The Fundamental Links Between Climate Change and 
Marine Plastic Pollution. Science of the Total Environment. 
Galgani, F., Hanke, G. and Maes, T. 2015. Global distribution, composition and abundance of marine 
litter. Springer, Cham. 44 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
GESAMP. 2015. Sources, Fate and Effects of Micro-Plastics in the Marine Environment: a Global 
Assessment. Polestar Wheatons (UK) Ltd, Exeter, EX2 8RP. 
Hamilton, L.A., Feit, S., Muffett, C., Kelso, M., Rubright , S.M., Bernhard, C., . . . Labbé-Bellas, R. 2019. 
Plastic & Climate: The Hidden Costs of a Plastic Planet. Center for International Environmental 
Law (CIEL). 
Heyer, K.-U., Hupe, K. and Stegmann, R. 2005. Landfill Aftercare—Scope For Actions, Duration, Costs 
And Quantitative Criteria For The Completion. Tenth International Waste Management and Landfill 
Symposium. Italy: CISA, Environmental Sanitary Engineering Centre. 
Hilmi, N., Chami, R., Sutherland, M.D., Hall-Spencer, J.M., Lebleu, L., Benitez, M.B. and Levin, L.A. 
2021. The Role of Blue Carbon in Climate Change Mitigation and Carbon Stock Conservation. 
Frontiers in Climate, https://doi.org/10.3389/fclim.2021.710546. 
Hou, L., Kumar, D., Yoo, C.G., Gitsov, I. and Majumder, E.L.-W. 2021. Conversion and removal strategies 
for microplastics in wastewater treatment plants and landfills. Chemical Engineering Journal 406, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.126715. 
IEA. 2018. The Future of Petrochemicals. OECD/IEA. 
IPCC. 2019. Climate Change and Land. 
Jâms, I.B., Windsor, F.M., Poudevigne-Durance, T., Ormerod, S.J. and Durance, I. 2020. Estimating the 
size distribution of plastics ingested by animals. Nature communications. 
Jambeck Research Group. (2015, February 12). Plastic Waste Inputs from Land into the Ocean. Retrieved 
from https://jambeck.engr.uga.edu/landplasticinput. 
Jambeck, J., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., . . . Law, K. 2015. Plastic waste 
inputs from land into the ocean. Science 347: 768–771. 
Kakadellis, S. and Harris, Z.M. 2020. Don’t scrap the waste: The need for broader system boundaries in 
bioplastic food packaging life-cycle assessment e A critical review. Journal of Cleaner Production 
274(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122831), 122831. 
Klaper, R. and Welch, L.C. 2011. Emerging Contaminant Threats and the Great Lakes: Existing Science, 
Estimating Relative Risk and Determining Policies. Alliance for the Great Lakes. 
Kosior, E. and Crescenzi, I. 2020. Solutions to the plastic waste problem on land and in the oceans. 
pp. 415–446. In: T.M. Letcher. Plastic Waste and Recycling. London, United Kingdom: NEXTEK, 
Kensington Gore,. 
Krantzberg, G. (2020, May/June). Plastic Pollution in the Aquatic Environment, Why it matters and what 
can we do about it. Water Canada, pp. 20–21. 
Kuhn et al., S. 2015. Deleterious Effects of Litter on Marine Life. In: M. Bergmann and e. al, Marine 
Anthropogenic Litter. Springer. 
Kvale, K., Prowe, A.E., Chien, C.-T., Landolfi, A. and Oschlies, A. 2021. Zooplankton grazing of microplastic 
can accelerate global loss of ocean oxygen. pp. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22554-w. 
Mansouri, N.Y., Cham, R., Duarte, C.M., Lele, Y., Mathur, M. and Osman, M.A. (2020, November 22). 
Policy Brief: nature-based solutions to climate change: towards a blue carbon economy future. 
Climate Change and Environment, 1–23. 
Marin, C. (2021, May). Global trade in plastic waste. Le Monde diplomatique. 
Meeker, J.D., Sathyanarayana, S. and Swan, S.H. 2009. Phthalates and other additives in plastics: human 
exposure and associated health outcomes. Biological Science, https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0268. 
Napper, I.E., Baroth, A., Barrett, A.C., Bhola, S., Chowdhury, G.W., Davies, B.F., . . . Koldewey, H. 2021. 
The abundance and characteristics of microplastics in surface water in the transboundary Ganges 
River. Environmental Pollution 274: 116348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.116348. 
NASA. (n.d.). Global Phytoplankton Distribution. Retrieved from My NASA Data: https://mynasadata. 
larc.nasa.gov/basic-page/global-phytoplankton-distribution. 
National Research Council. 2010. Advancing the Science of Climate Change. Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/12782. 
Ocean and Climate Platform. (n.d.). The Role of the Ocean in Climate Dynamics. ocean-climate.org. 
Ocean Conservancy, McKinsey Center for Business and Environment. 2015. Stemming the Tide: Land￾based Strategies for a Plastic-free Ocean. 
Oehlmann, J., Schulte-Oehlmann, U., Kloas, W., Jagnytsch, O., Lutz, I., Kusk, K.O., Wollenberger, L., 
Santos E.M., Paull, G.C., Van Look, K.J.W. and Tyler, C.R. 2009. A critical analysis of the biological 
impacts of plasticizers on wildlife. Biological Sciences, https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0242. The Correlation Between Plastic and Climate Change 45 
Plastic Pollution Coalition. 2017. What is the Role of Bioplastics in a Circular Economy? https://www. 
plasticpollutioncoalition.org. 
Posen, D., Jaramillo, P., Landis, A.E. and Griffin, W.M. 2017. Greenhouse gas mitigation for U.S. plastics 
production: energy first, feedstocks later. Environmental Research Letters. 
Rosenboom, J.-G., Langer, R. and Traverso, G. 2022. Bioplastics for a circular economy. Nature Reviews 
Materials 7: 117–137. 
Royer, S.-J., Ferron, S., Wilson, S.T. and Karl, D.M. 2018. Production of methane and ethylene from plastic 
in the environment. PLoS ONE 13(8): e0200574. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0200574. 
Ryan, P.G. 2015. A Brief History of Marine Litter Research. pp. 1–27. In: M. Bergmann, M. Klages and 
L. Gutow, Marine Anthropogenic Litter. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-16510-3_1)). Springer 
International Publishing AG Switzerland. 
Sebille, E.v., Aliani, S., Law, K.L., Maximenko, N., Alsina, J.M., Bagaev, A., Bergmann, M., Chapron, B., 
Chubarenko, I., Cózar, A., Delandmeter, P., Egger, M., Fox-Kemper, B., Garab, S.P., Goddijn-Murphy, 
L., Hardesty, B.D., Hoffman, M.J., Isobe, A., Jongedijk, C.E., Kaandorp, M.L.A, Khatmullina, L., 
Koelmans, A.A., Kukulka, T., Laufkötter, C., Lebreton, L., Lobelle, D., Maes, C., Martinez-Vicente, 
V., Maqueda, M.A.M., Poulain-Zarcos, M., Rodríguez, E., Ryan, P.G., Shanks, A.L., Shim, W.J., 
Suaria, G., Thiel, M., van den Bremer, T.S. and Wichmann, D. 2020. The physical oceanography of 
the transport of floating marine debris. Environmental Research Letters 15(023003). 
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. 2012. Impacts of Marine Debris on Biodiversity: 
Current Status and Potential Solutions. CBD Technical Series No. 67. 
Stamper, M.A., Spicer, C.W., Neiffer, D.L., Mathews, K.S. and Fleming, G.J. 2009. Morbidity in 
a Juvenile Green Sea Turtle (Chelonia mydas) Due to Ocean-Borne Plastic. Journal of Zoo and 
Wildlife Medicine 40(1): 1960198. 
Statistica. 2022. Annual production of Plastics Worldwide from 1950 to 2020. Retrieved from https:// 
www.statista.com/statistics/282732/global-production-of-plastics-since-1950/. 
Tabone, M.D., Cregg, J.J., Beckman, E.J. and Landis, A.E. 2010. Sustainability Metrics: Life Cycle 
Assessment and Green Design in Polymers. Environmental Science & Technology. 
Thompson, R.C., Swan, S.H., Moore, C.J. and Saal, F.S. 2009. Our plastic age. Biological Sciences 
364(1526), https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0054. 
Tolinski, M. 2012. Plastics and Sustainability: Towards a Peaceful Coexistence between bio-based and 
Fossil Fuel-based Plastics. 
UNEP. 2020. Addressing Single-Use Plastic Products Pollution Using a Life Cycle Approach. United 
Nations. 
UNEP. 2021. Neglected: Environmental Justice Impacts of Marine Litter and Plastic Pollution. United 
Nations Environment Programme. 
van Reenen, C. 2020. Our Fresh Water Is Seeing More Plastic Litter due to COVID-19. IISD. 
van Sebille, E., Wilcox, C., Lebreton, L., Maximenko, N., Hardesty, B.D., Franeker, J.A., Eriksen, M., 
Siegel, D. Galgani, F. and Law, K.L. 2015. A global inventory of small floating plastic debris. 
Environmental Research Letters 10: doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/124006. 
Vasarhelyi, K. 2021. The Hidden Damage of Landfills. Boulder: University of Colorado . 
Wang, J., Liu, X., Li, Y., Powell, T., Wang, X., Wang, G. and Zhang, P. 2019. Microplastics as contaminants 
in the soil environment: A mini-review. Science of The Total Environment 691(15): 848–857. 
Webb, J. 2012. Climate Change and Society: The Chimera of Behaviour Change Technologies. UK: 
sagepub DOI: 10.1177/0038038511419196. 
Weber, C.J. and Opp, C. 2020. Spatial patterns of mesoplastics and coarse microplastics in floodplain soils 
as resulting from land use and fluvial processes. Environmental Pollution, Volume 267, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115390. 
Welden, N.A. and Lusher, A.L. 2017. Impacts of changing ocean circulation on the distribution of marine 
microplastic litter. Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management 13(3): 483–487. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/ieam.1911. 
World Health Organization. 2019. Microplastics in Drinking Water. License: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0. 
Zapata, O. 2021. The relationship between climate conditions and consumption of bottled water: A 
potential link between climate change and plastic pollution. Ecological Economics. Chapter 4 
Plastics and Circular Economy
 Greg Zilberbrant and Eric Kassee* 
INTRODUCTION TO CIRCULAR ECONOMY 
Achieving sustainability in the way we live should be approached in many different 
ways in order to account for the complexities of modern life. What has once been 
seen as a miracle material for its versatility, processability, and low cost, is now 
generally seen as a villain that society should avoid and work to eliminate from 
our lives. Plastic products were originally created from a by-product of waste from 
the oil industry; their origin was directly tied to the smart re-purposing of waste 
products into valuable commodities. Decades later, we see how this miracle material 
has been drastically overused, and the result is pollution in our environment on an 
unprecedented scale that will take a great global effort to remedy. Recycling and 
purchasing choice helps in reducing plastic consumption, and single-use plastics are 
good options that should be pursued. But in order to create an economy where we can 
enjoy the benefits of plastic without the negative effects of pollution, we must change 
the way we treat the end-of-life disposal of plastic. This requires innovation on many 
fronts, such as designing products with end-of-life recycling and re-processing in 
mind and creating economic systems that allow for waste streams to be diverted into 
new raw materials. This chapter focuses on the circular economy with examples and 
case studies of how this can be achieved in practice today. 
In recent years, the circular economy has reached a point of being common 
terminology among corporate leaders and policymakers alike. The Circular Economy 
Action Plan under the European Green Deal—the emergence of international standards 
initiated in the form of BSI 8001 and ISO 323 (British Standards Institution, 2017) 
(ISO, 2018)—provides the adoption of circular economy targets by multinational 
corporations such as IKEA that commit to being a circular business by 2030 (IKEA, 
2020); even included the Tokyo Olympics in 2021 that used only recycled materials 
for medals and podiums (Euronews, 2021). There is no shortage of examples of 
efforts toward a circular economy at all levels of public and private organizations. 
McMaster University, 1280 Main St. W., Hamilton ON L8S 4K1. 
Email: zilberg@mcmaster.ca 
* Corresponding author: ekassee@jbienv.com Plastics and Circular Economy 47 
There is also the convergence of key themes and strategies that could lead to an 
“effective circular economy”. The two key terms of consideration are effective and 
economy. This chapter discusses the former further on but the latter, economy, is a 
critical term that can sometimes be overlooked when evaluating a specific material 
or product. 
The economy in “circular economy” refers to the services that are provided to 
society. This is explicitly different from the concept of circularity which refers to the 
flow of material or group of materials. If the material is 100% circular (has 100% 
circularity), then it eliminates any potential waste. But this metric has nothing to say 
about the amount of time the product was in service, the amount of energy consumed 
to reprocess the material, the shipping requirements to a specialized facility to 
reprocess it (if not possible simply with equipment), or whether embodied resources, 
energy or carbon of the material is exponentially greater than the alternatives that 
could provide the same service. In short, circularity is one measurement of the 
effectiveness of a circular economy but not the only one nor the end state of the 
transition to a circular economy. 
Figure 1 may be simplistic in its appearance, but it should not be mistaken as 
such. A linear system does not simply discard materials; a linear system discards 
the energy, craftsmanship, as well as cultural, social, and economic value. Figure 1 
represents an entire systemic failure in preserving these, as well as other values, in 
the resources we obtain, the goods we create, and the services that are provided to 
society. 
The challenge with simply looking at the material flows is that no activity is 
independent of another. Plastic bottles may be lighter transportation reducing fuel 
use, and plastic packaging may extend the shelf life of grocery products reducing 
food waste; plastic personal protective equipment may be the best way to manage the 
transition of a virus in a global pandemic. 
The shift to a circular economy requires a focus on every aspect of our system. 
This includes obtaining raw materials, manufacturing goods, and servicing/ 
extending the life of goods to managing the end-of-life of these goods in their initial 
and subsequent lives. The diagram below from the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, a 
global think tank focused on circular economy transition, highlights the numerous 
points of intervention that can occur rather than the disposal of material in a circular 
economy (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017). The diagram is split into two sections, 
highlighting the distinct paths for “finite materials” versus “renewables” where the 
former can be returned to the natural environment, while the latter must remain in the 
system for continuous re-use. 
Fig. 1. Flow of Material in a Linear Economy—A Take-Make-Waste Process. Material is Extracted, 
Manufactured Into a Product for Consumption, and Eventually Discarded. 48 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Fig. 2. Circular Economy Diagram (Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2017). 
An Effective Circular Economy 
The effectiveness of the intervention is of critical importance when considering the 
transition to a circular economy. Efficiency can be achieved in a linear economy. The 
reduction of impact relative to the current level can be achieved without changing 
the way the system operates. The same quantities of material could be extracted, 
the same quantities of products or services provided, and with less environmental 
impact at the end of the process. Even extreme levels of efficiency, if possible, could 
reduce the amount of waste that goes to landfills and increase recycling rates or the 
emissions that enter the natural environment. 
Perhaps one of the most fitting analogies of moving from efficiency to 
effectiveness was eloquently articulated by William McDonough (co-author of 
Cradle-to-Cradle) in A Boat for Thoreau (McDonough, 2000) which we will 
paraphrase below. 
Consider embarking on a road trip from Toronto to Belleville, Ontario. This 
journey will require you to drive along Highway 401 for approximately two hours 
(200 kilometers), again highly dependent on traffic in Canada’s most populous city. 
Although the road curves somewhat, at times, hug the shores of Lake Ontario, it 
is primarily northeast. In almost the exact opposite direction of London, Ontario, 
about the same distance from Toronto on the same highway, but is due southwest of 
Toronto. 
The question very poignantly posed by McDonough (using American cities in 
his example) is: How long would it take you to reach Belleville when travelling 
from Toronto to London? If you were to slow down from 100 km/hr to 70 km/hr, a 
30% reduction, or even 50 km/h, which is a 50% reduction, eventually you will still Plastics and Circular Economy 49 
end up in London but never in Belleville. Now, London is a lovely town but if the 
intention is to go to Belleville, then you are simply headed in the wrong direction. 
The point that McDonough is highlighting is that reducing the “speed” at which 
we create waste, release greenhouse gasses, or consume non-renewable resources, 
whether by 30% or 70%, will still result in our arrival at the same destination. It will 
simply take us longer to get there. 
A change to the system—from a linear one to a circular one—is analogous to 
turning the car around. Focusing on where we want to end up as a society is more 
important than the speed at which we are travelling. 
In order to do so, an effective circular economy must decouple material 
extraction, emissions and waste from social and economic progress. An effective 
circular economy operates within the natural boundaries of our planet for the benefit 
of society. And, if we are to benefit all of society on an ongoing basis, we cannot 
continue travelling in the same direction. 
Plastics in the Circular Economy 
Plastic is a blanket term used to refer to polymers of which there are many types 
with many different applications. It is useful to differentiate by resin type, as shown 
in Fig. 3, as they do not share the same processing, applications, physical properties, 
performance, and recycling characteristics with each other. Most single-use film 
packaging is made up of LDPE (low-density polyethylene) or HDPE (high-density 
polyethylene), and modern engineered plastics can have additive layers for enhanced 
performance characteristics, such as improved moisture resistance, adhesion, tear￾resistance, and other physical improvements. These additives are incorporated during 
Fig. 3. Distribution of Plastics Demand by Type and Application (PlasticsEurope, 2020). 50 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
the extrusion stage of production and are nearly impossible to physically separate 
from base polymers after this step, which leads to difficulty in recycling. Other 
resins are often chosen for ease of production and the properties desired in final 
products. PET (polyethylene terephthalate) expands easily and durably when heated, 
so it is often used in blow moulding for high output production of plastic beverage 
containers. Polystyrene (Styrofoam) expands easily and becomes rigid, making 
it useful in packaging fragile items, while also providing temperature insulation. 
Poly-vinyl chloride (PVC) is strong and resistant to chemicals, so it is often used 
in plumbing and in applications that are intended to last for a long time. There are 
many applications for all types of resins, and even more when combined to optimize 
specific properties. 
Plastic, in many of its forms, could be argued as being incompatible with 
the circular economy. That the material itself cannot exist in a functional circular 
economy. However, this assessment is usually based on behaviour and the category 
of plastics referred to as single-use or nondurable plastics. Materials, such as plastic 
shopping bags or drinking straws, have garnered most of the attention with plastic 
bans focused on these materials in Canada alongside stir sticks, six-pack rings, 
cutlery, and hard-to-recycle take-out containers (European Commission, 2021; 
Government of Canada, 2020). 
Chemical recycling from 
diverted waste 9 (< 1%) 
Chemical recycling from 
disposed waste 40 (< 1%) 
Resin in products 
staying in Canada 
End-use 
applications 
Nondurable1 
1,599 1,587 
Landfill 2,795 (86%)
(100%) 
3.268 
Durable1 
1,681 
3,068 
Mechanical (polymer) recycling 256 (8%) 
4,667 
Plastic in 
products 
discarded2 
Unmanaged dumps or leaks 29 (%) 
Incineration with energy recovery 137 (4%) 
Recycling3 305 (9%) 
1 Durable applications with an average lifetime > 1 year will end up as waste only in later years; given market 
growth and increase share of plastics in durable applications (e.g., construction, cars) plastics waste generated 
today is less than what is being put in the market that same year. On the contrary nondurable applications go 
almost straight to waste. 
2 1,587 thousand metric tons of mixed plastic waste from nondurable applications 1,681 thousand metric tons of 
mixed plastic waste from production in previous years. 
3 Output recycling rate, after taking into account process losses. 
Fig. 4. Canadian Resin Flow in Thousands of tonnes Annually (2016). Plastics and Circular Economy 51 
Nondurable plastics represent the largest portion of plastic waste in both Canada 
(as shown in Fig. 4) and the EU, at 47% and 50%, respectively. The same recycling 
systems that struggle to recycle 9% of plastic waste in Canada are not optimized 
to efficiently repurpose the types of plastic used in higher-end applications, such 
as for electronics, furniture, and other textiles. These systems have been optimized 
for the largest plastic waste-generating sector, which is packaging (ECCC, 2019). 
Even when the collection is optimized, the nature of the material (either in very low 
quantity or in highly heterogenous form or both) does not translate into material 
that will be reintroduced back into the system for new materials or products (ECCC, 
2019). 
The construction sector represents the highest use of durable plastics and the 
second highest in overall production with 26% of plastic utilization in Canada, and 
20% in Europe (in terms of utilization, construction is a close second to packaging 
which represents 33% of use in Canada). However, this sector represents only 5% 
of plastic waste produced in Canada (ECCC, 2019). In the construction sector, 
plastics can often be the best choice for a long-lasting material, offering durability 
and longevity improvements over alternatives. It is used for moisture and vapour 
barriers, insulation, and piping where its performance specifications and lower 
cost are advantageous. In this case, plastic products have a useful life of decades as 
opposed to minutes with many single-use items. Plastic has only been widely used 
in construction since the 1980s in Canada, which also plays a part in the low waste 
numbers for this sector as most of the plastic is still actively serving its purpose in 
constructed buildings. However, the plastic waste numbers will increase as buildings 
need to be renovated or refurbished, so durable plastics are not immune to ending up 
in the same situation as their nondurable counterparts without proper intervention. 
Despite recycling efforts, an excessive amount of plastic is ending up in a 
landfill and the environment. This reflects a fundamental flaw in the approach when 
looking at the end of the process to find solutions. Of the estimated 8.3 billion tonnes 
ever produced between 1950 and 2015, nearly 60% of that is estimated to exist in 
either the natural environment as pollution or landfills; 12% of it is estimated to have 
been incinerated, and only 9% has been recycled globally with the remaining 19% of 
plastic ever produced still in use today (Watkins, 2019). 
So if plastic production was to cease today, plastic recovery efforts in the 
form of policy intervention and technological innovation must continue. Globally, 
approximately 5 billion tonnes of plastic material is either in the natural environment 
or in a landfill (UNEP, 2018) with an additional 1.6 billion tonnes currently in service 
that may suffer the same fate as the other 5 billion tonnes without proper action. 
However, this is not the reality as the plastic demand remains at an all-time high with 
over 300 million tonnes produced annually. 
This speaks to a problem that requires a multi-pronged solution. Namely, 1) 
valued products and services need to be redesigned to eliminate plastic pollution and 
waste; 2) plastics destined for disposal or already in the natural environment need to 
be recovered; and 3) policies must be established to incentivize actions that eliminate 
or recovers waste plastic and clearly disincentivizes the opposite. 
Plastics, like all materials, provide a service to society and the ability of plastics 
to be compatible with a circular economy requires the application of the same 52 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
building blocks as any other materials. The next sections describe the key building 
blocks for a circular economy with a focus on the effective application of these 
building blocks to achieve the aforementioned multi-pronged solution, demonstrated 
with case studies in the plastics industry. 
Building Blocks of a Circular Economy 
The building blocks of a circular economy can be simplified into a few key approaches 
and prioritized accordingly. Figure 5 below shows the key approaches to transition to 
a circular economy with the three central approaches avoiding the potentially linear 
outcomes, while the outer rings aim to minimize existing impact with less and less 
desired results. The outermost ring represents an endpoint that is the same as a linear 
economy disposal scheme. 
Fig. 5. Circular Economy Interventions. 
The following sections further examine these approaches and how each can 
contribute to a circular economy. 
Circular Design 
Circular Design is an approach that integrates circularity into the design of a product 
or a material from the onset. The outcome of this approach is that no waste is 
produced. All non-renewable materials can be disassembled and repurposed, while 
any renewable or biological materials can be returned to the natural environment 
without a negative impact. This results in materials being reintroduced in the 
manufacturing of a similar new product, reprocessed into their original primary 
ingredient, or bio-based materials returning to the natural environment. Plastics and Circular Economy 53 
We have many examples of circular designs with precious metals. Gold, silver, 
and other precious metals can be re-smelted for the production of new products. This 
is especially true of jewellery where the metals are not mixed with other materials, 
Circular Design Case Study: Ecovative 
Ecovative directly reduces the amount of plastic and Styrofoam waste being produced and 
discarded by providing packaging without waste. Their mycelium technology is offering 
a new method for securely packaging fragile and oddly shaped products for shipment to 
consumers. 
Using just two ingredients, hemp hurds and mycelium, they are able to custom grow a 
durable package structure to surround and protect a product during shipping which 
traditionally required styrofoam, plastic, air, or cardboard to help reduce impacts and 
damage. Their process involves nine steps to creating a durable package for shipping: 
computer automated design (CAD) to determine required dimensions, CNC milling, and 
tooling of MDF product analog, thermoforming growth trays to the dimensions of the MDF 
part, filling the thermoformed mold with hemp hurds, mycelium, and other composite and 
reinforcing mediums when desired. Then the parts are grown internally in pods, popped 
out of the trays for additional external growing, and placed into a chamber for drying. The 
result is a thermally insulating and water-resistant package that offers protection for fragile 
items during shipping which can then be safely disposed of alongside other compost. This 
growth process takes seven days, while the end packaging will biodegrade when added to 
soil in 45 days. 
The need for a truly biodegradable option has been addressed with this design, rather than 
addressing the need for a recycling plan. Creating a product that can easily and safely be 
returned to the natural environment by end consumers shifts a lot of the burden away from 
municipal recycling programs and simplifies the extended producer responsibility for the 
shipped product as the alternatives (mainly styrofoam and blister packaging). 
(Ecovative, 2022) 54 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
so the reprocessing does not produce waste by-products any more than would be 
produced by using mined ore. In fact, the purity of the secondary material results 
in less waste and resource usage than processing ore (Fothergill, 2004). The same 
concept applies to other metals such as aluminum and steel. 
The circular design is intentional from the onset. Circular design can be more 
broadly adopted at a system level if organizations actively seek to reuse their 
materials and more importantly design their products to facilitate that reuse. The 
fundamental aspect of a circular design is that the producer has created something 
that has value beyond its initial use, whether it is to the organization to reintroduce 
into their process or the market or to the natural environment as nutrients. 
As the name implies, waste is “designed” out of the system. This requires 
reflection on the purpose of the service being provided. Southwest Airlines former 
President Colleen Barrett famously stated, “We’re in the customer service business, 
we just happen to fly airplanes” (Southwest, The Magazine, 2015). Just as intelligent 
oil and gas companies must realize that they are in the business of energy and focus 
on renewable energy to ensure their organizations are compatible with a sustainable 
future. Plastic and chemical companies must realize that they are in the business 
of packaging, food preservation, and other critical services to society that plastics 
currently provide in order to be compatible with a circular economy. 
With that mentality, the purpose of the service informs the design of the product. 
Mushroom-based packaging like Ecovative is a great example of bio-based circular 
design. The material is made from food waste and mycelium (the fungal network 
that mushrooms sprout from) to create a customer-shaped material to protect fragile 
products in shipping; a role traditionally performed by plastic products, Styrofoam. 
Industrial Symbiosis 
Industrial symbiosis refers to the beneficial exchange of materials between industrial 
operations. Most commonly, it is the use of one industrial process’ by-products as 
the feedstock for another industrial process. It can be seen as the intelligent design 
of the processes of multiple compatible industries to minimize ecological harm and 
maximize economic benefits through a material exchange. 
A great example of industrial symbiosis is the partnerships between the steel and 
cement industries. Blast furnace slag, a by-product of iron production, is utilized by 
cement manufacturing to supplement traditional Portland cement directly or as raw 
material feed. The slag can be utilized as a replacement for Portland cement which is 
the traditional material manufactured by cement plants. By utilizing this by-product 
from the steel industry, the cement industry reduces their dependence not only on 
the raw material but can also bypass the thermal (kiln) process needed to produce 
clinker—the intermediary product used to make cement—thereby reducing the fuel 
consumption and emissions associated with manufacturing this cement substitute. 
Broader examples of industrial symbiosis can exist as eco-industrial parks, a 
collection of industries that exchange resources. The most notable example is the 
eco-industrial park in Kalundburg, Denmark, where over a dozen facilities exchange 
material, water, and energy resources in a symbiotic relationship that supports 
the needs of each facility. Although Kalundburg is rightfully cited as a model for Plastics and Circular Economy 55 
industrial symbiosis, effective industrial symbiosis can be achieved on a smaller 
scale and incorporate the strategy of Reverse Cycles that will be presented later in 
this chapter. 
One company exemplifying industrial symbiosis in the plastics industry is C.R. 
Plastic Products. Located in Stratford, Ontario, C.R. Plastic Products utilizes plastic 
water bottle caps, milk jugs, and juice containers in the manufacturing of outdoor 
furniture. The use of HDPE recovered from their subsidiary recycling company, 
rather than virgin HDPE feedstock, reduces the need for virgin raw material for 
the furniture manufacturing business. Although a simple example, what separates 
this notion of industrial symbiosis from simply being referred to as recycling is the 
purpose for which it is executed. The purposeful use of by-products as raw materials 
requires a relationship (however, formal or informal) between the industry generating 
the by-product and the industry utilizing it as raw material. 
Industrial Symbiosis Case Study: CR Plastics 
CR Plastic Products is helping make the lifecycle of plastics more circular in their 
production of outdoor furniture products in Stratford, Ontario. They utilize high-density 
polyethylene (HDPE) recovered from recycling plants and turn them into long-lasting 
durable outdoor furniture products, such as deck chairs and tables. This allows for a 
seamless flow of recycled material to be processed (shredded, remelted, extruded, and 
reformed) into multiple products based on the type of material recovered. 
Diverting waste from landfills becomes much easier and more desirable when there are 
viable and profitable alternate uses for this discarded material. CR Plastic Products has 
developed a sustainable business model that operates on two important circular economy 
principles i.e., finding a profitable use for material that would otherwise be discarded and 
creating a new product that is durable and will serve its intended purpose for a long time; 
at which time its components can be recycled and reprocessed again into another new and 
valuable product. 
(C.R. Plastic Products, 2021) 
Industrial symbiosis can lead to overall reductions in virgin raw material and 
energy use through these beneficial exchanges. It is the manifestation of “waste = 
food”, where the waste of one process becomes the food (read: raw material) for 
another. 
Circular Business Models 
Filling a need in society is often heralded as the rationale to start a viable business. 
As the problem of plastics pollution is well documented, the emergence of new 
business models provides an opportunity to meet a need in society that does not 
create or contribute to the problem. Sourcing raw materials from the economy, rather 
than from raw ecological reserves, is one method as is repairing a product destined 
for a landfill. Even repurposing a discarded or seemingly end-of-life product from 
the energy-intensive transport and recycling processes is a value-adding niche that 
can be undertaken by any aspiring and entrepreneurial organization. 56 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
With the well-deserved negative publicity that single-use plastic products get, as 
well as the low historical recycling rates around the world, a new circular business 
model has shown a viable path to reducing the amount of plastic waste i.e., refillery 
services. 
Refillery services are creating a circular business model by applying this concept 
to an increasing variety of common household products that have often been sold in 
single-use plastic containers. 
By offering customers a way to simply refill their empty glass or durable plastic 
bottles with products, such as shampoo, dish soap, detergent, and even toothpaste, 
they eliminate the waste generated by end-of-life disposal of these products’ 
traditional packaging. The refillery model even reduces the burden of recycling 
plastic or glass, as you can clean and reuse these containers, as long as they remain 
structurally sound. Even refilling a shampoo bottle once saves another bottle from 
needing to be recycled or ending up in a landfill. Refillery services exist in many 
forms, such as a booth at a grocery store, entire locations dedicated to supplying 
products to consumers using customer-supplied containers, or mobile services that 
operated with regular pop-up locations. 
This business model achieves circularity by eliminating the need for individually 
packaged items. It delivers a product directly to the consumer which bypasses the 
need for packaging designed to last for long periods in warehouses or survive 
shipping around the world. By redesigning the entire service model, even at a small 
Circular Business Models Case Study: Refillable Household Cleaning Products 
Refillable Household Products 
In many instances of single-use plastic, the sole purpose of the plastic is packaging to 
preserve a product until it is delivered to the end consumer. Finding alternative ways to 
obtain these products and preserve them from their production through their delivery to 
the consumer and throughout their active-use lifetime without any end-of-life waste is a 
circular economy priority. There are many products and companies that offer alternative 
ways to access common household products while avoiding the waste of unnecessary 
packaging. In Ottawa, Ontario, grocery chain Terra20 has created Ecobar, Canada’s largest 
refill station. This system allows customers to buy cleaning and personal care products 
from well-known sustainable brands, return the bottles when finished for cleaning and 
reuse, and receive a discount on subsequent refills. This process directly reuses the plastic 
bottles, instead of disposing of them in a recycling center. 
(Terra 20, 2021)
 
The Glass Jar Refillery in Hamilton, Ontario, offers similar refill options to in-store 
customers with the benefit of being able to bring in and fill their own (pre-cleaned) 
containers. 
(The Glass Jar Refillery, 2022)
 
Another choice available to consumers is the mobile refillery option. Halton Region in 
Ontario-based refillery market has no brick-and-mortar location. Instead, they use their 
website to allow customers to view and order products for next-day delivery and refilling 
of personal containers (Refillery Market, 2021).
 
In Burlington, Ontario-based Park Market & Refillery has a combination of a storefront 
and a mobile refill van that will also drive to customers’ locations to fulfill orders. 
(Park Market and Refillery, 2022)
 Plastics and Circular Economy 57 
scale, significant waste reductions can be realized when focusing on the consumer 
need and the cleaning products rather than the packaging that contains them. As 
such, circular business models have a critical role to play in delivering value to 
society without the environmental burden. 
Reverse Cycles 
“Reverse cycles” is perhaps the most exciting opportunity for a circular economy 
and the area where policy can accelerate the transition. This approach is one where 
organizations actively seek out materials that have been discarded to introduce them 
back into the manufacturing process in place of virgin materials. Whether in an 
industrial stockpile, in waste bins, in communities, or in the oceans, reverse cycles 
present an opportunity to create economic and social value by literally bending the 
last stage in the linear economy arrow (disposal) in the other direction. Organizations, 
like Plastic Bank and Interface, are actively seeking to create a solution for waste 
materials in the natural environment. 
Plastic Bank, a Canadian-based organization, incentivizes the recovery of 
discarded plastics in developing nations. By monetizing the recovery of plastics for 
all community members, Plastic Bank is able to engage people to collect and return 
waste plastics from their communities to one of the company’s recycling centers. In 
turn, the company sells the cleaned, sorted material to large plastics processors and 
more critically returns material into the system that was otherwise lost. 
Another organization, Interface, is a recognized sustainability leader for decades 
and has been taking plastic recycling one step further. The company relies heavily on 
Nylon-6 for the manufacturing of its carpet tiles; a material that can be recycled from 
old carpets or purchased as raw feedstock. Nylon-6 is also the same material that 
is used in manufacturing fishing nets. Unfortunately, this material is present in any 
Reverse Cycles Case Study: Plastics Bank 
Plastic Bank is an organization that seeks to reduce plastic waste by monetizing the value of 
discarded plastic products and using them as feedstock to make recycled plastic products. 
This incentivized collection reduces the amount of plastic ending up in waterways and 
landfills and creates a circular economy of plastic collectors and producers. 
Discarded plastic is collected by individuals and brought to centralized collection and 
distribution centers. The material is weighed, sorted, and the collectors are paid with tokens 
based on the value of the material collected. These tokens act as a type of currency and 
can be used to purchase groceries, fuel, school tuition, health insurance, and more. This 
conversion of a polluting waste product into a valuable part of a supply chain has dramatic 
effects on participating communities, giving them a sustained source of income where 
there was none before. Once the plastic is collected and paid for, it is processed for reuse by 
washing, flaking, and separating. Integrating this process with a blockchain network allows 
the entire process to be secure, provides real-time data visualization, and makes the process 
transparent, traceable, and scalable. 
The collected and processed plastic is then turned into Social Plastic which is a raw plastic 
supply that can be used in place of virgin resins created from fossil fuels. Creating products out 
of social plastic is a significant contributor to a closed-loop supply chain. This technologically￾enhanced new recycling ecosystem reduces ocean plastic waste and the reliance on virgin 
plastic while supporting communities that can benefit from this new resource. 
(Plasticbank, 2021) 58 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
natural environment where there is fishing activity due to loss during fishing, tears/ 
damage, and discarded nets (Net-works, 2021). By actively engaging small fishing 
communities, Interface has created a system where damaged or discarded fishing 
nets can be sold to partner organizations for use in the production of their carpet tiles. 
As with Plastic Bank, Interface is actively seeking to return material that 
has been discarded, while creating economic benefits for the communities. This 
approach integrates secondary material as feedstock into their supply chains and 
returns valuable resources to the economy. Reverse cycles aim to correct the failings 
Reverse Cycles Case Study: Interface Net-works 
Interface has been a model for sustainable manufacturing since its Mission Zero commitment 
in 1994, and its passion and ability to find innovative solutions to production sustainability 
challenges have continued to evolve since. Net-Works, an initiative supported by Zoological 
Society of London, by Interface is an inclusive business model that combines plastic waste 
removal and prevention with marine life preservation and economic opportunities. 
Net-Works was originally trialed in 2012 in the Philippines Bantayan Islands and has 
since grown with hubs being established in Danajon Bank and Cameroon. This program 
is an all-encompassing solution to a few different but related problems in coastal fishing 
communities. Nylon-6 fishing nets often break after significant use and have traditionally 
been discarded in the water which has devastating effects on marine animal and plant life. 
Conservation efforts in the past can only do so much to help the problem, but fishing nets 
are disposed of at such a rate in the world’s oceans that a year’s worth of nets stretched end 
to end could wrap around the entire planet 1.39 times. Net-Works’ solution to this problem 
is to provide real incentives to local fishing communities to recover these nets and dispose 
of them properly in the first place. Between 2012 to 2015, 66,860 kg of fishing nets were 
collected. These nets are then dried and bailed for shipping where they are then sold to 
nylon yarn supplier Aquafil. Having this market to sell discarded nets to is crucial to the 
success of this project as financial empowerment is a driving force of this successful buy￾in by community participants. It is estimated that over 2 billion people in the world do not 
have a bank account which isolates them from many opportunities for school, housing, and 
retirement. Selling these nets is a way to bring in a consistent income which also brings 
with it many opportunities for socioeconomic improvement. 
Once Aquafil receives these nets, they recycle them into nylon yarn which is then bought by 
Interface to be used in their carpet tiles. This industrial ecology that was born out of a need 
to reduce plastic waste in the oceans has turned into a sustainable recycled carpet supply 
chain and as a result, it has many financial and socioeconomic benefits to impoverished 
coastal communities. 
(Net-works, 2021) 
of linear action by the proceeding users of material and the actions of predecessors 
that chose a linear approach which, as mentioned earlier in the chapter, discards the 
energy and craftsmanship, as well as the cultural, social, and economic value. 
There are many more solutions out there that have been proven to work and 
are not only cost-effective but can stimulate economic progress. Plastic pollution in 
our environment is not inevitable. Diverting existing sources of pollution by means 
of a circular economy and recovering the current plastic littering our planet are two 
equally important aspirations. The shift from seeing discarded plastic as garbage and 
waste to treating it as a useful resource is how we shift linear plastic supply chains Plastics and Circular Economy 59 
into becoming circular. By incentivizing recovery and proper disposal/recycling 
instead of incentivizing continual waste production, we not only fund a solution to 
pollution but also create the conditions for a circular economy to thrive. 
Energy Recovery & Disposal 
Energy Recovery remains the last ring of the circular economy—and arguable is 
more an element of a linear system than a circular one. It remains a viable tool for 
waste management to prevent dumping or landfilling of materials that will create 
impact to the nature environment. The material value is ultimately lost but the energy 
value is recovered. 
The problem of course, is the emissions created in the combustion of waste 
materials whether this takes places in an energy-from-waste facility generating 
electricity or as an alternative fuel in energy-intensive industries such as cement 
manufacturing. Energy generation and reducing the volume of waste in landfills 
would be an obvious win-win solution, if not for the emissions that result from the 
combustion process. In some energy-intensive industries, the use of plastics as fuel 
may be substituting coal or other fossil fuels that can lead to a reduction in certain 
emissions from combustion as well as avoiding extraction of fossil fuels to support 
the high energy needs of these processes. However, from a broader perspective— 
this remains a tool of a poorly designed (linear) system but a necessary one in the 
transition, if the only alternative is disposal. 
Disposal can take the form of landfilling or thermal destruction (without 
energy recovery). Formal waste management systems remain an important part of 
modern infrastructure, whether as public or private services, to avoid dumping or 
uncontrolled burning. Whether is in the form of energy recovery or disposal—the 
destruction of embodies resources is inconsistent with the goals of an effective 
circular economy. This necessity is a stark reminder of the failed design of the linear 
economy, however, the opportunity to redirect materials from landfill and energy 
recovery to higher value uses is a role that traditional waste management operators 
can play to support the transition to a circular economy. 
Policies Supporting the Circular Economy Transition for Plastics 
Reaching the goal of an effective circular economy, as logical as it is from a social, 
environmental, and economic standpoint, still requires the proper policy environment 
and instruments to facilitate the transition. Two common policy approaches are 
Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) and Deposit Return Systems (DRS). 
EPR is a policy instrument that refers to regulations that make the producers 
of a product responsible for its materials’ entire lifecycle, including recovery and 
recycling of end-of-life material components and even the packaging used to deliver 
the product to the consumer. Most OECD countries have at least some type of EPR 
regulation even if it extends only to specific sectors, such as packaging, batteries, 
or electronics (OECD, 2014). Throughout Canada, there currently exists over 120 
individual EPR programs across the provinces and territories (EPR Canada, 2017). 60 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Around the world, EPR adoption has been growing for years. The collection, 
sorting and recycling of a package typically cost more than the value of the material 
recovered, so EPR is the only way to fund these recycling efforts sufficiently (Ellen 
Macarthur Foundation, 2022). EPR is slowly but surely spreading around the globe 
with more than 25 countries in Europe having at least some type of EPR legislation, 
mostly related to household plastics (EXPRA, 2016). Figure 6 shows the growth in 
packaging EPR legislation around the world since 2000. 
While having legislation levels the playing field for companies operating across 
jurisdictions, individual businesses and organizations have their part to play, and 
they are also realizing that EPR policies are becoming more of a necessity. The 
Ellen Macarthur Foundation has reported that over 150 leading businesses and 
organizations have publicly recognized the need for EPR, and over 500 companies 
have signed commitments to reach targets for achieving a circular economy for 
plastics (Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2021). 
Fig. 6. International Growth of Extended Producer Responsibility Policies From 2000 to 2018 
(WWF, 2020). Plastics and Circular Economy 61 
Through EPR the economic burden of end-of-life material management systems 
is placed on the producer, creating the financial incentives to improve the design. 
The consumer can also be incentivized to help manage the destination of recyclable 
plastics. A proven, effective way to encourage the proper management of plastics and 
recyclable items is deposit return systems (DRS). 
DRS refers to an incentivized recycling collection system targeted directly at 
consumers. Retailers charge a small fee (usually a few cents) on the upfront sale of 
eligible products, such as plastic, glass, and aluminum beverage cans and bottles. 
The fee is then refunded to the consumer when the empty container is returned to 
either the same location or designated retailer or a centralized recycling and sorting 
center. This reduces operating costs and improves the uptake and efficiency of the 
recycling and collection system. 
Deposit return systems around the world have proven to work at reducing waste 
and encouraging consumers to make the choice and effort to recycle with often 
dramatic results. Norway introduced a deposit return system in 2018. Consumers 
pay a small deposit fee embedded in the cost of a product up front and later return 
the bottle or other empty package and collect the fee for their deposit at a centralized 
recycling centre or the more convenient option of a “reverse vending machine” which 
are available outside many retailers, such as grocery stores. These machines accept a 
large variety of bottle shapes and materials and will calculate the value of the deposit 
and print a coupon with a cash value that can be redeemed in the store. This system 
has resulted in Norway having a 97% recycling rate for plastic bottles, putting it 
well ahead of the European Union’s 2029 deadline to achieve a 90% recycling rate 
(Deshayes, 2020). Another successful example is Lithuania which improved a 34% 
recycling rate to over 92% within 2 years of implementing DRS policies (INNOWO, 
2020; USAD, 2022). 
Incentivizing Deposit Return Systems in combination with Extended Producer 
Responsibility and minimum recycled content policies can further support the 
building blocks of a circular economy. The building blocks of a circular economy 
for plastics are not independent of one another, and they in fact rely on each other 
and are strengthened by the symbiotic relationship of the system being created. This 
is supported by policies that create the environments to accelerate the adoption of 
these building blocks. Reducing the dependence on virgin plastics is critical but the 
current market demand for the services provided by plastics must then be met by 
some other means. The transition to an effective circular economy requires assessing 
the needs of our society, designing solutions that meet those needs, and ensuring 
the resulting solutions do not waste material, energy, cultural, social, and economic 
value. The future role of plastics in our society will be determined not by their 
chemical composition but by their adherence to the building blocks of an effective 
circular economy. 
The processes and methods discussed in this chapter serve as not just examples 
of effective action on plastic pollution but also as models of innovative thinking and 
creative solutions to this difficult problem. Since global supply chains and many 
products that are part of daily life rely on plastics right now, eliminating plastic is 
much more complex than just stopping the use and production of single-use plastics. 
Some of the solutions presented are clever ways that allow traditional packaging 62 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
and shipping to continue but without end-of-life waste, such as the mycellar packing 
example. Other innovations, such as refillable product containers or Net-works, 
reduce end-of-life waste by reprocessing the waste before it enters the environment. 
These multi-faceted approaches, targeting all areas of the plastic lifecycle, will make 
the work of end-of-life repurposing of a material a much more manageable task. 
These combined approaches and examples of creative thinking are how we as a 
society can have a measurable shift toward a circular economy for plastics. 
References 
Bloxsome, N. (2020, October 20). International Aluminium Institute publishes global recycling data. 
Retrieved from aluminiumtoday.com: https://aluminiumtoday.com/news/international-aluminium￾institute-publishes-global-recycling-data. 
British Standards Institution. (2017, May). The rise of the Circular Economy. Retrieved from bsigroup. 
com: https://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/standards/benefits-of-using-standards/becoming-more￾sustainable-with-standards/BS8001-Circular-Economy/. 
C.R. Plastic Products. (2021, July). Our Commitment to the Environment. Retrieved from crpproducts. 
com: https://crpproducts.com/about.html. 
CCSP. 2020. 2020 Annual Report on the State of Sustainable Public Procurement in Canada. Vancouver: 
The Canadian Collaboration for Sustainable Procurement. 
Deshayes, P.-H. (2020, February 13). In Norway, bottles made of plastic are still fantastic. Retrieved from 
phys.org: https://phys.org/news/2020-02-norway-bottles-plastic-fantastic.html 
E. Kosior, I.C. 2020. Solutions to the plastic waste problem on land and in the oceans. Plastic Waste 
and Recycling: Environmental Impact, Societal Issues, Prevention, and Solutions, 415–446. doi:doi. 
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817880-5.00016-5. 
ECCC. 2019. Economic Study of the Canadian Plastic Industry, Markets and Waste. Deloitte, Cheminfo 
Services. ECCC. Retrieved from https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2019/eccc/En4-
366-1-2019-eng.pdf 
Ecovative. (2022, January). We grow better materials. Retrieved from ecovative.com: ecovative.com 
Ellen Macarthur Foundation. 2017. Infographic: Circular Economy System Diagram. Retrieved from 
ellenmacarthurfoundation.org: https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy/ 
concept/infographic 
Ellen Macarthur Foundation. 2021. Global Committment: Signatory Reports. Packaging producers and 
users. Retrieved January 11, 2022, from https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/global-commitment/ 
signatory-reports 
Ellen Macarthur Foundation. (2022, January 12). Extended Producer. Retrieved from https://plastics. 
ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/epr: https://plastics.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/epr 
EPR Canada. (2017). Extended Producer Responsibility Summary Report. EPR Canada. Retrieved 
January 2022, from http://www.eprcanada.ca/reports/2016/EPR-Report-Card-2016.pdf 
Euronews. (2021, July 24). The Tokyo Olympics will merge ancient heritage with modern innovation. 
Retrieved from euronews.com: https://www.euronews.com/green/2021/07/24/the-tokyo-olympics￾will-merge-ancient-heritage-with-modern-innovation 
European Commission. (2021, July 29). Circular Economy action plan. Retrieved from ec.europa.eu: 
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/strategy/circular-economy-action-plan_en 
Eurpoean Commission. (2021, July 28). A European Green New Deal. Retrieved from ec.europa.eu: 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en#timeline 
EXPRA. (2016). Extended Producer Responsibility. Extended Producer Responsibility Alliance. Retrieved 
from https://www.expra.eu/uploads/downloads/EXPRA%20EPR%20Paper_March_2016.pdf 
Fothergill, J. (2004). Scrap Mining: An Overview of Metal Recycling in Canada. Ottawa: Canary Research 
Institute for Mining, Environment and Health. Retrieved from https://www.canaryinstitute.ca/ 
publications/Scrap_Mining.pdf 
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J. and Law, K. L. (2017, July 19). Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. 
Science Advances, 3(7). doi:10.1126/sciadv.1700782 Plastics and Circular Economy 63 
Government of Canada. (2020, October 7). Canada one-step closer to zero plastic waste by 2030. 
Retrieved from Environment and Climate Change Canada: https://www.canada.ca/en/environment￾climate-change/news/2020/10/canada-one-step-closer-to-zero-plastic-waste-by-2030.html 
Hopewell et al., e. a. (2009, July 27). Plastics recycling: challenges and opportunities. Philos Trans R Soc 
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 364(1526): 2115–2126. doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0311 
IKEA. 2020. IKEA Sustainability Strategy: People & Planet Positive. Retrieved July 2021, 
from https://gbl-sc9u2-prd-cdn.azureedge.net/-/media/aboutikea/pdfs/people-and-planet￾sustainability-strategy/people-and-planet-positive-ikea-sustainability-strategy-august-2020. 
pdf?rev=3a3e9a12744b4705b9d1aa8be3b36197&hash=099EADD58A6B850BD522866B8E01F5 
18 
INNOWO. 2020. How do effective deposit refund systems work? Innovation Norway. Retrieved from 
https://innowo.org/userfiles/deposit%20refund%20systems%20Manual%20ENG.pdf 
Interface Inc. 2021. About Net-Works. Retrieved from net-works.com: https://net-works.com/about￾net-works/#next-steps 
ISO. (2018). ISO/TC 323 Circular Economy. Retrieved from ISO Technical Committees: https://www.iso. 
org/committee/7203984.html 
ISO 20400. (2017). Sustainable Procurement. Geneva: International Organization for Standardization. 
McDonough, W. 2000. A Boat for Thoreau. The ruffin Series of the Society for Business Ethics, pp. 115– 
133. doi:10.5840/ruffinx2000210 
Net-works. (2021, July). Net-wroks. Retrieved from net-works.com: https://net-works.com/ 
OECD. 2014. The State of Play on Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR): Opportunities and 
Challenges. Global Forum on Environment: Promoting Sustainable Materials Management through 
Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR). Tokyo: OECD. Retrieved Jan 12, 2022, from https: 
//www.oecd.org/environment/waste/Global%20Forum%20Tokyo%20Issues%20Paper%2030-5-
2014.pdf 
Ontario Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Parks. (2021, June 3). Ontario Enhancing Blue Box 
Program. Retrieved from https://news.ontario.ca/: https://news.ontario.ca/en/release/1000259/ 
ontario-enhancing-blue-box-program 
Park Market and Refillery. (2022, January). How it Works. Retrieved from parkmarketandrefillery.com: 
https://parkmarketandrefillery.com/pages/how-it-works 
PlasticBank. (2021, July). Plastic Bank is empowering the regenerative society. Retrieved from plasticbank. 
com: https://plasticbank.com/about/ 
Plasticoceans.org. 2021. Plastic Oceans: The-Facts. Retrieved from Plasticoceans.org: https://plasticoceans. 
org/the-facts/ 
PlasticsEurope. 2020. Plastics—the Facts 2020. PlasticsEurope. Retrieved July 29, 2021, from https:// 
issuu.com/plasticseuropeebook/docs/plastics_the_facts-web-dec2020 
Quebec Ministere de l’Environment. (2021). Modernization of Québec’s deposit and selective 
collection systems. Retrieved from www.environnement.gouv.qc.ca: https://www.environnement. 
gouv.qc.ca/matieres/consigne-collecte/index-en.htm 
RCO. (2019, April 29). Canada recycles just 9 per cent of its plastics. Retrieved from Recycling Council of 
Ontario: https://rco.on.ca/canada-recycles-just-9-per-cent-of-its-plastics/ 
Refillery Market. (2021, June). Refillery Delivery. Retrieved from refillerymarket.ca: https:// 
refillerymarket.ca/pages/delivery/, 
Roser, Ritchie. 2018. Plastic Pollution. Retrieved from Our World in Data: https:/ 
/ourworldindata.org/plastic-pollution 
Sciencehistory.org. 2022. History and Future of Plastics. Retrieved from Sciencehistor.org: https://www. 
sciencehistory.org/the-history-and-future-of-plastics 
Sellito, F. M. (2018, August). Industrial Symbiosis: A Case Study Involving a Steelmaking, a Cement 
Manufacturing, and a Zinc Smelting Plant. Chemical Engineering Transactions, pp. 211–216. 
doi:10.3303/CET1870036 
Statista. 2021. Annual production of plastics worldwide from 1950 to 2020(in million metric tons). 
Retrieved from Statista: https://www.statista.com/statistics/282732/global-production-of￾plastics-since-1950/ 
Southwest The Magazine, July 2015 Issue, pg 16, https://issuu.com/southwestmag/docs/07_july_15, 
Original quote attributed to Colleen Barrett. 64 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Terra20. (2021, July). terra20.com. Retrieved from terra20.com: https://terra20.com/pages/about-us 
The Glass Jar Refillery. (2022, January). THE GLASS JAR REFILLERY. Retrieved from https:// 
glassjarrefillery.ca/: https://glassjarrefillery.ca/ 
UNEP. 2018. Our planet is drowning in plastic pollution—it’s time for change! Retrieved from www.unep. 
org: https://www.unep.org/interactive/beat-plastic-pollution/. 
USAD. (2022, January). Uzstatos Sistemos Administratorius. Retrieved from Grazinti verta: https:// 
grazintiverta.lt/en/about/69. 
Watkins, E. e. 2019. Policy approaches to incentivise sustainable plastic design. Paris: OECD Environment 
Working Papers, No. 149, OECD Publishing. doi:0.1787/233ac351. 
WWF. 2020. How to Implement Extended Producer Responsibility (Epr): A Briefing For Governments And 
Businesses. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved from https://wwfint.awsassets.panda.org/downloads/ 
how_to_implement_epr___briefing_for_government_and_business.pdf. 
WWF Australia (2021, July 2). The Lifecycle of Plastics. Retrieved from WWF.org.au: https://www.wwf. 
org.au/news/blogs/the-lifecycle-of-plastics#gs.77pikn. Chapter 5
 
Seeing Is Believing
 Educational and Volunteer Programming to Address 
Plastic Pollution in Hamilton Harbour 
Steven Watts,1,* Christine Bowen1,* and Chris McLaughlin1,2,# 
INTRODUCTION 
Plastic pollution is ubiquitous across the Laurentian Great Lakes (Earn et al., 2021). 
Plastics polluting aquatic environments originate primarily as litter on land where 
streams, rivers, and infrastructure then act as downstream conduits (Moore, 2008), 
providing plastic pathways toward places such as Hamilton Harbour at the far west 
end of Lake Ontario (Fig. 1). Cable et al. (2017) state that a better understanding 
of this process is critical to understanding “plastic litter budgets” and underpins 
the success of future management strategies to reduce plastic litter in surface water 
bodies and avoid the negative consequences of that waste on aquatic environments. 
Cable et al. (2017) tracked plastic pollution from anthropogenic sources to 
environmental sinks in various locations across the Great Lakes, concluding that 
“concentrations were highest near populated urban areas and their water infrastructure” 
(Eriksen et al., 2013; Zbyszewski et al., 2014; Driedger et al., 2015; Grbić et al., 
2020). This finding has shown significant relevance to Hamilton Harbour, given its 
immediately adjacent concentration of population, industry, and urban drainage by 
numerous tributaries, wastewater, and stormwater infrastructure. 
Unfortunately, Henderson and Green (2020) suggest that poor public understanding 
of the relationship between the personal usage of plastics and the growing problem of 
plastic waste reaching surface waters presents a significant challenge to reducing the 
plastics problem. However, there is evidence that a variety of community engagement 
activities and programs can improve public understanding and consequentially create 
opportunities to advance behavioural and policy changes (for example, Duckett and 
Repaci, 2015; Poletti and Landberg, 2021; Soares et al., 2021). 
1 Bay Area Restoration Council, 47 Discovery Drive, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8L 8K4.
 2 School of Earth, Environment & Society, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8S 4K1.
 
* Principal authorship is shared.
 # Corresponding author’s: chris@bayarearestoration
 66 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Fig. 1. The Hamilton Harbour Watershed With Its Three Major Subwatersheds in the Context of the Great 
Lakes. Image property of the Bay Area Restoration Council. 
Hamilton Harbour 
Hamilton Harbour has been a major shipping port for more than a century. Its 
southern shoreline is dominated by steel and iron production and is one of the largest 
concentrations of heavy industry in Canada. Decades of unmitigated industrial waste, 
untreated wastewater, and urban stormwater severely degraded the Harbour’s water 
quality and ecological health. 
In 1985, the International Joint Commission declared Hamilton Harbour as a 
Great Lakes Area of Concern (AOC) primarily due to its legacy and ongoing pollution 
that had overwhelmed water quality, eliminated habitat, and contaminated fish and 
wildlife populations. Those problems of pollution and degradation were labelled 
beneficial use impairments or BUIs. Remedial Action Plans, or RAPs, were created 
by government agencies, community organizations, and interested individuals 
together, a collective process to develop and implement actions that would remove 
the impairments and restore the beneficial use.1 
1	 For the most current information on Great Lakes Areas of Concern, corresponding Remedial Action 
Plans and the status of Beneficial Use Impairments, refer to the websites of the International Joint 
Commission (ijc.org), Environment and Climate Change Canada (canada.ca/en/environment-climate￾change.html), and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (epa.gov). For an overview of the 
strengths and limitations of that collective process relevant to community engagement, see McLaughlin 
and Krantzberg (2018, 2021). Seeing Is Believing: Educational and Volunteer Programming 67 
Plastic pollution was not identified as a specific problem, although one of the 
14 categories of BUIs is the Degradation of Aesthetics. The Aesthetics BUI addresses 
how the water looks and smells as a result of substances that produce persistent 
objectionable deposits or unnatural colour, cloudiness, or odour. Materials and 
substances that degrade aesthetics include oil slicks, surface scum, combined sewer 
overflows, excessive dust, nuisance algal blooms, and debris, such as micro- and 
macro-plastic waste (i.e., plastic particles < 5 mm and > 5 mm). 
The aesthetics of water is a highly subjective measure of environmental quality 
based on individual perceptions. Although aesthetics can be difficult to quantify 
and perceptions challenging to track, there was no doubt in 1969 that aesthetics 
in Hamilton Harbour had been utterly ruined when the member of Parliament 
for Hamilton-Wentworth, Colin Gibson, described the harbour as a “stinking, 
rotten quagmire of filth and poisonous waste” (Library of Parliament, 1969). Not 
surprisingly, the community surrounding the harbour and the city of Hamilton, in 
particular, had become arguably the most estranged from its water anywhere in 
Canada. 
As with communities across the Great Lakes at the time, community members 
were among the first to advocate for a change in these dreadful conditions. In 
Hamilton, the first such community group and the precursor to the Bay Area 
Restoration Council (BARC) was organized in 1971. As government agencies and 
other organizations began to develop the Hamilton Harbour Remedial Action Plan 
(HHRAP) in the late 1980s, many of those same individuals became members of 
the HHRAP’s public advisory committee. As implementation of the HHRAP began, 
those founding organizers and advocates incorporated BARC in 1991 to represent 
the public interest in the HHRAP process, to help its fellow community members to 
recognize and appreciate projects and challenges involved in the restoration, and to 
monitor and report on the HHRAP’s implementation and progress. 
BARC has served as an outreach function for 30 years with school programming 
and volunteer activities and by hosting community engagement events, both in￾person and increasingly online events. These varied approaches are a tremendous 
opportunity to shape public perceptions of the challenges and successes of 
restorative actions. In 2019, for example, BARC had more than 17,000 participants 
in its school programs and events that engaged with varied water literacy content 
and activities. In the last several years, schools and volunteer programming have 
increasingly included community science activities with the participants. Through 
this engagement, BARC staff has detected an increasing community interest and 
concern over plastic pollution. 
The growing public interest in plastic pollution is being expressed to BARC 
with new programming that educates students and the public about the complex 
connections of people and their plastic waste to the Harbour via tributaries and 
infrastructure. In addition, BARC has been contracted by federal and provincial 
agencies in recent years to engage substantively in the Aesthetics BUI. The 
subjective nature of this BUI means measuring progress in reducing the impairment 
of aesthetic conditions and determining the status of the BUI which is a significant 
and unresolved challenge. 68 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
This chapter shares BARC’s varied approaches to engaging and educating 
the community about plastic pollution in local aquatic environments. We describe 
the public understanding of plastic pollution to the extent that BARC staff have 
engaged with students, volunteers, and others to understand, quantify, and reduce 
plastic pollution in the Harbour. We have approached this chapter as educators and 
practitioners within the HHRAP community to highlight the importance of bridging 
scientific knowledge and public understanding to encourage and assist others 
with similar missions for engagement and education. The delivery of impactful 
programming is designed to educate and provide opportunities to directly engage 
community members in solutions which improve public understanding of plastic 
pollution and take advantage of local enthusiasm for problem-solving with tangible 
actions and measurable outcomes. 
Educational and Volunteer Programming 
Creating volunteer opportunities for community members and delivering educational 
programming for youth are key aspects of BARC’s mandate. Opportunities are 
designed to provide substantive experiential learning for participants, and the scope 
and content of each program is tailored to align with the provincial school curriculum 
at varying grade levels. BARC delivers four activities or programs that engage 
participants in issues of plastic pollution: litter cleanups, Seabin Project events, Water 
School, and shoreline monitoring. The delivery methods of BARC’s programs are an 
important aspect of the success of our community engagement. Specific approaches 
are used to reach broad demographics and ensure each participant gains the intended 
information and experience. 
Falk’s visitor identity model 
The demographics, backgrounds, and diversity of the BARC program’s participants 
vary significantly, and participant motivations are assessed; these are considered in the 
development and delivery. Falk’s (2009) research on free-choice learning, museum 
visitor studies, and science education informs BARC’s approach when considering 
different participant motivations. Falk’s predictive model is valuable in BARC’s 
attempts to best meet the needs of program participants. Although we cannot always 
predict participant motivation prior to events, Falk’s model is useful for preparing 
content and activities that engage specific audiences or varied participants. Falk 
outlines five identities: explorers, facilitators, professionals/hobbyists, experience 
seekers, and rechargers. BARC encounters each visitor’s identity throughout the 
delivery of various outreach programs. 
Explorers are motivated by curiosity and an interest in learning about topics, 
engaging with content that helps them learn, and gaining an understanding of issues. 
In Falk’s study, explorers described themselves as curious, science lovers, learners, 
and discoverers (also see Cotter et al., 2021). 
Facilitators are guided by social motivations and view event participation as an 
opportunity to spend time with those who accompany them (for example, a parent  
 
 
 
 
 
Seeing Is Believing: Educational and Volunteer Programming 69 
bringing a child). Participation by facilitators does not necessarily lead to impactful 
education as it sometimes becomes more about the opportunity to socialize. Their 
intention is to satisfy the needs or desires of the people they bring with them. 
Professionals/hobbyists are driven by their specific interests and choose events 
that build on their background or existing knowledge. In the case of plastic pollution, 
for example, professionals/hobbyists likely already have an interest in environmental 
issues and attend BARC events to gain specific and related knowledge and experience. 
They often come with a goal in mind and are described as being ‘on a mission’ to 
achieve it. 
Experience seekers are motivated by a desire to collect experiences and attend 
events for recreational opportunities. They expect to have an enjoyable experience 
and have the desire to leave fulfilled. 
Rechargers are looking for events or information that is introspective and an 
opportunity to rejuvenate. When motivated to recharge, these participants hope to 
experience awe during the event, such as seeing natural beauty (Cotter et al., 2021). 
Tilden’s principles of heritage interpretation 
The development and delivery of BARC’s programs also use Tilden’s (1977) six 
principles of heritage interpretation—described as “the communication of information 
about, or the explanation of, the nature, origin, and purpose of historical, natural, 
or cultural resources, objects, sites, and phenomena using personal or non-personal 
methods”—as a way to convey stories, information, and messages in ways that are 
approachable and digestible for broad demographics. BARC’s programs aim to 
reveal relatable and holistic information in an inclusive and age-appropriate manner 
as a way to inspire emotionally-driven (and knowledge-based) action. Incorporating 
Tilden’s principles helps to ensure that educational and volunteer programming is 
impactful, relatable, and directed to a varied audience. The six principles of heritage 
interpretation are as follows (Tilden, 1977): 
1. Interpretation that does not somehow relate what is being displayed or described 
to something within the personality or experience of the visitor will be sterile. 
Interpretation should be personal to the audience. 
2. Information, as such, is not interpretation. Interpretation is revelation based on 
information. Successful interpretation must do more than just present facts. 
3. Interpretation is an art which combines many forms of art. Any art is, to some 
degree, teachable. 
4. The chief aim of interpretation is not instruction but provocation. Interpretation 
should stimulate people toward a form of action. 
5. Interpretation should aim to present the whole rather than the part. Interpretation 
is conceptual and should explain the relationships between things. 
6. Interpretation addressed to children should not be a dilution of the presentation 
to adults, but it should follow a fundamentally different approach. Different age 
groups have different needs and require different interpretive programs. 70 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
BARC’s volunteer and education programs 
This section provides a brief overview of four examples of BARC programs or 
events that both educate and engage students and other community members with 
varied objectives and intended outcomes. Each example references Falk’s model and 
Tilden’s principles and describes BARC staff’s experience with the development and 
delivery of the programs and events. 
Litter cleanups (facilitators, explorers, and rechargers) 
Litter cleanup events involve the planning and delivery of an event in which volunteers 
remove litter and debris from a shoreline, recreational, or natural area. The shorelines 
of Hamilton Harbour are well-used by the general public for recreation and pleasure. 
Due to regular usage and high pedestrian and recreational traffic, significant litter 
accumulates in these areas. In this chapter, we will not be analyzing the motivations 
of people who litter, rather we are focussing on the motivations of individuals who 
attend cleanup events. 
The litter, found along shorelines, is made up of different materials, including 
various forms of plastic. Once discarded, plastic litter breaks down into small pieces, 
resulting in microplastics (MPs). These MPs eventually get into waterways, causing 
issues for wildlife, public health, and the aesthetics of the Harbour. 
Volunteers at cleanup events are often facilitators, explorers, or rechargers based 
on Falk’s predictive model. Based on volunteer history, attendees include families, 
community groups, and those who have prior volunteer experience with BARC. 
Cleanup events are always located in the natural environment which provides an 
opportunity for volunteers to appreciate and learn about local ecosystems. 
Cleanup events provide the tools and chosen locations for removing debris. The 
tools provided, such as garbage bags and gloves, are only one part of litter cleanup. In 
addition to the manual removal of debris, BARC also provides relevant information 
about the impacts of litter on the overall health of Hamilton Harbour. Participants in 
these events are motivated to not only clean up litter but also want to learn about the 
impact of pollution. The resulting pile of garbage bags filled with the litter picked 
up by our volunteers is a visual indicator of that impact. Following Tilden’s second 
principle, the pile of filled garbage bags clearly reveals the issue to participants. 
Seeing the litter they have removed is a signal of the volume of litter discarded 
near our waterways. The sight of filled garbage bags also provides provocation for 
changed behaviour which corresponds accordingly to Tilden’s fourth principle. 
Participants who attend cleanups initially look for large pieces of litter, such as 
single-use coffee cups or water bottles. BARC informs volunteers about the presence 
of smaller microplastics (i.e., “MPs” or plastics < 5 mm) and the importance of 
removing those items. Volunteers at cleanup events are informed that common 
single-use items such as cigarette filters, for example, are made up of plastic fibers 
that are shed when cigarettes are littered into waterways, and that leachate from 
cigarette butts is acutely toxic to marine and freshwater fish species. That research, 
by Slaughter et al. (2011), demonstrated that leachates from smoked cigarette butts 
with remnant tobacco were significantly more toxic to fish than the smoked filters 
alone, but that unsmoked filters also exhibited a small level of toxicity. Seeing Is Believing: Educational and Volunteer Programming 71 
By providing participants with additional information about the anthropogenic 
impacts of plastic pollution, especially on recreational and livelihood activities 
like fishing, Tilden’s first, fourth, and fifth principles are met. BARC is able to 
build a connection, draw an emotional response, and present a holistic picture for 
participants. In doing so, BARC also exercises two foundations of environmental 
education: highlighting our interdependence with the natural world and integrating 
multiple disciplines, such as natural sciences and social sciences, into program 
content (NAAEE, 2010). 
Seabin project events (professionals/hobbyists and explorers) 
The Seabin is a floating garbage receptacle that works by suctioning surface water 
and all debris at or near the surface into a catch bag and then retaining any litter 
and MPs larger than 2 mm.2 There is evidence that these types of interventions in 
plastic waste pathways across watersheds can both attract public attention to the 
plastic problem (McNeil, 2019) and be influential in problem-solving (Smyth et al., 
2021). In Hamilton Harbour, the Hamilton-Oshawa Port Authority (HOPA) installed 
three Seabins in its Harbour West Marina in the summer of 2021 when BARC 
staff and volunteers began working with HOPA marina staff to characterize (i.e., 
sort, describe, and quantify) the waste collected. BARC has partnered with HOPA 
to deliver these waste characterization events as participating local agencies in the 
Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup (GLPC) initiative that has focused on removing plastics 
from these nearshore areas right across the Great Lakes.3 The GLPC is a first-of-its￾kind initiative that uses this innovative technology to analyze and communicate the 
problem of plastic pollution in the Great Lakes. 
The characterization of waste in Seabins allows BARC to identify what waste 
is most prevalent in the marina and then dispose of it appropriately. Volunteers sort 
the waste found in the Seabins by size and type. On the worst days, the Seabins 
in Hamilton Harbour collected 2 kg of waste per day. Preliminary results suggest 
cigarette butts and small pieces of plastic film are the most frequent sources of local 
plastic pollution. 
Seabin waste characterization events attract professionals/hobbyists and 
explorers. Volunteers for this program usually have background knowledge of water 
issues in Hamilton. The Seabin events attract fewer participants than general cleanups 
and involve an analytical/data collection aspect. Professionals/hobbyists seek to gain 
experience with MP data collection and to learn about the impacts of plastic pollution 
in the Harbour. Explorers are curious about the type of litter found in the marina and 
learn about their reduction strategies. In an effort to build connections, BARC finds 
it beneficial for participants to share their existing knowledge and experience. In 
order to allow revelations to occur, participants next brainstorm the intention of the 
program and speculate in advance on what plastics might have been collected in the 
2 The Seabin Project works with marinas, ports, and yacht clubs to reduce marine litter with an initiative 
that has evolved into a comprehensive research, technology, and educational initiative with global 
interest and reach. For more information about the Seabin Project, visit seabinproject.com. 3 For more information about the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup, visit greatlakesplasticcleanup.org and see 
the chapter by Hilkene et al. in this volume. 72 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Seabins. Much like the general cleanup events, participants are also informed about 
MPs and the overall health of Hamilton Harbour. As many professionals/hobbyists 
are in attendance, we specifically reference any relevant academic papers and direct 
participants to more local resources from our partners. A first-hand connection with 
the Harbour, combined with a sharing of personal connections and history, creates an 
opportunity for place-based education (Smith, 2002). 
Water school (facilitators and explorers) 
Hamilton Harbour is fed by numerous streams and creeks that bisect neighbourhoods 
across the city on the surface and below (buried in stormwater infrastructure). These 
waterways and catchments include the properties of schools that participate in 
BARC’s many classroom and playground programs and events. However, school 
communities do not often have strong relationships with the water flowing near their 
school. Students lack first-hand experiences with their local environment which is a 
necessity for effective environmental education (Smith, 2002). The school community 
may have an awareness that nearby waterways exist, but in our experience do not 
usually know their name, health, or physical characteristics. 
Environmental degradation, which is combined with an inability for people 
to recognize those degraded conditions, can lead to a negative feedback cycle in 
which the decline in ecosystem health occurs without notice or care. To break this 
cycle, attention needs to be placed on creating new connections between people and 
nature and strengthening those connections where they are weak (Schuttler et al., 
2019). As such, BARC created Water School—a place-based program designed to 
connect secondary school communities to their immediate local waterways—so that 
student participants can see, feel, and build a relationship with those waterways. For 
environmental education to be most effective, it must concentrate on connections to 
environments where people live (NAAEE, 2010). Water School provides a multi-day 
immersive experience of water testing by allowing and requiring students to engage 
directly with flowing water. Students learn about the extent and characteristics of the 
Harbour’s watershed, conduct experiments and surveys, and become familiar with 
water testing equipment in the field. This program is rooted in practical and hands￾on experience and provides opportunities for investigation and analysis which is a 
foundational principle of environmental education (NAAEE, 2010). 
Water School engages students and their teachers in a program with classroom 
activities, field experience, and reflections. Teachers, often identified as facilitators, 
reach out to BARC to schedule this program and identify the specific needs of their 
students. Prior to program delivery, BARC’s planning involves conducting site 
research at local streams and forming strategies to make the program most effective 
and enjoyable. Teachers also work with BARC to connect Water School activities 
to the provincial education curriculum as well as any ongoing student projects and 
interests. Water School focuses on chemistry; however, there is an opportunity to 
meet broader curriculum ties and make the activities cross-disciplinary, for example 
by using math via run-off calculations or creating art using litter collected. Students, 
who become curiously engaged in water chemistry during the program, are identified 
as explorers under Falk’s model. While conducting water testing experiments, 
students begin to physically explore and engage with the stream. Specifically, they Seeing Is Believing: Educational and Volunteer Programming 73 
undertake an aesthetics survey and use all of their senses to evaluate the stream using 
specific criteria. 
Water School provides the tools for students and teachers to understand 
and recognize water quality and its other properties and characteristics in their 
neighbourhood. This process involves developing a relationship between BARC 
and the school community. BARC provides skill, information, and equipment to 
lead experimental, investigative activities and in the process, BARC staff become 
teachers and guides while remaining relatable to the young audiences. Students value 
a sense of personal and professional relatability during programming. It provides 
a sense of trust and a deeper investment in the learning process. To do so, BARC 
includes scientific facts about plastic pollution that relates or applies to the lived 
experiences of students. BARC staff also explain processes that need to be followed 
during experimentation. They explain that there are reasons why students are testing 
for specific parameters which makes the students then curious to know the purpose 
of each test or measurement. It is important to have open discussions with students 
and incorporate different forms of learning and activities. Although significant 
planning goes into the program, BARC cannot predict the exact learning style and 
experiences of each student which is why diversity of information and activities 
can improve the chances of program success. We are inclusive of all participants 
as the connections students develop are part of a personal process. Furthermore, by 
providing a variety of information and activities and taking a systems approach to 
environmental education, BARC appeals to Tilden’s principle of a holistic approach 
to engagement. 
Moreover, BARC staff forge a personal connection with students to establish a 
strong working relationship. Building this relationship often requires sharing personal 
experiences and opinions about topics, issues, and problems. Students appreciate 
hearing career advice and how staff have learned from their mistakes. Throughout 
the program, this relationship is strengthened as students become comfortable asking 
questions and engaging in experiments. 
Shoreline monitoring (professionals/hobbyists, explorers) 
Like Hamilton Harbour, Toronto Harbour, which is further east along the north shore 
of Lake Ontario, has also suffered historical pollution problems from inadequate 
treatment of industrial wastewater, sewage discharges, excessive floating debris, 
odour, and unnatural turbidity. These issues were captured by the Aesthetics BUI 
in the Toronto and Region Remedial Action Plan (TRRAP), and Dahmer et al. 
(2018) described the qualitative monitoring program implemented there to measure 
and assess aesthetic conditions in Toronto Harbour and parts of its watershed. An 
Aesthetic Quality Index (AQI), developed elsewhere for use in Areas of Concern to 
measure progress toward removing the problems impairing aesthetics, was adapted 
for the TTRAP by taking advantage of existing monitoring programs and local 
expertise. 
BARC was contracted in 2018 by senior government agencies of the HHRAP to 
report on the status of the Aesthetics BUI in Hamilton Harbour; in part, it compiled 
aesthetics data collected between 2012 and 2017 and attempted a semi-quantitative 
assessment using the TTRAP AQI assessment methodology to conduct further 74 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
investigations in 2018 and to augment those data, including research, surveys, and 
fieldwork. The report (BARC, 2019) was to make recommendations and provide 
direction regarding the adequacy of evidence, plans, and programming to address the 
status of the Aesthetics BUI for the HHRAP and to ensure continued and improved 
aesthetic conditions were achieved and monitored in the future. 
At the time of this writing, the final methodology to assess the status of 
aesthetics in Hamilton Harbour has not been agreed upon by a consensus of HHRAP 
agencies. However, BARC continues to develop a program for community science 
participants—specifically, the trained young adult volunteers who make substantive 
commitments of skill and time to our Community Water Leaders program—to collect 
data and monitor and report to the public on aesthetic conditions in the Harbour 
and across its watershed. Like the Seabin project, volunteers have background 
knowledge of local water issues and the programs attract the fewest number of 
participants compared to general cleanups due to the skill and time required. The 
shoreline monitoring attracts professionals/hobbyists volunteers due to the analytical 
nature of the tasks, and these volunteers seek to gain experience with plastic 
pollution data collection and to learn about its impacts on aquatic environments. 
Explorers are also amenable to these tasks as they are curious about the type of litter 
found along shorelines and their enthusiasm for learning also makes them able to be 
trained for the type of semi-quantifiable data collection involved. But the focus is on 
attracting professionals/hobbyists for participation due to the diligence and rigour 
of the tasks. BARC continues to work toward an integration of governmental and 
nongovernmental agency support and cooperation on resolving issues of logistics, 
methodology, and public communications of the Aesthetics BUI specifically and 
environmental quality at large. 
Discussion 
Prior to the Hamilton Harbour RAP, industrial land uses and development had almost 
eliminated public access at the Harbour’s southern and western shorelines and, as 
described, water quality and aesthetic conditions were utterly dreadful. Today, 
however, a walk around Bayfront Park and along the Waterfront Trail can be a full 
sensory experience; many pleasant sights, sounds, and smells have returned, and a 
physical connection to the water is possible. These ongoing changes have been made 
possible and reinforced by efforts to engage the broader community with programs 
and activities that provide teaching opportunities and tangible experiences for the 
general public. The most popular public programs typically involve issues that are 
readily seen and sometimes readily smelled. Issues like algae blooms and sewage 
bypasses are clear and recognizable, and they can impact public uses and perceptions 
of the Harbour. However, with issues that cannot be readily seen, such as the sources, 
extent, and impacts of MPs, there need to be more directed efforts to educate and 
engage the community. 
BARC’s educational and volunteer programming is an important foundation 
for engaging the Harbour’s watershed community in hidden problems, such as 
MPs. Through purposeful action, such as school programs, shoreline cleanup 
events, and community science initiatives, there is an opportunity to encourage Seeing Is Believing: Educational and Volunteer Programming 75 
and nurture an engaged public for positive outcomes. Such opportunities require 
a network of stakeholders, community partners, and individuals to adopt a shared 
perception of MPs, to collectively “see” MPs, and work toward community action 
for environmental benefit. 
A shared perception of MPs, however, first requires a collective understanding 
of the issue. The scientific research behind MPs is vast and growing and is most often 
shared in publications and venues that are beyond the access of the general public. 
One of the challenges to achieving a shared understanding is putting that science 
and understanding into the hands and minds of those community members most 
likely to use it and respond to new knowledge. Educational and outreach programs 
like the ones offered by BARC serve to connect scientists and other professionals 
with those public audiences and improve water and environmental literacy in the 
broader community by seeking to connect with the varied motivations for people 
to become involved (see Duckett and Repaci, 2015). BARC works to provide and 
translate scientific research on MPs, for example, for a range of demographics and 
backgrounds because “seeing” MPs is a critical element for further understanding, 
appreciation, and advocacy on a problem that will require multiple avenues to solve. 
References 
Bay Area Restoration Council. 2019. Status Report on the Degradation of Aesthetics Beneficial Use 
Impairment XI in the Hamilton Harbour Remedial Action Plan. https://hamiltonharbour.ca/ 
resources/documents/BARC_2019_Degradation_of_Aesthetics_BUI_Status_Report.pdf [accessed 
August 25, 2021]. 
Cable, R.N., Beletsky, D., Beletsky, R., Wigginton, K., Locke, B.W. and Duhaime, M.B. 2017. Distribution 
and modeled transport of plastic pollution in the Great Lakes, the world’s largest freshwater resource. 
Front. Environ. Sci. 5: Art. 45. 
Cotter, K., Fekete, A. and Silvia, P. 2021. Why do people visit art museums? Examining visitor motivations 
and visit outcomes. Empir. Stud. Arts (in press). 
Dahmer, S.C., Matos, L. and Jarvie, S. 2018. Assessment of the degradation of aesthetics Beneficial 
Use Impairment in the Toronto and region Area of Concern. Aquat. Ecosyst. Health Manag. 21(3): 
276–284. 
Driedger, A.G.J., Dürr, H.H., Mitchell, K. and Van Cappellen, P. 2015. Plastic debris in the Laurentian 
Great Lakes: A review. J. Great Lakes Res. 41: 9–19. 
Duckett, P. and Repaci, V. 2015. Marine plastic pollution: using community science to address a global 
problem. Mar. Freshw. Res. 66: 665–673. 
Earn, A., Bucci, K. and Rochman, C.M. 2021. A systematic review of the literature on plastic pollution 
in the Laurentian Great Lakes and its effects on freshwater biota. J. Great Lakes Res. 47: 120–133. 
Eriksen, M., Mason, S., Wilson, S., Box, C., Zellers, A., Edwards, W., Farley, H. and Amato, S. 2013. 
Microplastic pollution in the surface waters of the Laurentian Great Lakes. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 77: 
177–182. 
Falk, J.H. 2009. Identity and the Museum Visitor Experience. Routledge, New York. 
Grbić, J., Helm, P., Athey, S. and Rochman, C.M. 2020. Microplastics entering northwestern Lake Ontario 
are diverse and linked to urban sources. Water Res. 174: 115623. 
Henderson, L. and Green, C. 2020. Making sense of microplastics? Public understandings of plastic 
pollution. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 152: 110908. 
Library of Parliament, 1969. House of Commons Debates. First Session, Twenty-Eighth Parliament. 
Volume IX, Page 9262. https://parl.canadiana.ca/view/oop.debates_HOC2801_09/116?r=0&s=1 
[accessed September 15, 2018]. 
McLaughlin, C. and Krantzberg, G. 2018. Remedies for improving Great Lakes Remedial Action Plans: a 
policy Delphi study. Aquat. Ecosyst. Health Manag. 21: 493–505. 76 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
McLaughlin, C. and Krantzberg, G. 2021. Learning from experience with Great Lakes Remedial Action 
Plans: A policy delphi study of development and implementation. In: J.H. Hartig and M. Munawar 
(eds.). Ecosystem-Based Management of Laurentian Great Lakes Areas of Concern: Three Decades 
of U.S. - Canadian Cleanup and Recovery. Michigan State University Press, East Lansing, USA. 
McNeil, M. 2019. Fishing for garbage in Hamilton Harbour. Hamilton Spectator, September 7, https:// 
www.thespec.com/news/hamilton-region/2019/09/07/fishing-for-garbage-in-hamilton-harbour.html 
[accessed August 20, 2021]. 
Moore, C.J. 2008. Synthetic polymers in the marine environment: a rapidly increasing long-term threat. 
Environ. Res. 108: 131–139. 
Poletti, S.A. and Landberg, T. 2021. Using nature preserve creek cleanups to quantify anthropogenic litter 
accumulation in an urban watershed. Freshw. Sci. 40: 537–550. 
Schuttler, S. et al. 2019. Citizen science in school: students collect valuable mammal data for science, 
conservation, and community engagement. BioScience 69: 1. 
Slaughter, E., Gersberg, R.M., Watanabe, K., Rudolph, J., Stransky, C. and Novotny, T.E. 2011. Toxicity 
of cigarette butts, and their chemical components, to marine and freshwater fish. Tob. Control. 
20(Suppl 1): i25–i29. 
Smith, G. 2002. Place-based education: learning to be where we are. Phi Delta Kappan 83: 584–594. 
Smyth, K., Drake, J., Li, Y., Rochman, C., Van Seters, T. and Passeport, E. 2021. Bioretention cells remove 
microplastics from urban stormwater. Water Research 191, p. 116785. 
Soares, J., Miguel, I., Venâncio, C., Lopes and Oliveira, M. 2021. Public views on plastic pollution: 
Knowledge, perceived impacts, and pro-environmental behaviours. J. Hazard. Mater. 412: 125227. 
Tilden, F. 1977. Interpreting our heritage. 3rd edition. University of North Carolina Press, USA. 
Zbyszewski, M., Corcoran, P.L. and Hockin, A. 2014. Comparison of the distribution and degradation of 
plastic debris along shorelines of the Great Lakes, North America. J. Great Lakes Res. 40: 288–299. Chapter 6 
The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup
 An Effective Approach to Addressing Plastic 
Pollution in the Great Lakes
 
Melissa DeYoung,1,* Mark Fisher 2
 and Christopher Hilkene1 
INTRODUCTION 
Plastics are one of the most revolutionary innovations of the modern world. They 
play a critical role in shaping our economy and our daily lives. The functionality, 
durability, low maintenance, and relative cost-effectiveness of plastic products have 
contributed to significant growth in their application since the early 1950s. Today, 
plastics are ubiquitous with over a thousand types available in the market, and their 
versatility makes them appealing for a range of applications, including child safety 
helmets, airbags, cell phones, computers, packaging applications, and other electronic 
equipment. However, the way in which plastic is used, managed, and disposed of can 
pose significant challenges to the environment and our health. 
While many plastics have the ability to be recovered, recycled, or reconstituted, 
this value is lost when they are discarded or improperly disposed of. Improper disposal 
also contributes to extracting natural resources to create new plastics, generating 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, polluting water systems, and releasing harmful 
pollutants. The durability of plastic means that most types do not break down easily 
in the environment, thus creating major challenges around their appropriate disposal. 
Each day, plastic debris and fibres make their way into rivers, streams, and 
lakes where they accumulate. As a result, plastic accumulation, including in the 
oceans, has become an increasingly visible environmental issue that has led to an 
incredible global momentum to address plastic pollution in recent years. On 9 June 
1 130 Queens Quay East, Ste. 902, West Tower, Toronto, Ontario, M5A 0P6, 416-926-1907. 
2 3247 Clearwater Crescent, Ottawa, Ontario, K1V 7S3, (613) 668-2044. 
Emails: mark@councilgreatlakesregion.org; chilkene@pollutionprobe.org 
* Corresponding author: mdeyoung@pollutionprobe.org  
 
 
 
 
78 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
2018, governments, including those in Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the United 
Kingdom, and the European Union together with a number of large corporations, 
endorsed the Ocean Plastics Charter1
—a voluntary charter outlining concrete actions 
to eradicate plastic pollution—to demonstrate their commitment to taking concrete 
and ambitious actions to address the problem. Endorsees commit to moving toward 
resource efficiency and a sustainable approach to plastics management through 
action on: 
• Sustainable design, production, and after-use markets 
• Collection, management, and other systems and infrastructure 
• Sustainable lifestyles and education 
• Research, innovation, and new technologies 
• Coastal and shoreline action 
When it comes to plastic waste, the spotlight tends to shine on oceans’ plastic 
which comes with a good reason. However, freshwater systems play a significant role 
in the story. Plastic waste can have a devastating effect on these critical ecosystems 
before it eventually makes its way to the ocean and contributes to broader-scale 
impacts. It is estimated that approximately 10 million kg of plastic flows into 
the Laurentian Great Lakes alone each year. Microplastics (MPs)—plastic particles 
< 5 mm in size—have been found in surface water, sediment, and wildlife in and 
around the lakes with levels in surface waters of some parts of the lakes reported 
to be as high as 1.25 million particles per km2
; a concentration on par with that was 
found in the ocean’s garbage patches. 
The Importance of the Great Lakes 
The five Laurentian Great Lakes—Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, Lake Huron, 
Lake Erie, and Lake Ontario—form the largest group of freshwater lakes on Earth, 
holding 21% of the Earth and 84% of North America’s surface freshwater. A globally 
significant ecosystem, the lakes are considered one of the most diverse natural 
systems in the world, supporting 3,500 species of plants and wildlife, including 
more than 350 species of fish.2
 Some of these species are so singular to the Lakes’ 
ecosystem that they cannot be found anywhere else on Earth. 
The Great Lakes border two countries, and within those two countries are 
eight American states (Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, 
Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin) and one Canadian province (Ontario). A second 
province, Québec, is also directly affected by Great Lakes water quality. The 
region is home to hundreds of rural and urban municipalities, starting from Duluth 
in Minnesota to Montreal in Québec, numerous tribal governments, First Nations, 
and Métis communities. The Great Lakes (or Nayaano-nibiimaang Gichigamiin— 
an Anishinaabemowin term for the five freshwater seas—as they are referred to by 
1 Government of Canada. 2018. Ocean Plastics Charter. Retrieved from https://www.canada.ca/en/ 
environment-climate-change/services/managing-reducing-waste/international-commitments/ocean￾plastics-charter.html. 
2 Governments of Canada & U.S. 2019. 2019 Progress Report of the Parties. Retrieved from https:// 
binational.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Final-2019-PROP-English-June-7.pdf. The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup 79 
many First Nations) also provide drinking water for more than 40 million people, and 
the region is growing rapidly. 
The Great Lakes and surrounding watershed also support a thriving binational 
economy and cater to more than 1.5 million jobs. The economy rivals that of most 
nations with an annual GDP of approximately 6.0 trillion USD; if the region is 
hypothesized as a country, it would be then the third largest economy in the world, 
behind only the U.S. and China. Each year, approximately 230 million metric tonnes 
of raw and finished goods, valued at over 100 billion CAD, move through the Great 
Lakes to St. Lawrence Seaway which is the largest inland deep draft navigation 
system in the world. The Lakes are a vital shipping route for overseas markets with 
major ports located along their shores, supporting the global activities of a number 
of top consumer brands and Fortune 500 companies that are headquartered in the 
region, such as Procter and Gamble, Dow Inc., Kellogg, General Mills, Archer 
Daniels Midland, Kraft Heinz, Kohler, Boeing, 3M, Cargill, SC Johnson, Eli Lilly, 
Whirlpool, John Deer, the Ford Motor Company, and General Motors. 
Farming and food production are also vital to the binational economy; according 
to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, nearly 25% of Canadian agricultural 
production and 7% of American, or roughly 55 million acres, is located within 
the Great Lakes Basin. Moreover, a third of Canada’s employment in agriculture 
and food processing is found in Ontario, and almost all of this is within the Great 
Lakes region.3
 In the U.S., the eight Great Lakes states account for roughly 34%, or 
8.4 billion CAD, of agriculture and agri-food trade from the U.S. to Canada. 
Continued development within the Great Lakes region has had significant 
impacts on the health of the lakes themselves. While important progress has been 
made in recent years in protecting their waters and restoring areas that have been 
severely degraded or contaminated as a result of the region’s industrial history, the 
ongoing development and expansion of the built environment and the growth of the 
economy continues to affect the watershed, such as in some cases pushing species, 
habitats, and ecosystems to their limits. 
Plastic Pollution in the Great Lakes 
Protecting the Great Lakes and preventing future environmental issues is vital to the 
economic, social, and ecological wealth of not just the region but of the continent as 
a whole. In recent years, an increasing amount of plastic debris of all types, shapes, 
and sizes has been found to enter the lakes from a variety of sources (e.g., litter, 
debris from vessels, tire dust in road runoff, pellets from industry, or microfibers 
from laundering clothing). 
There are many different types of plastic, each of which interacts with the 
environment in different ways, which has a range of potential impacts on aquatic 
ecosystems. While data specific to the Great Lakes remains relatively limited, field 
and laboratory studies suggest that plastic pollution is common in freshwater food 
webs with the potential for immediate and long-term environmental impacts. For 
3	 Province of Ontario 2017. Ontario’s Great Lakes Strategy. Retrieved from https://www.ontario.ca/page/ 
ontarios-great-lakes-strategy#section-3. 80 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
instance, a recent study found that macroalgae in the Great Lakes contained large 
quantities of synthetic microfiber pollutants, including polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) and polyethylene, both entangled and adsorbed into the algae strands. These 
microfibers have the potential to find their way into the food web, affecting ecological 
communities in the lakes.4 
A recent laboratory study demonstrated the transfer of nano-sized polystyrene 
in a freshwater food chain, including algae, water fleas, and two levels of fish.5 
Polystyrene has been shown to adsorb other contaminants, such as polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs) and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which can be 
passed on to other organisms through ingestion. Potential impacts on freshwater 
fish in the study included damage to liver tissue, altered metabolism, disturbance to 
embryos, and changes in locomotive activity.6 
Polyethylene and polypropylene plastic have also been found in the 
gastrointestinal tract of double-crested cormorant chicks in the Great Lakes with 
studies suggesting that this may be due to parent cormorants consuming prey (e.g., 
fish), which have themselves consumed plastic before being captured, and then 
feeding this prey to their chicks.7 Another study also supports this after finding traces 
of MPs, including fibres, in the digestive tracts of fish in three major tributaries of 
Lake Michigan.8 
Fish larvae and invertebrates are also at risk. In laboratory studies, chronic 
exposure to polyethylene particles and polypropylene microfibers was found to 
significantly decrease freshwater amphipod growth and reproduction, and exposure 
to polyvinyl chloride (PVC) significantly inhibited weight gain and growth of 
common carp larvae. In the Grand River watershed, which flows into Lake Erie, 
freshwater mussels were found to be ingesting MP fragments, including those made 
of polypropylene.9 
Despite mounting evidence of its potentially devastating impacts, plastic 
pollution in our freshwater ecosystems, including the Great Lakes, continues 
to be largely overlooked. Bolstered by a growing body of research, Great Lakes 
organizations and advocates began to sound the alarm bell over a decade ago and 
to call for more coordinated actions by governments, industries, scientists, and civil 
society organizations in both the U.S. and Canada to combat the issue. Pollution 
Probe and the Council of the Great Lakes Region have been at the forefront of efforts 
to address the plastic waste and pollution issue from a freshwater perspective. 
4 Peller J. et al., 2021. Sequestration of microfibers and other MPs by green algae, and Cladophora in the 
US Great Lakes. Environmental Pollution, 276. 116695. 
5 Chae Y. et al., 2018. Trophic transfer and individual impact of nano-sized polystyrene in a four-species 
freshwater food chain. Scientific Reports, 8, 284. 
6 Rochman, C.M., Hoh, E., Kurobe, T. and Teh, S. J. 2013. Ingested plastic transfers hazardous chemicals 
to fish and induces hepatic stress. Scientific Reports, 3, 3263. 
7 Brookson et al., 2019. MPs in the diet of nestling double-crested cormorants (Phalacrocorax auratus), an 
obligate piscivore in a freshwater ecosystem. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 76, 11. 
8 McNeish et al., 2018. MP in riverine fish is connected to species traits. Scientific Reports, 8, 11639. 9 Xia et al., 2020. Polyvinyl chloride MPs induce growth inhibition and oxidative stress in Cyprinus 
carpio var. larvae. Science of the Total Environment, 716, 136479.  
 
 
 
 
The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup 81 
As part of its G7 presidency, the Government of Canada convened the G7 
Ministers of Environment and Energy in Halifax, Canada, in September 2018. The 
Council of the Great Lakes Region and Pollution Probe were invited to attend the 
event which focused on climate change, oceans, and clean energy and provided 
an important opportunity to engage directly with then Minister of Environment 
and Climate Change Canada, the Honourable Catherine McKenna, and U. S. 
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Honorable Andrew 
Wheeler, about the growing plastic pollution problem in the Great Lakes. 
In 2018, Pollution Probe and the Council of the Great Lakes Region hosted the 
Great Lakes Plastics Forum in Toronto, Canada. The forum provided an opportunity 
for a range of experts to convene and exchange ideas about how best to work 
together to develop innovative and practical solutions to the issue of plastic waste 
and improper disposal while supported by sound public policy.10 In 2020, the two 
organizations were invited by Environment and Climate Change Canada to inform 
and co-host a workshop in Toronto in support of the development of Phase 2 of 
the Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment’s Canada-Wide Action Plan 
to Achieve Zero Plastic Waste.11 The workshop and subsequent action plan placed 
significant focus on: 
• improving consumer, business, and institutional awareness to prevent and 
manage plastic waste responsibly 
• reducing plastic waste and pollution generated by aquatic activities 
• advancing plastics science to inform decision-making and measure performance 
over time 
• addressing plastics in the environment through capture and clean-up 
• contributing to global action on plastic pollution reduction. 
Building on these efforts, the Council of the Great Lakes Region and Pollution 
Probe began exploring further opportunities to work collectively with governments, 
the private sector, academia, and environmental and community groups to create 
innovative and practical solutions to plastic pollution in the Great Lakes that would 
have immediate, tangible results. The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup—an initiative 
of the Pollution Probe and the Council of the Great Lakes Region and supported 
by a broad network of collaborators—was launched in 2020. The initiative is the 
largest of its kind in the world, uniquely combining a focus on removing plastic 
from the environment, community outreach and engagement, and the collection of 
locally-relevant data to better inform regulatory and policy decisions. A number of 
key learnings have emerged from the first two years of the initiative related to the 
important role, including the combination of innovative technology, data collection, 
and local engagement which can successfully address an environmental issue of 
10 Pollution Probe and the Council of the Great Lakes Region. 2018. Great Lakes Plastics Forum: Solutions 
for a Sustainable Future Summary Report. Retrieved from https://www.pollutionprobe.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/Great-Lakes-Plastics-Forum-Summary-Report.pdf. 
11 Canadian Council of Ministries of the Environment. 2020. Canada-Wide Action Plan on Zero Plastic 
Waste: Phase 2. Retrieved from https://ccme.ca/en/res/ccmephase2actionplan_en-external-secured.pdf. 82 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
significance and discuss how it can further contribute to necessary systemic changes 
required to address plastic pollution in the region. 
The Role of Plastic Capture Technologies in 
Driving Systems Change 
Over the past several years, a number of plastic capture technologies have emerged 
as a means of removing plastic and other debris from the environment or preventing 
them from finding their way there in the first place. The Great Lakes Plastic 
Cleanup provides an important opportunity to pilot these technologies on a large 
scale and under a range of geographic and climatic conditions. While many plastic 
capture devices were initially developed for use in marine or ocean environments, 
the initiative highlights their ability to address similar plastic pollution issues in 
freshwater. 
While it is no surprise that the use of technology can be an integral part of the 
success of any initiative working to address important environmental challenges, the 
Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup is proving that technology can also act as an effective 
linchpin for driving broader systems change, including that related to plastic pollution. 
The initiative has shown that the value of these plastic capture technologies goes well 
beyond their ability to clean up plastic from the environment when combined with a 
focus on the collection of locally-relevant data that can further inform regulatory and 
policy decisions and community outreach and engagement efforts. The success of the 
Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup is also directly tied to its ability to provide a space for 
collective action on the part of its strong network of groups and organizations that are 
working together to end plastic waste. 
Given the magnitude of the challenge, it is clear that the plastic pollution issue 
will not be solved by any one individual or organization alone. Systems change— 
the identification of organizations and individuals already working on an issue and 
joining forces to achieve a common goal12—has long been identified as a means of 
moving beyond innovation to lasting, systems-level solutions. It is an effective way 
to address a complex environmental challenge by drawing upon the strengths and 
assets of diverse actors in a system. The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup has proven 
to be a catalyst for action since its inception, uniting a wide range of like-minded 
organizations to address an issue of shared concern. 
The initiative’s network continues to grow and includes partners, collaborators 
and funders from all orders of government, industry, academia and students, 
technology providers, not-for-profit and watershed management organizations, local 
marina and community groups, the artistic community, and the general public (Table 
1). While 37 collaborators were involved in its initial year, including marina partners 
on the Canadian side of the Lakes, the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup network has since 
12 Walker, J. 2017. Solving the World’s Biggest Problems: Better Philanthropy Through Systems Change. 
Stanford Social Innovation Review. Retrieved from: https://ssir.org/articles/entry/better_philanthropy_ 
through_systems_change#. The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup 83 
Table 1. Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup Network. 
Sector Canada The United 
States of America 
Binational Total 
Marinas 32 6 0 38 
Academia 5 6 1 12 
Government 2 2 0 4 
Industry 2 3 0 5 
Local Community Group/Civil Society 
Organization 
5 5 0 10 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) National Sea Grant 
Network 
0 4 0 4 
State and Municipal Parks 0 4 0 4 
Port Authorities 1 1 0 2 
Rotary Clubs 2 1 0 3 
Technology Providers 0 0 3 3 
Other 3 1 0 4 
Total 52 33 4 89 
expanded to include 89 collaborators in Canada and the U.S., representing a wide 
range of sectors. 
Through the combination of its elements, the initiative provides the flexibility 
necessary to successfully complement and build on a variety of important works 
that are underway to address the systemic causes of plastic pollution. This model 
ensures that important community efforts on the ground, including local beach 
cleanups and awareness campaigns, happen in step with the types of broader policy 
and engagement activities necessary to create longer-term solutions. 
Piloting technology in the Great Lakes 
In its first two years, the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup focused specifically on piloting 
two plastic capture technologies, Seabins and LittaTraps, to capture plastic before 
it enters the lakes or to clean up the waste that has already found its way there. 
Developed in Australia and New Zealand, respectively, early applications focused 
primarily on combating the ocean plastic issue. The Seabin acts as a “trash skimmer” 
and is designed to be installed in the water where it can help remove the plastic and 
other debris floating on the surface. It can intercept macroplastics and MPs, even 
including microfibres with an additional filter. Enviropod’s LittaTrap is a patented 
catch basin basket that sits inside a storm drain to prevent litter and other debris from 
entering the storm drain system. The trap’s mesh basket is designed to capture and 
retain 100% of plastic and other debris over 5 mm. It has high hydraulic conductivity, 
allows water to pass through it easily, and is both lightweight and structurally robust. 
The decision to initially use Seabins and LittaTraps for the Great Lakes Plastic 
Cleanup was based on several factors including:  
 
 
 
84 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
• Performance History and Leveraging Past Successes: The initiative looked to 
build on existing pilot projects that had proven successful results related to the 
amount of litter that could be collected. 
• Cost: The cost of comparable technologies was explored to determine which 
technologies would provide value for money and contribute to the scalability of 
their implementation over time. 
• Maintenance Requirements: Maintenance requirements for each technology 
were considered, given the objective of ensuring marinas could easily participate 
in the project. 
• Availability: Technologies were required to be available in Canada to ensure 
they could be sourced and installed. 
While not the first to pilot plastic capture technologies in a freshwater environment, 
the scale of the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup has provided an opportunity to determine 
their viability in unique geographic and climatic conditions that are found across the 
Great Lakes. The findings point to the role that the appropriate placement of the 
technologies can play in their effectiveness and the fact that the amount and type 
of debris captured can vary dramatically by location. The number of plastic capture 
technology offerings on the market has increased significantly since the launch of 
the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup, and the initiative’s model allows for the continued 
incorporation of these in an effort to test their effectiveness in addressing plastic 
pollution in freshwater and, more specifically, in the Great Lakes. 
The current season will see the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup pilot three additional 
technologies in the U.S.—the BeBot, Pixie Drone, and Gutter Bin—in an effort to 
broaden understanding of how different plastic capture technologies operate within 
a freshwater context. Developed by NITEKO and distributed Poralu Marine, the 
BeBot is a beach-cleaning robot that mechanically sifts sand and rakes seaweed to 
remove the plastic and other debris without harming the local environment. It has a 
sieve capacity of 100 L and can clean up to 3,000 m². 
The Pixie Drone, developed by Ranmarine and also manufactured by Poralu 
Marine, is a remote-controlled mobile plastic capture device which is deployed in 
the water and is equipped with a video camera and LIDAR technology to ensure 
it avoids obstacles. The Pixie Drone targets any type of floating debris, including 
organic, plastic, glass, metal, paper, and rubber with a collection capacity of 160 L. 
Developed by Frog Creek Partners, the Gutter Bin® stormwater filtration 
system is a catch basin filter that removes a broad spectrum of pollutants, including 
plastic, within a drop inlet, a curb inlet, or a trench drain. It has an adjustable frame 
and funnel that directs polluted water into a Mundus Bag® water filter, customizable 
according to the specific needs of the location. The Gutter Bin incorporates a 
backflow preventer to ensure zero pollution loss and an adjustable overflow which 
allows high-flow events to bypass the filter system. 
Enabling data collection and analysis 
Studies concerning the prevalence, transport, and fate of plastics in the environment 
have increased over the past decade, thanks to computer modelling and data collected  
 
The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup 85 
through beach cleanups and in situ samplings. However, those specific to the Great 
Lakes remain limited, and many models are built from an understanding of how 
waste is transported in an ocean environment.13 There is a clear need for a more 
robust dataset, particularly clarity of data that is related to the amount, location, and 
types of plastic that are found across the lakes. The use of plastic capture technologies 
is an effective way to complement these models with additional data. 
The advancement of technology has played a major role in opening up new 
opportunities for deeper interaction and participation in science and research efforts. 
Technologies and tools for sharing information have allowed community scientists to 
engage in the collection of data in new and innovative ways and to provide improved 
means for decision-makers, academia, industry, not-for-profit organizations, and 
local communities to use the data generated. 
When the use of plastic capture technologies is combined with the collection of 
data following a set of standardized protocols, it plays a critical role in building out a 
more fulsome picture of the plastic pollution issue. By collecting information about 
the types and amounts of plastic, along with where they are found, we can begin to 
build an understanding of potential plastic pathways and sources. This contributes to 
addressing information and data gaps specific to the Great Lakes which in turn can 
help to inform policymakers about effective solutions to prevent litter and to aid in 
the development of locally-relevant mitigation strategies. 
The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup network has been following two protocols 
developed by the University of Toronto Trash Team for the quantification of debris 
collected by the plastic capture devices: 
• Daily quantification: The purpose of the daily waste characterization is to collect 
the minimum data necessary to estimate the amount of anthropogenic debris that 
is being diverted from the Great Lakes. 
• Detailed characterization: The purpose of the deeper dive for debris collected 
over 24 hours is to quantify and characterize what is collected by the plastic 
capture devices. Data is synthesized and aggregated in an effort to understand 
the total impact across the network’s sites. 
Together, these approaches allow for an understanding of how much is reported 
to be diverted along with the specific types of materials that are captured at each 
location. 
Education and awareness 
Numerous studies support the idea that overall motivation and engagement in learning 
is enhanced by the implementation of technology. More specifically, technology 
engages individuals behaviourally (more effort and time spent participating in 
learning activities), emotionally (positively impacting attitudes and interests), and 
cognitively (mental investment to comprehend content). In addition, providing 
13 Hoffman, M.J. and Hittinger, E. 2017. Inventory and transport of plastic debris in the Laurentian 
Great Lakes. Marine Pollution Bulletin 115: 273–281. Retrieved from: https://pdfs.semanticscholar. 
org/80c1/80a30b73fe4fd3490b7fa3355c36c346015a.pdf. 86 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
opportunities to embed community engagement within research and monitoring 
programs has also been shown to ensure their longevity and ultimately, their ability 
to contribute in a meaningful way to policy development, and the building of more 
comprehensive datasets. Clearly understanding local priorities and realizing what 
they are looking to take away from their participation is critical to long-term success. 
Even a well-designed program may not result in successful engagement if it fails to 
connect and align with the needs or interests of the local community. 
The use of plastic capture technologies as part of the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup 
provides an excellent opportunity to bring marina users and local communities together 
to experience plastic pollution firsthand. The initiative has shown that Seabins, in 
particular, can be an amazing tool for educating and engaging. The technology offers 
a way to take immediate action while having the bins visible at the marina provides 
an opportunity to initiate important conversations about plastic waste in the lakes. 
One of the most powerful aspects of the use of these technologies is their ability 
to provide unique opportunities for individuals and communities to generate their 
questions, contribute to the collection of their data, and advocate for the change they 
wish to see. It allows those involved to gain a deeper understanding of their natural 
surroundings and to build an informed public that can advocate more successfully 
for the protection of human health and their environment. It is also an important way 
for governments and other social institutions to directly interact with the public while 
promoting an open collaboration in science, research, and policymaking. 
The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup has also established a unique partnership with 
the Toronto Zoo to successfully deploy plastic capture technologies on-site, serving 
as an excellent means of engaging more than 1.2 million visitors to the zoo each year 
in discussions around the rampant plastic pollution in the Great Lakes. 
Key Learnings Detailing the Future of the 
Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup
 
Program outcomes and feedback solicited from participating marinas and collaborators 
point to important lessons related to the piloting of plastic capture technologies in 
a freshwater environment, the collection of debris for characterization, effective 
community engagement, and the value of participation in a program of this nature. 
The findings also highlight a number of areas where further research and action may 
be necessary and describe implications for effective governance that are related to 
addressing plastic pollution in the region and beyond. 
Piloting plastic capture technologies 
The effective placement and installation of the plastic capture technologies was 
a learning process with equipment that needed to differ dramatically by location. 
Feedback from marinas has indicated that the specific placement of the technologies 
corresponds directly to the amount of waste that is retrieved and diverted. Locations 
with too much wave action during wind events necessitated the suspension of Seabin 
use for extended periods and in some cases even required its relocation. A number  
 
 
 
The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup 87 
of marinas, including those located in the Georgian Bay region, have experienced 
challenges with pine needles getting through the Seabin’s catch bag and clogging the 
bottom of the inner bin which contributed to mechanical issues. 
Experience with the technology over the first two seasons of the Great Lakes 
Plastic Cleanup will inform the approach to their continued operation moving 
forward with improvements being made to equipment location and maintenance 
practices. The need for a thorough assessment of the site, its topography, and local 
plant species, prior to the installation of the capture technologies, was identified 
as critical to finding an installation location where debris collection is maximized 
while also avoiding unnecessary maintenance issues. Marinas also note that 
ensuring the technology is installed in a location where it can serve as a focal point 
increases opportunities for visitors to engage, thus providing additional educational 
opportunities. Pairing this with visible signage at each location explains how the 
working of the equipment is also critical for furthering engagement with the local 
community. 
MPs are ubiquitous in the Great Lakes 
The amount of debris collected by plastic capture technologies could differ 
dramatically by day, depending on a wide range of factors including the location 
of the marina, where the technologies are installed on-site, and weather conditions. 
In 2021, participating marinas on the Canadian side of the lakes reported diverting 
close to 15 kg and 67,529 pieces of plastic, or an average of 28 g and 132 pieces per 
Seabin each day. The devices continue to collect debris even on days when data is 
not reported which means the actual amount of plastic they remove is substantially 
greater. 
Data collected over the past two seasons is also contributing to building an 
increasingly detailed plastic profile for each of the lakes, mapping trends on types 
and sources, and informing the initiative’s efforts to prevent plastic pollution and 
remove that which has found its way into the environment. In 2021, the distribution 
of plastic found at participating sites on the Canadian side of the lakes was as follows: 
• Lake Superior (1 site): 2,492 pieces weighing ~ 547 g 
• Lake Huron (11 sites): 2,8591 pieces weighing ~ 6.29 kg 
• Lake Erie (2 sites): 1,152 pieces weighing ~ 265 g 
• Lake Ontario (6 sites): 41,791 pieces weighing ~ 8.1 kg 
MPs make up the majority of the debris collected by the Great Lakes Plastic 
Cleanup and its network with the top three items found in 2021 being small foam 
pieces (45.4%), small hard plastic fragments (14.2%) and small pre-production plastic 
pellets (12.3%). Given the substantial growth of the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup 
network this season, including an expansion into the U.S., the overall amount of 
plastic diverted by the initiative is anticipated to increase significantly while also 
capturing data from Lake Michigan for the first time. 
A key finding from the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup is the connection between 
the organic material collected and the amount of small anthropogenic debris. Floating 
algae and other plant materials that are common in shallow and sheltered waters, 88 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
like those found at many marinas, collect and accumulate small plastic and other 
litter. This is an important consideration moving forward as a number of marinas 
have reported finding primarily organic material in their bins. However, upon closer 
investigation during the detailed characterization of debris, many small plastic 
pieces and fragments were found trapped within this vegetation. This highlights 
the importance of ensuring that the organic material collected in the plastic capture 
technologies is disposed of appropriately rather than being returned to the lake. 
Collaboration with local community groups is critical to successful 
data collection and engagement 
The COVID-19 pandemic had a direct impact on the ability of local groups to get 
involved in data collection efforts during the initiative’s first two seasons. As a 
result, the debris from the Seabins and LittaTraps required shipment to a number 
of academic partners for characterization off-site or in their labs. Those locations 
where local waste characterization partners were in place had more successful data 
collection efforts as they were able to interact directly with marinas. The importance 
of local relationships and the opportunity to visit in-person to collect samples played 
an important role in ensuring that debris was ready for characterization and analysis 
and also helped with communicating any challenges with operating and maintaining 
the technologies. This knowledge has directly informed the Great Lakes Plastic 
Cleanup’s efforts to continue building and expanding its waste characterization 
network. Beginning with an initial three waste characterization partners, including 
academic institutions and local community groups, the initiative now boasts more 
than 33 in Canada and the U.S. 
Building stewardship 
Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup collaborators have noted that the fundamental value of 
participating in the initiative is based on its ability to provide boaters and residents 
of their communities with the sense that the marina or municipality truly understands 
their needs and recognizes that small changes make a great impact over time. Many 
have indicated that prior to involvement in the initiative, community members often 
voiced concerns about litter and waste that would accumulate in the water. The 
plastic capture technologies provide them with a practical means of furthering their 
commitment to the environment through tangible action. 
In the time that we had our Seabins in the water last summer, we were able to 
help create a heightened environmental awareness in individuals of all ages! Our 
customers would stop dead in their tracks to ask questions about the Seabin and 
how it was helping clean the water. They loved walking by to see its contents and 
watching it remove any oil sheen from the water’s surface. 
Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup marina, personal communication, 
January, 2021 
Marinas located downstream of urban centres or areas of increased activity along the 
waterfront, in particular, appreciated the use of novel plastic capture technologies to The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup 89 
address waste at their site and also pointed to litter being a major concern in these 
locations. 
In addition to marina partners, the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup has also provided 
an important opportunity to build on the important efforts to address plastic pollution 
underway by a wide range of collaborators. Moving forward, strategic partnerships 
will further strengthen the findings and outcomes of the initiative and with this in 
mind, opportunities will be explored to continue partnering with new sponsors, local 
community groups, and audiences. The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup provides a range 
of opportunities for tailored employee engagement and on-the-ground participation 
by governments, industry, academia and other organizations. 
We see value in being a part of the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup because we 
are all working towards the same goal—removing plastics that can, or already are, 
contaminating our water. The more communities that get on board with curbing their 
own impacts on the quality of our water, the faster we can actually make and see 
a difference. Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup collaborator, personal communication, 
January, 2021. 
The initiative also inspired a sister project in B.C.—the Vancouver Plastic 
Cleanup—led by Swim Drink Fish which was built on the model developed by the 
Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup. This highlights the role that the initiative and its model 
can play in addressing plastic waste across the country based on its flexibility in 
adopting local considerations, interests and the needs of all collaborators and partners 
while ensuring it is scalable and practical. 
Policy development 
The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup has already contributed directly to the development 
of a much-needed policy to address plastic pollution, including through Ontario’s 
Bill 228, Keeping Polystyrene out of Ontario’s Lakes and Rivers Act, 2021. There 
has also been a draft regulation to address stray pre-production pellets at industrial 
facilities in collaboration with the Chemistry Industry Association of Canada— 
which is responsible for the implementation of Operation Clean Sweep (OCS) in 
Canada—and renowned academics. Members of the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup 
also contributed to the development of OCS. 
On 5 November 2020, MPP for Parry Sound—Muskoka, Norm Miller, 
introduced a Private Member’s initiative, Bill 228. The legislation aims to help limit 
MP pollution by requiring that all new dock floats and buoys made from polystyrene 
are fully encapsulated to prevent the foam from breaking down and entering aquatic 
ecosystems. The legislation was debated in the Legislature on 23 February 2021, and 
the efforts of the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup in contributing to important research 
on the issue through the use of plastic capture technologies was singled out. 
Efforts underway as part of the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup are also helping to 
inform the development of a proposed regulation to prevent pre-production plastic 
pellets from entering the environment. Despite mounting evidence of the presence 
and impacts associated with MPs in freshwater environments, there are currently no 
mandatory requirements for the control of their release from industrial facilities. A 
regulatory requirement aimed at complementing efforts under the OCS program can 
reduce plastic pollution and the loss of valuable plastic materials. 90 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
The creation of a regulation under the Ontario Environmental Protection Act 
requiring the plastics industry to install zero-loss containment systems and report 
on the leakage of pellets from their facilities has the potential to encourage further 
measurable action to prevent their release into the environment, while also increasing 
accountability. The proposed regulation would outline a solution that builds on the 
OCS program by incorporating more stringent requirements, acknowledging industry 
leadership demonstrated by members of the CIAC Plastics Division, and providing 
them with an exemption from its full requirements. In this way, the regulation could 
support the broader uptake of OCS across the province, nationally, and globally and 
ensure that resin and plastic manufacturers beyond CIAC members are also required 
to be a part of the solution. 
Conclusion 
Experience from the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup since its launch in 2020 illustrates 
the need for much more work to end plastic pollution. For this reason, the initiative 
has continued to expand with marinas and collaborators from across the region 
contributing to the prevention and removal of plastic waste entering the lakes. Each 
new plastic capture device installed or collaborator joining the network increases the 
amount of plastic removed from the Great Lakes and its waterways. However, the 
true value of the initiative extends well beyond capturing plastic. 
The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup has effectively highlighted that technology and 
tools for sharing information can play a critical role in driving the systems change 
which is necessary to eliminate plastic pollution. While the implementation of its 
model has contributed to important lessons specific to plastic, the unique combination 
of the initiative’s elements also has the potential for broader application and tangible 
results across a wide range of significant environmental challenges. 
A familiar refrain when discussing environmental issues is that you cannot 
manage what you cannot measure. At the same time, environmental challenges 
are often prioritized based on where information and data already exist. As such, 
the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup’s efforts to increase the amount of available data 
related to sources, types, and quantities of plastic in the region are playing a key 
role in ensuring that the importance of addressing plastic pollution in the region, and 
freshwater systems, in general, remains a top priority. 
In addition, research has shown that when people are provided with the 
opportunity to solve a challenge with their own hands, the outcomes are of much 
greater value to them. For example, collecting litter and discussing it significantly 
increases the likelihood that it will be disposed of appropriately in the future. The 
Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup’s focus on engaging local communities firsthand in 
activities that give them direct exposure to what happens to plastic when it enters 
the environment can inspire the adoption of a new behaviourally-based approach to 
addressing plastic pollution. 
Moving forward, the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup will focus on continuing to 
mobilize and translate the knowledge gained through the initiative while thoughtfully 
growing and expanding its efforts to reach new locations and audiences and deepen  
 
The Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup 91 
its contributions to ending plastic pollution in the lakes. This will involve pursuing a 
number of interrelated strategies: 
• Expanding to New Locations: In addition to continuing to strengthen 
collaboration and support for its current sites, the initiative will look to expand 
to strategic locations across the Great Lakes. This may include areas considered 
to be plastic “hot spots”, locations that are ecologically sensitive or where new 
audiences could be engaged (e.g., indigenous communities or local education 
organizations). 
• Exploring New Opportunities for Collaboration: The Great Lakes Plastic 
Cleanup benefits from collaboration across its dedicated network. Strategic 
collaborations will further strengthen the outcomes of the initiative and with 
this in mind, opportunities will be explored to partner with new sponsors, local 
community groups, and other organizations committed to addressing plastic 
pollution. 
Informing Broader Solutions: While addressing the plastic that has already 
found its way into the lakes is of critical importance, preventing it from entering 
the environment in the first place is an important goal of the Great Lakes Plastic 
Cleanup. The initiative has already contributed directly to the development of much￾needed policy and has continued to pursue opportunities to inform solutions for 
addressing plastic waste along the value chain in collaboration with government and 
industry partners. 
It is clear that it will take a suite of coordinated actions over the long term to 
effectively address the systemic causes of plastic pollution and its associated impacts 
on our critical freshwater ecosystems. Through its unique combination of elements, 
the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup is showing that practical action can be taken now that 
will have a measurable and immediate impact. The learnings and outcomes outlined 
in this chapter can be used to scale and replicate its successes and facilitate further 
action across watersheds while informing effective decision-making to address the 
significant challenge of plastic pollution. 
References 
Brookson, C.B. et al. 2019. Microplastics in the diet of nestling double-crested cormorants (Phalacrocorax 
auratus), an obligate piscivore in a freshwater ecosystem. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Sciences 76: 11. 
Canadian Council of Ministries of the Environment. 2020. Canada-Wide Action Plan on Zero Plastic 
Waste: Phase 2. Retrieved from https://ccme.ca/en/res/ccmephase2actionplan_en-external-secured. 
pdf 
Chae. Y. et al. 2018. Trophic transfer and individual impact of nano-sized polystyrene in a four-species 
freshwater food chain. Scientific Reports 8: 284. 
Government of Canada. 2018. Ocean Plastics Charter. Retrieved from https://www.canada.ca/en/ 
environment-climate-change/services/managing-reducing-waste/international-commitments/ocean￾plastics-charter.html 
Governments of Canada & U.S. 2019. 2019 Progress Report of the Parties. Retrieved from https:// 
binational.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Final-2019-PROP-English-June-7.pdf 92 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Hoffman, M.J. and Hittinger, E. 2017. Inventory and transport of plastic debris in the Laurentian Great 
Lakes. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 115: 273–281. Retrieved from: https://pdfs.semanticscholar. 
org/80c1/80a30b73fe4fd3490b7fa3355c36c346015a.pdf 
McNeish, R.E. et al. 2018. Microplastic in riverine fish is connected to species traits. Scientific Reports, 
8, 11639. 
Peller, J. et al. 2021. Sequestration of microfibers and other microplastics by green algae, Cladophora, in 
the US Great Lakes. Environmental Pollution, 276. 116695. 
Pollution Probe and the Council of the Great Lakes Region. 2018. Great Lakes Plastics Forum: Solutions 
for a Sustainable Future Summary Report. Retrieved from https://www.pollutionprobe.org/wp￾content/uploads/Great-Lakes-Plastics-Forum-Summary-Report.pdf 
Province of Ontario 2017. Ontario’s Great Lakes Strategy. Retrieved from https://www.ontario.ca/page/ 
ontarios-great-lakes-strategy#section-3 
Rochman, C.M., Hoh, E., Kurobe, T. and Teh, S.J. 2013. Ingested plastic transfers hazardous chemicals to 
fish and induces hepatic stress. Scientific Reports 3: 3263. 
Walker, J. 2017. Solving the World’s Biggest Problems: Better Philanthropy Through Systems 
Change. Stanford Social Innovation Review. Retrieved from: https://ssir.org/articles/entry/better_ 
philanthropy_through_systems_change# 
Xia. X. et al. 2020. Polyvinyl chloride microplastics induce growth inhibition and oxidative stress in 
Cyprinus carpio var. larvae. Science of the Total Environment 716: 136479. Chapter 7 
Microplastic Sources, 
Contamination, and Impacts on 
Aquaculture Organisms
 H.U.E. Imasha and S. Babel* 
INTRODUCTION 
Global plastic production has been rapidly growing with higher demand and wider 
applications of plastic products. In 2018, nearly 359 million tons of plastics have 
been produced globally (Plastics Europe, 2019). A large fraction of plastic garbage, 
nearly 6,300 million tons, has been created globally between 1950 to 2015 and has 
ultimately ended up in the aquatic environment due to improper management and 
misuse of plastics (Geyer et al., 2017). When released into the environment, large 
plastics could fragment into microplastics (MPs) (Peng et al., 2020). Particles that 
are less than 5 mm in diameter are generally defined as MPs. These can also be 
manufactured as pellets in industry or scrubbers in cosmetics and are a very important 
component in plastic pollution (Pinheiro et al., 2017). MPs are widespread, and 
they have been detected in beaches, sea bed sediments, surface water, freshwater, 
wastewater effluents, indoor and outdoor environments, and even in Arctic and 
Antarctic seas (Karbalaei et al., 2018). 
Owing to their tiny sizes, MPs become accessible for ingestion to a large range 
of organisms and shift to higher trophic level organisms across food chains (Chagnon 
et al., 2018). Many studies have demonstrated ingestion of MPs by a wide variety 
of marine organisms, including plankton (cope pods, euphausiacea (krill) and larval 
stages of mollusks, and decapods) and other invertebrates (polychaetes, bivalves, 
echinoderms, and decapods) (Van Cauwenberghe and Janssen, 2014). The ingestion 
of MPs does not just result in physical harm to the animals but also can cause toxicity 
due to chemicals, such as additives leaching out from MPs can end up in organism 
School of Bio-Chemical Engineering & Technology, Sirindhorn International Institute of Technology, 
Thammasat University-Rangsit Center, 99 Moo 18, KhlongLuang, PathumThani 12120, Thailand. 
* Corresponding author: sandhya@siit.tu.ac.th 94 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
tissues (Hahladakis et al., 2018). It has been found that ultimately MPs can cause 
damage to organisms and ecosystems and even affect human health (Karbalaei et 
al., 2018). 
According to Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), there is unprecedented 
growth in world aquaculture production with a high record of 114.5 million tons (live 
mass) in 2018. Increased production has led to increased consumption of aquaculture 
products globally. Aquaculture products provide valuable sources of nutrients for a 
healthy diet. The aquaculture sector is an important source of animal protein intake 
by the human population. Hence, it plays an important role in the growth of the 
human population (FAO, 2018). 
Researchers have shown that MPs appear in aquaculture sites as they are 
generally situated in areas where MPs cannot be easily drained out to open 
seas,thus resulting in higher bio accumulation in aquaculture organisms than in wild 
organisms. Mathalon and Hill (2014) reported a significant accumulation of MPs in 
farmed mussels (178/items per individual) compared to wild mussels (116/items per 
individual). The ingestion of MPs can cause physical damage to the organisms while 
these MPs in contaminated aquaculture products may pose a health risk to humans 
when consuming such products. Therefore, it is vital to investigate profusion and 
characteristics of MPs presented in aquaculture species to protect human health. 
This chapter summarizes sources of MPs in the aquaculture environment, the 
mechanisms of interactions with organisms, contamination,and their effects on biota. 
It also reviews the published literature regarding the occurrence of MPs in farmed, 
wild environments, and markets mussels,given that mussels have been used as the 
sentinel organism to track pollution created via MPs. 
Aquaculture Production 
World aquaculture production 
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) defines aquaculture as “cultivation of 
aquatic animals, such as finfish, crustaceans, molluscs, etc., and aquatic plants mostly 
algae, utilizing or within freshwater, seawater, inland saline water and brackish 
water” (FAO, 2020). In 2018, the global aquaculture sector reached a record high of 
114.5 million tons of aquaculture production in a live mass which had a commercial 
value of USD 263.6 billion. In 2018, the contribution to the world farm food fish 
production only from inland aquaculture was 62.5% (41.3 million tons of aquatic 
animals). The cultivation of aquatic animals in 2018 was dominated by the finfish 
produced in coastal aquaculture, mariculture, and inland aquaculture. In addition 
to finfish, mollusks, bivalves, marine invertebrates, aquatic turtles, and frogs have 
been grown as well. Seaweed is the dominant farmed aquatic algae in the world 
of aquaculture production. Asia accounts for 89% of global aquaculture production 
of cultivated aquatic animals. China, India, Egypt, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Norway, 
Vietnam, and Chile are among the top producers. Additionally, the fisheries and 
aquaculture sector represented employment opportunities for 59.5 million people in 
2018 which is an incremental increase compared to 2016 (FAO, 2020). Microplastic Sources, Contamination, and Impacts on Aquaculture Organisms 95 
Use of plastic in fisheries and aquaculture 
There is an increasing demand for aquaculture products (especially fish) with the 
increasing growth of the human population. The aquaculture sector plays a significant 
role in meeting the demand for fish, shellfish, and other aquaculture products as a 
result of the growing consumer market (Lusher et al., 2017). The use of a massive 
quantity of plastics for packaging and fabrication of various equipment has become 
a very common practice in the aquaculture sector. Characteristics like its resistance 
to abrasion, durability, rust resistance, light weight, low cost, ability to mold into 
specific shapes, and improvement of longevity and reliability of equipment have 
made plastics an excellent material for use in an aquatic environment. Various types 
of plastics are utilized in mariculture to inland aquaculture systems to fabricate 
equipment, such as cages, ponds, tanks, and ropes (Huntington, 2019). Low Density 
Polyethylene (LDPE), High Density Polyethylene (HDPE), Polyvinyl Chloride 
(PVC), Polypropylene (PP), Polystyrene (PS), Polyamide (Nylon), Polycarbonate 
(PC), Acrylic (PMMA), and Fiber Reinforced Plastics (FRP) are some of the most 
common plastic types that are used in aquaculture systems (Biernacki, 2011). 
Sources of MPs in Aquaculture Systems 
While plastics are a major component in the aquaculture sector, a considerable 
portion of equipment and other materials used in aquaculture end up in marine and 
other aquaculture environments as waste. Sources of MPs in aquaculture systems can 
be classified into direct and indirect sources. 
Direct sources 
In aquaculture systems, when materials composed of plastics, such as commercial 
fishing gear, net cages, plastic lines, and trammel nets, are continuously used for 
a longer period, they are exposed to direct UV rays, tidal action, abrasion, and 
temperature variations that contribute to its embrittlement and fragmentation. These 
materials are no longer suitable for use after their breakdown. Presently utilized 
artificial polymers do not immediately decompose and take a long duration to 
decompose and finally produce MPs. A large portion may end up becoming marine 
or freshwater debris. Browne et al. (2015) and Nelms et al. (2017) reported the 
presence of fisheries and aquaculture wastes in marine garbage. Cózar et al. (2014) 
reported the presence of fisheries and aquaculture wastes floating on surface water, 
while Iñiguez et al. (2016) reported its presence on the sea floor. The Republic of 
Korea has estimated the national aquaculture debris input to the marine environment 
as 44,081 tons from lost fishing gears, 2,374 tons of garbage input from fishing 
boats, and 4,382 tons from expanded polystyrene (EPS) floats that have been lost 
from aquaculture facilities (Lee et al., 2014). Castro et al. (2016) believe that the 
high levels of synthetic fibers in Jurujuba Cove, Brazil, originated from nearby local 
mussel farming. Davidson (2012) has observed the release of MPs in Polystyrene 
(PS) floats has been utilized in aquaculture facilities and docks by boring isopods 
(Sphaeroma spp.). 96 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Another main and direct source of MPs to the aquaculture system,especially 
mariculture systems, is abandoned, lost, or otherwise discarded fishing gear 
(ALDFG). Severe weather conditions, accidents, or conflicts with other users and 
wearing and tearing of anchor ropes may deteriorate aquaculture structures. These 
ALDFG has also been identified to cause marine pollution (Lee et al., 2015). 
Shellfish culture production is a key contributor to coastline debris, including EPS 
floats, plastic net sheets, bags, ropes, and baskets (Liu et al., 2015; Jang et al., 
2014a,b; Lee et al., 2015). Bendell (2015) found the loss of anti predator nets from 
the shellfish industry to be a source of plastic contamination in aquaculture systems. 
Floerl et al. (2016) referred to the release of net and rope fibers in the form of MPs 
into the environment as a result of the continual removal of biofouling organisms 
from aquaculture facilities. Bendell (2015) reported the pollution of Puget Sound by 
shellfish aquaculture, and Andréfouët et al. (2014) detected ALDFG from the pearl 
oyster aquaculture in French Polynesia. These are two examples of plastic waste 
being released by the aquaculture industry. 
Indirect sources 
Wind and atmospheric fallout results in the dissemination of MPs in aquaculture 
environments. In the Gulf region, due to its semi-closed geographic situation, 
typhoons increase inputs of MPs in the Gulf and consequently lead to an increased 
concentration of MPs in farmed oysters (Wang et al., 2019). Moore et al. (2002), 
Lattin et al. (2004), and Law et al. (2014) pointed out how storms and rainfall 
contributed to increases in concentrations of MPs in marine. Fischer et al. (2016) 
and Kukulka et al. (2012) identified that wind could change the distribution of MPs 
in freshwater lakes. Rivers and runoff are other indirect sources that bring MPs into 
aquaculture environments. MPs in facial care products are released into receiving 
waters and are accumulated in aquaculture systems. The concentration of MPs is 
significantly higher at the entrance of a fishpond than at the outlet, thus showing 
the accumulation inside the aquaculture system and the presence of MPs in the 
sediments (Bordós et al., 2019). MPs can enter rivers through the direct discharge 
of treated sewage from wastewater treatment plants. Although treatment plants can 
remove MPs from treated sewage around 98%, the remaining MPs particles are still 
directly discharged into the receiving water (Murphy et al., 2016). Runoff can also 
add MPs enclosed in soil into the river. The commercial seafood production industry 
also contributes to the accumulation and dispersal of MPs in aquatic environments 
through the direct disposal of plastic materials. The number of discarded tools used 
worldwide between 2000 and 2010 was approximately 10 million tons per year that 
was potentially accumulated by benthic species (Pauly and Zeller, 2016). Each year 
fish meal and fish oil is produced from the small pelagic species which mistakenly 
consume MPs as their food (To et al., 2016). A proportion of this fish meal is used as 
feed in aquaculture industry. These pre-contaminated feeds with MPs can be another 
source of its entrance in the aquaculture industry, although there is no evidence of 
this at present. Contaminated bait may result in either introduction of MPs to the 
focus organisms upon catch or to the environment as bait is discarded or lost (Lusher 
et al., 2017). Microplastic Sources, Contamination, and Impacts on Aquaculture Organisms 97 
Distribution of MPs in the aquaculture environment 
Today, we have come to a “Plastic Age” that has changed our life massively due to 
the advantages and convenience of using plastic materials. Production of plastics is 
increasing worldwide annually (Plastics Europe, 2019). In contrast, plastic pollution 
was observed and reported in all the ecosystems in the world (Gall and Thompson, 
2015). Distribution of MPs was reported in freshwater (Ta et al., 2020), oceans (Peng 
et al., 2020), treated wastewater (Dris et al., 2015), lakes sediments (Fischer et al., 
2016), soil organisms (Huerta Lwanga et al., 2016), air (Gasperi et al., 2015), and 
marine and freshwater animals (Karami et al., 2017; Phillips and Bonner, 2015). 
Studies presenting data on MP pollution in aquaculture sites are scarce at this 
moment. Table 1 summarizes the distribution of MPs in aquaculture sites. All the 
compartments, including water, sediment, and biota, and in most of all aquaculture 
environments around the world are contaminated with MPs. 
Interactions of MPs with Aquatic Organisms Under Laboratory 
Conditions and Field Environment
 
MPs have been discovered widely around the globe. Different trophic level organisms 
interact with MPs through a variety of routes by which exposure and interaction may 
take place. Lower trophic level organisms which were exposed to MPs present in 
the environment (water or sediment) and were mistakenly ingesting them, became 
an indirect source of MPs and later contaminated prey for their predators through 
trophic transfer. This phenomenon raises concerns about the interactions of MPs 
with biota, thus inspiring several exposures and toxicological studies in laboratory 
conditions. Uptake, movement, and dissemination of artificial particles in entire 
organisms and removed tissues (e.g., gills, intestinal tract, and liver) can be easily 
monitored under laboratory conditions. Laboratory experiments have proven that a 
variety of marine biota, across the different trophic levels, can consume or absorb 
MPs easily (Lusher et al., 2017). Protists, cope pods, annelids, echinoderms cnidaria, 
amphipods, molluscs, fish, and birds have been reported to be contaminated with 
MPs (Christaki et al., 1991; Cole et al., 2015; Wright et al., 2013; Nobre et al., 2015; 
Hall et al., 2015; Ugolini et al., 2013; Avio et al., 2015; Pedà et al., 2016; Tanaka et 
al., 2013). Several studies have reported interactions of freshwater biota with MPs. 
In comparison, very few studies have reported the ingestion of MPs by free-living 
terrestrial organisms; however, in a laboratory study, Rodriguez-Seijo et al. (2017) 
have indicated the ability of earthworms to consume plastic particles present in the 
soil. 
Mechanisms of MPs-biota interactions under laboratory conditions 
Uptake, accumulation, and toxicity of contaminants can be effectively studied using 
laboratory methods (Qu et al., 2018). Mechanisms of biota-MPs interactions have 
been explored in many studies under laboratory conditions. Mainly, there are two 
main ways of MPs-biota interactions: adhere and uptake. Cole et al. (2013, 2015) 
report that micro- and nano-plastics are able to adhere to the external limbs of cope 98 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance Table 1. Distribution of MPs in Aquaculture Environments. Aquaculture Environment Site/Aquaculture Activity Compartment Studied Identification Size Reference Estuary Qin River, China Surface water and Sediment Water Fibers, Lines, Sheets, Fragments, and Foams 1 to 5 mm (Zhang et al., 2020) Channel Baynes Sound, Shellfish Growing Region of Canada Surface Sediments Fibers Less than 0.65 μm (Covernton and Cox, 2019) Intertidal Zone Shellfish Aquaculture Site in Canada Shellfish (Clams and Oysters) Surface water and Sediment Fibers, Fragments, Spherules Sediments –100 to 499 μm Surface water – 1,000–5,000 μm Clams and oysters – 100 to 499 μm (Covernton et al., 2019) we compared microplastic particle (MP) Costal French Atlantic Coasts. Aquaculture of Mussels and Oysters Blue Mussels and Pacific Oysters Mussels – Polypropylene (PP), Polyethylene (PE), Polystyrene (PS), Polyester (PES), Fragments, Filaments, Fibers Oysters – PE, PP, Polyester, andPolystyrene, Fragments Mussels – 50–400 μm Oysters – 20–100 μm (Phuong et al., 2018) Open Sea Water A Mussel Farm in Germany Bivalves 0.36 ± 0.07 particles g/1 (wet weight) 5 to 10 mm (50.0%) (Van Cauwenberghe and Janssen, 2014) Aquaculture Water and Aquaculture Pond nfluents Pearl River Estuary of Guangzhou, China Water Samples PP and PE < 1,000 µm (56.3–87.7%) < 333 µm (43.7%) (Ma et al., 2020) Bay Baynes Sound, British Columbia.
Shellfish farming
industry 
Clams Fibers (90%)
Films (5.3%)
Fragments (4.7%) 
(Davidson and Dudas,
2016) Microplastic Sources, Contamination, and Impacts on Aquaculture Organisms 99 
pods, such as antennules, setae, and swimming legs. Watts et al. (2014) showed that 
MPs could adhere to the gills of green crabs, and Paul-Pont et al. (2016) reported 
MPs could adhere to blue mussels. The uptake of MPs through ingestion is the most 
studied interaction of MPs with biota. Due to the small sizes of MPs, biota cannot 
distinguish MPs from prey items or ingestion happens accidentally while filter 
feeding (Bergmann et al., 2015). Direct consumption of MPs is very common among 
suspension feeders,such as oysters (Bergmann et al., 2015) and mussels (Avio et al., 
2015). Direct consumption of MPs is also very common among deposit feeders, e.g., 
cucumbers (Graham and Thompson, 2009), annelids (Browne et al., 2015) Norway 
lobster (Welden and Cowie, 2016), and crabs (Watts et al., 2014). Green crabs 
can mistakenly allow the uptake of MPs during their ventilation through the gills 
(Watts et al., 2014). These uptake behaviors are mainly due to the indistinguishable 
nature between food and MPs. Savoca et al. (2016) reported that MPs in the marine 
environment create a dimethyl sulfide signature which acts as a keystone odorant in 
pelagic food webs. The diversity of organisms from zooplankton to baleen whales 
can mistake plastics for prey. 
Laboratory experiments have studied biota MPs interactions as well as pathways 
of MPs within an organism. Watts et al. (2014) and Farrell and Nelson (2013) 
reported the accumulation of MPs in the digestive tract of green crabs when MPs 
contaminated blue mussels that were used as food for green crabs feeding under 
laboratory conditions. Besseling et al. (2014) and Cedervall et al. (2012) showed 
the trophic transfer of MPs from green algae to the Daphnia magna and then to 
several species of fish, including Crucian carp, Tench, Bleak, Northern pike, Atlantic 
salmon, and Rudd. Laboratory experiments have reported the transfer of fluorescent 
PS from zooplankton to the mysid shrimp (Mysis spp.). However, laboratory exposure 
experiments results should be treated with care as often concentration exceeds more 
than that observed in the field. 
Field Observations of Biota Interactions with MPs 
Organisms from a wide variety of environments, including the ocean surface, 
water column, benthos, estuaries, aquaculture, and beaches, have been observed to 
have an increased uptake of MPs (GESAMP, 2016). More than 220 species have 
been observed to ingest MPs debris (UNEP, 2016; GESAMP, 2016). Out of this, 
58% of the studied species were commercially targeted species. These organisms 
include seabirds, marine mammals, shellfish, fishes, etc. (Lusher et al., 2017). 
Table 2 summarizes the field observation of interactions of commercially important 
organisms with MPs. Bivalves are the most studied species. 
MP Pollution in mussels 
Field experiments on MPs in mussels 
Mussels have been widely utilized as sentinel organisms around the globe for MP 
pollution. This is mainly due to the extensive filter-feeding activity of mussels that 
exposes them directly to MPs in the environment; also, their wide distribution around 
the globe, vital ecological niches, close relationship with marine predators, and risk 100 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance Table 2. Field Observation of Interactions of Commercially Important Organisms with MPs. Species Location Average Number of Particles (n) Per g Soft Tissue Type of Particles Reference MPs in Invertebrates; Crustaceans and Echinoderms Common Shrimp (Crangoncrangon) Belgium, France, Netherlands,and the United Kingdom 0.75 (0.03 to 1.92) n =165 Size: 200–1,000 µm (fibers) Fibers, Granule, and Film (Devriese et al., 2015) Norway Lobster (Nephrops Norvegicus) North and West Scotland 0.40 mg Maximum – 0.80 mg n = 1,450 Fibers Polyethylene, film, and PVC (Welden and Cowie, 2016) Sea Cucumbers EquitorialMid-Atlantic and Indian Ocean No Data Fibers (Taylor et al., 2016) MPs in Commercial Fish Atlantic Cod (GadusMorhua) Norway Nine Different Polymers; PE, PP, PVC, PET (Polyester), and Nylon (Bråte et al., 2016) mesoplastics (5–20 mm) Atlantic mackerel (Scomberscombrus) North and Baltic Sea n = 138 PE and PA (Rummel et al., 2016) we investigated 290 gastrointestinal tracts of demersal and pelagic fish species Atlantic Cod (GadusMorhua) n = 205 Film/Sheet, Threads, and Fragments (Liboiron et al., 2016) Microplastic Sources, Contamination, and Impacts on Aquaculture Organisms 101 
to the health of human beings, as mussels are consumed as a whole animal without 
discarding the digestive organs, make them all more hazardous. Other biotas, which 
have been reported to ingest MPs, such as fish and crustacean species usually contain 
MPs in their digestive tracts. Cleaning before consumption will remove most of the 
digestive tract, the head, and the gills, which often contain a major portion of the MPs 
(Devriese et al., 2015). Furthermore, the increased uptake of MPs by wild and farmed 
mussels has been reported widely showing mussels to be highly susceptible to ingesting 
MPs. So far, field investigations have been mainly done with blue mussels (Mytilus 
spp.) due to their widespread nature. But some studies focused on Pernaviridis and 
P. perna for MP pollution. Numerous countries have carried out field investigations 
of MPs in mussels around the globe, including the United Kingdom, Belgium, 
France, Germany, Italy, Turkey, Greece, Netherlands, Portugal, Denmark, Norway, 
Finland, Canada, China, Brazil, and Indonesia. 
Characteristics of MP Pollution in Mussels. Literature studies show that MPs are 
often detected in both wild and cultured mussels in numerous countries around the 
globe. Fibers are the most dominantly identified MP morphotypes that are followed by 
fragments in field studies. Murphy (2018) reported the presence of pellets in mussels. 
The most reported polymer types are PE, PP, PS, PES, PET, PA, PVC, and cellophane. 
Some studies demonstrated that the morphology and polymer composition of MPs 
in mussels appears to be consistent with their adjacent environmental media (Leslie 
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018; Qu et al., 2018). Qu et al. (2018) identified a correlation 
between MPs in mussels and the surrounding seawater reflecting that morphology 
and polymer types of MPs in mussels can indicate the real contamination in the 
adjacent environment. Qu et al. (2018) and Digka et al. (2018) showed that mussels 
can have an uptake of a larger proportion of smaller sizes of MPs, compared to the 
adjacent environmental media. Digka et al. (2018) reported smaller MPs 62.3% in 
seawater, 96.9% in sediments, and 100% in mussels in the Northern Ionian Sea. 
The abundance of MPs in studies varies, ranging between 0.05 items/g to 259 
items/g (Bonello et al., 2018; Murphy, 2018). The abundance of MPs in mussels 
varies due to the degree of background contamination, regional differences in MPs 
content, and the diversity of methods applied by different researchers. Browne 
et al. (2010, 2011) suggested a positive correlation between human population 
density and coastal concentrations of MPs. Furthermore, Li et al. (2016) reported 
that mussels in areas where intensive human activities happened contained a higher 
number of MPs which suggested the concentration of MPs in mussels was closely 
associated with human activities. Karlsson et al. (2017) reported significantly 
higher concentrations of MPs in mussels (3.7 × 104 items/kg dry weight) compared 
to surrounding sediment and seawater, which was 48 items/kg dry weight and 
27 items/L, respectively, thus it further indicated accumulation of MPs in mussels. 
Qu et al. (2018) also revealed a positive and quantitative relationship between MPs 
in mussels and their adjacent waters. 
Farmed Mussels Vs. Wild Mussels. Several studies have analyzed the relationship 
between farmed mussels and wild mussels. Mathalon and Hill (2014)reported that 
as the farmed mussels grew on polypropylene plastic lines, they contained more 
MPs than wild mussels. However, Li et al. (2016) reported reverse results, and they 102 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
suggested that it was not a single factor such as plastic lines on farms that decided 
the abundance of MPs in mussels but the level of total pollution by MPs in the 
environment. However, Vandermeersch et al. (2015) found no significant variation 
in levels of MPs in farmed and wild mussels. 
MPs in Mussels Purchased From Markets. There is a variation in MPs concentration 
among wild and farmed/commercially-sourced mussels as reported in the literature. 
Cho et al. (2019) comment that market-based assessment is an appropriate method for 
the evaluation of human ingestion of MPs through seafood consumption due to two 
reasons. First is that the majority of people consume seafood by directly buying from 
the market, and second is that MPs concentrations can alter during transportation 
from the aquaculture site to the market. Table 3 summarizes the widespread presence 
of MPs in mussels that are sold in markets in various countries. Italian markets have 
shown the highest concentration. There is a huge variation in the concentration of 
MPs in the market-sold mussels due to variations in regional contamination status 
by MPs and differences in the analytical methods. Bivalves from markets have been 
reported with a lower concentration of MPs compared to bivalves from coastal 
regions and aquaculture farm areas; it is mainly due to the depuration of MPs during 
transportation and storage (Cho et al., 2019). A decrease in the concentration of MPs 
by 30% in mussels and oysters after 3 days of depuration has been observed by Van 
Cauwenberghe and Janssen (2014). There is a difference between the abundance 
of MPs in supermarket-bought mussels based on whether they were pre-processed 
(either being pre-frozen and chilled or cooked-frozen-chilled) or alive at the time of 
purchase. Processed mussels have significantly higher MPs concentration compared 
to live mussels from farmed sources that are sold at supermarkets (Li et al., 2018). 
Laboratory experiments on MPs in mussels 
Laboratory experiments have been conducted to research the uptake, accumulation, 
and impacts of MPs in mussels. Mussels have an uptake of MPs mainly through 
ingestion and adherence to soft tissues, such as the mantle, foot, adductor, visceral 
tissue, and gonad. Laboratory studies show selectivity characteristics of mussels for 
a specific size range of MPs during the uptake and egestion process, which is in 
line with the findings of field studies. Results oflaboratory studies also indicate that 
there is a positive and quantitative relationship between MPs in mussels and their 
adjacent waters (Li et al., 2019). Qu et al. (2018) have observed that smaller sizes 
of MPs are more ingested by mussels that are similar to the field investigations. But 
the researchers have also reported that mussels can ingest beads easily compared 
to fibers due to the beads having smaller sizes than fibers,while field studies 
reported more ingestion of fibers by the mussels. This shows the difference between 
laboratory exposure studies and field studies. Factors like using short exposure time 
and neglecting the use of MPs that have environmentally relevant properties in 
laboratory studies can be the reason for such differences between field and laboratory 
experiments (Qu et al., 2018). Microplastic Sources, Contamination, and Impacts on Aquaculture Organisms 103 
Table 3. Observation of the Presence of MPs in Mussels from SupermarketsAround the World.
Country Species Analytical Method Concentration of MPs Common
Size (µm) 
Dominant
Shape 
Reference 
Digestion/
Density
Separation 
Filter
Pore Size 
(µm) 
Identification n/gWet 
Weight 
n/Individual 
China M. galloprovincialis H 2 O 2 /NaCl 5 µFT-IR 2.4 a NA 5–250 Fiber (Li et al., 2015)
France M. edulis HNO3 :HCl 5 Hot needle 0.06 ± 0.13 NA NA Fiber (Van Cauwenberghe and 
Janssen, 2014)
Belgium M. edulis HNO3 :HCl 25–60 Hot needle 0.35ab NA 1,000–1,500 Fiber (De Witte et al., 2014)
Spain M. galloprovincialis HNO3 :HCl 5 Hot needle 0.04 ± 0.09 NA NA Fiber (Vandermeersch Van 
Cauwenberghe et al., 
2015) 
Italy M. galloprovincialis H 2 O 2 0.45 Microscope 8.33 ± 3.58 3.6–12.4 1,700–1,900 Fiber (Renzi et al., 2018)
The UK M. edulis H 2 O 2 /NaCl 5 µFT-IR 0.9 a NA 5–250 Fiber (Li et al., 2018)
Canada M. edulis H 2 O 2 /NaCl 0.8 Microscope 7.42 178 NA Fiber (Mathalon and Hill,
2014) 
Korea M. edulis KOH/ lithium
meta-tungstate 
20 µFT-IR 0.07 ± 0.06 0.77 ± 0.74 100–200 Fragment (Cho et al., 2019) 
a = mean value, b = only fibers have analyzed 104 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Effects of MPs on Aquaculture Organisms 
Despite the growing literature on the presence of MPs in the biota, there is little 
information on its effects on the biota, especially when the research related to the 
human health risk of MPs is still at the initial stage. 
Effects of MPs on biota 
After ingestion, physical damages can follow, such as harm to the digestive organs, 
a false illusion of satiety, and lower nutrient ingestion that can lead to death (Zhang 
et al., 2019). These ingested MPs can also cause various cellular and molecular level 
toxic effects. Smaller particles of MPs accumulate inside the organisms and create 
the path for MPs to enter the food chain and reach higher trophic levels, thus creating 
further chronic effects (Farrell and Nelson, 2013). In addition, smaller-size MPs and 
nano-plastics pose severe effects, such as penetration of fungi cell walls and creation 
of toxicity, that can penetrate the highly selective fish membrane and create more 
adverse effects (Zhang et al., 2019). 
Ingestion of PE fragments by mussels was found to result in histological 
changes in gills and digestive tissues and hemocytic aggregates in the digestive 
gland. Ingestion of nano-PS by mussels has resulted in lower filtering activities. 
Furthermore, ingestion of MPs by mussels results in many adverse effects, including 
genotoxicity, inflammatory response, alterations of antioxidant system, neurotoxic 
effects, dysplasia, transcriptional responses, and lysosomal membrane destabilization 
(Li et al., 2019). Sussarellu et al. (2016) showed an interruption to the reproductive 
processes and a decreased larval development after oysters were exposed to PS 
pellets for two months. 
Entanglement of MPs into the aquatic biota (crustaceans, seabirds, mammals, 
and sea turtles) also creates negative impacts, such as drowning, suffocating, and 
starving, that can lead to death. More than 200 species have been reported to suffer 
due to entanglement and ingestion of plastics. Though the ingestion can be found 
through all most all trophic levels, entanglement is mainly reported with large marine 
organisms (Li et al., 2018). 
Apart from the physical damages, it has been found that surfactants in the 
digestive tract of biota could cause the rapid release of some chemicals and adsorbed 
pollutants in MPs into the digestive tract of the organism. These chemicals are fat￾soluble, and they can store in fatty tissues of the body and bioaccumulate at higher 
trophic levels. These chemicals pose a toxic effect on different organisms. Rochman 
et al. (2014) reported that endocrine-disrupting substances adsorbed to MPs can 
interfere with the endocrine system of Oryziaslatipes (Japanese Medaka), thus 
resulting in a negative impact on the reproductive capacity of both males and females 
(Gong and Xie, 2020). PS-particles tend to accumulate in the fish stomach. The 
accumulation of PS inside oysters can create adverse impacts, such as a reduction in 
sperm velocity (Li et al., 2018).  
Microplastic Sources, Contamination, and Impacts on Aquaculture Organisms 105 
Effects of additives in MPs on biota 
A variety of additives have been widely used during plastic manufacture to improve 
physical properties, such as hardness, color, and flame resistance. These additives 
include nonylphenol, bisphenol A, polybrominated biphenyls ethers, heavy metals, 
phthalates (potassium acid phthalate), and plasticizers, which are highly toxic to 
biota. Phthalates and bisphenol can cause endocrine disruption in invertebrates 
and vertebrates and can also cause cancer and damage to the human reproductive 
system. During the decomposition of plastics, these additives gradually release into 
the environment and thus pose serious adverse effects on biota. While many studies 
focus on the leaching of MPs additives into the environment, there is a lack of studies 
regarding negative effects of these released additives on biota (Zhang et al., 2019). 
Effects of adsorbed toxic substances by MPs on biota 
MPs have been reported as a sink for persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and a 
vector for hydrophobic pollutants, pharmaceuticals, and personal care products 
(PPCP) in the water (Li et al., 2018; Gong and Xie, 2020). Examples of POPs 
include polychlorinated biphenyl (PCBs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAHs), 
and dichlorobiphenyl trichloro-ethane (DDT) combined with heavy metals (e.g., Al, 
Zn, Pb, Cu, Ag, and Pb). Diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP), dibutyl phthalate (DBP), 
diethyl phthalate, diisobutyl phthalate, dimethyl phthalate, benzaldehyde, and 2,4-di￾tert- butylphenol have been found in MPs’ polymers in the marine environment. 
Studies have found that adsorbed POPs and heavy metals create worst negative 
impacts than those released by plastic additives (Zhang et al., 2019). Factors like 
the degree of weathering, the particle size, and the type of plastic influence the 
adsorption capacity of MPs (Gong and Xie, 2020). In particular, the coarser structures 
and higher surface areas of weathered plastics have stronger sorption capacity 
than virgin plastics. Environmental factors, such as solar irradiation, temperature, 
microorganisms’ activities, and pH, can also affect the sorption desorption process 
(Zhang et al., 2019). Some studies have shown that MPs can sorb high amounts 
of PCBs from adjacent water. The higher surface area and polarity of PVC makes 
more adsorption of heavy metals than PS (Brennecke et al., 2016). Avio et al. (2015) 
reported higher bioavailability of MPs mixed with PAH after ingestion by mussels 
(Mytilusgalloprovincialis) lead to toxicological consequences. However, the degree 
of pollutant transfer from MPs to primary consumers and along the food chain is 
poorly studied and needs to be further researched. While some researchers suggest 
that human health risks associated with these contaminants are not alarming,others 
argue that some substances are resulting in acute effects even at small dosages 
(Seltenrich, 2015). 
Furthermore, these adsorb chemical substances on MPs can promote microbial 
growth and attachment. Ingestion of microbiome-attached MPs can cause 
inflammation. This also can cause the introduction of pathogenic microorganisms 
into a clean environment (Zhang et al., 2019). Jiang et al. (2018) reported the 
presence of potential pathogens in MPs. Barnes and Milner (2005) have found a 
barnacle (Eliminiusmodestus) on plastic debris in the north Atlantic Ocean, which is 106 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
native to Australia and New Zealand. Biofilms attached to MPs’ surfaces can change 
the physical properties of MPs. The increase in the density of the light MPs can cause 
the sink of light MPs in the water column and benthic zones. Attached biofilms make 
the surface of the MPs less hydrophobic. At this time, it is still unknown whether 
attached biofilms can increase or weaken the adsorption of water-borne pollutants 
into MPs (Li et al., 2018). These attached microorganisms can enter the food chain 
and cause negative impacts to higher organisms (Gong and Xie, 2020). 
Effects of MPs’ biomagnification along the food chain 
MPs have been found in a huge number of biota at different trophic levels, indicating 
transportation along the food chain. MPs have been discovered in aquatic as well 
as terrestrial animals. Humans can also ingest the MPs through bottled beverages, 
seafood, and inhalation (Zhang et al., 2019). Humans’ intake of MPs through seafood 
varies between 1to 30 particles per day (Lusher et al., 2017). Van Cauwenberghe and 
Janssen (2014) show the annual dietary intake of MPs through European shellfish 
is 11,000 MPs per year. Mussel consumers in the UK would be exposed to upto 
123 particles per year. Individuals could be exposed to up to 4,620 particles per 
year via mussel ingestion in Spain, France, or Belgium (Catarino et al., 2018). 
In vivo studies have demonstrated that MPs can translocate from the gut cavity to 
the bloodstream and enter cells creating significant adverse effects on the tissue and 
cellular levels in mussels (Li et al., 2015). However, a recent study conducted by 
Catarino et al. (2018) provided evidence of human exposure to MPs via ingestion 
of mussels was lower compared to household fiber exposure during a meal via dust 
(123–4,620 particles/person per year vs. 13,731–68,415 particles/person per year, 
respectively). Though there is still no evidence regarding the adverse effects of MPs 
on humans, there is a high potential for the accumulation of adsorbed pollutants on 
the surface of MPs inside human body. MPs’ toxicity experiments on humans are still 
at an infancy level, making it hard to accurately decide the adverse effects on human 
health and thus requiring further studies. 
Conclusion 
MPs are ubiquitous contaminants present in all environmental compartments including 
water, sediments, biota, and air. Current evidence on MPs’ abundance in aquaculture 
organisms is currently of high public importance. This chapter summarizes the 
current status of research that has been carried out related to the detection of MPs 
in aquaculture organisms, especially the pollution by MPs in mussels. The chapter 
also addresses in detail the sources of MPs pollution in aquaculture environment, 
mechanisms of biota-MPs interactions, MPs contamination levels in organisms and 
the effects of MPs on biota. 
Plastics are extensively used by the aquaculture sector from packaging to the 
manufacturing of various equipment. A considerable portion of equipment and other 
materials used in aquaculture end up in marine and other aquaculture environments 
as waste. ALDFG, withering of net cages, plastic lines, and other plastic equipment 
that are used in aquaculture contribute as direct sources of MPs, while wind, runoff, Microplastic Sources, Contamination, and Impacts on Aquaculture Organisms 107 
typhoons, fish meal used as feed in aquaculture, and contaminated baitare identified 
as indirect sources of MPs entering into the aquaculture environment. These direct 
and indirect sources contribute to the exposure of aquaculture organisms to MPs. 
Distribution of MPs has been reported around the globe, including open sea water, 
coastal areas, inter-tidal zone, estuaries, bays, channels, and ponds, where many types 
of aquaculture activities take place. This wide distribution raises concern regarding 
MPs’ interactions with biota. 
A variety of aquatic organisms, across different trophic levels, can absorb or 
consume MPs readily. Ingestion and adherence are the two main ways that biota 
interacts with MPs. Biota can mistake plastics for prey items due to small sizes 
and indistinguishable nature between food and MPs. Laboratory experiments have 
studied the interactions of MPs with biota, pathways of MPs within an organism, 
and accumulation and trophic transfer of MPs. However, laboratory exposure 
experiments and results should be treated with care as often concentration exceeds 
more than what is observed in the field. 
There are various effects of MPs’ particles, additives, and adsorbed substances 
on biota. Annual dietary intake of MPs through European shellfish can be high as 
11,000 MPs per year. These findings show that the consumption of seafood can be 
a direct way of human exposure to MPs. This urge the necessity of more research 
regarding the toxicological effects of pollution by MPs on human health, which is 
still at the infant level. 
References 
Andréfouët, S., Thomas, Y. and Lo, C. 2014. Amount and type of derelict gear from the declining black 
pearl oyster aquaculture in Ahe atoll lagoon, French Polynesia. Marine Pollution Bulletin 83(1): 
224–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.03.048 
Avio, C.G., Gorbi, S., Milan, M., Benedetti, M., Fattorini, D., D’Errico, G., Pauletto, M., Bargelloni, L., 
and Regoli, F. 2015. Pollutants bioavailability and toxicological risk from microplastics to marine 
mussels. Environmental Pollution 198: 211–222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2014.12.021 
Barnes, D.K.A. and Milner, P. 2005. Drifting plastic and its consequences for sessile organism dispersal 
in the Atlantic Ocean. Marine Biology 146(4): 815–825. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00227-004-1474-8 
Bendell, L.I. 2015. Favored use of anti-predator netting (APN) applied for the farming of clams leads to 
little benefits to industry while increasing nearshore impacts and plastics pollution. Marine Pollution 
Bulletin 91(1): 22–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.12.043 
Bergmann, M., Gutow, L. and Klages, M. 2015. Marine anthropogenic litter. In: Marine Anthropogenic 
Litter (Issue June, pp. 1–447). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-16510-3 
Besseling, E., Wang, B., Lürling, M. and Koelmans, A.A. 2014. Nanoplastic affects growth of S. obliquus 
and reproduction of D. magna. Environmental Science and Technology 48(20): 12336–12343. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es503001d 
Biernacki, K. 2011. Application of Plastics in Manufacture (Issue January). https://www.researchgate.net/ 
publication/304019628_Application_of_Plastics_in_Aquaculture 
Bonello, G., Varrella, P. and Pane, L. 2018. First Evaluation of Microplastic Content in Benthic Filter￾feeders of the Gulf of La Spezia (Ligurian Sea). Journal of Aquatic Food Product Technology 27(3): 
284–291. https://doi.org/10.1080/10498850.2018.1427820 
Bordós, G., Urbányi, B., Micsinai, A., Kriszt, B., Palotai, Z., Szabó, I., Hantosi, Z. and Szoboszlay, S. 2019. 
Identification of microplastics in fish ponds and natural freshwater environments of the Carpathian 
basin, Europe. Chemosphere 216: 110–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.10.110 108 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Bråte, I.L.N., Eidsvoll, D.P., Steindal, C.C. and Thomas, K.V. 2016. Plastic ingestion by Atlantic cod 
(Gadus morhua) from the Norwegian coast. Marine Pollution Bulletin 112(1–2): 105–110. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.08.034 
Brennecke, D., Duarte, B., Paiva, F., Caçador, I. and Canning-Clode, J. 2016. Microplastics as vector 
for heavy metal contamination from the marine environment. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 
178(January): 189–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecss.2015.12.003 
Browne, Mark A., Galloway, T.S. and Thompson, R.C. 2010. Spatial patterns of plastic debris along 
estuarine shorelines. Environmental Science and Technology 44(9): 3404–3409. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/es903784e 
Browne, Mark Anthony, Chapman, M.G., Thompson, R.C., Amaral Zettler, L.A., Jambeck, J. and 
Mallos, N.J. 2015. Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Stranded Intertidal Marine Debris: Is There a 
Picture of Global Change? Environmental Science and Technology 49(12): 7082–7094. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/es5060572 
Browne, Mark Anthony, Crump, P., Niven, S.J., Teuten, E., Tonkin, A., Galloway, T. and Thompson, 
R. 2011. Accumulation of microplastic on shorelines woldwide: Sources and sinks. Environmental 
Science and Technology 45(21): 9175–9179. https://doi.org/10.1021/es201811s 
Browne, Mark Anthony, Underwood, A.J., Chapman, M.G., Williams, R., Thompson, R.C. and Van 
Franeker, J.A. 2015. Linking effects of anthropogenic debris to ecological impacts. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 282(1807). https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2014.2929 
Castro, R.O., Silva, M.L., Marques, M.R.C. and de Araújo, F.V. 2016. Evaluation of microplastics in 
Jurujuba Cove, Niterói, RJ, Brazil, an area of mussels farming. Marine Pollution Bulletin 110(1): 
555–558. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.05.037 
Catarino, A.I., Macchia, V., Sanderson, W.G., Thompson, R.C. and Henry, T.B. 2018. Low levels of 
microplastics (MP) in wild mussels indicate that MP ingestion by humans is minimal compared to 
exposure via household fibres fallout during a meal. Environmental Pollution 237: 675–684. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.02.069 
Cedervall, T., Hansson, L.A., Lard, M., Frohm, B. and Linse, S. 2012. Food chain transport of nanoparticles 
affects behaviour and fat metabolism in fish. PLoS ONE 7(2): 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pone.0032254 
Chagnon, C., Thiel, M., Antunes, J., Ferreira, J.L., Sobral, P. and Ory, N.C. 2018. Plastic ingestion and 
trophic transfer between Easter Island flying fish (Cheilopogon rapanouiensis) and yellowfin tuna 
(Thunnus albacares) from Rapa Nui (Easter Island). Environmental Pollution 243: 127–133. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.08.042 
Cho, Y., Shim, W.J., Jang, M., Han, G.M. and Hong, S.H. 2019. Abundance and characteristics of 
microplastics in market bivalves from South Korea. Environmental Pollution 245: 1107–1116. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.11.091 
Christaki, U., Dolan, J.R., Pelegri, S. and Rassoulzadegan, F. 1991. I/lln. 458–464. 
Cole, M., Lindeque, P., Fileman, E., Halsband, C. and Galloway, T.S. 2015. The impact of polystyrene 
microplastics on feeding, function and fecundity in the marine copepod Calanus helgolandicus. 
Environmental Science and Technology 49(2): 1130–1137. https://doi.org/10.1021/es504525u 
Cole, M., Lindeque, P., Fileman, E., Halsband, C., Goodhead, R., Moger, J. and Galloway, T. S. (2013). 
Microplastic ingestion by zooplankton. Environmental Science and Technology 47(12): 6646–6655. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es400663f 
Covernton, G.A. and Cox, K. 2019. Commentary on: Abundance and distribution of microplastics within 
surface sediments of a key shellfish growing region of Canada. PLoS ONE 14(12): 1–7. https://doi. 
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0225945 
Covernton, G., Collicutt, B., Gurney-Smith, H., Pearce, C., Dower, J., Ross, P. and Dudas, S. 2019. 
Microplastics in bivalves and their habitat in relation to shellfish aquaculture proximity in coastal 
British Columbia, Canada. Aquaculture Environment Interactions 11(October): 357–374. https:// 
doi.org/10.3354/aei00316
Cózar, A., Echevarría, F., González-Gordillo, J.I., Irigoien, X., Úbeda, B., Hernández-León, S., Palma, 
Á.T., Navarro, S., García-de-Lomas, J., Ruiz, A., Fernández-de-Puelles, M.L. and Duarte, C.M. 
2014. Plastic debris in the open ocean. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 111(28): 10239–10244. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1314705111 Microplastic Sources, Contamination, and Impacts on Aquaculture Organisms 109 
Davidson, K. and Dudas, S.E. 2016. Microplastic Ingestion by Wild and Cultured Manila Clams (Venerupis 
philippinarum) from Baynes Sound, British Columbia. Archives of Environmental Contamination 
and Toxicology 71(2): 147–156. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00244-016-0286-4 
Davidson, T.M. 2012. Boring crustaceans damage polystyrene floats under docks polluting marine 
waters with microplastic. Marine Pollution Bulletin 64(9): 1821–1828. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
marpolbul.2012.06.005 
De Witte, B., Devriese, L., Bekaert, K., Hoffman, S., Vandermeersch, G., Cooreman, K. and 
Robbens, J. 2014. Quality assessment of the blue mussel (Mytilus edulis): Comparison between 
commercial and wild types. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 85(1), 146–155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
marpolbul.2014.06.006 
Devriese, L.I., van der Meulen, M.D., Maes, T., Bekaert, K., Paul-Pont, I., Frère, L., Robbens, J. and 
Vethaak, A.D. 2015. Microplastic contamination in brown shrimp (Crangon crangon, Linnaeus 
1758) from coastal waters of the Southern North Sea and Channel area. Marine Pollution Bulletin 
98(1–2): 179–187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.06.051 
Digka, N., Tsangaris, C., Torre, M., Anastasopoulou, A. and Zeri, C. 2018. Microplastics in mussels 
and fish from the Northern Ionian Sea. Marine Pollution Bulletin 135(July): 30–40. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2018.06.063 
Dris, R., Gasperi, J., Rocher, V., Saad, M., Renault, N. and Tassin, B. 2015. Microplastic contamination 
in an urban area: A case study in Greater Paris. Environmental Chemistry 12(5): 592–599. https:// 
doi.org/10.1071/EN14167 
FAO. 2018. World Fisheries and Aquaculture. http://www.fao.org/3/i9540en/i9540en.pdf 
FAO. 2020. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2020. 
Farrell, P. and Nelson, K. 2013. Trophic level transfer of microplastic: Mytilus edulis (L.) to Carcinus 
maenas (L.). Environmental Pollution 177: 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2013.01.046 
Fischer, E.K., Paglialonga, L., Czech, E. and Tamminga, M. 2016. Microplastic pollution in lakes and lake 
shoreline sediments—A case study on Lake Bolsena and Lake Chiusi (central Italy). Environmental 
Pollution 213: 648–657. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.03.012 
Floerl, O., Sunde, L.M. and Bloecher, N. 2016. Potential environmental risks associated with biofouling 
management in salmon aquaculture. Aquaculture Environment Interactions 8: 407–417. https://doi. 
org/10.3354/AEI00187 
Gall, S.C. and Thompson, R.C. 2015. The impact of debris on marine life. Marine Pollution Bulletin 
92(1–2): 170–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.12.041 
Gasperi, J., Dris, R., Mandin, C. and Tassin, B. 2015. First overview of microplastics in indoor and outdoor 
air. 15th EuCheMS International Conference on Chemistry and the Environment, September, 2–4. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281657363%0AFirst 
GESAMP. 2016. Sources, fate and effects of microplastics in the marine environment: part 2 of a global 
assessment. (IMO, FAO/UNESCO-IOC/UNIDO/WMO/IAEA/UN/UNEP/UNDP). In: Kershaw, 
P.J. (Ed.), Rep. Stud. GESAMP No. 90 (96 pp). Reports and Studies GESAMP, No. 93, 96 P., 93. 
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J.R. and Law, K.L. 2017. Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. Science 
Advances 3(7): 19–24. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700782 
Gong, J. and Xie, P. 2020. Research progress in sources, analytical methods, eco-environmental effects, 
and control measures of microplastics. Chemosphere 254: 126790. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2020.126790 
Graham, E.R. and Thompson, J.T. 2009. Deposit- and suspension-feeding sea cucumbers (Echinodermata) 
ingest plastic fragments. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 368(1): 22–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jembe.2008.09.007 
Hahladakis, J. N., Velis, C. A., Weber, R., Iacovidou, E. and Purnell, P. 2018. An overview of chemical 
additives present in plastics: Migration, release, fate and environmental impact during their use, 
disposal and recycling. Journal of Hazardous Materials 344: 179–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jhazmat.2017.10.014 
Hall, N.M., Berry, K.L.E., Rintoul, L. and Hoogenboom, M.O. 2015. Microplastic ingestion by 
scleractinian corals. Marine Biology 162(3): 725–732. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00227-015-2619-7 
Huerta Lwanga, E., Gertsen, H., Gooren, H., Peters, P., Salánki, T., Van Der Ploeg, M., Besseling, E., 
Koelmans, A. A. and Geissen, V. (2016). Microplastics in the Terrestrial Ecosystem: Implications 110 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
for Lumbricus terrestris (Oligochaeta, Lumbricidae). Environmental Science and Technology 50(5): 
2685–2691. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b05478 
Huntington, T. 2019. Marine Litter and Aquaculture Gear—White Paper. In Aquaculture Stewardship 
Council (Issue November). 
Iñiguez, M.E., Conesa, J.A. and Fullana, A. 2016. Marine debris occurrence and treatment: A review. 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 64: 394–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.06.031 
Jang, Y.C., Lee, J., Hong, S., Lee, J.S., Shim, W. J. and Song, Y.K. 2014. Sources of plastic marine debris 
on beaches of Korea: More from the ocean than the land. Ocean Science Journal 49(2): 151–162. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12601-014-0015-8 
Jang, Y.C., Lee, J., Hong, S., Mok, J.Y., Kim, K.S., Lee, Y.J., Choi, H. W., Kang, H. and Lee, S. 2014. 
Estimation of the annual flow and stock of marine debris in South Korea for management purposes. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin 86(1–2): 505–511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.06.021 
Jiang, P., Zhao, S., Zhu, L. and Li, D. 2018. Microplastic-associated bacterial assemblages in the intertidal 
zone of the Yangtze Estuary. Science of the Total Environment 624: 48–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2017.12.105 
Karami, A., Golieskardi, A., Choo, C.K., Romano, N., Ho, Y. Bin and Salamatinia, B. 2017. A high￾performance protocol for extraction of microplastics in fish. Science of the Total Environment, 578, 
485–494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.10.213 
Karbalaei, S., Hanachi, P., Walker, T.R. and Cole, M. 2018. Occurrence, sources, human health impacts 
and mitigation of microplastic pollution. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 25(36), 
36046–36063. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-018-3508-7 
Karlsson, T.M., Vethaak, A.D., Almroth, B.C., Ariese, F., van Velzen, M., Hassellöv, M. and Leslie, 
H.A. 2017. Screening for microplastics in sediment, water, marine invertebrates and fish: Method 
development and microplastic accumulation. Marine Pollution Bulletin 122(1–2): 403–408. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.06.081 
Kukulka, T., Proskurowski, G., Morét-Ferguson, S., Meyer, D.W. and Law, K.L. 2012. The effect of wind 
mixing on the vertical distribution of buoyant plastic debris. Geophysical Research Letters 39(7): 
1–6. https://doi.org/10.1029/2012GL051116 
Lattin, G.L., Moore, C.J., Zellers, A.F., Moore, S.L. and Weisberg, S.B. 2004. A comparison of neustonic 
plastic and zooplankton at different depths near the southern California shore. Marine Pollution 
Bulletin 49(4): 291–294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2004.01.020 
Law, K.L., Morét-Ferguson, S.E., Goodwin, D.S., Zettler, E.R., Deforce, E., Kukulka, T. and Proskurowski, 
G. 2014. Distribution of surface plastic debris in the eastern pacific ocean from an 11-year data set. 
Environmental Science and Technology 48(9): 4732–4738. https://doi.org/10.1021/es4053076 
Lee, J., Lee, J.S., Jang, Y.C., Hong, S.Y., Shim, W.J., Song, Y.K., Hong, S.H., Jang, M., Han, G.M., Kang, 
D. and Hong, S. 2015. Distribution and Size Relationships of Plastic Marine Debris on Beaches in 
South Korea. Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 69(3): 288–298. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00244-015-0208-x 
Leslie, H.A., Brandsma, S.H., van Velzen, M.J.M. and Vethaak, A.D. 2017. Microplastics en route: 
Field measurements in the Dutch river delta and Amsterdam canals, wastewater treatment plants, 
North Sea sediments and biota. Environment International 101: 133–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envint.2017.01.018 
Li, Jiana, Green, C., Reynolds, A., Shi, H. and Rotchell, J.M. 2018. Microplastics in mussels sampled 
from coastal waters and supermarkets in the United Kingdom. Environmental Pollution 241: 35–44. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.05.038 
Li, Jiana, Lusher, A.L., Rotchell, J.M., Deudero, S., Turra, A., Bråte, I.L. N., Sun, C., Shahadat 
Hossain, M., Li, Q., Kolandhasamy, P. and Shi, H. 2019. Using mussel as a global bioindicator 
of coastal microplastic pollution. Environmental Pollution 244: 522–533. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envpol.2018.10.032 
Li, Jiana, Qu, X., Su, L., Zhang, W., Yang, D., Kolandhasamy, P., Li, D. and Shi, H. 2016. Microplastics 
in mussels along the coastal waters of China. Environmental Pollution 214: 177–184. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.04.012 
Li, Jiana, Yang, D., Li, L., Jabeen, K. and Shi, H. 2015. Microplastics in commercial bivalves from China. 
Environmental Pollution 207: 190–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2015.09.018 Microplastic Sources, Contamination, and Impacts on Aquaculture Organisms 111 
Li, Jingyi, Liu, H. and Paul Chen, J. 2018. Microplastics in freshwater systems: A review on occurrence, 
environmental effects, and methods for microplastics detection. Water Research 137: 362–374. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.12.056 
Liboiron, M., Liboiron, F., Wells, E., Richárd, N., Zahara, A., Mather, C., Bradshaw, H. and Murichi, J. 
2016. Low plastic ingestion rate in Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) from Newfoundland destined for 
human consumption collected through citizen science methods. Marine Pollution Bulletin 113(1–2): 
428–437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.10.043 
Liu, T.K., Kao, J.C. and Chen, P. 2015. Tragedy of the unwanted commons: Governing the marine 
debris in Taiwan’s oyster farming. Marine Policy 53(1): 123–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
marpol.2014.12.001 
Lusher, A., Hollman, P. and Mandoza-Hill, J.J. 2017. Microplastics in fisheries and aquaculture. In FAO 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper (Vol. 615, Issue July). https://doi.org/dmd.105.006999 
[pii]\r10.1124/dmd.105.006999 
Ma, J., Niu, X., Zhang, D., Lu, L., Ye, X., Deng, W., Li, Y. and Lin, Z. 2020. High levels of microplastic 
pollution in aquaculture water of fish ponds in the Pearl River Estuary of Guangzhou, China. Science 
of The Total Environment 744: 140679. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140679 
Mathalon, A. and Hill, P. 2014. Microplastic fibers in the intertidal ecosystem surrounding Halifax 
Harbor, Nova Scotia. Marine Pollution Bulletin 81(1): 69–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
marpolbul.2014.02.018 
Moore, C.J., Moore, S.L., Weisberg, S.B., Lattin, G.L. and Zellers, A.F. 2002. A comparison of neustonic 
plastic and zooplankton abundance in southern California’s coastal waters. Marine Pollution 
Bulletin 44(10): 1035–1038. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0025-326X(02)00150-9 
Murphy, C.L. 2018. A Comparison of Microplastics in Farmed and Wild Shellfish near Vancouver Island 
and Potential Implications for Contaminant Transfer to Humans By Cassandra Lee Murphy A 
Thesis Submitted to the Faculty of Social and Applied Sciences in Partial Fulfilment o. 1–75. https:// 
viurrspace.ca/handle/10613/5540 
Murphy, F., Ewins, C., Carbonnier, F. and Quinn, B. 2016. Wastewater Treatment Works (WwTW) as 
a Source of Microplastics in the Aquatic Environment. Environmental Science and Technology 
50(11): 5800–5808. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b05416 
Nelms, S.E., Coombes, C., Foster, L.C., Galloway, T.S., Godley, B.J., Lindeque, P.K. and Witt, M.J. 
2017. Marine anthropogenic litter on British beaches: A 10-year nationwide assessment using 
citizen science data. Science of the Total Environment 579: 1399–1409. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2016.11.137 
Nobre, C.R., Santana, M.F.M., Maluf, A., Cortez, F.S., Cesar, A., Pereira, C.D.S. and Turra, A. 2015. 
Assessment of microplastic toxicity to embryonic development of the sea urchin Lytechinus 
variegatus (Echinodermata: Echinoidea). Marine Pollution Bulletin 92(1–2): 99–104. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.12.050 
Paul-Pont, I., Lacroix, C., González Fernández, C., Hégaret, H., Lambert, C., Le Goïc, N., Frère, L., 
Cassone, A. L., Sussarellu, R., Fabioux, C., Guyomarch, J., Albentosa, M., Huvet, A. and Soudant, 
P. (2016). Exposure of marine mussels Mytilus spp. to polystyrene microplastics: Toxicity and 
influence on fluoranthene bioaccumulation. Environmental Pollution 216: 724–737. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.06.039 
Pauly, D. and Zeller, D. 2016. Catch reconstructions reveal that global marine fisheries catches are higher 
than reported and declining. Nature Communications 7: 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10244 
Pedà, C., Caccamo, L., Fossi, M.C., Gai, F., Andaloro, F., Genovese, L., Perdichizzi, A., Romeo, T. and 
Maricchiolo, G. 2016. Intestinal alterations in European sea bass Dicentrarchus labrax (Linnaeus, 
1758) exposed to microplastics: Preliminary results. Environmental Pollution 212: 251–256. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.01.083 
Peng, L., Fu, D., Qi, H., Lan, C.Q., Yu, H. and Ge, C. 2020. Micro- and nano-plastics in marine 
environment: Source, distribution and threats—A review. Science of the Total Environment 698: 
134254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.134254 
Phillips, M.B. and Bonner, T.H. 2015. Occurrence and amount of microplastic ingested by fishes 
in watersheds of the Gulf of Mexico. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 100(1), 264–269. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.08.041 112 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Phuong, N.N., Poirier, L., Pham, Q.T., Lagarde, F. and Zalouk-Vergnoux, A. 2018. Factors influencing the 
microplastic contamination of bivalves from the French Atlantic coast: Location, season and/or mode 
of life? Marine Pollution Bulletin 129(2): 664–674. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.10.054 
Pinheiro, C., Oliveira, U. and Vieira, M. 2017. Occurrence and Impacts of Microplastics in Freshwater 
Fish. Journal of Aquaculture & Marine Biology 5(6). https://doi.org/10.15406/jamb.2017.05.00138 
Plastics Europe 2019. PlasticsEurope, 2019. Plastics—the Facts 2019: An analysis of European plastics 
production, demand and waste. https://www.plasticseurope.org/en/resources/market-data 
Qu, X., Su, L., Li, H., Liang, M. and Shi, H. 2018. Assessing the relationship between the abundance and 
properties of microplastics in water and in mussels. Science of the Total Environment, 621(February 
2019): 679–686. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.11.284 
Renzi, M., Guerranti, C. and Blašković, A. 2018. Microplastic contents from maricultured and 
natural mussels. Marine Pollution Bulletin 131(April): 248–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
marpolbul.2018.04.035 
Rochman, C.M., Kurobe, T., Flores, I. and Teh, S.J. 2014. Early warning signs of endocrine disruption 
in adult fish from the ingestion of polyethylene with and without sorbed chemical pollutants from 
the marine environment. Science of the Total Environment 493: 656–661. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2014.06.051 
Rodriguez-Seijo, A., Lourenço, J., Rocha-Santos, T.A.P., da Costa, J., Duarte, A.C., Vala, H. and Pereira, 
R. 2017. Histopathological and molecular effects of microplastics in Eisenia andrei Bouché. 
Environmental Pollution 220: 495–503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.09.092 
Rummel, C.D., Löder, M.G.J., Fricke, N.F., Lang, T., Griebeler, E.M., Janke, M. and Gerdts, G. 2016. 
Plastic ingestion by pelagic and demersal fish from the North Sea and Baltic Sea. Marine Pollution 
Bulletin 102(1): 134–141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.11.043 
Savoca, M.S., Wohlfeil, M.E., Ebeler, S.E. and Nevitt, G.A. 2016. Marine plastic debris emits a keystone 
infochemical for olfactory foraging seabirds. Science Advances 2(11): 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
sciadv.1600395 
Seltenrich, N. 2015. New link in the food chain? Marine plastic pollution and seafood safety. Environmental 
Health Perspectives 123(2): A34–A41. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.123-A34 
Sussarellu, R., Suquet, M., Thomas, Y., Lambert, C., Fabioux, C., Pernet, M.E.J., Goïc, N. Le, Quillien, 
V., Mingant, C., Epelboin, Y., Corporeau, C., Guyomarch, J., Robbens, J., Paul-Pont, I., Soudant, 
P. and Huvet, A. 2016. Oyster reproduction is affected by exposure to polystyrene microplastics. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113(9): 2430– 
2435. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1519019113 
Ta, A. T., Babel, S. and Haarstrick, A. 2020. Microplastics contamination in a high population density 
area of the chao phraya river, Bangkok. Journal of Engineering and Technological Sciences 52(4): 
534–545. https://doi.org/10.5614/j.eng.technol.sci.2020.52.4.6 
Tanaka, K., Takada, H., Yamashita, R., Mizukawa, K., Fukuwaka, M. aki and Watanuki, Y. 2013. 
Accumulation of plastic-derived chemicals in tissues of seabirds ingesting marine plastics. Marine 
Pollution Bulletin 69(1–2): 219–222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2012.12.010 
Taylor, M. L., Gwinnett, C., Robinson, L.F. and Woodall, L.C. 2016. Plastic microfibre ingestion by deep￾sea organisms. Scientific Reports 6(September): 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep33997 
To, C., Security, F. and All, N.F.O.R. 2016. 2016 In Brief The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. 
The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2016, 24. 
Ugolini, A., Ungherese, G., Ciofini, M., Lapucci, A. and Camaiti, M. 2013. Microplastic debris in 
sandhoppers. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 129(June): 19–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ecss.2013.05.026 
UNEP. 2016. Marine plastic debris and microplastics. In Marine Plastic Debris and Microplastics. 
Van Cauwenberghe, L. and Janssen, C.R. 2014. Microplastics in bivalves cultured for human consumption. 
Environmental Pollution 193: 65–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2014.06.010 
Vandermeersch, G., Lourenço, H.M., Alvarez-Muñoz, D., Cunha, S., Diogène, J., Cano-Sancho, G., Sloth, 
J.J., Kwadijk, C., Damia Barcelo c, I., Allegaert, W., Bekaert, K., Fernandes, J.O., Marques, A., 
and Robbens, J. 2015. Environmental contaminants of emerging concern in seafood—European 
database on contaminant levels. Environmental Research 143: 29–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envres.2015.06.011 Microplastic Sources, Contamination, and Impacts on Aquaculture Organisms 113 
Vandermeersch, G., Van Cauwenberghe, L., Janssen, C.R., Marques, A., Granby, K., Fait, G., Kotterman, 
M. J.J., Diogène, J., Bekaert, K., Robbens, J. and Devriese, L. 2015. A critical view on microplastic 
quantification in aquatic organisms. Environmental Research 143(2014): 46–55. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.envres.2015.07.016 
Wang, J., Lu, L., Wang, M., Jiang, T., Liu, X. and Ru, S. 2019. Typhoons increase the abundance of 
microplastics in the marine environment and cultured organisms: A case study in Sanggou Bay, 
China. Science of the Total Environment 667: 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.02.367 
Watts, A.J.R., Lewis, C., Goodhead, R.M., Beckett, S.J., Moger, J., Tyler, C.R. and Galloway, T.S. 2014. 
Uptake and retention of microplastics by the shore crab carcinus maenas. Environmental Science 
and Technology 48(15): 8823–8830. https://doi.org/10.1021/es501090e 
Welden, N.A.C. and Cowie, P.R. 2016. Environment and gut morphology influence microplastic 
retention in langoustine, Nephrops norvegicus. Environmental Pollution 214: 859–865. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.03.067 
Wright, S.L., Rowe, D., Thompson, R.C. and Galloway, T.S. 2013. Microplastic ingestion decreases 
energy reserves in marine worms. Current Biology 23(23): R1031–R1033. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cub.2013.10.068 
Zhang, L., Liu, J., Xie, Y., Zhong, S., Yang, B., Lu, D. and Zhong, Q. 2020. Distribution of microplastics 
in surface water and sediments of Qin river in Beibu Gulf, China. Science of the Total Environment 
708: 135176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.135176 
Zhang, S., Wang, J., Liu, X., Qu, F., Wang, X., Wang, X., Li, Y. and Sun, Y. 2019. Microplastics in the 
environment: A review of analytical methods, distribution, and biological effects. TrAC—Trends in 
Analytical Chemistry 111: 62–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2018.12.002 Chapter 8 
Occurrence and Source of 
Microplastics Contamination in 
Drinking Water and Performance of 
Water Treatment Plants in Removing 
Microplastics 
Yubraj Dahal and Sandhya Babel* 
INTRODUCTION 
Water is an essential part of human life. According to the World Health Organization 
(WHO), “access to safe drinking water is essential to health, a basic human right 
and a component of effective policy for health protection” (Water and Organization, 
2006). The required intake of water for maintaining health is more than 2.2 liters and 
2.3 liters per day for women and men, respectively (Shen et al., 2021). Therefore, it 
is of utmost importance that drinking water should be free from contaminants. 
The quality of drinking water can be maintained through a series of combined 
actions that include source protection, control of the treatment process, management 
of the distribution lines, and proper handling of the water system (Water and 
Organization, 2006). The main purpose of Drinking Water Treatment Plants (DWTPs) 
is to ensure the quality of water for safe drinking through the elimination of pathogens 
and undesirable chemicals (Dalmau-Soler et al., 2021). In most countries, the source 
of drinking water includes both community systems as well as piped water systems 
(Water and Organization, 2006). Pipeline distribution of drinking water is the most 
efficient and convenient way of supplying potable water (Water, 2009). Apart from 
community and piped sources, another common source of drinking water is bottled 
School of Bio-chemical Engineering and Technology, Sirindhorn International Institute of Technology, 
Thammasat University, Khlong Nueng, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand. 
*Corresponding author: sandhya@siit.tu.ac.th Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 115 
water. Bottled water is available in different sizes and volumes in the market, and it 
offers variability to the consumer’s choice and comfort. In 2020, the global market 
value of bottled water was USD 217.66 billion. This value is estimated to experience 
a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 11.1% from 2021 to 2028 and result in a 
market value of USD 505.19 billion (Grand View Research, 2021). 
However, intriguingly, a new contaminant in drinking water has incited 
researchers’ attention globally. The new contaminant is microplastics (MPs), which 
are plastic particles less than 5 mm in diameter (Arthur et al., 2009). The first 
evidence of MPs contamination of the tap water was documented by Kosuth et al. 
(2018). After this, a series of scientific publications confirmed the presence of the 
MPs in drinking water around the world. The presence of MPs has been reported 
in human stools (Schwabl et al., 2019), which confirms human consumption of the 
MPs. Furthermore, the highest contamination scenario of MPs in bottled and tap 
water leads to the ingestion of 14,494 and 13,863 MPs particles per day (Shen et al., 
2019). Another possible source of MPs’ ingestion is the use of MPs’ contaminated 
water for cooking food (Danopoulos et al., 2020). MPs contamination of drinking 
water is a serious issue owing to the abundance of MPs in various shapes, sizes, and 
polymeric types. The mixture of MPs contains large amounts of additives that can 
leach into the human body, such as MPs potentially entering the human tissues upon 
consumption (Campanale et al., 2020). 
The human health risk associated with the MPs contamination of the drinking 
water is governed by both hazard and level of exposure. The chemicals absorbed 
by the particles from the environment and the development of the biofilms on the 
surface of the particles also determine the potential hazards of the MPs (Marsden et 
al., 2019). Since MPs have been traced in drinking water, polymeric identification of 
the particles can be correlated with additive types present in the water. The frequently 
identified polymers—such as polyethylene terephthalates (PET), polyethylene (PE), 
polypropylene (PP), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polyamide (PA), polycarbonate (PC), 
polystyrene (PS), etc.—in the drinking water confirm the presence of toxic additives, 
such as bisphenol A (BPA), phthalates, styrene monomer, and nonylphenol. In 
addition, chemical additives such as persistent organic compounds (POPs), polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), dioxins, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are 
contained in all types of plastics (Alabi et al., 2019). These additives can cause public 
health impacts, such as mimicking estrogen, causing ovarian disorders, interfering 
with testosterone and thyroid hormones, alteration in sperm characteristics, inducing 
possible reproductive and neurological damages as well as developmental and 
reproductive toxicity, and triggering the formation of deoxy-ribose nucleic acid 
(DNA) adducts and carcinogenic properties (Halden, 2010). The present level of 
daily exposure to plastic additives can induce oxidative stress in human cells (Pérez￾Albaladejo et al., 2020). Adding to this, MPs that are less than 1.5 μm in size can 
bypass the gut barrier and reach organs, such as the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes 
(Danopoulos et al., 2020). 
Assessing the MPs contamination of the drinking water is crucial in order to 
understand the source and level of contamination. This chapter aims to provide 
a landscape view of MPs contamination of drinking water and demonstrate the 
efficiency of the treatment plants in removing these MPs particles. The main goals 116 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
of this chapter are (i) to provide an overview of occurrence (size, morphology, and 
polymer type) and source of MPs contamination in drinking water that is reported 
in recent research, (ii) to understand the MPs’ removal capacity of different unit 
processes in DWTPs, and (iii) to know the overall efficacy of DWTPs in removing 
MPs. 
MPs Contamination of Bottled Water 
Occurrence of MPs 
The sample size, average concentration and range, and size-based concentration of 
the MPs observed in bottled water are summarized in Table 1. Similarly, Table 2 lists 
the commonly identified shapes and polymers in bottled water. 
Kankanige and Babel (2020b) examined the presence of small-sized MPs in 
10 brands of bottled water in Thailand. The particle count in the size range of 
6.5–20 µm was nearly seven times higher than the particles that were greater than 
50 µm and more than six-fold higher than the particles in the range of 20–50 µm. 
Furthermore, plastic-bottled water depicted a significantly higher abundance of the 
MPs compared to glass-bottled water. 
In another study, Mason et al. (2018) explored the MPs contamination in bottled 
water of globally recognized brands. High-ranking brands by volumes, sales, and 
consumption were chosen from China, India, the USA, Bangladesh, Mexico, the 
UK, France, Germany, Lebanon, and Indonesia. The particles in the size range 
(6.5–100 µm) were more than 30 times the concentration that was observed for the 
size range greater than 100 µm. When considering the brand, the highest average 
concentration of MPs was observed across Nestle Pure Life and Gerolsteiner at 
930 and 807 particles per liter, respectively. In contrast, the lowest concentration 
was observed at 60.1 and 30 particles per liter in Minalba and San Pellegrino, 
respectively. Intriguingly, 17 bottled water samples representing seven lots (25% of 
the total lots) were reported to be free of MPs. In the same manner, a single bottled 
water sample showed MPs contamination of more than 10,000 particles per liter. 
Makhdoumi et al. (2021) investigated the occurrence of MPs in PET bottled 
mineral water in Iran. MPs were reported in 9 out of 11 brands. Concentration as high 
as 36 particles per liter was observed in one brand, while the lowest concentration 
was 2 particles per liter. 
Oßmann et al. (2018) studied the small-sized MPs and the pigmented particles in 
bottled water in Germany. MPs were detected in all the samples with high variability 
in concentration among different bottle types. Particles that were as high as 35,436 
per liter were observed in one of the glass bottles. When comparing the contamination 
of the new and old reusable PET bottles, old bottles depicted significantly higher 
(more than three-fold) MPs concentrations than the new bottles. The new reusable 
plastic bottles contained MPs in the same concentration as seen in the single-use PET 
bottles. 
Zhou et al. (2021) studied MPs contamination of bottled water in China and 
observed MPs of the size range 100–300 µm in all the bottle samples. Around 90% 
of the particles were less than 1 mm. Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 117 
Table 1. Sample Size, Average Concentration and Range, and Size-Based Concentration of the MPs Observed in Bottled Water.
Samples Average Concentration and Range 
(Particles Per Liter) 
Size-Based Concentration of MPs References 
65 PET bottles
30 Glass bottles 
Plastic bottle = 140 ± 19
Glass bottle = 52 ± 4
 Size (µm) Concentrations (Particles Per Liter) (Kankanige & Babel, 2020b)
6.5–20 81 ± 3 
20–50 26 ± 2 
> 50 12 ± 1 
259 Bottles
11 Brands 
Bottled water = 325 Size (µm) Concentrations (Particles Per Liter) (Mason et al., 2018)
6.5–100 315 
>100 10.4 
24 PET bottles 
2 lass bottles
2 PC bottles 
Bottled water = 1.9
Range = 0.99–26 
25–500 µm (100%) (Almaiman et al., 2021) 
33 PET bottles 
11 Brands 
Plastic bottle = 8.5 ± 10.2
Range = 0–36 
(Makhdoumi et al., 2021) 
12 Reusable PET bottles 
10 Single use PET bottles 
10 Glass bottles 
Plastic bottle = 2,649 ± 2,857
Glass bottle = 4,889 ± 5,432 
< 5 µm ((95%)
< 1.5 µm (50%) 
(Oßmann et al., 2018) 
30 PET bottles
10 Brands 
Plastic bottle = 5.42E7 ± 1.95E7
Range = 3.16E7 – 1.1E8 
1.25–4.5 µm (100%) Zuccarello et al. (2019) 
69 PET bottles 
23 Brands 
Plastic bottle = 2–23 particles per
bottle 
Size (µm) Concentration (%) (Zhou et al., 2021)
25–50 0.35–14.16 
50–100 19.39–37.10 
100–300 29.20–49.20 
300–500 8.42–15.59 
500–1,000
1,000–5,000 4.75–12.26 
Table 1 contd.… 118 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance Samples Average Concentration and Range (Particles Per Liter) Size-Based Concentration of MPs References 11 Brands (single use PET bottles) 15 Brands (reusable PET bottles) 9 Brands (glass bottles) 3 Brands (Beverage cartoon) Single use (SU) = 14 ± 14, Range = 2–44 Returnable (R) = 118 ± 88 Range = 28–241 Glass bottle (GB) = 50 ± 52 Range = 4–56 Beverage carton (BC) = 11 ± 8 Range = 5–20 Size (µm) Concentrations (Particles Per Liter) (Schymanski et al., 2018) SU R GB BC 5–10 56 41 45 39 10–20 29 30 32 28 20–50 12 22 14 16 50–100 2 5 7 10 > 100 1 2 3 7 …Table 1 contd. Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 119 
Table 2. Morphological (shape) and Polymeric Characteristics of the MPs Observed in Bottled Water. 
Dominant Shape Observed Shapes Dominant Polymer(s) Observed Polymers References 
Fibers Fibers = 62.8%
Fragments = 37.2% 
PET PET, PE, PA, PP (Kankanige and Babel,
2020b) 
Fragments Fiber = 13%
Fragments = 66%
Films = 12% 
PP (54%) PP (54%), PA (16%), PS (11%), PE (10%), PEST (polyether 
sulphone (PES) + PET) (6%) 
(Mason et al., 2018) 
PE, PS, PET (Almaiman et al., 2021)
Fragments Fibers = 7%
Fragments = 93% 
PET, PS, PP. (Makhdoumi et al., 2021) 
PET (plastic bottle) 
PE (glass bottle) 
Plastic bottle Glass bottle (Oßmann et al., 2018) 
PET PE (46%)
PP (23%)
Styrene-butadiene–copolymer (14%)
SU R (Schymanski et al., 2018)
PEST (SU plastic bottle)
PEST (R plastic bottle)
PEST (glass bottle)
PE (Beverage cartoon) 
PEST = 59%
PE = 9%
PP = 1%
PA = 1%
Others = 30%
Glass bottle
PEST = 41%
PE = 35%
PA = 12%
PP = 8%
Others = 4% 
PEST = 84%
PP = 7%
PE = 5%
PA = 2% 
Others = 9%
Beverage
PE = 38%
PEST = 32%
PP = 26%
PA = 1%
Others = 3%
Fibers Fibers
(33.3–100%) 
Cellulose (71.16%) Cellulose (71.16%), PET (6.98%), PE (6.95%), PS (4.65%), 
PA (4.19%), polyurethane (PU) (1.86%), PVC (1.4%), PP
(0.93%), polyacrylic acid (PAA) (1.86%), polyethylene-vinyl￾acetate (PEVA) (0.47%), polyacrylamide (PAM) (0.47%) 
(Zhou et al., 2021) 120 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Schymanski et al. (2018) studied MPs contamination of bottled water in reusable 
plastic bottles, single-use plastic bottles, and glass bottles in Germany. Surprisingly, 
returnable bottles had MPs contamination nearly eight and half-folds and 11-folds 
higher than the single-use bottles and beverage cartons, respectively. The majority 
of the particles in all packaging types, except returnable bottles, appeared in the 
5–20 µm size range. However, returnable bottled water showed more than half of 
the total MPs in the size range of 5–10 µm. Moreover, the most frequently observed 
particles in all packing types were sized between 5–10 µm. 
Source of MPs 
Kankanige and Babel (2020b) indicated that the packaging materials used in bottled 
water were the main source of MPs contamination. The study further suggests that 
MPs can be introduced in PET bottled water at various stages, including during water 
injection into the bottle, storage, transportation, and bottle opening. In addition, the 
authors further suspect that the MPs that are not screened out by water treatment 
plants also appear in the bottled water. Other sources include atmospheric emissions 
during water bottling processes. 
Mason et al. (2018) speculate that a notable fraction of the MPs in bottled water 
is associated with processing activities during the bottling of the water. The authors 
consider several factors, including particle-fluid dynamics and variability in the 
manufacturing process as the contributor to MPs. Rather than the water source itself, 
a significant concentration of the MPs originates from the packaging material. This 
study suggests abrasion of the cap during the opening is the source of PP in bottled 
water. In addition, 4% of the MPs were found to be contaminated with industrial 
lubricants pointing to machinery as the possible source of contamination. 
Makhdoumi et al. (2021) consider three possible mechanical mechanisms 
supporting the release of MPs in bottled water. The first mechanism is the release 
of MPs from the body of the packaging material due to hydrodynamic shear stress 
applied during the filling process. Secondly, the mechanical stress produced between 
the cap and bottle neck during the opening and closing of the bottle results in MPs 
formation and contamination. Thirdly, MPs can be released to bottled water when the 
bottle’s body is squeezed during transportation. 
Oßmann et al. (2018) reported higher concentrations of the pigmented particles 
(> 10,000 pigmented particles per liter) in reusable bottles that used printed paper 
as a labeling material compared to those bottles labeled with plastic or single-use 
glass bottles. Stressing the inner surface of the older bottles during the washing 
process is one of the reasons for the higher content of PET particles in older bottles. 
Furthermore, the authors support the theory of abrasion of the cap as the source 
of MPs contamination in bottled water for both plastic and glass bottled water. 
However, contamination of glass bottled water by polymers, like PS, styrene￾butadiene-copolymer, or PET, cannot be from packaging material alone. The authors 
speculate that MPs may originate from the abrasion of the machinery parts and 
contaminate the bottle during cleaning process. In addition, the authors consider that 
the concentration of the washing liquor and the duration of washing also influence 
the MPs concentration of the bottled water.  
Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 121 
The pH of the bottled water and the density of the material of the bottle showed a 
strong correlation with the concentration of the MPs. The bottles made up of poor-quality 
plastics reported higher MPs contamination in bottled water (Zuccarello et al., 2019). 
Schymanski et al. (2018) concluded that plastic bottles themselves (packaging 
material) were the sources of MPs contamination in bottled water. This theory was 
further supported by the abundance of a high fraction of PEST in returnable bottles. 
Furthermore, authors suggest abrasion of the packaging material as the source of 
increased MPs contamination in the returnable bottles because returnable bottles 
are exposed to high stress due to reutilization as compared to single-use bottles 
and beverage cartons. The authors reported a correlation between carbon dioxide 
content and MPs contamination in bottled water. They speculate that the high 
pressure in the sparkling water compared to the still water increases stress in the 
packaging material, thereby releasing more particles. Since beverage cartons were 
coated inside and outside with PE and cellulose material, identification of PE in the 
water also suggested the origination of the particles from the packaging material 
itself. Moreover, the authors consider the abrasion of the plastic cap with the harder 
material of the bottle (neck) to be the plausible reason for extra wear and release of 
the particles in the bottled water. 
Zhou et al. (2021) suggest contamination of the raw water source that is utilized 
for bottled water production by fibers originating from the washing of synthetic 
clothes as one of the sources of fibrous MPs. Furthermore, they point to packaging 
material as the source of MPs in bottled water. 
In summary, MPs have been identified in the majority of the bottled water 
samples. When considering the MPs’ size, the MPs’ abundance significantly increases 
with decreasing size. The observed shapes in bottled water are fibers, fragments, 
and films. The commonly observed polymers are PET, PE, PA, PS, and PP. Though 
the majority of the MPs originates from the packaging material itself, the level of 
contamination depends on various stressing factors, such as washing, filling, squeezing 
while transportation, and abrasion while closing and opening of the bottle cap. 
Understanding the upper-stress limit that generates minimal MPs from the packaging 
material while undergoing these processes is imperative to minimize the level of 
contamination in bottled water. Another possible way of minimizing contamination 
is shifting from plastic bottled water to glass bottled water; however, it is not an easy 
paradigm either. Shifting from plastic to glass bottled water production is linked with 
technical transformation, consumer acceptability, and the manufacturer’s economic 
viability, which can result in a business failure. Similarly, replacing the squeezable 
plastic bottle with a hard non-squeezable plastic bottle may reduce the contamination 
caused by external stress. 
MPs’ Contamination of Tap Water 
Occurrence of MPs 
Table 3 lists the sample size, average concentration and range, and size-based 
concentration of the MPs observed in tap water. Table 4 summarizes the commonly 
identified shapes and polymers in tap water. 122 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance Table 3. Sample Size, Average Concentration and Range, and Size-Based Concentration of the MPs observed in Tap Water. Samples Average Concentration and Range Size-Based Concentration of MPs References 5 Sampling points 45 liter Tap water 96 particles per liter Size (µm) Concentrations (Particles Per Liter) (Kankanige and Babel, 6.5–53 56 ± 14 2020a) 53–300 21± 7 300–500 13 ± 5 > 500 6 ± 3 5 Sampling points Distribution lines 174 ± 405 per m3 30% of the MPs less than 20 µm 8–374 µm (size of the MPs) (Kirstein et al., 2021) 42 Sampling points 42 Samples Water reserve = 2–1 particles Distribution line = 1 particle Hydrants = 1 particle All concentrations are in per 250 mL (Paredes et al., 2019) 159 Samples Tap water 5.45 particles per liter (0–61 particles per liter) Size range 0.10–5 mm Average size 0.96 mm (Kosuth et al., 2018) 32 Samples Tap (South wing) 97 ± 55 per 500 mL (24–228 per 500 mL) Tap (North wing) 219 ± 158 per 500 mL (48–597 per 500 mL) Size range 6–50 µm (Pratesi et al., 2021) 42 Samples Tap water 
39 ± 44 particles per liter
(1.9–255 particles per liter) 
Size (µm) Concentration (Particles per liter) (Mukotaka et al., 2021)
19–50 15 ± 17 
50–100 17 ± 23 
> 100 7.3 ± 9.1 Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 123 
42 Samples
126 L 
Public fountain
18 ± 7 particles per liter
(5 ± 2–91 ± 14 particles per
liter) 
Size (mm) Concentration (%) (Shruti et al., 2020)
< 0.5 50 
0.5–1 25 
3–5 3 
38 Samples Tap water
440 particles per liter
(0–1,247 particles per liter) 
Size (µm) Concentration (%) (Tong et al., 2020)
1–50 31.25–100 
50–100 1.47–31.25 
100–300 1.72–31.25 
300–500 1.18–7.69 
500–5,000 1.72–11.76 
110 Samples Tap water 
2.181 ± 0.165 particles per liter
(0 to 8.605 particles per liter) 
Size (µm) Concentration (%) (Lam et al., 2020)
2.7–149 8.9 
150–499 30.8 
500–999 25.5 
1,000–2,499 27.2 
2,500–5,000 7.6 
21 samples Tap water 
0.7 ± 0.6 particles per liter
(0.3–1.6 particles per liter) 
Size (µm) Concentration (%) (Zhang et al., 2020)
< 100 1.20 
100–500 26 
500–1,000 46.4 
1,000–5,000 26.4 
4 Samples Tap water 
343.5 particles per liter
(267–404 particles per liter) 
(Shen et al., 2021) 124 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance Table 4. Morphological (Shape) and Polymeric Characteristics of the MPs Observed in Tap Water. Dominant Shape Observed Shapes Dominant Polymer(s) Observed Polymers References Fibers Fibers = 58% Fragments = 37% Films = 5% Size (µm) Polymer PE, PVC, PP PA, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), PAM (Kankanige and Babel, 300–500 PE (26.5%), PVC (19.1%) 2020a) > 500 PE (18.7%), PVC (18.1%) Fragments Fibers = 19% Fragments = 81% PE (67%) PES, PE, PP, acrylic (Kirstein et al., 2021) Fibers Fibers = 98% Fragments = 1% Films = 1% Kosuth et al. (2018) Fragments Fragments = 90.4% Fibers = 9% Spheres = 0.6% PS PS, PE, styrene ethylene butylene styrene block copolymer (SEBS), PE, PET, PVC, acrylic compounds (Mukotaka et al., 2021) Fibers Fibers, Fragments PTT Polytrimethylene terephthalate (PTT), epoxy resin (Shruti et al., 2020) Fragments Fragments 53.85–100% Fibers 1.18–30.77% Spheres 2.27–36.36% PE (26.8%). PP (24.4%) PE, PP, copolymerized compounds of PE and PP (22%), PPS (7.3%), PS (6.5%), PET (3.3%) (Tong et al., 2020) Fibers Fibers (98.7%) Films (2.2%) (Lam et al., 2020) Fibers Fibers = 99.2% Fragments = 0.8% Rayon Rayon, PET, PE, PS, PAA, polymethyl-phenyl-siloxane
(PMPS), polyisoprene (PI), PAM, 
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS),
polycaprolactone (PCL) – diol 
(Zhang et al., 2020) 
Fibers Fibers (50–52%)
Fragments (48–50%)
Spheres 1% 
PE (24%) PE (24%), PP (4%), PET (25%), PVC, 
PA 
(Shen et al., 2021) Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 125 
Kankanige and Babel (2020a) examined the MPs’ contamination in tap water 
at Thammasat University in Thailand. The water comes through PVC pipes to the 
tap. Results showed an increasing concentration of the MPs in smaller size range. 
The lowest size range, 6.5–53 µm, comprised most of the MPs. 
Kosuth et al. (2018) examined the contamination of tap water in 14 countries. 
The countries taken into consideration for this study are Cuba (n = 1), Ecuador 
(n = 24), England (n = 3), France (n =1), Germany (n = 2), India (n = 17), Indonesia 
(n = 21), Ireland (n = 1), Italy (n = 1), Lebanon (n = 16), Slovakia (n = 8), Switzerland 
(n = 2), Uganda (n = 26), and the US (n = 36). About 81% of the samples were 
contaminated with anthropogenic debris. Moreover, the highest mean concentration 
was observed in the US (9.24 particles per liter). In terms of region, North America 
(the US and Cuba) reported the highest mean concentration of 9.18 particles per liter, 
while the lowest concentration was observed in European nations (England, France, 
Germany, Ireland, Italy, Slovakia, and Switzerland) at 3.60 particles per liter. The 
samples from less developed nations (Cuba, Ecuador, India, Indonesia, and Uganda) 
depicted low average concentration compared to the developed nations (EU, the US, 
and Lebanon). The concentration of the particles observed in developed and less 
developed nations was 6.85 and 4.26 particles per liter, respectively. 
Pratesi et al. (2021) examined tap water contamination by MPs in the city of 
Brasilia, Brazil. Samples (each of 500 ml) were randomly collected from bars, 
restaurants, and cafes in the South and North Wing of the city. Both areas take water 
from the same treatment plant that includes unit processes, such as coagulation, 
flocculation, filtration, and fluoridation. All the samples depicted the presence of 
the MPs. However, the North Wing reported a significantly higher concentration 
than the South Wing. The authors speculate the differences in the composition of the 
water tank, plumbing material (galvanized steel pipes vs. PVC pipes), and sample 
collection days between these sites to be the reasons for this variability. 
Mukotaka et al. (2021) investigated the MPs contamination of tap water in 
developed countries, including Japan, the US, France, Germany, and Finland. Three 
to five samples were collected at each site. MPs were found in all the samples. Also, 
11 out of 42 samples displayed MPs concentrations were less than 10 particles per 
liter, whereas three samples displayed MPs were greater than 100 particles per liter. 
Japan displayed the lowest concentration of MPs (14 particles per liter) than the EU 
(58 particles per liter). The size of the MPs ranged from 19.2 µm to 4.2 mm. MPs 
greater than 100 µm were detected in 34 out of 42 samples and in all the sites. 
Shruti et al. (2020) studied MPs contamination of free public drinking water 
fountains in Mexico. All the samples depicted MPs contamination. Nineteen stations 
out of 42 stations had MPs concentrations of 5–10 particles per liter; 29% of the 
stations reported MPs count of 13–20 per liter; 22–38 particles per liter were detected 
in 19% of the stations, and 7% displayed MPs count of 60–91 particles per liter. 
A higher abundance of MPs was observed in the commercial zones, whereas the 
lowest was reported in the hospital and recreational zone. MPs less than 1 mm in size 
accounted for 75% of the total MPs. Only fibers were found to be greater in size than 
1 mm, whereas fragments were observed to be smaller than 0.5 mm. 
Tong et al. (2020) examined MPs contamination of tap water in different cities 
in China. Except for two samples, 36 samples depicted MPs contamination. The 126 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
size of the MPs ranged from 3 to 4,453 µm. Particles less than 50 µm predominated 
all the samples (abundance ranging from 31.25 to 100%). This study revealed the 
occurrence of large-sized MPs (> 300 µm) in more than two-thirds of the samples. 
Lam et al. (2020) studied tap water samples sourced from surface water in Hong 
Kong to examine the MPs contamination. Out of 110 samples, 86 samples contained 
MPs. MPs that were smaller than 1 mm accounted for 97.8% of the total MPs. The 
size of the MPs varied between 50–4,830 µm. 
Zhang et al. (2020) collected tap water samples from seven districts of 
Qingdao in China for analysis. The majority of the particles were greater than 
500 µm. In tap water, 11 polymers were detected. In the study carried out by Shen 
et al. (2021) in China, researchers found decreasing concentrations of the MPs with 
increasing size range, and they also discovered MPs greater than 100 µm were 
minimal. The majority of the particles were smaller than 10 µm. 
Source of contamination 
PE, PVC, and PA were the dominant polymers in the study carried out by Kankanige 
and Babel (2020a). In agreement with Mintenig et al. (2019), the authors suggest 
abrasion of the pipe and fittings that runs from the treatment plant to the household 
as the source of contamination of these polymers. Furthermore, the authors suggest 
a higher possibility of contamination of the raw water entering the treatment plants 
by PET and other polymers. They believe MPs contamination of the raw water 
(Chao-Phraya River), which has been reported to contain MPs contamination by 
Ericsson and Johansson (2018), is the source of MPs in the tap water. Another source 
of contamination was PAM, an anionic polyelectrolyte, which was added to enhance 
flocculation in the water treatment plant. 
Kirstein et al. (2021) agree with Mintenig et al. (2019), who suggest degradation 
of the equipment (made up of PVC, PE, and PP) used in DWTP and distribution 
system as the sources of MPs contamination in tap water. The authors found no 
correlation between the age of the pipe and the concentration of the MPs. 
Paredes et al. (2019) speculate that the presence of MPs in the drinking water may 
be due to the use of plastic [low density polyethylene (LDPE)] coating in the storage 
tanks. They suggest the hardness of water to be the reason behind significantly less 
abundance of MPs compared to other studies. The hardness of water develops a layer 
inside the PVC pipe preventing its wear and tear. 
Kosuth et al. (2018) suggest that the difference in concentration of the particles 
between developed and less developed countries depends on the variability in the 
water source (well, surface, and snowmelt), regional population density, and water 
filtration method. Contamination by MPs in treated water may also originate from 
aerosols and distribution pipes (Mukotaka et al., 2021). 
Shruti et al. (2020) suggest a wide spectrum of factors, such as human activities, 
water transportation means and pathways, and urban water storage conditions, 
responsible for the presence of MPs in public drinking water fountains. They 
speculate atmospheric deposition of the MPs at the water intake is the source of 
fibers in fountain water, along with the discharge of wastewater as the potential 
source of MPs in the water. Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 127 
Tong et al. (2020) consider pipes and fittings used in households as the source of 
MPs, such as PE and PP. Lam et al. (2020) suggest that human activities around the 
water source, atmospheric deposition of the MPs, and use of plastic equipment in the 
treatment plant and distribution lines are the potential sources of the MPs. 
Zhang et al. (2020) also point to human activities and atmospheric deposition of 
MPs as the potential source of MPs contamination of the raw water, which eventually 
appears in the tap water. Furthermore, they point to the degradation of larger MPs 
during physical and chemical treatment processes in the DWTP as the reason behind 
the increased concentration of MPs in the tap water compared to the raw water. 
To summarize, the highest and lowest concentration reported in tap water was 
440 and 0.7 particles per liter, respectively. The observed shapes in tap water are 
fibers, fragments, spheres, and films. The commonly observed polymers in tap water 
are PE, PP, PVC, PS, and PA. MPs in the tap water originates mainly from the raw 
water, and pipes and fittings that run from the treatment plant to the tap. Thus, tap 
water includes the same contaminants as that of the treatment plants along with the 
addition of new contaminants from distribution lines. The MPs contamination of 
tap water can be minimized by increasing the efficacy of the DWTPs and replacing 
plastic pipes and fittings with metal. An option to prevent MPs consumption from 
drinking tap water would be the development of portable MPs removal filters that 
can be installed to the tap. 
Performance of Treatment Plants 
Occurrence of MPs 
Table 5 lists the concentration of the MPs in raw and treated water and the size￾based concentration of the MPs observed in DWTPs in different studies. Table 6 
summarizes the commonly observed shapes and polymers in the DWTPs. Table 7 
shows the removal efficiency of the treatment units and the treatment plants. 
Kankanige and Babel (2021) examined the MPs contamination and the removal 
efficiency of different treatment units in a conventional drinking water treatment plant 
in Thailand. The prevalence of the MPs was dominated by the small-sized particles 
ranging in size between 6.5 to 53 and 53 to 300 µm in both the dry and rainy seasons. 
The major treatment units responsible for the MPs’ removal were clarification and 
dual media filtration. In addition, smaller particles were sedimented and removed 
effectively compared to the larger particles. Filtration appeared efficient in removing 
MPs greater than 300 µm, whereas clarification removed all sized particles with 
better efficiency. 
Pivokonsky et al. (2018) investigated the MPs abundance in the raw and treated 
water of three different treatment plants with varying raw water sources. MPs were 
observed in all the raw water samples from three different treatment plants. The 
removal efficiency of the treatment plants varied from 45–100% depending on the 
size of the MPs. The lower removal rate of 45–51% (depending on the sampling day) 
was observed at DWTP2 for particle size of 10–50 µm. The authors suggest that 
the shape of the particles also plays an important role in determining the removal 
efficiency of treatment plants. 128 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance Table 5. Overall and Size-Based Concentration of the MPs in Raw and Treated Water of DWTPs. Concentration of MPs (Particles Per Liter) Size-Based Concentration (Particles Per Liter) References Raw Water Treated Water Dry season 1,385 448.7 Size (µm) Dry season Dry season (Kankanige and Babel, 2021) Raw water Treated water Raw water Treated water > 500 161.9 32.1 172.1 59 Rainy season 1,796.6 769.4 500–300 244.4 51.7 312.6 105.7 300–53 472.2 162.4 702.9 281.2 53–6.5 506.5 202.5 609 323.5 1,473 ± 34 to 3,605 ± 497 338 ± 76 to 628 ± 28 Size (µm) Raw water Treated water (Pivokonsky et al., 2018) 1–5 40–60 25–60 5–10 30–40 30–50 DWTP1 2,808 ± 80 1,401 ± 86 < 10 µm (65–87%) (Adib et al., 2021) DWTP2 1,996 ± 268 1,042 ± 269 DWTP3 2,172 ± 119 971 ± 103 17.88 6.99 Maximum MPs less than 100 µm (Sarkar et al., 2021) DWTP 6,614 ± 1,132 930 ± 71 Size (µm) Raw water Treated water (Wang et al., 2020) 1–5 3,760 ± 726 793 ± 53 5–10 1,520 ± 258 136 ± 22 10–50 731 ± 216 1 ± 1 
50–100 379 ± 117 0 
> 100 224 ± 126 0 Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 129 
DWTP1 23 ± 2 14 ± 1 Raw water Treated water (Pivokonský et al.,
2020) DWTP2 1,296 ± 35 151 ± 4 DWTP1 50% (1–5 μm) 65% (1–5 μm) 
DWTP2 46% (50–100 μm) 59% (< 50 µm) 
DWTP1 6.6 3.1 Size (µm) Raw Water Treated Water (Radityaningrum et
1–100 0.5 0.3 al., 2021)
101–350 4.5 1.3 
351–1,000 13.5 8.5 
1000–5000 8.3 2.2 
DWTP2 8.8 2.1 Size (µm) Raw Water Treated Water 
1–100 1.5 0.7 
101–350 4.9 2.8 
351–1,000 15.8 3 
1,000–5,000 12.8 2 
DWTP 0.96 ± 0.46 0.06 ± 0.04 Fibers Fragments (Dalmau-Soler et al.,
Raw Water 57% (200–500 µm) 60 % (500–1,000 2021)
µm) 
15% (20–200 µm) 20% (1,000–2,000
µm) 
14% (500–1000 µm) 20% (> 2,000 µm)
14% (1,000–2,000 µm) 22% (20–200 µm)
Treated Water 31% (200–500 µm) 56% (200–500 µm)
8% (20–200 µm) 22% (500–1,000 µm) 
37% (500–1,000 µm)
24% (1000–2,000 µm)
DWTP 2753
(2,173–3,998) 
351.9
(336–400) 
(Shen et al., 2021) 
DWTP 330.2 105.8 (Ferraz et al., 2020) 130 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance Table 6. Morphological (Shape) and Polymeric Characteristics of the MPs Observed in DWTPs. Dominant Shape(s) Observed Shapes Dominant Polymer(s) Observed Polymers References Fibers Dry season Fibers = 49.6% Fragments = 35.1% PE PA, PE, PP, PET, PVC (Kankanige and Babel, 2021) Rainy season Fibers = 39.8% Fragments = 38.6% Fragments DWTP1 & DWTP2 Fragments = 71–76% PET PET, PE, PP (Pivokonsky et al., 2018) DWTP3 Fibers = 37–61% Fragments = 42–48% Fibers Raw water Fibers = 51.1% Fragments = 35.6% Spheres = 13.3% PP Raw water (PP = 27.3%) Treated water (PP = 24.8%) PP, PE, PS, PET, PVC, PA, PU, PC, polybutylene terephthalate (PBT), PTFE, and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) (Adib et al., 2021) Treated water Fibers = 38% Fragments = 56.7% Spheres = 5.3% Fibers Fibers = 52–59% Fragments = 41–48% Raw water PET (54%) Treated water PET (56%) PET, PE, PP, PS (Sarkar et al., 2021) 
Fibers Raw water
Fibers = 53.9–73.9%
Fragments = 17.6–25.5%
Spheres = 8.6–20.6% 
PET PE, PP, PAM, PS, PVC (Wang et al., 2020) 
Treated water 
Fibers = 51.6–78.9%
Fragments = 14.4–38.3%
Spheres = 6.7–10.1% Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 131 
Fragments DWTP1
Fibers = 20%
Fragments = 80% 
DWTP1
CA (42%) 
Cellulose acetate (CA), PET, PVC, PE, PP (Pivokonský et al., 2020) 
DWTP2
Fibers = 8–13%
Fragments = 87–92% 
CA, PET, PVC, PE, 
PP
(90%) 
Fibers DWTP1 Raw (%) Treated (%) PE, PP, PE PE, PP, PE, PA 6, PA 6, 6, 
polytrimolithicamide 
(Radityaningrum et al.,
2021) Fibers 92.16 100 
Fragments 6.72 
Film 1.12 
DWTP2 Raw (%) Treated (%) 
Fibers 94.57 82.35 
Fragments 5.14 15.29 
Film 0 1.18 
Pellet 0.29 1.18 
Fibers Fibers Fragments PP, PET PP, PET, polyvinyl acetate (PVAC), 
epoxy resin, PTFE, PA, alkyd resin, 
polyacrylonitrile (PAN), PS 
(Dalmau-Soler et al.,
2021) 
Raw Water 59% 41% 
Treated 
Water 
58% 42% 
Fragments
(raw water)
Fibers
(treated
water) 
Raw water (%) Treated water 
(%) 
Raw water
PE (26.8%)
Treated water 
PE (24%) 
Raw water
PE (26.8%), PP (13.2%), PS (16.5%), PET
(16.1%), PVC, polymethyl methacrylate
(PMMA) 
(Shen et al., 2021) 
Fibers 20–23 45–48 
Fragments 57–65 42–50 Treated water 
PE (24%), PP (4%), PET (25%), PVC, PA
Spheres 12–18 1–2 
Fibers Fibers (%) Pellets (%) Firms (%) Ferraz et al. (2020) 
Raw Water 89.4 10.5 0.1 
Treated 
Water 
80.2 19.1 0.7 132 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Table 7. Removal Efficiency of the Unit Processes and the Treatment Plants. 
Unit Process and Efficiency (%) Remarks Overall 
Efficiency 
(%) 
References 
Units Dry 
season 
(%) 
Rainy 
season 
(%) 
River water (water source) 67.5 (dry) 
57.2 (rainy) 
Kankanige and 
Babel, 2021) 
Screen 6.2 7 
Clarification 36.6 26.7 
Filtration 34.8 30.9 
Chlorination tank 16.4 8.9 
DWTP1 
Coagulation, flocculation, and sand 
filtration 
DWTP1 (Large valley water 
reservoir) 
DWTP2 (Small reservoir) 
DWTP3 (River water) 
95% MPs less than 10 µm in 
raw and treated water; 
Complete removal of MPs > 
50 µm; 
2% of MPs > 100 µm in raw 
water; 
Significant fraction of MPs 
< 1 µm in the raw water 
(111–2,181 particles per liter); 
Significant reduction of MPs 
< 1 µm in the treated water 
DWTP1 (70) 
DWTP2 (81) 
DWTP3 (82) 
(Pivokonsky et 
al., 2018) 
DWTP2 & DWTP3 
Coagulation, flocculation, sand 
filtration, and Granular Activated 
Carbon (GAC) filtration 
Screening, coagulation and 
flocculation, sand filtration, and 
disinfection 
River water (water source); 
Nearly complete removal of 
MPs > 50 µm; 
Significant removal of fibers 
than fragments 
DWTP1 
(50.1) 
DWTP2 
(48.4) 
DWTP3 
(55.2) 
(Adib et al., 
2021) 
Unit Process 82.1–88.6 
Fibers (82.9– 
87.5%); 
Fragments 
(73.1– 
88.9%); 
Spheres 
(89.1–92.7%) 
(Wang et al., 
Coagulation/sedimentation 2020)
Removed fibers by (50.7–60.6%) 
Overall efficiency (40.5–50.5%) 
River water (water source); 
Coagulation/sedimentation 
almost completely removed 
particles > 10 µm; 
Ozonation coupled with GAC 
increased MPs removal by 
17.2–22.2%; 
1–5 µm MPs dominated raw 
(54.6–58%) and treated water 
(84.4–86.7%); 
Effective removal of large 
MPs 
Sand Filtration 
Removal efficiency of 29–44.4% 
Removed 30.9–49.3% (fibers), 
23.5–50.9% (fragments)
Ozonation 
GAC 
Removed 56.8–0.9% of the MPs 
Removed 73.7–98.5% of 1–5 µm 
MPs 
Removed 38–52.1% (fibers), 
76.8–86.5% (fragments)
Units Cumulative 
Removal 
Efficiency (%) 
River water (water source) 
Significant fraction of MPs < 
100 µm in all the samples; 
Effectiveness of pulse clarifier 
and sand filtration in removing 
MPs > 100 µm; 
Removed fibers and fragments 
with same level of efficiency 
84.6 (Sarkar et al., 
2021) 
Pulse clarifier 63 
Sand filtration 85 
Table 7 contd. ... Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 133 
...Table 7 contd. 
Unit Process and Efficiency (%) Remarks Overall 
Efficiency 
(%) 
References 
DWTP2 River water (water source); 
70% of MPs < 10 µm; 
Sedimentation removed to a 
similar extent; 
Filtration removed fragments 
more efficiently than fibers; 
Ozonation depicted similar 
removal pattern to filtration 
GAC significantly removed 
fragments ≥ 10 to < 50 µm; 
improved removal of fibers 
DWTP1 (40) 
DWTP2 (88) 
(Pivokonský et 
al., 2020) Unit Process Removal 
Efficiency (%) 
Sedimentation 62 (Overall)
Filtration 20 (Overall); 
34 (fragments ≥ 50 
µm); 
19 (fragments ≤ 
50 µm)
Ozonation 1 (Overall)
GAC 5 (Overall)
Units DWTP1 
(%) 
DWTP2 
(%) 
River water (water source); 
350–1,000 µm sized MPs 
dominated raw (45–50%) and 
treated water (36–69%); 
High efficiency of DWTP1 for 
MPs 1,000–5,000 µm (72%) 
and 100–350 µm (71%); High 
efficiency of DWTP2 for MPs 
350–1,000 µm (80%) and 
1,000–5,000 µm (84%) 
DWTP1 (54) 
DWTP2 (76) 
(Radityaningrum 
et al., 2021)
Aeration 45 47 
Pre￾sedimentation 
39 37 
Coagulation 17 N/A 
Filtration 26 N/A 
Unit process Removal efficiency 
(%) 
Sand filtration significantly 
reduced MPs concentration 
93 (Dalmau-Soler 
et al., 2021)
Sand filtration 78 
GAC 18 
Reverse 
Osmosis 
54 
Aeration, coagulation/ 
sedimentation, sand filtration, GAC 
filtration, disinfection 
87 (Shen et al., 
2021) 
70 Ferraz et al. 
(2020) 
N/A = Not Available 
Adib et al. (2021) investigated the MPs contamination of three conventional 
drinking water treatment plants in Tehran, Iran. In total, 18 samples (45 L) were 
analyzed for MPs contamination. The DWTPs seemed to be effective in removing 
larger particles, while smaller particles were not removed owing to the low density. 
The authors speculate that the higher removal rate of the fibrous MPs may be due 
to the trapping of the long end of the fibrous MPs by the sand filter. Moreover, the 
lower removal efficiency of the DWTPs may be due to not using the PAM in the 
coagulation process. This study suggests that conventional drinking water treatment 
plants are not capable of removing MPs less than 10 µm in size. 
Sarkar et al. (2021) examined the prevalence and removal efficiency of the MPs 
at different treatment units of a typical drinking water treatment plant in India. In this 
study, no change in MPs abundance appeared after pre-treatment and coagulation. 
Pulse clarification significantly reduced the MPs count from 17.88 to 6.99 particles 
per liter. Surprisingly, the MPs’ concentration at the inlet of the sand filter was higher 
than that at the clarification outlet, increasing from 6.99 to 11.17 particles per liter. 
However, filtration significantly reduced the MPs count to 2.75 particles per liter. 134 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Wang et al. (2020) examined the MPs’ removal efficiency of different treatment 
units in one of the largest drinking water treatment plants in China. Depending on the 
size category, the plant removed 72.3–100% of the particles. Coagulation coupled 
with sedimentation seemed effective in removing fibrous MPs. Similarly, GAC stood 
efficient in removing small-sized MPs. Surprisingly, the MPs’ concentration in the 
outlet of the ozonation tank increased by 2.8–16%. Basically, the shape and size of 
the MPs were the features determining the efficiency of the treatment units. 
Pivokonsky et al. (2020) studied the MPs contamination (≥ 1 µm) in raw and 
treated water of two different DWTPs in the Czech Republic. The first treatment plant 
(DWTP1) receives water from a dam, while the second one (DWTP2) takes water 
directly from the Uhlava River. For DWTP1, two samples were collected (one at the 
inlet and another at the outlet). In the case of the second plant (DWTP2), six samples 
were collected, including inlet, outlet, and four-unit processes (sedimentation, 
filtration, ozonation, and GAC). MPs were observed in all the samples, but the 
concentrations were erratic between the treatment plants and along the unit processes. 
However, MPs comprised less than 0.02% of the total particles present in the water. 
In addition, more than 70% of the particles were less than 10 µm. As per Pivokonský 
et al. (2020), the removal efficiency of the DWTP1 for fragments decreased with 
decreasing size range. When considering the overall treatment efficiency, DWTP2 
removed larger particles with better efficiency. 
Radilyaningrum et al. (2021) studied MPs’ abundance in two DWTPs in 
Indonesia. At aeration, MPs in the size range of 350–1,000 µm experienced the 
highest removal efficiency of 68% at DWTP1, while DWTP2 removed the MPs 
(1–100 µm) with the highest removal efficiency of 93%. In the pre-sedimentation 
process, DWTP1 removed MPs of 100–350 µm with an efficiency of 73%. However, 
a removal efficiency of 55% was achieved at DWTP2 for MPs of size range 
350–1,000 µm. DWTP1 and DWTP2 removed fragments and fibers effectively 
during pre-sedimentation, respectively. No fibers were removed during flocculation￾sedimentation in DWTP1 and DWTP2. However, 100% and 61% of fragments were 
removed during flocculation-sedimentation in DWTP1 and DWTP2, respectively. 
About 31% of the fibers were removed during filtration in DWTP1. DWTP2 could 
remove 100% of the pellets. 
Dalmau-Soler et al. (2021) examined MPs contamination of a DWTP sourced 
from Llobregat River in Barcelona, Brazil. DWTP almost removed fibers of all the 
size ranges along the treatment units, while fragments exhibited a decrease in size 
range along the treatment units. 
Ferraz et al. (2020) studied MPs contamination (> 200 µm) of the raw and treated 
water sourced from the Sinos river in Southern Brazil. Sixteen samples from the 
river and sixteen samples from the residence that receives treated water were taken 
into consideration. One sample of raw water showed no MPs contamination after 
controlled filter correction. Both raw and treated water depicted a similar distribution 
pattern of the MPs types (shapes). The minimum and maximum MPs count in 
raw water was 0 and 940 particles per liter, respectively. Similarly, the minimum 
and maximum concentration of MPs in the treated water was 2 and 459 particles per 
liter, respectively. Urbanization gradient showed no effect on the abundance of the 
MPs. Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 135 
Mintenig et al. (2019) examined MPs contamination of the raw and treated 
water of five DWTPs, one consumer household (at the water meter and tap water) 
supplied by each DWTP, and water from three wells in Germany. MPs were not 
detected in 14 samples out of 24 samples. Five samples depicted MPs contamination 
of less than one per cubic meter. Similarly, one to three particles were detected in 
four samples, and a maximum of seven particles were detected in a single sample. 
The mean concentration of the MPs was observed to be 0.7 particles per cubic meter 
and concentration ranged between 0–7 particles per cubic meter. MPs were observed 
in the size range of 50–150 µm. After blank correction, no fibers were found in the 
samples. All the identified particles were fragments. PET (62%) dominated all the 
polymers. Other polymers observed were PVC (14%), PA and epoxy resin (9%), and 
PE (6%). 
Source of MPs 
Kankanige and Babel (2021), Dalmau-Soler et al. (2021), and Radityaningrum et al. 
(2021) suggest MPs contamination of the water source is the major source of MPs in 
raw and treated water. Furthermore, Kankanige and Babel (2021) speculate that the 
presence of contamination in the treatment plant may be due to MPs originating from 
the plants themselves. In line with this, Mintenig et al. (2019) suggest abrasion of the 
storage tanks, pipes, and fittings as the source of MPs, such as epoxy resin, PVC, and 
PE, in the treated water. Furthermore, despite strict precautions, samples were found 
to be contaminated with environmental MPs (Kankanige and Babel, 2021). Shen et 
al. (2021), Adib et al. (2021), and Pivokonsky et al. (2018) suggest human activities 
near the water source is a potent factor determining the abundance of the MPs in 
the raw water. The other factors influencing the concentration of the MPs in the 
raw water are the quality of the water (Adib et al., 2021), the landscape around the 
water source (Pivokonský et al., 2020), the source of water and ambient environment 
(Pivokonsky et al., 2018), the weather conditions, such as as precipitation and flood 
(Adib et al., 2021; Pivokonsky et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2021), and the land use in the 
vicinity, such as industrial and residential area (Shen et al., 2021). 
Similarly, Shen et al. (2021) suspect the degrading of discarded plastics in the 
water source, wastewater from domestic laundry, personal care products, and other 
cleansing media are the sources of MPs in raw water. Ferraz et al. (2020) reported 
discharge of unfiltered sewage from the sink and washing machines and untreated 
municipal sewage into the river are the major sources of fibrous MPs in the raw 
water (Sinos river, Brazil). This was further supported by Pivokonský et al. (2020), 
wherein authors consider a higher MPs count in the raw water of the DWTP2 is 
possibly due to the effluent of the wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) entering the 
water source. Additionally, the study by Shen et al. (2021) speculates the material of 
the pipes and fittings used in the household is the source of increased concentration 
of PVC MPs in tap water than in the treated water. 
In summary, the DWTPs in operation around the globe cannot remove MPs 
completely. MPs concentration as high as 1,401 particles per liter and as low as 0.06 
particles per liter has been reported in the treated water. The commonly observed 
shapes in the DWTPs are fibers, fragments, and spheres, while the observed polymers 136 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
are PA, PE, PP, PET, PVC, and PS. A variability in MPs removal efficiency has been 
observed among the DWTPs and between the unit processes among the DWTPs 
around the globe. With current knowledge, the units responsible for removing 
MPs are coagulation/flocculation and sedimentation, GAC, clarifier, and filtration. 
However, these units have displayed a mixture of results in removing MPs of various 
shapes and sizes. More robust and rigorous research is intrinsic to understanding 
the removal capacity and features of the unit processes. The major source of MPs 
contamination in DWTPs is raw water. In this regard, source protection plays a key 
role in diminishing MPs contamination of both DWTPs and tap water. Technological 
advancement is necessary to bypass the MPs from the raw water before entering the 
treatment plant. Discarding plastic equipment in treatment plants can also reduce 
MPs of both DWTPs and tap water to some extent. 
Single-Use Plastics and Policies 
Accounting for 40% of packaging types, the worldwide production of plastic marked 
380 million tons in 2015 (Plastic Europe, 2019). The majority (about 60%) of 
plastic packaging is used for food and beverages (Groh et al., 2019). The global 
accumulation of the plastic waste was about 6.3 billion tons in 2015, of which 567 
million tons was recycled, 756 millions tons was incinerated, and about 5 billion 
tons was left in landfills or natural environment (Geyer et al., 2017). With present 
consumption and waste management practice, it has been estimated that about 12 
billion tons of plastics will find their way to landfills and the environment by the end 
of 2050 (Giacovelli, 2018). About 10% of the plastics produced find their way to the 
marine environment, and the rest remains in the terrestrial environment in the form 
of macro-, micro-, and nano-plastics (Mattsson et al., 2015; Allen et al., 2019). 
Single-use plastic (SUP) products, made of polyethylene, are used for carrying 
goods and discarded after one use (Giacovelli, 2018). SUP shares a greater fraction 
of the general plastic production in many countries around the globe (Chen et al., 
2021). According to the UN report, the most common SUP products are (in the 
order of magnitude) cigarette buds, plastic drinking bottles, plastic bottle caps, food 
wrappers, plastic grocery bags, plastic lids, straws and stirrers, other types of plastic 
bags, and foam take-away containers (Giacovelli, 2018). About a trillion SUP bags 
are used per year (Earth Policy Institute, 2014). In 2014, The regional distribution of 
single-use plastic production was 26% in North East Asia, 21% in North America, 
17% in the Middle East, 16% in Europe, 12% in Asia and the Pacific, 4% in Central 
and South America, 3% in Former USSR, and 1% in Africa (Giacovelli, 2018). In 
2015, the global per capita consumption of plastic material was 45 kg per person. 
The highest and the lowest per capita consumption in this year was 139 kg per person 
in North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) region and 16 kg per person in 
the Middle East and Africa (Plastic Insight, 2016). Plastics, despite their ability to 
degrade slowly, can degrade to small sizes (5 mm to 1 µm) (da Costa, 2018). Thus, 
shifting plastics from macro-plastics (MaPs) into MPs, in the long run, is possible 
(Allen et al., 2019). Concerns are being raised by governments around the world 
regarding the increasing plastic pollution. More than 60 countries around the globe 
have implemented bans or levies to combat single-use plastic pollution (Giacovelli, Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 137 
2018). Different countries have introduced a variety of schemes to beat single-use 
plastic pollution. Commonly used tools to limit the use of plastic bags are shown in 
Table 8. 
These policies can be adopted at the national, state, or municipal level to combat 
single-use plastic pollution. Table 9 summarizes the type of policy implemented by 
different countries at the national level or local level or both levels to deal with 
plastic bags and Styrofoam products. 
When comparing the policy regulations implementation region-wise, European 
countries have adopted levies to deal with the use of plastic bags, while the rest of the 
countries are more inclined toward banning as a policy. Many countries have banned 
the import, production, sale, and use of plastic bags or non-biodegradable plastic 
bags completely. In contrast, other countries have implemented a ban on plastic/ 
non-biodegradable plastic bags to a specific size range and/or levies on thicker 
plastics. Countries, namely Ethiopia, Mozambique, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania 
(local level), Uganda, and Zimbabwe, have banned plastic bags < 30 μm. Similarly, 
Canada (Montreal), Argentina, India, Belgium (local level), and Cote d’Ivoire have 
banned plastic bags < 50 μm. Australia has banned the use of plastic bags < 35 μm in 
Tasmania and Queensland. Moreover, countries imposing size-based restrictions are 
Malawi (60 μm), China and Mongolia (25 μm), and Israel and Sri Lanka (20 μm). 
Apart from regulation policy, some countries are practicing public-private agreements 
to cope with single-use plastic pollution. Countries like Thailand, Austria, Finland, 
Germany, Luxembourg, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Canada, and Australia are a 
few adopting this strategy (Giacovelli, 2018). 
Six Southeast Asian countries are in the top 20 countries with unmanaged plastic 
waste. These are Indonesia (second), Philippines (third), Vietnam (fourth), Thailand 
Table 8. Policy Tools to Limit the Use of Plastic Bags. 
Policy Features 
Regulatory 
Instruments 
Ban A total or partial restriction (a particular type or combination) on 
single-use plastics including plastic bags, foamed plastic products, etc. 
An example of this policy is a ban on the use of plastic bags 30 μm 
thickness. 
Economic 
Instruments 
Levy on 
suppliers 
Under this policy, the suppliers of plastic bags (domestic producers 
or importers) are liable for paying the levy. To ensure consumers’ 
behavioral change toward the use of plastic bags, this levy should be 
fully passed on from the suppliers to the retailers given that the retailers 
charge consumers for plastic bags or promote the use of recyclable bags 
by rewarding those who obviate the plastic bags. 
Levy on 
retailers 
This is the levy to be paid by the retailer on the purchase of plastic 
bags. Under this scheme, the retailers are not bound to impose/pass the 
tax on the consumers. 
Levy on 
consumers 
Under this scheme, the consumers are charged a certain amount as 
defined by the law on each bag sold. 
Combination 
of regulatory 
and economic 
instruments 
Ban and 
Tax 
This policy includes a combination of ban and tax. An example of this 
policy is a ban on thin plastic bags and a tax on thicker bags. 
Source: (Giacovelli, 2018) Table 9. Policies Adopted by Different Countries to Combat With the Plastic Bags and Styrofoam Products at the National Level, Local Level or Both.
Region Country
Ban Only Both Levy and Ban or Levy Only Imminent Action
Ban Levy 
Africa Benin (N), Burkina Faso (N), Cameroon (N), Cape Verde (N), 
Chad (L), Cote d’Ivoire (N), East Africa (R), Egypt (L), Eritrea 
(N), Ethiopia (N), Gambia (N), Guinea-Bissau (N), Kenya (N),
Malawi (N), Mali (N), Mauritania (N), Mauritius (N), Morocco (N),
Mozambique (N), Niger (N), Rwanda (N), Senegal (N), Somalia (L),
Tanzania (N&L), Uganda (N) 
Botswana (N), Tunisia (N), Zimbabwe 
(N), South Africa (N) 
Botswana (N),
Nigeria (N),
Republic of Congo (N) 
Asia Bangladesh (N), Bhutan (N), China (L), India (N&L), Indonesia (L),
Malaysia (L), Mongolia (N), Myanmar (L), Pakistan (L), Philippines
(L), Sri-Lanka (N) 
China (N and L), Indonesia (L), Israel
(N), Malaysia (L), Vietnam (N)
Central
and South
America 
Antigua and Barbuda (N), Argentina (L), Belize (N), Brazil (L), 
Chile (N), Ecuador (L), Guatemala (L), Guyana (N), Haiti (N),
Hondurans (L), Mexico (L), Panama (N), St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines (N) 
Brazil (L), Colombia (N), Mexico (L) Costa Rica (N),
Jamaica (N) 
Uruguay (N),
Croatia (N) 
Europe Belgium (L), France (N), Italy (N), Romania (N), Spain (L) Belgium (N), Bulgaria (N), Croatia
(N), Cyprus (N), Czech Republic (N),
Denmark (N), Estonia (N), Greece (N),
Hungary (N), Ireland (N), Italy (N),
Latvia (N), Lithuania (N), Malta (N),
Netherlands (N), Portugal (N), Romania
(N), Slovakia (N), Spain (L), Sweden
(L), the United Kingdom (L) 
Slovenia (N) Spain (N),
Poland (N) 
North
America 
Canada (L), The USA (L) The USA (L) 
Oceania Australia (L), Papua New Guinea (N), Vanuatu (N), Marshall Islands 
(N), Palau (N) 
Fiji (N) Vanuatu (N),
New Zealand (L)
Source: (Giacovelli, 2018)
N = National level
R = Regional level
L = Local level 
N and L = National and Local Level 
138 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 139 
Table 10. Legal Framework and Policies Adopted by the Southeast Asian Countries to Tackle Plastic 
Bags. 
ASEAN Countries Legal Framework and Policies 
Brunei Darussalam Ban plastic bags in all supermarkets by 2019. 
Cambodia Ban on the import, local production, distribution, and use of plastic bags less 
than 30 µm thickness and base width of 25 cm. Charging of USD 0.10 for one 
plastic bag by the supermarkets. 
Indonesia Ministry of Industry encouraging the use of biodegradable plastics. Ban on 
plastic bags in the cities like Banjarmasin and Bogor. Charging of USD 0.01 on 
plastics bag in 23 cities for a trial period of 3 months (2016). 
Lao PDR Use of recyclable plastic bags in cafes and markets. 
Malaysia Implementation of tax on plastic. Ban on the use of plastic bags and containers 
made from polystyrene in Selangor and Federal states. 
Myanmar Ban on plastic bags in Mandalay, Nay Pyi Taw, and Yangon city. Charging of 
USD 0.07 for one single-use plastic bag. Encouragement for carrying own bag. 
Philippines Prohibition on the disposal of plastic products by the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources. Legal decree for plastic bag reduction 
in Quezon City (2012). Proposed actions like the plastic straw and stirrer 
ban (2018), the total plastic ban act (2011), and national standards on plastic 
shopping bags and biodegradable plastics. 
Ban on single-use plastic in Dipolog and Cebu City. Awareness campaign for the 
use of reusable bags with the slogan “Bring Your Own Bag”. 
Singapore Packaging agreement aimed to reduce packaging waste (2007). 
Thailand Implementation of the “Say No to Plastic Bag” campaign in 11,000 mini markets 
and stores. Signing of Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment. Campaign on “No plastic cap 
seals of drinking water bottles” (2018). Ban on plastic bags in national parks 
by the Department of National Parks, Wildlife, and Plant Conservation (2018). 
Ban on plastic bags in hospitals by Department of Medical Services, Ministry of 
Public Health (2018).Campaign for reducing single-use plastic at campuses: 
“Public-private partnership for sustainable plastic and waste management” 
(2018). 
Vietnam Tax on plastic bags ranges from USD 1.3 – USD 2.1 per kilogram of plastic 
bags. Announcement of the circular for eco-friendly plastic bags. 
Source: (Hisham and Florent, 2019) 
(sixth), Malaysia (eighth), and Myanmar (seventeenth) (The Conversation, 2021). 
In terms of Southeast Asian countries, the United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), and Japan have collaboratively 
launched a project named “Closing the Loop” in four Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) cities. These are Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia), Surabaya (Indonesia), 
Nakhon Si Thammarat (Thailand), and Da Nang (Vietnam), and it was to deal with 
plastic waste pollution (ESCAP, 2020). Recently, ASEAN nations launched ASEAN 
Regional Action Plan for Combating Marine Debris in the ASEAN Members States 
(2021-2025) on May 28, 2021, to tackle plastic pollution (The World Bank, 2021). 
The action plan binds the countries to undertake actions to eradicate the use of 
single-use plastics, develop common policies on recycling and plastic packaging 
standards, and reinforce measurements and monitor mechanisms of marine debris 
at the regional level (ADB, 2021). Table 10 summarizes the measures adopted by 
Southeast Asian countries to cope with plastic bags.  
140 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Conclusions 
MPs have been reported in the majority of the bottled water samples. Studies so far 
have shown an increasing concentration of MPs with decreasing size range. In terms 
of packaging material, old reusable plastic bottles have a higher concentration of 
particles than single-use plastic bottles and glass bottles. Thus, avoiding reutilization 
of the plastic bottles can be a better option to avoid MPs contamination to some extent. 
The commonly observed shapes are fibers and fragments. Similarly, the frequently 
observed polymers are PET, PE, PA, PS, and PP in bottled water. Furthermore, the 
abundance of polymers other than PET and PP suggests the source of origination of 
MPs beyond packaging material, such as machinery, bottle-washing liquor, and raw 
water. The factors that influence the release of the MPs from the bottled water are 
stressing of the bottles during the filling and transportation processes, abrasion of the 
bottle cap during opening and closing, density of the packaging material, and pH and 
carbon dioxide content of the water. 
Also, the tap water as well as the systems, such as distribution lines, hydrants, 
pumping stations, and water reserves, contain MPs. The tap water in the developed 
countries depicted a higher concentration of MPs compared to less developed 
countries. This remains a subject of profound research and analysis. The common 
polymers in tap water are PE, PP, PVC, PS, and PA. The dominant shapes in tap 
water are fibers and fragments. The primary source of MPs in tap water is the raw 
water itself. MPs also originate from the degradation of the equipment made up of 
plastic materials (such as PVC, PE, and PP) that are used in the treatment plants, 
pipes, and fittings that run from the treatment plants to taps. 
The MPs removal efficiency of the DWTPs ranged between 40–93%. This 
implies that a significant proportion of MPs can be removed by DWTPs. Based 
on recent studies, it can be concluded that MPs that are less than 10 µm greatly 
contribute to the MPs concentrations in the raw and treated water. At present, based 
on the studies so far, it can be concluded that DWTPs cannot remove MPs that are 
smaller than 10 µm. Thus, suitable technological innovation is needed to curb the 
MPs from escaping the treatment plant. Moreover, both fibers and fragments shared 
a major fraction of the MPs in DWTPs. In terms of shape, treatment plants seem 
equally efficient in removing fibers and fragments. The major unit processes that are 
responsible for the removal of a significant proportion of MPs are sedimentation, 
clarification, and filtration. The major source of MPs contamination in the DWTPs 
is the raw water. The source of raw water (surface and groundwater), the quality of 
the raw water, the nature of the source (protected areas/open areas), the weather and 
ambient environmental conditions, and the human activities in the premises of water 
sources are the factors influencing the abundance of the MPs in the raw water. In 
addition, MPs also originate from the plastic equipment used in the treatment plant. 
With proliferating plastic production globally and consequent environmental 
implications introduced by their mismanagement, nations around the globe are 
finding ways to combat plastic pollution, especially packaging types. The commonly 
employed strategies to cope with plastic pollution are ban and levy on plastic products 
to a certain specification. Levy policies have been widely employed in European 
countries, while many other countries have adopted ban policies. Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 141 
References 
ADB. 2021. Southeast Asia Takes Action against Plastic Pollution. https://seads.adb.org/news/southeast￾asia-takes-action-against-plastic-pollution. 
Adib, D., Mafigholami, R. and Tabeshkia, H. 2021. Identification of Microplastics in Conventional. 
Drinking Water Treatment Plants in Tehran, Iran. Research Square. https://doi.org/10.21203/ 
rs.3.rs-242504/v1. 
Alabi, O.A., I, O.K., Awosolu, O. and Alalade, O.E. 2019. Public and Environmental Health Effects of 
Plastic Wastes Disposal: A Review. Journal of Toxicology and Risk Assessment 5(2). https://doi. 
org/10.23937/2572-4061.1510021 
Allen, S., Allen, D., Phoenix, V.R., Le Roux, G., Durántez Jiménez, P., Simonneau, A., Binet, S. and Galop, 
D. 2019. Atmospheric transport and deposition of microplastics in a remote mountain catchment. 
Nature Geoscience 12(5): 339–344. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-019-0335-5 
Almaiman, L., Aljomah, A., Bineid, M., Aljeldah, F.M., Aldawsari, F., Liebmann, B., Lomako, I., 
Sexlinger, K. and Alarfaj, R. 2021. The occurrence and dietary intake related to the presence of 
microplastics in drinking water in Saudi Arabia. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 
193(7): 1–13. 
Arthur, C., Baker, J.E. and Bamford, H.A. 2009. Proceedings of the International Research Workshop on 
the Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris, September 9–11, 2008, University 
of Washington Tacoma, Tacoma, WA, USA. 
Campanale, C., Massarelli, C., Savino, I., Locaputo, V. and Uricchio, V.F. 2020. A Detailed Review Study 
on Potential Effects of Microplastics and Additives of Concern on Human Health. Int. J. Environ. 
Res. Public Health 17(4). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17041212 
Chen, Y., Awasthi, A.K., Wei, F., Tan, Q. and Li, J. 2021. Single-use plastics: Production, usage, disposal, 
and adverse impacts. Sci Total Environ 752: 141772. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141772 
da Costa, J.P. 2018. Micro-and nanoplastics in the environment: research and policymaking. Current 
Opinion in Environmental Science & Health 1: 12–16. 
Dalmau-Soler, J., Ballesteros-Cano, R., Boleda, M.R., Paraira, M., Ferrer, N. and Lacorte, S. 2021. 
Microplastics from headwaters to tap water: occurrence and removal in a drinking water treatment 
plant in Barcelona Metropolitan area (Catalonia, NE Spain). Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-13220-1 
Danopoulos, E., Twiddy, M. and Rotchell, J.M. 2020. Microplastic contamination of drinking water: A
 
systematic review. PLoS One 15(7): e0236838. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0236838
 
Earth Policy Institute. 2014. Plastic Bags Fact Sheets http://www.earth-policy.org/mobile/releases/
 
plastic_bags_fact_sheet 
Ericsson, E. and Johansson, E. 2018. Quantification for the Flow of Microplastic Particles in Urban 
Environment: A Case of the Chao Phraya River, Bangkok, Thailand. In: Degree Project in 
Technology, School of Architecture and the Built …. 
ESCAP. 2020. New UN initiative to reduce plastic pollution from ASEAN cities https://www.unescap.org/ 
news/new-un-initiative-reduce-plastic-pollution-asean-cities 
Ferraz, M., Bauer, A.L., Valiati, V.H. and Schulz, U.H. 2020. Microplastic Concentrations in Raw 
and Drinking Water in the Sinos River, Southern Brazil. Water 12(11). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
w12113115 
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J.R. and Law, K.L. 2017. Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. Science 
Advance 3(7). https://doi.org/DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.1700782 
Giacovelli, C. 2018. Single-Use Plastics: A Roadmap for Sustainability (rev. 2). 
Grand View Research. 2021. Bottled Water Market Size, Share & Trends Report 2021–2028. https://www. 
grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/bottled-water-market 
Groh, K.J., Backhaus, T., Carney-Almroth, B., Geueke, B., Inostroza, P.A., Lennquist, A., Leslie, H.A., 
Maffini, M., Slunge, D., Trasande, L., Warhurst, A.M. and Muncke, J. 2019. Overview of known 
plastic packaging-associated chemicals and their hazards. Sci Total Environ 651(Pt 2): 3253–3268. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.10.015 
Halden, R.U. 2010. Plastics and health risks. Annu. Rev. Public. Health. 31: 179–194. https://doi. 
org/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.012809.103714 142 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Hisham, M.M. and Florent, M.Z. 2019. Overview of plastic issues in ASEAN, focusing on marine debris 
and microplastics in the region. 
Kankanige, D. and Babel, S. 2020a. Identification of Micro-plastics (MPs) in Conventional Tap Water 
Sourced from Thailand. Journal of Engineering and Technological Sciences 52(1). https://doi. 
org/10.5614/j.eng.technol.sci.2020.52.1.7 
Kankanige, D. and Babel, S. 2020b. Smaller-sized micro-plastics (MPs) contamination in single￾use PET-bottled water in Thailand. Sci. Total Environ. 717: 137232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2020.137232 
Kankanige, D. and Babel, S. 2021. Contamination by ≥ 6.5 μm-sized microplastics and their removability 
in a conventional water treatment plant (WTP) in Thailand. Journal of Water Process Engineering 
40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2020.101765 
Kirstein, I.V., Hensel, F., Gomiero, A., Iordachescu, L., Vianello, A., Wittgren, H.B. and Vollertsen, 
J. 2021. Drinking plastics? - Quantification and qualification of microplastics in drinking water 
distribution systems by microFTIR and Py-GCMS. Water Res 188: 116519. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
watres.2020.116519 
Kosuth, M., Mason, S.A. and Wattenberg, E.V. 2018. Anthropogenic contamination of tap water, beer, and 
sea salt. PLoS One 13(4): e0194970. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0194970 
Lam, T.W.L., Ho, H.T., Ma, A.T.H. and Fok, L. 2020. Microplastic Contamination of Surface Water￾Sourced Tap Water in Hong Kong—A Preliminary Study. Applied Sciences 10(10). https://doi. 
org/10.3390/app10103463 
Makhdoumi, P., Amin, A.A., Karimi, H., Pirsaheb, M., Kim, H. and Hossini, H. 2021. Occurrence of 
microplastic particles in the most popular Iranian bottled mineral water brands and an assessment of 
human exposure. Journal of Water Process Engineering 39: 101708. 
Marsden, P., Koelmans, A., Bourdon-Lacombe, J., Gouin, T., D’Anglada, L., Cunliffe, D., Jarvis, P., 
Fawell, J. and De France, J. 2019. Microplastics in Drinking Water (9241516194). 
Mason, S.A., Welch, V.G. and Neratko, J. 2018. Synthetic Polymer Contamination in Bottled Water. Front 
Chem 6: 407. https://doi.org/10.3389/fchem.2018.00407 
Mintenig, S.M., Loder, M.G.J., Primpke, S. and Gerdts, G. 2019. Low numbers of microplastics detected 
in drinking water from ground water sources. Sci. Total Environ. 648: 631–635. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.08.178 
Mukotaka, A., Kataoka, T. and Nihei, Y. 2021. Rapid analytical method for characterization and 
quantification of microplastics in tap water using a Fourier-transform infrared microscope. Science 
of the Total Environment 790. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.148231 
Oßmann, B.E., Sarau, G., Holtmannspotter, H., Pischetsrieder, M., Christiansen, S.H. and Dicke, W. 2018. 
Small-sized microplastics and pigmented particles in bottled mineral water. Water Res, 141, 307­
316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2018.05.027 
Paredes, M., Bodero, E., Castillo, T., Fuentes, G. and Viteri, R. 2019. Microplastics in the drinking water 
of the Riobamba city, Ecuador. Przegląd Naukowy Inżynieria i Kształtowanie Środowiska 28(4): 
653–663. https://doi.org/10.22630/pniks.2019.28.4.59 
Pérez-Albaladejo, E., Solé, M. and Porte, C. 2020. Plastics and plastic additives as inducers of oxidative 
stress. Current Opinion in Toxicology. 
Pivokonsky, M., Cermakova, L., Novotna, K., Peer, P., Cajthaml, T. and Janda, V. 2018. Occurrence of 
microplastics in raw and treated drinking water. Sci. Total Environ. 643: 1644–1651. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.08.102 
Pivokonský, M., Pivokonská, L., Novotná, K., Čermáková, L. and Klimtová, M. 2020. Occurrence and 
fate of microplastics at two different drinking water treatment plants within a river catchment. 
Science of the Total Environment 741: 140236. 
Plastic Europe. 2019. Plastics-the Facts 2019 An analysis of European plastics production, demand and 
waste data (Available on the website: http://www. plasticseurope. org, Issue. 
Plastic Insight. 2016. Global Consumption of Plastic Materials By Region (1980–2015). https://www. 
plasticsinsight.com/global-consumption-plastic-materials-region-1980–2015/ 
Pratesi, C.B., AL Santos Almeida, M.A., Cutrim Paz, G.S., Ramos Teotonio, M.H., Gandolfi, L., Pratesi, 
R., Hecht, M. and Zandonadi, R.P. 2021. Presence and Quantification of Microplastic in Urban Tap 
Water: A Pre-Screening in Brasilia, Brazil. Sustainability 13(11): 6404. Microplastics in Drinking Water and Water Treatment Plants 143 
Radityaningrum, A.D., Trihadiningrum, Y., Mar’atusholihah, Soedjono, E.S. and Herumurti, W. 2021. 
Microplastic contamination in water supply and the removal efficiencies of the treatment plants: A 
case of Surabaya City, Indonesia. Journal of Water Process Engineering 43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jwpe.2021.102195 
Sarkar, D.J., Sarkar, S.D., Das, B.K., Praharaj, J.K., Mahajan, D.K., Purokait, B., Mohanty, T.R., Mohanty, 
D., Gogoi, P. and Kumar, S. (2021). Microplastics removal efficiency of drinking water treatment 
plant with pulse clarifier. Journal of Hazardous Materials 413: 125347. 
Schwabl, P., Koppel, S., Konigshofer, P., Bucsics, T., Trauner, M., Reiberger, T. and Liebmann, B. 2019. 
Detection of Various Microplastics in Human Stool: A Prospective Case Series. Ann. Intern. Med. 
171(7): 453–457. https://doi.org/10.7326/M19-0618 
Schymanski, D., Goldbeck, C., Humpf, H.U. and Furst, P. 2018. Analysis of microplastics in water by 
micro-Raman spectroscopy: Release of plastic particles from different packaging into mineral water. 
Water Res. 129: 154–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.11.011 
Shen, M., Zeng, Z., Wen, X., Ren, X., Zeng, G., Zhang, Y. and Xiao, R. 2021. Presence of microplastics in 
drinking water from freshwater sources: the investigation in Changsha, China. Environ. Sci. Pollut. 
Res. Int. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-13769-x 
Shruti, V.C., Perez-Guevara, F. and Kutralam-Muniasamy, G. 2020. Metro station free drinking water 
fountain- A potential “microplastics hotspot” for human consumption. Environ. Pollut. 261: 114227. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.114227 
The Conversation. 2021. Why collaboration in the ASEAN region is vital to tackle plastic waste in the 
oceans. https://theconversation.com/why-collaboration-in-the-asean-region-is-vital-to-tackle￾plastic-waste-in-the-oceans-151849 
The World Bank. 2021. ASEAN Member States Adopt Regional Action Plan to Tackle Plastic Pollution 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2021/05/28/asean-member-states-adopt￾regional-action-plan-to-tackle-plastic-pollution 
Tong, H., Jiang, Q., Hu, X. and Zhong, X. 2020. Occurrence and identification of microplastics in tap 
water from China. Chemosphere 252: 126493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.126493 
Wang, Z., Lin, T. and Chen, W. 2020. Occurrence and removal of microplastics in an advanced drinking 
water treatment plant (ADWTP). Sci. Total Environ. 700: 134520. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2019.134520 
Water, S. and Organization, W.H. 2006. Guidelines for drinking-water quality [electronic resource]: 
incorporating first addendum. Vol. 1, Recommendations. 
Water, U. 2009. Water in a Changing World, United Nations World Water Development Report 3. World 
Water Assessment Programme. 
Zhang, M., Li, J., Ding, H., Ding, J., Jiang, F., Ding, N.X. and Sun, C. 2020. Distribution characteristics 
and influencing factors of microplastics in urban tap water and water sources in Qingdao, China. 
Analytical Letters 53(8): 1312–1327. 
Zhou, X.-j., Wang, J., Li, H.-y., Zhang, H.-m., Hua, J. and Zhang, D.L. 2021. Microplastic pollution 
of bottled water in China. Journal of Water Process Engineering 40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jwpe.2020.101884 
Zuccarello, P., Ferrante, M., Cristaldi, A., Copat, C., Grasso, A., Sangregorio, D., Fiore, M. and Conti, G.O. 
2019. Exposure to microplastics (< 10 μm) associated to plastic bottles mineral water consumption: 
The first quantitative study. Water Research 157: 365–371. Chapter 9 
Regulating the Export of Plastic 
Waste in Canada
 Ryder LeBlanc1,* and Gail Krantzberg 2 
INTRODUCTION 
Plastic waste is a serious threat to global health and the environment. Globally, an 
estimated 8,300 million metric tons of plastic have been produced by humankind 
(Geyer et al., 2017). This total estimation increases by approximately 300 million 
tons each year (IUCN, 2021). It is estimated that Canada contributes 3.3 million 
tonnes of plastic waste annually (Young, 2021). In terms of final disposal for these 
products, 9% is recycled, 12% is incinerated, and the remaining 79% is left discarded 
in landfills, bodies of water, or other areas of the environment (Geyer et al., 2017). 
Oceans are particular dumping grounds for these products as plastic waste accounts 
for 80% of all marine litter (IUCN, 2021). Incinerating plastic waste is especially 
harmful because of the toxins released into the atmosphere. The problem of plastic 
waste is a persistent problem given that plastic bottles, for example, can take 450 
years to decompose (Abdul-Rahman and Wright, 2014). 
High-income countries, such as Canada, generate more plastic waste per person 
than on average (The World Bank, 2021) and should, therefore, have a greater 
responsibility for the management of plastic waste. Canadians make up less than 
1% of the global population, but use 1.4% of all manufactured plastics (Young, 
2021). Recycled plastics are often shipped abroad, predominantly to South Asian 
countries. This is for two main reasons: insufficient processing facilities in Canada 
and the ability to profit from waste sold to nations in need of resources. In 2015 
approximately 3% of Canada’s plastic waste, or 100,618 tons, was sold to China 
(de Montrouge, 2019). In 2018, China restricted its import of waste materials and 
Canada shifted its plastic waste exports to the United States, sending 101,131 tons to 
1 2304 - 2240 Lakeshore Blvd W.Toronto, Ontario M8V 0B1. 
2 McMaster University, 1280 Main St. W., Hamilton On Canada. 
Email: krantz@mcmaster.ca 
* Corresponding author: leblanc.ryder@gmail.com Regulating the Export of Plastic Waste in Canada 145 
recycling brokers in the US (Banks, 2020). Although Canada has signed international 
agreements prohibiting the shipping of waste overseas, once Canadian waste ends 
up in the control of American exporters who can sell it to whomever they want, 
Canada is then no longer tracked by any regulations. As a consequence, plastic waste 
generated in Canada continues to be sent by the US to countries that do not have 
the facilities required to process it. This poses a threat to the health of people and 
the environment around the world. This policy loophole needs to be closed so that 
Canada can follow through on its international commitments (The Basel Convention) 
regarding the export of its plastic waste. 
Current Regulations 
The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements is the only global 
legally binding agreement that specifically addresses plastic waste (BRS Secretariat, 
2021). The Basel Convention has been an active instrument since 1992—originally 
negotiated under the United Nations Environment Programme in 1988—to protect 
human health and the environment by regulating the transboundary movement of 
hazardous substances. In 2019, it was amended to include plastic waste, effectively 
naming plastics as a hazardous material. The amendments identify plastics that are 
considered hazardous and expect countries to treat the transboundary movement 
of these substances, as they would with any other hazardous waste that has been 
covered in the convention. This means that parties to the convention have a legal 
obligation to ensure that their plastic wastes do not pose a threat to human health 
or the environment, including at their place of disposal. Specifically, countries are 
required to check with and ensure that the transport and disposal of plastic waste in 
importing countries is done in an environmentally sound way. Currently, 189 parties 
have signed the Basel Convention, including Canada and the US. Notably, however, 
the US never ratified the convention and is therefore not legally bound by it. 
In addition to the Basel Convention, Canada has over 10 federal acts, regulations, 
and agreements governing plastic waste. These include the Microbeads in Toiletries 
Regulations (2017), the Ocean Plastics Charter (2018), and the Canada-wide 
Action Plan on Zero Plastic Waste (2018). Additionally, in May 2021, the Canadian 
Environmental Protection Act (1999) added “plastic manufactured items” to its Toxic 
Substances List (Canada, 2022). This action empowers the Government of Canada to 
make regulations that support its plastic waste goals. 
Risks Associated with Plastic Waste Exports 
Plastic waste and its by-products pose social, environmental, economic, and health 
risks. Social risks are tied to how the environment becomes unusable as it is polluted 
by plastic. Beaches and bodies of water that are traditionally used for recreation 
become less appealing as they fill with plastic waste. This results in people spending 
less time in such recreational areas which limits their ability to meet their social 
needs (Beaumont et al., 2019). Though illegal in Canada, plastic is incinerated in 
open fields in countries without proper facilities for waste disposal, which degrades 
the aesthetic value of the environment. This raw burning of plastic waste reduces air 146 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
quality and deters individuals from spending time outside, further limiting their areas 
for social activity. 
Plastic and potential contaminants pose significant environmental threats. 
Plastic, just by being present in the environment, affects carbon and nutrient cycles, 
disturbs habitat availability, entangles and suffocates wildlife, and puts additional 
stress on the populations of endangered or otherwise vulnerable species (MacLeod 
et al., 2021). Plastic is often used to store or transport other hazardous substances, 
and so contaminated plastic waste introduces additional threats to the environment. 
Economically, plastics improve efficiency and benefit the food and transportation 
sectors, but these advantages come at a significant cost. Bodies of water with plastic 
waste impact fish populations and reduce the production of fisheries. Plastic waste 
also reduces the tourism and recreation appeal of the environment, reducing further 
revenues in these sectors as well. Reduced air quality slows overall economic output 
by causing premature deaths and ailments in the population. When these effects are 
taken together, it is estimated that the average cost of plastic waste globally is US $75 
billion each year (UNEP, 2014). 
Plastic waste is a threat to human health as it can either be ingested directly 
or its harmful components can find their way into the human body through other 
means. It is estimated that the average person consumes 5 grams of plastic each 
week, usually in the form of microplastics (MPs) in drinking water (WWF, 2019). 
Plastic waste that is poorly incinerated introduces new health risks through the toxins 
that are released during the process. These include Dioxins, Furans, Mercury, and 
Polychlorinated Biphenyls, which reduce air quality and expose humans to residues 
on crops and in waterways (Verma et al., 2016). Dioxins alone cause cancer and 
damage the neurological, reproductive, and respiratory systems (Verma et al., 2016). 
Current Policy Obstacles/Challenges 
Data shows that “it is the management of plastic waste that determines the risk of 
plastic entering the ocean” (Ritchie, 2018); also, medium- and low-income counties 
are more likely to mismanage waste because they lack the disposal infrastructure 
of wealthier countries. The 2019 plastic amendments to the Basel Convention were 
added to combat this very problem and as noted above, while the US also signed the 
Convention, it never ratified it and is, therefore, not bound by its regulations. 
This asymmetry between Canada and the U.S. was addressed in October 2020 
in the form of a bilateral agreement on plastic waste. Under the Basel Convention, 
parties are allowed to ship waste to non-signatory nations as long as they have a 
bilateral agreement. Though the Convention requires that any agreement meet or 
exceed the standards of the Convention itself, this particular agreement is not legally 
binding (Dyer, 2020). Therefore, once Canadian waste is shipped to American 
importers, there are no reliable mechanisms for tracking or ensuring the waste is 
disposed of properly or that it is even disposed of in the U.S. Regulating the Export of Plastic Waste in Canada 147 
Policy Evaluation 
The US has recently adopted a national recycling strategy, and the Environmental 
Protection Agency has said it will explore the ratification of the Basel Convention 
(Calma, 2021). This suggests that the bilateral agreement may not be needed in the 
future but unfortunately, it is unlikely that the U.S. will ratify the convention or any 
legally binding agreement with Canada soon. The U.S. is increasing its shipments 
of plastic waste to developing nations (Steiner, 2021). This is unsurprising since a 
similar trend has been seen in the export of electronic waste from the U.S. (Lecher, 
2019), which is another controlled substance under the Basel Convention. The fact of 
the matter is that waste exports in the U.S. are held to fewer standards than required 
under the Basel Convention and as long as the U.S. does not ratify the treaty, brokers 
will continue to do whatever they like with both domestic and imported Canadian 
waste. The statistics show that they prefer exporting to developing nations, which lack 
the capacity for proper disposal. Therefore, the 2020 bilateral agreement on plastic 
waste between Canada and the U.S. is insufficient for reaching Canada’s zero plastic 
waste goal and contradicts the commitments enshrined in the Basel Convention. 
Canada’s other regulations on plastic waste are also insufficient for reaching its 
zero plastic waste goal. The Microbeads in Toiletries Regulations (2017), though 
useful for reducing Canada’s microbead (plastic particles equal to or less than 5 mm 
in size) waste, only applies to toiletry products and does not address regular plastics. 
The Ocean Plastics Charter (2018) is insufficient because it is unenforceable and 
lacks the support of the U.S. Though it aims to bring together leading governments 
and organizations to commit to taking action to make plastics more sustainable and 
resource-efficient, the US is not a signatory. While the Charter encourages an increase 
in domestic capacity to manage plastics, which would lessen Canadian exports to the 
U.S., it does not state an end to plastic exports, which leaves this issue unaddressed. 
The Canada-wide Action Plan on Zero Plastic Waste (2018), a more structured and 
comprehensive policy on plastic waste, does not address plastic exports either. It does 
commit to ambitious targets of 100% circular (reusable, recyclable, or recoverable) 
plastics by 2030 and recovery of 100% of all plastics by 2040 but without any 
commitments on tracking exports, this may not address the problem. Producing and 
recovering more recyclable plastic will not help the plastic waste issue if all this 
waste is exported to the U.S. and then on to countries that cannot properly process it.
 Conclusion 
Canada has made promises on plastic waste under the Basel Convention and has 
over 10 domestic acts, regulations, and agreements. These commitments stand to 
be undermined by an unenforceable bilateral agreement with the US, which has not 
made the same commitments. Unfortunately, the U.S. does not seem prepared to take 
serious action on plastic waste, and therefore it is unreasonable to expect them to ratify 
the Basel Convention or any bilateral agreement that involves legal accountability. 
Therefore, the only way for Canada to act in line with its commitments is for it to 
revoke the bilateral agreement with the U.S. This action will create many questions 148 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
about what is to be done with Canada’s plastic waste, but these are questions that need 
to be answered and will likely not be considered so long as this bilateral loophole 
exists. 
References 
Abdul-Rahman, F. and Wright, S.E. 2014. Reduce, Reuse, Recycle: Alternatives for Waste Management. 
NM State University. https://aces.nmsu.edu/pubs/_g/G314.pdf 
Banks, K. (2020, March 3). Where Canada sends its garbage. 10,000 Changes. https://10000changes.ca/ 
en/news/where-canada-sends-its-garbage/ 
Beaumont, N.J., Aanesen, M., Austen, M.C., Börger, T., Clark, J.R., Cole, M., Hooper, T., Lindeque, P.K., 
Pascoe, C. and Wyles, K.J. 2019. Global ecological, social and economic impacts of marine plastic. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin 142: 189–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2019.03.022 
BRS Secretariat. (2021, January 1). BC Plastic Waste Amendments. Http://Www.Brsmeas.Org/. http:// 
www.brsmeas.org/Implementation/MediaResources/PressReleases/BCPlasticWasteAmendments/ 
tabid/8728/language/en-US/Default.aspx 
Calma, J. (2021, November 15). The US finally adopts a national recycling strategy. The Verge. https:// 
www.theverge.com/2021/11/15/22783450/recycling-united-states-epa-plastic-pollution-waste 
Canada. (2022, September 6). Toxic Substances List: Schedule 1. Canada.ca. https://www.canada.ca/en/ 
environment-climate-change/services/canadian-environmental-protection-act-registry/substances￾list/toxic/schedule-1.html 
de Montrouge, P.D. (2019, January 10). Media Briefing: Canada’s Plastic Waste Export Trends Following 
China’s Import Ban. Greenpeace Canada. https://www.greenpeace.org/canada/en/qa/6971/media￾briefing-canadas-plastic-waste-export-trends-following-chinas-import-ban/ 
Dyer, E. (2020, December 3). Government quietly made “back door” agreement with U.S. that could 
undermine treaty on plastic waste. CBC. https://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/canada-us-plastic-waste￾basel-1.5827340 
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J.R. and Law, K.L. 2017. Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. Science 
Advances 3(7). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700782 
IUCN. (2021, November 17). Marine plastic pollution. https://www.iucn.org/resources/issues-briefs/ 
marine-plastic-pollution 
Lecher, C. (2019, December 4). The dark side of electronic waste recycling. The Verge. https://www. 
theverge.com/2019/12/4/20992240/e-waste-recycling-electronic-basel-convention-crime-total￾reclaim-fraud 
MacLeod, M., Arp, H.P.H., Tekman, M.B. and Jahnke, A. (2021, July 2). The global threat from plastic 
pollution. Pubmed. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34210878/ 
Ritchie, H. (2018, September 1). Plastic Pollution. Our World in Data. https://ourworldindata.org/plastic￾pollution#mismanaged-plastic-waste 
Steiner, M. (2021, February 5). US-CANADA PLASTIC TRADE DEAL SUBVERTS BASEL 
CONVENTION. Basel Action Network. https://www.ban.org/news/2020/12/22/us-canada-plastic￾trade-deal-subverts-basel-convention12 
The World Bank. (2021). Trends in Solid Waste Management. Worldbank.Org. https://datatopics. 
worldbank.org/what-a-waste/trends_in_solid_waste_management.html 
UNEP. (2014, June). Plastic Waste Causes Financial Damage of US$13 Billion to Marine Ecosystems 
Each Year as Concern Grows over Microplastics. UN Environment. https://www.unep.org/news￾and-stories/press-release/plastic-waste-causes-financial-damage-us13-billion-marine-ecosystems 
Verma, R., Vinoda, K., Papireddy, M. and Gowda, A. 2016. Toxic Pollutants from Plastic Waste—A Review. 
Procedia Environmental Sciences 35: 701–708. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proenv.2016.07.069 
WWF. (2019, June 12). Revealed: plastic ingestion by people could be equating to a credit ca. https:// 
wwf.panda.org/wwf_news/press_releases/?348337/Revealed-plastic-ingestion-by-people-could-be￾equating-to-a-credit-card-a-week 
Young, R. (2021, November 26). Canada’s plastic problem: Sorting fact from fiction. Oceana Canada. 
https://oceana.ca/en/blog/canadas-plastic-problem-sorting-fact-fiction/ Chapter 10
 
Nature-Based Solutions to Address 
the Plastics Problem
 Biomimicry 
Negin Ficzkowski and Gail Krantzberg* 
INTRODUCTION 
The advent of plastic addressed many immediate needs for human society, 
incrementally creating a culture wherein eliminating it from the market is difficult 
to envision (Fig. 1). Consequently, many efforts aimed at combating its adverse 
effects are focused on replacing its feedstock more so than rethinking the underlying 
design. The persistent residues of petroleum as macro-, meso-, or micro-pollutants, 
the resulting degradation of the entire natural ecosystem, the limited non-renewable 
reserves of fossil fuels, and the resource-heavy extraction processes have encouraged 
a shift toward using renewable biomass sources, such as corn, cassava, sugar beet, 
sugar cane, or cellulose that offer potentials for reducing the overall environmental 
impacts of the produced waste (Tolinski, 2012). The increasing appetite for solutions 
in this category has created a market that is nearly saturated with what is commonly 
known as “bioplastics” which, contrary to popular belief, does not inherently address 
the emissions or pollution issues attributed to conventional fossil-based plastic. 
The term bioplastic has not been regulated, and it is currently used to refer 
to a plastic material that contains some undefined percentage of biological-based 
feedstock, is biodegradable, or features both properties (European Bioplastics, 
2022). This vague labelling enables the notion of green washing and poses a 
public policy challenge that not only encourages consumers to buy products that 
do not offer the promised environmental benefit (Wright, 2020) but also misleads 
them toward ineffective disposal practices. From a design standpoint, the pattern 
continues to follow the linear model of take-make-use-dispose, resulting in burden 
McMaster University, 1280 Main St. W., Hamilton ON L8S 4K1. 
* Corresponding author: krantz@mcmaster.ca 150 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance Fig. 1. The Highlights of the Life of Plastic in Summary; created and based on Meikle (1995) and Tolinski (2012). Nature-Based Solutions to Address the Plastics Problem 151 
shifting throughout the lifecycle of these products (Andrews, 2015; McDonough 
and Braungart, 2002). In the case of the plastic crisis, any effective solution should 
simultaneously consider the environmental and climate costs resulting from systemic 
complexities and failures of the plastic industry over the past century. This chapter 
investigates the opportunities this shift provides for Canada, the existing barriers, 
and the changes required within the Canadian landscape to allow for such innovative 
ventures to become mainstream. 
Experts suggest that in addition to efforts in replacing the conventional raw 
materials, marketing incentives and promoting products that are multiuse are 
necessary for addressing the inefficacy of global waste management practices 
including the plastic’s (Fig. 2). Reducing the consumption of plastic involves a 
radical and transformative shift that includes a paradigm shift for the government, 
businesses, and society from immoderate consumerism and linear consumption 
patterns to a sustainable circular and regenerative lifestyle (Learn Biomimicry, 
2021). Incremental interventions are necessary for slowing down the crisis; a hasty 
underdeveloped shift away from conventional plastic and toward the next best 
alternative without a shift in the mental model can cause more harm than good. For 
instance, replacing the famously debated plastic straws with metal straws at similar 
consumption rates introduces higher carbon emissions while remediating less than 
1% of the ocean plastic waste crisis. Similarly, replacing liquid-carrying plastic 
Fig. 2. The Ambitions of the New Plastic Economy (Source: Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2016). 152 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
containers with resource-heavy materials such as glass or aluminum without having 
an effective reuse business model or recycling infrastructure in place can result in 
higher global warming potential over the lifecycle of the products. 
Since 1950, a mere 9% of the plastic ever produced has been recycled back into 
the economy (Wuennenberg and Tan, 2019). This number is shown to have reduced 
even further since the start of the global COVID-19 pandemic by more than 20% in 
Europe, 50% in Asia, and about 60% in some parts of the US, while the pandemic￾associated plastic waste was estimated to be over eight million tons (Peng et al., 
2021). Many efforts are underway globally for scaling up the rate of plastic recycling, 
hoping to reduce the amount of plastic waste entering the environment; but since 
almost none of the conventional products are designed for circularity, the recovery 
rates and the externalities of these efforts (such as energy use, water footprint, and 
emissions from transportation) vary significantly (Liboiron, 2012). 
It is estimated that over 80% of all product-related environmental impacts are 
determined during the design phase of a product (IISD, 2011), therefore developing 
policies that target responsible design of the products and services can provide a 
pathway to alternative concepts and strategies for sustainable development in 
consideration of the long-term impact on climate, society, and the planet. As an 
emerging field, responsible design theory challenges the traditional definition and 
practice of design to embed a planet-centric, pluriversal, and transdisciplinary 
approach in proposing solutions and interventions (Escobar, 2018). Many emerging 
design attitudes began recognizing this socio-technical complexity and aim to 
embrace planetary diversification into the development of science and technology, 
which needs radically different ways of observing the world and understanding 
how all entities are interrelating and influencing each other (Iwabuchi, 2020). An 
alternative way to rethink, reframe, and respond to a multidimensional challenge, such 
as the plastic crisis, is made possible by looking into nature and natural ecosystems 
for inspiration. Nature-based Solutions (NBS) is an umbrella term designated to the 
applications of ecosystem services, natural capital, and lessons that can be learnt 
from nature to solve specific problems or challenges of human well-being (Potschin 
et al., 2016). Soft engineering approaches, green infrastructure, and biomimicry are 
all examples of this approach wherein the identification of the core problem is key 
(EC, 2015). 
What is biomimicry? 
Biomimicry is a tool that enables a move away from petroleum-based plastics if 
it is well integrated into the educational system, regulatory frameworks, design 
policies, and product management strategies. The field of biomimicry focuses on 
commercial mimicry of nature’s ingenuity by recognizing the potential for emulating 
its strategies in the design and development of sustainable solutions, as long as 
these solutions cause no harm to nature and contribute to its conservation (Neves 
and Francke, 2012). Defining the right question is central to maintaining circularity 
through biomimicry or any other nature-based interventions (Potschin et al., 2016). 
The principles of biomimicry need to be applied at a systems level and for the 
design of the solutions in an integrated, long-term-oriented, and transformative way Nature-Based Solutions to Address the Plastics Problem 153 
to enable the shift toward circular technological development (Escobar, 2018) and 
sustainable economic growth that supports further scientific understanding of the 
world (Andrews, 2015). 
Historical Evolution of Biomimicry in Addressing the 
Linear Design Framework
 
The political climate within the oil-rich countries and the resulting rising oil prices 
in the 1970s became a driver for reinvesting in the research and development of 
bioplastics (British Plastics Federation, 2014). The majority of inventions in this 
era were focused on producing plastic polymers using microbes and bacteria. A 
notable discovery in this era was the principle of biodegradable plastic by Japanese 
scientists. Biodegradability has been done by adding chemicals or natural organisms 
into the plastics to assist in a quicker breakdown. While biodegradability introduces 
a promising solution for reducing the buildup of waste at landfills, it does not 
contribute to the reduction in MP sediments or bioaccumulation in the environment. 
In 1996, Monsanto led a shift in the market by using plants instead of biological 
organisms in producing bioplastics (British Plastics Federation, 2014). Soon 
after, many plastic industry leaders joined forces to scale up plant-based plastic 
production. Certain plants such as seaweed immediately emerged as biomass with 
huge economic potential for many developing countries, such as Indonesia whose 
seaweed export was valued at around US $200 million in 2014 and was estimated to 
grow by 30% annually in plastic production (Barrett, 2018). Other plastic alternatives 
in the current market are made from the waste recovered from common agricultural 
processes globally, such as Avocado pits used as the main feedstock for Mexican￾based BioFase for creating biopolymers (Biofase, n.d.) or the extracted fibres of 
pineapple leaves for the UK-based synthetic leather Piñatex (Ananas Anam, n.d.). 
Pure plant-based plastics release carbon dioxide (or methane) and water when 
they break down (Tolinski, 2012). However, similar to the conventional plastic 
production processes, chemicals are typically added during the manufacturing 
process of conventional plant-based alternatives for increasing strength, preventing 
wrinkling, or conferring breath ability (European Bioplastics, n.d.). If added, toxins 
are released during degradation, impacting the environmental integrity of plant￾based products. Furthermore, the addition of conventional adhesive for attaching 
plastic components or labelling them impact the rate of recovery after use. The 
products designed to be “compostable” within Canadian (and EU) standards have 
the capability to fully break down into a natural soil-like organic matter (Government 
of Canada, 2008). As such, by regulation, they cannot contain toxins that could leach 
into the soil (European Bioplastics, n.d.). 
These challenges lead to biomimicry as a new direction for addressing the plastic 
pollution problem in the scientific literature. Emulating nature for design solutions 
is not new but an emerging discipline of ancient practices found within many native 
cultures (Learn Biomimicry, 2021). Biomimicry became widely known in the 1980s 
when George de Mestrel invented Velcro based on emulating the way seeds/burs 
stick to animal fur. In the 1990s many more isolated cases of bio-inspired products, 
processes, systems, and strategies emerged around the world (Learn Biomimicry,  
 
 
154 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
2021). In 1997, science writer Janine Benyus provided an overarching perspective 
and framework for this field in her book on Biomimicry which became a catalyst 
in reintroducing the field in practice (Learn Biomimicry, 2021). Biomimicry life’s 
principles focus on adapting to change within the larger context of earth’s operating 
principles and the capacity of organisms to grow and develop. The development 
of advanced microscopes and analytical tools over the last decade has increased 
scientific understanding of the natural ecosystem and allowed biomimicry to tap into 
the knowledge base for translating nature’s design principles into new concepts for 
solving emerging problems (Dorfman, 2020). Biomimicry case studies fundamentally 
emulate the natural organisms at form, process, or system levels that may fit the 
purpose (Learn Biomimicry, 2021). Spending time in nature provides learners with 
hands-on opportunities to experience natural design patterning, interactions among 
species, and processes that provide material regeneration (Cash, 2015). It is also 
repeatedly highlighted by academic experts that reflection and repeatability in design 
strategies are integral to a successful transfer of fundamental concepts into different 
applications and individual worldviews (Learn Biomimicry, 2021). 
Practical Adaptation of Biomimicry in Addressing the Problem 
Biomimicry systems thinking requires integrative policies that encourage the 
successful uptake of the theory and invention protection of resulting technologies. 
The examples below elaborate on the use of biomimicry life’s principles to address 
the primary global challenges of plastic from immediate remediation to long-term 
integration: 
a) Solutions for Cleaning Up Plastic Waste That Enters Waterways: Overwhelmed 
by the scale of the plastic problem, by 1986 many grassroots organizations 
began ocean plastic cleanup projects in order to collect and document the types 
of trash littering at the beaches and some coastal waterways (Mironenko and 
Mironenko, 2020). Many organisms in nature provide mechanisms that can 
be adopted for the effective cleanup of MP sediments. For example, Floating 
Coconet designed in the Netherlands aims to capture free-flowing plastics of all 
dimensions (micro-, meso-, or macro-) from rivers prior to entering the oceans 
through a mechanism inspired by filtration system in Manta Rays and basking 
sharks filter food from water (Ask Nature, 2016; 2019). 
b) Managing Plastic After Its Initial Intended Use: Nature builds (and recycles) from 
the bottom up. This can translate into what we know as additive manufacturing 
or strategies for enabling a better rate of recycling for emerging plant-based 
solutions: 
•	 The Challenge of Adhesives: The physiology of Geckos enables them to 
climb a variety of surfaces as though they have adhered to them. Their toe 
pads are covered in millions of small hair-like projections that branch further 
into hundreds of nano-scale structures that end in tiny discs, giving them a 
high surface area. The tendons of the gecko’s feet are stiff and stretch from 
the bone to the skin all the way to the underside of the feet, which allows 
for even distribution of forces when they stiffen their feet, hence sticking Nature-Based Solutions to Address the Plastics Problem 155 
to surfaces effortlessly. The Ford automotive company has introduced a 
mechanism inspired by this function that allows surface adhesion without 
using glue in automotive manufacturing. This allows for the complete 
disassembly of plastic parts and increased recycling rates. Other companies, 
such as Geckskin, have also adopted the system of gecko feet to create a 
strong adhesion device that allows for conforming objects to surfaces (such 
as labels on bottles) without leaving residue (Ask Nature, 2012; 2017; 2020). 
•	 The Challenge of the Inner Lining of Plant-Based Containers: A company 
called Humble Bee in the US has developed a cellophane-like cell lining 
inspired by bee nesting lining processes and materials to improve the organic 
recovery of plant-based plastics (Humble Bee, 2018). 
•	 The Challenge of Toxic Additives for Producing Colour: Having been inspired 
by plants and animals such as chameleon, various studies suggest changing 
the structure and thickness of material allows for eliminating colour additives 
in plastic production. However, none of these solutions have been transferred 
to the market yet due to increased cost and time of production (Ask Nature, 
2020). 
c) Using Less Material by Design: Some inventions use mechanisms found in nature 
to reduce the amount of plastic required in producing conventional items. There 
are deep patterns in nature that can inspire optimizing product structure with 
minimal materials. These patterns can be summarized in 12 categories focused 
on composition and the architecture of the materials, such as form following 
flow, functional gradients, cylindrical strength, and tensegrity (Benyus J., 2017). 
An example of this adaptation is the Portuguese-designed Vitalis Water Bottles 
which focuses on reducing the amount of material used per plant-based liquid 
bottle by providing lightweight and durability inspired by spiral patterns of pine 
tree trunks (Ask Nature, 2017; Biomimicry Institute, 2019). 
d) Mindset Shift in Design: By questioning the fundamental principle of the 
industrial revolution and the unnecessary economic and environmental costs 
associated with conventional interior design practices, i2 carpet tiles mimic the 
random patterns of the forest floor by incorporating natural elements of the forest. 
The market shift created by this design enabled a significant reduction in waste 
generation, unplanned costs for enterprises, and embodied carbon associated 
with the “attic stock” of conventional carpets (Ask Nature, 2009). Many 
solutions have no technical component and are merely intended to influence 
consumer habits, such as supermarkets that are designed specifically to allow 
consumers to purchase products without any packaging (Learn Biomimicry, 
2021). 
e) Using Waste From One System as Raw Material for Another: Globally, 85% of 
the plastic waste in the earth’s waterways consists of single-use and packaging 
items, highlighting the immediate need for applicable alternatives (Ellen 
Macarthur Foundation, 2016). Some solutions have been extremely simple and 
grassroots as these have focused on localized bioutilization for just-in-time 
packaging solutions, such as the traditional use of the green leaves of miracle 
fruit for packaging hot food in Nigeria and these leaves take less than six months 156 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
after use to decompose back into nutrient-rich soil (UNDP, 2019). They can also 
involve systems-level biomimicry with limited processing of natural resources 
to mimic material cycling in nature and allow extended useful life of leaves for 
countries with limited immediate access, such as the German food packaging 
producer using pressed and dried leaves stitched into the form of simple food 
containers or the UK-based single-use tableware items and party supplies for hot 
and cold food made from naturally fallen Areca palm leaves in Southern India, 
which is gathered and cleansed with high-pressure water jets. Once dried, these 
leaves are shaped under heated moulds and ready for commercial use. There 
are no coatings, additives, or chemicals used, just the natural leaf. Similarly, 
Indian-based edible utensils are made from limited processing of sorghum flour 
commonly grown in South Asia, Africa, and Central America. Another example 
is the New York-based company, Ecovative which is using mycelium, the 
vegetative branching part of a fungus, and cellulosic agricultural byproducts, 
such as corn stalks, hemp hurds, and wood chips to make home compostable 
thermally insulating, and water-resistant packaging material, tiles, and planters 
(Ecocative, n.d.). The mycelium added to the cellulosic materials strongly bonds 
them together, replacing the need for moulded packaging. 
More unconventional yet highly technical solutions are also on the rise to 
enable more cost-effective solutions on a global scale and transform natural 
“waste” into useful products that are fully biodegradable at the end of their life. To 
avoid the use of any nutritionally important materials and reduce the high cost of 
producing biobased alternatives like polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), researchers at 
Columbia University are developing systems to intake wastewater (human waste) 
for producing biodegradable bioplastics. Similarly, research efforts from Japan and 
Stanford University in the US focus on material-process combinations to convert 
greenhouse gases from wastewater treatment plants or landfills into lactic acid or 
sugar for creating raw biomaterial for bioplastic production that biodegrades back 
into methane for natural digestion in marine microorganisms. Similar innovations use 
plant-driven sugars and fermentation processes to produce protein chains that mimic 
spider silk for less environmentally harmful textile production. A European study is 
investigating the potential for using animal waste material from slaughterhouses to 
synthesize plastic. The environmental and moral disputes regarding the meat industry 
aside, solutions like this are attempting to regard all waste as useful material and put 
them back into the flow. Such approaches would only constitute viable strategies for 
producing environmentally safe and efficient alternatives to conventional plastic if 
the processing steps do not require sophisticated lab procedures or financial resources 
and would not contribute relatively higher emissions and resource usage (water and 
energy) throughout their entire lifecycle. 
Some inventions are attempting to replace the need for conventional packaging 
practices by producing a variety of new protective materials to be used for the purpose 
of transportation. For instance, a Japanese design company is producing a solution 
to provide enough cushioning function from agar in red marine algae for items to be Nature-Based Solutions to Address the Plastics Problem 157 
transported (Pangburn, 2016). This solution has been developed based on a locally 
common dessert made by mixing agar and hot water that provides a cushion-like 
function after being frozen. 
Discussion 
Biomimicry systems’ thinking recognizes that regardless of the scale of a problem, 
the big picture of the solution is rarely static and it focuses on creating patterns 
for leading change over time. The leverage points shown in any complex system 
intervention are the opportunities where a small shift can produce big changes 
(Davelaar, 2021). Constraints, feedback loops, and paradigm shifts are three levels 
of interventions (Meadows, 1999) that can encourage the shift from the status quo 
to a more nature-inspired mindset for resolving the plastic crisis using biomimicry 
thinking. 
Canada along with France, Germany, Italy, the UK, and the European Union 
adopted the Ocean Plastics Charter on June 9, 2018, as an informal non-binding 
agreement (ECCC, 2018) to demonstrate its commitment to a more resource-efficient 
plastic economy (ECCC, 2020). Canada also has an integrated management approach 
to plastic products in the discussion that can benefit from the inclusion of time-bound 
targets for reducing conventional plastic production and from the increasing reuse/ 
reusable models across sectors (Greenpeace, 2020). 
The concept of the circular economy is currently being used in different 
jurisdictions as an incentive to better manage costs associated with end-of-life 
management. In addition to slowly progressing regulations and bans, market drives 
and financial incentives often attract increased participation for accelerating the 
adaptation of new methodologies and products (Yock et al., 2015). The application of 
biomimicry systems thinking is not yet widely recognized within certain professions 
(such as engineering design in an ecological context) and is slow compared to 
many other developed countries around the world (Cash, 2015). That said, some 
networks and private institutions, such as Biomimicry Alberta, Biomimicry Ontario, 
Biomimicry Commons, and Biomimicry Frontiers in Guelph, Ontario, are created 
to promote biomimicry education, mostly for integration of the principles in urban 
development. In addition to various academic research laboratories across the 
country, a few youth design challenges have embodied biomimicry applications 
in Alberta and British Columbia in various fields, such as water management and 
transportation. 
In the US, biomimicry is recognized as a valuable design methodology technique 
for promoting a circular economy and minimizing the material impact on the 
environment (Cash, 2015). One of the most impactful shifts that has occurred in more 
advanced economies, such as the US or the UK, for addressing the plastic problem 
has been focused on business model developments that offer product services instead 
of products (Biomimicry Innovation Lab, 2021). Particularly, in Europe adapting 
biomimicry principles has progressed more due to the advances in the distributed 
economy as opposed to the centralized manufacturing systems in North America 
(Learn Biomimicry, 2021). 158 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Conclusion 
Nature is a model, measure, and mentor for regenerative and resilient development. 
The inspirations are everywhere and the technology is available. The key to applying 
these inspirations to tackling complex and multifaceted problems, such as that posed 
by plastic which is intertwined with every aspect of the economy, is incorporating 
system thinking tools and biomimicry life’s principles rather than specific 
technologies or biological models. 
References 
Ananas Anam. (n.d.). Piñatex. Retrieved from Ananas-Anam: https://www.ananas-anam.com/about-us/ 
Andrews, D. 2015. The circular economy, design thinking and education for sustainability. Local Economy 
30(3): 305–315. 
Barrett, A. (2018, July 5). The History of Bioplastics. Bioplastics News. 
Benyus, J. 2008. A good place to settle: Biomimicry, biophilia and the return of nature’s inspiration to 
architecture. pp. 27–42. In: S. Kellert, J. Heerwagen and M. Mador (eds.). Biophilic Design, The 
Theory, Science, and Practice of Bringing Buildings to Life. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Benyus, J. (2017, November 17). Lightweighting Inspired by Nature (Seminar). Biomimicry 3.8. 
Biofase. (n.d.). Technology . Retrieved from Biofase: https://biofase.com.mx/technology 
Bioplastics Magazine. (2017, November 13). Scientists are trying to synthesize environmentally-friendly 
plastic alternatives, using cyanobacteria. Retrieved from https://www.bioplasticsmagazine.com/en/ 
news/meldungen/20171113_cyanobacteria.php 
British Plastics Federation. 2014. A History of Plastics. Retrieved from bpf.co.uk 
Canada Business Registry 2022. 
Cash, K. 2015. Beyond LEED®: Constructing a Bridge to Biomimicry for Canadian Interior Design 
Educators. Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada: Thesis submitted to the Faculty of Graduate Studies, The 
University of Manitoba. 
Chambers, M. 2011. Enhanced searchable database for exploration—Application of biomimicry in 
interior design. Graduate Thesis and Dissertations. Iowa State University, Paper 11958. 
Cocker, J., Pariseau, J. and Larnder-Besner, M. (2021, March 19). State of regulation of plastics in Canada: 
The basics. BLG Law. 
Da Silva, S. 2021. Towards Osaka Blue Ocean Vision: National Action Plan. Ministry of the Environment, 
Japan. 
Dale, A. and Newman, L. 2005. Sustainable development, education and literacy. International Journal of 
Sustainability in Higher Education 6(4): 351–362. doi:10.1018/14676370510623847. 
Damstra, J.R. (2020, February 5). Supreme Court of Canada Silent on Environmental Regulation Cases. 
Retrieved from https://www.lerners.ca/lernx/climate-cases/ 
Davelaar, D. 2021. Transformation for sustainability: a deep leverage points approach. Sustainability 
Science 16: 727–747 . 
Dorfman, M. (2020, April 20). Biology Inspires a Plastics (R)evolution. Synapse. Biomimicry 3.8. 
Ecocative. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://ecovative.com/why-mycelium 
Ellen Macarthur Foundation. 2016. The New Plastics Economy: Rethinking the Future of Plastics. 
Escobar, A. 2018. Designs for the Pluriverse. North Carolina: Duke University Press. 
ECCC. 2018. Ocean Plastics Charter. Retrieved from Government of Canada: https://www.canada.ca/en/ 
environment-climate-change/services/managing-reducing-waste/international-commitments/ocean￾plastics-charter.html 
ECCC. 2020, October 7. Canada one-step closer to zero plastic waste by 2030. Retrieved from Government 
of Canada: https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/news/2020/10/canada-one-step￾closer-to-zero-plastic-waste-by-2030.html 
Environment and Climate Change Canada. (2020, October 10). A proposed integrated management 
approach to plastic products to prevent waste and pollution: Discussion Paper. Order Adding a Toxic 
Substance to Schedule 1 to the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999: 154(41). Nature-Based Solutions to Address the Plastics Problem 159 
Eunomia. 2020. What is a Plastic? A summary report exploring the potential for certain materials to be 
exempted from the Single-Use Plastics Directive. Eunomia Research & Consulting. 
Fawcett-Atkinson, M. (2021, March). Canada is drowning in plastic waste and recycling won’t save us. 
Retrieved from Canada’s National Observer investigation. 
Public Policy Forum. 2020. Nature-based Solutions: Some of the answers to climate change come 
naturally. 
Fry, T. 2009. Design futuring. New York, NY: Berg Publishers. 
Government of Canada. (2019, August 22). Heritage Institutions Across British Columbia Receive Support 
from the Government of Canada. Retrieved from Canadian Heritage: https://www.canada.ca/en/ 
canadian-heritage/news/2019/08/backgrounder--heritage-institutions-across-british-columbia￾receive-support-from-the-government-of-canada.html 
Government of Canada. 2021. Competition results for the Discovery Accelerator Supplements 
program. Retrieved from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada: 
https://www.nserc-crsng.gc.ca/NSERC-CRSNG/FundingDecisions-DecisionsFinancement/ 
DiscoveryAcceleratorSupplements-SupplementsAccelerationDecouverte/index_eng. 
asp?Year=2021 
Government of Canada. (2021, February 3). Bill C-204, An Act to amend the Canadian Environmental 
Protection Act, 1999 . 
Government of Canada. (June 2008). Environmental Claims: A Guide for Industry and Advertisers 
(Archived) 
Government of Canada. (2022, January 20). Environmental claims and greenwashing. 
Grasso, M. (2019). Oily politics: A critical assessment of the oil and gas industry’s contribution to climate 
change. Energy Research & Social Science (50): 106–115 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2018.11.017. 
Greenpeace. (2020, December). Plastic Recycling: That’s not a thing. Retrieved from https:// 
www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-canada-stateless/1d30117a-greenpeacereport_ 
plasticrecyclingthatsnotathing.pdf 
Hamilton, L.A., Feit, S., Muffett, C., Kelso, M., Rubright , S. M., Bernhard, C., . . . Labbé-Bellas, R. 2019. 
Plastic & Climate: The Hidden Costs of a Plastic Planet. Center for International Environmental 
Law (CIEL). 
Humble Bee. 2018. Humble Bee Bio. Retrieved from https://www.humblebee.co.nz 
IEA. 2018. The Future of Petrochemicals. OECD/IEA. 
Innovations & Partnership Office. 2021. Inventor’s Guide to Technology Transfer. 2. 
IISD. 2020. Unpacking Canada’s Fossil Fuel Subsidies. Retrieved from International Institute for 
Sustainable Development: https://www.iisd.org/articles/unpacking-canadas-fossil-fuel-subsidies￾faq 
Iwabuchi, M. (2020, July 3). Emerging Design Attitudes: Speculative, Transitional, and Pluriversal 
Design: Go beyond Cartesian Belief System in this Century. Retrieved from UX Planet: https:// 
uxplanet.org/design-attitudes-for-this-century-speculative-transitional-and-pluriversal-design￾fb55c9d401e6 
Learn Biomimicry. 2021. Biomimicry Master Class Course Material. Biomimicry Switzerland. 
Liboiron, M. (2020, November 19). Research on the relationship between EPR and shoreline plastics. 
Retrieved from CLEAR: https://civiclaboratory.nl/2020/11/19/research-on-the-relationship￾between-epr-and-shoreline-plastics/ 
Liboiron, M. (2012, July 25). Designing a reuse symbol and the challenge of recycling’s legacy. Retrieved 
from Discard Studies: https://discardstudies.com/2012/07/25/designing-a-reuse-symbol-and-the￾challenge-of-recyclings-legacy/ 
McDonough, W. and Braungart, M. 2002. Design for the triple top line: new tools for sustainable 
commerce. Corporate Environmental Strategy 9(3): 251–258. 
Meikle, J.L. 1992. Into the Fourth Kingdom: Representations of Plastic Materials, 1920-1950. Journal of 
Design History 1992, 5(3): 173–182. 
Meikle, J.L. 1995. American Plastic: A Cultural History. Rutgers University Press. 
Meadows, D.H. 1999. Leverage Points: Places to Intervene in a System. Sustainability Institute. 
Mironenko, O. and Mironenko, E. (2020, September 16). Education Against Plastic Pollution: Current 
Approaches and Best Practices. pp. 67–93. In: F. Stock, G. Reifferscheid, N. Brennholt, E. Kostianaia 160 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
(eds.). Plastics in the Aquatic Environment - Part II. The Handbook of Environmental Chemistry 
(Vol. 112). Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/698_2020_486. 
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. (n.d.). Plastics science for a cleaner 
future. Retrieved from https://www.nserc-crsng.gc.ca/Professors-Professeurs/RPP-PP/Plastics￾Plastiques_eng.asp 
Pangburn. (2016, September 03). New Seaweed-Based Material Could Replace Plastic Packaging. 
Potschin, M., Kretsch, C., Haines-Young, R., Furman, E., Berry, P. and Baró, F. 2016. Nature-Based 
Solutions. In: M. Potschin and K. Jax (eds.). OpenNESS Ecosystem Services Reference Book. 
Available via: www.openness-project.eu/library/reference-book: EC FP7 Grant Agreement no. 
308428. 
Roland, E.C. 2009. 8 Forms of Capital. Permaculture Magazine #68, pp. 58–61. 
Rochman, C. (2020, September). The story of plastic pollution: from distant ocean gyres to the global 
policy stage. The oceanography Society 33(3): 60–70. 
Ryan, P.G. 2015. A Brief History of Marine Litter Research. pp. 1–27. In: M. Bergmann, M. Klages and 
L. Gutow, Marine Anthropogenic Litter (. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-16510-3_1)). Springer 
International Publishing AG Switzerland. 
Strasser, B. and Schlich, T. 2020. The art of medicine: A history of the medical mask and the rise of 
throwaway culture. The Lancet, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31207-1 1. 
The European Economic and Social Committee. 2018. A European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular 
Economy COM/2018/028. Brussels: European Commission. 
Thompson et al., R.S. 2009. Our plastic age. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B. 364: 
1973–1976 doi:10.1098/rstb.2009.0054. 
Tolinski, M. 2012. Plastics and Sustainability: Towards a Peaceful Coexistence between Bio-based and 
Fossil Fuel-based Plastics. Hoboken, New Jersey; Salem, Massachusetts. 
Wright, G. (2020, Janauary 29). 83% of shoppers mislead by green & sustainable advertising. Retail 
Gazette. 
Wuennenberg, L. and Tan, C.M. 2019. Plastic Waste in Canada: A daunting economic and environmental 
threat or an opportunity for sustainable public procurement? IISD. 
van Sebille, E., Wilcox, C., Lebreton, L., Maximenko, N., Hardesty, B.D., Franeker, J.A. and Law, K.L. 
2015. A global inventory of small floating plastic debris. Environmental Research Letters 10: 
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/124006. 
Walker, T.R., McGuinty, E., Charlebois, S. et al. 2021. Single-use plastic packaging in the Canadian 
food industry: consumer behavior and perceptions. Humanit. Soc. Sci. Commun 8: 80. https://doi. 
org/10.1057/s41599-021-00747-4 
Webb, J. 2012. Climate Change and Society: The Chimera of Behaviour Change Technologies. UK: 
sagepub DOI: 10.1177/0038038511419196. 
Yock, P., Zenios, S., Makower, J., Brinton, T., Kumar, U., J, W. and Kurihara, C. 2015. Biodesign. 
Cambridge University Press.  
Chapter 11
 
Microplastic Research in India:
 Current Status and Future Perspectives 
Arunbabu V.1 and E.V. Ramasamy2,* 
INTRODUCTION 
Plastics are undoubtedly one of the most important inventions of the twentieth century. 
Because of their unique properties such as lightweight, high strength, durability, 
ease of molding into any shape, low cost of production, etc., plastics have found 
application in almost all aspects of human life, including health care. Consequently, 
the global production of plastics has increased from 2 million tons in 1950 to 380 
million tons in 2015 and is projected to increase in the coming decades (Geyer et 
al., 2017). However, the proliferation of single-use plastics (SUPs) has put the waste 
management system under pressure. It is estimated that approximately 6,300 million 
tons of plastic waste has been generated globally between 1950 and 2015, and 79% 
of this has been accumulated in landfills and the natural environment (Geyer et al., 
2017). It is further estimated that if current production and waste management trends 
continue in business as usual (BAU) mode, approximately 12,000 million tons of 
plastic waste will be in the natural environment and landfills by 2050. Another 
estimate indicated that 4 million to 12 million tons of plastic waste entered the 
marine environment in 2010 alone (Jambeck et al., 2015). The majority of the plastic 
debris in the oceans arises from land-based sources. Lebreton et al. (2017) estimated 
that rivers transport 1 million to 2.5 million tons of plastic to the seas every year. 
Microplastics (MPs), which are defined as plastic particles < 5 mm in size, are 
emerging as a contaminant of global concern. They are ubiquitous and pervasive in 
the environment, and their presence has been detected in lakes (Sruthy and Ramasamy, 
2017), rivers (Mani et al., 2015), oceans (Andrady, 2011), terrestrial ecosystems (Beriot 
et al., 2021; de Souza Machado et al., 2018), and atmosphere (Chen et al. 2020). MPs 
1 School of Environmental Studies, Thunchath Ezhuthachan Malayalam University, Tirur, Malappuram, 
Kerala 676 502, India. 
Email: arun@temu.ac.in 2 School of Environmental Sciences, Mahatma Gandhi University, Priyadarsini Hills P.O., Kottayam, 
Kerala 686 560, India. 
* Corresponding author: evramasamy@mgu.ac.in 162 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
are even reported from remote areas, such as the Arctic (González-Pleiter et al. 2020; 
Ramasamy et al. 2021) and Antarctic regions (Waller et al., 2017). MPs originate from 
both primary and secondary sources. The primary sources include microbeads used 
in personal care products, fibers used in textiles, and pellets used as raw materials 
in manufacturing plastic products. The secondary MPs result from the fragmentation 
of larger plastics in the environment due to photo-oxidation, thermal degradation, 
mechanical action of waves and wind, and biological actions. The major sources of 
plastics and MPs in the environment come from unscientific waste disposal, discharge 
of treated and untreated domestic and industrial wastewater, stormwater runoff, road 
and tire wear particles, atmospheric deposition, shipping, etc. 
Many recent studies reported the ingestion of MPs by aquatic and terrestrial 
organisms, including humans (Daniel et al., 2020a; Kutralam-Muniasamy et al., 2020; 
Schwabl et al., 2019). However, the consequences of MP ingestion by aquatic and 
terrestrial organisms are not well understood. The ingested MPs can significantly impact 
organisms through food intake and digestive system impairment. The additives in plastics 
can also leach into the digestive system of organisms. Apart from this, the MPs have been 
reported to adsorb many chemicals, including persistent organic pollutants and heavy 
metals from the surrounding environment (Dong et al., 2020). Therefore, MPs can act as 
vectors of toxic contaminants in organisms. All these factors signify the requirement for 
stringent control measures and policies to reduce plastic and MP pollution. 
With more than 1.2 billion population, India is the second-most populous 
country globally. It is also one of the major consumers of plastic items. However, 
due to inadequate infrastructure and poor waste management practices, huge 
quantities of plastic waste are littered in the environment. It is estimated that in 2018, 
approximately 3.3 million tons of plastic waste were generated in India (CPCB, 
2019). The lack of public awareness and inadequate infrastructure to collect and 
treat municipal solid waste leads to the littering of plastic waste in every nook and 
corner of the country. Fragmentation of these plastics leads to the formation of MPs. 
The discharge of untreated municipal wastewater also contributes significantly to 
MP pollution in the environment. 
Estimating MP contamination in various environmental matrices and examining the 
sources of such MPs is necessary to develop suitable policies to mitigate plastic waste 
and evaluate the effectiveness of such policies. In this context, selected studies from India 
reporting MPs in various environmental matrices, biota, and food items are reviewed 
in the present study. The concentration of MPs in various ecosystems and biota is 
highlighted, and the impact on human health is discussed. The present policies on plastic 
waste management are briefly discussed. The major challenges facing MP research in 
India are highlighted, and the priority areas for future research are proposed as well. 
MPs in Rivers, Lakes, and Wetlands 
The contamination of rivers, lakes, and wetlands by MPs is a serious concern as the 
local people depend on these ecosystems for water, food, and livelihood. These aquatic 
ecosystems also reflect the level of contamination in the terrestrial environment. The 
rivers act as a major transport route for MPs into the marine environment. Napper et 
al. (2021) estimated that 1–3 billion pieces MPs are discharged into the Bay of Bengal Microplastic Research in India: Current Status and Future Perspectives 163 
through the Ganges every day. As these aquatic ecosystems play a significant role in 
groundwater recharge, the presence of MPs in the sediments of these ecosystems also 
has implications for groundwater contamination. Despite these facts, the contamination 
of freshwater ecosystems with MPs has received less attention globally than marine 
ecosystems. Despite having a large number of rivers, lakes, and wetlands in India, very 
few studies were conducted on MP pollution in these ecosystems. 
The first Indian lake to be investigated for MP contamination was Lake Vembanad 
in Kerala (Sruthy and Ramasamy, 2017). Later, Lake Red Hills (Gopinath et al., 2020) 
and Lake Veeranam (Bharath et al., 2021) in Tamil Nadu and Lake Renuka (Ajay et 
al., 2021) in Himachal Pradesh were investigated for MP contamination (Table 1). 
The surface water and sediment samples were analyzed from these lakes, except for 
Vembanad, where only the sediment was analyzed. From the reported literature, it 
is observed that MPs are present in all the lake samples. Hence, it could be inferred 
that MPs are pervasive pollutants in the lakes of India. The common morphological 
classifications of MPs reported in these studies are fibers, films, fragments, and pellets. 
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and Raman Spectroscopy were used 
to identify the polymers. The polymers such as polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), 
and polystyrene (PS) are reported in all the studies, thus indicating the wide use of 
these polymers across the country. In addition to these polymers, polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) and nylon were reported from Lake Veeranam (Bharath et al., 2021). Most of 
the studies targeted MPs in the size range of 0.3 mm to 5 mm. The abundance of MPs 
in water and sediment samples of Lake Renuka varied from 2–64 particles per liter and 
15–632 particles per kg respectively (Ajay et al., 2021). The abundance of MPs in most 
studies falls within the range reported from Lake Renuka. 
MPs of different morphologies, such as fragments, fibers, foams, films, pellets, and 
microbeads are reported from Indian rivers (Table 1). The different polymers reported 
are PE, PP, PS, PA, PET, PVC, polyester, nylon, acrylic, etc. Most studies reported MPs 
in the size range of 0.3 mm to 5 mm. However, there are disparities in selecting the size 
range of MPs among different studies. Few studies reported MPs as small as 20 µm. 
The MPs in the river sediments range from 17 to 3,485 particles per kg (Table 1). 
The presence of low-density polymers, such as PE and PP, in the lake and river 
sediments indicates biofouling and adsorption of contaminants over the surface of MPs, 
which increases their density leading to subsequent sedimentation. Most studies reported 
land-based sources as a significant contributor to MPs in aquatic ecosystems. It includes 
garbage dumping, littering, laundry, tourism, plastic manufacturing and recycling 
industries, sewage treatment plants, agricultural discharge, recreational activities, 
fishing, road and tire wear particles, atmospheric deposition, etc. (Baensch-Baltruschat 
et al., 2020; Vanapalli et al., 2021). The flow velocity, residence time of water, population 
density, and waste management practices in the area are the crucial factors that influence 
the abundance and distribution of MPs in the sediments of water bodies. It was observed 
that there is no unified standard protocol for collecting, processing, and extracting MPs 
from water and sediment samples. Moreover, the size range of MPs reported often varied 
significantly across studies. Therefore, comparing the MPs across different studies is 
difficult. The abundance of MPs reported in rivers and lakes might be an underestimation 
as the methodologies adopted by most of the authors did not account for smaller MPs. 
India currently has 75 Ramsar sites (wetlands of international importance) with 
a surface area of 1,326,677 hectares (PIB, 2022). However, the MP contamination Table 1. MPs in Indian Lakes and Rivers.
Sl No. Location Sample
Type 
Abundance of
MPs 
Size range of MPs Shape of MPs Identified Polymers* References 
1 Lake Vembanad, 
Kerala 
Sediment 252.80 ± 25.76
particles per m2 
< 5 mm Film, foam, fiber, pellet, 
andfragment 
LDPE, PS, PP, and HDPE (Sruthy and
Ramasamy, 2017)
2 LakeRed Hills,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu 
Sediment 27 particles per kg 0.3 to 5 mm Fiber, fragment, film, and pellet HDPE, LDPE, PP, and PS Gopinath et al., 2020 
3 Lake Veeranam, 
Tamil Nadu 
Sediment 309 particles
per kg 
0.3 to 5 mm Fiber, film, pellet,and fragment Nylon, PE, PS, PP, and 
PVC 
(Bharath et al., 2021) 
4 Lake Renuka,
Himachal Pradesh 
Sediment 15–632 particles
per kg 
< 4.75 mm Fiber, fragment, foam, and film PE, PP, and PS (Ajay et al., 2021) 
5 LakeRed Hills,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu 
Water 5.9 particles per
liter 
0.3 to 5 mm Fiber, fragment, film,and pellet HDPE, LDPE, PP, and PS Gopinath et al., 2020 
6 Lake Veeranam, 
Tamil Nadu 
Water 28 particles per
km 2 
0.3 to 5 mm Fiber, film, pellet, and fragment Nylon, PE, PS, PP, 
andPVC 
(Bharath et al., 2021) 
7 Lake Renuka,
Himachal Pradesh 
Water 02–64 particles
per liter 
> 0.2 μm Fiber, fragment, foam, film, and 
bead/pellet 
PE and PP (Ajay et al., 2021) 
8 Ganga River Sediment 107.57–409.86
particles per kg 
63 μmto 10 mm Fiber, filament, film, foam/
bead,and fragment 
PET, PE, PP, and PS (Sarkar et al., 2019) 
9 Netravathi River Sediment 9.44–253.27
pieces per kg 
0.3 to 5 mm Fragment, fiber, film, foam, and 
pellet 
PE, PET, PP, and PVC (Amrutha and
Warrier, 2020)
10 Brahmaputra River Sediment 20 to 3,485
particles per kg 
20 μm to 5 mm Fragment, fiber, and bead PP, PE, PA, PET, PVC, 
and PTFE 
(Tsering et al., 2021) 
11 Indus River Sediment 60 to 1,752
particles per kg 
20 μmto 5 mm Fragment andfiber PP, PE, PET, PA, PTFE, 
and PS 
(Tsering et al., 2021) 
12 Ganga River Sediment 17–36 particles
per kg 
0.7 to 7.5 mm Fragment, foam, film,
andfilament 
PE, PS, PP, PVC, PE-P, 
Cellophane, and Polyester 
(Singh et al., 2021) 
13 Netravathi River Water 56–2328 particles
per m3 
0.3 to 5 mm Fiber, film, fragment, and foam, 
pellet 
PE, PET, PP, and PVC (Amrutha and
Warrier, 2020)
14 Ganga River Water 0.038 particles per
liter 
< 300 μm Fiber and fragment Rayon, acrylic, PET, PVC, 
polyester, and nylon 
(Napper et al., 2021) 
15 Ganga River Water 380–684 particles
per 1000 m3 
0.7 to 7.5 mm Fragment, foam, film, and
filament 
PE, PS, PVC, PE-P, 
Polyester, and Cellophane 
(Singh et al., 2021)
164 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
*PE – Polyethylene; PS – Polystyrene; PP – Polypropylene; PVC – Poly Vinyl Chloride; PA – Polyamide; LDPE – Low Density Poly Ethylene; HDPE – High Density Poly 
Ethylene; PTFE – Polytetrafluoroethylene; PET: Polyethylene terephthalate; PE – P: Polyethylene Propylene Microplastic Research in India: Current Status and Future Perspectives 165 
in a few Ramsar sites, such as Vembanad and Renuka lakes, has been studied so far. 
Similarly, very few rivers are studied for their MPs’ contamination. Most of the studies 
are based on one-time sampling, which may not be adequate to understand the temporal 
variations, sources, and dynamics of MPs in the environment. Moreover, there is a need 
for unified sampling, extraction, and analysis protocols for MP research in India. The 
size of the MPs monitored should be unified and smaller particles need to be accounted 
for considering their greater impact on human health as compared to larger particles. 
Therefore, nationwide comprehensive monitoring programs using standard protocols 
are required in the future to understand the spatial and temporal variations in MPs. 
MPs in the Marine Environment and Beaches 
The marine environment is considered a major sink of MPs. India has a long coastline 
of 7,500 km, which makes the country one of the world’s major fishing and shipping 
hubs. The coastal regions are densely populated, and several major cities are located 
on the coast. The urban runoff, sewage, industrial effluents, and discharge from 
numerous rivers into the coastal waters make it a hot spot for MP pollution. 
The beach sediments, beach sand, and surface water have been examined for 
MP contamination from various coastal regions in India. The MPs reported from 
the marine environment are diverse in their morphology and polymer composition. 
MPs are commonly classified as fibers, films, fragments, and pellets. For identifying 
the polymer content of MPs, most of the studies used FTIR. However, few studies 
adopted Raman spectroscopy and SEM EDX methods. The polymers, like PE and 
PP, are the most abundant polymers reported from the marine environment. However, 
other polymers, such as PS, PET, PVC, PA, PMMA, etc., were also reported in less 
abundance (Table 2). The time of sample collection, method of sample collection 
and extraction of MPs, reagents used for density separation, and techniques used for 
polymer identification influenced the abundance of MPs. Due to the variations in 
these parameters among the studies reported, a comparison of spatial and temporal 
variations in MPs is not feasible (Veerasingam et al., 2020). 
A threefold increase in MPs in the coastal environment was observed after a flood 
event in Chennai, Tamil Nadu (Veerasingam et al., 2016). They also observed that the 
MP abundance is higher near the river discharge points. A similar observation was also 
reported in Kerala (Kumar and Varghese, 2021a). Therefore, it can be inferred that 
floods can transport large quantities of plastic debris, including MPs from land-based 
sources, into the oceans. The abundance of MPs in the coastal environment also may be 
influenced by the direction of winds and currents (Veerasingam et al., 2016). 
Identifying the sources and routes is a critical primary step in the regulation of 
MP pollution (Vanapalli et al., 2021). The reported studies trace the source of the 
MPs in the marine environment to land-based sources. The major land-based sources 
include improper solid waste management, discharge of treated/untreated sewage, 
inadequate wastewater treatment, industrial effluents, etc. From these sources, the 
MPs enter the marine environment through stormwater runoff, rivers, and streams. 
Shipping, fishing, tourism, and pilgrimage activities also lead to the discharge of MPs 
into the coastal environments (Kumar and Varghese, 2021b, 2021a; Patchaiyappan et 
al., 2020; Vanapalli et al., 2021). Table 2. MPs in the Marine Environment and Beaches in India.
Sl
No. 
Location Sample
Type 
Abundance of MPs Size
Range of
MPs 
Shape of MPs Commonly Identified
Polymers* 
References 
1 Chennai, Tamil Nadu Beach
sediment 
304 (before the flood) to 896
(after the flood) 
2 to 5 mm Pellets PE and PP (Veerasingam et al., 2016)
2 Tamil Nadu Beach
sediment 
2 to 178 particles per m2 0.3 to 4.75
mm 
Fragment, fiber, and 
foam 
PE, PP, and PS (Karthik et al., 2018) 
3 Tuticorin, Tamil Nadu Sediment 8.22 ± 0.92 to 17.28 ± 2.53
particles per kg 
0.005 mm
to 5 mm 
Fiber, fragment, and 
film 
PE, PP, PA, polyester,and 
paint 
(Patterson et al., 2019) 
4 Port Blair Bay, 
Andaman Islands 
Sediment 45.17 ± 25.23 particles per kg 46.72 to
5024 μm 
Fiber, fragment, and 
pellet 
Nylon, PU, PVC, and
Acrylic 
(Goswami et al., 2020) 
5 South Andaman Beach
sediment 
414.35 ± 87.4 particles per kg < 5 mm Fragment, fiber, and 
spherule 
PP, PVC, nylon, polyvinyl 
formal, and polybutadiene 
(Patchaiyappan et al., 2020)
6 Maharashtra,
Karnataka, Goa 
Beach sand 162 to 820 particles per m2 1–5 mm Fragment, fiber, 
film, and pellet 
PE and PP (Maharana et al., 2020) 
7 Mandovi-Zuari
Estuary, Goa 
Sediment 800 to 17,300 particles per
kg.(Average 4873 to 7,314 
particles per kg) 
20 μm to 5
mm 
Fragment, film, fiber, 
and bead 
PA, PVP, PVC, PAM, 
polyacetylene, polyimide
(PI) 
(Gupta et al., 2021) 
8 Calicut Beach, Kerala Beach
sediment 
80.56 to 467.13 particles per kg 1–5 mm Film, fiber, and 
lump, 
PE, PP, PET, PE + PP, PS, 
PVC, and PCU 
(Kumar and Varghese, 2021a)
9 Tuticorin coast, Gulf 
of Mannar 
Water 12.14 ± 3.11 to 31.05 ± 2.12 
particlesper liter 
0.005 to 5
mm 
Fiber, fragment, and 
film 
PE and PP (Patterson et al., 2019) 
10 Port Blair Bay, 
Andaman Islands 
Surface
seawater 
0.93 ± 0.59 particles per m3 35.29 to
5,010 μm 
Fiber, fragment, and 
pellet 
Nylon, PU, PVC, and
acrylic 
(Goswami et al., 2020) 
11 Mandovi-Zuari
Estuary, Goa 
Water 0.057 to 0.141 particles per m3 20 μm to 5
mm 
Fragment, film, fiber, 
andbeads 
PA, PVP, PVC, PAM, 
polyacetylene, and
polyimide (PI) 
(Gupta et al., 2021) 
12 Northern coast of
Kerala 
Surface
seawater 
0.96–7.12 particles per m3 0.08 to 2
mm 
Fiber, fragment, and 
flake 
PP, PEVA, PA, PE, and 
polybutadiene 
(Pavithran, 2021)
166 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
*PE – Polyethylene; PP – Polypropylene; PS – Polystyrene; PA – Polyamide; PVC – Polyvinyl chloride; PAM – Polyacrylamide; PET – Polyethylene terephthalate; PAN – 
Polyacrylonitrile; PMMA – Polymethyl methacrylate; PEVA – Polyvinyl acetate ethylene; PVAL – Polyvinyl alcohol; PVP – Polyvinyl pyrrolidone; PCU –Polycarbonate 
urethane. Microplastic Research in India: Current Status and Future Perspectives 167 
MPs in Salt 
The widespread occurrence of MPs in the marine ecosystem, including water, sediment, 
and biota, is a major concern for human health. The high abundance of MPs reported 
in coastal water indicates the possible transfer of these particles to the human food 
chain via salts. India has a long coastal area and is one of the major salt-producing 
countries in the world. The leading salt-producing states in India are Gujarat and 
Tamil Nadu (Vidyasakar et al., 2021). Evaporation of coastal water in salt pans is the 
primary method of salt production in India. Hence, contaminated coastal water may be 
a significant source of MPs in salts. The review of reported literature on MPs in salts 
from India revealed that all the samples irrespective of their origin are contaminated 
with MPs (Table 3). The abundance of MPs in salts ranges from 2 particles per kg 
(Sathish et al., 2020a) to 575 particles per kg (Vidyasakar et al., 2021). The size range 
selected for studying MPs varies considerably from 3.8 µm to 5.2 mm between studies 
and might influence the abundance of MPs reported. The common shapes of MPs found 
in salts include fibers and fragments; few studies also reported the presence of films 
and pellets. FTIR was the most commonly used technique for identifying polymers 
from salt samples. The different polymers reported are PE, PS, PA, PET, PVC, Nylon, 
Polyester, etc. (Table 3). The studies suggest that contaminated seawater is the primary 
source of MPs in salts. However, the possibility of contamination during the processing 
and packaging of salts cannot be ruled out. 
A comparative study of salts produced from Gujarat and Tamil Nadu suggests 
that MP abundance is high in salts produced from Gujarat than from Tamil Nadu 
(Vidyasakar et al., 2021). The average concentration of MPs (34 particles per kg salt) 
from commercially available six brands of sea salts in the state of Kerala has been 
reported by Ramasamy et al. (2019). By comparing salts produced from different 
sources, sea salts are more contaminated with MPs than bore-well salts (Sathish et 
al., 2020a). They estimated that people using sea salts consume 216 particles of MPs 
per year, while people consuming bore well salts consume 48 particles per year. It 
was also suggested that a simple sand filtration of seawater before evaporation could 
significantly reduce the MP content in salt (Seth and Shriwastav, 2018). 
MPs in Dust 
The MP contamination in the terrestrial environments in India has received little 
attention compared to the aquatic ecosystems. The MPs in street dust from Chennai, 
Tamil Nadu, have been reported to contain 227.94 ± 91.37 MPs per 100 g, and the 
particles are mostly fragments and fibers (Patchaiyappan et al., 2021). The nine 
polymers identified in the street dust are PVC, HDPE, poly(ethylene-co-vinyl-acetate), 
poly (tetrafluoroethylene), cellulose microcrystalline, lyocell, superflex-200, wax-1032, 
and AC-395 (Patchaiyappan et al., 2021). On the other hand, indoor dust from Patna, 
India, has been reported to contain MPs, such as PET (55–6,800 µg/g) and PC (0.11– 
530 µg/g) (Zhang et al., 2020). The above mentioned studies signify the importance of 
dust as a route of exposure to MPs through inhalation. The sources of MPs in the indoor 
dust may be attributed to textile fibers, furniture, packaging items, toys, carpets, paints, 
etc. The MPs in street dust may be attributed to improper waste management, littering, 
tire and road wear particles, road paints, building materials, and atmospheric transport. 168 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance Table 3. MPs in Salt. Sl No. Location Sample Type Abundance of MPs Size range of MPs Shape of MPs Identified Polymers* References 1 Kerala, Maharashtra, Gujarat Commercial salt 56 ± 49 to 103 ± 39 particles per kg < 5 mm Fiber and fragment PE, PS, PET, PA, and polyesters (Seth and Shriwastav, 2018) 2. Kerala Commercial salt 34 particles per kg < 5 mm Fiber, fragment, bead, and sheet PS, PA, PET, PP, PE, and PVC Ramasamy et al. (2019) 3 Tamil Nadu Salt pans Na na Fragment, fiber, and film PP, PE, nylon, and cellulose (Selvam et al., 2020) 4 Tamil Nadu Sea salt 35 ± 15 to 72 ± 40 particles per kg 55 µm to 2 mm Fiber and fragment PE, PP, Polyester, and PA (Sathish et al., 2020a) 5 Tamil Nadu Tube welll salt 2 ± 1 to 29 ± 11 particles per kg 55 µm to 2 mm Fiber and fragment PE, PP, Polyester, and PA (Sathish et al., 2020a) 6 Tamil Nadu Salt 23 to 101 particles per 200 g 100 µm to 5mm Fiber, film, pellet, and irregular PE, Polyester, and PVC (Vidyasakar et al., 2021) 7 Gujarat Salt 46 to 115 particles per 200 g 100 µm to 5mm Fiber, film, pellet, and irregular PE, Polyester, and PVC (Vidyasakar et al., 2021) 8 Tamil Nadu Salt from salt pans 3.67 ± 1.54 to 21.33 ± 1.53 particles per 10g na Fiber Nylon, PP, LDPE, and PET (Nithin et al., 2021) 9 Tamil Nadu Commercial salt 4.67 ± 1.15 to 16.33 ± 1.53 particles per 10g na Fiber Nylon, PP, LDPE, and PET (Nithin et al., 2021) 10 India Commercial salt 700 particles per kg 3.8 µm to 5.2 mm Fragment, fiber, and pellet Cellophane, PS, PA, and polyarylether (PAR) (Sivagami et al. 2021)
*PE – Polyethylene; PS – Polystyrene; PP – Polypropylene; PVC – Poly Vinyl Chloride; LDPE – Low Density Poly Ethylene; PA – polyamide; PVC – Polyvinyl chloride. Microplastic Research in India: Current Status and Future Perspectives 169 
MPs in Biota 
The infiltration of MPs in the human food chain is drawing more attention globally. In 
this context, the presence of MPs in different aquatic organisms, such as zooplanktons, 
shrimps, mussels, oysters, and fishes, has been reported from various parts of India 
(Table 4). Most of the studies came from south Indian states, like Kerala and Tamil 
Nadu. In the extraction procedure of MPs, the majority of the studies used 10% KOH 
for the digestion of organic matter. However, very few studies used H2
O2
 for the removal 
of organic matter. Fibers, fragments, films, and pellets are commonly reported in biota. 
Few studies also reported beads and foam. FTIR was most commonly used to identify 
the polymers. Very few studies used Raman spectroscopy for polymer identification. 
A number of investigators used SEM EDAX to evaluate the surface morphology and 
estimate the adsorbed chemicals, including heavy metals, on the surface of MPs. 
Polymers, such as PE, PP, PS, PVC, nylon, and acrylic, are most commonly reported to 
be ingested by aquatic species. The abundance of MPs varies considerably depending 
on the species, feeding behavior, size, and age of the organism investigated. MPs were 
observed to be more in pelagic fishes than demersal fishes (James et al., 2021). We 
observed that most of the studies reported a high abundance of low-density polymers, 
such as PE and PP in the surface waters. Hence, it could be inferred that the pelagic 
fishes are exposed to higher levels of low-density MPs that float in the seawater. 
However, more studies are required to reach a consensus on this matter. 
Few studies investigated the toxic effects of MPs on biota. It is reported that MPs cause 
abrasion in the ciliated structure and induced toxic physiological and structural alterations 
in the mussel Pernaviridis (Vasanthi et al., 2021). They also reported significantly high 
levels of oxidative stress markers in response to MP exposure in P. viridis. An increase in 
lipid peroxidation and enzymatic antioxidants in the shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei due to 
short-term exposure to PE microbeads was also reported (Maharana et al., 2020). These 
studies highlight the need to investigate the ecological implications of MP pollution. 
Most of the studies investigated MPs in the digestive tracts of fishes. However, 
except for small fishes, the digestive tract is normally removed before cooking. 
However, dietary exposure to MPs via fish could be possible if these particles were able 
to translocate across the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) or gills via paracellular diffusion or 
transcellular uptake (Wright and Kelly, 2017). On the other hand, plastics contain several 
additives, such as phthalates, bisphenols, colorants, etc., which are known as endocrine 
disruptors. Moreover, owing to their large surface-to-volume ratio, MPs can accumulate 
significantly high amounts of pollutants from the surrounding environment and can act as 
vectors of these pollutants to the organisms. The release of such additives and adsorbed 
pollutants in the digestive system of fishes may adversely affect the organism concerned. 
Additionally, the accumulation of these pollutants in the tissues of such organisms 
assumes a greater risk to human health and therefore needs more attention in the future. 
MPs’ sources, routes of exposure, and human health impacts 
MPs are ubiquitous pollutants in the environment and have been reported from a 
number of ecosystems and food items destined for human consumption. MPs are 
also reported to be ingested by fishes and other aquatic organisms. Therefore, human 
exposure to MPs is unavoidable. The sources, routes of exposure, and possible health 170 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance Table 4. MPs in the Aquatic Biota. Sl. No. Type of Biota Location Abundanceof MPs Size Range of MPs Shape of MPs Polymer Type* References 1 Zooplankton Port Blair Bay, Andaman Islands 0–0.41 particles per individual 21.57 to 2,225 μm Fiber, fragment, pellet Nylon, PU, PVC, and Acrylic, (Goswami et al., 2020) 2 Shrimps Kochi, Kerala 0.39 ± 0.6 particles per shrimp 157 to 2,785 µm Fiber, fragment, sheet PE, PP, PA, and Polyester (Daniel et al., 2020b) 3 Mussels Kasimedu, Chennai - 0.8 mm to 4.7 mm Fiber, sphere, flake, sheet, fragment PP, PE, polyester, cellophane, rayon (Vasanthi et al., 2021) 4 Oyster Tuticorin coast, Gulf of Mannar 6.9 ± 3.84 particles per individual 0.005–5 mm Fiber, film, fragment PE, and PP (Patterson et al., 2019) 5 Fishes and shellfishes Port Blair Bay, Andaman Islands 10.65 ±7.83 particles per specimen 111.58 to 5094 μm Fiber, fragment, and pellet Nylon, PU, PVC, and acrylic (Goswami et al., 2020) 6 Fishes Chennai and Nagapattinam of Tamil Nadu 20 particles in 17 fishes < 5 mm Fiber, film, pellet PE, PA, and polyester (Karuppasamy et al., 2020) 7 Fishes Vembanad Lake, Kerala 15 ± 13 particles per fish 0.04–4.73 mm Fiber, fragment, film, microbead PE, PP, PS, and PVC (Nikki et al., 2021) 8 Fishes Tuticorin, Tamil Nadu 0.11 ± 0.06 to 3.64 ± 1.7 particles per individual 85 μm to 5 mm Fiber, fragment, film, foam PE, PA, and polyester (Sathish et al., 2020b) 9 Fishes Kerala 22 particles from 15 fishes < 5 mm Fiber, fragment, foam PE, cellulose, rayon, polyester, and PP (Robin et al., 2020) 10 Fishes Kochi, Kerala 30 particles from 653
samples 
0.27 mm to 3.2
mm 
Fragment, filament, pellet PE and PP (James et al., 2020) 
*PE – Polyethylene; PS – Polystyrene; PP – Polypropylene; PVC – Poly Vinyl Chloride; PA – Polyamide; PU – Polyurethane. Microplastic Research in India: Current Status and Future Perspectives 171 
impacts of MPs on humans are summarized in Fig. 1. Cox et al. (2019) estimated 
that annual MPs consumption by humans through food and beverages ranged from 
39,000 to 52,000 particles, depending on age and sex. These numbers may increase 
significantly when exposure through drinking water and inhalation is considered. 
MPs less than 130 μm in diameter have the potential to translocate into human tissues 
and initiate a localized immune response (Wright and Kelly, 2017). Inside the tissues, 
they may also release constituent monomers, additives, and adsorbed contaminants, 
such as persistent organic pollutants and heavy metals (Cox et al., 2019; Wright and 
Kelly, 2017). The recent findings of MPs in the feces of humans (Schwabl et al., 
2019; Zhang et al., 2021) and the human placenta (Ragusa et al., 2021) highlighted 
the consumption of MPs by humans and its possible health consequences. However, 
further studies are required to shed more light on the human health impacts of MPs. 
Policies in India 
In order to provide a regulatory framework for the systematic management of plastic waste 
in the country, the government of India has issued several rules and amendments from 
time to time. These include the Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules (2011), 
Plastic Waste Management Rules (2016), Plastic Waste Management (Amendment) 
Rules (2018), and more recently the Plastic Waste Management (Amendment) Rules 
(2021). India has also made significant interventions in the international forums for 
mitigating plastic pollution. In 2019, the United Nations Environment Assembly adopted 
a resolution piloted by India to address pollution from single-use plastic (SUP) products. 
These above mentioned rules mandated the generators of plastic waste take 
necessary measures that minimize the quantity and littering of plastic waste and store 
segregated plastic waste at the source. These rules stipulated the responsibilities of waste 
generators, local bodies, gram panchayats, street vendors, and retailers to effectively 
manage plastic waste. The rules mandated Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) by 
the producers, importers, and brand owners and worked out modalities for collecting 
plastic waste. State-level monitoring committees have been constituted under these 
rules to effectively monitor and implement the provisions of these rules. Through the 
Plastic Waste Management (Amendment) Rules, 2021, the government of India aims to 
prohibit the production and use of identified single-use plastic items having low utility 
and high littering potential by 2022. Accordingly, the minimum thickness of plastic 
carry bags was mandated to increase from 50 microns to 75 microns on September 
30, 2021. It has been further mandated to increase to 120 microns by December 31, 
2022. Moreover, the government prohibited the manufacturing, importing, stocking, 
distributing, selling,and using of single-use plastic products, such as plastic plates, 
cups, glasses, cutleries, wrapping or packing films around sweet boxes, invitation cards, 
cigarette packets, plastic or PVC banners less than 100 microns in thickness,plastics 
sticks for earbuds, candy, and ice cream, balloons, and plastic flags with effect from 
July 1, 2022. The waste management rules, along with the budget allocation of Rs. 
1,41,678 crore over 5 years from 2021–2026 under the Urban Swachh Bharat Mission 
2.0, is expected to improve the environment and health through complete fecal sludge 
management and wastewater treatment, source segregation of garbage, reduction 
in single-use plastic, reduction in air pollution by effectively managing waste from 
construction-and-demolition activities, and bio-remediation of all legacy dump sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
172 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Fig. 1. Sources, Routes of Exposure, and Human Health Impacts of MPs. 
The above mentioned rules and policies are certainly an impetus for reducing 
plastic waste; however, considering the gravity of the problem, more stringent measures 
are required. We believe that public action is the deciding factor for reducing plastic 
and MP pollution. Therefore, along with the stringent implementation of the rules, we 
propose the following measures for better reduction of plastic waste and MP pollution. 
• Systematic and progressive ban on single-use plastic products and promote 
environment-friendly alternate materials. 
• Ban the use of MPs in paints, personal care products, cleaning products, etc. 
• Improve infrastructure for plastic waste recycling. 
• Promote circular economy and ensure strict compliance to extended producer 
responsibility. 
• Sensitize the issues of plastics and MPs through regular public awareness 
campaigns for civilians through mass media and students’curriculum. 
• Create awareness among fishermen and give incentives for measures taken to 
reduce plastic pollution. 
• Regular cleanup drives with public participation to remove littered plastics from 
various environments, especially beaches. 
• Impose taxes on plastics and provide fiscal incentives to reduce plastic. 
• Popularize the concept of plastic-free markets, campuses, offices, etc. 
• Recognize and adopt best practices for plastic waste management. 
• Improve waste management and ensure zero dumping of waste in the open. 
• Improve wastewater and sludge management. 
Future Research Perspectives 
Since most of the studies on MPs are conducted in South India, there is a paucity of 
data on the occurrence and abundance of MPs from other regions of the country. There 
is also a need to standardize sample collection and analysis protocol, which will help to 
compare results and evaluate the spatial and temporal variations in MP pollution. Since 
MPs are present in large numbers in sediments, the chances of further fragmentation of 
these particles cannot be ruled out. The long residence time of MPs in sediments may 
lead to their vertical migration in the sediment column. This has further implications for 
the contamination of groundwater aquifers. Therefore, we suggest that future research 
should also focus on the vertical distribution of MPs in sediments through core samples. 
Most MPs reported in the studies belong to secondary MPs. The sources of them are the Microplastic Research in India: Current Status and Future Perspectives 173 
fragmentation of larger plastics in the environment. Therefore, future studies need to be 
focused on tracing the sources of MPs for better control of MP pollution. 
MPs in the terrestrial ecosystems, atmosphere, and indoor environments 
received little attention in India. Therefore, more research needs to be focused on 
these environments and the exposure of terrestrial organisms and humans to MPs. 
Research should also focus on developing and improving the waste and wastewater 
treatment processes to reduce MPs. Apart from this, the impact of policies on the 
abundance and distribution of MPs needs to be monitored systematically. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors are grateful to the Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES), Govt. of India, 
for funding the project “Microplastics Contamination in Sediment and Selected 
Benthic Organisms of Arabian Sea Coast and a Few Estuaries of Kerala” through 
National Centre for Coastal Research (NCCR), Chennai. The financial support from 
the Kerala State Council for Science Technology and Environment (KSCSTE), 
Govt. of Kerala, for funding the project “Monitoring and Assessment of Microplastic 
Pollution in Water, Sediment and Selected Biota of Vembanad Lake, Kerala” is 
gratefully acknowledged as well. Lastly, the authors acknowledge DST-SAIF and 
DST-PURSE (Phase II) programs of Mahatma Gandhi University for providing the 
infrastructure and analytical facilities for this research. 
References 
Ajay, K., Behera, D., Bhattacharya, S., Mishra, P.K., Ankit, Y. and Anoop, A. 2021. Distribution and 
characteristics of microplastics and phthalate esters from a freshwater lake system in Lesser 
Himalayas. Chemosphere 283: 131132. 
Amrutha, K. and Warrier, A.K. 2020. The first report on the source-to-sink characterization of microplastic 
pollution from a riverine environment in tropical India. Sci. Total Environ. 739: 140377. 
Andrady, A.L. 2011. Microplastics in the marine environment. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 62: 1596–1605. 
Baensch-Baltruschat, B., Kocher, B., Stock, F. and Reifferscheid, G. 2020. Tyre and road wear particles 
(TRWP) - A review of generation, properties, emissions, human health risk, ecotoxicity, and fate in 
the environment. Sci. Total Environ. 733: 137823. 
Beriot, N., Peek, J., Zornoza, R., Geissen, V. and Huerta Lwanga, E. 2021. Low density-microplastics 
detected in sheep faeces and soil: A case study from the intensive vegetable farming in Southeast 
Spain. Sci. Total Environ. 755: 142653. 
Bharath K.M., Srinivasalu, S., Natesan, U., Ayyamperumal, R., Kalam S, N., Anbalagan, S., Sujatha, 
K. and Alagarasan, C. 2021. Microplastics as an emerging threat to the freshwater ecosystems of 
Veeranam lake in south India: A multidimensional approach. Chemosphere 264: 128502. 
Chen, G., Feng, Q. and Wang, J. 2020. Mini-review of microplastics in the atmosphere and their risks to 
humans. Sci. Total Environ. 703: 135504. 
Cox, K.D., Covernton, G.A., Davies, H.L., Dower, J.F., Juanes, F. and Dudas, S.E. 2019. Human 
Consumption of Microplastics. Environ. Sci. Technol. 53: 7068–7074. 
CPCB, 2019. Annual report on implementation of plastic waste management rules, 2018 for the year 
2018-2019. Central Pollution Control Board, Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change, 
Government of India, October 2019. 
Daniel, D.B., Ashraf, P.M. and Thomas, S.N. 2020a. Microplastics in the edible and inedible tissues of 
pelagic fishes sold for human consumption in Kerala, India. Environ. Pollut. 266: 115365. 
Daniel, D.B., Ashraf, P.M. and Thomas, S.N. 2020b. Abundance, characteristics and seasonal variation 
of microplastics in Indian white shrimps (Fenneropenaeus indicus) from coastal waters off Cochin, 
Kerala, India. Sci. Total Environ. 737: 139839. 
de Souza Machado, A.A., Kloas, W., Zarfl, C., Hempel, S. and Rillig, M.C. 2018. Microplastics as an 
emerging threat to terrestrial ecosystems. Glob. Chang. Biol. 24: 1405–1416. 
Dong, M., Luo, Z., Jiang, Q., Xing, X., Zhang, Q. and Sun, Y. 2020. The rapid increases in microplastics 
in urban lake sediments. Sci. Rep. 10: 1–10. 174 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J.R. and Law, K.L. 2017. Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. Sci. 
Adv. 3: 25–29. 
González-Pleiter, M., Velázquez, D., Edo, C., Carretero, O., Gago, J., Barón-Sola, Á., Hernández, L.E., Yousef, 
I., Quesada, A., Leganés, F., Rosal, R. and Fernández-Piñas, F. 2020. Fibers spreading worldwide: 
Microplastics and other anthropogenic litter in an Arctic freshwater lake. Sci. Total Environ. 722: 137904. 
Gopinath, K., Seshachalam, S., Neelavannan, K., Anburaj, V., Rachel, M., Ravi, S., Bharath, M. and 
Achyuthan, H. 2020. Quantification of microplastic in Red Hills Lake of Chennai city, Tamil Nadu, 
India. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 27: 33297–33306. 
Goswami, P., Vinithkumar, N.V. and Dharani, G. 2020. First evidence of microplastics bioaccumulation 
by marine organisms in the Port Blair Bay, Andaman Islands. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 155: 111163. 
Gupta, P., Saha, M., Rathore, C., Suneel, V., Ray, D., Naik, A., Unnikrishnan, K., Divya M. and Daga, K. 
2021. Spatial and seasonal variation of microplastics and possible sources in the estuarine system 
from central west coast of India. Environ. Pollut. 288: 117665. 
Jambeck, J.R., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T.R., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., Narayan, R. and Law, K.L. 
2015. Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. Science. 347: 768 –771. 
James, K., Vasant, K., Padua, S., Gopinath, V., Abilash, K.S., Jeyabaskaran, R., Babu, A. and John, S. 
2020. An assessment of microplastics in the ecosystem and selected commercially important fishes 
off Kochi, south eastern Arabian Sea, India. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 154: 111027. 
James, K., Vasant, K., Sikkander Batcha, S.M., Padua, S., Jeyabaskaran, R., Thirumalaiselvan, S., 
Vineetha, G. and Benjamin, L.V. 2021. Seasonal variability in the distribution of microplastics in the 
coastal ecosystems and in some commercially important fishes of the Gulf of Mannar and Palk Bay, 
Southeast coast of India. Reg. Stud. Mar. Sci. 41: 101558. 
Karthik, R., Robin, R.S., Purvaja, R., Ganguly, D., Anandavelu, I., Raghuraman, R., Hariharan, G., 
Ramakrishna, A. and Ramesh, R. 2018. Microplastics along the beaches of southeast coast of India. 
Sci. Total Environ. 645: 1388–1399. 
Karuppasamy, P.K., Ravi, A., Vasudevan, L., Elangovan, M.P., Dyana Mary, P., Vincent, S.G.T. and 
Palanisami, T. 2020. Baseline survey of micro and mesoplastics in the gastro-intestinal tract of 
commercial fish from Southeast coast of the Bay of Bengal. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 153: 110974. 
Kumar, A.S. and Varghese, G.K. 2021a. Microplastic pollution of Calicut beach - Contributing factors and 
possible impacts. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 169: 112492. 
Kumar, A.S. and Varghese, G.K. 2021b. Source Apportionment of Marine Microplastics: First Step 
Towards Managing Microplastic Pollution. Chem. Eng. Technol. 44: 906–912. 
Kutralam-Muniasamy, G., Pérez-Guevara, F., Elizalde-Martínez, I. and Shruti, V.C. 2020. Branded milks 
– Are they immune from microplastics contamination? Sci. Total Environ. 714: 136823. 
Lebreton, L.C.M., Van Der Zwet, J., Damsteeg, J.W., Slat, B., Andrady, A. and Reisser, J. 2017. River 
plastic emissions to the world’s oceans. Nat. Commun. 8: 1–10. 
Maharana, D., Saha, M., Dar, J.Y., Rathore, C., Sreepada, R.A., Xu, X.R., Koongolla, J.B. and Li, H.X. 
2020. Assessment of micro and macroplastics along the west coast of India: Abundance, distribution, 
polymer type and toxicity. Chemosphere 246: 125708. 
Mani, T., Hauk, A., Walter, U. and Burkhardt-Holm, P. 2015. Microplastics profile along the Rhine River. 
Sci. Rep. 5: 17988. 
Napper, I.E., Baroth, A., Barrett, A.C., Bhola, S., Chowdhury, G.W., Davies, B.F.R., Duncan, E.M., Kumar, 
S., Nelms, S.E., Hasan Niloy, M.N., Nishat, B., Maddalene, T., Thompson, R.C. and Koldewey, H. 
2021. The abundance and characteristics of microplastics in surface water in the transboundary 
Ganges River. Environ. Pollut. 274: 116348. 
Nikki, R., Abdul Jaleel, K.U., Abdul Ragesh, S., Shini, S., Saha, M. and Dinesh Kumar, P.K. 2021. 
Abundance and characteristics of microplastics in commercially important bottom dwelling finfishes 
and shellfish of the Vembanad Lake, India. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 172: 112803. 
Nithin, A., Sundaramanickam, A., Surya, P., Sathish, M., Soundharapandiyan, B. and Balachandar, K. 
2021. Microplastic contamination in salt pans and commercial salts—A baseline study on the salt 
pans of Marakkanam and Parangipettai, Tamil Nadu, India. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 165: 112101. 
Patchaiyappan, A., Ahmed, S.Z., Dowarah, K., Jayakumar, S. and Devipriya, S.P. 2020. Occurrence, 
distribution and composition of microplastics in the sediments of South Andaman beaches. Mar. 
Pollut. Bull. 156: 111227. 
Patchaiyappan, A., Dowarah, K., Zaki Ahmed, S., Prabakaran, M., Jayakumar, S., Thirunavukkarasu, C. 
and Devipriya, S.P. 2021. Prevalence and characteristics of microplastics present in the street dust 
collected from Chennai metropolitan city, India. Chemosphere 269: 128757. 
Patterson, J., Jeyasanta, K.I., Sathish, N., Booth, A.M. and Edward, J.K.P. 2019. Profiling microplastics 
in the Indian edible oyster, Magallana bilineata collected from the Tuticorin coast, Gulf of Mannar, 
Southeastern India. Sci. Total Environ. 691: 727–735. 
Pavithran, V.A. 2021. Study on microplastic pollution in the coastal seawaters of selected regions along 
the northern coast of Kerala, southwest coast of India. J. Sea Res. 173: 102060. Microplastic Research in India: Current Status and Future Perspectives 175 
PIB, 2022. 75 Ramsar sites in 75th year of Independence. Press Information Bureau, Government of India, 
13 August 2022. 
Ragusa, A., Svelato, A., Santacroce, C., Catalano, P., Notarstefano, V., Carnevali, O., Papa, F., Rongioletti, 
M.C.A., Baiocco, F., Draghi, S., D’Amore, E., Rinaldo, D., Matta, M. and Giorgini, E. 2021. 
Plasticenta: First evidence of microplastics in human placenta. Environ. Int. 146: 106274. 
Ramasamy, E.V., Sruthy, S., Harit, A.K., Mohan, M. and Binish, M.B. 2021. Microplastic pollution in the 
surface sediment of Kongsfjorden, Svalbard, Arctic. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 173: 112986. 
Ramasamy, E.V., Sruthy, S.N., Harit, A.K., Babu N. Microplastics in human consumption: Table salt 
contaminated with microplastics. pp. 74-80. In: S. Babel, A Haarstrick, M.S. Babel, A. Sharp [eds.] 
2019. Microplastics in the water environment. Cuvillier Verlag, Göttingen. 
Robin, R.S., Karthik, R., Purvaja, R., Ganguly, D., Anandavelu, I., Mugilarasan, M. and Ramesh, R. 2020. 
Holistic assessment of microplastics in various coastal environmental matrices, southwest coast of 
India. Sci. Total Environ. 703: 134947. 
Sarkar, D.J., Das Sarkar, S., Das, B.K., Manna, R.K., Behera, B.K. and Samanta, S. 2019. Spatial distribution of 
meso and microplastics in the sediments of river Ganga at eastern India. Sci. Total Environ. 694: 133712. 
Sathish, M.N., Jeyasanta, I. and Patterson, J. 2020a. Microplastics in Salt of Tuticorin, Southeast Coast of 
India. Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 79: 111–121. 
Sathish, M.N., Jeyasanta, I. and Patterson, J. 2020b. Occurrence of microplastics in epipelagic and 
mesopelagic fishes from Tuticorin, Southeast coast of India. Sci. Total Environ. 720: 137614. 
Schwabl, P., Koppel, S., Konigshofer, P., Bucsics, T., Trauner, M., Reiberger, T. and Liebmann, B. 2019. 
Detection of various microplastics in human stool: A prospective case series. Ann. Intern. Med. 171: 
453–457. 
Selvam, S., Manisha, A., Venkatramanan, S., Chung, S.Y., Paramasivam, C.R. and Singaraja, C. 2020. 
Microplastic presence in commercial marine sea salts: A baseline study along Tuticorin Coastal salt 
pan stations, Gulf of Mannar, South India. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 150: 110675. 
Seth, C.K. and Shriwastav, A. 2018. Contamination of Indian sea salts with microplastics and a potential 
prevention strategy. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25: 30122–30131. 
Singh, N., Mondal, A., Bagri, A., Tiwari, E., Khandelwal, N., Monikh, F.A. and Darbha, G.K. 2021. 
Characteristics and spatial distribution of microplastics in the lower Ganga River water and 
sediment. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 163: 111960. 
Sivagami, M., Selvambigai, M., Devan, U., Velangani, A.A.J., Karmegam, N., Biruntha, M., Arun, A., 
Kim, W., Govarthanan, M. and Kumar, P. 2021. Extraction of microplastics from commonly used 
sea salts in India and their toxicological evaluation. Chemosphere 263: 128181. 
Sruthy, S. and Ramasamy, E.V. 2017. Microplastic pollution in Vembanad Lake, Kerala, India: The first 
report of microplastics in lake and estuarine sediments in India. Environ. Pollut. 222: 315–322. 
Tsering, T., Sillanpää, Mika, Sillanpää, Markus, Viitala, M. and Reinikainen, S.P. 2021. Microplastics pollution 
in the Brahmaputra River and the Indus River of the Indian Himalaya. Sci. Total Environ. 789: 147968. 
Vanapalli, K.R., Dubey, B.K., Sarmah, A.K. and Bhattacharya, J. 2021. Assessment of microplastic pollution 
in the aquatic ecosystems – An Indian perspective. Case Stud. Chem. Environ. Eng. 3: 100071. 
Vasanthi, R.L., Arulvasu, C., Kumar, P. and Srinivasan, P. 2021. Ingestion of microplastics and its 
potential for causing structural alterations and oxidative stress in Indian green mussel Perna viridis– 
A multiple biomarker approach. Chemosphere 283: 130979. 
Veerasingam, S., Mugilarasan, M., Venkatachalapathy, R. and Vethamony, P. 2016. Influence of 2015 
flood on the distribution and occurrence of microplastic pellets along the Chennai coast, India. Mar. 
Pollut. Bull. 109: 196–204. 
Veerasingam, S., Ranjani, M., Venkatachalapathy, R., Bagaev, A., Mukhanov, V., Litvinyuk, D., 
Verzhevskaia, L., Guganathan, L. and Vethamony, P. 2020. Microplastics in different environmental 
compartments in India: Analytical methods, distribution, associated contaminants and research 
needs. TrAC - Trends Anal. Chem. 133: 116071. 
Vidyasakar, A., Krishnakumar, S., Kumar, K.S., Neelavannan, K., Anbalagan, S., Kasilingam, K., 
Srinivasalu, S., Saravanan, P., Kamaraj, S. and Magesh, N.S. 2021. Microplastic contamination in 
edible sea salt from the largest salt-producing states of India. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 171: 112728. 
Waller, C.L., Griffiths, H.J., Waluda, C.M., Thorpe, S.E., Loaiza, I., Moreno, B., Pacherres, C.O. and 
Hughes, K.A. 2017. Microplastics in the Antarctic marine system: An emerging area of research. 
Sci. Total Environ. 598: 220–227. 
Wright, S.L. and Kelly, F.J. 2017. Plastic and Human Health: A Micro Issue? Environ. Sci. Technol. 
51: 6634–6647. 
Zhang, J., Wang, L. and Kannan, K. 2020. Microplastics in house dust from 12 countries and associated 
human exposure. Environ. Int. 134: 105314. 
Zhang, N., Li, Y. Bin, He, H.R., Zhang, J.F. and Ma, G.S. 2021. You are what you eat: Microplastics in the 
feces of young men living in Beijing. Sci. Total Environ. 767: 144345. Chapter 12 
Forging Plastic Litter Governance 
Addressing Acute Plastic Litter Pollution in Korea 
Youngjin Choi 
INTRODUCTION 
It is a fact of life that plastics are an important part of modern life. However, 
irresponsible disposal of plastic materials is making the planet unsafe for us and our 
future generations. To present an alternative to plastics, the problem of environmental 
pollution caused by the reckless use of disposable products on a global level needs 
to be examined first. Plastic pollution, in particular, provides an acute threat to the 
ocean, river, and inland lake ecosystems. 
In Korea, daily life involves the use of a lot of plastic products, such as straws, 
cups, and bottles used in drinks, meal boxes, and parcels wrapped in plastic packaging 
that come through shopping online. Total plastics waste generation in 2019 increased 
by about 11.5% compared to the previous year, i.e., 446,102 tons/day to 497,238 tons/ 
day. The composition cost for each type of waste in 2019 was 44.5% of construction 
waste, 40.7% of business discharge facility waste, 11.7% of household waste, and 
3.1% of designated waste (Korean Ministry of Environment, 2020). 
The trash crisis has been a big concern in Korea for some time now. Korea 
used to export the waste to China and other countries. However, it started in 2018 
when domestic companies refused to collect plastic wastes because China banned the 
importation of 24 solid waste items due to the high pollution risks they pose to the 
environment. After this enforcement, environmental activists from the Philippines 
have likewise expressed opposition to Korea exporting plastic wastes into their 
country, prompting the Philippine government to return these to Korea twice in the 
second half of 2018 (KBS News, April 3, 2019). 
Department of Sociology and Institute of Global Affairs, Kyung Hee University. Forging Plastic Litter Governance 177 
Unit: ton/day 
Source: Korean Ministry of Environment (2020) 
Fig. 1. The Volume of Plastic Waste Generated by Sort. 
Accordingly, the Korean government came up with policies to regulate the use 
of solid plastics. Unfortunately, the use of disposable plastics is already part of the 
lives of modern people seeking convenience, and regulating the use of plastics is no 
longer seen as a fundamental solution (Marine Innovation, 2019). The only option 
for such is to reuse and recycle them. 
This paper discusses the concern about the saturated landfills in the Seoul 
metropolitan area and the proliferation of waste mountains in its adjoining provinces. 
The paper also tackles how this is linked to the problems of waste export failure in 
China and Southeast Asian countries. In addition, the paper examines leaching and 
cyclical flow of coastal wastes from the inland to the sea of the Korean peninsula. 
This chapter also attempts to suggest policies to address all the above-mentioned 
plastic issues such as forging multilayered plastic governance on the use of plastic 
and recycling in Korea. 
Landfill Situation in the Seoul Metropolitan Area 
Before 1964, the residential sites, wetlands, etc., of Seoul reeked of bad odor because 
the city did not have any decent waste disposal plant for solid wastes. Solid wastes 
were simply dumped and buried anywhere. In 1964, the Seoul municipal government 
secured landfills on the outskirt of Northern Seoul. To address this situation, the 
government also converted Gangnam (located on the southern outskirt of the Seoul 178 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
city center in the north center), which previously used to be rice fields, into an 
exclusive city landfill. The city used the Gangnam area mainly as a landfill from the 
mid-1960s to 1977. 
During this period, the population of Seoul increased significantly. From 1.56 
million in 1955, the city’s population increased to 7.82 million in 1978. To address 
the demands for housing, the landfill sites in the Gangnam area were developed 
into large-scale apartment complexes, thus putting pressure on the government to 
consolidate its landfills in one place. 
The city of Seoul designated Nanjido, located in the suburban area of Sangam￾dong, as a large-scale landfill area. The area was adjudged to be the best place to 
throw trash far from ‘one’s neighborhood’ and was assigned convenient transportation 
and levee construction. From March 1978, trash discharged from Seoul and parts of 
Gyeonggi province were dumped in the Nanjido in Sangam-dong. 
Nanjido, near the site of the current World Cup Park, was originally a beautiful 
island called ‘Flower Island’. It was a place where orchids and bushes once grew 
along flowing clear water. From 1978 to 1993, however, the area was converted into 
a landfill where all kinds of garbage were dumped and left to accumulate dust and 
rot, thus emitting a foul odor. 
Due to Seoul’s rapid expansion and urbanization, garbage trucks lined up to 
leave all kinds of garbage in Nanjido every day. It was estimated that the average 
amount of trash generated per person was 1.95 kg in 1985. This increased sharply to 
2.17 kg in 1988 and 2.30 kg in 1991. The Seoul Metropolitan Government estimated 
at that time, an average of 3,000 tons of waste, which was 8-ton trucks a day, were 
dumped in Nanjido. This continued for 15 years until the Nanjido got filled up in 
March 1993, and by then it was estimated to contain about 92 million m3
. Household 
wastes, construction, and industrial wastes were piled randomly in the landfill site, 
along with two huge piles of garbage that stood at a height of 90 m. 
When the Nanjido trash site, which was responsible for holding 78% of Seoul’s 
household wastes, reached its limit in 1993, there was no other place in Seoul that 
could accommodate the solid wastes of the city anymore. Because Seoul did not 
Fig. 2. The Nanjido Landfill in 1985. Forging Plastic Litter Governance 179 
want garbage to pile up within the city, the city government then looked for a site 
outside the city and identified the western reclamation sites of Gimpo-gun, Gyeonggi 
province, and Oryu-dong, Seo-gu, Incheon as the potential landfill sites. However, 
the province and the city opposed the idea of Seoul dumping garbage there. To resolve 
the situation, the National Environment Agency intervened and proposed to create 
an integrated facility that would treat garbage generated by Seoul, Gyeonggi, and 
Incheon in one place itself. This facility is now known as the ‘Seoul Metropolitan 
Area Landfill Site’. 
The metropolitan landfill site opened on February 10, 1992, just as the Nanjido 
landfill in Seoul reached its saturation point. The new landfill site was created 
by landfilling public wastes near Incheon Metropolitan City and Gimpo City 
in Gyeonggi province. Currently, the said landfill serves as a “wide-area waste 
treatment facility” that jointly treats wastes generated in Seoul, Gyeonggi-do, and 
Incheon. This metropolitan landfill site is the world’s largest ‘garbage bin’ with an 
area of 16.85 m2
 and a reclamation capacity of 230 million tons. The total amount of 
garbage brought in 2020 was 634,359 tons, while it was 621,953 tons by the end of 
October, 2020. 
Initially, the permit for reclamation in the metropolitan area was the Maginot 
Line, which was expected to terminate by 2016. However, this has been extended up 
to August 2025 due to a lack of alternative landfills. As the reclamation period was 
extended, Seoul, Gyeonggi, and Incheon decided to explore other landfills. 
Since the reclaimed land in the metropolitan area has been operating for around 
28 years, environmental damage has been accumulating as well, such as increasing 
odor and leachate. Sawol village, which is about 1 km away from the metropolitan 
landfill site, has been marked as unsuitable for housing as a consequence of the 
investigation by the Ministry of Environment. With the construction of Cheongna 
International City and Geomdan New City, the resistance of residents toward the 
reclaimed land has also been increasing. This is the reason that around 80% of the 
total waste carried into the metropolitan landfill is coming from Seoul and Gyeonggi 
provinces. 
Garbage Mountain Problem 
In recent years, the problem of domestic waste production has become even more 
prominent because China, the world’s largest importer of plastic waste, declared that 
it will no longer accept foreign wastes. South Korea attempted to export garbage 
to Southeast Asian countries, such as the Philippines and Indonesia, as a desperate 
measure to address this issue. However, discarded plastic wastes that were not 
collected properly and were not suitable for recycling proved to be more difficult to 
export and were subsequently refused by Southeast Asian countries. When Southeast 
Asian countries refused to accept these Korean-made (plastic and vinyl) solid wastes, 
the damage of plastic waste went back to local residents living far from Seoul, the 
metropolitan area, and other large cities. Some plastic wastes were even left in the 
yard and/or the top of the house in the cities. 180 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
In front of a rural village in Uiseong-gun in Gyeongbuk province, not far from 
the upstream of Nakdong River, a garbage mountain that has the height of a 10th￾floor apartment, can be noticed from afar. A recycling company dumped 172,000 
tons of waste there, which was 80 times the volume that it was permitted to dump 
(2,157 tons). It meant to sort out more than 60,000 tons of garbage of which 26,000 
tons of plastic waste was meant to be taken out in 2019. However, they left the waste 
unattended for two years starting from 2016 to 2017. This meant that the national 
government spent a tax of 5.3 billion Won (US$ 4.8 million) with the additional 
budget to dispose of about a third of the 170,000 tons of waste produced. In addition, 
5 billion Won (US$ 4.5 million) was set for handling this mountain waste in Uiseong￾gun (Lim, June 3, 2019). For expenses other than waste disposal, such as treatment 
expenses for residents, the county had to make appropriations for additional budget. 
Due to the disordered waste management system, more than 10 billion Won in taxes 
were only spent on the garbage disposal. 
On the other hand, in a village in Cheonan, Chungcheongnam province, about 
13,000 tons of wastes were left without intervention for over a year, thus causing 
nearby residents and administrative authorities to suffer as a result. It is estimated 
that it will cost about 4 billion Won to clean up the wastes, thereby fueling growing 
concerns about further wasting taxes (Han, Dec. 21, 2020). 
Since it relies solely on the performance reports of solid waste management 
companies, it becomes difficult to recognize the flow of wastes into cities, especially 
when the waste disposal company's report are often invalid and cannot be trusted as 
they may hand over the waste disposal to other companies. This happens unless it is 
often monitored by related organizations, like the local governments. For example, 
although more than 170,000 tons of wastes were dumped in Uiseong, the amount of 
waste reported to the government was no more than 50,000 in 2017 (Lim, June 3, 
2019). 
Nonetheless, even if the local government finds out that the volume of waste being 
kept there exceeds the permitted volume, administrative disposition of notification 
Source: This photo was taken by the author on October 2, 2020. 
(Source mention the photo taken by the author) 
Fig. 3. The Trash Mountain in Uiseong.  
 
Forging Plastic Litter Governance 181 
is difficult and the sanctions are weak, thus making it conducive for waste disposal 
companies to simply dump garbage and get away without any ramifications. 
He further added: 
After the controversy over the garbage mountain, the county conducted 
special inspections and thorough investigation. But manpower was limited 
for each investigation. Since it was a rural village, I think it would not be 
noticeable if they throw something there, so they simply dump the trash 
there. In the end, it was not the responsibility of those who discarded the 
wastes anymore, but the residents and local governments of the abandoned 
area. Unfortunately, the cost of incineration of the trash had to be paid with 
the people’s precious taxes (Lim, June 3, 2019). 
To address the difficulties of holding anyone responsible for the illegal disposal 
of wastes, the government intends to hold everyone, including the consignee and the 
landowners, who are involved in the illegal disposal process in the future and punish 
them for such offenses, that is instead of simply fining to imprisoning them (Kim, 
August 9, 2019). 
To curb the situation, waste disposal companies need to seek permission from 
the Ministry of Environment before changing their company's name so that person/ 
companies discharging illegal waste can be held responsible and penalised at once. 
If waste is disposed of through administrative execution, it is allowed to check the 
property first to prevent property concealment. 
Since 2019, the number of national garbage mountains that the Ministry of 
Environment has identified totals 356 places, 1.15 million tons (as of the end of 
August, 2020). The ministry should be strict toward the illegal dumping of waste. 
However, the volume of garbage does not decrease. A new garbage mountain can be 
still seen day after day (Moon, Oct. 29, 2020). 
Until recently, the government had discovered a total of 437 garbage mountains 
and 1.91 million tons nationwide. By August of 2022, 1.578 million tons of them 
were cleared. It has been confirmed that 54 (436,328 tons), half of the 108 garbage 
mountains nationwide that local governments cleaned up by proxy, were charged to 
innocent victims (landowners). The amount of compensation claimed amounts to 
33.7 billion won (Lee, Dec. 9, 2022). 
The problem of the saturation of landfills in the Seoul metropolitan area shows 
that Korean society is at a critical point so far as the solid waste management issue is 
concerned. This was because domestic wastes, particularly plastic wastes, have been 
rapidly increasing due to the rising number of single households. Korea’s Ministry of 
Environment estimated that domestic wastes were 41,000 tons per day in 2017. This 
is 30,000 tons higher compared to the data five years ago. 
According to the report of the European Plastics and Rubber Association 
(EUROMAP), Korea’s annual plastic consumption per capita in 2015 was 
132.7 kg, which was the highest in the world at that time. Belgium topped the list with 
177.1 kg. Based on the plastic used for packaging, Korea is the second country 
(132.7 kg) after Belgium in 2015. Korea’s Ministry of Environment estimated that 182 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
the number of living plastic waste generated in the country in 2018 in 3.23 million 
tons, which was 71.7% of what it was 10 years before. During the same period, the 
total amount of household wastes also increased by about 10%. In particular, the 
increased rate, which stayed at 10.6% for five years until 2013, soared to 46.6% over 
the next five years. In 2020, plastic wastes are expected to increase by 14.6% from 
the previous year due to preventive measures that need to be taken against the corona 
virus infection (COVID-19) (Kim, Jan. 5, 2021). 
The Big Trouble With Trash Due to the Ban on Importing 
Wastes into China
 
In April 2017, the initiative of circular development has been announced with the 
aim of strictly controlling the import of wastes and increasing the level of domestic 
waste recycling. After that, in January 2018, China stopped importing 24 kinds of 
wastes, including plastic wastes, recyclable paper, and so on. Up to this period, China 
was a major importer of plastic wastes, accounting for more than half of the world’s 
waste imports. However, it can no longer ignore its own environmental pollution, 
thus stressing the importance of circulating resources. 
As the demand for plastic wastes in China declined, the price of recyclable 
wastes plummeted. From 148 Won in April 2017, the price of recyclable paper fell to 
90 Won in September 2017, or six months thereafter. This made collecting recycled 
wastes unprofitable for the waste collectors. Eventually, recycling companies halted 
waste collection across the country. Private collection companies indicated that they 
would no longer collect wastes because of losses (Hong, 2018). This began the so￾called ‘garbage catastrophe’. 
Since 2017, China has continuously reinforced its import waste regulations by 
amending its Solid Waste Act and enacting relevant administrative regulations to 
protect its environment. On December 18, 2020, the Ministry of Environment in 
Korea announced that the Chinese government will ban the importation of all solid 
wastes from January 2021, in accordance with the new enforcement of its revised 
‘Solid Waste Environmental Pollution Prevention Act’. The Ministry of Environment 
estimated that the volume of solid wastes exported by China from Korea is 14,000 
tons per year. This is 93% less than the volume that it used to import before it 
tightened its waste importation regulations in 2017. The export of household waste 
plastics to China has been suspended by Korea since 2018. 
Table 1. Chronology of Trash Concerns in Korea. 
January 2018 China stopped importing 24 kinds of waste, including plastic wastes 
March 2018 Domestic recycling garbage prices fell 
April 2018 Recycling companies stopped collecting solid wastes 
After April 2018 Outbreak of big trouble with the proliferation of solid waste issues 
March 2019 Vietnam banned imports of plastic wastes, effective from 2025 
2019 Onwards Ongoing trash crisis 
“[Land of garbage] ④ How did we become ‘garbage Korea’?,” KBS News, April 3, 2019. Forging Plastic Litter Governance 183 
Currently, all solid waste export in Korea comprises wastes coming from 
business sites, such as slags and dust. Because these wastes are treated domestically 
or in third countries as part of the responsibility of the trash emitter, the Ministry of 
Environment predicts that the direct impact of this in the market will be economically 
insignificant. However, the domestic solid waste problem was already at saturation 
point, and China’s importation ban on recyclable waste products has exacerbated the 
problem. 
Trash Destination Gone; Where Will These Go? 
With the export road to China being blocked, the government looked to Southeast 
Asia as an alternative destination for its trash. However, it is also strengthening 
environmental regulations as well. In July and October 2019, the illegal exportation 
of garbage to the Philippines was caught twice by a local environmental civil group, 
the Eco-Waste Coalition of the Philippines. Korea’s prestige in the international 
market was significantly reduced. Vietnam, a major waste importer in Southeast 
Asia, later announced that it would completely ban the import of waste plastics from 
Korea by 2025 onwards. 
Another factor that contributed to the Korean trash crisis was the adoption of 
the volume-based waste rate system in 1995. On January 1, 1995, the volume-based 
waste rate system was implemented along with a system for separate discharge, 
collection, and sorting of recyclables. However, this failed to effectively separate 
different types of plastics. In order to promote the separate disposal of recyclables 
while envisioning a volume-based waste rate system, the local governments decided 
to collect recyclables free of charge without paying garbage fees. Once the pay￾as-you-go system was implemented, economical recyclable items such as paper 
wastes, scrap metal, and used clothes were bought by private recycling companies 
through direct contracts with the apartment residents. However, as China’s imports 
of recycled products increased rapidly after 2000, the price of recycled products 
including plastics soared. Mixed plastics, which were not economical in the past, 
were also included in the items being bought by private recycling companies. 
According to Article of the Waste Management Act in Korea, the legal 
responsibility for the collection and recycling of waste lies with local governments. 
However, Korea's recycling market is not active in supporting the state, but the 
private sector. It is being criticized that private businesses are passing on the cost 
of recycling, which is the responsibility of local governments, to the private sector, 
even if they cannot form a recycling market on their own. 
As the producer responsibility recycling system took effect in 2004, vinyl 
wastes were added to the list of recyclable products that must be separated and 
identified for export. Since vinyl wastes were not paid products in the recycling 
market, local governments collected and separated them while the business sector 
such as producers supported their costs. However, due to fierce competition among 
private businesses for recycled products from apartment houses, a market structure 
was established wherein private businesses collected and separated these despite 
the abolition of collecting vinyl wastes. This has not changed due to the long-term 
recycling market boom in the 2000s (Hong, 2018: 2). 184 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
According to the revised Resource Recycling Act, the use of disposable vinyl 
has been banned in supermarkets starting from 2019. This is one of the follow-up 
measures adopted as part of the implementation of the comprehensive recycling 
waste management policy and the revision of the enforcement regulations of the 
Act on the Promotion of Saving and Recycling of Resources. This promoted the 
prohibition of the use of plastic bags in large-scale stores (about 2,000 locations) and 
supermarkets (about 10,000 locations) (Lee and Jeong, 2019). 
Korea is going to incinerate plastic wastes and use it for a thermal power plant 
to extract petroleum. On the other hand, the European Union (EU) and others see 
only ‘recycling materials’ that are used by changing plastics into raw materials and 
turning them back into plastics. According to Greenpeace, although it is told that the 
recycling rate of Korean plastic waste was about 62.0% as of 2017, it was only 22.7% 
of the recycled materials. In the same year, the EU’s recycling rate was about 40%. 
Impact of COVID-19 on the Use of Plastics 
With the spread of the coronavirus-19 (COVID-19) toward the end of January 2020, 
the Ministry of Environment temporarily allowed the use of disposable items in food 
service establishments, such as coffee shops and restaurants. Temporary exceptions 
were granted when the level of infectious disease crisis warning under the current 
law is at ‘borderline’ or higher. Since the infectious disease crisis warning is currently 
at the ‘severe’ stage, the use of disposable items is permitted. This caused a concern 
that the volume of solid wastes would again rise due to the increase in the use of 
disposable items. Indeed, in the first half of 2020, vinyl production increased by 
11.1% when compared to 2019. Plastic production increased by 15.16%. Adding to 
this concern was the fact that the plastic recycling market is struggling due to the 
economic downturn and falling international oil prices (Lim, Sep. 15, 2020). 
Due to COVID-19, the use of disposable products is recommended for personal 
hygiene and safety. The use of disposable products is likewise becoming a daily 
routine, raising concerns about environmental pollution. 
Taking these into consideration, the Korean government allowed the use of 
disposable items in coffee shops and restaurants but were ‘subject to restrictions’ 
effective from January 2020. Because of the prolonged COVID-19 pandemic, 
however, it has led to an increase in plastic wastes. Packaging materials also have 
increased sharply since online shopping, which relies on courier services, has become 
popular. As the number of parcels and the number of delivered food packages 
increase, the volume of household wastes, such as plastic, vinyl, paper, and foamed 
resin, that use packaging containers likewise increases (Kim, Sep. 12, 2020). 
According to the petrochemical industry, disposable plastics such as plastic 
gloves and door handle covers are also becoming essential safety supplies during the 
quarantine against COVID-19. The Ministry of Environment estimated that the use 
of plastic packaging materials during the first quarter of 2020 (January to March) 
increased by 20%. Paper wastes and plastic packaging also increased by 15% and 
8%, respectively. For ‘A-list’ companies producing vinyl products, the volume of 
sales of vinyl gloves surged by more than 170% in April 2020 compared to their 
volume of sales during the same period in 2019 (Heo, July 22, 2020). Forging Plastic Litter Governance 185 
With the increased use of disposable products, since the COVID-19 pandemic, 
environmental experts warned that another ‘garbage crisis’ would be likely to occur 
in Korea. This necessitates the examination once again of the segregation methods 
being adopted in Korea. How can people properly segregate solid wastes? Why is it 
important to accurately to dispose of or discharge wastes properly? 
As experts say, the reason why ‘accurate’ segregation and disposal is important 
is that even though recycling is not possible, randomly separated wastes not only 
interfere with the sorting process but also damage the machines used in the recycling 
process. Since December 2020, in particular, transparent PET bottles have been 
collected separately in large complexes by security guards and cleaners, who are 
already overburdened to do this work. These bottles have much higher recycling 
value than other colored plastic bottles, so these are collected separately and made 
into clothes or shoes. 
First, to reduce the production and the use of plastic containers, it is recommended 
to set the production ratio of plastic containers among containers produced for 
container manufacturers over a certain size. To this end, in 2022, in accordance with 
the Framework Act on Resource Recycling, the recycling availability evaluation 
system was used to assess whether resource recycling is easy for each company. 
The production target for plastic containers that are relatively difficult to recycle is 
lowered, and glass bottles that are advantageous for reuse or recycling are produced 
to raise instead. The ratio of plastic containers among all containers is aimed to be 
reduced from the current 47% level to 38% by 2025 (Kwon, June 4, 2020). 
There are also some attempts to reduce using plastics by the business sector. For 
instance, ‘Market Cully’, the online food market, which is said to be a pioneer of 
early morning delivery, has been pinpointed that it is causing environmental pollution 
due to excessive packing. Accordingly, the styrofoam boxes used for packaging the 
frozen products delivered by Saebyul were converted into paper. All the packaging 
materials for delivery products, such as cushioning packaging, box tape, and zipper 
bags, are also changed into paper, minimizing the use of plastic and Styrofoam; all 
packaging materials will be converted to paper materials by 2021 all packaging 
materials was converted to paper materials by 2021. Furthermore, no more than the 
carrier bags made by paper have been used since November 24, 2022. 
Coastal Garbage Collection 
According to the Korean coastal waste monitoring results, plastics account for 56% 
of all litter. By category, it is found that the ratio of PET bottles, plastic bags, caps, 
ropes, and steel foam buoys is high among all plastics (Lee, 2018). According to the 
KOIST, MPs were also detected in four types of shellfish, such as oysters and clams, 
that are sold in Korea (KIOST, 2017). 
Marine waste collection can be largely divided into projects carried out by the 
central government and local governments; it depended on the nature of the marine 
waste purification project, offshore sedimentation waste collection project, fishing 
ground environment improvement project, oil-damaged area support project, illegal 
fishing nets demolition project, and so on. In 2017, the volume of garbage collected 186 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
on Korean coasts was 82,175 tons. In 2019, it rose to 108,644 tons. It increased by 
32.2% in two years. The share of the East Coast dropped sharply from 50.8% in 2017 
to 42.8% in 2019 and then rose again to 49.6% in 2019, which was almost similar in 
terms of volume to the garbage collected on the West Coast. Moreover, the volume of 
plastic wastes around the southeast coast where the population was larger, was about 
twice as much as that of the east coast or the west coast region, where the population 
was less. About 86% of the plastics collected were microplastics (MPs) of less than 
300 micrometers (μm). Most of the MPs found on the southern coast came mainly 
from styrofoam buoys (KIOST, 2015). 
The volume of plastics flowing into the ocean from the Nakdong River is 53 tons 
per year, reaching about 1.2 trillion pieces. It is estimated that the damage costing 
over 30 billion won was due to plastic wastes coming from Geoje Island alone due to 
local heavy rains and typhoons in 2011. Marine pollution caused by plastics also led 
to a decrease in the number of tourists that go to the area (Shim, 2019). 
Garbage Inflows and Outflows into the Korean Ocean 
According to the data collected from 2007 to 2014, plastic wastes accounted for 
37%, polystyrene foam, 35% of wood wastes, and 12% of floating marine litter 
(FML) in Korea. The main plastic trash composition includes plastic bags, bottles, 
plates, and ropes. Floating marine debris was found in tourist spots, ports, fishing 
areas, industrial, and recreation areas along the coast of China, which flows into the 
coast of Korea (NOWPAP MERRAC, 2017). 
For the most part, plastic wastes and styrofoams were the highest in terms of the 
volume of debris. Plastic wastes made up almost (or more) half of the marine wastes. 
Wood, glass, tobacco, or foreign marine debris account for the rest of the debris 
(NOWPAP MERRAC, 2017: 30). About 20–30% of the total marine debris collected 
from 2010 to 2015, which varies slightly depending on the year, were fishery-related 
wastes such as styrofoam/plastic buoys or ropes. The rest (about 70–80%) of marine 
debris originated from land. 
In general, the volume of marine debris tends to increase during the summer 
months. In Korea, geographical location, heavy rain, and summer season (June and 
July) generate more wastes in Northeast Asia. Marine garbage increases during typhoon 
season (August/September). The volume of marine debris collected is generally higher 
on the southern coast (i.e., Tongyeong, Masan, and Jeju). The aforementioned study 
noted the dominance of EPS particles in Geoje Island in the Southeast Sea (Heo et al., 
2013). Other studies indicated a large portion of the MPs from the sea level suggesting 
that EPS buoys for aquaculture may be an important source of such (Song et al., 2015). 
It has been confirmed that this trash floated south along the east coast along the 
ocean currents. The research team predicted and traced back the path of the movement 
of objects floating in the sea along the currents and winds with the floating material 
movement diffusion model and confirmed that the garbage found in the Gangneung 
coastal area on September 17 came from near the Tuman River around August 28, 
2016 (Park & Kim, Nov. 4, 2016). Forging Plastic Litter Governance 187 
Conclusion 
The rise of plastic in the environment compelled the Korean government to commit 
to cutting its plastic wastes in half by 2030. Unfortunately, due to COVID-19, the 
current governmental policy was not unprecedentedly stable, despite the possibility 
of increased impacts of disposal of masks and gloves on the aquatic and terrestrial 
ecosystem. Another trash crisis may come from the burden of small waste selection 
and recycling businesses due to the rise of minimum wage. Even so, according to 
the 2050 Declaration of Carbon Neutrality, the transition to a ‘post-plastic society’ 
remains in full swing. The government has established measures to reduce plastic 
generation over the entire cycle, such as reducing plastic use by 20% by 2025 and 
increasing the current recycling rate of waste plastic from 54% to 70%. At the same 
time, the importation of plastic waste from abroad is completely proscribed from 
2022 (Lee, Dec. 24, 2020). 
It is stressed that for Korea to dispel the stigma of being the world’s worst 
plastic abuse nation, public awareness of reducing plastic use should be improved. 
The campaign to reduce the use of disposable plastic has been conducted at the 
national level since 2018. After all, if humans cannot live without discharging trash, 
they have to live with it. However, it has to first establish and enforce regulations 
that promote appropriate methods of waste segregation. Companies will change 
only when consumers strengthen their civic awareness and lifestyle through proper 
separate discharge education and speak out based on this fact. 
In addition to the importance of segregating individual wastes, the advancement 
of corporate plastic recycling technology is of paramount importance. In fact, the 
lack of sharp countermeasures is even more problematic, and it must be solved for 
the next generation. Although measures such as the regulation of disposable products 
around the world were already at hand, these cannot be the fundamental solution to 
plastic pollution. To solve plastic contamination fundamentally, disposable plastics 
must be reduced from the production stage with a certain responsibility. In addition, 
to promote the use of recycled raw materials, the Ministry of Environment decided 
to reduce producer-responsible recycling contribution in a proportion to the amount 
of recycled raw materials used by producers. Urging improvement of the material 
of containers and packaging considering recycling at the production stage; practical 
regulation is needed. It would be mandatory for local governments to purchase more 
than a certain percentage of recycled products made from recycled raw materials. 
Lastly, the central government’s coordination and integration of waste-related work 
between ministries, as well as institutional support for plastic recycling, is very 
crucial as this is most effective when combined with individual incentives. 
Acknowledgment 
This work was supported by National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded 
by the Korean Government (NRF-2021S1A5A2A01068565). 188 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
References 
Choi, Byeongseong, “Terrible oyster farm. It must be like this”, Ohmynews, December 21, 2020. 
EUROMAP. 2016. Plastics Resin Production and Consumption in 63 Countries Worldwide. 
Han, Sol, “13,000 tons of waste are left in the mountains behind the village... “Only 4 billion won in 
processing costs”, KBS, December 21, 2020. 
Heo Dong-jun, “Disposable products that became essential for quarantine...US-Europe also postponed 
‘plastic regulation’”, Dong-A Ilbo, July 22, 2020. 
Heo, N.W., Hong, S.H., Han, G.M., Hong, S., Lee, J., Song, Y.K., Jang, M. and Shim,W.J. 2013. 
“Distribution of Small Plastic Debris in Cross-section and High Strandline on Heungnam beach, 
South Korea.” Ocean Sci. J. 48: 225–233. 
Hong, S., Lee, J. and Lee, J. 2020. Understanding of Floating Marine Litter Sources and Flows in the 
NOWPAP Region. NOWPAP MERRAC. Sinkwangsa. 
Hong, Suyeol. 2018. “T-he ‘Garbage Disruption’, which became an opportunity for telephone upset,” 
World and City, pp. 18–27. (in Korean) 
Hyuck Jun Kwon, “’Deplastic society’ in earnest… 20% reduction in plastics by 2025”, News1 December 
24, 2020. 
Kim, Hyeong Jong, “Korea’s plastic usage is ‘notorious’, nowhere to bury,” Hankookilbo, January 5, 
2021. 
Kim, Jeongyeon. “Get rid of all the nationwide garbage mountains this year... Strengthen punishment for 
illegal emitters.” Daily Joongang August 6, 2019 
Kim Joo-hyun, “Sushi was delivered, so full of plastic...the trash attack”, Money Today, September 15, 
2020. 
KIOST. 2015. A Study on Pollution of Coastal Environment by Microplastics, Ansan: Korea Ocean 
Science Technology. 
KIOST. 2017. Research on Food Safety Management for Micro-Plastics. (in Korean) 
Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology. 2015. A Study on Pollution of Coastal Environment by 
Microplastics, Ansan: Korea Ocean Science Technology. 
Kwon Jin-kyung, “The ‘garbage mountain’ that became a laugh...Rejected Korean plastic, why?”, KBS, 
July 12, Collection of archival materials of the World Cup Park," Seoul Culture Today June 4, 2020. 
Korean Ministry of Environment. 2020. 2019 National Waste Generation and Disposal Status. 
Lee, Chenga. "The disposal cost of 54 garbage mountains is 33.7 billion won.The innocent landowners 
took on their shoulders." Donga-ilbo. Dec. 9, 2022. “Limits and Implications of Waste Plastics 
Management Policy.” Issue and Diagnosis, No.368, Korea Economic Research Institute. (in Korean) 
Lee, Jeong-Yong, “Incheon City, Garbage Independence’s ‘Signal Bullet’ Shot”, Sisa Journal, No. 1625, 
December 5, 2020. 
Lee, Jongmyung. 2018. “Marine waste status and countermeasures.” Beach usage culture improvement 
discussion, Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries, Marine Environment Corporation. (in Korean)
 
Lee, Seok-hyung, “‘Deplastic society’ in earnest… 20% reduction in plastics by 2025”, News1, December 
24, 2020. 
Lim, Jin-hee. “The story of Uiseong people groaning in the garbage mountain < 2019 New Plastic 
Report>”, CBS Nocut News, June 3, 2019. 
Lim So-Hyun, “[Corona trash trash ②] I ordered food for delivery… Disposable Bomb”, New Daily 
Economy, September 15, 2020. 
Marine Innovation, “Plastic Waste, it is OK?,” https://100up.kakaoimpact.org/problems/49/view (Search: 
Jan, 20, 2021). 
Moon, Dongseong. “Putting on a ganster and throwing it away…’national waste disposal cost of 100 
billion won’” Kookmin-ilbo October 29, 2020. 
Nam, Soo-hyun, “You say you can’t separate disposable forks? As it is, a bigger crisis than the ‘garbage 
catastrophe’ two years ago”, JoongAng Ilbo, November 11, 2020. 
NOWPAP MERRAC. 2017. Understanding of Floating Marine Litter Distribution in the NOWPAP 
Region, Sinkwangsa. 
Park, Young-min. “China, prohibits the entire import of solid waste. Increased possibility of domestic 
waste paper supply excess”, GDnet Korea, December 18, 2020. Forging Plastic Litter Governance 189 
Park, Young-gyu and Kim, Gwang-seok, “Checking the route of movement to the Cheonryan Satellite”. 
KIOST, Confirming the inflow of water waste from North Korea and China to the East Sea, Korea 
Institute of Ocean Science and Technology, November 4, 2016. 
Pyo, Joo-Yeon. “[Attack on the continent ③] Marine debris from China, destroys the clean waters of the 
west and south seas,” Newsis, March 30, 2016. 
Shim, Won-jun. 2019. “Plastic environmental pollution.” 2019 KRIBB Issue Conference, April 2. 
Song, Y.K., Hong, S.H., Jang, M., Han, G.M. and Shim, W.J. 2015. “Occurrence andDistribution of 
Micro-plastics in the Sea Surface Microlayer.” in Jinhae Bay, South Korea. Arch. Environ. Contam. 
Toxicol. 69: 279–287. <Newspaper and broadcasting articles in Korean> “[Land of garbage] ④ How 
did we become ‘garbage Korea’?,” KBS News, April 3, 2019. 
The disposal cost of 54 garbage mountains is 33.7 billion won. The innocent landowners took on their 
shoulders." Donga-ilbo. Dec. 9, 2022. Chapter 13 
The Role of International Water 
Law in the Management of Marine 
Plastic Pollution
 The Case of China and Its Transboundary Rivers 
David J. Devlaeminck 
INTRODUCTION 
After establishing increasingly strict regulations regarding the import of plastics, 
China enacted a partial ban on the import of various kinds of plastic waste in 2018. 
As of January 1, 2021, China enacted a full ban on solid waste imports (Global Trade, 
2021), and pledged to cut single-use plastics in the coming years (Xinhua, 2020). This 
ban sent shock waves through the global recycling industry, resulting in pile up of 
plastic waste in states around the world and even the halting of some local recycling 
programs (Semuels, 2019). Recyclables began piling up in plastic-exporting states 
as plastic importing states began to experience a rapid and drastic increase in imports 
of plastic waste (Agence France-Presse, 2019). While states around the world have 
struggled to cope, China’s ban also acted as a catalyst, forcing plastic exporting states 
to rethink their plastic waste programs and enact their own policies regarding the import 
of plastics (Nguyen, 2020). While this has certainly shaken the industry, widespread 
use of disposable plastics remains the norm (at least for now). Since the development 
of plastics in the 1950s, the world has produced approximately 8.3 billion tonnes of 
plastic, producing around 300 million tonnes annually today (UNEP, 2020). Only 
9% of this waste has been recycled, while 79% ends up in landfills, dumps, and the 
environment, with roughly 8 million tonnes ending up in the world’s oceans every 
year (UNEP, 2020). As of 2015, it was estimated that there were approximately 150 
million tonnes of plastic waste in the world’s oceans. If no action is taken, this will 
School of Law, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China. 
Email: djdevlaeminck@cqu.edu.cn International Water Law and Marine Plastics 191 
rise to 600 million tonnes by 2040 (Parker, 2020). If the trend continues, there could 
be more plastic than fish in our oceans by 2050 (UNEP, 2020). 
Although these plastics are in the world’s oceans, a recent study indicates 
that 88–94% of marine plastics come from land-based sources. These plastics are 
carried by rivers into the ocean, and 90% of the ocean’s plastic waste is carried by 10 
rivers, including the Amur-Heilong (38,267 tonnes), Brahmaputra-Ganges-Meghna￾Yaluzangbu (72,845 tonnes), Hai (91,858 tonnes), Indus (164,332 tonnes), Lancang￾Mekong (33,431 tonnes), Niger (35,196 tonnes), Nile (84,792 tonnes), Pearl (52,958 
tonnes), Yangtze (1,469,481 tonnes), and Yellow (124,249 tonnes) rivers (Schmidt 
et al., 2017; UNEP, 2020). Of these 10 river systems, eight are in Asia, including 
the Amur-Heilong, Brahmaputra-Ganges-Meghna-Yaluzangbu, Hai, Indus, Pearl, 
Lancang-Mekong, Yangtze, and the Yellow River. A common riparian state amongst 
all of these rivers is China. Whereas the Hai, Pearl, Yangtze, and the Yellow Rivers 
are domestic rivers fully within China’s territory and therefore are not governed by 
international law; the Amur-Heilong, Brahmaputra-Ganges-Meghna-Yaluzangbu, 
Indus, and Lancang-Mekong are transboundary, shared between China and 11 riparian 
states (Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Laos, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, 
Russia, Thailand, and Vietnam). Although China’s domestic rivers are a large source 
of marine plastics themselves, this is not to say that China is a major contributor to 
plastic pollution in its transboundary rivers. Instead, this chapter will argue that as 
a growing power, regional leader and common riparian, China has the potential to 
play a leading role in promoting regional and global cooperation to combat marine 
plastics. Given the nature of the world’s oceans beyond state jurisdiction as a global 
commons and that a major source of marine plastics is rivers, resolving this issue 
will require significant global and regional cooperation and coordination across all 
levels, including state-state cooperation. 
While there are certainly a variety of technical solutions available to us (Nikiema 
et al., 2020), international law can provide a framework for state-state cooperation 
and coordination in regard to global and regional problems. Although international 
lawyers highlighted the issue of marine plastic pollution in the 1990s (Nollkaemper, 
1993), it has only received greater scholarly attention over the past few years.1 
Although efforts are underway to establish a binding global plastics treaty (UNEP, 
2022),2
 international law governing marine plastics, like international environmental 
law generally, is significantly fragmented. However, in regard to marine plastics 
entering the oceans from rivers, there are two areas of international law that are 
of particular relevance, the law of the sea codified through the United Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea (LOSC,1982a), and the law of international 
watercourses, codified in the two global water conventions—UNECE Convention 
on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes 
1 For example, a special issue on the subject of “Plastics Regulation” was published in the Review of 
European Comparative and International Environmental Law, 27(3) (2018). 
2 In March 2022, states adopted a UNEP resolution where they committed to working towards an 
international plastics treaty. The draft is expected to be complete by 2025 (UNEP, 2022). Although the 
draft may be complete at that time, it is yet to be seen how quickly the treaty can achieve the required 
number of ratifications and enter into force. 192 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
(Water Convention, 1992a) and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the 
Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses (Watercourses Convention, 
1997a). 
This chapter seeks to explore the role of international law in the governance 
of transboundary rivers as a source of marine plastics with an emphasis on the law 
of the sea, the law of international watercourses, and China’s governance of its 
transboundary rivers. China and almost all of its riparian neighbours are party to 
the LOSC (1982a) and therefore bound by its provisions; however, of all the states 
on the four aforementioned rivers, only Russia and Vietnam are party to either of 
the global water conventions. While the global water conventions have limited state 
parties in Asia, China has established a series of binding bilateral agreements and 
various non-binding instruments with other nations through which it seeks to jointly 
govern its transboundary rivers. Although these agreements do not directly mention 
marine plastics or the marine environment, they may offer basic frameworks that 
can be further elaborated upon and progressively developed by the parties. Thus, 
the chapter will first unpack the role of international law in managing rivers as a 
source of marine plastics through the law of the sea and the law of international 
watercourses. It will then explore regimes related to the joint governance of China’s 
transboundary rivers, highlighting the role of current legal regimes in the region and 
(often large) gaps in their application to marine plastics. A focus on China’s treaties 
does not provide a complete picture of the governance mechanisms in place on all of 
these rivers, however it can highlight opportunities for China to take a leading role in 
the fight against marine plastics. 
The Regulation of Rivers as Sources of Marine Plastics Under 
International Law 
The international legal regime related to the protection of the environment has been 
notably fragmented, consisting of a series of overlapping sub-regimes at the global 
and regional levels (Koivurova, 2014). In regards to rivers as a source of marine 
plastics, there are a series of rules across sub-regimes of international environmental 
law that may apply, most notably the law of the sea and the law of international 
watercourses. Although they may apply to the issue of marine plastics, provisions 
are often vague in their application to rivers. The LOSC (1982a) sets out a series of 
obligations across a wide range of issues, including territorial delimitation, transit, 
economic rights, resource development, and environmental protection among many 
others. Part XII, Protection and Preservation of the Marine Environment, includes 
a series of obligations related to the protection of the marine environment. Article 
194 requires all states to “take, individually or jointly as appropriate, all measures 
consistent with this Convention that are necessary to prevent, reduce and control 
pollution of the marine environment from any source, using for this purpose the best 
practicable means at their disposal and in accordance with their capabilities […]” 
(LOSC, 1982a). 
While plastic pollution is not specifically mentioned, the provision indicates that 
these measures “shall deal with all sources of pollution of the marine environment” International Water Law and Marine Plastics 193 
and “shall include, inter alia […]”;3
 measures meant to minimize “the release of 
toxic, harmful or noxious substances, especially those which are persistent, from 
land-based sources, from or through the atmosphere or by dumping” (LOSC, 1982a, 
Art. 194(1)). Section 5, International Rules and National Legislation to Prevent, 
Reduce and Control Pollution of the Marine Environment, even goes on to include 
select provisions that address this issue directly (LOSC, 1982a, Sect. 5). In regards 
to land-based sources of pollution, Article 207 obligates states to take a series of 
measures to prevent, reduce and control land-based sources of pollution and “adopt 
laws and regulations […] taking into account internationally agreed rules, standards 
and recommended practices and procedures” (LOSC, 1982a, Art. 207(1)), “take 
other measures as may be necessary” (LOSC, 1982a, Art. 207(2)), to “endeavour to 
harmonize their policies in this connection at the appropriate regional level” (LOSC, 
1982a Art. 207(3)), and “endeavour to establish global and regional rules, standards 
and recommended practices and procedures […] taking into account characteristics 
of regional features, the economic capacity of developing States and their need for 
economic development” (LOSC, 1982a, Art. 207(4)). Article 213 further obliges 
states to “enforce their laws and regulations adopted in accordance with article 207” 
and to adopt rules and regulations so as to implement other relevant international 
rules “through competent international organizations or diplomatic conferences” 
(LOSC, 1982a, Art. 213). While this broad approach recognizes the “complexity of 
[land-based sources of pollution]” and the “range and diversity of legal approaches 
required to address it”, it is also admittedly vague and unclear (McIntyre, 2020). 
Another area of international environmental law relevant to marine plastics 
from rivers is the law of international watercourses. This area of international law 
seeks to provide “an identifiable corpus of rules of treaty and customary law that 
determine the legality of State actions with respect to water resources that cross 
national boundaries” (Wouters, 2013), and has been codified and progressively 
developed in the Water Convention (1992) and Watercourses Convention (1997). 
Whereas the scope of the Watercourses Convention does not explicitly mention the 
connection between rivers and marine ecosystems in its definition of an international 
watercourse, the preamble of the Water Convention notes that rivers can act as a source 
of pollution for the marine environment (Water Convention, 1992a, preamble; Finska 
and Howden, 2018).These conventions are founded upon two substantive rules, i.e., 
the principle of equitable and reasonable utilization and the due diligence obligation 
not to cause significant harm. While they are the centrepiece of international water 
law, these rules remain largely unhelpful for the management of land-based sources 
of pollution. As codified in the Watercourses Convention, states are to “utilize an 
international watercourse in an equitable and reasonable manner” and “with a view 
to attaining optimal and sustainable utilization thereof and benefits therefrom” 
(Watercourses Convention, Watercourses Convention, 1997a, Art. 6). The Water 
Convention more strongly emphasizes pollution prevention, and it too includes the 
principle of equitable and reasonable utilization, obligating all states to “ensure 
that transboundary waters are used in a reasonable and equitable way, taking into 
particular account their transboundary character, in the case of activities which cause 
or are likely to cause transboundary impact” (Water Convention, 1992a, Art. 2(2c)). 
3 The phrase inter alia means among others. 194 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
In achieving equitable and reasonable utilization, states are to take into consideration 
as a whole a series of factors (Watercourses Convention, 1997a; Tanzi, 2015).
4 
While these factors include “the effects of the use or uses of the watercourses in one 
watercourse State on other watercourse States” (Watercourses Convention, 1997a, 
Art. 6), the provision is largely unhelpful as it is targeted at specific utilizations 
of shared water resources and their potential effects, not pollution in general. 
Furthermore, the balancing of interests that it requires does not include the protection 
of the marine environment, nor does it take into consideration the interests of coastal 
states, even if those states are riparian states (Nollkaemper, 1993). The due diligence 
obligation not to cause significant harm requires that all “watercourses States shall, 
in utilizing an international watercourse in their territories, take all appropriate 
measures to prevent the causing of significant harm to other watercourse States” 
(Watercourses Convention, 1997a, Art. 7). Although plastic pollution in rivers may 
be recognized as “harm”, for it to fall under Article 7 the harm in question must 
be considered “significant”. This entails that the harm must be “capable of being 
established by objective evidence,” and that there must be “a real impairment of 
use”, including a “detrimental impact of some consequence upon, for example, 
public health, industry, property, agriculture or the environment in the affected State” 
(ILC, 1988, page 36). While marine plastics have been shown to impact marine life 
(Gall and Thompson, 2015), this impact falls beyond the scope of international water 
law as it occurs in the marine environment. Recent research has begun to dive into 
the effects of plastic pollution on riverine ecosystems, illustrating its toxic effects, 
hazards for marine life, and even harm to livelihoods (Emmerik and Schwarz, 
2019). However, it will be difficult to argue that this falls under the due diligence 
obligation not to cause significant harm as it may be impossible to point to a specific 
utilization of the watercourse that is causing said plastic pollution. Some forms of 
harm, however, can be recognized as “per se unreasonable”, and these may include 
those that endanger human health or those that cause irreparable and long-lasting 
harm (McCaffrey, 2019). 
Given the lack of clarity in applying the two primary rules of the law of 
international watercourses to the issue of marine plastics, it is best to look to other 
provisions for potential legal avenues. Article 23 of the Watercourses Convention, 
Protection and preservation of the marine environment, requires States to “take all 
measures with respect to an international watercourse that are necessary to protect and 
preserve the marine environment, including estuaries, taking into account generally 
accepted international rules and standards” (Watercourses Convention, 1997a). 
Whereas the aforementioned due diligence obligation not to cause significant harm 
is limited to the prevention of harm to other watercourse States, Article 23, based on 
the common interest of states, is not limited as such and provides a “duty to manage 
the watercourse in a manner that does not harm” the marine environment (Finska 
and Howden, 2018, page 248; also see McIntyre, 2020). The Water Convention also 
includes provisions that directly relate to the protection of the marine environment, 
4 This list of factors to take into consideration is found in Article 6, Watercourses Convention. The Water 
Convention does not contain such a list; however, interpretative guides of the Water Convention point to 
the list of factors found in the Watercourses Convention (UNECE, 2013). International Water Law and Marine Plastics 195 
such as Article 2(2a) which obligates states to “prevent, control and reduce pollution 
of waters”. This could be applied to coastal states, as Article 9(4) clearly provides 
riparian states with an obligation to cooperate with coastal states so as to reduce 
transboundary impact (Water Convention, 1992a; Finska and Howden, 2018). 
Beside these binding agreements, there are a series of soft law instruments that 
can guide cooperation among states. Soft law includes non-binding instruments that, 
although they do contain commitments made by States, are non-binding and not readily 
enforceable via dispute settlement mechanisms (Boyle, 1999; Guzman and Meyer, 
2010; Thürer, 2009). Such non-binding instruments have played a significant role in 
the development of international environmental law, have often acted as a precursor 
to more binding agreements and serve as guidance for current practice (Dupuy, 1990). 
In regards to rivers as a source of marine plastics, the Global Programme of Action 
for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-Based Activities (1995) is 
most notable. Aiming to “prevent the degradation of the marine environment from 
land-based activities by facilitating the realization of the duty of States to preserve 
and protect the marine environment”, the Plan of Action sets out a series of national, 
regional, and international recommendations to “establish and strengthen voluntary 
multi-stakeholder action such key sectoral issues”, such as radioactive substances, 
persistent organic pollutants, heavy metals, and litter, among others (McIntyre, 
2020, page 285). Furthermore, it clearly recognizes the interconnectivity between 
rivers and the marine environments and, in relation to litter, their role in transporting 
plastic pollution to marine and coastal environments (UNEP, 1995). This connection 
between marine plastics and land-based sources has been echoed in more recent soft 
law instruments and related initiatives at the United Nations, such as the Sustainable 
Development Goals, a set of 17 goals and 169 targets for global development that 
all states will jointly and individually work towards (UNGA, 2016). Through Goal 
Number 14, all states have pledged to “conserve and sustainably use the oceans, 
seas and marine resources for sustainable development”. Through Target 14.1, states 
pledge that “by 2025, [they would] prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution 
of all kinds, in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and 
nutrient pollution” (UNGA, 2016). States have also pledged to follow up, review, 
and report the progress in regards to the SDGs (para. 47) and indicators have been 
established with Target 14.1 progress being determined by “plastic debris density” 
monitoring parameters which use earth observation and modelling data, national data 
from all states, and other additional indicators. While the parameters are related to 
plastics in the marine environment, “river litter” is also included (UNEP, 2021).5 
Marine Plastics in China’s Transboundary Water 
Agreements and Instruments
 
While the aforementioned global conventions can enable and facilitate cooperation 
on marine plastics to a degree, they have limited parties on the four rivers that 
5	 It should be noted that “river litter” as a monitoring parameter is not clearly defined. As an “additional 
indicator”, the Manual does not elaborate on it further (UNEP, 2021). 196 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
are studied here (see Table 1). Eleven of the 12 aforementioned riparian states 
(Bangladesh, China, India, Laos, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Russia, 
Thailand, and Vietnam) are party to the LOSC.6
 However, only Russia is party to the 
Water Convention and only Vietnam is party to the Watercourses Convention. While 
all remain bound by the substantive rules of equitable and reasonable utilization and 
the due diligence obligation not to cause significant harm as customary international 
law, non-party China and its neighbours are not bound by these agreements. 
Furthermore, even those states that are bound (Russia and Vietnam), are only bound 
in their relations with other parties to the conventions (VCLT, 1969, Art. 34).
7
 Thus, 
their impact is limited until other states in the region acede. There are, however, a 
series of binding agreements and non-binding instruments through which China and 
its neighbours jointly manage their transboundary water resources, which may assist 
in managing sources of plastic pollution from these rivers. While at present there are 
no agreements that involve China on the Indus, there are binding bilateral agreements 
with states on China’s northeast, i.e., Amur-Heilong River which is shared among 
China, Mongolia, and Russia; there are also various soft law arrangements with 
the states on China’s southwest, especially on the Brahmaputra-Ganges-Meghna￾Yaluzangbu,which is shared among Bangladesh, China, India, and Nepal, and the 
Lancang-Mekong that is shared among Cambodia, China, Laos, Myanmar, Thailand, 
and Vietnam (see Table 2). Treaties are to be interpreted “in good faith in accordance 
Table 1. State Parties to the LOSC, Water Convention and Watercourses Convention Among the Riparian 
States Studied Here (Water Convention, 1992b; Watercourses Convention, 1997b; LOSC, 1982b). 
Convention on the Law of 
the Sea (1982) 
Water Convention 
(1992) 
Watercourses Convention 
(1997) 
Bangladesh ü
Cambodia * 
China ü
India ü
Laos ü
Mongolia ü
Myanmar ü
Nepal ü
Pakistan ü
Russia ü ü
Thailand ü
Vietnam ü ü
*Cambodia signed but has not yet ratified the LOSC. It is therefore not obligated by the provisions of 
the Convention but shall not frustrate its purpose (VCLT, 1969). 
6	 It is interesting to note that Laos, Mongolia, and Nepal are parties to the LOSC, even though they are 
landlocked states. This makes the obligations of LOSC (Section 5) particularly relevant for them. 
7	 For an exploration of this issue in the context of international water law, see Spijkers and Devlaeminck 
(2021). International Water Law and Marine Plastics 197 
Table 2. A Selection of Relevant Binding and Non-Binding Instruments on the Rivers Studied Here. 
River Basin States Document 
Amur-Heilong China, Mongolia, and 
Russia 
1994 China-Mongolia Agreement on Protection 
and Utilization of Boundary Waters 
1995 Agreement on the Establishment of the 
Consultative Commission for the Development 
of the Tumen River Economic Development Area 
and Northeast Asia 
1995 Memorandum of Understanding on 
Environmental Principles Governing the Tumen 
River Economic Development Area and Northeast 
Asia 
2001 China-Russia Treaty on Good 
Neighbourliness 
2008 China-Russia Agreement on Management 
and Protection of Transboundary Waters 
Brahmaputra￾Ganges-Meghna￾Yaluzangbu 
Bangladesh, China, India, 
and Nepal 
1993 China-India Agreement on Environmental 
Cooperation 
2006 China-India Joint Declaration 
Indus China, India, andPakistan 
Lancang-Mekong Cambodia, China, Laos, 
Myanmar, Thailand, and 
Vietnam 
1995 Agreement on the Cooperation for the 
Sustainable Development of the Mekong River 
Basin 
2016 Sanya Declaration of the First Lancang￾Mekong Cooperation (LMC) Leaders’ Meeting 
2018 Phnom Penh Declaration of the Second 
Lancang-Mekong Cooperation (LMC) Leaders’ 
Meeting 
2020 Vientiane Declaration of the Third Mekong￾Lancang Cooperation (MLC) Leader’s Meeting 
with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and 
in light of its object and purpose” (VCLT, 1969, Art. 31(1)). These agreements are 
admittedly vague and do not include provisions that directly address plastic pollution. 
However, the seriousness of the issue and the fact that these rivers are major sources 
of marine plastics provide an opportunity for the progressive development of these 
agreements via subsequent agreements, practices, or relevant rules of international 
law (VCLT, 1969, Art. 31(3)) and even soft law instruments, which can assist in 
solidifying consensus on best practice (Shelton, 2009). Adopting such an approach 
would provide China with an opportunity to update and align these agreements 
with existing instruments and practices, such as that of the LOSC, the global water 
conventions, the Global Programme of Action, and SDGs, among others. 
The Amur-Heilong river: Binding agreements 
Although China is not a party to either of the global water conventions, its 
transboundary water treaty practice incorporates both equitable and reasonable 
use and the due diligence obligation not to cause significant harm (Wouters and  
 
198 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Chen, 2013) among its other provisions. This is most apparent in the Amur-Heilong 
river, which is shared among China, Mongolia, and Russia where multiple binding 
agreements are in force. As earlier discussed, these substantive rules may be 
unhelpful in the management of marine plastics; however, these same rules in China’s 
transboundary water agreements offer a broad and often unspecified scope which 
may cover riverine plastic pollution. Article 2 of the China-Mongolia Agreement on 
the Protection and Utilization of Transboundary Waters (1994) provides that “for 
the purpose of protection and equitable and rational use of transboundary waters”, 
the parties shall cooperate in investigating and surveying boundary water quality, 
monitoring, and reduction of pollution among other actions (China-Mongolia, 
1994). The China-Russia Treaty on Good Neighbourliness (2001) also incorporates 
equitable and reasonable utilization, indicating that China and Russia “shall carry 
out cooperation in the protection and improvement of the environment, prevention of 
cross-border pollution, the fair and rational use of water resources along the border 
areas” among other areas of cooperation (China-Russia, 2001). Whereas some 
agreements, such as the China-Russia Water Agreement (2008), limit this obligation 
to the threshold of “significant harm” (Vinogradov and Wouters, 2013), others take 
a broader approach. The China-Mongolia Agreement (1994), for example, requires 
that the parties “should jointly protect the ecological system of the transboundary 
waters and develop and utilize transboundary waters in a way that should not be 
detrimental to the other side” (China-Mongolia, 1994). While these provisions do not 
explicitly mention plastic pollution or the marine environment, given their broad and 
undefined scope they could facilitate cooperation on riverine and marine plastics. 
Marine plastics do not necessarily fall outside of their scope, and they could assist 
in limiting plastic pollution if the parties were to interpret them to do so. Terms 
such as detrimental to the other side, pollution, protection and improvement of the 
environment, and transboundary impact, for example, require further development 
and exploration by the parties. 
Apart from the substantive rules, there are also a series of procedurally oriented 
environmental obligations that could guide action on plastic pollution. For example, 
the China-Russia Agreement (2008) indicates that in order to protect and use the shared 
freshwater resources, the parties should cooperate in a series of issue areas [Art. 2(1)]. 
In regards to pollution, the parties are to conduct joint research and identify sources 
of pollution and take measures to control and reduce their transboundary impact [Art. 
2(16)] (Vinogradov and Wouters, 2013). The China-Mongolia Agreement (1994) 
also provides for a series of obligations, including monitoring of pollution and water 
quality levels (Art. 2(4) and 3(1)). It also obligates the parties to “take measures to 
prevent, mitigate and eliminate the possible damage to the quality, resources and 
natural dynamics of the transboundary waters and aquatic animals and plants caused 
by natural or human factors” (China-Mongolia, 1994, Art. 6). While the provision 
lists “flood, ice run and industrial accidents”, as examples, it is not limited to these 
instances (China-Mongolia, 1994). Both agreements establish a joint body, the China￾Mongolia Joint Committee on Transboundary Waters (China-Mongolia, 1994) and 
the China-Russia Joint Working Group (Vinogradov and Wouters, 2013), which 
could act as a focal point of discussion on marine plastics, assist in implementation, 
and work to progressively develop these agreements. International Water Law and Marine Plastics 199 
Besides these transboundary water agreements, there are other cooperative 
institutions that have been established via a legal agreement that encompasses the 
shared watercourse. The Greater Tumen Initiative, first established in 1991 under 
the United Nations Development Program as the Tumen River Area Development 
Program, seeks to establish “their common interests” and “increase mutual 
benefits, to strengthen economic and technical cooperation, and to attain greater 
growth and sustainable development” for the states involved. It later evolved into 
the Greater Tumen Initiative in 2005 (Lee et al., 2019). While the Tumen River is 
only shared among North Korea, China, and Russia, the Greater Tumen Initiative 
includes Mongolia and South Korea as part of the region in which the parties will 
cooperate and enact projects and programmes for joint development (GTI, 1995a). 
The Agreement on the Establishment of the Consultative Commission for the 
Development of the Tumen River Economic Development Area and Northeast Asia 
(1995) indicates that parties “shall implement the Agreement on the basis of the 
international law governing relations between States” (GTI, 1995a), highlighting the 
importance of relevant international law, such as the LOSC, the Water Convention 
which Russia is a party to, and various other bilateral agreements. It also provides 
for the establishment of a commission (GTI, 1995a). In order to “attain growth and 
sustainable development” (GTI, 1995a), the member States have established the 
Memorandum of Understanding on Environmental Principles (1995). Although it 
is non-binding, states have pledged to jointly establish “environmental mitigation 
and management plan[s]” (GTI, 1995b). These plans are to include measures for the 
protection of: 
Land resources, particularly wetlands, fragile coastal areas, forests and sensitive 
ecosystems; preservation of biodiversity, including threatened or endangered species 
and their habitats; […] protection and improvement of water quality; protection of 
the marine environment and marine living resources; sound disposal, management, 
treatment and movement of hazardous and solid wastes; […] and monitoring of 
pollution and environmental conditions (GTI, 1995b). 
Similar to the Tumen Agreement, it also reaffirms the importance of international 
law and various multilateral agreements; although none are specifically mentioned 
(GTI, 1995b). Furthermore, the parties meet annually and release a declaration (GTI, 
2021), providing an opportunity to refine and perhaps redirect their cooperation to 
emerging issues. 
The Indus, Brahmaputra-Ganges-Meghna-Yaluzangbu and the 
Lancang-Mekong: Non-binding instruments 
While China has agreements in its northeast, elsewhere cooperation is not facilitated 
through legally binding agreements. Although China does not have any agreements 
or instruments regarding the Indus River shared with India and Pakistan, China 
has established a series of soft law instruments that guide its cooperation on the 
Brahmaputra-Ganges-Meghna-Yaluzangbu and the Lancang-Mekong. In the 
Brahmaputra-Ganges-Meghna-Yaluzangbu, China has signed various soft law 
declarations with India. These instruments, however, are incredibly broad in scope 
covering nearly every area of cooperation between the two states. The China-India 200 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Agreement on Environmental Cooperation (1994), however, includes pledges to 
cooperate on global environmental issues, including pollution control and “any 
other areas that may be agreed upon by the parties” (China-India, 1993). As this 
cooperation has unfolded, the two states have signed a series of declarations on 
various issues, some of which reaffirm their commitment to cooperation. The China￾India Joint Declaration (2006), for example, provides that these two states will 
have regular consultations on various issues, including environmental degradation 
(China-India, 2006). There are, however, no relevant agreements with Bangladesh 
or Nepal. Whereas soft law cooperation with China and its Brahmaputra-Ganges￾Meghna-Yaluzangbu riparians is limited, China has taken the lead in cooperation in 
the Lancang-Mekong. The four lower riparians of the Lancang-Mekong (Cambodia, 
Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam) are parties to the Agreement on the Cooperation for 
the Sustainable Development of the Mekong River Basin (1995) which established 
the Mekong River commission (MRC) (Mekong Agreement, 1995). China and 
Myanmar, however, are not parties. While the MRC has taken notice of the plastic 
pollution issue in the Lancang-Mekong by initiating a review of the issue of plastic 
pollution and regional legal and institutional frameworks as part of a project with 
the United Nations Environment Programme (MRC, 2020), China is not bound by 
the Agreement and is unlikely to play a major role in this process. Although China 
remains bound by customary law on these rivers, it also has sought to establish 
a series of soft law instruments, most notably the Lancang-Mekong Cooperation 
Mechanism (LMC). 
The LMC, established by China in 2015,8
 is a multilateral institution counting 
all Lancang-Mekong riparian states as members (Cambodia, China, Laos, Myanmar, 
Thailand, and Vietnam). While it is a non-binding regime which has been developed 
via a series of soft law instruments including declarations and joint communiqués, 
its broad scope and complete coverage of the basin can act to catalyze action on the 
issue of marine plastics. Similar to the Greater Tumen Initiative, the LMC recognizes 
and operates alongside the international legal obligations of its member states, as 
LMC documents consistently exhort “respect for the UN Charter and international 
laws” (LMC, 2016; 2018; 2020), recognizing existing legal frameworks in the 
region. The LMC offers a broad scope via its 3 + 5 approach, which works across 
three pillars: (i) political security, (ii) economy and sustainable development, and (iii) 
social and people-to-people and cultural exchange. There are also five priority areas: 
(i) connectivity, (ii) production capacity, (iii) cross-border economic cooperation, 
(iv) water resources, and (v) agriculture and poverty reduction (MFA, 2016).
9 
Such a broad scope may allow for a multi-pronged approach to combatting plastic 
pollution, offering a path for the reduction of plastic use, managing land-based 
sources of plastic, and mitigating plastic in the riverine environment. Even though 
LMC documents contain a strong emphasis on sustainability and environmentally 
conscious development, there is no mention of plastics or the marine environment. 
8 There are multiple dates that could be used as a starting point for the LMC. The LMC was first proposed 
in 2014, its first Foreign Minister’s Meeting was held in 2015, and the First Leader’s Meeting was held 
in 2016 (Devlaeminck, 2021). 9 For a complete discussion of the approach of the LMC, see Devlaeminck (2022).International Water Law and Marine Plastics 201 
Sustainable development is a common theme throughout LMC documents, including 
the Sanya Declaration of the First Leader’s Meeting and Phnom Penh Declaration 
of the Second Leader’s Meeting, both indicating that LMC states will take action 
to “promote green and sustainable development” (LMC 2016; 2018). While there 
is no mention of plastic pollution of the marine environment in any LMC water￾related document as of the end of 2021, given the softness of the mechanism it is 
certainly possible that it could develop in such a direction. The LMC provides a 
series of institutional arrangements in which it could do so, including bi-annual 
leaders meetings, annual foreign minister’s meetings, and working group meetings 
(MFA, 2016); each of which can act as a forum of discussion for the management 
of marine plastics on the Lancang-Mekong and reflect this in future declarations or 
communiqués. Furthermore, given the growing relationship between the MRC and 
LMC (for example, MRC-LMC, 2019), this may be an area of future collaboration 
while also ensuring that action on marine plastics takes place at the basin level. 
Conclusion: Legal Avenues for China in the Fight 
Against Marine Plastics
 
China is an incredibly important country in terms of Asia’s transboundary rivers 
and a common riparian on nearly all of the major rivers that transport plastics from 
land-based sources into the marine environment. However, given the remoteness of 
these transboundary rivers in its territory, it is not necessarily the case that China 
is a major contributor to marine plastics in these rivers. That being said, given 
China’s upstream position, its role as a regional (and increasingly global) power and 
its increasing engagement with international law, it can certainly play a larger role 
in combatting marine plastic pollution within its own borders and in coordination 
with its neighbours. China has illustrated that it is willing to take a leading role 
in international environmental issues, especially in environmental concerns such as 
climate change (Shen and Xie, 2019). Assuming a leadership role on the issue of 
marine plastics can provide a focal point for cooperation on China’s transboundary 
water resources while aligning its transboundary practice with its own domestic 
actions to control plastic pollution. It could also offer an opportunity for China to 
actualize its concept of “ecological community”, which seeks to transcend Western 
models of industrialization and establish a society that aspires to place sustainable 
development and co-existence with ecosystems at its core (Barresi, 2020; Corne 
and Zhu, 2020). In order to fully realize this, however, China will have to work 
closely with the international community and its riparian neighbours to close gaps in 
management both at the international and regional levels. 
At the global level, there is significant fragmentation in conventions that are 
meant to enable cooperation on marine plastics. While the LOSC has 168 parties 
(LOSC, 1982b) establishing near-global coverage, the two global water conventions 
have significantly fewer parties. At the time of writing, the Water Convention, now 
open globally for accession, has 47 parties (Watercourses Convention, 1997b), 
whereas the Watercourses Convention has 37 parties (Water Convention, 1997b). 
While almost all of the states on the four rivers studied here are party to the LOSC, 
only Russia and Vietnam are party to the global water conventions. 202 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
How might we overcome this gap? Further uptake of these legal norms is required 
for them to act as adequate frameworks for the reduction of marine plastics in the 
region and elsewhere. Some have suggested the establishment of a global plastics 
treaty, which would establish norms instead of relying on the fragmented nature and 
partial coverage of current international law applied to marine plastics (Keselica, 
2020; Kirk and Popattanachai, 2018). In 2022, the international community took a 
major step in this direction when states adopted a resolution at UNEP agreeing to 
initiate the drafting process of a binding convention on plastics, with completion 
of the draft by 2025 (UNEP, 2022). Such a treaty will “include both binding and 
voluntary approaches, based on a comprehensive approach that addresses the full 
lifecycle of plastic” (UNEP, 2022). At the time of writing the treaty appears to take 
the approach of the Paris Agreement, establishing basic objectives and allowing 
states to establish their own prevention, reduction, and elimination strategies (Kirk, 
2022). 
Regardless of its approach, this process could offer an opportunity to bridge 
fragmented international legal regimes related to marine plastics, including the Law 
of the Sea and the Law of International Watercourses. However, given that the large 
majority of marine plastics comes from land-based sources transported to marine 
environments by rivers, the discussions surrounding the drafting of a global plastics 
treaty are certain to overlap with discussions surrounding the norms of international 
water law. While both global water conventions are in force, they are not necessarily 
the most popular as mentioned earlier. China, a common riparian on rivers that are 
some of the largest sources of plastic pollution, was one of three states that voted 
against the adoption of the Watercourses Convention at the United Nations General 
Assembly in 1997 (UNGA, 1997). States, however, continue to be reluctant to adopt 
the package of norms provided by these conventions. This is evidenced by the 44 
years it took in the study, drafting, and ratification before it entered into force, as 
the Watercourses Convention was first suggested for study by the International 
Law Commission in 1970 (UNGA, 1970) with a draft being voted on at the United 
Nations in 1997 (UNGA, 1997) and further 17 years before it entered into force 
in 2014 (Watercourses Convention, 1997b). Given that rivers are a major source 
of marine plastics and that there will be significant overlap between the norms of 
international water law and a marine plastics treaty, the process of study, drafting, 
and entry into force required for any such treaty may require a similar length of time. 
Thus, while a binding convention is something that should be considered in the long 
term, in the short term we must continue to utilize this fragmented legal landscape. 
Although China voted against the Watercourses Convention at the United 
Nations, this does not mean that it opposes key norms of the Convention as China 
prefers to govern its transboundary waters via bilateral agreements which embody 
them (Wouters and Chen, 2013). For the joint management of these rivers, China 
has established a series of bilateral agreements with its neighbours in the northeast. 
While, as illustrated, these agreements are broad in scope and leave much to be 
defined and progressively developed by the parties, various aspects of them can 
be utilized to assist in reducing marine plastics, particularly provisions regarding 
monitoring, pollution reduction, and joint research to identify sources of pollution. 
However, given the vagueness of the terms used in provisions of these agreements, International Water Law and Marine Plastics 203 
such as equitable and reasonable utilization and the due diligence obligation not 
to cause significant harm, at least one of the parties would need to first raise the 
issue under the arrangement and seek agreement on its interpretation in light of their 
commitments under other agreements and customary international law. Given its 
domestic push to combat plastic pollution, China could link its transboundary and 
domestic practice and raise this issue with its bilateral treaty partners through the 
institutional bodies available to them. While this may not be within the scope of the 
treaties discussed here, soft law can play a role in overcoming this gap. 
Soft law has played an increasingly important role in the management of China’s 
transboundary waters and has particular benefits over binding legal regimes. While 
binding regimes can take significant time to draft and enter into force, soft law can 
be drafted and signed quickly as states are more willing to do so given its non￾binding nature. Furthermore, after signature, it is more malleable and therefore more 
easily and quickly amended (Boyle, 1999; Guzman and Meyer, 2010; Shelton, 2009; 
Thürer, 2009). With one soft law mechanism in place, the LMC and one hybrid 
regime, the Greater Tumen Initiative, soft law could act as a mechanism for quick 
action regarding plastic pollution as both contain various environmental norms, 
procedural aspects, and could be quickly amended. Although it is non-binding, this 
does not necessarily mean that states would not abide by their commitments, as states 
are compelled by both reciprocity and reputation (Guzman and Meyer, 2010). A soft 
law declaration in the Greater Tumen Initiative or one of the transboundary water 
commissions on the Amur could provide greater clarity on legal cooperation in China’s 
northeast. The same could be done in China’s southwest if the LMC States were to 
prioritize marine plastics as an issue of cooperation. Given the broad scope of the 
LMC, it seems an obvious fit and may even act as a pathway for cooperation between 
the MRC and LMC. On the Indus and Brahmaputra-Ganges-Meghna-Yaluzangbu, 
however, there are no relevant binding agreements or soft law instruments. However, 
here too soft law might be best, as ongoing border issues make reaching a binding 
agreement unlikely. A broad-scope and multilateral mechanism, like the LMC, has 
even been suggested as a potential pathway to greater cooperation in the region 
(Hu, 2016). Regardless of the path forward, binding or non-binding, global or 
regional, the issue of marine plastics is certain to haunt us for years to come. Given 
China’s increasing importance internationally and regionally, as well as its growing 
engagement on the global stage, it certainly can play a leading role in tackling this 
wicked problem. 
Acknowledgements 
The author would like to thank Professor Owen McIntyre and the editors of this 
collection for their insightful comments on an earlier draft of this chapter. 204 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
References 
Agence France-Presse (2019, 23 April). How China’s Ban on Plastic Waste Imports Became an 
“Earthquake” that Threw Recycling Efforts into Turmoil. South China Morning Post. Retrieved 
from https://www.scmp.com/news/china/politics/article/3007280/how-chinas-ban-plastic-waste￾imports-became-earthquake-threw 
Barresi, P.A. 2017. The Role of Law and the Rule of Law in China’s Quest to Build an Ecological 
Civilization. Chinese Journal of Environmental Law 1(1): 9–36. 
Boyle, A.E. 1999. Some Reflections on the Relationship of Treaties and Soft Law. International and 
Comparative Law Quarterly 48(4): 901–913. 
China-India. 1993. Agreement on Environmental Cooperation between the Government of the Republic 
of India and the Government of the People’s Republic of China (signed and entered into force 7 
September 1993). 
China-India. 2006. Joint Declaration by the Republic of India and the People’s Republic of China (signed 
21 November 2006). 
China-Mongolia. 1994. Agreement on the Protection and Utilization of Transboundary Waters (signed 29 
April 1994). 
China-Russia. 2001. Treaty of Good-Neighbourliness and Friendly Cooperation (signed 16 July 2001). 
Corne, P. and Zhu, V. 2020. Ecological Civilization and Dispute Resolution in the BRI. Chinese Journal 
of Environmental Law 4(2): 200–216. 
Devlaeminck, D.J. 2021. Timeline of the Lancang-Mekong Cooperation (LMC) Mechanism. Academia. 
edu. Retrieved from https://chongqing.academia.edu/DavidDevlaeminck 
Devlaeminck, D.J. 2022. Softness in the Law of International Watercourses: The (E)merging Normativities 
of China’s Lancang-Mekong Cooperation. Transnational Environmental Law 11(2): 357–380. 
Dupuy, P.M. 1990. Soft Law and the International Law of the Environment. Michigan Journal of 
International Law 12(2): 420–435. 
Emmerik, T.V. and Schwarz, A. 2019. Plastic Debris in Rivers. WIREs Water 7(1): 1–24. 
Finska, L. and Howden, J.G. 2018. Troubled Waters—Where is the Bridge? Confronting Marine Plastic 
Pollution from International Watercourses. Review of European Community and International 
Environmental Law 27(3): 245–253. 
Gall, S.C. and Thompson, R.C. 2015. The Impact of Debris on Marine Life. Marine Pollution Bulletin 
92(1–2): 170–179. 
Global Trade (2021, 5 June). China's Recent Ban on Solid Waste Imports to Shift Global Recovered Paper 
Market, Global Trade Magazine. Retried from https://www.globaltrademag.com/chinas-recent-ban￾on-solid-waste-imports-to-shift-global-recovered-paper-market/. 
GTI (Greater Tumen Initiative). 1995a. Agreement on the Establishment of the Consultative Commission 
for the Development of the Tumen River economic Development Area and Northeast Asia (signed 
30 May 1995). 
GTI 1995b. Memorandum of Understanding on Environmental Principles Governing the Tumen River 
Economic Development Area and Northeast Asia (signed 30 May 1995). 
GTI 2021. List of Documents. Retrieved from http://www.tumenprogramme.org/?list-1527.html 
Guzman, A.T. and Meyer, T.L. 2010. International Soft Law. Journal of Legal Analysis 2(1): 171–225. 
Hu, W. (2016, December 26). LMC can be used as example for China to handle transboundary river 
disputes. Global Times. Retrieved from https://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1025661.shtml 
ILC 1988. Report of the Commission to the General Assembly on the Work of its Fortieth Session (A/ 
CN.4/SER.A/1988/Add.1 (Part 2)). Yearbook of the International Law Commission, II. 
Keselica, T.G. 2020. Fish Don’t Litter in Your House: Is International Law the Solution to the Plastic 
Pollution Problem?. Pace International Law Review 33: 115–149. 
Kirk, E.A. and Popattanachai, N. 2018. Marine Plastics: Fragmentation, Effectiveness and Legitimacy in 
International Lawmaking. Review of European Community and International Environmental Law 
27(3): 222–233. 
Kirk, E. 2022. Four Reasons to be Hopeful About the Proposed Global Plastics Treaty. The Conversation. 
Retrieved from: https://theconversation.com/four-reasons-to-be-hopeful-about-the-planned-global￾plastics-treaty-178444 
Koivurova, T. 2014. Introduction to International Environmental Law. Abingdon/New York: Routledge. International Water Law and Marine Plastics 205 
Lee, S., Hong, I. and Chung, J. 2019. Transboundary Water Cooperation in the Tumen River Basin: A 
Focus on the Greater Tumen Initiative. Asia-Pacific Research (아태연구) 26(4): 22–54. 
LMC 2016. Sanya Declaration of the First Lancang-Mekong Cooperation (LMC) Leaders’ Meeting 
(signed 23 March 2016). 
LMC 2018. Phnom Penh Declaration of the Second Lancang-Mekong Cooperation (LMC) Leaders’ 
Meeting (signed 10 January 2018). 
LMC 2020. Vientiane Declaration of the Third Mekong-Lancang Cooperation (MLC) Leader’s Meeting 
(signed 24 August 2020). 
LMC-MRC 2019. Memorandum of Understanding Between the Mekong River Commission Secretariat 
and the Lancang-Mekong Water Resources Cooperation Center (signed 17 December 2019).
 
LOSC 1982a. United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (signed 10 December 1982; entered into 
force 16 November 1994). 
LOSC 1982b. United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea: Status,UN Treaty Collection. 
Retrieved from https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetailsIII.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXI￾6&chapter=21&Temp=mtdsg3&clang=_en 
McCaffrey, S. 2019. The Law of International Watercourses (3 ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
McIntyre, O. 2020. Addressing Marine Plastic Pollution as a ‘Wicked’ Problem of Transnational 
Environmental Governance. Environmental Liability 25(6): 282–295. 
Mekong Agreement. 1995. Agreement on the Cooperation for the Sustainable Development of the 
Mekong River Basin (adopted 5 April 1995). 
MFA (Ministry of Foreign Affairs – China) (2016, March 17). Five Features of Lancang-Mekong River 
Cooperation. Retrieved from www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/zxxx_662805/t1349239.shtml 
MRC 2020. Actions to address Mekong plastic pollution take shape. Retrieved from http://www. 
mrcmekong.org/news-and-events/news/actions-to-address-mekong-plastic-pollution-take-shape/ 
Nguyen, S. (2020, 12 December). Southeast Asia Braces for Trash Dump as China Enacts Waste 
Import Ban. South China Morning Post. Retrieved from https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/health￾environment/article/3113665/southeast-asia-prepares-get-dumped-china-enacts-waste 
Nikiema, J., Mateo-Sagasta, J., Asiedu, Z., Saad, D. and Lamizana, B. 2020. Water Pollution by Plastics 
and Microplastics: A Review of Technical Solutions from Source to Sea. Retrieved from https:// 
cn.bing.com/search?q=Water+Pollution+by+Plastics+and+Microplastics%3A+A+Review+ 
of+Technical+Solutions+from+Source+to+Sea&cvid=d8e044c0e3314158b2d81 
f8002d3b51b&pglt=163&FORM=ANSPA1&PC=U531 
Nollkaemper, A. 1993. Legal Protection of the Marine Environmnent from Pollution: Recent 
Developments. Maritime Pollution Bulletin 26(6): 298–301. 
Oral, N. 2021. From the Plastics Revolution to the Marine Plastics Crisis: A Patchwork of International 
Law. pp. 281–315. In: R. Barnes and R. Long (eds.). Frontiers in International Environmental Law: 
Oceans and Climate Change. Brill. 
Parker, L. (2020, July 23). Plastic Trash Flowing in the Seas will Nearly Triple by 2040 Without 
Drastic Action. National Geographic. Retrieved from https://www.nationalgeographic.com/ 
science/2020/07/plastic-trash-in-seas-will-nearly-triple-by-2040-if-nothing-done/ 
Schmidt, C., Krauth, T. and Wagner, S. 2017. Export of Plastic Debris by Rivers into the Sea. Environmental 
Science and Technology 27(51): 12246–12253. 
Semuels, A. (2019, March 6). Is this the End of Recycling?. The Atlantic. Retrieved from https://www. 
theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2019/03/china-has-stopped-accepting-our-trash/584131/ 
Shelton, D. 2009. Soft Law. pp. 68–80. In: D. Armstrong (ed.). Routledge Handbook of International Law. 
New York/Abingdon: Routledge. 
Shen, W. and Xie, L. 2019. Can China Lead in Multilateral Environmental Negotiations? Internal Politics, 
Self-Depiction and China’s Contribution in Climate Change Regime and Mekong Governance. 
Eurasian Geography and Economics 59(5–6): 708–732. 
Spijkers, O. and Devlaeminck, D.J. 2021. Layers of Regulation in Transboundary Water Governance: 
Exploring the Role of Third States in the Lancang-Mekong. Water International 47(1): 132–151. 
Tanzi, A. 2015. The Economic Commission for Europe Water Convention and the United Nations 
Watercourses Convention: An Analysis of their Harmonized Contribution to International Water Law 
(ECE/MP.WAT/42). Retrieved from https://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/water/publications/ 
WAT_Comparing_two_UN_Conventions/ece_mp.wat_42_eng_web.pdf 206 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Thürer, D. 2009. Soft Law. In: Max Planck Encyclopedia of International Law. 
UNECE. 2013. Guide to Implementing the Water Convention (ECE/MP.WAT/39). Retrieved from https:// 
unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/water/publications/WAT_Guide_to_implementing_Convention/ 
ECE_MP.WAT_39_Guide_to_implementing_water_convention_small_size_ENG.pdf 
UNEP. 1995. Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land￾Based Activities (UNEP(OCA)/LBA/G.2/7) (signed 5 December 1995). 
UNEP. 2020. Our Planet is Drowning in Plastic Pollution. United Nations Environment Programme. 
Retrieved from https://www.unenvironment.org/interactive/beat-plastic-pollution/ 
UNEP. 2021. Understanding the State of the Ocean: A Global Manual on Measuring SDG 14.1.1, SDG 
14.2.1 and SDG 14.5.1. https://wedocs.unep.org/handle/20.500.11822/35086 
UNEP. 2022. United Nations Environment Assembly of the UNEP, Fifth Session, 2 March 2022 - End 
Plastic Pollution: Towards an internationally legally binding instrument (UNEP/EA.5/L.23/Rev.1). 
UNGA. 1970. General Assembly Resolution 2669 (XXV), 8 December—Progressive development and 
codification of the rules of international law relating to international watercourses. 
UNGA. 1997. 99th Plenary Meeting, Fifty-First Session, United Nations General Assembly (A/51/PV.99). 
UNGA. 2016. Transforming our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (A/RES/70/1). 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld 
VCLT. 1969. Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties(adopted 23 May 1969; entered into force 27 
January 1980). 
Vinogradov, S. and Wouters, P. 2013. Sino-Russian Transboundary Waters: A Legal Perspective on 
Cooperation. Retrieved from http://isdp.eu/content/uploads/images/stories/isdp-main-pdf/2013­
vinogradov-wouters-sino-russian-transboundary-waters-legal-perspective.pdf 
Water Convention 1992a. Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and 
International Lakes (adopted 17 March 1992; entered into force 6 October 1996). 
Water Convention 1992b. Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and 
International Lakes: Status. United Nations Treaty Collection. Retrieved from https://treaties.un.org/ 
pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXVII-5&chapter=27&clang=_en 
Watercourses Convention 1997a. United Nations Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of 
International Watercourses (adopted 21 May 1997; entry into force 17 August 2014). 
Watercourses Convention 1997b. Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International 
Watercourses: Status. UN Treaty Collection. Retrieved from https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ 
ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXVII-12&chapter=27&clang=_en#1 
Wouters, P. 2013. International Law—Facilitating Transboundary Water Cooperation. Retrieved from 
http://www.gwp.org/globalassets/global/toolbox/publications/background-papers/17-international￾law---facilitating-transboundary-water-cooperation-2013-english.pdf 
Wouters, P. and Chen, H. 2013. China’s ‘Soft-Path’ to Transboundary Water Cooperation Examined in the 
Light of Two UN Global Water Conventions–Exploring the ‘Chinese Way’. Journal of Water Law 
22(6): 229–247. 
Xinhua (2020, 1 January). China reveals plan to cut plastic use by 2025. Xinhua. Retrieved from http:// 
www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-01/19/c_138718297.htm Chapter 14 
The Plastic Vote
 Referendum as a Governance Tool to 
Combat Plastic Pollution
 
Nanuli Silagazde and Savitri Jetoo* 
Direct democracy is a vital element of governance in the United States that has 
been applied to resolve a wide range of policies. Direct democracy, in contrast to 
indirect or representative democracy, refers to the direct participation of citizens 
in the democratic decision-making process. In recent decades only, hundreds of 
environmental issues have been put on for popular vote addressing, such as issues 
on energy, forests, natural resources, and water. Despite the widespread use of 
referendums in this domain, there have been only two popular votes on plastic—in 
the state of California in 2016 and the city of Seattle in 2009. Both referendums 
were sponsored by the industry to overturn the previously imposed ban on single-use 
plastics but came out with two contrasting outcomes. This chapter investigates why 
these referendums occurred in the first place, the narrative used in the campaigns, 
and other factors that contributed to their adoption or rejection by the public. Most 
importantly, it examines whether referendums can be viewed as an effective tool 
of governance in combatting the problem of plastic pollution. All these aspects 
gain additional weight amid COVID-19 since hard-won plastic bag bans have been 
suspended in various communities, and the plastics industry has been seizing the 
moment and lobbying for further changes in the legislation. 
Participatory Democracy in Plastic Governance 
In general, elements of direct democracy—citizen initiatives and referendums—have 
become established tools within environmental governance, especially on the local 
and provincial levels (Buček and Smith, 2000). Various democratic innovations, 
Åbo Akademi University, Social Science Research Institute (Samforsk), Turku, Finland. 
* Corresponding author: jsavitri@hotmail.com 208 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
such as participatory and deliberative fora, have spread in the field of environmental 
governance in the hopes of improving environmental policy processes and outcomes 
(Newig et al., 2019). Apart from direct democracy, North Americans have organised 
an increasing number of civic forums, including mini-publics, co-governance 
institutions, and popular assemblies, and 15% of these are devoted to answering 
environmental questions (Karpowitz and Raphael, 2019). 
Direct Democracy in the USA 
Given its federal system, the US has traditionally offered its citizens multiple ways for 
involvement, be it through associations or town meetings. At the turn of the twentieth 
century, the American Populist Party and its allies fought successfully to establish 
and spread referendum and initiative (Piott, 2004). Since then direct democracy 
has become a customary element of American political life. There are three major 
mechanisms of direct democracy that are widely employed: recall, referendum, and 
ballot initiative. Given the founders’ scepticism about direct democracy, the US 
Constitution neither authorizes national referendums/initiatives nor allows citizens 
to vote directly on federal issues (Karpowitz and Raphael, 2019). Accordingly, no 
ballot can be initiated that refers to legislation that has been approved by Congress; 
similarly, the recall of elected federal officials is not permitted either (Noyes, 2018). 
Instead, direct democracy is available at the local and state levels. Although the 
regulations differ across states, most Americans live in a city or state that allows its 
citizens to enact laws through the ballot initiative (Matsusaka, 2004). However, the 
most common restriction for ballot initiatives is related to the topics like votes on 
budget issues or state institutions (Noyes, 2014). Additionally, most states require 
that a ballot initiative covers only a single subject in order to prevent voter confusion 
(Gilbert, 2006). There are significant variations in regard to the signature gathering 
process. A majority of states have a residency requirement that helps ensure that 
an initiative has substantial grassroots support within the state and is not hijacked 
by out-of-state special interests. The amount of time for gathering signatures lies 
usually between 12 to 18 months. As for the number of signatures that is required to 
place an initiative on the ballot, there are often considerable differences. Colorado, 
for instance, requires a number of signatures that are equal to 5% of the votes cast 
for Secretary of State in the last election, whereas Wyoming’s requirement for an 
initiative is a number of signatures equal to 15% of the total votes cast in the last 
general election for any office (Noyes, 2014). Interestingly, the five states with the 
least restrictive rules (California, Oregon, Colorado, North Dakota, and Arizona) 
account for over half of all state-wide initiatives (Donovan, 2014). On one hand, 
lower signature requirements along with an open-ended circulation period encourage 
the use of direct democracy and result in a high number of qualifying ballot 
initiatives. Also, more ballot initiatives may overwhelm voters and decrease their 
interest and engagement in the whole process (Magleby, 1984). Furthermore, some 
citizens abstain from voting when information demands are too great (Donovan and 
Bowler, 2003). 
California is an exceptional case in various regards. First, the modern-day 
trend of initiatives began in California in 1978 with the adoption of Proposition The Plastic Vote: Referendum as a Governance Tool 209 
13 which cut property taxes from 2.5% of market value to just 1%. Within two years, 43 
states had adjusted their taxes (Waters, 2003). California’s usage of direct democracy 
remains exceptionally high. Alone in 2016, 627 local ballot votes were approved and 
196 were defeated in Californian municipalities (Schiller, 2018). California is the 
only state where the legislature may not amend or repeal the ballot initiative unless 
the initiative itself allows for it (CA Const. art. II, § 9, art. XII, § 2). Moreover, 
regulations regarding recall are most relaxed here, allowing for its activation from 
the first day of authority in office (Bowler, 2004). The most prominent case of recall 
and second recall in the US history took place in California in the year 2003 when 
Governor Gray Davis of the Democratic Party was removed from office and replaced 
by Arnold Schwarzenegger of the Republican Party. 
On Funding Regulations 
Referendum campaigns tend to attract various interest groups. Each of these groups 
has the potential to influence votes, advance personal agendas, and gain visibility for 
themselves. Moreover, the involvement of various actors often leads to a disparity of 
financial resources spent on promoting one referendum option over the other since 
resources mobilized by different organizations are rarely distributed evenly (Taillon, 
2018). This disparity in campaign spending may undermine the quality of the 
debates due to significant differences in the visibility of each camp in the media via 
posters, radio, television, etc. (Papadopoulos, 1996). In the absence of legal limits on 
campaign spending, the very pluralistic nature of the referendum can be jeopardised 
in the aftermath of reduced diversity and circulation of ideas (Stéfanini, 2004). 
Referendums are certainly sensitive to money and financial resources. As Kobach 
noted, “money unquestionably affects the outcome to some degree” (Kobach, 1994). 
For instance, in systems where referendums are frequently held—Switzerland and 
certain states in the US—there is greater professionalisation and commercialisation 
of signature gathering as specialised firms in this domain offer their services for 
sale (Cronin, 1989; Kobach, 1994; Magleby, 1984). In fact, the signature gathering 
has become a big business in the United States. Alone in California during the year 
2016, more than $ 45 million was spent to collect 11 million signatures at an average 
price of almost $ 4 per signature (Mai-Duc, 2016). This means that influential groups 
have better chances of placing their issues to a vote. However, despite these massive 
expenditures, approximately 26% of all initiatives that were filed in California had 
made it to the ballot out of which only 8% were adopted by the voters (Waters, 2003). 
In fact, there are different views regarding the role of money in referendum 
campaigns as the expenditure of funds does not necessarily guarantee victory for one 
side or the other (Gerber, 1999). Interestingly, differences in spending in the US are 
more strongly felt in favour of ‘No’ camp; in other words, it is easier to secure the 
status quo with substantial resources. In contrast, in Europe, referendums directed 
towards change are more likely to be adopted compared to those aiming at preserving 
the status quo (Silagadze, 2022). This means that the financially advantaged camp 
has a higher chance of beating the proposal rather than succeeding in getting a new 
measure adopted (Cronin, 1989). Although money plays an important role in shaping 
the political agenda, it is less powerful at determining the outcome/deciding the vote 210 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
as measures backed by big corporations to promote their narrow interests more often 
get rejected than the other kinds of initiatives (Damore et al., 2012; Donovan, 2014). 
Despite growing concern over the influence of campaign funding and the 
importance of its regulation (Gilland-Lutz and Hug, 2010), only a small number of 
countries have adopted specific regulations. Since referendum campaign legislations 
are particularly controversial, in many countries such laws emanate from court 
rulings. Yet, regulations vary substantially across countries. Some countries limit 
government financing of their side in a referendum campaign, while others only have 
political neutrality requirements for public authorities. Ireland, for instance, forbids 
the expenditure of public funds in support of one side of an issue, and France, on 
the other hand, puts a ceiling on donations (Reidy and Suiter, 2015). In contrast, 
in Switzerland and the US, despite the potential dangers of deregulated spending, 
any form of restriction or ceiling on referendum expenditures is viewed through the 
lens of freedom of expression and is considered an attack on individuals’ right to 
defend their beliefs. The US Supreme Court has ruled that establishing a ceiling on 
campaign spending would be unconstitutional since controlling campaign spending 
would inevitably result in the violation of the constitutional principle of freedom 
of expression. [Similarly, the Constitutional Court in Italy decided that limitations 
on spending for legislative elections were not applicable to referendum campaigns 
(Taillon, 2018)]. 
The Case of Seattle 
In the summer of 2008, the Seattle City Council voted to impose a 20-cent fee on paper 
and plastic bags, which would have taken effect on January 1, 2009. However, the 
‘Coalition to Stop the Seattle Bag Tax’, funded by the American Chemistry Council, 
the Washington Food Industry, and 7-Eleven, quickly collected 22,000 signatures 
(instead of the required 20,000) to put the measure on the ballot as Referendum 1 
(BALLOTPEDIA, 2009; Thompson, 2009). 
According to the adopted legislation, a 20-cent fee would be required for every 
disposable bag (paper or plastic) distributed by grocery, drug, and convenience 
stores. Small businesses under $1 million in annual revenue would keep the entire 
20-cent fee, while bigger businesses would get to retain 5 cents. The remaining 15 
cents would go to Seattle Public Utilities to fund the implementation and oversight 
of the program, provide free reusable bags to low-income families, and sponsor soup 
kitchens and homeless shelters (Rucker et al., 2008). The city expected to collect $10 
million in annual revenue (Yarow, 2009).The proposed green fee would not apply 
to bags used in stores to hold bulk items, such as bakery goods, vegetables, nuts, 
etc., as well as bags used to hold newspapers would be exempted too (Rucker et al., 
2008). Seattle was not the first city that attempted to discourage the use of plastic 
bags, but it was the biggest city in the U.S. that tried to put this kind of surcharge on 
bags (Kaste, 2009). 
The fee was introduced as a way to influence Seattleites’ shopping habits, thus 
encouraging the use of reusable bags without banning disposable ones straight away. 
Supporters argued that the fee would encourage the use of more reusable bags, cut 
down on pollution and waste, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions (Yarow, 2009). The Plastic Vote: Referendum as a Governance Tool 211 
The advocates pointed to Ireland’s successful PlasTax, which too imposed a similar 
fee, that resulted in over 90% reduction in plastic bag use only a few weeks after 
it took effect. The Seattle Public Utilities estimates that each year approximately 
360 million disposable bags are used in the city and that most of these are made of 
plastic. Since plastic bags can take up to 1,000 years to decompose, while paper 
bags, although easily recyclable, require far more energy and toxic chemicals for 
their production; one study estimated that Referendum 1 could cut greenhouse-gas 
emissions by about 4,000 tons per year which was the equivalent of taking 665 
cars off the road (Rucker et al., 2008). However, the ‘Yes’ camp managed to raise 
only around $64,000—a tiny fraction of the $1.4 Mio raised by the ‘No’ side. The 
main organization supporting the bag fee was the Seattle Green Bag Campaign, 
backed by Mayor Greg Nickels, five Seattle City Council members, National 
Wildlife Federation, and UW Sierra Student Coalition. Additionally, the Seattle 
Times endorsed the measure as well as the former president and CEO of Starbucks 
Orin Smith. The ‘Yes’ side framed their campaign as a fight against big oil and 
environmental pollution (C. Thompson, 2009). 
The ‘No’side was mainly driven by the ‘Coalition to Stop the Seattle Bag 
Tax’ and most of its funding came from the American Chemistry Council, whose 
members included Dow Chemical, ExxonMobil, and major plastic-bag producers. 
At the same time, some other powerful actors came out against the measure,such 
as the Independent Business Association, Korean American Grocers Association, 
Washington Association of Neighborhood Stores, as well as mayoral candidate 
Jan Drago and Seattle City Council candidates (C. Thompson, 2009). The plastics 
industry outspent its opponents in their aggressive campaign against the fee with a 
ratio of about 15 to 1 (Yarow, 2009). 
The ‘No’ side opposed the measure stating that it was costly and unnecessary in 
a city where plastic bags represented only 1% of the city’s garbage and claimed 90% 
of its citizens were already reusing their disposable bags (Kaste, 2009). Moreover, 
opponents criticised the legislation included too many exemptions and loopholes to 
be effective. According to the ‘No’ camp, a bag tax would not help the environment 
but could hurt the economy and businesses and even cost jobs. They referred to 
a measure as a tax, not a fee, although the fact that revenues were designed to go 
to bag-elimination efforts (instead of into a general fund) puts it more in the fee 
category (C. Thompson, 2009). One of the arguments of the ‘No’ camp was that the 
tax would unfairly affect low-income people and even defended it with the slogan “A 
tax on grocery bags is not what we need in this economy”(Kaste, 2009).Opponents of 
the legislation estimated that it would cost Seattle residents $300/year as around 600 
bags per person were thrown away/utilised each year. Simultaneously, a nationwide 
$.20 bag fee in the US would generate $2 billion each year (Fletcher and Hayes, 
2009). Additionally, the ‘No’ camp emphasised the ineffectiveness of the Irish 
PlasTax, which eliminated plastic shopping bags but did not stop consumers from 
using plastic bags. In fact, it resulted in a 21% increase in the total amount of plastic 
consumed in Ireland and a 400% increase alone in sales of garbage bags (PIFA Points 
To Bag Tax, 2006). 
On August 18, 2009, the measure was defeated as 53% of Seattleites voted 
against it. However, two years later, the Seattle City Council returned with a new 212 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
proposal and unanimously approved a ban on plastic bags and a 5-cent fee for paper 
bags, which went into effect on July 1, 2012 (L. Thompson, 2011; Yardley, 2011). 
The Case of California 
In 2014, California passed the first state-wide legislation in the country banning 
single-use plastic bags. The legislation was backed by the California Grocers 
Association and the United Food and Commercial Workers Union. According to the 
legislation (Senate Bill 270), even recycled paper bags were mandated to be sold for 
no less than $0.10. It allowed for the continued use of thicker plastic bags that last 
for 125 uses. The bill, signed by Governor Jerry Brown, was supposed to take effect 
in July 2015. Larger grocery chains, including Wal-Mart and Target, were required to 
comply with the law as it entered into force, while smaller convenience, liquor stores, 
and food marts had an additional year to adjust to the new regulations, which was 
until July 2016 (Mernit, 2016a, 2016b). Additionally, state plastic bag manufacturers 
were to be provided with $2 million in loans to help them retain jobs and transition 
to making thicker and multi-use recycled plastic bags (J. Gerber, 2016). 
Taking into consideration that plastic manufacturers earn between $100 and 
$150 earned million every year alone in California, they were against this measure, 
to put it mildly (Mernit, 2016b). The national plastics lobby, united under The 
American Progressive Bag Alliance (APBA), had fought hard to prevent this state￾wide ban from being adopted but in vain. However, in the end, the Alliance succeeded 
in suspending the measure as they gathered enough signatures to put the bill to a 
referendum as Proposition 67 (Mernit, 2016a). 
According to the California Constitution (Article II), a referendum can be called 
to approve or disapprove a recently (within 90 days) enacted piece of legislation. The 
minimum amount of signatures required is 5% of the total number of voters in the 
previous gubernatorial election, which in this case was around 505,000 (Mahoney 
and Seaward, 2016). The proponents collected over 800,000 signatures out of which 
555,000 were verified and thus qualified for the referendum (White, 2014). The costs 
for signature collections were estimated at around $3 Mio or $5.77 per signature 
(BALLOTPEDIA, 2016). 
In addition, the plastics manufacturers managed to add another initiative to the 
ballot—Proposition 65—which aimed at redirecting fees grocers would collect for 
disposable carry out bags to a state wildlife fund (Mernit, 2016a). It was meant to 
be confusing as the plastic industry intentionally applied the strategy of having two 
competing proposals on the ballot. The bet was on voter fatigue and the expectation 
that people would just vote no to both. Indeed, as a survey conducted by Capitol 
Weekly illustrated about 70% of respondents had misperceptions about Proposition 
65, believing that when supporting it they were voting against the interests of the 
plastic industry (Mitchell and Yan, 2016). The representative of the plastic trade 
association did not even argue that helping wildlife was the point, but rather that 
the goal of Proposition 65 was merely to highlight where the fee goes after grocers 
collect it (Mernit, 2016b). Furthermore, the wording of Proposition 67 itself was 
confusing. The ‘Yes’ vote would uphold the ban and ‘No’ vote would overturn it. It is 
not intuitive that one needs to vote ‘Yes’ for the law to go into effect. One might even The Plastic Vote: Referendum as a Governance Tool 213 
think ‘I don’t want to veto the law’ and mistakenly vote ‘No’ in that case (Mernit, 
2016b). However, it must be acknowledged that California ballots often suffer from 
problems of clarity as it is not seldom that voters are invited to cast their preferences 
on dozens of different and highly complex matters (LeDuc, 2015). 
The campaign was, therefore, truly ‘a battle of uneven’. The camp for repealing 
the ban on plastic bags had only four contributors, whereas the campaign to uphold 
the ban was backed by more than 500 organizations, including environmental groups, 
businesses, community organizations, dozens of cities and counties, and more than 
40 newspapers endorsing it. However, in financial terms, the campaign was heavily 
skewed in the other direction. Plastic bag manufacturers spent over $6 Mio against 
the ban, whereas the campaign in favour had a budget of less than $2 Mio, out of 
which over 70% came from the environmental community (Davis, 2016). 
It is worth mentioning that bans on single-use plastic bags were not a novelty in 
the state of California, where San Francisco became the first city to enact the banal 
ready in 2007. Moreover, since June 2016, over 150 cities and counties in California 
had their own local carry out bag laws (Farsi & Hansen, 2016). For instance, in Los 
Angeles, the largest city in California and second largest in the US, single-use plastic 
bags have been banned since 2014 and a fee of $0.10 is charged for a paper carry out 
bag (“BALLOTPEDIA”, 2016). Thus, at the time of the referendum, more than 40% 
of California communities were already living without plastic shopping bags through 
local ordinances, and they did not want to roll back (Davis, 2016). 
The ‘No’ camp was notably using the word ‘tax’ rather than charge or fee in 
its claims. Their official slogan was: “Don’t be fooled: Not one penny of the bag 
ban tax goes to the environment”. However, using the term ‘tax’ was simply wrong 
and misleading since revenue would go to stores and not to a government agency. 
Moreover, the claim completely ignored the indirect benefit the fee could have on 
the environment by substantially reducing the amount of plastic bags in circulation 
and encouraging consumers to shift towards reusable bags/options (Nichols, 2016). 
The spokesman for the APBA, Jon Berrier, opposed the ban saying that: “It 
bans a 100-percent recyclable product produced in America with American labor, 
that according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency accounts for only 0.3 
percent of the waste stream” (Mernit, 2016b). Although Berrier was right that plastic 
bags account for only a small percentage of waste, his statement disregards the fact 
that plastic is recyclable only in special facilities and otherwise does not decompose 
in hundreds (sometimes thousands) of years (Wang et al., 2016); hence, putting the 
oceans and wildlife at risk. On the website of APBA, it said that plastic bags are “the 
smartest, most environmentally-friendly choice at the checkout counter” (Loftus￾Farren, 2016). 
In the end, on November 8, 2016, California said no to the plastics lobby’s wish 
list, approving Proposition 67 with 52% and rejecting Proposition 65 with 51%. This 
was exactly the outcome environmental groups, grocers, and unions had advocated 
for. However, the millions invested in the campaign and lobbying the legislature 
during previous years did not go waste since the industry made $15 million in profit 
alone, while the bag ban was on hold (Mernit, 2016a). 214 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Conclusion: Post-Referendum Developments 
After California successfully withstood industry-backed referendum in 2016, its 
annual consumption of plastic bags was reduced by around 15 billion bags. This is a 
very positive development, especially when keeping in mind that this state had gone 
to great lengths to increase plastic bag recycling but was never able to go above 3% 
of total consumption. Along with approximately 150 municipal bans put in place 
across California since 2007 and with the help of the state-wide ban, the overall 
amount of plastic bag litter along the California coastline decreased by around three￾quarters in the period from 2010 to 2017 (Dauvergne, 2018). Moreover, a recent 
study has found that California’s ban on plastic bags led to a huge decrease in plastic 
bag consumption, i.e., 71.5% (Taylor, 2019). In fact, the state went even further in its 
efforts to combat plastic in 2018 when the state legislature passed bills that mandated 
the development of microplastics management strategies for both drinking water and 
California’s coastal ocean (Martindale et al., 2020). 
Similar effects were observed in other locations. A report comparing periods 
before and after the ban in San Jose found an 89% reduction in bag litter in the 
city’s storm drain system and about a 60% reduction in the city’s rivers, streets, and 
neighbourhoods (Nichols, 2016). After Washington introduced its 5-cent tax in 2009, 
bag use dropped there sharply too (Rosenthal, 2013). Plastic bans and fees work, 
notwithstanding the legislative path taken. According to the report issued by Seattle 
Public Utilities (2016) on the plastic bag ban ordinance from 2011, the measure has 
proven effective in reducing the number of plastic bags distributed throughout the 
city. More specifically, the amount of plastic bags in residential garbage declined by 
almost 50% and by almost 80% in the commercial waste stream. However, a side 
effect—increased shoplifting—occurred in Seattle (R. Thompson, 2013). Asimilar 
phenomenon also followed bans in Hawaii, California, and the United Kingdom. 
This may be explained by the fact that when plastic bags are no longer common, it is 
more difficult to determine who paid for their goods (Stephenson, 2018). 
During the COVID-19 pandemic,plastic-related legislation has been suspended, 
resulting in a temporary return to single-use plastic. Retailers in California, for 
instance, were allowed to hand out free single-use plastic bags for 60 days starting 
in April. The supporters of this measure—California Retailers Association and 
the California Grocers Association—argued that reusable bags put supermarket 
employees at risk of being infected. Other cities went even further; San Francisco, for 
example, temporarily banned reusable bags altogether (Murphy, 2020). In California, 
the state-wide ban together with the requirement for plastic bags to contain 40% 
recycled materials was back in force by late June (Staub, 2020). Similarly, in Seattle, 
the adopted legislation from 2011 was suspended during the outbreak of the virus. 
However, according to the Seattle Government (2020), the measures have been 
reinforced starting from January 1, 2021, i.e., a ban on single-use plastic carryout 
bags and a charge of a minimum of 5 cents for paper bags. The Plastic Vote: Referendum as a Governance Tool 215 
References 
BALLOTPEDIA. 2009. Retrieved November 29, 2020, from https://ballotpedia.org/Seattle_Plastic_Bag_ 
Tax,_Referendum_1,_2009 
BALLOTPEDIA. 2016. Retrieved November 11, 2020, from https://ballotpedia.org/California_ 
Proposition_67,_Plastic_Bag_Ban_Veto_Referendum_(2016) 
Bowler, S. (2004). Recall and representation: Arnold schwarzenegger meets edmund burke. Representation 
40(3): 200–212. 
Buček, J. and Smith, B. 2000. New Approaches to Local Democracy: Direct Democracy, Participation and 
the ‘Third Sector.’ Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 18(1): 3–16. 
Cronin, T.E. 1989. Direct Democracy: The Politics of Initiative, Referendum, and Recall. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press. 
Damore, D.F., Bowler, S. and Nicholson, S.P. 2012. Agenda Setting by Direct Democracy. State Politics 
& Policy Quarterly 12(4): 367–393. 
Dauvergne, P. 2018. Why is the global governance of plastic failing the oceans? Global Environmental 
Change 51: 22–31. 
Davis, M. 2016. How California Became America’s First State to Ban Plastic Bags. Retrieved September 
2, 2020, from https://www.ecowatch.com/california-plastic-bag-ban-2143461966.html 
Donovan, T. 2014. Referendums and Initiatives in North America. pp. 122–161. In: Referendums Around 
the World: The Continued Growth of Direct Democracy. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Donovan, T. and Bowler, S. 2003. Are Voters Competent Enough to Vote on Complex Issues. In: D.M. 
Waters (ed.). The initiative and Referendum Almanac: A comprehensive guide to the initiative and 
referendum process in the United States. Durham: Carolina Academic Press. 
Farsi, M. and Hansen, J. 2016. Proposition 65: Carryout Bags. Charges. California Initiative Review 
(CIR), Article 16: 1–21. 
Fletcher, K. and Hayes, D. 2009. Editorial: The petrochemical industry’s profits are our litter. Retrieved 
August 1, 2020, from https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news//2009/07/the-petrochemical￾industrys-profits-are-our-litter-.html 
Gerber, E.R. 1999. The Populist Paradox : Interest Group Influence and the Promise of Direct Legislation. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Gerber, J. 2016. Vote YES on PROP 67 to Uphold the California Bag Ban! Retrieved November 29, 2020, 
from https://ncrarecycles.org/2016/08/vote-yes-on-prop-67-to-uphold-the-california-bag-ban/ 
Gilbert, M.D. 2006. Single subject rules and the legislative process. University of Pittsburgh Law Review, 
67(4): 803–870. 
Gilland-Lutz, K. and Hug, S. (eds.). 2010. Financing Referendum Campaigns. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Karpowitz, C.F. and Raphael, C. 2019. Democratic innovations in North America. pp. 371–388. In: 
S. Elstub and O. Escobar (eds.). Handbook of democratic innovation and governance. Cheltenham 
& Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing. 
Kaste, M. 2009. Debate Over Plastic Bags Heats Up In Seattle. Retrieved November 29, 2020, from 
https://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=111662657&t=1606566014505 
Kobach, K.W. 1994. Switzerland. pp. 98–153 In: D. Butler and A. Ranney (eds.). Referendums around the 
World: The Growing Use of Direct Democracy. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute for 
Public Policy Research. 
LeDuc, L. 2015. Referendums and deliberative democracy. Electoral Studies 38: 139–148. 
Loftus-Farren, Z. 2016. Can California Finally Ditch Single-Use Plastic Bags? Retrieved September 2, 
2020, from https://www.earthisland.org/journal/index.php/articles/entry/can_california_finally_ 
ditch_single-use_plastic_bags/ 
Magleby, D.B. 1984. Direct Legislation: voting on ballot propositions in the United States. Baltimore & 
London: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Mahoney, R. and Seaward, S. 2016. Proposition 67: Ban on Single-Use Plastic Bags. California Initiative 
Review (CIR), Article 18: 1–22. 
Mai-Duc, C. 2016. Get signatures, make money: How some gatherers are making top dollar in this year’s 
flood of ballot initiatives. Retrieved November 30, 2020, from https://www.latimes.com/politics/la￾pol-ca-signature-gatherers-ballot-initiatives-california-20160627-snap-htmlstory.html 216 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Martindale, S., Weisberg, S. and Coffin, S. 2020. Status of Legislation and Regulatory Drivers for 
Microplastics in California. Readabout 54: 17–22. 
Matsusaka, J.G. 2004. For the Many or the Few: The Initiative, Public Policy and American Democracy, 
Chicago. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, p. 15. 
Mernit, J.L. 2016a. After the Vote: Plastic Bag Battle Over, More Fights on the Horizono Title. Retrieved 
October 15, 2020, from https://capitalandmain.com/after-the-vote-plastic-bag-battle-over-more￾fights-on-the-horizon-1110 
Mernit, J.L. 2016b. Plastic Bag Ban Prop 67. Retrieved September 13, 2020, from https://www. 
laprogressive.com/plastic-bag-ban-prop-67/ 
Mitchell, P. and Yan, A.N. 2016. CA120: Crunching the poll numbers, big time. Retrieved November 8, 
2020, from https://capitolweekly.net/ca120-poll-numbers-crunching-big-time/ 
Murphy, H. 2020. California Lifts Ban on Plastic Bags Amid Virus Concerns. Retrieved November 9, 
2020, from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/24/us/california-plastic-bag-ban-coronavirus.html 
Newig, J., Challies, E. and Jager, N.W. 2019. Democratic innovation and environmental governance. pp. 
324–338. In: S. Elstub and O. Escobar (eds.). Handbook of democratic innovation and governance. 
Cheltenham & Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing. 
Nichols, C. 2016. PolitiFact: Does Prop. 67 money go to environment? Retrieved September 2, 2020, from 
https://capitolweekly.net/politifact-plastic-bag-prop-67/ 
Noyes, H.S. 2014. The Law of Direct Democracy. Durham: Carolina Academic Press. 
Noyes, H.S. 2018. Existing regulations and recommended best practices: the example of the USA. 
pp. 271–285. In: L. Morel and M. Qvortrup (eds.). The Routledge Handbook To Referendums And 
Direct Democracy. London and New York: Routledge. 
NS Packaging. 2006. PIFA Points To Bag Tax. Retrieved November 29, 2020, from https://www. 
nspackaging.com/news/pifa-points-to-bag-tax-failure/ 
Papadopoulos, Y. 1996. Les mécanismes du vote référendaire en Suisse : L’impact de l’offre politique. 
Revue Francaise de Sociologie 37(1): 5–35. 
PIFA, Mike Kidwell Associates. 2006. Retrieved November 29, 2020, from https://www.nspackaging. 
com/news/pifa-points-to-bag-tax-failure/ 
Piott, S. 2004. Giving Voters a Voice: The Origin of the Initiative and Referendum in America. Columbia, 
MO: University of Missouri Press. 
Reidy, T. and Suiter, J. 2015. Do rules matter? Categorizing the regulation of referendum campaigns. 
Electoral Studies 38: 159–169. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ 
S0261379415000426 
Rosenthal, E. 2013. Should America Bag the Plastic Bag? Retrieved September 1, 2020, from https:// 
www.nytimes.com/2013/05/19/sunday-review/should-america-bag-the-plastic-bag.html 
Rucker, R.R., Nickerson, P.H. and Haugen, M.P. 2008. Analysis of the Seattle Bag Tax and Foam Ban 
Proposal. Retrieved from http://www.seattlebagtax.org/ruckerreport.pdf 
Schiller, T. 2018. Local referendums: A comparative assessment of forms and practice. pp. 60–80. In: L. 
Morel and M. Qvortrup (eds.). The Routledge Handbook To Referendums And Direct Democracy. 
London and New York: Routledge. 
Seattle Government: Bag Requirements. (2020). Retrieved December 1, 2020, from https://www. 
seattle.gov/utilities/protecting-our-environment/sustainability-tips/waste-prevention/at-work/bag￾requirements 
Seattle Public Utilities: report on plastic bag ban ordinance. 2016. Retrieved from http://mrsc.org/ 
getmedia/d4703f1e-2ab4-4bfd-9f0a-98ca5ca32b44/s42plastic.pdf.aspx 
Staub, C. 2020. California reinstates bag ban and PCR requirements. Retrieved December 1, 2020, 
from https://resource-recycling.com/plastics/2020/06/24/california-reinstates-bag-ban-and-pcr￾requirements/ 
Stéfanini, M.F. 2004. Le contrôle du référendum par la justice constitutionnelle. Paris: Presses 
Universitaires d’Aix-Marseille. 
Stephenson, F.E. 2018. Persecuting Plastic Bags. pp. 351–360. In: A.J. Hoffer and T. Nesbit (eds.). For 
Your Own Good: Taxes, Paternalism, and Fiscal Discrimination in the Twenty-First Century.For 
Your Own Good: Taxes, Paternalism, and Fiscal Discrimination in the Twenty-First Century. 
Arlington, VA: Mercatus Center at George Mason University. The Plastic Vote: Referendum as a Governance Tool 217 
Taillon, P. 2018. The democratic potential of referendums: intrinsic and extrinsic limitations. pp. 169– 
191. In: L. Morel and M. Qvortrup (eds.). The Routledge Handbook To Referendums And Direct 
Democracy. London and New York: Routledge. 
Taylor, R.L.C. 2019. Bag leakage: The effect of disposable carryout bag regulations on unregulated bags. 
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 93: 254–271. 
Thompson, C. 2009. Controversy heats up over Seattle’s proposed disposable bag fee. Retrieved 
November 29, 2020, from https://grist.org/article/2009-08-07-bag-fee/ 
Thompson, L. 2011. Seattle City Council bans plastic shopping bags. Retrieved November 5, 2020, from 
https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/seattle-city-council-bans-plastic-shopping-bags/ 
Thompson, R. 2013. Plastic bag ban leads to nationwide increase in shoplifting rates. Retrieved November 
4, 2020, from https://dailycaller.com/2013/07/24/plastic-bag-ban-leads-to-nationwide-increase-in￾shoplifting-rates/ 
Wang, J., Tan, Z., Peng, J., Qiu, Q. and Li, M. 2016. The behaviors of microplastics in the marine 
environment. Marine Environmental Research. 
Waters, D.M. 2003. The Initiative and Referendum Almanac: A comprehensive guide to the initiative and 
referendum process in the United States. Durham: Carolina Academic Press. 
White, J.B. 2014. California plastic bag ban referendum has enough signatures, backers say. Retrieved 
November 17, 2020, from https://www.sacbee.com/news/politics-government/capitol-alert/ 
article5122236.html 
Yardley, W. 2011. Seattle Bans Plastic Bags, and Sets a 5-Cent Charge for Paper. Retrieved September 
2, 2020, from https://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/20/us/seattle-bans-plastic-bags-and-sets-a-5-cent￾charge-for-paper.html 
Yarow, J. 2009. Seattle Rejects Its Plastic Bag Tax. Retrieved November 29, 2020, from https://www. 
businessinsider.com/seattle-rejects-its-plastic-bag-tax-2009-8?r=US&IR=T Chapter 15 
Plastic Pollution Treaty
 Way Forward 
Neha Junankar 
Considering the current global plastic waste situation,there are two urgent issues 
to be addressed; one is to reduce the volume of uncontrolled or mismanaged waste 
streams going into the water bodies (including oceans) and the other is to increase 
the level of recycling (UNEP, 2021). There is also a need for a legally binding global 
treaty. This chapter looks at some of the existing treaties—such as the Basel Treaty 
and its amendment as well as the End Pollution Treaty—its draft form, and way 
forward. 
Basel Treaty: Amendment 2021 
The value chain and lifecycle of plastics cross lots of borders. The plastic life 
cycle includes extraction of raw materials, design and production, packaging and 
distribution, use and maintenance, and recycling, reuse, recovery, or final disposal. 
Plastic pellets—the raw material used to make plastic products—are produced in one 
region and traded in another jurisdiction to manufacture the end product. Along with 
consumer goods trading, plastic waste generated has been traded across continents 
in the past few decades. 
From the 1990s until 2011,the trans boundary movement of plastic waste has 
steadily increased. It is estimated that in 2016, almost half the plastic waste recycled 
(14.1 million tonnes) was not processed in the country but was exported to other 
locations (Brooks et al., 2018; UNEP, 2021). 
China was the major importer of plastic waste till 2018, almost accepting 50% of 
globally traded plastic waste for decades until it imposed bans on importing plastic 
waste. The world’s manufacturing hub,China, sent ships full of goods to North 
America and Europe, and on their way back, it brought back plastic waste from 
North America as well as Europe to be processed in China. Imported waste plastic 
Engineering and Public Policy, Wbooth school of Engineering practice and technology, McMaster 
University, Canada. 
Email: junankan@mcmaster.ca Plastic Pollution Treaty: Way Forward 219 
was then recycled to produce new plastic products to be either exported or consumed 
by its own industries. This was predominantly processed via an informal sector that 
provided low-technology processing services to exporters (Velis, 2014; Rucevska et 
al., 2015). High-income countries such as Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and 
the United States were the top plastic waste exporters (UN Comtrade, 2021). The 
incoming plastic waste was contaminated with mixed grade and consisted of poor 
quality. The cheap labour available in the country would segregate the recyclables 
or higher grades from mixed waste and further send them for processing, while 
the leftover low grades and contaminants were burnt or dumped in the oceans or 
landfills. To restrict illegal trade and import of poor-quality waste, China banned 
imports of plastic waste in 2018. Moreover, China’s internal plastic waste production 
is sufficient by now to fulfil its recycling raw material demand. 
By 2019, China’s global share of plastic waste imports had fallen by 46%, but 
new locations for overseas recycling and other disposal operations were opening 
up. India, Malaysia, the Republic of Korea, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, 
and Vietnam emerged as contenders (UNCTAD, 2020; UN Comtrade, 2021). There 
was a sharp increase in illegal waste shipments entering Southeast Asia (Interpol, 
2020). The plastic waste is usually misdeclared and traded into the country, where 
low-grade plastics are disposed of in landfills, rivers, and even plantations and only 
high-grade would be recycled. Some governments like that of Malaysia took swift 
action by reinforcing border controls and banning plastic waste imports. 
To tackle the illegal trade of plastic waste the Basel convention was amended 
in 2021. These amendments clarify which types of plastic waste are considered 
hazardous and which ones, although not hazardous, still require special consideration 
and are subjected to the control procedure for exports, transit, and import of wastes 
under the Basel Convention (UNEP, 2021). The Basel Convention Plastic Waste 
Amendments imply that all plastic waste and mixtures of plastic waste generated by 
parties to the convention are to be moved to another party, which is subjected to the 
prior and informed consent procedure unless they are non-hazardous and destined for 
recycling in an environmentally sound manner and almost free from contamination 
and other types of waste. Exports to Africa, the Middle East, and South America 
have increased in the past decade but are still relatively small (Wang et al., 2020). 
Over time these regions are expected to become more important. The lack of legally 
binding or lenient enforcement laws in developing countries provides businesses 
with opportunities to illegally trade waste. In developed countries, the recycling 
costs are higher along with stricter waste disposal regulations than in developing 
countries that boosts this trading for recycling. 
Many nations have policies and regulations in place to deal with plastic waste. 
The legislation explorer developed by the UNEP secretariat is a compilation of 
all these legislations covering plastic pollution. The explorer has 599 National 
legislations along with subsidiary legislation and policies from around the globe. 
The Basel Convention is the only global legally binding instrument that controls 
the trans boundary movement of hazardous waste and its safe and proper disposal 
with the objective to protect human health and the environment from its adverse 
effect. In 2019, the Conference of Parties (COP) added plastic waste and amended 
the convention. 220 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Other Related Global Treaties 
The Stockholm Convention regulates a number of Persistent Organic Pollutants 
(POPs) used as plastic additives. Other chemicals not covered under the Stockholm 
Convention are considered under a voluntary initiative, the Strategic Approach to 
International Chemicals Management (SAICM). A recent report (Karasik et al., 
2020) lists 28 global policies that have emerged in the last 20 years that address 
marine pollution. However, few of these policies specifically address plastic pollution 
or have targets or legally binding commitments to address that issue (especially in 
relation to land-based sources of marine litter). Thousands of businesses have entered 
voluntary agreements,such as the Ellen MacArthur Foundation in collaboration with 
UNEP’s Global Commitment and the Ellen MacArthur Foundation’s Plastics Pact 
Network. However, the new 2020 plastic economy global commitment progress 
report pointed out that current efforts are not sufficient to stop the growing use and 
pollution problem. Without any major interventions with current demand and under 
business-as-usual scenarios,production is estimated to ramp up to 1,100 million 
annually by 2050 (Geyer, 2020), producing 155–265 million tonnes of mismanaged 
plastic waste. 
Need for Global Plastic Treaty 
The nature of existing legal instruments across countries is diverse and mostly 
focused on end-of-life and downstream activities. There are different standards 
across jurisdictions for designing plastics, so they can be recycled, or have different 
recycling, and design standards. While some countries have banned the use of 
certain grades of plastic, neighbouring countries may have not and this may lead 
to the production, export, and even propagation of illegal trade; thus, lowering 
the effectiveness of existing efforts made in some parts of the world that advocate 
the need for harmonized regulations and collective actions. A global treaty will 
harmonize existing, diverse, and dispersed initiatives and stimulate new policies. 
Considering how massive the plastic problem is and that it lasts an entire lifecycle, 
it needs an effective global legal instrument focusing on the entire life cycle. To 
achieve the systemic transformation, it needs to achieve the transition to a circular 
economy. The global treaty will enhance investment planning and coordination in 
infrastructure development as well as technology transfer in developing countries 
and socio-economically disadvantaged areas where waste management challenges 
still exist. 
Current efforts are primarily committed towards macroplastic (MaP) pollution 
whereas microplastics or MPs (plastic particles less than 5 millimetres in size) 
including nanoplastics are overlooked. There is an urgent need for MPs to be 
considered in regulations and legislation addressing air, water, and soil quality. This 
will provide impetus to material and process innovation to reduce the number of 
microfibres from textiles. Multiple independent studies have shown that MPs have 
made their way into our food chain and the human bloodstream. Some studies 
estimate that people consume more than 50,000 particles of plastics every year (Cox 
et al., 2019).  
Plastic Pollution Treaty: Way Forward 221 
MPs and MaPs may contain hazardous additives. These additives pose a 
significant threat to our health and ecosystem and are often leaked into marine, air, 
land, and soil environment during the different stages of the plastic life cycle. A 2018 
study found that 7,000 additives are used globally,such as fillers, flame retardants, 
plasticizers, dyes, etc. (Flick, 2004); many of these are hazardous at different levels 
to the humans and environment. Out of these, especially have been identified as 
the most hazardous (Groh et al., 2018). Some additives are regulated under various 
chemical regulations, such as phthalates. Phthalates are plasticizers that are used in 
a wide range of applications such as self-care products, toys, electronics, electrical 
equipment, etc. EU ECHA classified 4 phthalates as toxic to reproduction as these 
can damage human fertility and affect unborn children,hence its use needs to be 
regulated. USEPA, under TSCA, also regulates the use of phthalates. These chemicals 
enter our food chain and in an environment that is often overlooked as the focus is 
more concentrated on the pollution or downstream activities of plastics’ value chain. 
End Plastic Pollution: Towards an Internationally Legally Binding 
Instrument (Current, Draft Resolutions, and Adopted Resolution) 
At the United Nations Environmental Assembly (UNEA-5), held on March 02 2022, 
in Nairobi, Kenya, heads of states, ministers of environment, and other representatives 
from the UN member states unanimously agreed to have a global plastic pollution 
treaty—a legally binding agreement to end plastic pollution. There solution ‘End 
Plastic Pollution: Towards an Internationally Legally Binding Instrument’ was 
adopted after a three-day meeting at Nairobi with more than 3,400 in-person and 
1,500 online participants from the UN member states. Inger Andersen, executive 
director of UNEP, said the following: 
Today marks a triumph by planet earth over single-use plastics. This is the 
most significant environmental multilateral deal since the Paris accord. It is 
an insurance policy for this generation and future ones, so they may live with 
plastic and not be doomed by it. 
The final a doptedre solution is based on three initial draft resolutions from 
Rwanda-Peru presented in September (2021) followed by Japan in December (2021) 
and India in January (2022). These initial resolutions have some commonalities and 
differences at various levels. A joint frame work was presented by Rwanda and Peru 
at the Ministerial Conference on Marine Litter and Plastic Pollution in September 
2021 to address plastic pollution followed by Japan presenting its resolution in 
December 2021. Both drafts proposed legally binding actions along with a call 
for quick negotiations and included the need for technical and financial support 
mechanisms for developing economies and socio-economically disadvantaged 
areas with special considerations for the economies in transition. While Rwanda￾Peru resolution has the full life cycle approach addressing plastic pollution in all 
compartments of the environment on land, water, and the air, Japan’s draft resolution 
focused more on marine plastic pollution and down stream interventions. Both drafts 
suggested setting up an international negotiating committee to prepare the treaty. 222 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
The third resolution by India proposed a voluntary approach focusing on single￾use plastics. India had already put a resolution ahead in UNEA-4 (2019), which it 
recalled and released another draft month ahead of UNEA-5. As the draft emphasized 
concerns about the growing use of single-use plastic (SUP),it elaborated on the role 
of short-lived plastic packing and its upward demand. India stressed the need for 
all the relevant stakeholders to get involved and asked member states to implement 
extended producer responsibility (EPR), make provisions to replace plastic packing 
with sustainable and greener options, develop policies to encourage recycling, and 
improve resource efficiency; India also requested member states to prepare national/ 
regional action plans, share best practices, and enhance cooperation in exchanging 
scientific research, data, and technology on sustainable alternatives to SUP. It shared 
its regional framework on EPR, including countries’ collection, recycling and reuse 
targets, and notified its decision to ban most single-use plastic by July 2022. 
India pushed for “common but differentiated responsibility” as it wants to focus 
on the waste management/diversion aspect,tackle reducing plastic footprint and fossil 
fuel for production later, and have the right to decide on the timeline for that. The 60 
member states were in favour of the draft submitted by Rwanda and Peru in the first 
meeting. Norway and the EU were strong supporters of Peru’s draft, while Japan, 
India, and the US opposed it strongly but agreed with the addition of certain items. 
One point was dropped from negotiations as the US strongly objected, i.e., chemicals 
of concern in the plastic. There have been no concrete discussions in negotiation on 
whether there will be a restriction on fossil fuel use (carbon emission obligations 
during the use phase), but the most carbon-intensive phase is the extraction phase. 
There is an expectation to see a lot of resistance from the petrochemical industry. 
The emphasis was also on the developed countries having an advanced collection 
and sorting system in place but not beyond that as they export which has not solved 
the crisis and there should be national targets to mitigate by addressing the life cycle 
than by just managing waste which would be easy for trading. 
Few Quotes From Participating Governments After Agreeing to 
Develop Historic Global Instruments 
Modesto Montoya, Minister of Environment Government of Peru said, “We appreciate 
the support received from the various countries during this negotiation process. Peru 
will promote a new agreement that prevents and reduces plastic pollution, promotes 
a circular economy, and addresses the full life cycle of plastics.” 
A quote from Dr. Jeanne d’Arc Mujawamariya,Rwanda’s minister of the environment: 
The world has come together to act against plastic pollution—a serious threat to 
our planet. International partnerships will be crucial in tackling a problem that affects 
all of us, and the progress made at UNEA reflects this spirit of collaboration. We look 
forward to working with the INC and are optimistic about the opportunity to create 
a legally binding treaty as a framework for national ambition-setting, monitoring, 
investment, and knowledge transfer to end plastic pollution. 
Following is a quote from the Government of Japan. “The resolution will take 
us towards a future with no plastic pollution, including in the marine environment,” 
said Tsuyoshi Yamaguchi, Japan’s Environment Minister, whose draft resolution  
Plastic Pollution Treaty: Way Forward 223 
contributed to the final resolution. “United, we can make it happen. Together, let 
us go forward as we start the negotiations towards a better future with no plastic 
pollution.” 
Final Resolution and Way forward 
The joint resolution drafted by Rwanda and Peru was favoured but the final resolution 
includes some elements from Japan and India’s resolution as well. The final treaty 
would have binding and voluntary approaches and actions, focusing on the entire life 
cycle of the plastics that have a circular approach. The adopted resolution recognises 
plastic pollution includes MPs. Implicating it may have measures related to MP 
pollution along with visible MaP pollution. Though the treaty considers pollution 
at all levels on land, air, and water, special attention will be given to marine litter. 
Setting up an intergovernmental negotiating committee to come up with the treaty is 
also necessary. 
Few Highlights From the Adopted Draft 
“Acknowledges that some legal obligations arising out of a new international 
legally binding instrument will require capacity building and technical and financial 
assistance to be effectively implemented by developing countries and countries with 
economies in transition”. 
Dedicated multilateral funds: 
To develop, implement and update national action plans reflecting country￾driven approaches to contribute to the objectives of the instrument; To promote 
national action plans to work towards the prevention, reduction, and elimination 
of plastic pollution and to specify national reporting, as appropriate. 
Timeline for Final Treaty 
As 175 countries agreed to create a legally binding global treaty at UNEA-5 on March 
2, 2022, the next step was to set up an intergovernmental negotiating committee; the 
executive director of UNEP and the committee then commenced its work during 
the second half of 2022, which will go on till the end of 2024. INC is expected to 
complete a draft of a global legally binding agreement. 
The resolution also mentions Executive Director of UNEP convene an ad-hoc 
open-ended working group to hold one meeting during the first half of 2022 to 
prepare for the work of the intergovernmental negotiating committee in particular to 
discuss the timetable and organization of work of the intergovernmental negotiating 
committee. INC will report the progress in UNEA-6. Draft stresses the need to 
ensure the widest possible and effective participation in the ad-hoc open-ended 
working group meeting and the intergovernmental negotiating committee; requests 
the Executive Director as a priority action to provide the necessary support to 
developing countries and countries with economies in transition to allow for effective 
participation in the work of the ad-hoc open-ended working group meeting and the 
intergovernmental negotiating. 224 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
What Can be Expected 
Experts say there can be chances that industry associations and producers would try 
to add options, such as biodegradable plastics and plastic-to-fuel, and this will enable 
producers to claim the plastics can be degraded or used as fuel and label it as circular 
and get it licensed to ramp up production. This could be difficult and may threaten 
the objective of decreasing production. 
Not sure if we can expect similarities with the carbon economy, like plastic 
offset, plastic neutrality and plastic washing (like green washing), and trading plastic 
credits. Or if there will be measures already thought and incorporated from lessons 
that were learned during the Paris agreement, especially the consequences of carbon 
trading. 
References 
Freinkel, S. 2011. A Brief History of Plastic’s Conquest of the World Cheap plastic has unleashed a flood 
of consumer goods. Scientific American. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/a-briefhistory￾of-plastic-world-conquest/. 
GESAMP 2015. Sources, fate, and effects of microplastics in the marine environment: a global assessment 
(Part 1). IMO/FAO/UNESCO-IOC/UNIDO/WMO/IAEA/UN/UNEP/UNDP Joint Group of Experts 
on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Environmental Protection. 
Geyer, R. 2020. Production, Chapter 2- Production, Use, and Fate of Synthetic Polymers in Plastic Waste 
and Recycling. Letcher, T.M. (ed.). Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, pp. 13–22. 
Keswani, A., Oliver, D.M., Gutierrez, T., and Quilliam, R.S. 2016. Microbial hitchhikers on marine plastic 
debris: Human exposure risks at bathing waters and beach environments. pp. 10–19. In: Marine 
Environmental Research. 118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marenvres.2016.04.006 
Lamb, J.B., Willis, B.L., Fiorenza, E.A., Couch, C.S., Howard, R., Rader, D.N. et al. 2018. Plastic waste 
is associated with disease on coral reefs. Science 6374, pp. 460–462. https://doi.org/10.1126/science. 
aar3320. 
Maes, T., Barry, J., Stenton, C., Roberts, E., Hicks, R., Bignell, J. et al. 2020a. The world is your oyster: 
low-dose, long-term microplastic exposure of juvenile oysters. Heliyon 6(1): e03103. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e03103. 
Maes, T., van Diemen de Jel, J., Vethaak, A.D., Desender, M., Bendall, V.A., van Velzen, M. et al. 
2020b. You Are What You Eat, Microplastics in Porbeagle Sharks From the North-East Atlantic: 
Method Development and Analysis in Spiral Valve Content and Tissue. Front. Mar. Sci. https://doi. 
org/10.3389/fmars.2020.00273. 
Parker, L. 2020. The world’s plastic pollution crisis is explained. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/ 
environment/habitats/plasticpollution/. 
Rodrigues, A., Oliver, D.M., McCarron, A. and Quilliam, R.S. 2019. Colonization of plastic pellets 
(nurdles) by E. coli at public bathing beaches. Marine Pollution Bulletin. 139, pp. 376–380. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2019.01.011. 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2021). Drowning in Plastics—Marine Litter and 
Plastic Waste Vital Graphics. ISBN: 978-92-807-3888-9. 
Zettler, E.R., Mincer, T.J. and Amaral-Zettler, L.A. 2013. Life in the “plastisphere”: Microbial communities 
on plastic marine debris. Environmental Science and Technology 47(13): 7137–7146. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/es401288x.  
C
Index
 
A
Amur-Heilong 191, 196–198 
B
Biomimicry 149, 151–155, 158 
Biota 94, 97, 99, 104–107 
Bottled water 115–117, 119–121, 140 
Brahmaputra-Ganges-Meghna-Yaluzangbu 191, 
196, 197, 199, 203 
California 207–209, 212–214 
Circular design 52, 53 
Circular economy 41, 46–52, 56–62, 157 
Climate resilience 36, 37 
Community science 85 
D
Data collection 81, 84, 88 
Direct democracy 207–209 
Drinking water treatment plant 114, 127, 133, 
134 
Driver 8, 10, 12, 21 
Due diligence obligation not to cause significant 
harm 194, 196, 197, 203 
E
Ecological community 201 
Ecosystems 193, 194, 199, 201 
Educational programming 68 
Emerging contaminants 161 
Equitable and reasonable utilization 193, 194, 
196, 198, 203 
F
Fate 8, 15–18 
Fragmentation 201 
G
Global plastic treaty 220 
Global programme of action 195, 197 
Great lakes 65, 66, 71, 77–80 
Greater tumen initiative 199, 200, 203 
H
Hamilton harbour 65–67, 70–72 
Human health 162, 165, 167, 171, 172 
I
Impacts 93, 95, 102, 104–106 
Interaction 97, 99 
K
Korea 176, 177, 179, 181–187 
L
Lancang-Mekong 191, 196, 197, 199, 200, 
Lancang-Mekong cooperation 197, 200 
Land-based sources 191, 193, 195, 200–202 
Law of the sea 191, 192, 196, 202 
Leverage points 157 
M
Marine 144 
Marine environment 192, 193–195, 198–200 
Microbeads 145, 147 
Microplastic 1, 8, 78, 93, 114, 115, 146, 161, 173 
O
Oceans 144 
P
Pearl 191 
Plastic 8–20, 22, 46, 49–52, 54, 55, 57, 60 
Plastic ban 214 
Plastic capture technology 84 
Plastic debris 77, 79, 85 
Plastic pollution 27, 29, 30, 32, 38–43, 65, 67–72, 
75, 77–87, 89–91, 207, 208, 210, 212, 214, 
218–223 
Plastic pollution treaty 6 
Plastic treaty 220 226 Plastic Pollution: Nature Based Solutions and Effective Governance 
Plastic waste 78, 80–82, 86, 89–91 
Plastics pact 220
 
Public perception 67
 
R
Ransboundary Watercourses and International 
Lakes 191
 
Referendums 207–209 
R
Rivers 190–197, 201, 202
 
S
Significant harm 194, 196, 197, 198, 203
 
Soft law 195–197, 199, 200, 203
 
Sources 93–96, 102, 106, 107
 
Systems change 82, 90 
T
Tap water 115, 121–127, 135, 136, 140 
Terrestrial Ecosystem 162, 173
 
Transboundary 190–192, 195–198, 201–203 
Trash mountains 180
 
U
United Nations Convention 191, 192
 
United Nations Environment Programme 200
 
USA 208
 
Uses of International Watercourses 192
 
Y
Yangtze 191
 
Yellow river 191
  
About the Editors
 
Dr. Gail Krantzberg works at the interface of science and public policy with 
extensive expertise in disciplines involving remediation of degraded freshwater 
ecosystems, regeneration policies for natural ecosystem assets, and the advancement 
of Great Lakes resilience. She is Professor of the Masters of Engineering and Public 
Policy at McMaster University. She worked for the Ontario Ministry of Environment 
from 1988 to 2001 and was the director of the International Joint Commision’s Great 
Lakes Regional Office from 2001–2005. 
Dr. Savitri Jetoo is an Adjunct Professor at Åbo Akademi University in Finland, 
whose work was recognised by the Baltic Sea Science Day Award. She obtained her 
undergraduate degree at the University of Queensland, Australia and her doctorate 
at McMaster University, Canada. She works at the interface of science and public 
policy with extensive expertise in water resources governance in many areas of the 
world where she lived and worked including the Great Lakes Region. 
Dr. Velma I. Grover has work experience spanning over two decades in international 
development with international policy think-tank, non-governmental sector, 
consulting and teaching at Universities (McMaster University and York University, 
Canada, and Kobe College, Japan). Her research interests include water, waste and 
impact of climate change on water cycle and health, and regeneration policies. She 
teaches at McMaster University in the ‘Masters of Engineering and Public Policy’ 
program. 
Dr. Sandhya Babel is a full professor at the School of Biochemical Engineering and 
Technology, Sirindhorn International Institute of Technology, Thammasat University, 
Thailand. Her main research focus has been on development of low-cost technolgies 
for the protection of environment. Specific research interests include microplastics 
pollution and uptake by biota, microbial fuel cells, adsorption, photocatalysis, 
phytoremediation, and membrane technology. She has been listed in the top 2% 
scientists in the world by Stanford University and Elsevier BV since 2020. 
