PLASTIC CAPITALISMPublished with assistance from the foundation established in memory of James Wesley Cooper of the
Class of 1865, Yale College.
Copyright © 2024 by Sean H. Vanatta.
All rights reserved.
This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, including illustrations, in any form (beyond
that copying permitted by Sections 107 and 108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and except by reviewers
for the public press), without written permission from the publishers.
Yale University Press books may be purchased in quantity for educational, business, or promotional
use. For information, please e-mail sales.press@yale.edu (U.S. office) or sales@yaleup.co.uk (U.K.
office).
Set in Scala with Scala Sans display type by IDS Infotech Ltd.
Printed in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2023947803
ISBN 978-0-300-24734-3 (hardcover : alk. paper) A catalogue record for this book is available from
the British Library.
This paper meets the requirements of ansi/niso z39.48-1992 (Permanence of Paper).
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1For my father,
Lee Lyon VanattaCONTENTS
Preface: Buying Time
Introduction
  1 The New Deal Regulatory Order
  2 Charge Account Banking
  3 Profits Squeeze
  4 Deluge
  5 Regulating Revolving Credit
  6 Confronting Cards in Congress
  7 Risk Shifting
  8 The Marquette Decision
  9 Profits Anywhere
10 Credit Control
11 Breakdown
EpilogueNotes
Acknowledgments
IndexPREFACE
BUYING TIME
BEFORE I KNEW I WOULD WRITE A BOOK, this project began as an attempt to
answer some questions about myself. When I was an undergraduate, I
racked up about $3,000 in credit card debt in rather short order. I then
struggled for years to bring the balance down. Why, I wanted to know, did I
think accumulating the debt was a good idea? How did I convince myself, a
college student without a stable income, that I would borrow-to-buy
responsibly? I started a graduate program in U.S. history still pondering
these questions. In my first attempt to formulate a research topic, I
projected them onto the nation’s recent past: why had so many Americans
taken on so much high-interest debt in the 1980s, the 1990s, and after?
What changes in the nation’s society and culture convinced them to do so?
To frame my thinking, I examined national statistics, where I saw my
experience reflected in the parabolic rise of credit card borrowing,
indebtedness that peaked in May 2008 at more than $1 trillion. I read books
like Robert Manning’s Credit Card Nation, which offered sociological
explanations for the nation’s so-called credit addiction. I talked to a
marketing professor who had worked on American Express’s class-coded
branding (green, gold, platinum, black). Yet I couldn’t see a viable research
design or set of sources that would shine new light on why consumers
borrowed so much, so often. Individual borrowing choices were just that, I
reasoned—individual, idiosyncratic. Borrowing is also personal and private.
Even if people had reflected on their choices, there could hardly be enough
evidence to make generalizable claims about American society. My project
needed a new direction.
To find one, I transitioned from “why” to “how”: how did it become
possible for American consumers to take on so much unsecured debt? That
question led me to focus not so much on society and culture, but on publicpolicy and business strategy. The story I uncovered begins in the 1930s,
with Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal. Amid the ravages of the Great
Depression, the Roosevelt administration sought to revive the economy by
encouraging household borrowing. To do so, the New Dealers created both
federal welfare programs that made many American families creditworthy
and federal lending programs that made low-cost credit widely available for
privileged households. Consumer credit became a tool for American
welfare policy, one managed by the federal government and—I discovered
—the states. Through a mix of federal and state regulation, the New Dealers
channeled credit toward social priorities and granted consumers oversight
over state-level credit markets. The New Deal created, in effect, a place￾based social contract for finance. Throughout the post–World War II
decades, state laws restrained finance and financial profits. Bankers,
unsurprisingly, chafed under these restrictive rules. They seized credit cards
as one way to innovate around them. Cards became the era’s fintech—novel
financial technology, space-age plastic. In the 1950s and 1960s, bankers
used cards to offer high-interest loans outside the bounds of existing
regulations. The New Deal financial structure, though, proved resilient.
Consumer and labor groups organized for and secured state-level limits on
credit card interest rates. State price caps shifted the risk of long-term
interest fluctuations onto card issuers, discouraging bankers and other
lenders from putting consumers into long-term credit card debt. In the early
1980s, however, opportunistic bankers found another way to undermine
state credit rules. They relocated their card businesses to states, like South
Dakota and Delaware, with the most favorable regulations, curtailing the
ability of all states to regulate the price of credit. Banks then opened the
spigots.
Plastic Capitalism thus recovers state regulation as a foundational
component of the New Deal’s safe and stable financial system and uncovers
a missing hinge on which the U.S. turned toward risky, expensive finance in
the decades after 1980. I show how, for a time, state-level financial
regulation restrained consumer indebtedness. I have tried to do so, however,
without being naïve or nostalgic. It’s not just that white supremacists
defended slavery and later Jim Crow segregation under the tarnished banner
of states’ rights. State governments were and are centers of political power,
where interest groups compete to imprint their goals onto public policy. Inthis book, I recount how privileged consumers used state interest rate caps
to extend a bargain made during the New Deal that guaranteed low-cost
credit to white, male-breadwinner-led families. The most sophisticated did
so knowing that new rate caps would exclude poor and minority households
from credit access, forcing them toward high-cost, fringe finance.
The eventual hamstringing of state regulation changed the terms of
financial inequality but not its essential substance. Instead of exclusion,
after the 1980s borrowers assigned lower credit scores—often poor and
minority consumers—experienced what Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor has
called predatory inclusion. They paid higher prices for credit, faced a raft of
charges and service fees, and risked debt collection and bankruptcy.
Meanwhile, card firms offered middle-income and elite consumers less
expensive credit and a buffet of perks and rewards. Freed of regulatory
restraints, credit cards became engines of upward redistribution. They also
became immensely lucrative for banks and for the networks, Visa and
Mastercard, that control the private payment systems in our twenty-first￾century economy.
I began this project interested in consumer indebtedness and economic
precarity, but through researching and writing, the book also became a story
about financial industry growth and banking concentration. The card I
received in the mid-2000s was issued by Maryland Bank, N.A. (MBNA). I
didn’t know it at the time, but Baltimore’s Maryland National Bank
chartered MBNA as a Delaware subsidiary in 1982, after the bank failed to
convince Maryland’s legislature to allow annual fees on credit card
accounts. Over time, MBNA became one of the nation’s largest credit card
issuers, in part by partnering with colleges and universities to offer cards to
undergraduates. My card came on the letterhead of the University of
Georgia Alumni Association. It had a picture of the school’s mascot, UGA
VI, on the front. In 2006, Bank of America acquired MBNA. With more
than 5,700 branches in thirty states, Bank of America was big and growing
bigger. The MBNA deal vaulted Bank of America over J. P. Morgan Chase
and Citigroup to make it the nation’s largest bank card issuer, with 20
percent of the highly concentrated credit card market. These three banks,
along with American Express and Capital One, issued three-quarters of the
nation’s credit cards.The scale of national financial concentration, while common in other
developed democracies, was new in the United States. In the 1930s,
Congress designed the New Deal banking regulations to preserve a political
economy of small finance. Interstate branching rules prohibited banks from
building offices across state lines. Product-line restrictions prevented
bankers from engaging in other financial businesses, like insurance.
Together with state price ceilings, these rules kept most banks small,
reinforcing the place-based social contract. Banking concentration within
discrete geographic markets existed, but never on a national scale.
Several forces converged to erode the New Deal’s barriers to
concentration. Beginning in 1979, Federal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker
waged all-out war against inflation by unleashing unprecedentedly high
interest rates. The tight money policy, coupled with a bipartisan movement
aimed at rolling back New Deal era rules, pressured Congress to initiate
moderate price and product-line deregulation in the early 1980s.
Nevertheless, lawmakers maintained the system’s core reliance on state
boundaries to restrain national financial consolidation. The financial
turbulence caused by the Fed’s policy, though, gave further momentum to
deregulatory ideology and ultimately greater banking concentration: as
bank failures increased, federal officials encouraged strong banks to rescue
weak rivals through interstate acquisitions. State legislatures, meanwhile,
enacted laws that encouraged regional bank mergers ahead of direct
competition from colossal New York and California banks. In 1993,
Congress authorized fully interstate branching, unleashing a wave of
consolidation. Then in 1999, the New Deal’s industry silos fell too, enabling
concentration to spread across the financial services industry. The era of
domestic megabanks, forestalled since the 1930s, had arrived.
Credit cards prefigured the larger process of financial consolidation,
fronting bank strategies to create regional and then national consumer
businesses within the still vibrant New Deal order. This outcome was
unintended and ironic. Bankers developed card plans in the 1950s to help
small retailers compete with expanding department stores. Department
stores already offered card-based credit. Bankers merely emulated this
service. In doing so, bankers exerted greater control over local credit
markets by shifting credit relationships, which merchants and consumers
maintained outside of banks, into bank offices. Still, bank card plansremained small and local. Only with time and experience did bankers settle
on transaction volume as a critical component of card plan profitability. As
the number of transactions increased, they reasoned, costs per transaction
would go down. Geographic expansion would generate more volume and
enable banks to compete with travel and entertainment cards, issued by
firms like Diners Club and American Express, that already enjoyed
nationwide reach. In the late 1960s, bankers connected their local plans into
regional and later nationwide networks, enabling consumers to use bank
cards from coast to coast.
The geographic expansion of bank card plans advanced in tension with
the social ties that held financial markets together. Bankers continued to
root their card plans in local relationships. They recruited consumers and
merchants within reach of their branch offices. Bank card networks
remained fragmented and localized—built and maintained as a collective
project by banks that were confined within narrowly constructed geographic
markets. Only in the mid-1970s did aggressive banks—led by New York’s
Citibank—arrogate the networks that the industry had built collectively to
solicit cardholders on a national scale. Citi’s timing, on the eve of the
Volcker shock, proved first ill-chosen, then opportune. When the surging
cost of money threatened to wreck their card businesses on the shoals of
interest rate risk, large card issuers relocated to job-hungry states without
price regulations. No longer burdened by interest rate restrictions, Citi and
its peers resumed nationwide solicitations, claiming national market share
at the expense of smaller and less sophisticated rivals.
In their quest for scale, bankers initiated what I call Gresham’s law of
plastic, through which high-cost, high-risk credit crowded out lower-cost,
less risky alternatives. Here, Plastic Capitalism’s themes of concentration
and consumer indebtedness merge. Even as market interest rates fell in the
mid-1980s, the largest banks maintained heavy card promotions and high
prices. Bankers justified high rates in part because they lent to riskier
borrowers: high prices compensated bankers for the higher likelihood of
credit losses. Predatory inclusion contained a circular, self-reenforcing
logic. Expensive credit compensated lenders for extending credit to riskier
borrowers; expensive credit made consumer default more likely, justifying
high prices. Over time, improved information technology enabled banks to
discriminate more effectively among low- and high-risk borrowers.Financial finetuning encouraged still more lending. As credit card debt
climbed ever higher, so did consumer bankruptcies, which increased from
288,000 in 1980 to 1.5 million in 2004.
This point merits emphasis: high bankruptcy rates were an expected
outcome of lending large, unsecured sums to high-risk borrowers. Yet high
bankruptcy rates also undermined the consumer lending markets that fueled
the nation’s economic engine. Mass consumer credit, emergent in the
1920s, was given robust government support during the New Deal. Even
with the scaling back of the New Deal’s financial regulations, the new
policy regime required an active government role in structuring and
policing credit markets. In the same way that policymakers had created
rules to protect the pre-1980 system of low-cost consumer finance (for
example, by devoting public resources to combatting credit card fraud), so
too did policymakers align to protect the new system of expensive and risky
lending. In the 1990s and early 2000s, banks and other lenders lobbied for
stronger personal bankruptcy rules to enforce credit card contracts. In 2005,
Congress enacted the Bankruptcy Abuse and Consumer Protection Act,
which made it harder for consumers to discharge debts through bankruptcy.
The enhanced provisions of the act, in turn, may have partially motivated
Bank of America’s takeover of MBNA. Following the acquisition, the New
York Times reported, “Bank of America elected to follow the MBNA
methods it had long admired—from its partnership marketing to its
aggressive debt collection techniques and reliance on high fees.” With
concentration, the most aggressive card issuer practices became the only
card issuer practices. Bad plastic money drove out the good.
Together, consumer indebtedness and banking concentration point like a
beacon toward the financial crisis of 2008, a drama in which Bank of
America, Citigroup, and other protagonists of this book played leading
parts. The crisis seemed to affirm economist Hyman Minsky’s central
insight, that “the tendency to transform doing well into a speculative
investment boom is the basic instability in a capitalist economy.” In the
United States, much of the speculative investment flowed into consumer
credit markets—most obviously housing, but credit card lending as well.
The nation’s longstanding reliance on consumer borrowing to drive
economic growth remained but with none of the restraint imposed by the
New Deal regulatory order.As the financial system came crashing down, federal officials rescued
the concentrated, systemically important firms. Citigroup, the world’s
second largest bank (and, by September 2008, world’s largest credit card
lender), was the quintessence of too big to fail. Citi’s role in national and
global payment systems was one of the many reasons government officials
gave for repeatedly bailing out the bank. “You would go out in a cab, swipe
your card, and it wouldn’t go through,” Citigroup chairman Richard Parsons
explained in March 2011, likewise framing the case for rescue around Citi’s
dominant position in consumer payments. “You wouldn’t be able to buy a
loaf of bread or clear a check. It would be like Egypt. People would be out
in the streets.” Presumably, Parsons meant this as hyperbole. Six months
later, people would be out in the streets, occupying Zuccotti Park in lower
Manhattan to protest the government rescue of banks but not of households
—and thus the perpetuation of the political economy of big finance and
unremitting debt.
Reflecting on the affluent society the New Deal created, Harvard
economist John Kenneth Galbraith asked in 1958, “Can the bill collector be
the central figure in the good society?” After the 2008 crisis, it seemed like
the time had come to renew Galbraith’s question, with purpose. Credit card
debt peaked at $1 trillion in May 2008, but declined to $832 billion by May
2011. I anticipated a turning point, a recalibration. The Great Depression of
the 1930s destroyed much of capitalism and threatened to destroy all of it.
In its wake, a new social compromise emerged, which in the United States
included an invigorated welfare state and the rigorous control of finance.
The 2008 financial crisis threatened similarly epochal destruction.
Policymakers, schooled in the lessons of the 1930s, forestalled a similarly
catastrophic collapse. We should not lament the rescue. But no new social
compromise emerged—no new political economy took command.
Instead, the nation’s political leaders sought to preserve the existing
system, continuing to rely on household borrowing to spur the economy
forward. Piecemeal reforms provided some new consumer protections
without fundamentally altering the status quo. The Dodd-Frank Act, which
created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, is one example. The
Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (CARD) Act,
enacted in 2009, is another. Momentum for card reform had been building
before the crisis. The CARD Act restricted a number of abusive pricing andbilling practices, while protecting “young consumers,” eighteen- to twenty￾one-year-olds (like me), by making it more difficult for them to get credit
cards. Yet these reforms came without addressing the underlying reasons
young consumers borrowed in the first place, likely pushing cash-strapped
undergraduates toward other forms of debt. I finally paid off my card
balance with a federal student loan. In recent years, credit card borrowing
has resumed its galloping growth, and student loan debt has grown even
faster.
This is a book of history, and I will not venture either policies or
predictions. It is also a book concerned, at its core, with the fraught
relationship between capitalism and democracy. The Great Depression of
the 1930s nearly ended both experiments. The New Deal, in different ways,
rescued both, in part by making capitalism subject to a greater measure of
democratic participation and oversight. In finance, this order was twofold.
First, through the institutions of federalism, organized consumers enforced
a place-based social contract. That contract proved fundamentally
inadequate—it excluded low-income and minority groups from the
bargaining table and from mainstream credit markets. Nevertheless, the
New Deal regulatory order enabled consumers to shape vigorous credit
regulations to match their expectations for economic fairness in America’s
rapidly changing consumer society. Second, the continued maintenance of
the political economy of small finance ensured that most banks remained
small. Fear of concentrated finance was elemental to the American
democratic tradition. In the postwar era, policymakers worried that large,
concentrated financial firms would favor large corporate borrowers over the
small proprietors who embodied the ideal of American free enterprise. In
league with small bankers, congressional policymakers maintained a
fragmented financial system, which limited bank profits and channeled
bank lending toward public purposes. This book is about the end of both
restraints. Bankers adopted cards to escape the regulatory checks on
financial profits. They used cards to escape democratic oversight.
The New Deal emerged from the failure of capitalism to reconcile itself
to democracy, and the failure of financial capitalism in particular to provide
the stability required by democratic society. The New Deal restrained
private finance and bent its powers toward public purposes. Other
developed economies followed even more restrictive paths. Yet through itsuse of private finance, the New Deal opened the door for financiers to grasp
the mantle of public legitimacy—to deliver the prosperity promised by the
New Deal while disavowing democratic control. Credit cards, as I
demonstrate in this book, were central to a long contest between those who
sought prosperity through regulation and those who sought prosperity
without it. Still, the rise of finance after 1980 was not the result of a grand
design. It was incremental, opportunistic, and often clumsy. It operated
through a fragmented political system, which offered stakeholders a variety
of tools for shaping and reshaping market rules. It rested on a legal system
that often struggled to apply inherited legal categories to the strategic
deployment of new financial technologies. Although this book ends in the
1980s with bankers’ manipulation of the political structure to shield
themselves from democratic control, it forcefully demonstrates the long and
successful efforts of consumers and other stakeholders to shape card
markets through democratic institutions.Introduction
IN APRIL 2006, CITIGROUP CEO CHARLES “Chuck” Prince III made a special visit
to Sioux Falls, South Dakota. Formed by the 1998 union of Travelers
Insurance and New York’s Citibank, Citigroup was the world’s largest
financial services company. The merger, which also included Travelers’s
investment bank subsidiary Salomon Smith Barney, blasted through
regulatory silos that had divided commercial and investment banking since
the New Deal’s 1933 Glass-Steagall Act. Backed into a corner, Congress
finally dismantled these barriers the following year. With them went the last
vestiges of the New Deal’s political economy of small finance, maintained
by policymakers through the postwar years of economic growth and
financial stability. Citi—giant, complex, sprawling—epitomized the new
era of hyperconcentration and turbulence. It was exactly the kind of
financial amalgamation the New Deal’s rules had been designed to prevent.
By the time Prince arrived in Sioux Falls, Citi operated in more than one
hundred countries, oversaw more than $1.5 trillion in assets, and offered a
one-stop shop for consumer and corporate finance. It was also too big to
manage. Citigroup’s architect Sandford “Sandy” Weill handpicked Prince, a
corporate lawyer, as his successor. Prince began his tenure in 2003
navigating scandals inherited from the Weill era. Conflicts of interest in
investment banking, “systematic and widespread deceptive and abusing
[consumer] lending practices,” and complicity in the Enron and Worldcom
frauds had generated massive regulatory fines. By 2006, with these troubles
mostly resolved, Prince sought to turn a corner. He was ready to step out ofWeill’s long shadow. He visited Sioux Falls, a meat packing and
agricultural depot, on a mission to chart a new course for Citigroup.1
Prince took the stage at Sioux Falls’s Washington Pavilion to honor
Citi’s twenty-fifth anniversary in the Mount Rushmore State. Citibank
relocated its credit card division to South Dakota in 1981 as part of a
desperate plan to save the card business. In the late 1970s, before it could
build branches outside New York State, Citi constructed a nationwide
consumer lending business through cards. At the time, New York strictly
limited the interest banks could charge on credit card loans. When Paul
Volcker, as Federal Reserve chairman, dramatically raised interest rates to
beat back inflation in October 1979, Citibank’s cost of funds exceeded what
it could charge its millions of cardholders. “New York was squeezing us,”
Prince recalled, “the bank lost nearly a billion dollars.” Citi’s card business
was deep under water, dragging the bank down with it. The move to South
Dakota, a state that did not regulate card interest, offered a miraculous
solution. “A solution that was good for South Dakota—and that’s terrific!—
but frankly can be seen to have saved Citibank. Think of that,” Prince
continued reverently, “saved Citibank.” Prince’s interest was not historical;
he was there to urge Citi employees to grow the bank’s card business.
“Cards,” Prince implored, “is the centerpiece of our North American
consumer business. There’s no getting around it.” Gaining momentum, the
CEO of the world’s largest financial services company emphasized each of
his next seven syllables: “We Need Growth From U S Cards—We need
growth in what we sell to people. We need growth in numbers of accounts.
We need growth.” He continued, his voice a crescendo: “We’re going to
grow this business. We’re going to grow Citigroup.” And Prince did; Citi’s
net-income from U.S. Cards rose 41 percent in 2006, to $3.9 billion. In the
financial press, Prince—for a moment—was king.2
Citi’s achievement marked the outer limit of a credit card bubble, which
along with the mortgage bubble, soon erupted with devastating force. The
following year, as the global financial crisis began to unfold, Citi’s card
income fell 26 percent. In 2008, with the collapse fully underway, the bank
lost a staggering $523 million on its North American card accounts. The
losses underscore the immense growth of consumer indebtedness.
Outstanding credit card debt doubled from 1980 to 1985, again by 1990,again by 1995, and again by 2005, topping out in May 2008 at just over $1
trillion. And this figure understates the magnitude. Beginning in the 1990s,
consumers often paid down high-interest cards by mortgaging their homes,
feeding the motor of American abundance with a steady fuel of debt. The
scale of Citi’s losses also emphasizes the mammoth size of the top financial
firms. By 2005, Citibank claimed 80 million card customers, who
collectively spent $229 billion annually, equivalent to 2 percent of the U.S.
gross domestic product. Card concentration was but one aspect of a larger
phenomenon, encouraged by financial deregulation in the 1980s and 1990s.
In 1984, the top four U.S. banks—including Citi—controlled 15 percent of
U.S. deposits. By 2008, the top banks controlled more than 35 percent. Citi,
gigantic, had been too big to manage. Now, the nation’s megabanks were
too big to fail. The relocation to Sioux Falls had “saved Citibank,” Prince
explained in April 2006. During the financial crisis, the federal government
saved Citigroup by pumping in more than $500 billion through various
bailout programs. It did not save Chuck Prince. When the music stopped in
2007, Prince headed for the exit.3
Plastic Capitalism is a history of the bank credit card industry from its
origins in the early 1950s until the relocation of card-issuing banks to
places like Sioux Falls, South Dakota, and Wilmington, Delaware, in the
early 1980s. It is, in the first instance, a business history of the banking
industry: bankers developed credit card plans; they signed up merchants
and solicited consumers; they incorporated cards into their business models
and back office processes; they constructed complex nation-spanning card
networks; they lobbied government officials; they filed lawsuits; they made
mistakes; they lost money; and they ultimately built private payment
systems—Visa and MasterCard—that most of us use today. In doing so,
bankers changed not only consumer financial practices but also the social
and political structure of consumer financial markets. Their business
strategies were fundamentally political strategies aimed at reshaping their
industry’s regulatory boundaries. Bankers were, in short, innovating around
the rules. Although in this book I examine the specific case of credit cards,
the point holds for financial change more broadly: in the dense financial
regulatory system, innovation always involves the strategic interplay of
business practice and political action.4Bankers pursued financial innovation within a regulatory system
designed to limit their size, business scope, and political power. During the
New Deal in the 1930s, Congress restructured the nation’s financial
markets, constraining financial firms and channeling their private business
activities toward public social goals. In the postwar years, three overlapping
regulatory priorities shaped the financial system. The first was financial
federalism, restrictions on the geographic scope of financial markets, which
enabled states to regulate finance within their borders and limited the size
of financial institutions by confining firms within states. The second was
industry siloing, or the compartmentalization of specific financial service
fields—like commercial banking, investment banking, and insurance—that
limited both financial industry concentration and cross-industry
competition. The third priority was price controls, which restricted both
what banks could pay for deposits, through Federal Reserve Regulation Q,
and what they could charge for loans, through interest rate restrictions
(called usury limits) imposed by individual states. In all, the New Deal
regulatory order relied on a dynamic relationship between federal and state
law to create a stable financial structure, which would underwrite liberal
social priorities, including mortgage lending, government borrowing, and
small business finance. The system preserved private finance and with it the
symbolism of free enterprise while making financial rules subject to
continuous—often state-level—political negotiation.5
Commercial bankers retained status and authority in the post–World
War II years, yet they struggled under the regulatory restraints put in place
by the New Deal. This may seem counterintuitive. After all, the early
postwar years are rightly remembered as an era of unprecedented bank
safety. Out of more than thirteen thousand U.S. banks, fewer than ten failed
in any given year from 1943 to 1974. Nevertheless, regulatory controls
constrained bank growth and curtailed bank profits. New Dealers still
dominated congressional policymaking: Illinois senator Paul Douglas and
Texas congressman Wright Patman maintained and extended the New
Deal’s political economy of small finance into the 1960s. Geographic
regulations, meanwhile, fixed banks in place as American businesses and
households became more mobile. Bankers could not build branches across
state lines. In many states, they were restricted to a single office. Locked indowntown skyscrapers, bankers watched as businesses migrated out of
central cities, often to the booming Sunbelt. Affluent consumers,
meanwhile, flew to the suburbs. Cities became browner and poorer. Hedged
in by regulation, bankers endured a decades-long profits squeeze. Inflation
raised their costs. Businesses withdrew deposits and sought higher returns
than bankers could offer. Commercial banks grew in the postwar years, but
the industry withered relative to differently regulated financial firms.
Commercial banks controlled 57 percent of U.S. financial assets in 1945 yet
only 40 percent in 1958. Savings and loans, credit unions, and other
consumer-focused firms gained ground, as did insurance companies and
pension plans.6
Bankers gradually came to see credit cards as one solution to the
regulatory challenges they confronted. Bankers did not invent credit cards,
and early on they imitated the strategies refined in other consumer
industries. At the turn of the twentieth century, department stores in bustling
cities developed card-based payments to identify customers and speed
transactions. Gasoline firms like Standard Oil of California and Phillips
Petroleum participated in interfirm card networks in the late 1930s,
enabling motorists to access credit at service stations across the country. By
the early 1950s, when small banks began experimenting with local card
plans, Diners Club and similar firms were building global card networks for
traveling executives. In every case, firms developed card payments to make
credit purchasing convenient for affluent consumers, encouraging them to
buy more and pay later. Bank credit cards differed from their predecessors
and competitors in that bankers imagined a universal credit service,
eventually one that relied on consumer borrowing as the main source of
profits. Department store and gasoline cards remained confined to a single
retail brand, and they existed to drive retail sales, not to generate profits in
their own right. Travel cards targeted an exclusive market of jet-setting
executives, generating revenue through merchant and cardholder fees, not
interest charges. Bankers sought to combine these markets, transforming
cards into a source of universal, credit-driven purchasing power—a new
form of plastic money to rival and replace paper cash and checks.
Bankers’ credit card plans—and their larger aspirations—took time to
develop. As policymakers adopted mass consumerism as a core nationalgoal in the postwar years, cards became synonymous with credit
purchasing. Cards also symbolized consumer excess. Bankers, ever
cautious, remained cautious. They preferred to lend against solid collateral,
like home mortgages and auto loans, where the underlying asset secured the
debt. Unsecured consumer lending made them queasy. Bankers entered the
card business incrementally, in waves—in 1953, in 1958, and after 1966—
at moments when traditional lending proved less lucrative and the
industry’s future seemed less certain. The inflection point came in 1966, the
postwar era’s first banking crisis. Bankers seized on cards as the technology
that would enable them to compete in the consumer market. Seeing this
opportunity, banks mailed tens of millions of unsolicited cards in a
desperate bid to capture affluent suburban consumers.7
In Plastic Capitalism, I examine financial innovation in context; this book
is a study of fintech, with all the freight that slogan carries. As such, I
reconstruct bankers’ evolving business strategies, showing how they crafted
new financial services and reimagined the future of their industry through
cards. I also emphasize the contingent political processes of market
construction, maintenance, and reconstruction that necessarily accompany
financial innovation. Within the New Deal regulatory order, the state (and
the states) created rules and institutions that organized financial markets.
Bankers adopted cards to circumvent particular clusters of rules, while
nevertheless relying on the state(s) to legitimate and structure the new
markets they sought to create. Thus, bankers’ pursuit of fintech, in the
service of initiating regulatory change, was never about removing
government from markets. Rather, bankers used technology to reorganize
financial markets and financial rules to favor their interests over those of
other stakeholders—a reorganization bankers supported with claims about
the necessity and inevitability of the new technologies they promoted.8
Put differently, in this book I see cards (qua fintech) as tools for
securing power, which motivated bankers deployed in three primary
directions. First, bankers used cards to claim power within the banking
industry. Confined by New Deal regulations, bankers needed new ideas.
They saw information technology—embodied in mainframe computers—as
an inevitable, transformative force. Affluent households, meanwhile,
offered an expanding market for financial services. Proponents positionedcards as a way to capitalize on these trends. In doing so, card advocates
gained resources within their banks and steered the banking industry toward
consumer markets. Second, bankers used cards—as private payment
networks—to claim power within the economy. Bankers placed themselves
at the center of card payment systems. They consolidated local, dispersed
credit relationships within their banks and eventually within nationwide
payment networks. Bankers controlled who could access cards and set the
terms of that access. They made themselves the fundamental financial
intermediaries of the consumer economy. Finally, bankers used cards to
claim power vis-à-vis the New Deal regulatory order. In the 1950s and
1960s, bankers argued that to best serve consumers, cards should be free
from regulatory interference. Regulation came anyway. Then, in the 1970s
and 1980s, bankers used the geographic ambiguities of cards, which easily
crossed state borders, to undermine the place-based regulatory system and
its place-based social contract. Collectively, bankers cooperated to build
card networks and to legitimate bank card lending. In industry meetings,
through network governance, and in lending markets, they also competed
relentlessly to shape the structure and direction of card development.
Overall, however, as cards gained traction, bankers’ claims to power proved
mutually reinforcing, propelling card technology—and banker power—
forward with sustained momentum.9
Bankers sought to exercise power in a political environment designed to
stymie their influence and restrain their ambition. Initially, the New Deal
order held firm. New Deal era financial politics—focused on maintaining
the political economy of small finance, on ensuring financial stability, and
on channeling credit toward social priorities—encouraged continuous
congressional and administrative attention on bank card plans. In this
context, organized consumer groups drove the regulatory agenda. In line
with longstanding pocketbook organizing for fair consumer prices,
consumer and labor groups mobilized to control the price of card-based
lending. In the post–World War II years, federal mortgage subsidies
conditioned privileged households—white, well-compensated,
breadwinner-led families—to expect low-cost, widely available credit.
Card-based lending, by contrast, tended to be expensive. State by state,
consumers brought unsecured card lending under the New Deal pricecontrol regime. Banks’ mass mailing campaigns, meanwhile, elevated
concerns about marketplace safety, which were central to new consumer
organizing in the 1960s and 1970s. Consumers and their advocates targeted
cards as they sought to make credit marketing, reporting, and billing
practices safer, more transparent, and more responsive to consumer
complaints. By the early 1970s, middle- and upper-class consumers secured
rules that ensured credit markets provided them with safe, low cost credit.
Yet price controls and consumer safeguards worked against a third strand of
consumer politics, one that focused on opening credit access to excluded
groups, including women, minorities, and low-income consumers. Bankers
and their allies sought to exploit the tensions among consumer goals,
arguing that only markets unencumbered by price and safety regulations
would deliver truly egalitarian credit access. Initially, bankers’ free-market
arguments went nowhere.10
The contests over credit card regulation operated through the complex
political structure of U.S. federalism, in which states and the federal
government maintained an evolving balance of regulatory authority. Until
the 1980s, the regulatory priorities of the New Deal—financial federalism,
industry siloing, and price controls—remained in place. The state rules that
implemented these priorities, however, were never static. As market
conditions and business practices changed, as political coalitions changed,
or as idiosyncratic processes (judicial decisions, legal reform movements,
moral panics, and so on) worked through local contexts, financial rules also
changed. Federalist financial regulation created room for flexibility and
incremental adjustment. Confined within individual states, bankers engaged
in continuous negotiations with local stakeholders to shape evolving state
rules; they participated in the place-based social contract. Privileged
consumer households, represented by unions and consumer groups, enjoyed
significant influence in state policy. This influence grew as consumerism
became a mainstream political force in the 1960s and 1970s. Democratic
and Republican politicians competed for consumer votes and advanced
consumer priorities. Federalist financial regulation thus enabled a measure
of democratic control over finance; financial constituents could change
market practices by adjusting state rules. As in other areas of mid-century
American politics, it was a circumscribed democracy. Privileged consumerswere well represented; low-income and minority citizens were not. Through
the late-1970s, privileged Americans accepted exclusion as the price for
maintaining white credit privileges.11
In the New Deal financial order the place of states made sense because
financial transactions had fixed, predictable, and knowable locations.
Bankers made loans in bank offices. Those offices—stone and steel—
existed in one state or in another. In the political economy of small finance,
banks remained localized, geographically confined institutions. By the late
1960s, however, cards and other financial technologies raised difficult
questions about where financial transactions happened and which state’s
regulations applied. Gradually, bankers used the spatial ambiguities of
abstract finance to unravel the state-based regulatory order.
In part, the regulatory confusion—and conflict—was unintended. When
bankers developed card networks in the 1960s, large banks often built card
programs over multistate territories, partnering with small banks to sign up
merchants and solicit consumers in adjacent states. The large banks issued
cards to consumers and expected card transactions to happen, legally, in
their bank offices. Consumers, however, struggled to understand how
purchases made in Iowa, for instance, became bank loans in Nebraska.
Bankers sought uniformity and legal certainty. Consumers and state
attorneys wanted transactions that appeared to happen in a state to be
governed by that state’s consumer protection laws. After a decade-long
legal and legislative fight, in 1978 the U.S. Supreme Court settled the
question in favor of card-issuing banks. Card transactions, the court
decided, would be regulated by the state where the bank was located, not
where consumers lived or used their cards. The case, known simply as
Marquette, became a hinge, a turning point away from the New Deal
regulatory order and toward the deterritorialization of U.S. consumer
finance.
At the time it was decided, Marquette barely registered. Bankers
continued to be confined within states; they remained subject to ongoing
negotiations with local financial constituents. As long as states maintained
regulatory leverage over confined financial firms, the differences among
state rules would be meaningful for banks competing across state lines, but
they would also be small and subject to renegotiation.12Marquette continued to locate card transactions at a bank in a specific
place, and in a larger sense it reflected a shared understanding of bank card
markets as geographically circumscribed and tied to local bank offices.
Bankers signed up merchants and enrolled consumers in recognizable
territories. They expected cards to connect plan participants to their banks
and to generate local demand for other banking services. Yet, by the mid￾1970s, some enterprising bankers imagined a new future for cards—not as a
way to draw customers into physical bank branches but as banks in
miniature, plastic branches that could move beyond the spatial confines for
the New Deal order. New York’s Citibank pushed this idea furthest, fastest.
Already Citi straddled the world as a global financial superpower, yet
within the United States it could not grow beyond New York State. In its
worldwide businesses, Citi executives fostered a culture of regulatory
manipulation and aggressive expansion. Turning those ambitions
homeward, in the late 1970s, bank executives launched a card solicitation
campaign to initiate nationwide consumer banking. Citi gained millions of
new cardholders across the country. The bank’s competitors, in turn,
resumed aggressive card solicitations, now unbound by spatial limitations.
At the peak in 1979, banks approved nearly 75,000 credit card applications
a day.
13
By issuing cards across the country, Citi took advantage of a
fundamental transformation in the U.S. financial structure. Banks built card
networks to connect markets that remained divided by geographic
regulations. Until the late 1970s, consumer solicitations and merchant
enrollment remained local, even as cardholders used networks to shop on
credit when they traveled to other banks’ territories. However, once the
network infrastructure was in place—with merchants signed up,
transactions functioning smoothly, and consumers identifying networks
(BankAmericard, later Visa; Master Charge, later MasterCard) with card
payments—card networks broke down the spatial divisions altogether. Card
networks reordered the nation’s payments infrastructure, a fact which
contemporaries recognized but struggled to articulate. Bankers,
policymakers, and industry observers saw that private bank cards and
private bank networks might rival and replace prevailing forms of payment:
public cash and quasi-public checks. They promoted the “cashless” and“checkless” society, with bank cards as the inevitable alternative to
supposedly outmoded payment media. In effect, bankers created a new
universal means of payment, a point BankAmericard made explicitly in the
1970s, urging cardholders to “think of it as money.” Through card
networks, bankers created private money and gained new gatekeeping
power over economic participation.14
That power would coalesce over time, but in the late 1970s, bank cards
remained highly regulated, their future uncertain. Indeed, as bankers
barreled into consumer markets with new vigor, the nation’s faith in
boundless consumption sagged. The 1970s were racked by high inflation
and high unemployment. New competition, from West Germany and Japan,
undercut the American industrial machine. The rise of low-paid service
work, a constant force throughout the postwar years, became more visible
and more concerning. The postwar political economy, built on consumer
lending and rising wages, could no longer count on the latter to propel
broad-based mass prosperity. Americans used credit more and felt more
anxious about mounting debts. Policymakers, who had worried throughout
the postwar years about the economy’s dependence on consumer
borrowing, increasingly understood indebtedness as a moral and economic
problem. President Jimmy Carter and his administration struggled to
contain rising prices. His staff identified cards as a prime source of inflation
and a symbol of national decadence, and in March 1980, Carter initiated a
credit control policy to discourage inflationary card purchasing. Controls
invited a brief reckoning with the postwar economy’s reliance on consumer
debt. Americans reevaluated their credit habits. They mailed cards to the
White House in support of Carter’s policy. Yet by pulling back from credit
spending they also contributed to the sharpest decline in economic activity
since the Great Depression. The spring of an election year was the wrong
time to pull the rug out from under the economy. And Ronald Reagan
exploited the moment, rejecting any ambivalence about consumerism. At a
pivotal moment, Carter tried to rein in the credit card economy, yet it had
grown past his power to control.15
Carter’s implementation of direct credit controls demonstrates the extent
to which the New Deal regulatory order remained an active governance
framework, even as financial deregulation—as a solution to the nation’seconomic ills—gained momentum in the 1970s. In the same month Carter
instituted controls, he signed the Depository Institution Deregulation and
Monetary Control Act, legislation that phased out federal control of deposit
interest rates. Together, these actions underscore the long-building tension
between flexibility and control within the New Deal order. Policymakers
designed the system to be flexible: Federal Reserve officials could and did
adjust deposit ceilings; state lawmakers could and did adjust lending price
caps. Over the postwar era, bankers sought still more flexibility. They made
space at the margins: through new products, in new markets, and—for the
largest banks—offshore. Aggressive bankers saw opportunity and seized it.
Each turn to flexibility created more tension and more risk.
For many card-issuing banks, those risks came to fruition in the months
before Carter’s control policy. In October 1979, Federal Reserve chairman
Paul Volcker, determined to quash inflation, orchestrated a dramatic rise in
market interest rates, an event now known as the Volcker Shock. Many
banks, seeking flexibility, had financed card lending by borrowing in
variable-rate money markets rather than relying on price-controlled
deposits. The shock dramatically increased the cost of funding bank card
plans, even as state interest rate ceilings prevented banks from passing
rising costs onto consumers through higher credit prices. Citibank had taken
the largest risk and faced insolvency. Bank executives frantically negotiated
with New York State policymakers to raise the state’s price ceilings but to
no avail. Schooled in regulatory arbitrage through their international
experience, Citi executives found a loophole that allowed the bank to
relocate its credit card business to another state, if that state’s legislature
formally invited them in. It was “a solution that was good for South
Dakota,” as Chuck Prince later explained, “but frankly can be seen to have
saved Citibank.” Citi, unable to negotiate regulatory relief in New York,
moved its card business to South Dakota.16
In the years that followed, other banks moved, or threatened to move,
and states rolled back price controls and other regulations to lure financial
industry jobs or hold on to the ones they had. Under financial federalism,
bankers had a voice in state policy debates. Citi showed them the exit.
States and stakeholders lost their regulatory leverage at a critical moment
when deindustrialization and economic distress made state policymakersespecially eager to compete for financial industry jobs. Bankers, once
compelled to negotiate with privileged local stakeholders, now had power
to shape state regulatory environments to their whims. “It could have been
Missouri,” Chuck Prince reminded his audience in Sioux Falls, but
“Missouri blinked.” His message to South Dakota’s political leaders: don’t
blink. The relocations reshaped the economics of the bank card industry.
Cards, marginally profitable before 1980, became extremely profitable,
especially for the largest banks. What emerged was Gresham’s law of
plastic: because they charged higher prices, banks in regulatory havens
poured money into marketing and promotion, effectively crowding out low￾cost cards. Over the next decade, the bank card industry became
increasingly concentrated, rooted in states like South Dakota and Delaware,
where there were fewer regulatory controls. State regulation remained—and
remains—fundamental to financial governance, yet the states that regulate
the largest financial firms are those more amenable to financial industry
interests. State political dynamics have thus been an essential—if so far
ignored—mechanism for financialization, both by creating new sites for
financial extraction and by shielding banks from democratic oversight.17
The narrative of this book unfolds in three phases, the first comprises three
chapters, the second two contain four each. The first chapter shows how the
New Dealers at once solidified the political economy of small finance and
mobilized private credit for economic recovery and later consumer
prosperity. In chapters 2 and 3 I uncover the initial development of card
plans in alignment with the New Deal’s regulatory priorities, and then the
adoption and reorientation of cards by large banks in response to the profit
pressures created by the regulatory system. In the next group of chapters
(chapters 4 to 7) I focus on the banking industry’s convergence on credit
cards as a technological fix for its regulatory restraints and the resultant
surge of bank card solicitations in the late 1960s. Bankers’ aggressive
marketing, examined in chapter 4, encouraged a variety of
countermobilizations at the state and federal level, focused especially on
credit prices (chapter 5), consumer safety, and the overall structure of
postwar financial markets (chapter 6). Bankers and other card issuers
mobilized too, to fight off—unsuccessfully—new price and safety
regulations and to fight for—more successfully—active governmentpolicing of credit card fraud (chapter 7). Despite bankers’ hopes, by the
early 1970s, credit cards were securely bound within the New Deal
regulatory order.
Yet even as consumer and labor groups used federalist institutions to
restrain card plans, bankers were mounting a sustained challenge to the
regulatory geography on which those victories relied. In the final four
chapters I follow the erosion of the place-based regulatory structure.
Chapter 8 uncovers the origins of that process through a series of
midwestern legal cases about the regulation of credit cards that crossed state
lines, cases that led to the Supreme Court and Marquette. In chapter 9 I
show how Citibank exploited the resultant case law to develop a nationwide
card-based consumer bank, mailing cards to places where the bank could
not yet build branches and spurring another round of aggressive bank card
marketing. Although consumer groups and the Carter administration sought
to maintain the New Deal regulatory order and restrain bank card plans,
they failed to re-embed cards (chapter 10). In the final chapter I show how
Citibank’s relocation to South Dakota in 1981 launched a race to rewrite
state-level card rules to retain banks and financial industry jobs—or to steal
them. In this sense, place-based regulation and the place-based social
contract retained decisive importance for how finance was regulated, but
the balance of power to determine the form and content of financial rules
fundamentally shifted in bankers’ favor.1The New Deal Regulatory OrderSaving Capitalism
When Franklin D. Roosevelt swore his inauguration oath on March 4,
1933, the American financial system had collapsed. Between January 1930
and March 1933, 5,722 distressed banks had merged or permanently closed.
To prevent further failures, most states ordered all banks to shut their doors.
Whatever Roosevelt’s future ambitions, the rescue and reform of the
American banking system had to come first. Without safe, stable, and
sufficient finance, national recovery could not proceed. Under the
leadership of Southern Democrats in Congress, the New Deal’s financial
reforms hewed conservative. They preserved the existing structure of
primarily small, local banks, while imposing new boundaries on price- and
business-line competition on all banking firms. In exchange, bankers
received government support through federal deposit insurance and
recapitalization. New Dealers, however, soon became frustrated by bankers’
failure to support recovery. Credit was the lifeblood of the capitalist
economy. The government had rescued the banks. It now needed the banks
to lend. “Had it not been for the Government support . . . there would be no
private banking system in operation today,” Treasury official Marriner
Eccles wrote to Bank of America chairman A. P. Giannini in October 1934.
No one, Eccles continued, “has received more aid from the Government
than the bankers and . . . they are the last ones, in their own interests, who
should criticize and complain.” Eccles, a banker himself, was fast gaining
influence over New Deal financial policy. His message to Giannini, head of
the nation’s largest bank, was intended for all bankers. The time had come
to get in line.1
Eccles also recognized that by saving capitalism—as the New Dealers
congratulated themselves for doing—the government had left capitalists in
power. Their cooperation could not be willed; it had to be bought. With the
banks on a sound footing, Eccles and his allies devised policies to
encourage bankers to lend in the public interest. In part, Eccles channeled
the still-percolating ideas of British economist John Maynard Keynes, who
attributed the Depression’s severity to a collapse in demand. Famously,
Keynes called for government spending to make up the difference. Eccles
embraced this idea. He also recognized Roosevelt’s antipathy to federaldeficits, and he therefore looked to consumer purchasing power, and
particularly consumer credit, as an alternate path to recovery. Consumers,
borrowing to buy industrial products, would support investment and
employment in production industries, generating purchasing power for
reemployed workers and yet more consumer demand as workers spent their
wages. In June 1934, Eccles helped secure the National Housing Act, which
created federal subsidies for consumer installment loans and home
mortgages. Federal subsidies convinced bankers to lend. Giannini, for one,
strongly supported this program. “Today,” Giannini wrote in a widely
reproduced October 1936 editorial, the consumer “is a better loan prospect
for a bank than ever before.” The reason: New Deal policy. “Social security,
old age pensions, Federal insurance of bank deposits, and governmental
insurance of various types of installment loans, have made bank loans to
individuals a preferred investment,” Giannini insisted. Few bankers were so
publicly effusive. In their offices, though, they followed the federal money
and developed new consumer lending divisions, building a foundation for
credit-financed consumer prosperity.
2
The New Deal thus brought commercial bankers into consumer lending
markets in service of national recovery, infusing private lending with public
purpose. Yet by channeling public policy through private firms, the New
Deal’s credit programs allowed lenders to maintain pre-Depression beliefs
about the superiority of individual economic autonomy and privately
ordered markets over governmental planning and control. Building on
experience regulating consumer credit during World War II, policymakers
like Eccles sought to extend federal credit management into the postwar era
to meet the government’s new obligations for economic stability and full
employment. Lenders balked. Under the terms set by the New Deal, they,
not the federal government, would determine how best to allocate credit in
their communities. Some lenders circumvented wartime credit controls,
transitioning consumers from fixed-term and regulated installment lending
to variable-term and initially unregulated charge accounts. After the war,
creditors joined a wide-ranging business effort to roll back federal authority.
Private lenders sought and achieved autonomy over local lending decisions.
They claimed, through public rhetoric and credit advertising, the mantle of
prosperity. By promoting consumer borrowing as a private engine ofrecovery, the New Deal legitimated it as a private vector of prosperity. In
1936, an estimated 24 percent of households held installment debt. By
1952, 38 percent did, a figure that jumped to 45 percent by 1956. Although
bankers remained at the margins of consumer lending, the New Deal’s
federal credit programs and the wider societal embrace of credit-driven
consumer prosperity eventually created pathways for bankers to retake
control.3
The Roots of the Postwar Financial System
The financial landscape that unfolded before American consumers in the
post–World War II years appeared as long-tended farmland, divided by
hedges and fences and habits of mind built up over generations. It owed its
shape to deep-rooted traditions of local financial control dating to the
colonial era, successively reaffirmed by political resistance to big,
nationwide banks. Americans—or at least middling American elites spread
through townhalls and statehouses across the nation’s vast interior—
remained committed to local popular sovereignty, expressed variously as
states’ rights, tax resistance, and antimonopoly politics. They believed, in a
general way, that every town should have its own bank managed by its own
best citizens. And they succeeded. By the early 1920s, these ideals existed
as the stone fronts and columns of almost 30,000 independent banks. An
overwhelmingly white, exceedingly male, financial elite controlled these
institutions. They justified their financial authority through commitments to
community prosperity, commitments which gave moral content to banking’s
place-based social contract. “Remembering that the banker is a trustee for
the community’s funds,” bank reformer Henry M. Dawes contended in May
1930, “he has no more right to withhold them unreasonably than he has to
distribute them carelessly.” As comptroller of the currency in the 1920s,
Dawes crafted federal reforms that preserved local financial control. His
paean to trusteeship echoed speeches small-town bankers had made at club
meetings and civic celebrations for half a century. Bankers were custodians.
Their community leadership reflected a symbolic moral economy and
paternalistic masculinity, which, while imperfectly practiced, legitimized
their financial profits.4America’s traditions of local finance provided ideological foundation
for the legal and geographic structure of financial federalism, which
combined federal oversight of the financial system with state control of
financial institutions within their borders. The dynamic relationship
between state and federal banking law began during the Civil War, when
Congress forged a new national banking system to provide a uniform bank
note currency and to enable the northern states to finance their war effort.
The National Banking Acts (1863 and 1864) authorized the federal
government to charter and regulate national banks, while also retaining a
competing system of state-chartered banks regulated by individual states. In
what became known as the dual banking system, national and state banks
were confined within state-defined markets. Most banks remained small.
National banks were permitted just one banking office, though state banks
could build branches if permitted by their states. No bank, meanwhile,
could build branches across state lines. Federal banking laws created
distinct state and federal banking regimes, yet they also gave states
significant regulatory control over all banking institutions within their
borders. National banks, for instance, had to observe interest rate ceilings
on loans established by their home state, giving states significant statutory
control over their internal financial markets.5
Over time, financial federalism and its political economy of small
finance became deeply ingrained, but countervailing trends toward growth
and scale, always present, gained momentum at the turn of the century. In
America’s growing cities, large banks sought to keep pace with
consolidating industrial firms. Big businesses needed big banks. Further,
branching restrictions limited the size and scope of banking markets and
made individual banks dependent on local economies. Reformers and
financial entrepreneurs pursued branch banking as a safer, more profitable
alternative. By the early 1920s, an exodus of banks from the national
system to more permissive state systems pressured Congress to liberalize
rules governing nationally chartered banks. The McFadden Act (1927),
drawn up by Henry Dawes and sponsored by Louis T. McFadden (R-PA),
the House Banking Committee chairman, enabled national banks to operate
citywide offices if they were located in a state that permitted branching.
California, for example, allowed branch banking, and so a national bankheadquartered in San Francisco could branch across the city. A bank
headquartered in Chicago, however, could not, since Illinois remained a unit
banking state. State rules varied but one constant remained: banks could not
branch across state lines. Despite urbanization, industrial consolidation, and
the integration of nationwide markets, in banking, financial federalism and
state authority over local financial institutions remained paramount.6
The Great Depression leveled the political economy of small finance
but not the ideology that undergirded it. During the 1920s, a festering
agricultural downturn claimed hundreds of banks each year. Successive
banking crises in the early 1930s claimed thousands more. In the fires of
failure, some bankers lost faith. “Friends whose estates I managed, my
family, whose interests I represented, and the community at large, in whose
economic life I played a sensitive role, all expected me to find a way out of
the pit,” Eccles remembered. “All I could find within myself was despair.”
Despair led Eccles to abandon the free-market principles of his youth,
determining instead that the federal government must act to rebalance the
economy. Eccles, though, was an exception. While many bankers shared his
despair, few willingly abandoned their convictions. Moreover, even after
Roosevelt’s inauguration in March 1933, federalism remained the structural
anchor of the American political order. Members of Congress—elected to
represent states and communities—were not prepared to uproot localized
finance, despite its profound shortcomings. The most powerful members of
Congress, entrenched Southern Democrats, sought to preserve federalism,
and with it the racial caste system, at all costs. Even Roosevelt, though his
administration shouldered the full burden of national financial safety,
remained committed to a financial world ordered, as Eccles recalled, by
“small local units of power.”7
Thus the New Deal financial reforms did not challenge financial
federalism; they reinforced it. The Banking Act of 1933—known as Glass￾Steagall—embodied complex and sometimes contradictory goals, but at its
core the law buttressed local financial control. House Banking chairman
and Alabama populist Henry B. Steagall (D-AL) insisted that the law
include federal deposit insurance, which shifted risk from community
bankers to the federal government. The new Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC) protected individual accounts in the case of bankfailure. If a bank practiced sound lending but the local economy went bust,
the FDIC would preserve the community’s financial resources. Small
bankers remained in business and in power. Yet the law also contained
countercurrents, which encouraged bigger, safer banks. Glass-Steagall
further liberalized federal branching rules, allowing nationally chartered
banks full parity with state banks. A San Francisco bank could build
branches across California. A Chicago bank remained confined to one
office, in line with local rules. Overall, banks remained rooted in individual
states and subject to those states’ geographic and interest rate policies. The
New Deal thus centralized financial risk in the federal government while
maintaining state authority in financial regulation.8
The New Deal financial reforms preserved financial federalism, which
distributed authority geographically, and they also introduced or reinforced
divisions between different types of financial firms. Congress imposed this
fragmentation, or industry siloing, to limit what Senator Carter Glass (D￾VA) saw as destructive competition among financial service providers.
Glass most feared securities speculation. In the 1920s, large commercial
banks created affiliate companies, which sold stocks and bonds to the public
and ventured on their own account. Glass, the architect of the Federal
Reserve System and congressional don of financial regulation, had long
opposed “the dangerous use of the resources of bank depositors for the
purpose of making speculative profits.” To prevent firms from taking
excessive risks with depositors’ money, businesses were compartmentalized
into specific fields, such as investment banking, insurance, consumer
finance, and commercial lending. Congress defined these fields by the kinds
of liabilities firms could assume (e.g., deposits), the kinds of assets they
could hold, and the kinds of services they could provide. Specialization,
policymakers believed, meant safety. As New Dealers became more
interested in national economic management, siloing created specialized
channels for directing the flow of financial resources through the offices of
private financial firms.9
In addition to confining firms to specific lines of business, the New
Deal reforms also limited price competition by establishing price ceilings,
directly through federal regulation and indirectly through state interest rate
laws. First, Glass-Steagall barred commercial banks from paying interest ondemand accounts (i.e., checking accounts) and required the Federal Reserve
to establish maximum rates for savings accounts, a rule known as
Regulation Q. Price controls prevented commercial banks from drawing
away deposits from their competitors by taking on dangerously expensive
deposit liabilities. Meanwhile, nearly universal state-level interest rate laws,
known as usury limits, restrained the prices banks could charge on loans.
Federal policymakers understood state interest ceilings as direct
compliments to federal deposit rate controls. After observing that
Regulation Q fixed low deposit rates for banks, ensuring high profits if
banks channeled inexpensive deposits into high-interest lending, a
concerned congressman asked Eccles if “there is no attempt to fix the
maximum interest” banks “might charge when they loan that money?”
Eccles, now Federal Reserve governor, replied, “Most states have usury
laws.” Through price controls, financial reformers envisioned commercial
banks operating safely within closely monitored bands of competition, risk,
and profit.10
Together, financial federalism, industry siloing, and price controls
constituted the New Deal financial reform’s three pillars, which would
structure the American banking industry until the 1980s. They also reflected
tense political compromise. Carter Glass strongly opposed deposit
insurance. So, initially, did Roosevelt. Eccles, impatient with the political
economy of small finance, wanted to be rid of “mushroom miscalled
banks.” Nevertheless, although the New Deal reforms grew from different
intellectual and ideological ground, by the mid-1930s they interlaced,
bound by the institutional gravity of the FDIC and a reformed, centralized,
Federal Reserve. Assembled in parts, by the postwar era the financial
system resembled a functional whole. Pluralism gave the system strength.
By subdividing businesses through policy, the New Deal fragmented the
financial services industry politically. Over the next generation, siloed firms
spent their political capital protecting their market privileges against less or
differently regulated rivals. The system required maintenance, ranging from
periodic adjustment to active and vigorous defense. But it was—or at least
appeared—solid.11
Consumer Credit and New Deal Economic PlanningIn the early months of the New Deal, financial reformers worked to
reconstitute a financial system that had fallen apart, to provide stability and
calm in the face of economic chaos. Once the system stabilized in 1933,
their concern turned from rescue to recovery. Here, if possible, debates were
larger, more complicated, and more contentious. With the backdrop of
massive unemployment and still grinding economic hardship, the New
Dealers aspired to save capitalism from itself. They could not agree,
however, on the system’s primary illness or the appropriate course of
treatment. Within the administration, factions prescribing central planning,
cartelization, and antimonopoly all vied for influence. Early reform
programs, especially the National Recovery Administration, bogged down
in these debates. On technical matters, Roosevelt remained ambivalent. He
knew that the legitimacy of his reform agenda—whatever form it took—
rested on rebuilding the economy, on providing Americans economic
security and meaningful work. Those goals, administration officials
believed, required the banking industry’s cooperation. Roosevelt, along
with Henry Morgenthau Jr., his Treasury secretary, and other key advisers
remained skeptical of aggressive government spending. Once the financial
system was stable, they expected bankers to lend and business activity to
resume. Their hopes were disappointed. The 1930s financial crises made
lenders cautious. Bankers kept their money on the sidelines. They waited.
The New Deal, however, could not wait.12
Administration officials, from Roosevelt down, looked for policies that
would revive the flow of private credit and in doing so redirect idle capital
from bank balance sheets into purchasing power and productive investment.
Eccles, who joined the administration in February 1934 as Morgenthau’s
special assistant, understood the problem clearly. A banker, Eccles thought
like a banker. With the economy stagnant and factories empty, private
lenders would not risk their funds. “The question is not how bankers . . . can
bring about recovery,” he told a Utah audience in October 1933, “but why
they should do so, so long as there is no incentive offered in any field for
profitable investment.” In Eccles’s view, the root of the nation’s prolonged
depression was the collapse of consumer spending. Only the resumption of
that spending, and with it demand for the products of industry, would
generate incentives for new investment. Only then would private capitalflow. “The profit incentive,” Eccles argued, “will continue to be absent until
spending increases, consumption increases, and people get back to work.”
Eccles initially called for direct government spending to energize the profit
incentive. Once in the Treasury, though, he embraced an alternative
approach, advocating for federal credit programs that would encourage
bankers to lend to consumers, who would then spend, stoke demand, and
revive profitable opportunities across the economy.
13
The New Dealers’ embrace of consumer credit in 1934 reflected the
transformed place of consumer borrowing in American economic life.
Consumer credit changed significantly in the 1910s and 1920s, as consumer
durables manufacturers and urban department stores used credit to drive
sales and broaden their markets. Industrial firms in consumer goods
industries developed installment credit to sell expensive products, like
sewing machines, radios, and, most importantly, automobiles to salaried and
wage workers. For a reasonable down payment and a series of equal weekly
or monthly payments thereafter, consumers could participate in the mass
consumption economy. New financial institutions—finance companies—
emerged at the time to enable small, independent retailers to offer mass
installment credit. These firms financed retailer inventories on one side, and
then bought, consolidated, and collected on consumer installment contracts
on the other. Specialization increased the flow of credit. For proponents,
installment selling initiated a virtuous circle. Credit created demand for
pricey goods, encouraged economies of scale in manufacturing, drove down
unit costs, and made expensive goods less expensive. Opponents saw only
vice. Predatory retailers used installment contracts to sell shoddy goods at
high markups, especially to poor and minority customers. When borrowers
failed to make payments, lenders repossessed the items, leaving borrowers
with nothing but debt. Both theories told part of the story. Both reflected
reality for some borrowers. During the 1920s boom, installment lending
increased significantly, even as debates about its economic consequences
and moral efficacy remained unresolved.14
While durable goods retailers refined installment credit to sell expansive
goods to wage earners, urban department stores experimented with charge
accounts as a new way to sell soft goods to well-to-do buyers. Charge
accounts were a high-status evolution of traditional retail credit, scaled upand systematized through new credit technologies. Like installment lending,
department stores developed charge plans to drive sales, in this case by
making credit quick and convenient. Charge accounts granted affluent
consumers a fixed line of credit that they repaid each month without paying
interest. Consumers applied with a store’s credit department, and once
approved they often received a charge token—a metal badge shaped as a
key fob or small plate—that featured identifying information such as the
store’s name and the customer’s account number. To access their line of
credit, customers presented charge tokens at checkout, using the metal
badges to physically demonstrate their creditworthy status and enabling
clerks to recognize valued customers in cities overflowing with strangers.15
On the back of these innovations, consumer credit surged in the 1920s,
but like the banking system, it crashed when the economy turned south at
decade’s end. Lenders were not eager to take new risks when the economy
was in free fall. Consumers likewise retreated, repaying old debts before
assuming new ones. Consumer credit augmented swings in the business
cycle. It bolstered consumer purchasing power on the upswing, generating
increased consumer demand and drawing in additional investment in
manufacturing capacity. On the downswing, consumers stopped spending
income and credit. Industries dependent on credit-enhanced buying suffered
a double loss, leaving factories idle and workers without work. Only by
fully replacing pre-crisis purchasing power, officials like Eccles argued,
would business investment, and with it industrial employment, return on the
supply side.16
Forced to action by the slow recovery in 1934, administration officials
developed policies that would recreate consumer demand by encouraging
lenders to offer low cost, widely available consumer credit. Eccles led this
effort. In June 1934, he guided the National Housing Act (NHA) through
Congress, legislation that transformed national markets for home mortgage
and durable goods credit by introducing government insurance for private
lending. Cyclical credit swings had also undercut the housing market.
During the Depression, mortgage lending evaporated. Home construction,
Roosevelt recognized, was a critical nexus of productive activity, linking
industries from lumber to lace curtains. The president was eager to revive
home building and recover these jobs. Policymakers developed the NHA torestart private investment in housing. That meant convincing bankers to
lend. To draw bankers in, the law created a novel system of federal
insurance covering home mortgages and housing-related installment credit,
loans made for immovable home improvements like electrification and air
conditioning. The insurance protected lenders in the case of consumer
default. In exchange, the law required financiers to lend at low, federally
mandated rates, prices balanced by the still lower interest banks paid to
depositors under the new banking laws. Thus, the NHA enabled lenders to
extend credit, risk free, at a modest but guaranteed profit. The approach,
Eccles claimed, would generate “a maximum degree of private spending
through a minimum of public spending,” bolstering purchasing power with
borrowed funds.17
The National Housing Act laid the groundwork for a U.S. home loan
industry that was at once structured by federal policy and managed at the
local level by networks of community elites. Private appraisers evaluated
residential properties, private real estate agents mediated home purchases,
and private banks financed home loans. Federal officials issued standards
and provided insurance, but they did so largely out of sight. As a
consequence, federally subsidized credit flowed to neighborhoods—white,
often suburban—where these publicly empowered private actors expected
property values to go up. Mixed race, minority, and urban areas were cut
off, redlined into self-fulfilling prophesies of decay and decline.18
Credit insurance revolutionized mortgage lending; it also pulled
commercial bankers, who traditionally focused on business lending, into
consumer markets. Before the New Deal, few commercial banks offered
consumer credit. Bankers, as custodians, cloaked themselves in
traditionalism and prudence. Bankers lent to businesses. Businesses
produced value. Value ensured repayment. Consumption, like the illness,
was a wasting disease. In 1934, commercial banks made just 1 percent of all
installment loans (though they funded consumer borrowing indirectly
through business loans to finance companies). By guaranteeing modest
profits, the installment lending provisions of the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA), known as Title I, convinced commercial bankers to
develop consumer lending departments. By the end of 1934, more than
6,400 banks participated in the Title I program. On the back of thisexperience, commercial banks steadily increased their lending to
consumers. In 1937, banks extended 3 percent of installment loan debt. By
1941, that figure rose to 8 percent. More banks waded into consumer credit
markets. By 1946, the American Bankers Association reported that 8,770 of
14,029 commercial banks, or 63 percent, offered some form of consumer
credit.19
Like the New Deal’s financial reforms, federal credit programs created
an enduring structure that carried forward into the postwar era. Federal
support for credit-driven purchasing power made credit access a defining
component of economic citizenship in the United States. Credit citizenship,
however, remained circumscribed, reserved for privileged borrowers, who
tended to be white and affluent. Under the continued sway of financial
federalism, New Dealers vested authority over credit access in financial
firms and local financial elites. Doing so, they ensured that credit-driven
purchasing power flowed according to local elites’ prejudices and in support
of their profits. “The watchwords,” Eccles intoned in November 1934, were
“profits [and] decentralization.” Social benefits thus accrued only to the
creditworthy, and creditworthiness remained a function of perceived
individual traits, including race, class, gender, and sexual orientation.
Privileged groups, especially straight white men and their dependents,
enjoyed protected access to credit-financed abundance. Others did not.20
Moreover, the New Deal’s credit programs enabled lenders to maintain
fervent belief in individualism and free markets, even as the federal
government took responsibility for ensuring those markets provided
stability and abundant credit. “No class,” Eccles wrote, “received more aid
from the government than the bankers.” Yet by retaining the political
economy of small finance and channeling social policy through it, the New
Deal fomented a building tension between lenders, who sought to preserve
their economic and social power, and federal policymakers, who, in
accepting responsibility for national economic well-being, increasingly
favored centralized credit management. The New Deal’s financial reforms,
built on pillars of financial federalism, industry siloing, and price controls,
in conjunction with targeted credit policies like the NHA, gave
policymakers a variety of tools for managing the economy through thefinancial system. By also preserving the position of financial elites, these
same programs encouraged ready and sustained opposition to their use.21
Credit Control in War and Peace
During the 1930s, the Roosevelt administration and Congress
restructured the American financial system, and in so doing created new
incentives for private lenders to offer widely distributed, low-cost consumer
credit. They did so during the Depression to increase the flow of credit as
purchasing power into industries still suffering from excess capacity. They
hoped to jumpstart a positive cycle of demand, new employment, and
further demand. Soon, however, policymakers needed to twist the knobs the
other way. As the United States confronted prospects of international
conflict in 1940 and 1941, Eccles, now chairman of the Federal Reserve,
feared consumer credit would stoke inflation in an economy geared for war.
When the nation’s productive capacity turned toward armaments and armor,
Eccles believed, the positive cycle of credit-driven demand combined with
wartime scarcity of consumer goods would quickly drive up consumer
prices. When the storm of war broke, Eccles and Roosevelt acted decisively
to curtail credit buying in order, as Roosevelt explained, “to keep the cost of
living from spiraling upward.” But whereas financial firms and business
groups had supported policies that expanded credit and guaranteed profits,
they resisted policies that pushed in the opposite direction.22
For administration officials, wartime credit controls, administered under
provisions of the War Powers Act, provided a testing ground for still
emergent ideas about national economic management and federal regulation
of consumer credit markets. In the short term, proponents hoped to channel
consumer purchasing power into patriotic saving and redirect the nation’s
financial flows from consumption to wartime production. “We must
discourage credit and installment buying, and encourage the paying off of
debts, mortgages, and other obligations,” Roosevelt demanded, “for this
promotes savings, retards excessive buying and adds to the amount
available to the creditors for the purchase of war bonds.” At the same time,
some policymakers saw wartime controls as a means of continuing the New
Deal reform agenda. Office of Price Administration (OPA) officials RolfNugent and Leon Henderson, who with Eccles designed and implemented
the credit control program, wanted to initiate permanent federal regulation
of consumer credit. In their pre–New Deal careers, these administrators had
worked to protect consumers from predatory lending. States, however,
regulated consumer credit, and reformers had struggled to achieve
consumer protections across forty-eight jurisdictions. Better to have
uniform federal regulation, legitimized through wartime experience.
Nugent, Henderson, and Eccles all also feared the macro-economic
consequences of relying too much on consumer borrowing to deliver
national abundance. Credit controls, by adjusting the price and availability
of credit, could temper the swings of the business cycle, first in war and
then in peace.23
In 1941, Federal Reserve and OPA officials crafted controls to restrain
installment lending, but retailers quickly thwarted regulatory efforts by
developing new forms of credit which blurred the boundaries between fixed
installment credit and more flexible charge accounts. Fed officials sought to
curtail consumer purchases of durable goods, such as refrigerators and
automobiles. Officials mandated higher down payments and shorter
repayment periods on installment loans, increasing the up-front cost of
credit purchasing. Although the Fed restricted installment loans, which
consumers paid over time, it ignored retail charge accounts, which
consumers paid off every month. Charge accounts, regulators believed,
made up just a small fraction of overall consumer borrowing and were too
complicated to regulate effectively. Retailers capitalized on this omission.
First, they lengthened charge account repayment periods, converting short￾term credit into long-term financing. Second, retailers began to assess
monthly interest charges, so that charge accounts functioned more like
installment credit. Retailers thus created a new form of lending, revolving
credit, which gave consumers a fixed credit limit—like a charge account—
but allowed them to pay over time—like installment credit. In short,
retailers pursued financial innovation to thwart government regulation.24
In response, the Federal Reserve extended controls to cover charge
accounts, which prompted further innovation, not to circumvent controls
but to comply with them. Under new, complicated rules, Fed officials
required retailers to freeze charge accounts of customers who failed to payoff their balances by the tenth day of the second month after each credit
purchase. Store personnel, however, often struggled to transmit delinquent
account information from the billing department to the sales floor. Charga￾Plate technology, a billing system marketed by Boston’s Farrington
Manufacturing Company, provided an effective solution. Originally
developed in the 1920s, Charga-Plate technology employed metal plates
embossed with the customer’s name and account number. When processing
a credit transaction, sales clerks imprinted the account information onto
carbon paper sales slips. A clerk could then compare the account number to
a list of frozen accounts before finalizing the purchase. By simplifying
regulatory compliance, Charga-Plate became the industry standard for large
retailers and department stores. The plates—or cards—soon symbolized
credit buying.25
For many retailers, wartime controls created a tangible link between
revolving credit and payment card technologies like Charga-Plate. Charge
accounts, which remained more widespread, relied on the same card-based
accounting systems. After the war, large retailers transitioned from offering
fixed charge accounts to flexible revolving credit, a transformation often
reflected in practice but not terminology. Many retailer “charge account”
plans featured revolving credit; others had to be repaid promptly each
month. Likewise, although “credit card” later came to be exclusively
associated with revolving credit, in the 1950s, the term remained
ambiguous. What ultimately held these types of credit together was the
status attached to them. Charge accounts were for well-to-do people. They
were not the installment credit of the working class nor the fringe finance—
the pawn shops, loan companies, and loan sharks—of the working poor.
26
Federal policymakers recognized that formerly distinct credit categories
had converged during the war years, but when the United States returned to
peace in 1945, they were principally concerned with maintaining controls to
restrain inflation. The Truman administration and the Eccles Fed believed
that reconversion and the return to mass consumption would cause
consumer demand to outstrip the supply of goods. Americans had
accumulated significant wartime savings. They were eager to buy consumer
durables whose production had been limited by the war. To keep credit from
bolstering already abundant purchasing power, the Fed maintained controlsin the months after V-J Day. Anticipating pressure to lift them prematurely,
Eccles told a congressional committee in March 1944 that “the danger” of
inflation “carries over after peace comes and war-weary people, tired of
wartime controls and restraints, are eager to throw them off.” Truman asked
Congress to extend credit control authority in 1947. After Congress
assented, the administration maintained controls until the authority expired
in June 1949.27
Although the administration framed continued controls as essential for
war reconversion, Eccles and his colleagues believed permanent federal
controls could ensure stable economic growth within the context of
Keynesian demand management. Federal officials were desperate not to
repeat the Depression experience. In their most ambitious moments, they
believed they had the knowledge and authority to tame the business cycle.
Under the Employment Act of 1946, they were affirmatively charged with
pursuing “maximum employment, production, and purchasing power.”
Unpredictable credit markets threatened these goals. Drawing on the
consensus of postwar economic thought, Eccles told the Senate Banking
Committee in June 1947 that installment credit “accentuates the boom and
it accentuates the downswing. It tends to make for instability.” Instability
was exactly what policymakers wanted to avoid. Eccles continued to
believe in a virtuous credit cycle that supported employment, production,
and purchasing power. Consumers bought industrial products with
installment credit, thus supporting well-paid, unionized industrial labor. To
keep production stable and unionized workers at work, the credit system
required federal management.28
Retail and credit industry lobbyists urged Congress to end the
administration’s control authority, seeking to establish an alternative theory
of political economy where prosperity flowed through abundant, privately
administered credit, not government management. In the early postwar
years, they joined a wider movement of business leaders, who worked to
roll back the New Deal’s expansion of federal power. The Consumer
Bankers Association captured the scope of the credit community’s
grievances: “Regulation of consumer credit by Federal authority is
unnecessary, ineffective, un-American, unsocial, inconsistent, and
impractical.” The legions of retail and financial trade groups that descendedon Congress in the late 1940s hammered these claims: only local lenders,
whether department stores, auto dealers, or community banks, had the
knowledge and experience to make individual credit decisions. They knew
their customers. They knew their communities. Creditors drew on the
longstanding values that undergirded financial federalism. They claimed the
right to manage, to decide the best course in a free economy. As employers
sought to wrest labor negotiations from federal oversight, so too did
creditors seek dominion over credit relationships. Following relentless
lobbying, they convinced Congress to allow credit control authority to
expire.29
Although officials lost the fight over direct controls, throughout the
1950s federal policymakers, including Harry S. Truman and Dwight D.
Eisenhower, remained concerned that cyclical credit swings threatened
postwar prosperity. In their annual Economic Report of the President, both
Truman and Eisenhower urged Congress to reinstate control authority. For
the federal managers of the postwar economy, controlling credit never
meant denying credit. Federal welfare ran through the financial system.
Suburbanization, a major driver of postwar economic growth, depended on
mortgage lending, auto financing, and municipal borrowing. If credit
extensions moved abreast of advancements in disposable income, if they
did not threaten to exacerbate inflation, and if adequate credit flowed
toward social priorities such as home mortgages, agriculture lending,
municipal borrowing, and the credit needs of businesses, policymakers were
content to let credit follow its course. Such a benign credit environment,
however, was never present. Under the tidal force of monetary policy, credit
rushed or receded unpredictably. Administration officials wanted to
implement, or at least have the authority to implement, credit controls to
manage the ebbs and flows of finance, to fine-tune the economy at the
micro as well as macro levels. Outside of wartime, policymakers did not get
their wish.30
Instead, consumer lenders, successful in their campaign against
controls, now carried the political burden of the credit-driven economy.
They did so eagerly, championing credit as the motive force of broad-based
prosperity. In an address to the National Association of Credit Men in June
1951, executive manager Henry H. Heimann praised consumer credit intypically hyperbolic terms: “Next to atomic energy it has the greatest power
and influence in the development of industry and commerce, of a high
standard of living, and of a happy citizenship.” Throughout the 1950s, at
trade association meetings and in the banking and retail press, self￾identified credit men aligned consumer credit with the broader political
compromises between labor and capital which stabilized the New Deal
order in the postwar era. Privately administered consumer credit, they
argued, not antagonistic labor organizing, would facilitate mass purchasing
power and support industrial employment. The legitimacy of consumer
credit hinged on its relationship to production; consumer credit was the
engine of the Fordist economy because it financed Fords. Within this
compromise, lenders maintained coveted power to administer credit—to
make day-to-day decisions about who could access credit, for what purpose,
at what price—decisions decisively shaped by notions of creditworthiness
rooted in race, gender, and social class. Contrary forces remained: the
postwar expansion of consumer credit also proceeded under broadly shared
understandings, likewise rooted in the legacy of the New Deal, that mass
credit should be safe and inexpensive. Meanwhile, credit exploitation
continued at the margins and became more visible as credit use became
more widespread. Overall, creditors promoted a credit politics closely
aligned with mass consumer prosperity and economic growth, channeled
through private, locally managed institutions. The watchwords remained
profits and decentralization.31
Postwar credit advocates’ view of consumer credit as a driver of
economic growth was (and is still) somewhat circular because it relied on
the belief that credit purchasing would raise wages and enable consumers to
repay old debts and incur new ones, continuing the growth cycle. With time,
key federal institutions accepted that privately administered consumer
credit would constitute a driving force in American economic prosperity. In
a six-volume 1957 study, the Federal Reserve found that more American
families used more credit, year after year. At the end of World War II,
consumer debt comprised one-fifth of all private debt. A decade later, it had
risen to a third, claiming ground from business and agricultural lending.
The report presented such growth as inevitable and beneficial. “Debt,” one
Fed economist wrote, “flows from and contributes to the achievements of afree economy, and continued growth of debt is to be expected as the
economy makes further progress.” Yet critics did not retire from the field. In
his influential 1958 book, The Affluent Society, Harvard economist John
Kenneth Galbraith leveled a sustained attack on the ways private
consumption crowded out public goods in postwar America. Galbraith had
served with Nugent and Henderson at the OPA. He wrote The Affluent
Society with the Fed’s consumer credit report close at hand. “Can the bill
collector be the central figure in the good society?” Galbraith asked.
Certainly not. Still, whatever audience Galbraith and other critics of debt￾fueled affluence found among the public, they did little to turn the tide.
Credit, as Galbraith again predicted, intensified swings in the business
cycle. For advocates, success came when recovery, fueled by credit,
followed each trough with equal conviction.32
During the early New Deal, the Roosevelt administration rescued the
private financial system and imposed on it a three-part regulatory
framework of financial federalism, industry siloing, and price controls.
Although the policy motivations undergirding this system emerged from
conflicting ideological positions, the regulatory order reinforced the
political economy of small finance and restrained the power and profits of
financial firms. Within this framework, federal policymakers developed
credit programs to channel idle financial resources, through private
businesses, into consumer purchasing power. They preserved and bolstered
the role of privately administered consumer credit and brought the
commercial banking industry into consumer markets. After World War II,
officials sought greater regulatory authority to meet their obligations for
managed prosperity. But because the New Deal had rescued and built on the
ideology of private enterprise and decentralized control, those values
retained vigorous force. As Eccles feared, war-weary people, tired of
controls and restraints, were eager to throw them off. Credit moved to the
center of the business cycle.
In this, the U.S. followed a different path than its peer nations in
Western Europe and Japan. In those countries, central governments
established, and central banks managed, robust credit control policies, often
aimed at restraining consumer lending in favor of supporting business
investment, suppressing inflation, and protecting consumers from excessivedebt. European countries especially made bureaucratic credit allocation a
key feature of postwar economic planning and the backbone of the postwar
economic miracle—the trente glorieuses in France, the Wirtschaftswunder
in Germany, the miracolo economico in Italy. Considerable national
distinctions remained in terms of aims and implementation, yet collectively,
developed economies embraced interventionist credit control policies as
core to postwar economic management. Public officials, not private elites,
determined the course of credit. By contrast, U.S. policy remained
decentralized. Without credit control authority, the Federal Reserve
managed the business cycle through blunt interest rate adjustments, which
refracted through the overlapping institutions of financial federalism,
industry siloing, and price controls, and through targeted lending programs
like the FHA. In periods of financial disruption, American policymakers
would revisit centralized credit controls, looking to wartime experience and
foreign examples for inspiration. Overall, however, the U.S. remained an
outlier in its commitment to a privately administered, credit-driven
prosperity.
33
That the New Deal laid the groundwork for an unstable, credit-driven
consumer economy is ironic. The New Deal’s financial reforms and credit
policies formed two strands of its broad commitment to economic security,
which also embraced the creation of a sustained social safety net along with
protections and power for many workers. Taken together, the strands of
security had a unified consequence: The New Deal made Americans
creditworthy, or at least the white industrial workers and their dependents
who primarily benefited from New Deal welfare policies. Giannini argued
precisely this point in 1936. Consumer lending became a sound investment
because of Social Security and government credit insurance. The calculous
worked as well for borrowers as for lenders. With security, consumers could
hazard more risk. By the postwar era, lenders across the economy shared
Giannini’s assessment. They clamored for consumer profits, and they did
so, conveniently, by forgetting the federal role in securing those profits in
the first place.342Charge Account Banking
Charge-Rite
In spring 1955, G. L. Toole, cashier for the Upper Darby National Bank
in suburban Philadelphia, published a pair of articles in the American
Banker newspaper detailing his bank’s success developing a charge account
credit service, a forerunner of the bank credit card. The program allowed
consumers to shop at a variety of local stores using a single, bank￾sponsored credit plan, which they repaid at the end of each month. The plan
was called Charge-Rite. “Sure, the name can be called corny,” Toole
conceded, “but it refers to the service it represents, is short, phonetic, and
kind of easy to remember.” Toole’s bank began Charge-Rite in 1953, and by
early 1955 the bank had processed more than $750,000 in local credit
transactions. After enduring high start-up costs, Charge-Rite was generating
modest profits, and the future looked bright. “At my bank,” Toole
explained, “we believe charge account banking will develop into one of the
most successful of our services.” Toole was not alone. After detailing the
success of charge account banking plans across the country, American
Banker associate editor Otto C. Lorenz gushed in November, “Where else
could the banker invest . . . and get such handsome returns?”1
The charge account plans described by Toole and praised by Lorenz
were, at first glance, an unlikely innovation for bankers to pursue during the
early postwar decades. In the wake of the Great Depression and New Deal
banking reforms, the American commercial banking industry was
structurally and culturally predisposed toward a custodial obsession with
safety, not an entrepreneurial spirit of risk-taking. Commercial bankers,
who primarily provided financial services to businesses, tended to be
suspicious of direct consumer lending. When bankers did lend toconsumers, they did so for purchases with concrete collateral, like
automobiles and appliances; for those with firm government guarantees,
like Federal Housing Administration Title I loans; or, in the best
circumstances, both. They did not finance casual shopping. For a small
cohort of bankers, however, the industry’s marble-pillared traditionalism
was too confining. Consumption was self-evidently the pulsing heart of the
postwar economy. Financial institutions that catered to consumers, like
credit unions and savings and loans, were growing quickly at commercial
banking’s expense. If commercial banks wanted a part of this future, self￾described “progressive” bankers like Toole believed, they would need to
shake the industry’s stodginess and find innovative ways to serve consumer
markets.
This is not to say that Toole and his peers were bent on destroying the
New Deal banking reforms. Just the opposite. Even as bankers pursued
financial innovation in the early postwar years, they remained constrained
by the era’s regulatory barriers and the habits of thought these barriers
encouraged. Specifically, although bankers were eager to facilitate
consumption, they could not yet imagine marketing their new credit
products directly to consumers. Instead, the postwar political and regulatory
structure led charge account bankers toward a set of business strategies
focused on retailers not consumers, and toward an inherently antimonopoly
politics that was pro-small business rather than being pro-consumerism.
Charge account banking was a business service designed to help small
retailers compete with the credit practices—and overcome the market
power—of expanding department stores. Bankers used the plans to deepen
business relationships with merchants, who bore the costs of charge account
plans, while keeping the primarily female consumers who used the plans at
arm’s length. The postwar political economy of small banking, which
sharply limited individual banks’ geographic markets, also allowed charge
account bankers to form a collaborative innovation community, since their
plans did not directly compete. Through the banking press and new industry
groups, charge account proponents organized and legitimized a new field
within the banking industry. As they worked together to achieve
profitability through the 1950s, charge account bankers adopted many of
the features that would later define large-scale bank card systems. In doingso, they pushed the banking industry to embrace unsecured consumer
lending.2The Credit Trap
The Federal Reserve’s World War II credit controls transformed retail
credit in the United States. Controls initially restricted installment loans,
which consumers paid in set amounts over fixed intervals, but left charge
accounts, which consumers paid in full every month, unregulated. To skirt
controls, retailers developed revolving credit, which gave consumers a fixed
credit limit—like a charge account—and allowed them to pay over time—
like installment credit. Retailers also adopted payment card technologies,
which simplified compliance with federal oversight. Wartime controls thus
created a tangible link between non-installment retail credit—old charge
accounts and new revolving credit plans—and payment card technologies.
After the war, large retailers promoted credit plans of all varieties. The
National Retail Dry Goods Association, retailers’ main trade group, urged
members that credit, not accumulated savings, should drive postwar
consumption. “Saving should not be relied upon,” the association declared.
Instead, “the expansion of charge account volume . . . offer[s] a fertile
field.” Retailers were quick to respond. “In nearly all instances,” industry
newspaper Women’s Wear Daily reported in February 1946, “stores are
either already aggressive in going after new charge customers or are
planning to become so.”3
In the early postwar years, major urban department stores began
building branches beyond city centers, often using the availability of credit
to promote new suburban locations. Department stores offered credit at
scale: they operated stand-alone credit departments, where specialized
employees carefully vetted each credit customer while coaxing efficiency
from technically sophisticated credit systems. With their large customer
base, department stores enjoyed a diversified lending pool of thousands of
individual credit accounts. They could bear the risks of late or missed
payments. Importantly, department stores did not operate credit programs at
a profit. Credit, as a marketing tool, drove sales. According to the National
Retail Credit Association, by 1953 well-managed retailers could offer credit
at a cost equivalent to 2 percent of total charge volume. Because credit costs
were low, department stores kept financing charges low as well. Chargeaccounts carried no interest, and revolving accounts carried no interest for
the first month, and then usually a modest 1 percent per month (12 percent
annually) charge for each monthly billing cycle.4
The capacity to offer convenient credit divided large retailers from their
smaller rivals, a division that carried sharp political connotations. Small
retailers viewed the competitive advantages of larger firms through the lens
of antimonopoly. A bright thread of “fair competition” ran through the
fabric of the New Deal, woven in through legislation like the Robinson￾Patman Act (1936) and the Miller-Tydings Act (1937), which Congress
designed to curtail the market power of large retail firms. Even as business
leaders rejected federal power after World War II, antimonopoly persisted
as a powerful symbol in the retail industry. Wright Patman and Millard
Tydings remained in Congress. Retailers, like bankers, continued to
negotiate the boundaries of market competition through the political
process. Conflicts over market power also played out in the retail and credit
trade press. The editors of Credit World recognized that not all merchants
could afford the mechanical infrastructure necessary to promote mass
credit. In the early 1950s, the magazine began publishing a special section,
“For the Smaller Businessman,” to address the concerns of small
merchants. “Occasionally a smaller businessman complains that he is at a
terrific disadvantage in competing in credit sales promotion with the bigger
stores,” the magazine observed in June 1952. Small merchants knew their
customers, industry writers argued, and they should use that knowledge to
expand their credit operations.5
Small retailers, however, recognized that prioritizing credit introduced
additional risks as they struggled to compete with larger, more efficient
rivals. Small merchants always navigated a precarious existence. Failure
was common. Postwar demographic and geographic changes transformed
the retail landscape, leaving small firms at a disadvantage. Offering credit
necessarily strained merchants’ already limited capital, and small retailers
often lacked the time or expertise to manage charge accounts. Credit also
strained relationships. Denying credit or hounding consumers for repayment
were surefire ways to lose customers. In short, small merchants were caught
in a credit trap. They needed to offer charge accounts to compete, but
offering convenient credit tied up capital and increased costs and risk,potentially making small retailers less competitive or less profitable.
Moreover, once most merchants offered credit, individual stores had to bear
the higher costs with no gain in competitive advantage. Thus, as consumer
credit became an essential feature of postwar consumer capitalism, it
created structural advantages for large firms while weighing heavily on
smaller competitors. Given the continued rhetorical importance of small
business as the lifeblood of American free enterprise and the ongoing—if
overdrawn—debates about the survival of small business in the face of
competition and government regulation, such competitive disadvantages
shaded into political symbolism. Charge accounts would save small
merchants or doom them, but there was no question that survival was at
stake.6
The Origins of Charge Account Banking
Small bankers sympathized with their retailer kin: they too worried
about survival in the face of aggressive and expanding rivals—and about
the overall survival of small proprietors in a political economy oriented
toward big, capital-intensive firms. Small bankers also listened to their
merchant customers: some saw opportunity in the new pressures of postwar
retailing. “As far back as 1946,” G. L. Toole recalled, “our top men were
seeking a way to assist the many local merchants who sought help
[meeting] the competition of credit buying offered by center city
merchants.” Yet sympathy did not translate immediately into strategy. New
Deal credit programs had nudged bankers into consumer lending fields.
They were making home improvement loans and financing automobile and
durable goods purchases. These lines of business relied on fixed installment
contracts and ran through firms, like auto dealers or appliance sellers, that
sold directly to consumers. Most commercial bankers had little retail
experience beyond making business loans to retailers. Thus, despite a
shared interest in preserving small capitalism against ever-encroaching big
business, prevailing experience did not offer bankers like Toole an obvious
path to follow.
7
Experimentation started small and at the margins. In the mid-1940s,
John C. Biggins, an executive at Flatbush National Bank, a small banknestled in a growing Brooklyn neighborhood, noticed that his merchant
customers were facing increased competition from New York City’s
downtown department stores. After the war, Manhattan department stores
had branched out across the East River and enticed Brooklyn consumers
with charge accounts. Biggins’s merchant customers needed to offer
convenient credit too, but doing so was expensive and risky. “The number
of merchants who have been knocked out of business by supplying their
own credit is enormous,” Biggins explained in August 1946. “Charg-It,” a
plan for “providing the small storekeeper with a credit arrangement that
wasn’t a losing proposition for everyone concerned,” was Biggins’s answer.
Under this plan, Biggins’s bank provided consumers with a revolving credit
account they could use to shop at a variety of local retailers. The bank
would pay merchants for the goods consumers purchased and assume the
bookkeeping costs and credit risk.8
Biggins conceived of Charg-It as at once a credit service and a means of
maintaining community integrity in the face of external competition. Charg￾It, however, got its first trial not in Brooklyn but in Bay Shore, an outlying
community linked to New York City by the Long Island Rail Road. While
Biggins was developing Charg-It, Manufacturers Trust Company, a large
Manhattan bank that was also expanding into Brooklyn, acquired Flatbush
National. Manufacturers Trust executives considered implementing
Biggins’s plan across New York City but chose not to, perhaps because
Charg-It would have competed with the charge account plans of their
department store customers. Instead, Biggins tested his plan in partnership
with the First National Bank and Trust of Bay Shore. The program was
small: a 1946 ad listed eleven participating merchants clustered on Bay
Shore’s Main Street. “Charg-It will give you the advantages of a department
store charge account in your favorite local stores,” one ad promised,
offering suburban residents an incentive to do their shopping in town
instead of downtown. Biggins continued to hone this community-shopping
strategy at Paterson Savings and Trust Company in suburban New Jersey,
where he introduced Charg-It on a larger scale in 1950. Paterson merchants
also competed with New York department stores, and Charg-It offered these
retailers a “vital community service” by keeping business local. “You can
shop in your own neighborhood,” a Paterson Savings ad promised. “Charg-It [at] stores and receive the same credit courtesy available [at] the biggest
stores in the city.”9
Biggins designed Charg-It to help small retailers compete with
department stores, but the plan had a critical weakness: it did not replicate
the social prestige embodied in department store charge accounts. By the
late 1940s, most department stores had adopted charge plates—embossed
metal cards—which, as part of an otherwise invisible accounting and billing
infrastructure, enabled stores to monitor and control credit purchases. For
consumers, the card appeared only as a means of identification and a
medium of credit. As such, it marked class status, not credit control. Such
class symbolism, bankers and retailers believed, was especially important
for female customers. “There is . . . a certain prestige for particularly the
woman shopper,” G. L. Toole observed, “who could present her credit card
and merely say, ‘Charge it—please.’” On the contrary, Charg-It operated
through credit scrip. The bank gave customers paper certificates equal to
their preestablished credit limit, which they could spend like money at
participating stores. Scrip put bankers firmly in command. Consumers
could never use more scrip than the bank provided and they received new
scrip only when they paid their outstanding Charg-It balances. Scrip,
however, was inconvenient. Issued only in denominations of $1 or more in
whole dollars, it annoyed consumers, since purchases inevitably did not
come out in round figures. Scrip was also oversight manifest; it physically
argued that consumers could not control themselves. “There is a certain
stigma attached to the carrying of scrip,” Toole observed. Because of that
stigma, his bank chose not to adopt a scrip-based plan.10
Biggins initiated bankers’ shift into revolving retail credit, but the
industry largely rejected credit scrip. Instead, to bring charge account
banking into alignment with female shoppers’ status expectations,
innovative bankers emulated department store credit practices. The Franklin
National Bank, also of suburban Long Island, led this effort, introducing the
similarly named “Charge-It” plan in 1951. The bank developed Charge-It,
executive Edward Donohue explained, following a conference it hosted to
consider how the bank’s merchant customers could better promote their
businesses. Charge account services, the assembled retailers argued, were
“perhaps the greatest need.” As they considered how to help these firms,Franklin executives decided that if department stores were the threat, they
should also be the standard. “In order to make this program completely
acceptable to the ultimate consumer,” Donohue observed, “we could not
change habits; we would have to emulate exactly the technique and
methods of department stores.” Franklin National made the card both the
form of identification and credit medium. Charge-It customers would
experience charge account purchasing at their local merchant exactly as
they did at a department store.11
With merchant buy-in seemingly assured, Franklin National executives
looked to recruit creditworthy consumers. In a model that later charge
account programs would widely adopt, Franklin executives made retailers
the frontline of consumer enrollment. Under the bank’s plan, “Mrs.
Housewife,” applied for a bank charge account through a participating
merchant. “We stressed,” Donohue explained, “that a merchant should
attempt to solicit and originate charge accounts in his store.” The bank
performed its own credit check later, but by relying on its merchant partners
to sign up customers, the bank embedded Charge-It within existing
relationships between merchants and consumers, relying on established
social bonds to anchor the new credit program. Using retailers in this way
both expanded and constrained consumer access to bank credit programs.
The bank’s merchant network reached more customers than the bank could
and engaged consumers at the moment when credit purchasing would be
foremost in their minds. Retailers also policed card programs, soliciting
customers who matched racial and class expectations about
creditworthiness (which bankers would in turn monitor by enrolling
merchants who served desirable clientele).12
Once she passed the credit check, Mrs. Housewife was issued a charge
card by Franklin National, imprinted with her husband’s name and their
account number. When making a purchase, she handed the retailer her card,
and—if the advertisements are any indication—proudly exclaimed, “Please
charge it!” The retailer, duly impressed, completed a carbon paper sales slip
with the purchase details and imprinted the embossed card on the slip,
which Mrs. Housewife signed. If the purchase was above $10, or some
similar predetermined “floor limit,” the merchant called the bank to confirm
Mrs. Housewife’s account was in good standing. As far as Mrs. Housewifewas concerned, the transaction ended there. She took her goods and left.
Every month the bank consolidated Mrs. Housewife’s account and mailed
her a bill containing carbon copies of her sales slips. She paid her bill in full
each month, without paying interest.13
Behind Mrs. Housewife’s transaction lay a second series of transfers
between the merchant and the bank, which hid the mechanics and—more
importantly—the costs of her charge account. At the end of the business
day, Franklin National’s merchant-customers consolidated their charge sales
slips and transferred them to the bank. The bank then credited each
merchant’s checking account for the full value of these purchases, less a
fixed percentage called the merchant discount. Merchants also paid fees to
join the charge account plan, to rent the imprinter that recorded the
customer’s information on the sales slip, and to participate in advertising
tie-ins with the bank.14
As Donohue’s invocation of “Mrs. Housewife” suggests, bankers
designed their charge account plans to facilitate female-led, family
consumption. Charge account bankers imagined their market as white,
female, married, and affluent, a vison prominently portrayed in charge
account advertising. Toole’s customer was “Mrs. John Shopper”; other
bankers preferred plain “Mrs. Shopper.” Charge account banking,
advertisements promised, made wifely tasks like provisioning and
budgeting more convenient, consolidating small purchases into one monthly
bill. Bank charge accounts thus operated in contrast to predominantly male
modes of credit, like automobile loans and durable goods purchases. Large
purchases like these tended to require a husband’s presence and approval.
Likewise, the husband’s approval was a necessary step in obtaining a
Charge-It account since the family’s credit was in his name. Charge account
bankers thus promoted wholesome abundance and familial safety, central
middle-class family values in the Cold War era.15
When Charg-It and Charge-It emerged in the early 1950s, the business
press hailed the plans as important new banking services for aiding small
retailers. Clearly reflecting the narratives employed by Biggins and
Donohue, Business Week, Banking, and other publications portrayed bank
charge accounts as products imbued with small business, antimonopoly
politics. Franklin National’s “Charge-It” plan could “support privateenterprise at the small retailer level” and even “stem the disappearance of
the small store which finds it difficult to compete with the large units
opening branches in suburban areas.” Charge account bankers needed allies;
to recruit them, they leaned into these narratives. At industry conferences
and in the banking press, charge account bankers reiterated their politically
coded origin story: banks initiated charge accounts to help their small
merchant customers compete with department store credit plans. They did
so in part to convince other bankers to adopt, develop, and sustain the new
financial technology. The message was also aimed at merchants, whom
bankers understood as necessary partners in any charge account plan—and
indeed as necessary allies in their pursuit of financial innovation.16
Press enthusiasm was one of several currents that drove a wave of banks
to launch charge account plans in the early 1950s. First, the end of the
Korean War and with it another round of wartime credit controls cleared the
way for the growth of consumer borrowing. In this market, charge account
plans promised significant revenues—as high as 20 percent, American
Banker estimated in October 1952. Firms that manufactured credit￾processing equipment, such as Addressograph and Diebold, also
encouraged bankers to imagine profits flowing from retail credit plans. So
did charge account bankers, like Biggins and Donohue, whose banks
marketed franchise arrangements to their industry colleagues. Whether they
signed with an established plan or developed their own, at least 91 banks
launched charge plans by the end of 1953. “‘Charge accounts for banks,’”
Donohue declared confidently in March 1953, “is here to stay.”17
Donohue’s optimism hid the impending difficulties bankers faced as
they brought their new charge account plans to market. High equipment and
supplies costs, difficulty enrolling merchants and consumers, inexperience
managing retail credit accounts, and regulatory scrutiny would all challenge
firms as they tailored charge account banking to their local markets. Their
banking peers, meanwhile, remained skeptical that charge accounts were a
legitimate banking service. Rather than confront these challenges alone,
bankers quickly formed formal and informal networks to promote charge
account banking. They worked together to determine best practices and to
develop new profit-making strategies. In doing so, they also refined their
social and political arguments that charge accounts were a rightful bankingservice, constructing a vision of commercial banking’s future with
consumer borrowing at the center. Such cooperation was possible because,
under the New Deal order’s geographic regulations, charge account bankers
did not directly compete.18
American Banker editor Otto Lorenz led the promotional campaign
within the banking industry. Lorenz, a veteran of the industry’s expansion
into installment lending in the 1930s, seized on charge accounts, turning
commercial banking’s leading newspaper into a claxon for consumer
lending. In June 1953, Lorenz began publishing multipage quarterly reports
in American Banker, which detailed statistics on charge account sales
volume, expenses, and profits and also featured extensive commentary from
Lorenz and practicing charge account bankers on plan management.
Through his reports, Lorenz forged a community of practitioners—whom
he fondly called “pioneers”—giving them a virtual space to test new ideas.
Together, Lorenz and his contributors identified the methods that made
charge account banking profitable and even formulated the statistical
categories that defined profitability in the first place. Was the size of a
bank’s “trading area” a factor in charge account success? What was the best
way to report delinquency data (while not scaring off potential adopters)?
How much overhead should the charge account program be accountable
for? By reporting and analyzing the strategies employed by exemplary
performers, and by using such information to critique underperforming
firms, Lorenz and his contributors crafted a proscriptive guide to charge
account banking. They sought to demonstrate that charge accounts were a
legitimate banking function and to entice more bankers to adopt the plans.
Budget targets, accounting principles, explanations of plan management
procedures, and Lorenz’s enthusiastic boosterism opened charge account
banking to more firms and guided bankers over the early shoals their plans
inevitably encountered.19
As charge account bankers built a community through Lorenz’s
American Banker reports, they developed institutions to solidify innovation
within their banks and spread them to the wider industry. At first,
practitioners cooperated informally. As one banker recalled, “Many of us . .
. had been exchanging ideas and discussing problems, both through
correspondence and during personal visits to each other’s offices.” InMarch 1954, at the American Bankers Association’s National Installment
Credit Conference, 24 banks from 13 states formed the Charge Account
Bankers Association (CABA) to “promote generally the interest of charge
account banking.” CABA became a clearinghouse of information about
bank card plans. Through annual conferences and frequent late night phone
calls between overworked bankers, CABA members gradually settled on a
common set of charge account practices, more closely resembling Franklin
National’s department store-style card than Biggins’s scrip plan (Biggins
did not join CABA). Once bank charge accounts found a stable footing,
CABA transitioned into a self-regulatory institution. The group developed
and disseminated standards for charge account banking programs to
reassure bank management, regulators, and other stakeholders that the
seemingly risky credit plans were in fact safe and sound.20
At the same time that Lorenz and CABA members tried to convince
skeptical bankers that charge account plans merely extended established
banking practices, they sought to convince government officials that the
plans should not be held to the same standards as traditional banking. As a
new financial technology, charge accounts existed in ambiguous regulatory
space, and bankers worked to shape regulatory interpretations to their
advantage. Government officials, bankers argued, should evaluate their
novel credit service on the same basis as the retail firms that banks
emulated—firms that were not subject to banking’s strict accounting and
oversight standards. Charge account bankers focused special attention on
charge-offs, the mandated delinquency period after which banks had to
write off non-performing loans, and on state interest rate limits, which
restricted rates on bank loans but usually did not extend to retail credit. “We
have been examined four times—once by F.D.I.C., twice by State, and once
by Clearing House,” one banker complained. Frustrated with the rapid
charge-offs mandated by officials, he continued, “We believe 90 day charge
off is impractical on retail charge accounts. I know of no retailer who acts
so soon.” Lorenz urged CABA to educate oversight officials by creating
uniform standards for charge account write-offs that officials could then
apply. Some bank examiners agreed to follow the account delinquency rules
that CABA published in 1959, but others maintained stringent lendingstandards. “Some banks,” Lorenz reported, “had unhappy management” as
a result.21
Variations in state law also complicated charge account bankers’ efforts
to offer revolving credit. Through the 1950s, retailers gradually shifted from
charge accounts that consumers paid off monthly to revolving credit that
allowed consumers to carry balances by paying interest. Retailers’ revolving
credit plans fell under a legal exemption to usury laws called the time-price
doctrine and were largely unregulated. Even when states specifically
regulated retail credit sales, rates were higher than for money loans. After
1960, New York retailers could charge 1.5 percent a month (18 percent
annualized) on unpaid revolving credit balances, whereas banks could
charge only 6 percent per year for personal loans.22 Over the long term,
state interest rate restrictions became the most visible and politically
contested regulatory barrier constraining bank card plans. In the 1950s,
however, official oversight of charge account banking largely proceeded out
of sight, without public pronouncements or obvious political conflict.23
In the mid-1950s, the future of charge account banking remained
uncertain. Bankers struggled to win industry, merchant, and regulatory
allies. Most plans tended to lose money for several years before turning
modest profits, and about half of the firms that jumped into the field in 1953
did not wait long enough to turn the corner. Bankers lacked experience
developing, staffing, and promoting retail-related services. Some—sold on
the merits of charge account banking by aggressive equipment salesmen—
bought more processing equipment, carbon forms, and card imprinters than
they needed. For several years, the charge account banking “fraternity”
endured a slow attrition. Few new banks started plans. The economy
boomed from 1954 to 1957, and the banking industry enjoyed many safe,
profitable outlets for bank funds. Despite Lorenz’s best efforts, commercial
bankers largely remained suspicious of direct consumer lending.24The Merchant Approach
The charge account banking plans that survived grew significantly in
the 1950s, making gains in consumer accounts, credit volume, and overall
profits. Early practitioners solidified their merchant-centered approach to
unsecured consumer credit, recruiting retailers into charge account plans
and then encouraging them to sign up creditworthy consumers. The
merchant approach derived from commercial bankers’ business lending
experience and their ongoing rhetorical commitment to antimonopoly retail
politics. It enabled bankers, Lorenz and CABA emphasized, to make
profitable consumer loans and to deepen their business relationships with
merchant members. Charge account bankers engaged constantly with their
retail partners. Through their charge plans, they promoted additional
services, including commercial and mortgage loans. And because retailers
maintained a checking account at their charge account bank—where the
bank deposited funds against their charge sales receipts—the plans also
provided inexpensive funding. “The charge account banking business,”
Lorenz argued, “finances itself.”25
Despite claims that smaller merchants desperately needed charge
accounts to compete with large department stores, bankers still had to sell
charge accounts to retailers. Bankers breathlessly advertised the many
benefits offered by their plans. The first should have been obvious. As the
Pan American Bank of Miami, Florida, explained in a brochure, “Mr.
Merchant: Here’s a New Avenue of Revenue!” The bank’s Charge Plan
“enables the local merchant to offer his customers a charge-account service
comparable to that of a large department store.” Merchants, the bank
explained, would receive immediate cash for all their charge account sales
and did not risk any credit losses. The Pan Am Bank Charge Plan
guaranteed “INCREASED SALES,” “INCREASED NET PROFITS,” and “INCREASED
NUMBERS OF POTENTIAL CUSTOMERS.” Other plans promised to reduce
bookkeeping, personnel, postage, and supply costs, allowing merchants to
focus on what they did best—merchandising. Summing up these
advantages, the Florida National Bank of Orlando explained that its “F.N.B.
Charge Plan Acts as the Credit, Accounting, Bookkeeping, and CollectionDepartments, And Actually costs participating merchants and professional
men, and their customers less.”
26
Merchants would have to pay for these services, of course, and they did
so through the merchant discount, which operated at once as a service
charge and set of legal relationships between the merchant, the consumer,
and the bank. Discounts, a longstanding banking practice, are effectively
interest in reverse, paid upfront instead of over time. The merchant discount
—calculated as a percentage of the final sales price—compensated the bank
for the time it took to collect the balance, the cost of administering the
account, and the risk associated with the transaction. In the case of a 5
percent discount, when a merchant sold a $10 pair of shoes, the bank paid
the merchant $9.50. The remaining 50 cents accrued to the bank, covering
the cost and risk of lending. Discounting also created legal safeguards for
both merchants and bankers. When a consumer signed her charge account
receipt, she actually signed a debt contract with the merchant. The merchant
then sold—or “discounted”—this debt to the bank. Bankers purchased
charge account contracts on a non-recourse basis, meaning if the customer
failed to pay, the bank could not pass the losses back to the retailer. Bankers
became holder in due course, meaning that if the merchandise was faulty or
the merchant had committed fraud, the consumer still had to pay the bank.27
Through the merchant discount, merchants, not consumers, paid for
charge account banking. While John Biggins claimed that his Charg-It plan
“doesn’t cost” consumers “a penny more” than purchasing with cash,
merchants handed over 8 percent of their Charg-It sales. Franklin National’s
plan was less expensive, charging merchants 5 percent on 30-day charge
purchases and 6 percent on 60-day charges. When later plans allowed
consumers to spread their charge account payments over 30, 60, or 90 days,
many banks raised the merchant discount on longer repayment periods.
Eventually, some banks reduced their merchant discounts by rebating
merchants if they met certain sales volume targets. Still, during the 1950s,
discounts remained high. From 1954 to 1959, American Banker calculated
that profitable bank plans charged an average discount of 5.21 percent. In
charge account banking, consumers borrowed, and retailers paid the
interest.28Although bankers promoted charge plans as a mutually beneficial
service, many retailers remained doubtful about the merits of charge
account banking. “Strange as it may seem,” Franklin National’s Donohue
remarked, “the merchant requires a good deal of education in this program.”
Merchants were getting a good deal of education from the retail trade press,
often of a character unfavorable to banks. “Granting credit on credit cards
issued by others,” Credit World bluntly warned readers in September 1953,
“is a mistake.” Many merchants, faced with high discounts, doubtlessly
agreed. Banks’ fees, a writer in the trade magazine Stores argued, cost more
that managing an in-house credit department. For efficient department
stores, credit costs averaged about 2 percent of charge volume versus the 5
percent commanded by banks. Bankers disputed these figures. They argued
that the increased sales generated through charge accounts more than
compensated for these costs. For merchants without existing credit
departments, the Stores writer conceded, a bank’s charge plan might be an
appealing alternative to investing in equipment and personnel, but the
merchant would need to promote credit purchases, turning potential cash
sales into 5 percent markups.29
High merchant discounts strongly influenced which types of retailers
would join bank card plans, limiting participation to those that charged high
markups on their merchandise. Clothing and shoe stores, which competed
directly against department stores, were obvious targets. Drug stores and
hardware stores also joined charge account plans, as did gas and service
stations. Florists and photographers often participated, and so did
optometrists and dentists. In small towns, local department stores
occasionally joined bank charge account plans, though they tended to
negotiate lower discounts, giving the sponsoring bank high sales volume
but little added profit. More often, department stores with established credit
plans declined to join, as did discount retailers that offered low prices and
no credit. Grocers, especially supermarkets that likewise sold on low
margins, seldom adopted bank card plans in the 1950s. In a 1960 report, the
U.S. Department of Agriculture suggested that the first grocery store to join
a bank plan might increase its profit by pulling customers away from its
competitors. But if a city’s other grocers also adopted charge accounts, the
opportunity to gain new customers would disappear. All the grocers wouldthen be stuck paying high merchant discounts, costs that would either
subtract from profits or lead to higher consumer prices. This was exactly the
kind of credit trap retailers sought to avoid.30
High costs were just one reason retailers resisted charge account
programs: they also worried about banks intervening in their relationships
with customers. Instead of returning to the store each month to settle up—
and perhaps make additional purchases—customers paid off their charge
accounts at the bank or by mail, costing smaller stores valuable foot traffic.
Merchants also feared that by sending their accounts to the bank, they
would lose their customers to competitors who adopted the bank’s charge
plan. Some banks, like Marine Midland, a banking group in upstate New
York, tried to counter this fear by enrolling only one type of retailer in a
particular location, like a new shopping plaza. Some merchants took
matters into their own hands, sending more troublesome credit accounts to
the bank while keeping their prompt-paying customers for themselves.
Throughout the 1950s, the retail trade press remained suspicious of
bankers’ retail credit plans. The same spirit of independent proprietorship
that fueled retailers’ impulse toward antimonopoly also led them to resist
what one writer in Women’s Wear Daily called banks’ “long-range . . .
campaign to establish themselves as the principal source for all types of
credit.”31
Despite these ongoing tensions, bankers convinced many merchants to
join their plans. Between June 1953 and November 1958, the number of
merchants accepting bank charge plans rose from 5,000 to 12,000, or from
about 170 to about 360 merchants for each reporting bank. Merchants
wanted to offer credit. Although charge account banking had drawbacks,
bank plans allowed merchants to participate in the expansion of the private
credit economy without investing heavily in the infrastructure necessary to
do so on their own.
In their pitch to retailers, bankers often promised to unite merchants into
local shopping communities, a process that manifested in the spatial
strategies banks adopted to serve their local markets. In smaller towns,
charge account banks worked to preserve and revitalize downtown
shopping. Of the 74 merchants listed in the directory of the Industrial
Savings and Trust of Muncie, Indiana, 54 were clustered within four blocksof the main downtown intersection, where the bank had its offices.
Expanding automobile ownership placed many small-town merchants into
direct competition with large stores in nearby cities. Bank charge accounts
kept retail business local. After describing how the new four-lane highway
created “the tendency . . . for the ladies to go to Indianapolis to shop,”
Columbus, Indiana, banker J. Irwin Miller explained to Congress how,
thanks to the bank’s charge account plan, “by and large, business . . . stays
in Columbus.”32
Banks on the outskirts of major cities, meanwhile, adopted suburban
strategies for their charge account plans. When merchants moved into the
nation’s shiny new shopping centers, they were often short on capital and
lacked established ties with local customers. Financing consumer credit was
a risky burden. Bank charge plans banded merchants together into shopping
center-wide credit services. Charge account plans that emphasized suburban
shopping, however, threatened downtown merchants. As one worried Credit
World author observed, “Banks all over the country are sponsoring new
consolidated ‘charge account’ services, the single purpose of which is to get
people to buy in the neighborhood instead of going ‘downtown.’” The
geographic diversity of charge account plans suggests that the programs
were flexible and could be adapted to different retail environments, even as,
like the banking industry more broadly, the service remained confined by
geographic regulation.33
Geographic restrictions were not always insurmountable barriers. In a
preview of networking strategies banks developed in the 1960s, some
charge account bankers experimented with interchange, where banks
separated by geographic regulations participated in the same card plan. The
first interchange system began in 1955, when five small banks in rural
Michigan approached the larger Citizens Commercial and Savings Bank of
Flint, which operated a plan called “Charge-O-Matic.” As a Citizens
executive explained in American Banker, the smaller banks wanted to offer
charge accounts in their towns but feared they would not generate adequate
volume to make the plans profitable. Citizens Commercial had long￾standing relationships with the banks; its executives, sensing an opportunity
to profitably deepen these ties, devised a cooperative interchange system
that enabled the smaller banks to offer charge accounts in theircommunities. The small banks recruited merchants in their towns, and the
merchants recommended consumers to participate in the plan. The small
correspondent banks—later called agent banks—managed the merchant
side of the business, collecting charge slips, taking floor limit calls, and
crediting merchant accounts for consumer purchases. Merchants, in turn,
opened checking accounts with their local agent bank, and the agent bank
earned a portion of the merchant discount on each local transaction.
Citizens Commercial handled the consumer side, collecting merchant slips
from the small banks, billing consumers, and retaining any interest
consumers paid on their accounts. “Will it work?” the Citizens Commercial
executive asked. When he explained the plan in May 1956, “it [was] a little
too soon to know.”34
The banks that experimented with “correspondent charge account plans”
in the 1950s did so to capitalize on investments in managerial expertise and
credit-processing equipment and to expand the geographic reach of their
plans. Citizens Commercial and the First National Bank and Trust of
Kalamazoo, which began the second such plan in 1957, were both located
in Michigan, a state that limited branch banking to a 25-mile radius from a
bank’s primary office. Correspondent plans incorporated merchants and
consumers from outside the card-issuing banks’ restricted market,
increasing transaction volume and lowering individual transaction costs.
Still, bankers remained careful to root their correspondent plans in their
agent banks’ communities, relying on cross-branding to ensure that the
agent bank was the prominent face of the plan in their markets. While
Citizens Commercial claimed its plan covered a 100-mile radius, in the
small towns serviced by Charge-O-Matic, the program’s emblem carried the
agent bank’s name in bold letters. Cardholders also received their Charge￾O-Matic cards in a letter from the agent bank. The small community banks
thus maintained local relationships with merchants and consumers, and
added income as well.35The Consumer Question
Bankers anticipated how charge accounts would benefit local merchants
and deepen their relationships with small business customers, but they
struggled to conceptualize how they would interact with consumer
cardholders. We now think of card-issuing banks as intermediaries
connecting cardholders to merchants and merchants to cardholders.
Through the card, consumers’ relationships are now firmly with the bank. In
the 1950s, charge account plans ran through merchants. Banks relied on
their retail partners to promote charge accounts to their customers and to
encourage credit spending at each transaction. Enrolling consumers was the
first step. From that point forward, as Lorenz and other American Banker
contributors emphasized, when the consumer chose between cash, check, or
credit, bankers needed merchants to promote their credit plans.36Fig. 1: Brochure promoting the charge account service of the First National Bank and Trust of
Kalamazoo. Mrs. Smith, who feels a charge account would be “more convenient” than cash,
approaches a shopkeeper, who then helps her apply for the bank’s charge account in his store.
Source: “First National Charge Account Service Shoppers Guide,” First National Bank and Trust of
Kalamazoo Clipping File, Kalamazoo Public Library (ca. mid-1950s). Reprinted with permission of
PNC Bank, N.A.
Charge account bankers worried constantly that merchants were not
encouraging credit sales enthusiastically enough. At Marine Midland Bank,
executive Douglas A. Freeth confronted the issue directly in a memo titled
“What’s Wrong with Midland Charge Plan?” Five of Midland’s subsidiarybanks had adopted charge accounts in the 1950s and all were losing money.
For Freeth, “the heart of the whole problem” was “the host of merchants, of
all sizes, who do not realize the value of credit selling or know how to
accomplish it.” Without sufficient merchant cooperation, the Midland banks
could not generate sufficient sales volume to cover their plans’ fixed costs.
Bank personnel had to sell merchants on the virtues of the Midland Charge
Plan, and they had to convince merchants to sign up consumers and push
credit sales. “We need to stimulate, through merchants, more card holders
and increased card usage,” Freeth concluded. “Such a result will not just
happen. It must be made to happen—by selling—hard!” In the banking
press, charge account bankers reinforced this sentiment, uniformly arguing
that bankers had to convince merchants to sell on credit, not convince
consumers to buy.
37
Although bankers praised charge accounts as a way to gain and deepen
business lending relationships, they seldom discussed how charge accounts
could generate new consumer deposits or consumer loans. Commercial
bankers specialized in business lending. In other lines of consumer credit,
they usually worked through consumer-facing firms, such as car dealers
when making auto loans. Bankers structured charge accounts in the same
way, creating a debt between the consumer and the merchant, which the
merchant then sold to the bank. Most bankers simply did not feel that they
could make an all-out pitch to consumers. As Freeth concluded, “An
individual’s attitude toward debt and his paying habits are not easily
predetermined or readily changed.” Other bank card promoters agreed.
Recall Edward Donohue’s exhortation that “we could not change habits.”
Instead, bankers built their charge plans on relationships that already
existed, first between consumers and merchants, and then between
merchants and the bank.38
Bankers’ image of their ideal charge account customer—Mrs.
Housewife—also inhibited aggressive customer solicitation. Bank offices
were overwhelmingly male spaces and charge account bankers self￾consciously styled themselves a “fraternity.” Bankers worked within a
hierarchy of social and gender divisions: merchants and bank tellers served
female customers, while bankers dealt with other men. For such bankers,
female-led shopping carried transparent sexual undertones. Warningbankers against soliciting consumers directly, Lorenz cautioned, “Nobody
uses a charge card unless a buying impulse has been aroused. That buying
impulse must be stirred up by the merchant and his wares.” Bankers would
facilitate credit sales. The charge account fraternity, however, had no
business between the sheets with Mrs. Housewife and the draper.
39
Still, just because bankers did not feel they could solicit consumer
participation directly did not mean that consumers were not active agents in
the growth of charge account banking. After all, banks developed charge
account plans so that small merchants could meet customers’ credit
demands. So long as consumers borrowed while retailers paid the interest—
so long as the costs of the system remained hidden from consumers by
prices that weighed heavily on merchants—consumers continued to
pressure retailers to take their new bank cards. For Pan American Bank in
Miami, “Each customer [was] an ambassador of good will and usually
demand[ed] new merchants . . . inquire and join this service.” Retailers,
however, seldom appreciated being arm-twisted by their customers. As
Marine Midland executive Raymond Alm discovered after surveying his
bank’s merchant partners, “Most of these merchants did not need (or desire)
this bank service, but joined the plan in order to retain present customers
who might wish to use the bank charge card in their stores.” As more
consumers carried bank cards, retailers faced a stark choice: accept bank
cards and pay the merchant discount or refuse bank cards and lose sales
entirely.
40
Although merchant discounts remained consistent throughout the 1950s,
charge account bankers slowly adopted revolving credit, which allowed
consumers to carry purchases over time by paying interest on their
outstanding balances. In October 1953, Lorenz reported that only a fifth of
charge account bank plans incorporated revolving credit, “surely an
omission of major magnitude.” As charge account bankers gained more
experience, Lorenz urged them to adopt revolving credit “both as a means
of increasing volume and as another source of valuable income.” By August
1958, nearly 60 percent of charge account banking plans incorporated
revolving credit, and consumer interest payments accounted for about a
quarter of the income for profitable bank plans.41Bankers, though, were unsure how to promote revolving credit, because,
as Alm found, consumers remained apprehensive about credit purchasing.
In addition to surveying Marine Midland’s merchant customers, Alm also
surveyed the bank’s inactive cardholders “to determine their reaction to the
charge plan and their reasons for not using this service more often.” Here,
Alm discovered a paradox. He found that 31.2 percent of inactive
cardholders claimed they preferred not to use credit, yet only 9.8 percent
reported they did not use charge accounts. Alm considered this “an obvious
inconsistency.” Was it? Perhaps consumers, in the throes of postwar
abundance, remained uncomfortable with the insecurity and indebtedness
that came with credit use. For Alm and Marine Midland Bank, the solution
to consumer reluctance was simple: do not talk about credit. “The economy
and convenience of only one bill a month should be emphasized,” Alm
wrote, “thus creating the image that the bank is performing a billing service,
not a credit service.” To convey this image, Marine Midland renamed their
Midland Shopper Credit Service the Midland Charge Plan. The bankers
who oversaw Charge-It, Charge-Rite, and Charge-O-Matic had long taken
the same approach.42
The Travel Cards: Credit Unbound
At the same time that bankers were developing charge accounts to serve
merchants and families in local communities, entrepreneurs in New York
City developed a different kind of credit card, one for jet-set executives.
Origin stories of the credit card industry often begin here, with Frank X.
McNamara. The tale has evolved over time, but the basic version is that in
1949, McNamara was transacting business over an expensive yet
“wholesome”—as in, hold the martinis—lunch in New York City. As the
waiter was about to bring the check, McNamara realized he had left his
wallet at home in one of his other suits. Ignobly waiting for his wife to
drive in from suburban Long Island so he could settle the bill, McNamara
got to thinking. “Why,” he wondered, “should people be limited to spending
what they are carrying in cash, instead of being able to spend what they can
afford?” That thought launched the Diners Club. Initiated in February 1950,Diners was the first travel and entertainment card and, in most journalistic
and scholarly accounts, the first “universal” credit card.43
As origin stories go, McNamara’s wayward wallet worked well. It made
the Club’s cards instantly elite and masculine, perfect for the man who
couldn’t keep track of his wallet among his many suits. It also encoded the
card as safely straight and white, wedded—through McNamara’s wife—to
the clean family living of the all-white Long Island suburbs. And it made
the card functionally distinct, different than the charge accounts and
department store cards used by households and housewives. Also, like
many origin stories, it was a fabrication. As the tale filtered through
marketing materials and news accounts, few have asked how a businessman
who forgot his wallet would have remembered his Diners Card.44
The story was no less powerful for being implausible—it stuck and so
did the Diners Club. Begun as a way for New York executives to dine on
credit at restaurants and nightclubs, Diners expanded to provide a variety of
services for its elite clientele, enabling them to charge hotel rooms, car
rentals, and even freshly cut flowers. In the Club’s estimation, such services
made the card the “Indispensable New Convenience for the Executive—the
Salesman—the man who gets around!” By its one-year anniversary Diners
claimed more than 40,000 members and 300 participating restaurants and
nightclubs, and it had offices in Boston, Hollywood, and Chicago. The
company began international operations in 1953 in Italy and France, by
which time it claimed more than 100,000 members and 3,000 merchant
partners. Growth continued: Diners went public in 1955. Membership
reached 260,000 in April 1956 and 560,000 in February 1958. By then, the
firm was billing $92 million a year.
45
For executives in the 1950s, wining and dining clients was at once an
expected social practice and a valuable tax write-off. Like charge account
banking, Diners sold cardholders convenience, not credit. The phrase
“charge it” featured prominently in company advertising; “credit” never
did. Convenience, moreover, reflected status. “You don’t have to be a top
executive to enjoy the many benefits of this man-about-town charge
account privilege,” the Club claimed. For all the implied prestige, Diners
offered a practical product. The “biggest advantage to business members,”
Time magazine reported, is that “it gives them ready-made accounting oftheir expenses for income-tax purposes.” Early on, the firm found its top
users were “advertising men; closely followed by public relations men,
[and] men in various selling businesses.” These men needed to drink with
clients and track the receipts; Diners helped them do both.46
As with the early bank charge plans, restaurants and other participating
merchants bore the costs of the system, while cardholders used credit for
free. The Club demanded a high discount. It kept 7 percent of what its
cardholders charged, arguing that cardholders entertaining clients on credit
would spend more. Meanwhile, Diners built its membership by giving cards
to anyone who passed an initial credit check. Managing the plan, however,
required significant capital. Diners had to pay merchants immediately,
while waiting for cardholders to settle their accounts. Unlike banks, which
accessed low-cost funding through consumer and business deposits, Diners
had to borrow the money it lent to cardholders in financial markets. Even
with its high merchant discount and short repayment period, the firm could
not generate a profit until it added a $3 annual membership fee. Cardholders
who did not regularly use the card dropped out, but demand for new
memberships continued to grow. The fee added prestige. Although the Club
lost more than $300,000 in its first year, the annual fee enabled the firm to
turn a profit by 1955.47
Diners Club spawned numerous rivals and imitators, especially as it
expanded from offering just meals to a full suite of travel and entertainment
services. Alfred Bloomingdale, department store heir and early backer of
Diners, built his own card plan in Los Angeles called Dine-n-Sign.
Eventually, Bloomingdale bought out McNamara and merged the two plans.
Now-forgotten cards like Trip-Charge, the Esquire Club, the Gourmet Guest
Club, the Golden Key, and the Playboy Club all pursued a similar elite male
clientele. The most lasting were Hilton Hotel’s Carte Blanche, which grew
out of the hotel chain’s in-house charge card, and American Express, a firm
specializing in business and travel services which began issuing cards in
1958. The remaining firms either folded or were absorbed by Diners,
Hilton, or American Express.48
Bank charge accounts and travel and entertainment cards thus served
distinct markets, distinguished by function—family shopping versus
business entertaining—and by location—neighborhoods and suburbancommunities versus major cities. Nevertheless, these parallel products were
tightly connected. Both bank charge accounts and the Diners Club
developed between New York City and its Long Island suburbs in the early
postwar years. Donohue and McNamara may have occasionally shared a
train. Both products were part of the continued redefinition of male,
homosocial workspaces, on the one hand, and idealized white, affluent,
female-led suburban life, on the other. They operated in separate and
distinct spheres, earmarking specific kinds of consumption while
overlapping in the wallets and pocketbooks of middle-class families. The
plans grew together. In the first quarter of 1958, Diners had 560,000
members, while the charge account banks that reported to American Banker
accounted for 754,000 cardholders between them. Travel cards, which
served male elites in major cities, gained wide press attention; bank cards,
which served housewives in the suburbs, continued steady, if
inconspicuous, growth.49
In 1958, California’s Bank of America and New York’s Chase Manhattan,
the two largest banks in the United States, entered the charge account
business. Bankers deluged Lorenz with questions. Should they, too, begin
offering charge accounts? And why, after all, had so many banks dropped
out of the business over the past few years? Lorenz had little patience for
these inquiries. Through relentless promotion of charge account banking
over the past half decade, Lorenz believed he had demonstrated the viability
of charge account programs. Through such demonstrations, moreover, he
revealed that bankers needed to escape the confines of their marble-clad
imaginations and embrace progressive methods of granting credit. “Charge
account banking stands on its own feet,” Lorenz retorted. “It is
profitable.”50
The very visible rise of travel and entertainment plans like Diners Club
and the later entry of major banks like Bank of America and Chase have
eclipsed the history of charge account banking, and with it our
understanding of early postwar financial innovation. In one sense, charge
account banking reveals a process through which bankers innovated within
the rules rather than around them. The structure of charge account banking
followed from the New Deal regulatory order and the politics of small￾business antimonopoly that undergirded it. Bankers developed their novelcard plans within the confines of a political economy designed to constrain
their firms’ geographic reach, which ultimately enabled bankers to
cooperate and innovate together. Through the banking trade press and
newly formed national trade associations, bankers shaped a shared social
vision for the charge account field and a common set of business practices.
On the ground, they built plans through existing relationships with retailers
and, through the retailers, with consumer cardholders. Their pricing
strategy, which placed the cost of card plans fully on retailers, reflected
these relationships. By the late 1950s, charge account banking was a viable,
if still evolving, financial service. As later chapters will reveal, many of the
pioneering banks, including Marine Midland and the First National Bank of
Omaha, would go on to play critical roles in the card industry’s future.51
Still, although charge accounts emerged from within the political
economy of small finance, they nevertheless represented tentative steps to
reshape the regulatory environment by opening new consumer markets.
CABA bankers worked to convince financial regulators that charge account
plans were different from traditional banking—that the old rules did not
apply to innovative financial products. Moreover, just because bank card
plans were local did not mean that bankers’ ambitions were small. Banks,
W. Albert Hess, vice president of the Bank of Virginia, explained in October
1953, “should be the reservoirs for every type of credit in their
communities.” Hess predicted that soon “banks may be handling the bulk,
maybe all, charge account financing.” Expressing similar sentiment,
Bankers Monthly editor J. H. Peters reflected, “When you really get to
thinking about ‘charge account’ banking, in all of its ramifications, it
doesn’t shrug off very easily.” These ramifications would take time to
develop. Charge account banks created the foundation for private credit
networks, which would gradually draw merchants and consumers into a
permanent credit—and payments—trap.523
Profits Squeeze
Creative Management in Banking
David Rockefeller, president of Chase Manhattan, regretted his bank’s
brief experiment with charge account banking. Encouraged by reports from
Otto Lorenz and the American Banker, Chase initiated the Chase Manhattan
Charge Plan (CMCP) in 1958 as a part of a broader effort to expand its
retail banking presence across New York City. Chase bankers determined
that “there was a ready market for this type of credit-card service,”
Rockefeller recalled, and they “liked the prospects.” However, by 1964,
when Rockefeller reflected on the experiment in a lecture at Columbia
University, published as Creative Management in Banking, the program had
gone bust. In 1960 alone, CMCP lost $1,790,000, almost 20 times the start￾up costs Chase executives had projected. The creative banker needed the
courage to risk failure, Rockefeller explained, and the wisdom to move past
mistakes. For Chase Manhattan, charge account banking had been a
mistake.1
Creative Management in Banking was not primarily a reflection on
CMCP; it was instead Rockefeller’s attempt to answer a larger question:
was the New Deal regulatory order capable of meeting the evolving
demands of the postwar economy? Rockefeller—whose grandfather John
D. had built the family fortune on Standard Oil and whose older brother
Nelson began his fifteen-year reign as governor of New York in 1959—had
tried to answer that question as a member of the Commission on Money andCredit (CMC). The commission convened in 1958, at the request of
President Eisenhower, to evaluate the postwar financial structure in light of
the nation’s evolving economic circumstances. Within its wide-ranging
analysis, the commission revealed the extent to which the New Deal
regulatory priorities of financial federalism, industry siloing, and price
controls had constrained commercial banks. Banks, like Rockefeller’s
Chase Manhattan, which traditionally served the financial needs of
businesses, had lost significant ground to consumer-oriented financial firms.
They suffered, bankers complained, from an acute “profits squeeze.” The
commission urged immediate reform. Yet restrictive policies continued to
enjoy robust political support, especially in Congress. Well-placed
lawmakers, notably Representative Wright Patman (D-TX) and Senator
Paul Douglas (D-IL), stridently defended the system’s limits on
concentrated financial power. While Rockefeller and other members of the
commission sought space for financial firms to grow and change, Douglas,
Patman, and their allies maintained the New Deal order’s regulatory
constraints.2
Through his service on the Commission of Money and Credit,
Rockefeller worked with bankers and other elites to reform the New Deal
financial rules through the political process; his bank’s simultaneous
experiment with charge account banking reflected an effort to innovate
around regulatory restraints. But, as Rockefeller learned, the financial
regulatory order, for all its contradictions, was not easily reformed or
circumvented. After Congress barred the door on direct growth through
merger, larger banks turned to new services, including charge accounts, that
might open windows onto new markets. Chase and Bank of America, its
West Coast rival, both launched card plans in 1958. As with the first wave
of charge account banking, they did so as consumer spending lifted the
economy out of recession, presaging commercial banks’ full-scale pivot
toward consumer markets. Within the banking industry, the entry of these
giant firms signaled a new phase for card-based credit. Still, most bankers
watched and waited. Chase and Bank of America experienced significant
operational challenges, and both banks suffered major public losses. By the
early 1960s, Bank of America’s resilience—and Chase’s capitulation—
solidified a new business model focused on consumers rather thanmerchants. As the banking industry pursued consumer markets in the next
decade, the industry adopted Bank of America’s consumer-focused
strategies. Charge account banking faded from view.
The New Deal Regulatory Order in Transition
The Commission on Money and Credit was the product of President
Dwight D. Eisenhower’s persistent concern with achieving sustained
growth within a context of economic stability, low inflation, and fiscal
responsibility. Ike, a Republican, had made his peace with the New Deal
welfare state. Unlike his Democratic predecessors, successors, and critics,
he resisted making federal spending a perpetual engine of economic
expansion. Instead, he and his advisers believed monetary rather than fiscal
policy was a more appropriate tool for managing the U.S. economy.
Monetary policy, however, worked through the fragmented financial
system, generating unexpected—and often politically contentious—
outcomes. When the Federal Reserve tightened the money supply to tamp
down on inflation in 1956, mortgage rates and municipal borrowing costs
surged. Congressional investigations followed in short order. The financial
infrastructure seemed incapable of effectively transmitting the will of
policymakers. Considering new policy directions as he began his second
term in 1957, Eisenhower sought to determine whether the financial
structures inherited from the New Deal could deliver stable, long-term
growth. During his State of the Union Address that January, Eisenhower
called on Congress to create a commission “to conduct a broad national
inquiry into the nature, performance and adequacy of our financial system.”
Eisenhower wanted the commission to be nonpartisan—to keep matters of
expert economic analysis beyond the reach of partisan politics.3
In banking, though, politics always intervened. In this case,
Eisenhower’s proposal landed amid a long-running conflict between
congressional Democrats and national business groups over how to evaluate
—and possibly reform—the financial structure. Since the late 1940s, the
Committee for Economic Development (CED), a business-led policy
institute, had pressed for the kind of independent investigatory commission
Eisenhower now proposed. Congressional leaders, however, would not cedepolicy authority. They stonewalled CED’s efforts even after Eisenhower’s
endorsement. Patman and Douglas, guardians of the New Deal financial
order, instead sought a congressional commission, one that would be
sympathetic to their antimonopolistic vision of the postwar credit economy.
Yet they too failed to win congressional approval. Finally, with support
from the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations, the CED undertook Ike’s
project on its own initiative, establishing the Commission on Money and
Credit in 1958.4
Despite its contested origins, the commission assembled a prominent
membership and proceeded to examine the financial system in light of the
economic, social, and political demands placed on it. In addition to
Rockefeller, CMC members included former Federal Reserve chairman
Marriner Eccles, future Treasury secretary Henry Fowler, labor leaders,
New Deal veterans, and other leading financial executives. Paul Volcker,
future chairman of the Fed, served as Rockefeller’s assistant, and economist
Hyman Minsky wrote one of its supplemental reports. The commissioners
framed their study around the widely accepted goals of price stability, low
unemployment, and persistent economic growth. Growth, they believed,
required credit. Consumers needed credit to buy homes, cars, and household
goods; businesses needed credit to make these products and bring them to
market; government units needed credit to build infrastructure, maintain the
armed forces, buttress the welfare state, and otherwise secure the blessings
of liberty for Americans and their posterity. In contrast to Western European
nations, which channeled credit largely toward business investment,
American politicians wanted to direct scarce credit to consumption, to
production, and toward an eclectic mix of more specific goals like housing,
agriculture, and small business. Given the disparate public objectives,
commission members struggled to identify a tangible agenda beyond that of
a general loosening of regulatory restraints. As the report’s lengthy
argumentative footnotes indicate, they struggled to agree on anything at
all.5
At the level of policy, commission members labored to find a viable
direction, but their work also placed a spotlight on the postwar growth of
the U.S. financial system and the diminished place of commercial banks
within it. In broad strokes, the news was encouraging. American householdsturned their rising incomes into savings. Corporations turned their profits
into capital. “We have witnessed a very rapid growth in financial
institutions,” the commission reported, adding, “The assets of all private
financial institutions have increased at a growth rate well above the rate of
growth of population, real output, or national wealth.” The financial
business boomed. Total assets of private financial firms grew from $280
billion in 1945 to $614 billion in 1958. Commercial banks were growing
too, but slowly. Over the same period, commercial bank assets increased
from $159 billion to $238 billion, but they declined relative to the financial
sector, from 56.5 percent to 39.5 percent. The regulatory structure, the
commission argued, clearly benefited some firms more than others. Thrifts,
like savings and loans and credit unions, could not offer checking accounts
as did commercial banks, but they paid higher interest on consumer savings.
As mortgage specialists, thrifts also led the postwar housing boom.
Meanwhile, less or differently regulated firms, particularly investment
companies, pension funds, and insurance firms, competed with commercial
banks for business loans without the geographical impediments of interstate
branching boundaries.6
Commercial bankers were slow to recognize the ways that regulatory
differences and their own conservative strategies undermined their
competitive position. In the early postwar years, commercial banks easily
met the credit needs of their primary customers, business firms. They did so
primarily by selling U.S. bonds accumulated during the Depression and war
years instead of seeking new deposits from businesses and consumers. At
the peak in 1946, Treasury securities represented more than half of total
commercial bank assets. Banks sold these securities and used the proceeds
to invest in business loans, transitioning from one asset to another rather
than seeking new deposits to expand their balance sheets. From 1946 to
1956, commercial bank deposits increased only 38 percent, compared to
GDP growth of 100 percent and non-bank deposit growth of 172 percent.
Bankers blamed their meager gains on regulatory disadvantages. In material
written under the CMC’s auspices, bankers warned policymakers that weak
deposit growth threatened the entire economy. The ability of commercial
banks to provide adequate credit, the American Bankers Association
warned, “depends to a large extent upon the way in which banks serve—orare permitted to serve—as deposit institutions.” If they could not grow their
deposit base, bankers belatedly realized, they would not keep pace with the
growing needs of their business customers.7
Table 1. Distribution of Assets of Private Financial Institutions,
1945 and 1958 (by percent)
1945 1958
Commercial banks
56.5 39.5
Mutual savings banks
6.0 6.2
Savings and loan associations; credit unions; and finance,
mortgage, and loan companies 3.9 13.2
Life and other insurance companies
19.1 22.8
Pension funds and investment companies
2.1 7.4
Trust departments and securities brokers and dealers
12.3 10.9
Total
99.9
100
Source: Commission on Money and Credit, Money and Credit: Their Influence on Jobs, Prices, and
Growth (Prentice-Hall, 1961), 155.Commercial bankers felt particularly hard pressed when it came to
expanding consumer markets. At the end of World War II, commercial
banks held 53 percent of household savings, but by 1960 they retained only
41 percent. As the commission’s study highlighted, American consumers
enjoyed a diverse market for financial services. With their deposit rates
fixed by the Federal Reserve, commercial banks often competed for
consumer accounts through non-financial incentives. Some were quaint,
including toaster and steak-knife giveaways. Yet entrepreneurial bankers
also experimented with new products and services, like charge accounts, to
draw consumers into their banks. Even so, geographic regulations prevented
many banks from following white, affluent customers as they migrated out
of central cities, where banks had their offices, and into the suburbs.
Americans were on the move, the commission recognized, as their banks
stayed in place. “While the migration of people and industry had not been
restricted by city, county, or state boundaries,” the commission observed,
“the migration of banks by branching often has been restricted.” Consumers
were, in more ways than one, leaving commercial banks behind.8
Not only had bankers been slow to compete for deposits, but in the early
postwar years the deposits they did possess become increasingly expensive,
squeezing bank margins between expensive deposits and loan rates subject
to price controls and public pressure. Persistent inflation made depositors
price conscious. Over time, consumers and businesses shifted their money
from accounts that did not pay interest to those that did. In 1945, 81 percent
of commercial bank deposits were checking accounts that paid no interest.
By 1958, they were down to 73 percent. Conversely, savings and time
deposits, which paid rates set by the Federal Reserve, rose from 19 percent
to 27 percent over the same period. They continued to rise to 33 percent in
1961 and 49 percent in 1972. “A principal factor” in Chase Manhattan’s
“persistent rise in expenses,” Rockefeller’s bank noted in 1961, was “the
growing importance of time and savings deposits for which interest must be
paid.” Banks, however, could not easily pass on rising costs through higher
prices. State usury laws restricted rates on consumer loans and mortgages.
Meanwhile, competition and political pressure held down business lending
rates. Any increase in the prime rate—the rate banks charged their most
creditworthy business customers—ensured vocal criticism from politiciansand negative headlines in the nation’s mainstream press. Trapped between
expensive deposits and low loan rates, commercial banks confronted what
Rockefeller and his contemporaries termed the “profits squeeze.”9
Commission members saw clearly—and, in Rockefeller’s case,
experienced personally—the ways the regulatory structure constrained
commercial bankers’ role in the American financial order. The commission
also recognized that some banks sought to retain profitability through
aggressive growth, especially via merger. Rockefeller’s bank provided the
salient example. In 1955, Chase National Bank, a wholesale bank that
served large business clients through offices in Manhattan, merged with the
Manhattan Company, a retail bank with branches spread through the Bronx,
Brooklyn, and Queens. The new Chase Manhattan became the second
largest bank in the country—behind only California’s Bank of America. The
combination also ignited a merger boom among Chase’s competitors. The
New York Times hailed a “New Banking Era.” Congress was not so
enthusiastic. Patman and Douglas, along with allies like Emanuel Celler (D￾NY) and Estes Kefauver (D-TN), rose to defend the New Deal’s political
economy of small finance. “The businessman and merchant,” Celler warned
as he prepared a congressional inquiry, “will be at the mercy of a financial
colossus.” Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, Congress extended the New
Deal’s political economy of small finance through a raft of antimonopoly
legislation, including the Bank Holding Company Act (1956) and the Bank
Merger Acts (1960, 1966). Even as the CMC debated regulatory
liberalization, Congress remained committed to fragmentation and
restraint.10
Congressional antagonism to bank mergers did not bode well for the
commission’s recommendations. In its June 1961 report, the Commission
on Money and Credit offered 91 proposals aimed at increasing financial
competition and improving the federal government’s economic
management and credit programs. For commercial banks, the report
recommended loosening branching restrictions to enhance competition with
non-bank financial firms, liberalizing bank investment powers, and
equalizing limits on savings account rates. President John F. Kennedy
praised the report and called on Congress’s Joint Economic Committee
(JEC) to propose appropriate legislation. Patman and Douglas, however,jointly chaired the JEC. With their allies, they remained hostile to
concentrated economic power, defensive of state regulatory prerogatives,
and protective of the New Deal banking reforms. “I think we should have
local banks run and owned by local people,” Patman explained. David
Rockefeller, scion of a monopolist and president of a monopolist bank,
embodied the antithesis of their vision. When Rockefeller appeared before
the JEC’s hearings in August 1961, Patman grilled the Chase president on
the dominance of New York banks and attacked the commission’s
branching recommendations (never mind that Rockefeller was there to
discuss federal lending programs). With Patman and Douglas in charge of
the agenda, the JEC buried the commission’s proposals.11
Congressional leaders remained committed to the political economy of
small finance, rejecting both the practical efforts of bankers to grow through
merger and the theoretical claims of the CMC that financial liberalization
would encourage the policy trifecta of low inflation, high employment, and
steady growth. Patman and Douglas found an eager constituency among the
thousands of small financial firms, which collectively sought to preserve
their competitive positions against the forces of consolidation and
monopoly. Small, local finance also reflected the commonplace
understanding that financial relationships were social relationships,
embedded in communities (and in community power structures, including
race, gender, and social class). Although banks would chip away at the
edges through innovation, Congress remained committed to the New Deal
regulatory order into the 1960s.12
Within the nation’s larger banks, the regulatory system’s unyielding
restrictions on commercial banks vis-à-vis other financial firms bred an
increasingly vigorous regulatory resentment paired with an anti-regulatory,
free-market ideology. This was especially true for a cohort of young,
midlevel bankers who built their careers in the 1950s and 1960s. In
succeeding decades, men—and they were all men—like Citibank’s Walter
Wriston, First National Bank of Omaha’s John R. Lauritzen, and Seattle
National Bank of Commerce’s Dee Hock would press against the political
economy of small finance. In doing so, they turned antimonopolists’
language of fair competition against the regulatory state, arguing that the
solution to the unfair regulatory standards was free competition in themarket. Like the profits squeeze, this ideology would develop over time,
and as it did, many of its proponents reached for credit cards as a strategic
embodiment of its ideals: as a way to pursue regulatory reform through
market means.13
The Divergent Paths of Chase Manhattan and Bank of
America
The financial order, built on financial federalism, industry siloing, and
price controls, created wide channels for growth for some firms but
restrained commercial banks. Congressional leaders, eager to maintain the
political economy of small finance, watchfully guarded the system. As
bankers reexamined their competitive positions at the end of the 1950s, they
looked for new ways to generate profits within the system or, barring that,
to plot a course beyond its confines. In boardrooms, the inviting call of the
charge account bankers sounded louder and clearer. Charge account bankers
reported 750,000 cardholders, $40 million in transaction volume, and $12.5
million in credit outstanding in 1957. The charge account fraternity aimed
for one million cardholders and $45 million in volume in 1958 and
expected to achieve it. “This hard-working, resourceful and successful little
corps of pioneers have come through with better results year after year,”
Otto Lorenz gloated. Charge account banking had direction and
momentum.14
The course of that momentum shifted dramatically in 1958 when
Rockefeller’s Chase Manhattan and California’s Bank of America launched
charge account plans. The two firms were orders of magnitude larger than
their commercial bank competitors. The average (mean) U.S. bank in 1958
had $38.5 million in total assets, whereas the average (mean) card-issuing
bank had—as a rough estimate—about $250 million. By comparison, Chase
and Bank of America were huge: at the end of 1958, Bank of America had
$11.2 billion in assets, Chase had $8.3 billion. Although they shared size in
common, they operated fundamentally different business models shaped by
their distinct state regulatory contexts. These elemental differences
determined how their executives understood the challenges their new cardplans would face—and what strategies they would adopt to overcome
them.15
Chase entered the charge account business at a moment when its
executives were uncertain about the bank’s identity and future direction.
The original Chase National Bank had been a wholesale bank, serving large
corporate clients in New York State and across the country. Chase
executives recognized that postwar inflation was encouraging these clients
to shift their deposits from interest-free demand deposits to interest-bearing
time accounts at the bank or to new financial instruments outside of it.
Chase bankers determined that the bank needed to diversify its deposit base
and asset portfolio. They did so, in 1955, by merging with the Manhattan
Company, a firm that focused on the consumer market. The merger created
double vision within the bank. Former Chase National executives like
Rockefeller saw a nationwide—even global—corporate market. Their
ambition stretched as far as planes could fly from New York City. Former
Manhattan Company executives, meanwhile, saw their customers from their
office window, in the neighborhoods where the new Chase Manhattan Bank
maintained its branch offices. Under state law, the consolidated bank could
not build branches outside New York’s five boroughs; only in 1960 could
they extend to neighboring Nassau and Westchester Counties. The merger
agreement called for joint leadership by the Manhattan Company’s
consumer-focused executives and Chase’s traditionally wholesale bankers.
The two visions might coexist, but they could not co-lead.16
In 1958, as the internal power struggle remained unresolved, the bank
introduced the Chase Manhattan Charge Plan (CMCP). Bank executives
modeled the plan on the charge account programs promoted in American
Banker, adopting the methods and goals developed there. Through CMCP,
executives argued, Chase would forge new relationships with small
retailers, while helping those merchants compete with credit-granting
department stores. As Rockefeller recalled, “Our studies strongly indicated
that there was a ready market for this type of credit-card service, designed
to give customers of smaller retail establishments credit facilities
comparable to those of major department stores.” Advertising to retailers,
Chase emphasized that “the merchant is able to improve his competitive
position” by offering “a modern charge account service.” Chase alsofollowed the charge account bankers’ model when courting consumers,
promoting the CMCP as a boon to middle-class, female-led, family
shopping. In a typical ad from April 1959, “One woman tells another . . .
the Chase Manhattan Bank Charge Plan is the smartest way to shop!”
Spring shopping, back-to-school shopping, Christmas shopping, the CMCP
was the “convenient, modern way to shop” for all seasons. In an
arrangement familiar to charge account bankers, while women did the
shopping, husbands got the credit. CMCP made “back-to-school shopping a
pleasure!” for a mother of four; the card she used belonged to “Jonathan Q.
Public,” not Jane.17
The Chase executives soon learned that the strategies medium-sized
banks pioneered in towns and suburban communities proved less successful
for a massive bank in a major city. Chase struggled to develop successful
merchant or consumer recruitment strategies, and with them sufficient
volume to generate reliable profits. Merchants were lukewarm to the plan.
Large retailers with existing credit programs refused to join CMCP, and
small merchants complained about the 6 percent merchant discount. CMCP
also alienated Chase’s existing business customers, like department stores,
which viewed CMCP as a competitive threat. By mid-1961, an internal
report found that CMCP had produced only $2.5 million in new deposit
accounts, or $379 per merchant. The bank struggled to recruit creditworthy
cardholders. Because Chase executives used CMCP to establish
relationships with merchants, they could not immediately tap into
merchants’ relationships with their customers. Instead, Chase ran newspaper
ads and mailed applications to existing checking account customers. The
bank required potential cardholders to submit a credit application.
Executives tried to be diligent: they rejected half the consumers who
applied. Nevertheless, Chase’s mail-order credit screenings lacked the
intimate formality of department store and smaller bank card plans. Instead
of securing the personal recommendation of a participating merchant or
sitting for a credit interview at the bank—methods that added social weight
to consumers’ credit responsibility—consumers applied through the mail.
Fraud became a significant and mounting problem. The bank’s blacklist of
cards reached seventeen pages.18As Chase executives struggled to identify promotion strategies that
would yield adequate transaction volume, they also refused to charge prices
that would produce adequate revenue. Chase initially charged CMCP
cardholders 1 percent per month on their outstanding balances (12 percent
annually). Even with CMCP’s high merchant discount, these rates proved
too low. Under New York law, the bank could have charged up to 1.5
percent (18 percent annually) on most balances, but executives ruled out
raising rates. “When we evaluated this service in the context of our over-all
banking activity,” Rockefeller recalled, “we simply could not see ourselves
charging customers 18 per cent—even though the servicing costs fully
justified the charge.” Chase specialized in safe business lending, where 18
percent interest was unthinkable. In 1960 Chase earned just 4.5 percent
interest on its entire loan portfolio, up from 4.05 percent in 1959. Further,
politicians like Paul Douglas were mobilizing against high consumer credit
prices, and Chase executives worried that charging consumers 18 percent
would draw unwanted political attention. Finally, Chase’s internal
accounting rules allocated more expenses to the CMCP than was common
at other banks, while executives balked at retooling their billing machinery
to tabulate higher rates. In November 1961, the bank’s federal examiners
found that CMCP had lost between $4 and $5 million in three years of
operation. Executives were not encouraged.19
Unlike Chase, Bank of America was fundamentally a consumer bank,
built to sustain founder A. P. Giannini’s famed commitment to help “the
little fellow.” That help came through a far-reaching branch network and
through the bank’s savvy embrace of postwar federal lending programs.
California did not restrict branch banking, and when it launched its
BankAmericard program in November 1958, Bank of America had 638
offices across the rapidly growing state. These offices generated 7 million
individual deposit accounts, or 486 accounts for every 1,000 residents of
California. Bank executives channeled household savings back into
consumer lending. In contrast to Chase, Bank of America made just under
40 percent of its loans to businesses. Instead, more than 20 percent of the
bank’s lending supported consumer installment purchasing. The bank
invested another 40 percent in real estate, primarily home mortgages,
compared with just 4.5 percent at Chase. Fully a quarter of Bank ofAmerica’s loans were “guaranteed or insured by the United States
Government or its agencies” through programs like FHA and VA mortgage
guarantees and FHA home improvement loans.20
Government lending programs provided guaranteed profits for Bank of
America, and they also required executives to manage millions of consumer
loan accounts across a large and diverse state. The principal challenge of
lending to “the little fellow” remained the high costs of administering small
loans. In the 1950s, Bank of America executives blended their past focus on
consumer services with a future-oriented commitment to new technologies
that would make small transactions more efficient and less expensive. The
bank invested heavily in large mainframe computers. In 1955, it unveiled
Electronic Recording Machine, Accounting (ERMA), an electronic check￾processing system. Engineers also developed installment and real estate
loan software that ran on IBM machines. Experience with these new
systems convinced top management that the right mix of technology could
make credit cards a profitable service. Bank executives had considered
starting a charge account banking plan in 1953, when the first boom was at
its peak, but held off fearing they did not yet know how to make a card plan
work. By 1956, executives were ready to move forward with serious
planning.21
Bank of America’s consumer-focused, technologically-driven culture
led executives to reorient their charge account plan from merchants—where
Chase and the charge account banking pioneers were focused—to
consumers. By shifting their perspective, executives fundamentally changed
how they understood the business problems associated with card plans,
reshaping in turn the subsequent strategies they adopted to overcome them.
Heading this effort was Joseph P. Williams, who led the bank’s Consumer
Research Service Department. Williams ardently embraced Bank of
America’s consumerist philosophy. In the 1940s, he drove across the
country to seek a job at the bank (no small feat before the construction of
the interstate highway system). Williams propelled the development of what
would become the BankAmericard as a consumer-focused product—not
primarily a means of offering charge account services to merchants, but a
way to sell revolving credit to consumers.22From the outset, bank executives imagined the BankAmericard as a
vehicle for consumer lending, and they established an 18 percent interest
rate on revolving credit balances. At the time, just over half of charge
account banks offered revolving credit, and few—if any—charged 18
percent.23 California, unlike New York, did not regulate interest on
revolving accounts. Bank of America executives, unlike their counterparts
at Chase, had no qualms about charging a price that would make the
BankAmericard profitable. And consumers were paying these rates already.
Williams simply copied the prices that retail firms, specifically Sears and
Mobil Oil, were charging. On the other side of the card transaction, Bank of
America followed Chase and the other charge account banks by charging
merchants 6 percent on each card purchase but found merchants resistant to
this high fee. To meet merchant concerns, Bank of America lowered its
discount and introduced graduated rate reductions based on a merchant’s
monthly charge volume. And unlike other banks, which often negotiated
discounts privately with individual merchants, Bank of America provided
clear tables and pricing transparency. The bank thus streamlined merchant
enrollment and likely made merchant discounts easier for their computer
systems to process.24
Bank of America executives also revolutionized consumer and merchant
recruitment. Instead of relying on merchants to recommend creditworthy
cardholders, Bank of America launched its program by mailing out millions
of unsolicited cards directly to bank customers. Such direct consumer
marketing was anathema to charge account bankers. In their view, banks
designed card plans to serve merchants; merchants, in turn, promoted bank
card plans. “Once you have your merchant signed your work is only
beginning,” Charge Account Bankers Association president Charles
Landrain observed at a banking conference in November 1958. “From that
time on . . . you have to roll up your sleeves to keep your merchant under
control and producing.” Charge account bankers understood that they
needed to recruit enough consumers and merchants to make participation
worthwhile for each group. They had resolved to make merchants the vector
of the process and to accept a slow buildup of creditworthy cardholders.
Bank of America executives inverted the prevailing logic: instead of using
merchants to recruit consumers, the bank used consumers to draw inmerchants. Executives made unsolicited cards the center of this bold and
risky strategy. “It would be impossible to start a major program with a small
amount of cards,” a BankAmericard spokesman explained to Women’s Wear
Daily, “‘because it would be impossible to interest merchants.’” Card￾carrying consumers would pull merchants in.25
The unsolicited mailing of cards went against the experience and
inclination of the commercial banking industry. It was, American Banker
editor Otto Lorenz declared, “Mistake No. 1.” Williams, however, believed
the bank could build adequate volume and sustain the new credit program
only by putting cards into consumer hands. Lorenz, reflecting the
experience of small and mid-sized banks, understood consumer credit as
rooted in communities, embedded in social relations. Williams and his team
did not abandon social embeddedness entirely. Although Bank of America
dispensed with merchant recommendations and in-person credit checks, in
its early campaigns the bank sent cards only to established customers. Bank
of America built its program on a vast infrastructure of bank branches,
which connected the BankAmericard to local communities. Williams, who
had no direct lending experience himself, believed that the bank’s
community presence would ensure that customers used their cards properly
and paid their debts promptly. There was no need to plumb the depths of
cardholders’ souls before giving them cards, no need to subject them to the
steely-eyed stare of a bank credit manager. Odds were, if they were already
Bank of America customers, they would use their cards properly.
26
Because the bank had branches across California, Williams and his team
had the luxury of testing the waters before fully committing to the plan.
Executives chose to unveil the BankAmericard in Fresno, then a city of
130,000 midway between Los Angeles and San Francisco, where Bank of
America controlled 45 percent of the banking market. If the plan flopped,
bankers hoped, no one in San Francisco or Los Angeles would notice. In
late 1958, the bank enlisted over 300 community retailers before mailing
credit cards to every bank customer in the area, nearly 60,000 in all.
Williams dubbed the experiment “the drop.” To inform consumers where
they could use their new BankAmericards—and to demonstrate to
merchants that their competitors had already enrolled in the plan—the bank
ran full-page ads, listing all participating merchants, in the Fresno Bee.Initially, the mass-mailing approach had the desired effect. Facing
competitive pressure and the knowledge that half their customers now had
BankAmericards, merchant enrollments tripled over the next five months.27
The BankAmericards mailed in September 1958 presented Fresno
consumers with another innovation: the cards were made of plastic. Before
then, payment cards were either metal, integrating with mechanical
information systems popular with service stations and department stores, or
paper, requiring clerks to record account information by hand. Bank of
America, working with the small technology firm Dashew Business
Machines (DBM), pioneered plastic credit cards. Founded by entrepreneur
Stanley A. Dashew in 1951, DBM primarily contracted with the U.S. Navy
and was one of California’s many technology firms weaned on the military
industrial complex. DBM specialized in card-embossing equipment, which
the Navy used to keep track of spare parts. By his own recollection, Dashew
saw the expanding card industry as a potential application of his firm’s
technology. The Databosser, DBM’s flagship product, could read and
transcribe information directly from IBM punch cards used by both the
Navy and big banks, at a speed unmatched by its competitors. That DBM’s
Databosser could churn out 1,000 cards in an hour would have meant little
to BankAmericard recipients. But the new plastic cards fit seamlessly into
the era’s prevailing feeling of boundless technological progress. “The
citizens of Fresno gather[ed] around the checkout counter to watch
someone pay with a BankAmericard,” business writer Joseph Nocera
observed. “This was the 1950s . . . a time of wonder at the miraculous
march of progress. The BankAmericard was part of that march.”28
Based on the promising results in Fresno and rumors that competitors
were planning to launch plans in other key California markets, Bank of
America’s managing committee moved to rapidly implement the program
on a statewide basis. The bank rolled out the BankAmericard in
Sacramento, San Francisco, and Los Angeles in early 1959. By the end of
the year, the bank announced, “Nearly two million California families hold
our BankAmericard, which is honored by more than 25,000 merchants and
professional members.”29 This bold pronouncement proved premature.
Bank of America soon revised down its tally of cardholders—counting notsimply households to which the bank had mailed cards but those actually
using them.
Indeed, Bank of America’s computerized credit future did not
materialize quite as planned. While Williams’s mass-distribution strategy
succeeded in recruiting cardholders and merchants, it also invited criticism
from consumers who were less eager to accept the bank’s new plastic
liabilities. In early 1960, Consumer Reports magazine joined a growing
chorus critical of the BankAmericard, “which appears to lead in the sales￾persuasion chants in praise of debt.” Bankers also critiqued unsolicited card
mailing. Charge Account Bankers Association president Charles Landrain
mocked Bank of America: “It is agreed by most operators that broadcasting
credit cards to the public is a waste of money.” In Bank of America’s
offices, executives saw that Landrain had a point. Aggressive marketing
came at the price of delinquency and fraud. Williams expected an initial
delinquency rate of 4 percent; the actual rate was close to 20 percent. “The
degree of credit checking we did was somewhat limited by the urgency to
get the card out on the wide basis,” a BankAmericard spokesman later
explained. “We had to move fast.” Moreover, like Chase, the bank failed to
sign up large retailers who already had credit departments, who disdained
the bank’s high discount, and who feared the loss of their customer base—
objections which denied Bank of America access to key sites of high dollar
consumption. The bank reported nearly $9 million in BankAmericard losses
for 1960 alone.30
Nevertheless, Bank of America’s top management remained committed
to the card and with it a future defined by convenient credit. At the end of
1959, Williams left the bank. The card plan’s losses, he realized, would be
an indelible mark on his career. After Williams’s departure, top
management transferred the BankAmericard to the bank’s installment
lending division. For a time, Bank of America stopped mailing unsolicited
credit cards and focused on weeding out unprofitable accounts. Meanwhile,
the bank’s very public losses scared away competitors. Bank of America
maintained a virtual monopoly over the bank card business in California
into the mid-1960s, enabling bank executives to identify and overcome
organizational and technological challenges and to achieve steady
profitability.
31Chase suffered similarly but lacked Bank of America’s commitment.
The New York bank was initially unable to recruit large retailers and
experienced greater than anticipated expenses from equipment, personnel,
account delinquencies, and the cost of funds. Consistent with its retailer
focus, Chase lowered merchant discount rates to bring in more retailers and
generate more volume, which further eroded income, especially because the
bank’s executives refused to consider raising consumer interest rates.
Importantly, John J. McCloy, the chairman who had pushed Chase National
into retail banking through the Manhattan Company merger and who had
been a strong supporter of the CMCP, retired in 1960. He was replaced by
George Champion, a Chase National veteran and lifelong commercial
banker. Champion, according to David Rockefeller, had “worked hard to
make Chase the country’s foremost wholesale domestic bank, catering
primarily to large U.S. corporations.” After an internal audit of the program,
Champion decided that CMCP was a poor bet to produce significant future
earnings. Chase ultimately sold CMCP to Uni-Serv, a company Joseph
Williams founded after leaving Bank of America in order to have another
crack at the card business.32
The early charge account programs found success and profits by developing
through established community relationships and operating at a scale that
was manageable for small bank executives. Following Otto Lorenz’s
advice, they were frugal with equipment and personnel. They used their
card programs to expand their merchant customer base, slowly warming to
profiting from consumer lending. Charge account banking, nestled in the
political economy of small finance and nurtured by a community of like￾minded pioneers, had—and retained—forward momentum. Yet for Chase
and Bank of America, the stakes and the scale of the challenges were
dramatically larger. By the early 1960s, Chase remained committed to a
future that looked much like its past, lending wholesale to large corporate
clients. Its executives were not patient enough to allow their plan to develop
slowly and not adventurous enough to take an aggressive risk on consumer
banking. Bank of America executives also followed a path defined by the
bank’s corporate culture, but it had a longstanding commitment to consumer
lending, bolstered by the New Deal’s federal loan guarantees. The bank’s
commitment to consumer lending, in conjunction with its statewide reach,led executives to make sustained investments in information technology.
Despite experiencing higher initial losses than Chase, Bank of America
executives stuck with their card, reaching profitability by 1962 and
maintaining it through the decade.
The very visible struggles of both firms caused other banks to steer
clear of charge account banking for nearly a decade. For their part, charge
account bankers continued to pursue steady, incremental growth,
overshadowed by their giant competitors and the flashy travel cards
developed by Diners Club and American Express. Charge account bankers
lost their most vocal advocate in January 1960, when Lorenz died following
a long “wasting illness.” Without his leadership and enthusiasm, American
Banker discontinued its charge account coverage. Although many of the
charge account pioneers remained active in the card market, the eventual
profitability of Bank of America’s consumer model, in line with a wider
eclipse of antimonopoly politics by consumer politics in the 1960s,
propelled bankers to follow its lead.33
Bankers developed early credit card programs within the social and
political framework of the New Deal regulatory order before turning cards
into a technological weapon against that system. Put another way, bankers’
use of financial technology to innovate around the rules was an incremental
process, one that required them to fit the technology within the existing
social and political structure. Charge account bankers understood cards as
an organic outgrowth of their relationships with retail firms, which shaped
both the business strategies they developed and the antimonopoly narrative
they promoted. Charge accounts, as a business service for merchants,
slotted in commercial banking’s regulated silo. The programs,
geographically circumscribed and inexpensive for consumers, matched the
spirit of financial federalism and price controls. Regulatory negotiations—
over charge-offs and revolving credit—unfolded at the margins. For Bank
of America, charge accounts followed from the bank’s entwined
commitments to information technology and consumer lending. By
developing the BankAmericard on a statewide basis and charging
consumers 18 percent interest, executives pressed against the spirit of
geographic restrictions and price ceilings. In this, California’s distinct rules
shaped Bank of America’s strategy. The bank’s experience, in turn,prefigured later approaches used to affirmatively challenge both financial
federalism’s geographic restrictions and price controls in more restrictive
states. Chase, for its part, lacked the internal resources or compelling future
vision to sustain card-based innovation.
Ultimately, the 1950s were a seedbed for dynamic changes that
reshaped the industry in later years. Some of this dynamism, like the
accelerating investment in information technology, aligned with immediate
regulatory goals while encouraging financial concentration in the long run.
Information technology made banks more efficient and helped bankers
reduce the mounting costs of processing financial transactions. Big banks
could invest in mainframe computers and other back-office technology.
Small banks could not. Economies of scale and scope worked against the
political economy of small finance. In other areas, bankers pressed more
directly against the regulatory boundaries or sought to escape the New Deal
system altogether. Large banks expanded abroad into less or differently
regulated foreign markets, achieving growth overseas that Congress would
not allow at home. They also developed ways of circumventing federal
price controls on deposit rates by borrowing in financial markets. The
regulatory order structured all these strategies, which, like charge account
banking, reflected efforts to grow at the margin of the rules. Moreover, a
rising cohort of bankers, not chastened by the Depression years, were
increasingly not satisfied to innovate at the margins. They wanted to be
entrepreneurs, not mere custodians. They wanted to tear down the rules
altogether. Political stasis fed a rising tension, building competitive
pressures that soon would pop.4Deluge
Self-Fulfilling Prophecy
Following the strategy pioneered by Bank of America, from 1966 to
1970 bankers flooded American mailboxes with tens of millions of
unsolicited credit cards. They did so, they argued, because they had no
other choice. “In the competitive climate that exists, if we had depended
upon applications alone our plan could not have been launched
successfully,” David M. Kennedy, chairman of Continental Illinois Bank in
Chicago, explained to shareholders in January 1967. “There never was any
possibility that we could have proceeded at a more leisurely pace.” For the
next four years—until Congress banned unsolicited card mailing in October
1970—bankers repeated versions of Kennedy’s argument. Mass mailing
was simply the only way to launch a successful bank card program. In one
sense, bankers spun their self-fulfilling prophesy out of hopeful visions of
the future. Most states did not yet regulate the price of credit card lending.
Bankers increasingly saw consumer markets as the key to growth and
profits, an emphasis steadily ingrained by the profits squeeze of the 1950s
and increasing financial turbulence in the 1960s. At this pivotal moment,
card technology captured the industry’s imagination. If managed properly,
bankers believed, cards would not only produce profits on their own but
would also create lucrative and long-lasting consumer banking
relationships. Further, bankers saw cards as a logical step toward the
industry’s technological future, where computers and data processing would
expand the range of bank services and drive down operations costs. With
these hopes came intense anxiety. The number of creditworthy customers
was limited, bankers reasoned. No one could afford to wait while rivals
scooped them up.1As they sprinted into the credit card market, bankers developed regional
and national payment networks, which enabled their banks to integrate local
plans into far-reaching credit systems. Bankers, confined by geographic
regulations, had long used interfirm relationships to conduct business in
distant markets. Card networks built on these traditions. They were
necessary, bankers believed, to compete with travel card firms, like the
Diners Club and American Express. Whereas travel cards catered to male
business elites, bankers envisioned universal cards, equally useful for
shopping trips and business trips. Drawing on a common pool of
technology and industry know-how, rival network-building firms developed
card systems with distinct organizational styles that reflected financial
federalism’s diverse, state-based regulatory environments. Bank of America
began franchising its BankAmericard plan to select licensee banks in early
1966, modeling the network on its centralized control of its California
branches. Many bankers viewed BankAmericard’s expansion as a threat. To
counter, rivals developed regional card associations and, eventually, a
competing national network, the Interbank Card Association. Taken
together, the flurry of network building rested on established modes of
interfirm cooperation, along lines of longstanding interbank rivalry and
within geographic strategies dictated by financial federalism. Put another
way: the regulatory structure shaped bankers’ networking strategies.2
Even as bankers developed card networks to merge the gendered retail
and travel markets, they retained implicit class and racial boundaries on
consumer participation. As one Continental Illinois banker explained, the
“demographics of the ‘best’ credit card customers point to married couples
between the ages of 24 and 34, with family incomes of from $7,000 to
$15,000, probably living in high-growth areas.” Bankers coded
creditworthiness—their governing criteria for credit access—as young,
white, middle- to high-income, straight, and suburban. Young suburban
families, bankers believed, would consume now on the promise of higher
future incomes. They would use their cards and pay their bills on time.
While the best customers lived in high-growth, all-white suburbs,
geographic regulations often cloistered large urban banks, like Continental,
in racially diverse downtowns. Bank network-building thus also aimed at
reaching suburban consumers, propelling credit from city centers into leafyenclaves of white privilege. In Chicago, where downtown banks began
issuing cards in October 1966, network expansion occurred alongside
demonstrations led by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. against segregated
suburban housing. Although Continental’s David Kennedy spoke solemnly
about finding “the solution of our urban problems,” card network building
conformed with the broader pattern of “Jim Crow credit,” the disinvestment
from browning cities and reinvestment in white suburbs that defined
postwar American finance. In their haste to get cards in the hands of
suburban families, bankers narrowed their potential market and increased
the competitive pressure. They pursued mass mailing to achieve volume
and scale, ultimately stoking a suburban backlash.3
In the mid-1960s, cards offered bankers a path out of the postwar
regulatory confines, particularly the price controls and geographic
restrictions that anchored the New Deal financial order. States did not yet
regulate credit card interest rates. With card networks, bankers could begin
recruiting consumers across state lines. In their eagerness, bankers
swamped the nation in cards just as consumer politics and protection were
emerging as a bipartisan political force. Bankers embraced cards as a means
of innovating around the New Deal rules; by decade’s end, political
backlash against relentless credit expansion firmly ensconced cards within
them.Competing with Diners Club
In the mid-1960s, the bank credit card industry was poised for renewed
expansion. The sustained economic boom of the 1950s burned even hotter
early in the next decade. From January 1960 to January 1967, the economy
grew at 6.6 percent a year. Incomes and expectations for material comfort
grew apace, especially among the white, increasingly suburban middle
class. A series of federal tax cuts, proposed by President John F. Kennedy in
1963 and enacted after his death, further spurred growth. The cuts, Lyndon
Johnson explained, put “$25 million a day in the hands of the American
consumer.” Johnson urged Americans to spend the money. They did, often
augmented with credit. Feeling more affluent, consumers borrowed more
freely. Recognizing widespread prosperity, lenders extended more credit.
Consumer borrowing, growing at 9 percent a year, significantly outpaced
economic growth. The virtuous cycle of consumer purchasing power, juiced
by credit, continued to spin, at least for Americans fortunate to be
considered creditworthy.
4
In this environment, universal card plans gained momentum. “Credit
Card Companies Are Enjoying a Fresh Surge of Healthy Growth,” the
business magazine Barron’s announced in a March 1964 headline.
Incumbent firms, which the magazine divided along established lines of
travel and entertainment cards for male executives and retail cards for city
and suburban shoppers, had seen steady increases in cardholder spending.
Card issuers had also expanded merchant and cardholder membership,
while curtailing bad-debt losses. Newspapers and the business press touted
BankAmericard’s success as evidence that bank card plans had found solid
ground. In 1965, several large regional banks debuted new card ventures,
including Valley National Bank in Phoenix and Mellon National Bank in
Pittsburgh. “Alert banks,” Mellon president John A. Mayer observed,
“realize that there have been major social changes in the United States.
People who weren’t candidates to do business with banks now are.” The
New Deal political economy, bolstered by relentless postwar growth,
continued to make more Americans creditworthy. Bankers were bullish. The
cover of the December 1966 issue of Burroughs Clearing House, themagazine “for Bank and Financial Officers,” greeted readers with a picture
of a red-cheeked Santa with bank and travel cards tumbling from his
billfold. The industry, once skeptical of charge account banking and
unsecured consumer lending, seemed ready to embrace cards.5
Nevertheless, Mayer’s invocation of “alert banks” hinted at the
industry’s continued apprehension about falling behind their differently
regulated financial competitors. Commercial bankers chafed at restraints.
Affluent consumers continued migrating to the suburbs, where, in states
with branching restrictions, downtown banks could not follow. Thrifts, like
credit unions and savings and loans, offered consumers better rates on
savings and lower prices on home mortgages. Beginning in 1966,
regulatory differences contributed to a series of acute crises. When the
Federal Reserve raised interest rates to fight surging inflation, investors
moved money out of price-controlled bank deposits and into higher yielding
financial assets. To meet existing loan commitments to large corporate
borrowers, bankers raised cash by selling municipal bonds, promptly
crashing that market. In this unstable environment, bankers remained torn
between their custodial duty to make safe loans and an entrepreneurial itch
to develop new services. They sought a greater share of consumer lending
markets and, through those relationships, more stable consumer deposits.
By the 1960s, a new generation of bank executives, men who had not
weathered the Depression and bowed to its regulatory compromises, moved
into bank leadership. With the well-publicized success of the
BankAmericard, credit cards looked like a service ambitious bankers could
call their own.6
Bankers’ hopeful vision for cards centered in large measure on
automation, especially new computer technologies that promised to
streamline labor-intensive credit account processing. As noted in Mayer’s
Mellon Bank 1965 annual report, “A prime factor in making this service
possible is the degree to which the Bank has developed the use of computer
equipment, which is economically essential to the operation of a program of
this magnitude.” California’s Crocker National likewise hailed the credit
card as a “development made possible by the use of electronic data￾processing equipment.” And cards were just the start. The banking press
anticipated the imminent arrival of the “cashless” and “checkless” society,imagined futures of computerized payment systems that would lift the
mountainous weight of processing paper cash and checks. Across the
financial system, the steady growth of transactions, from stock purchases to
check usage, placed enormous pressure on firms’ accounting and processing
capacities. Computers would, bankers believed, solve these back-office
problems. They could also generate new lines of business. “The trick is
going to be to combine money and computers to create a whole new range
of services,” one observer wrote. Bank of America had pioneered
commercial bank applications of computer technology with its ERMA
check-processing system in the late 1950s. It developed the BankAmericard
to utilize these systems as well. Major banks, seeking advantages in
electronic scale, followed Bank of America’s lead.7
The potential reach of computer technology remained limited, however,
so long as bank cards operated in circumscribed geographic and product
markets. As Barron’s highlighted, travel cards enjoyed a global reach, while
retail cards were confined by financial federalism: “The largest [retail credit
plan] is that of the Bank of America, which operates exclusively in
California.” A few dozen other bank cards served smaller markets, limited
to smaller states and individual cities. Geographic divisions mirrored the
continued gender division among travel and retail plans. For travel cards,
the New York Times reported, “The average card holder is: male, married,
earns between $10,000 and $20,000 a year, travels frequently, and is a
college graduate.” Such assertions combined reality as it was with what
travel card marketers wished to project: creditworthiness coded as high￾income, male, and straight (whiteness was assumed, if unstated; a
vanishingly small number of Black workers received high salaries). To
maintain their masculine exclusivity, travel firms policed the division
between their cards and feminized retail markets. “We believe women
account for 95% of the spending on the BankAmericard,” Diners chairman
Alfred Bloomingdale wrote in a letter published in Forbes in October 1966,
“while men account for 95% of the spending on the Diners Club card. We
do not believe that the Bank of America is a competitor of the Diners Club.”
Bloomingdale wanted the gender divide to remain stark and explicit.8
Bloomingdale may have accurately described card markets as they were
when he wrote, but only because banks had just begun to merge genderedcredit markets. Bank of America led the transformation. Initially, bank
executives promoted regional card use within the rubric of female-led
consumption. BankAmericard ads highlighted “statewide shopping
convenience,” emphasizing that the card was “the sound, modern plan for
making the most of your family dollars.” BankAmericard’s early
advertising seldom featured men; when it did, the focus remained family
shopping. It was, after all, “The Family Credit Card.” As executives sought
to increase transaction volume to maximize investments in electronic
equipment and personnel, the bank turned to travel services. In 1964, Bank
of America signed ten airlines into the BankAmericard plan. By then, more
than three thousand hotels, restaurants, and travel agencies across California
accepted the card. Incorporating travel features expanded BankAmericard’s
market from affluent female shoppers to their upwardly mobile husbands.
Unlike travel cards, the bank offered these services without charging an
annual fee. Combining retail and travel created economies of scale, making
the BankAmericard cheaper for merchants and consumers. It also created
network effects: More consumers would carry the BankAmericard, more
businesses would accept it, and participation would be more valuable for
both groups. Still, Bank-Americard operated exclusively in California.
Bloomingdale was right; it was not yet a competitor of the Diners Club.9
At the end of 1965, the two largest New York banks, First National City
—today’s Citibank—and Chase Manhattan, sought to enter the travel card
business with an eye toward geographic expansion. In September, First
National City partnered with third-ranked travel firm Carte Blanche. The
companies initially planned to extend Carte Blanche’s services
internationally by linking the then-nationwide card plan to Citibank’s global
branch network. Federal law prohibited U.S. banks from expanding across
state lines, but after World War II federal officials encouraged large banks
to develop overseas branch networks. With their foreign branches American
banks supported multinational U.S. firms and projected U.S. economic
power. Citibank, Chase, and Bank of America all operated significant
overseas businesses, with Citi boasting more than one hundred international
branches. As Citi’s negotiations with Carte Blanche developed, bank
executives decided to purchase the travel business outright. Not to be
outdone, Chase, Citibank’s chief New York rival, moved immediately topurchase Diners Club. The acquisitions offered clear strategic advantages.
The banks could finance card lending more cheaply than the stand-alone
travel firms, making the businesses more competitive and profitable.
Moreover, travel cardholders—elite, male business executives—were the
banks’ ideal customers, opening pathways for new business lending.10
Commentators readily observed that travel cards remained “a totally
different business” than retail credit, yet rival firms anticipated that Citi and
Chase held larger ambitions: to use travel cards as the basis for nationwide,
universal card plans. If Bank of America was moving from retail to travel,
Citi and Chase could go in the other direction. “We’re in the money
business,” a Citi spokesman quipped. Such a move aligned with the New
York banks’ broader strategies. Citi and Chase pressed against the New
Deal order’s regulatory boundaries, waging constant battle against state and
federal officials who restrained their geographic growth through branching
and merger restrictions. With nationwide—and international—reach and
experience managing far-flung plans, Carte Blanche and Diners could serve
as platforms for breaking down the geographic and gender divisions in card
markets. American Express executives saw these possibilities clearly. In
December 1965, Amex made its own bid to combine the travel and retail
markets by acquiring Uni-Serv, a retail card company that had taken over
Chase’s ill-fated Charge Plan. The Department of Justice saw the same
thing. The Antitrust Division sued to block Citi’s acquisition of Carte
Blanche and threatened suit if Chase closed its deal with Diners. Allowing
the largest banks to take over established travel plans would reduce
competition in the card market, federal antitrust attorneys reasoned (a risk
apparently not immanent in Amex’s purchase of Uni-Serv, which the
department allowed). Citibank, the department wrote, “is especially
qualified to enter the credit card business on its own . . . and such entry is
likely if the proposed merger is enjoined.” The Antitrust Division’s actions
effectively foreclosed acquisition as a strategy that banks could use to enter
the card market and expand geographically.
11
The Department of Justice’s intervention constrained the territorial
growth of individual bank card plans at a time when bankers increasingly
saw the geographic scope of their card programs as important for recruiting
middle-class consumers, for building transaction volume, and formaximizing the value of credit processing technology—for, in short,
competing with Diners Club. Instead of large banks operating stand-alone
nationwide card plans, as Citi and Chase had intended, the decision
encouraged bankers to construct networks that would combine their local
retail credit programs into regional and national card systems. This path was
perhaps the likeliest outcome anyway. Although some aggressive bankers
sought to push past regulatory restraints, most of the nation’s nearly 14,000
banks continued to embrace localism and community embeddedness as
fundamental values. Alert bankers saw wide vistas for expansion into
consumer markets. They also wanted to maintain bulwarks against the
market power of Citi, Chase, Bank of America, and their ilk. From the
1960s onward, bankers continued to develop card plans as local services,
built to sell convenient credit and to deepen relationships with consumer
and merchant customers in geographically restricted markets. They did so
recognizing that even to compete locally they needed to offer credit that
could move across states and around the country. Doing so required
cooperation: bankers could not build where they could not reach. And they
needed to build quickly. Citibank’s and Chase’s aborted acquisitions sent a
clear signal: competition was coming.12
Top-Down Network Building: BankAmericard
Given the constraints of financial federalism, both legal—in that banks
could not build branches across state lines—and ideological—in that
bankers could not easily think beyond state borders, it was not obvious that
banks would develop nationwide credit plans in the 1960s. In 1958, Otto
Lorenz writing in American Banker had suggested that a “liaison”
connecting distant bank card plans would enable them to compete with
nascent travel cards. Lorenz, though, remained an outlier. Market
participants and observers understood retail bank credit as bound in space.
In this environment, the path to BankAmericard’s nationwide expansion
appeared essentially by accident. As bankers around the country realized
that the BankAmericard had found a stable, profitable market in California,
they sought to understand and replicate its success. Bank of America
executives capitalized on this interest. In 1965, the bank began to market itsproprietary credit card accounting software, repackaging a financial
information system developed in its local market for sale to a global cohort
of large, computerized banks. Executives focused on U.S. banks with
existing card programs—like Marine Midland in upstate New York—and
on foreign banks—specifically Barclays in England, which planned to
initiate its own card plan. Building on this experience, executives concluded
that a nationally (and, in the case of Barclays, globally) compatible
accounting system run on efficient computers could provide a technological
foundation for expanding the BankAmericard beyond California. Bank of
America could sell more than its accounting software; it could sell its entire
card plan, recruiting consumers and merchants at scale.13
To do so, Bank of America executives developed a national cooperative
network in the style of its California operation. The bank adopted a
franchise model, selling licenses to participant banks, setting their
geographic territories, and ultimately controlling entry and competition
within the network. Bank of America executives designed the system so
they could manage it from the top down, replicating their experience
managing a statewide card network across California’s diverse markets. To
join the network, banks paid a $25,000 franchise fee and 0.5 percent of their
card plan’s gross credit sales. In return, participant banks gained, according
to executive Ken Larkin, “a nationally-known product . . . a card which is
not limited to one regional area.” Initially Bank of America restricted
participation to large regional banks and assigned territories to licensees.
The bank encouraged licensees to market cards aggressively, teaching
participants how to use the unsolicited mailing strategy it developed in
California. In theory, participant bankers would not compete to enroll the
same merchants and consumers, or if they did, competition in any market
would be confined to a few “reputable banks.” The franchise model also
meant that licensee banks were fundamentally subordinate. The
BankAmericard system had a clear hierarchy, with the nation’s largest bank
firmly at the top.14
Bank of America adopted the franchise model to replicate the local ties
created by its branch network, using licensees’ community relationships to
root the BankAmericard in markets across the country. Bank of America’s
executives first recruited banks in large cities not yet served by bank cardprograms. The bank also sought large banks, which could afford the
technological systems and costs associated with launching the plan on a
massive scale through unsolicited mailing. Licensee banks, in turn,
recruited merchants and consumers in their immediate market area. They
also expanded across their assigned regions by signing agent agreements
with smaller banks—partnerships similar to those used by charge account
bankers who built small-scale card networks in the mid-1950s. Agent banks
recruited local merchants and suggested potential cardholders to licensee
banks, which managed all consumer accounts. Although card networks
hinted at a future where bankers could decouple their services from the
physical constraints of their branch systems, in the 1960s bankers saw cards
as a tool for connecting consumers and merchants to their branches.
Bankers worked to embed card plans within community relationships,
efforts that extended to plan branding. “We give other banks the benefit of
our experience in helping them set up their own cards,” Larkin explained in
October 1966, indicating that although banks were joining Bank of
America’s network, they would retain control of their card plan locally.
Like the correspondent charge plans, BankAmericard cards and advertising
carried the local licensee’s name to tie the BankAmericard program into the
local community. Unlike the earlier plans, “BankAmericard” appeared
centrally in bold text, signaling which bank was paramount.15
Bank of America developed its network to facilitate nationwide
“interchange,” the process of registering card transactions, discounting sales
slips, debiting merchant accounts, and billing cardholders. In California,
Bank of America handled these steps internally, managing interchange
among its branches through a subsidiary, BankAmericard Service
Corporation (BASC). To expand its network nationally, Bank of America
organized franchising through BASC, which then coordinated interchange
procedures and established operational rules among participating banks.
When a cardholder, signed up by Seattle’s National Bank of Commerce,
purchased goods from a California merchant enrolled by Bank of America,
the merchant first discounted their sales slip at their local Bank of America
branch. Bank of America then credited the merchant’s account for the cost
of the merchandise, less the merchant discount, and forwarded the slip to
the National Bank of Commerce. The National Bank of Commercereimbursed (rediscounted) Bank of America for the purchase and added the
charge to the cardholder’s bill. As interchange networks developed, the
“issuing bank” (National Bank of Commerce) would also deduct an
interchange fee from the funds it reimbursed to the “acquiring bank” (Bank
of America). Although card networks were new, bankers understood
interchange. Since the nineteenth century, they had developed a variety of
private institutions, from correspondent networks to clearinghouses, to
facilitate transactions across financial federalism’s geographic barriers. The
credit card system, “is one of exchanging valuable pieces of paper,” one
commentator argued. “Bankers are no strangers to this process, which is
fundamentally the same as the existing check clearing system.”16
Bank of America announced its plans to license the BankAmericard in
May 1966, and over the next two years the program grew rapidly. By the
end of 1966, Bank of America counted 8 licensees, growing to 17 the
following year. By the end of 1968, 41 licensee banks issued
BankAmericards, and 1,823 agent banks signed up merchants and
recommended consumers in their territories. With this growth came
building tension. Although Bank of America relied on its partners to build
the network, executives also intended the BankAmericard as the
steppingstone for Bank of America’s eventual nationwide expansion. “The
ultimate objective of this program,” Larkin wrote in a March 1966 memo,
“is to make the name BankAmericard a household word throughout the
nation.” These ambitions, well known within the banking industry,
undermined trust in BASC among participant banks, especially when Bank
of America seemed to place its own interests ahead of the franchisees and
the success of the system. Cooperation without competition was at best a
strained compromise, which placed Bank of America as at once competitor
and referee. At the same time, the BankAmericard’s expansion inspired a
competitive fervor among rival firms, especially large regional banks that
topped the local financial hierarchies in the nation’s geographically
segmented banking markets. They recognized Bank of America’s ambitions,
and they sought to use its mass promotional strategy to secure their card
plans before the California colossus came crashing in.17Fig. 2: A schematic illustration of consumer-merchant-bank connections fashioned by different bank
credit card networks. The figure also reflects the increasing scale and complexity of these networks,
from stand-alone charge account banking plans (independent system), to regional plans that
connected card-issuing and agent banks (affiliate system), to regional and then nationwide card
networks that linked smaller systems together (interchange system).
Source: Karl A. Scheld, “Bank Credit Cards: Saturation in the Midwest?,” Business Conditions (June
1968): 14. Reprinted with permission of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Cooperation with Competition: Regional Bankcard
Associations
For bankers able to buy a franchise, the BankAmericard offered a clear
path to the credit card future. Most banks, however, could not or would not
join. Bank of America restricted franchises to a handful of large banks.
Others refused to participate as junior partners to the California giant. For
bankers outside the BankAmericard system, its nationwide expansion posed
an acute, monopolistic threat. Bank of America, the nation’s largest bank,
sought to dominate convenient retail credit. The card industry “could not be
something . . . jealously guarded by an individual bank,” Marine Midland
executive Karl Hinke recalled. To counter, rival bankers began to build their
own regional and then national card networks. Just as California’s
regulatory geography influenced BankAmericard’s structure, the geographic
regulations governing these bankers’ markets shaped the networks they
built. All were constructed with one eye on the local market and one on the
national competitive picture.18
Bankers in Chicago developed the first alternative to Bank of America’s
top-down network, under the leadership of the city’s largest bank,
Continental Illinois, and its chairman, David Kennedy. Continental and
Kennedy were unlikely credit card pioneers. Kennedy, a devout Mormon
raised in rural Utah, began his banking career in 1930 as a clerk at the
Federal Reserve in Washington, D.C., where he eventually served as
assistant to Fed chairman Marriner Eccles. After World War II, Kennedy
moved to Continental and rose quickly. Through the 1950s, the bank
remained deeply conservative, taking deposits from large businesses and
investing in business loans and government securities. Continental scorned
consumer banking. Its 1924 neo-classical headquarters, situated in the heart
of the Loop, embodied stodginess. The building’s most distinctive feature,its Grand Banking Hall, was a three-story financial temple of thick Ionic
columns and entablatures decorated with gentlemanly quotes. “All of the
progress of men and nation is based on the sacredness of contracts,” a
typical one reads. When Kennedy became chairman in 1959, Continental
was, his biographer emphasized, “‘an old man’s bank.’”19
Kennedy set out to remake Continental, a campaign he advanced in
evolving relationship with the racial and economic transformations of urban
Chicago. Stodginess aside, Continental’s main limitation remained Illinois’s
unit banking laws, which confined the bank to its single downtown office.
Within these constraints, Kennedy established Continental’s consumer
banking business, rebranding Continental as “the big bank with the little
bank inside” and creating a “family banking center” to lure customers
downtown. Chicago, though, was changing. White residents steadily
migrated to the suburban periphery. Black residents, following the triumphs
of the Civil Rights (1964) and Voting Rights Acts (1965), escalated claims
for racial and economic justice. In summer 1966, Martin Luther King Jr.
began his Chicago campaign, leading marches through the city and its all￾white suburbs. Like other urban business leaders, Kennedy worried that
with rising racial tensions, consumers would avoid downtown altogether.
Continental, though, could not move. Kennedy sought to foster urban
economic opportunity. He allied with Chicago mayor Richard J. Daley to
promote redevelopment. Continental actively hired Black employees. Such
actions, while well-intentioned, failed to address the deep structures of
segregation and credit redlining that continued to undermine Black
opportunity. Kennedy also looked beyond the city. Continental expanded its
international operations in the 1960s and lobbied state lawmakers for
branching liberalization. Credit cards, which bank executives hoped could
serve the Chicago region and wider Midwest, sat uneasily between urban
engagement and abandonment. Cards also reflected a third front of
Kennedy’s strategy: technological modernization. In a widely reproduced
speech to Continental’s shareholders, Kennedy explained that “advancing
technology not only makes charge cards more feasible and economical for
general use but singles them out as an important milestone on the road to
the future.”20As Continental executives plotted their move into the card business,
they considered the scope of their markets—which merchants and
consumers to target—and the design of their network—how to achieve
scale given the bank’s geographic confinement. To address the first
question, Continental commissioned a market research study in the summer
of 1966. Focusing initially on retail rather than travel services, the
researchers interviewed merchants enrolled in the First Wisconsin National
Bank’s charge plan, which had recently begun operations in Milwaukee.
Even more than their peers in the 1950s, these retailers felt compelled to
offer credit. “Many said their customers expect to charge purchases,” the
report observed, emphasizing the ever-present competition of firms, like
Marshall Field and Sears, with in-house card plans. Consumer expectations
opened a door for the bank, especially in affluent suburban communities.
“Retailers in or near wealthy or high-status suburbs . . . seem to offer an
excellent potential for the bank card plan,” the report argued, “since people
in these areas appear to be extremely charge conscious.” Retailers still
harbored significant reservations, especially about the costs of accepting
bank cards. They fumed, as well, “that they are unfairly being forced to pay
for the customers’ credit.” Consumer demand left them little choice.21
Although Continental executives focused narrowly on retail credit, they
appear to have contemplated a racially inclusive card plan, one that could
serve urban and suburban markets. Continental’s researchers convened
seven focus groups. Five represented suburban communities—three from
Evanston, north of the city, two from Hinsdale, to the west. Two more
represented “Negro consumers.” Perhaps bankers sought to extend the card
market’s racial boundaries to include Black customers. Yet the groups’
responses, which were not disaggregated by race, suggest a wide gulf in
credit experiences and expectations. Most interviewees valued
“convenience,” especially the convenience to shop at a variety of stores
without securing charge privileges at each one. These consumers expected
credit access. Others shunned convenience. They wanted cards as a backup
in emergencies or to establish credit with the bank. Consumers also held
different views on price. Some argued that Continental charged too much,
too quickly; they expected longer repayment periods without interest
common in informal credit plans. “Who pays for this?” others asked,skeptical that the card and initial thirty days of credit could come free of
charge. The report did not identify which consumers fell into which
categories. It seems likely, however, that charge conscious consumers, from
white, high-status suburbs, expected convenient, inexpensive credit.
Likewise, Black consumers, who were often denied access to mainstream
financial services and channeled into expensive credit relationships with
inner-city merchants, likely sought economic security and access to
traditional banking relationships. Based on their experience, Black
consumers expected to pay.
22
Researchers presented interviewees’ divergent perspectives while
nudging Continental executives away from non-white borrowers with coded
language of creditworthiness. The bank should avoid marketing that “might
associate the charge card too closely with poor credit risks,” the researchers
advised. These “could be a strong negative association for many people.”
Instead, the researchers urged Continental to take a conventional approach,
marketing the card “as a convenience,” to support high-status, family
shopping. To expand the market, bankers needed to maintain the symbolic
power of aspirational consumerism. Extending cards to non-white people
would threaten their exclusivity and prestige. To be blunt, it would blacken
the cards. To expand the networks into white suburbia, bankers believed
they needed to maintain racial exclusion. Bankers might blend the gendered
travel and retail markets without sacrificing status; crossing racial
boundaries risked shrinking the market rather than widening it. Yet by
prioritizing a narrow vision of white, suburban, affluent creditworthiness,
banks also increased the pressure to reach those consumers, and quickly.
23
As Continental executives debated marketing strategy in summer 1966,
they also partnered with other Loop bankers to develop a new kind of card
network that would enable Illinois’s unit banks to expand throughout the
city, into the suburbs, and beyond. In June, a consortium of Chicago’s four
largest banks revealed plans to study a statewide, “compatible bank credit
card system.” Unlike BankAmericard, the Wall Street Journal reported, “the
group stressed that the plan won’t be a franchise agreement.” Under what
became known as the Midwest Bank Card System, participants both
cooperated and competed; cooperating to manage interchange among the
separate plans while competing to enroll consumers and merchants. Withoutbranches, Chicago’s bankers reasoned, their individual card plans would
struggle to enroll enough merchants or consumers. Moreover, if several
large banks entered the market at once, their competing plans would sow
confusion and deny any bank adequate charge volume. Under the Midwest
system, each bank created its own card brands, setting individual policies
on interest charges and merchant discounts (though given the banks’ close
cooperation, these tended to converge). All cards and store decals,
meanwhile, carried the Midwest logo, an abstract blue, green, and white
dollar sign, marking the network clearly for merchants and consumers.
Unlike Bank-Americard, the participant banks managed the Midwest Bank
Card System as partners. The association standardized processes for the
interchange of sales slips between banks, enabling participants to work
together in the collective interest of the system while pursuing their own
profits.24
Midwest Bank Card organizers designed the network to extend far
beyond Chicago. This choice reflects their stated ambitions to generate
charge volume as well as an unstated desire to expand their consumer
businesses outside the city’s urban core. Each Midwest bank adopted the
agent bank structure, relying on established “correspondent” relationships
to develop proxy branch networks through smaller banks across the region.
Given Illinois’s unit banking laws and banks’ expressed intention to mail
unsolicited cards, Midwest Bank Card members needed agent banks to
embed the individual card plans in the neighborhoods, suburbs, and towns
where they operated. “We . . . stand a reasonable chance of having our
newly introduced card widely accepted and used through the ties
[correspondent banks] provide with their own communities,” Kennedy
explained to Continental’s shareholders. By that time, Continental had
recruited 380 agent banks in Illinois, Indiana, and Michigan to offer its
Town & Country Charge card. The other Midwest banks pursued a similar
path. Collectively, Chicago’s bankers expressed hope that Midwest would
“dovetail into a national system of similar regional bank credit card plans”
and eventually challenge the BankAmericard. Their expansion efforts also
demonstrated the extent to which Loop bankers saw their future outside
Chicago. At Continental, the name tells the story. Executives named theplan “Town & Country Charge,” evoking suburbs and golf clubs, not urban
shopping.25
To overcome geographic regulatory constraints and to confront
competition from BankAmericard as it enrolled large banks across the
country, bankers quickly developed cooperative bankcard associations in
other regions. In October 1966, four major California banks announced a
similar cooperative-competitive network that would compete against the
BankAmericard in its home state. Likewise contrasting themselves with
Bank of America’s top-down approach, the participants stressed that “they
won’t sell participation to banks outside the state” and instead
“encourage[d] banks in other areas to establish similar ventures and affiliate
themselves with the group.” By 1968, fourteen regional associations,
including the New England Bankcard Association, the Southern Bankcard
Association, and the Eastern States Bankcard Association, formed to
coordinate local interchange in their regions. With banks across the country
rapidly entering the credit card market, the pulse of competition beat ever
faster.
26
Growth and Consolidation: The Interbank Card Association
As banks new to the card field used regional associations to build
bulwarks against BankAmericard’s expansion, several banks with
established card plans began to plot a rival nationwide network. Marine
Midland Bank Group, a large New York bank holding, led the effort.
Several of the corporation’s banks operated a unified card program, the
Midland Charge Plan, which its Binghamton bank initiated in 1953. When
Bank of America announced it would license the BankAmericard in 1966,
Midland Charge was the second largest bank card program in the country,
with more than 400,000 cardholders and 6,500 participating merchants.27
Seeing an opportunity, the largest bank in the group, Buffalo’s Midland
Trust, applied for a BankAmericard license. The previous year, Midland
Trust had purchased Bank of America’s credit card accounting software,
encouraging Bank of America executives to imagine a nationwide card
market. Although Bank of America advertised that “the plan is available to
any bank,” Midland Trust’s application was turned down. “Buffalo wasn’tthat important a community,” Midland executive Karl Hinke recalled, “and
[Bank of America executives] were looking for larger game.” Hinke
suspected that Bank-Americard planned to grant an exclusive license for
New York State to a large New York City bank. If that happened, Midland
executives feared, the New York City bank would then enlist merchants and
customers in Midland’s upstate territory, bringing the BankAmericard into
direct competition with the Midland Charge Plan. Midland executives
resented this possibility. Upstate banks had long defended New York State’s
branching restrictions, which kept powerful New York City banks
geographically confined to the city’s boroughs and out of upstate markets.28
Now, instead of becoming a BankAmericard licensee, Midland
executives feared Midland Charge could soon face the competitive weight
of the nationwide BankAmericard and a New York City rival. If the
Midland Charge Plan was going to compete, it needed to go national as
well. In the summer of 1966, Hinke and vice president for consumer credit
Douglas “Doug” Freeth listed banks that had existing card plans and might
be viable partners in a cooperative national venture. They also hedged their
bets. Because Midland had longstanding relationships with Bank of
America, Hinke and Freeth decided to try again with the California bankers
in person. The meeting went badly. Hinke and Freeth arrived at Bank of
America’s San Francisco headquarters for a 10:30 a.m. meeting with
Vernon Richards, the executive in charge of BASC. It is unclear if they
again raised the issue of securing a BankAmericard franchise, or instead
proposed joining Midland Charge and BankAmericard into a cooperative￾competitive system. In either case, Richards wanted no part in their
proposal. “There is nothing we want to or can do,” he said. He didn’t even
invite them to lunch. In the clubby world of banking, this was a stinging
rebuff.29
When Hinke and Freeth emerged from Bank of America’s offices,
Hinke recalled, they looked across the intersection and saw, like a beacon,
the Wells Fargo sign. They knew Wells Fargo, then a midsized California
bank, had recently co-founded the California Bankcard Association to
challenge Bank-Americard across the state, and they knew the Wells
executive, Jack Elmer, who headed the association. That day Elmer proved
receptive to a nationwide cooperative network (though, because he had aprior appointment, he didn’t take them to lunch either). Encouraged, Hinke
and Freeth flew to Phoenix to negotiate with the Valley National Bank,
which operated a statewide Suncard across Arizona. They eventually
recruited the Bank of Virginia in Richmond, Citizens and Southern National
Bank of Atlanta, and the Mellon and Pittsburgh National Banks in
Pittsburgh, all leading card issuers eager to stymie the BankAmericard’s
progress.30
Representatives for these banks met in Buffalo in August 1966,
determined to pursue a different organizational model than the top-down
Bank-Americard. By November, the banks had agreed to form a nonprofit
cooperative, the Interbank Card Association, which would manage a
national interchange network. Hinke became Interbank’s first president.
Like the regional bankcard associations, Interbank’s members rejected the
franchise model. Through licensing, Bank of America set network policies
and skimmed revenue from every transaction, even as licensee banks
worked to expand the BankAmericard network. “Interbank was and would
always be an operating association rather than governing entity that might
someday grow into dictatorship,” an Interbank executive explained in
Bankers Monthly in July 1968. Although Interbank began as a network
connecting individual bank card plans, many regional associations joined as
well. The California Bankcard Association joined in early 1967, as its
members prepared to mail out cards under the “Master Charge” brand. In
January 1969, Midwest joined. As a foil to BankAmericard’s top-down
policies, Interbank became the antimonopoly network.31
Like the regional associations, Interbank balanced unified system
branding with the desires of individual banks to maintain local identity.
Within the BankAmericard system, all cards and merchant decals carried
the program’s blue, white, and gold emblem (retained by its successor,
Visa). The issuing bank’s name appeared in small type in the top blue bar,
with “BankAmericard” in bold in the central white stripe. On the contrary,
Interbank did not offer a unified national brand; instead, its members placed
an i enclosed in a circle on their cards and decals. Midland and its peers had
invested heavily in their local brands. They were not ready to give them up.
“The association approach allows each bank—large or small—to keep its
own identity,” Wells Fargo president Richard Cooley explained, adding, “Itallows the small bank to compete with the largest . . . [with] a card that
would be honored anywhere in the country.” Interbank made this pitch
directly to bankers: “Give your customers the national charge they want.
Keep the local identity you want.”32
More was at stake than brands, of course. The competing networks
embodied different responses to tensions embedded in financial federalism,
between local and national markets, and between local and national control.
The organizers of both Interbank and BankAmericard sought to overcome
geographic regulatory barriers, within states and between states, to create
nationwide credit and payment networks. Doing so enabled them to
compete with travel firms not subject to these boundaries and, as Hinke
reckoned, with one another. Both networks, to greater and lesser degrees,
foregrounded local bank identity. All believed that bank card plans needed
to build on the existing relationships of local bankers, merchants, and
consumers to gain traction and grow. For Interbank, local bank identity was
paramount; for BankAmericard, the network was. The starkest difference
reflected the most enduring conflict: Bank of America centralized power
and authority; Interbank diffused it. These orientations were not permanent;
they could—and would—change. To better achieve nationwide recognition,
the Interbank plans would adopt Master Charge as a unifying brand. Bank￾Americard licensees, meanwhile, soon demanded more autonomy and
control. These developments were in the future. In the mid-1960s, the battle
lines were sharp and clear.Fig. 3: Geographic coverage of BankAmericard and Interbank in April 1968. The extent of each card
network is depicted as conforming strictly to state boundaries, suggesting the importance of state
borders in defining financial space under regulatory federalism. At this time, only Arizona,
Wisconsin, and New York were exclusively Interbank territory.
Source: Thomas C. Franklin, “The Significance of Interchange for Bank Card Plans,” Burroughs
Clearing House (August 1968), 28.The Deluge
In retrospect, bank network-building strategies appear calm, orderly,
and rational. Bank of America and its licensees developed a cooperative
system with minimal internal competition to extend consumer credit across
the country. Competing banks responded by spontaneously organizing
regional and national cooperative-competitive platforms, coalescing into the
rival Interbank network. Network expansion enabled bankers to offer travel
services, generating system volume by combining a market previously
divided by gender, even as cards remained privileged products for
creditworthy, white Americans—Town & Country rather than inner city.
Network building, however, facilitated a competitive process that was
anything but well-ordered. The multiplication of bank card plans begins to
suggest the scale. At the end of 1965, 68 banks operated credit card plans,
and few competed against other banks. Four years later, 1,207 banks
operated card plans, all competing for shares of local and regional markets.
These figures include only card--issuing banks, not the agent banks that
signed up merchants and solicited consumers. By April 1970, more than
half of all commercial banks, 7,810 out of slightly less than 14,200, had
affiliated with either the BankAmericard or Interbank. The networks
claimed 450,000 merchant participants each and almost 60 million
cardholders altogether.
33
Facing breakneck expansion, commercial bankers were seized by
excitement and fear, expectation and doubt. Bankers saw cards as their road
to a profitable, technologically modern, consumer-focused future. They
believed transaction volume was the key to card profitability. They
aggressively built network infrastructure and recruited consumers to secure
it. Mapped from above, the drama looked like a sweeping military
campaign. BankAmericard licensees fought to command new markets.
Regional cooperatives sprang up to resist them. As Bankers Monthly
explained, “When BankAmericard started its franchising program, banks
that did not sign up for this plan hurried to get their own cards as a
competitive counter weapon.” The martial metaphor is apt. Bankers viewed
card competition as zero-sum: neither consumers nor merchants were likelyto maintain relationships with two banks. A gain for one bank was a loss for
another. Bankers were especially concerned about consumers. Guided by
their racially- and class-inflected assumptions, bankers reasoned that the
number of creditworthy households was limited. Consumers would, they
expected, accept the first card that came their way. If that card was issued
by a competitor, bankers feared, the customer might be lost forever.
34
The consequences of such zero-sum thinking played out most vividly in
David Kennedy’s Chicago. There the downtown Midwest banks all sought
to enroll medium- to high-income suburban consumers. Bank cards, though,
were novel, unproven. Suburbanites, Loop bankers believed, would not
commute in to apply for cards in person. The civil rights marches of 1966
and violent white reaction likely reinforced this view. Meanwhile, the city’s
banking industry swirled with rumors that “one of the big, national credit￾card companies was about to mount a special campaign to get Chicago
cardholders.” Chicago’s bankers could not wait for the merchant-initiated
signups used by charge account banks. They never considered it. Instead,
they embraced Bank of America’s unsolicited mailing strategy.
Competition, David Kennedy explained, “necessitates a new—and to some
surprising—approach to the concept of credit: Banks did not ask for
applications for charge cards but instead mailed the cards directly to
creditworthy people.” It was a fateful decision.35
In their initial deliberations, Midwest banks had planned to wait until
1967 to begin their solicitation campaigns, so that they could calmly study
operating procedures, screen card recipient lists, and implement appropriate
security measures. In August, however, the Pullman Bank Group, a small,
South Side bank holding company, announced that its banks would
introduce a statewide card plan, Illinois Bankcharge, in November 1966.
The Loop banks accelerated their timelines. Unwilling to cede the valuable
suburbs and believing their preparations were more advanced than their
competitors’, Continental executives moved their launch date forward to
October. The remaining banks followed, swamping the holiday mail with
millions of unsolicited cards. The numbers were staggering. Continental
mailed 3.25 million Town & Country cards, two to a family. The First
National Bank of Chicago issued cards to one million families, as did HarrisTrust. The remaining Midwest banks issued cards merely in the hundreds of
thousands.36
In his January 1967 speech to shareholders, Kennedy described what
Continental hoped to gain by entering the card market, but his ultimate goal
was to rationalize the unfolding chaos. By launching their programs in
October and November, Chicago’s banks dropped millions of cards into a
postal system oversaturated with holiday mail and staffed by sticky￾fingered seasonal employees. The banks publicly announced their plans,
lighting a beacon for Chicago’s well-organized underworld. As credit cards
mingled with Christmas cards, criminals scooped them up by the thousands
at the post office and from mailboxes; some apparently targeted multifamily
homes and apartments, where they collected dozens of cards at once. Unlike
modern cards, which require activation using private personal information,
these cards were live and ready to use. They required nothing but a
signature—any signature—to facilitate fraudulent holiday shopping. Some
merchants colluded with criminals, billing the banks for merchandise
purchased with stolen cards and splitting the proceeds with card thieves.
Eventually thirty business owners were indicted, and many others were
charged with stealing cards from the mail.37
Criminals may have been thrilled, but many consumers were not. “I
object,” one angry card recipient wrote Continental, “to the manner in
which these charge cards are promoted and to the inflationary pressures
they cause by encouraging people to extend their indebtedness.” Kennedy
sympathized with consumer concerns. He quoted the letter in his speech.
Bankers, Kennedy explained, were not trying to “lure people into debt over
their heads by offering the enticement of easy spending” or by “asking for
repayment at excessive rates of interest.” They were instead upholding their
age-old obligation to make credit available to their communities. Kennedy
felt these accusations keenly. His religious upbringing and continued
leadership in the Mormon church instilled a strong aversion to the bondage
of debt. “Many of us,” he told Continental’s shareholders, “were brought up
under more conservative financial and banking circumstances and feel a
natural reluctance to accept some of the seemingly radical innovations that
are upon us.” Yet this reluctance, Kennedy urged, “must give way in the
face of increasingly strong competition.” Kennedy, chairman of one of thenation’s largest banks, could not follow his conscience. He had to follow the
market.38
Or so he claimed. Kennedy’s pretentions to responsibility clashed with
widespread evidence of recklessness. Chicago’s bankers had purchased
rosters of likely cardholders from third parties. In their rush to get cards out,
they did not vet them. Continental had only issued cards, Kennedy
explained, to “bank customers and shareholders and a few others in whom
there was reason to place confidence.” His vagueness was suggestive. The
press sharpened the picture, highlighting a litany of bank blunders. People
with strong credit histories or relationships with multiple banks received as
many as a dozen cards. Graver mistakes occurred. One woman received
cards from two separate banks, which was unfortunate, since she had been
dead five months. Small children received credit in the mail. As Federal
Reserve governor Andrew F. Brimmer later explained to congress, “Babies
with sizable savings accounts—frequently opened by grandparents—could
not be distinguished from adults.”39
The trouble all came back to competition. “If we were to enter the field
at all,” Kennedy explained, “the necessity to be among the first was
compelling.” Before Continental launched its plan, one of Kennedy’s
subordinates argued that if it took the bank fifteen years to recover its start￾up costs, the expense would be worth it, so long as Continental beat the
other Chicago banks to market. Zero-sum thinking prevailed. Yet in the
plan’s first months, even fifteen years might have seemed optimistic. For
the six months ending June 30, 1967, Continental reported an increase in
“other” operating expenses of $7 million from the same period in 1966, a
loss equal to 30 percent of the bank’s annual profits. Kennedy attributed the
increase to start-up costs, especially “a relatively high proportion of fraud
losses.” The other Midwest banks gushed money too. Three eventually
withdrew their cards from circulation, reissuing new ones after completing
more thorough credit checks. “For other banks around the country,” the
Wall Street Journal explained, “the Chicago credit card program could have
been a how-not-to-do-it demonstration staged for their benefit.”40
Despite the enormous losses and widespread embarrassment of these
banks, the difference between their experiences and what the rest of the
banking industry soon endured was one of degree rather than kind. Bankersconvinced themselves that unsolicited mailing and intense mass promotion
were indispensable. “A basic formula for success in credit card banking
consists largely of two basic ingredients,” the American Bankers
Association (ABA) reported after surveying card-issuing members in 1967:
“1) a bank must be consumer oriented; and 2) it must be willing to
implement its program with vigorous merchandising efforts.” The Federal
Reserve offered a similar assessment. “All of the banks that we have
contacted . . . found it desirable in launching their credit card plans to send
out cards unsolicited,” a Fed official reported. By design, the strategy was
seductive and coercive. Unsolicited mailing enticed “charge conscious”
consumers, feeding their expectations of widely available credit. To satisfy
these expectations, merchants had to join card plans. Success required
speed and scale.41
Competition created an inescapable cycle, reinforced from above by
trade groups and card networks and on the ground by local rivals. The ABA
found that almost half (49 percent) of banks admitted to entering the credit
card field solely because of competition from other banks. “It is becoming
abundantly clear,” wrote a Dallas banker, “that many banks have gone into
the credit card program as a defensive measure and without first doing their
homework.” Fear brought on recklessness. The same ABA survey found
that only 54 percent of banks checked consumers’ credit before mailing
unsolicited cards. Congress later heard that closer to 80 percent of banks
failed to perform adequate credit checks. As the number of card-issuing
banks expanded, so did the competition. Gasoline companies and
department stores mounted aggressive campaigns as well. By 1970, one
journalist estimated, firms had mailed over 100 million unsolicited cards.
With so many cards in the mail, bankers discovered, “there’s no good
solution to the fraud problem.” The incidents that made Chicago’s banks the
laughingstock of the financial press multiplied, year after year, undermining
the credibility of the industry as a whole.42
Some bankers urged caution, but most ultimately argued that only free,
unbridled competition would give the public the full benefits of the new
card plans. Speaking at the ABA conference in March 1967, Bank of
America president Rudolph A. Peterson called for restraint: “The public is
becoming confused and more than a little concerned about the unseemlyspectacle of banks competing frantically to be the first in their region with
their own particular cards.” He warned of the “credit card hysteria now
sweeping our industry.” Bank of America, of course, had initiated that
hysteria. Peterson could hardly hope to restrain the bedlam that followed.
Instead, a year later, Marine Midland banker Thomas L. Bailey argued
before Congress that “banks should be encouraged to develop new methods
of serving the credit needs of their communities.” Unimpeded mass
distribution was essential, Bailey claimed, because “to deny banks without
credit card plans the privilege of issuing cards unless requested would
completely limit this business—which is a most natural one for banks.”
Driven by competition to undertake unsolicited mailing, bankers appealed
to competition to defend it. Bankers had long faced disadvantages in
consumer markets, an area that represented their best hope for future
expansion. As the proper conduits of credit in their communities, bankers
believed, they should be encouraged in these endeavors. To remain
custodians, they needed freedom to also be entrepreneurs.43
Arguments for market freedom were met with a rising tide of consumer
and political anger. Life magazine columnist Paul O’Neil perhaps best
captured the mood in his March 1970 article, “A Little Gift from Your
Friendly Banker.” Banks undertook card distribution, O’Neil wrote, “in
many cases, with a kind of eager innocence which none of them would have
countenanced for a moment in firms with which they did business.” O’Neil
went further. “A few of them, caught up in the excitement of the unfamiliar
chase, seem to have become as blithely careless of consequences as a
drunken sailor shooting craps in a Mexican whorehouse on New Year’s
Eve.” The article explored the litany of problems caused by unsolicited
mailing: fraud, fears of impersonal technology, inflation, unsteady gender
dynamics, and threats to the safety and soundness of irresponsible card￾issuing banks, all of which spurred new regulatory efforts. O’Neil’s
characterization highlighted the moral concern many felt about traditionally
austere banks pushing credit on consumers and called into question whether
the credit card business really was “a most natural one for banks.”44Fig. 4: Banks’ adoption of new financial technologies and the public’s experience of mass credit card
mailing were given visual form in the illustration that accompanied a Life magazine article aptly
titled “A Little Gift from Your Friendly Banker.”
Source: Paul O’Neil, “A Little Gift from Your Friendly Banker,” Life (March 27, 1970). Illustration
by John Huehnergarth.
———
In the mid-1960s, the banking industry converged on cards as the road to
the future, with new computer technologies facilitating low-cost,
geographically expansive consumer financial services. Certainly some
bankers traveled more warily than others, but once the competitive cycle
started the destination was never in question. The cascading momentum
built on several fronts. The banking industry, squeezed by the New Deal
regulatory order, turned to consumer markets with energy—and
desperation. As it did so, a new generation of bankers, committed to less
restrained competition and freer markets, assumed leadership. Competition
with Diners and American Express led bank executives to combine
masculine travel and feminine retail credit, covering regional andnationwide markets. State and federal geographic regulations and federal
antitrust policy pushed bankers toward network building and shaped the
strategies adopted in differently regulated markets. Below the surface,
network-building bankers harbored even greater ambitions. Kennedy argued
that cards would “replace on a direct retail basis” credit that flowed through
merchants or other consumer financial firms. With cards, banks could
become the center of consumer finance. With universal credit cards,
bankers envisioned universal payment systems under their control.
Nevertheless, although bankers presented values like convenience as
universal, their network building evidenced a racial and class politics that
favored high-income, “credit conscious” suburbanites over less affluent,
often minority inner-city residents. For banks, the road to the future implied
a road from the past, one inscribed in the geographic legacy of nineteenth￾century commercial districts and twentieth-century urban industrialization.
Banks, especially big urban banks, stood immobile in transforming
downtowns: Continental in Chicago, Midland in Buffalo, Mellon in
Pittsburgh, Citibank and Chase in New York. White Americans continued
their flight to the suburbs. Cities became browner and poorer. Large banks
faced a dilemma: engage urban consumers or plot an escape. In different
cities, bankers pursued different strategies. In the aggregate, large, urban,
card-issuing banks built networks as conduits to the suburbs. When a
Continental banker described the “demographics of the ‘best’ credit card
customers” as “married . . . with family incomes of from $7,000 to $15,000,
probably living in high-growth areas,” he drew a de facto racial boundary.
Fewer than 20 percent of Black families earned such high incomes. By
prioritizing white suburbanites, bankers increased the pressure to enroll
these consumers ahead of their competitors. In their fear, they carpet￾bombed the crabgrass frontier. They also did so at an inopportune time. For
while the politics of American cities were changing, so were the suburbs.
Bankers expected to set the terms by which well-off Americans accessed
convenient credit, but a rising consumer movement soon challenged bank
practices. As urban citizens rose to demand economic and racial justice,
suburban consumers sought to maintain the New Deal’s promise of low￾cost, widely available credit.45In the final analysis, the bank card networks embodied a paradox.
Bankers designed their networks to embed nationwide card plans within the
local ties between merchants, consumers, and card-issuing or agent banks.
Place still mattered. BankAmericard and Master Charge linked
circumscribed markets, they did not overlay them. A Marine Midland
Charge Plan, bankers believed, was different than a Wells Fargo Master
Charge. Credit cards were not commodities. Instead, they were grounded in
each bank’s market area, inextricably linked to the physical edifice of the
bank and its branches, where consumers and merchants would come to
make deposits and engage other banking services. But unsolicited mailing
set in motion several disembedding forces. It divorced the process of
receiving credit from the experience of consumption; to access credit,
consumers no longer had to endure an interview with a credit manager,
“something,” characterized in Bankers Monthly as “akin to a prisoner-of￾war interrogation.” Credit came in the mail. But while bankers hoped cards
would still be coupled with their branch offices, and through them with the
social relationships that undergirded their role as responsible guardians of
credit, consumers experienced cards differently. Like Kennedy’s mysterious
“few others,” many consumers were unknown to the banks who issued
them cards. When bankers bought lists of likely credit risks to reach beyond
their existing customer base, they eliminated social connection in the
process. For some consumers, this meant they were less careful with their
spending and more likely to default. Other consumers were outraged that
credit invaded domestic space. Over the long term, it meant that most
consumers associated their credit with the network, Bank-Americard and
Master Charge, rather than the issuing bank. Credit cards became
commodities, divorced from local markets, and as such tools to break down
financial localism.465Regulating Revolving CreditPocketbook Politics
In January 1968, a new credit disclosure law went into effect in
Washington State and quickly unsettled the local politics of retail credit.
The law required lenders to publish consumer interest rates in simple,
annual terms. For retail and bank card issuers, the change was sharp.
Instead of telling consumers they were paying only 1.5 percent a month on
their revolving credit accounts, these firms now had to advertise rates of 18
percent a year. Although technically identical, interest calculated on an
annual basis looked much more expensive. Consumer groups responded
immediately. The Washington State Labor Council, the umbrella
organization for the state’s labor unions, collected over 100,000 signatures
for a ballot measure to restrict credit card and installment interest rates to 12
percent a year. In November 1968, the initiative succeeded by a wide
margin. As the president of the Labor Council explained afterward, “The
campaign brought home to the consumer for the first time the fact he was
actually paying 18 percent.” Once consumers understood the full cost of
convenient credit, they organized and used state-level regulation to curtail
credit prices.1
Washington State was at the head of a national wave of political
mobilization aimed at expensive consumer credit. Large retailers, for
example, Sears and J. C. Penney, had heavily promoted card-based
revolving credit during the postwar years. Bankers joined this effort slowly
in the 1950s, then suddenly in the 1960s, cementing expectations of
convenient retail credit as foundational to middle-class purchasing power.
Revolving credit, however, remained more expensive than other forms of
consumer lending. It also remained unregulated, situated outside state-level
price controls that restrained other borrowing costs within the New Deal’s
place-based social contract. For consumer and labor groups, especially the
National Consumers League and the AFL-CIO, expensive credit
contradicted the postwar promise of low-cost, widely available borrowing.
They resolved to fight. They did so at an important moment for the
consumer-labor coalition, which had pursued a purchasing power agenda of
high wages and fair prices since the New Deal. Persistent postwar inflationstrained this alliance, especially as union wage demands seemed to drive up
the cost of consumer goods. Consumer groups, meanwhile, became more
concerned with securing protection from harm—caused by unsafe products
or environmental degradation—than fixing prices. Nevertheless, these
groups continued to find common cause in the struggle over expensive
credit. Together, and in concert with state officials, they worked to secure
state regulation of credit card interest rates, joining the continuous
negotiations between government officials and industry groups over the
state rules that comprised the New Deal regulatory order.
2
Consumer and labor groups pursued rate regulation in opposition to
stakeholders who argued that competitive markets, not restrictive state laws,
should set the price of credit. Senator Paul H. Douglas, a liberal Democrat,
stood firmly against state rate ceilings. Douglas authored the federal Truth￾in-Lending Act (1968), which—like the Washington State law—mandated
uniform credit price disclosure. Douglas shared consumers’ and labor’s
desire for low-cost credit. With price disclosure, he believed competitive
markets would provide it more effectively than price controls. As a
regulatory strategy, disclosure offered more flexibility than the New Deal’s
blunt product and price restrictions, relying on informed, free-contracting
consumers to make credit markets work more efficiently. Douglas’s federal
Truth-in-Lending Act, in turn, created a pathway for state-level regulatory
reform. The law allowed states with equivalent disclosure rules to seek
exemption from federal regulations in order to maintain state control of
local financial rules. Federalist-minded legal reformers took the state
exemption clause as an invitation to rationalize what one called the “crazy￾quilt pattern” of state-level credit regulations. In 1968, the National
Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws (NCC) published the
Uniform Consumer Credit Code (UCCC), a model state law designed to
match Truth-in-Lending’s disclosure provisions, to simplify and standardize
state credit regulations and to promote competition in consumer credit
markets. NCC members then campaigned to secure the UCCC’s adoption,
with the aim of replacing restrictive state price controls with competitive
markets. “If the market is competitive,” they argued, “rates will find their
own level without regard to the ceiling”—a level in the best interests of
consumers.3Douglas and the NCC staff developed their reform arguments to address
new political demands on the postwar financial system. In the mid-1960s,
Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society and War on Poverty initiatives drew
attention to the continued exclusion of poor and minority Americans from
postwar abundance. Civil rights advocates shifted their attention from
political rights to economic inequality. During major urban uprisings, Black
protesters targeted retailers who employed exploitative credit practices—
what legal scholar Mehrsa Baradaran calls “Jim Crow credit.” Poor
Americans, Black and white, demanded access to the low-cost, convenient
credit enjoyed by privileged white households. Lenders, however, expected
to charge higher prices to borrowers they perceived as riskier. Including
low-income households meant raising or eliminating state rate limits, the
UCCC drafters argued, “to permit most credit-worthy consumers to have
access to the legitimate consumer credit market.” Consumer and labor
groups rejected this argument. They expressed sympathy with poor and
Black borrowers. Yet in the debates over Truth-in-Lending and the UCCC,
consumers fought to maintain the privileged credit economy, protecting
themselves from high credit costs and dangerous levels of debt. Consumer
and labor groups recognized that imposing low price ceilings would shrink
consumer credit markets, ensuring credit access for only the most
creditworthy. They accepted that tradeoff.4
Political conflict over credit prices began before bankers surged into the
credit card market and continued as banks rained millions of cards down on
suburban households. Bankers had entered the card market because
revolving credit was not yet regulated. They joined retailers in the fight
against price caps; when regulation became inevitable, bankers lobbied for
higher statutory rates. Truth-in-Lending, and the state rate regulations that
followed, decisively structured the bank card industry, creating distinct
markets, state by state, subject to continuous negotiation and renegotiation
among competing interest groups. In the short run, new rules hemmed in
the profitability of bank card plans. In the long run, distinct state rules
created advantages for some banks over others, opening space to undermine
the system altogether.
Truth-in-LendingThe Truth-in-Lending Act grew from long-building momentum for
consumer credit reform. Since the 1940s, prominent policymakers, among
them Marriner Eccles, chairman of the Federal Reserve, had worried that
fluctuations in consumer lending could upset stable economic management
of the postwar economy. The rapid growth of consumer credit through the
1950s, interrupted by the recession of 1957 and 1958—which some
economists attributed to declines in credit purchasing—provided further
evidence of the disruptive consequences of unchecked consumer borrowing.
For the public, newspaper and mass-market magazine articles expounded
credit’s virtues and its vices, which the readers encountered alongside
advertisements that displayed the glowing wonders of credit purchasing. All
the while, consumer advocates, legal reformers, and social critics amassed
evidence that the credit economy was not meeting the needs of many
consumers, that it instead perpetuated social, economic, and racial
inequalities which mass prosperity supposedly erased. Calls for reform
sounded from many corners of postwar society and grew louder over time.5
Nationwide momentum for consumer credit reform coalesced around
Douglas’s Truth-in-Lending Act. In January 1960, Douglas introduced
legislation requiring creditors to publish credit prices as simple, annual
interest rates. Douglas, a former University of Chicago economist, had been
mulling mandatory rate disclosure since serving in the New Deal’s National
Recovery Administration. Through his high-profile leadership of Congress’s
Joint Economic Committee in the postwar years, Douglas became a
prominent liberal voice on federal economic policy. For Douglas, Truth-in￾Lending combined two interrelated goals. First, market competition would
lower consumer prices and increase employment. Truth-in-Lending, by
“facilitating more informed bargaining between customer and creditor,”
aligned with his pro-competitive, purchasing power agenda. Second,
Douglas also argued that rate disclosure would improve federal economic
management and support Democratic social priorities. If price-conscious
consumers knew the true cost of credit, they would slow credit purchasing
when the Fed, in response to an overheating economy, raised market
interest rates and made credit more expensive. Likewise, consumers would
increase credit purchases when the Fed, in response to a cooling economy,
lowered rates and made credit cheaper. Privately, Douglas recognized thatby requiring lenders to publish credit prices as annual, and thus higher￾seeming, rates, Truth-in-Lending would dampen overall consumer credit
demand. Lenders would then reallocate credit toward Democratic priorities
like small business, housing, and municipal borrowing.6
Faced with powerful and nearly unanimous creditor opposition, Douglas
knew he could not sell credit disclosure as competition policy and
macroeconomic management. Refining his pitch in 1961 and 1962, Douglas
prioritized combatting deceptive credit practices, a subtle pivot with
transformative implications. In Douglas’s hands, Truth-in-Lending became
a vehicle for reorienting Democratic consumer politics from provision to
protection—merging the New Deal’s pocketbook politics of fair prices with
an emerging consumer politics of protection in the marketplace. Through
legislative hearings and grassroots organizing, Douglas used Truth-in￾Lending to develop a new consumer constituency, adopting the mantle of
consumer protection that would, over the next decade, transform American
economic policymaking.7
The movement scholars now call third-wave consumerism was not
Douglas’s creation alone: by the mid-1960s an emerging cohort of activists,
lawyers, and lawmakers swelled to the consumer cause. Privileged white
Americans enjoyed unprecedented abundance in the postwar years. With
that abundance came high expectations about product quality and safety.
When markets failed to meet these expectations, consumers organized and
turned to government. Douglas recognized the budding consumer
movement earlier than most Democrats. As he pursued Truth-in-Lending,
he foregrounded consumer protection to appeal to affluent, suburban voters.
“Passage is extremely important not only for itself,” Douglas explained as
he lobbied President Kennedy to continue supporting the legislation in
December 1962, “but because of the real problem we Democrats face in the
suburbs which are growing and which tend to be Republican.” Although
Truth-in-Lending debates eventually encompassed the kinds of deceptive
practices that plagued poor and minority borrowers, Douglas initially aimed
at mainstream credit markets. In doing so, he lit an organizing beacon for a
new branch of liberal politics. Kennedy, who had endorsed Truth-in￾Lending in his “Message to Consumers” in March 1962, appeared to share
this vision. So did Lyndon Johnson, who continued the commitment afterKennedy’s death, both publicly and through plodding, behind-the-scenes
policy work as the legislation stalled, shuddered, and then, in 1968, almost
suddenly succeed.8
Truth-in-Lending induced a grinding, gouging legislative fight, one in
which the new consumer politics—although decisive for final passage—
initially proved a sideline to the main issue. By promising to bring
consumer credit under permanent federal oversight, Truth-in-Lending
threatened the prevailing division of federal and state authority. Traditions
of localized finance undergirded a broad consensus that states should
regulate the terms and price of credit. Within this framework, segregationist
Southern Democrats, amid their scorched-earth battle against 1964 Civil
Rights and 1965 Voting Rights Acts, vigorously resisted any federal
intrusion on state prerogatives. Preserving state authority was not only
about preserving Jim Crow, however. For a wider audience, including legal
reformers, state-level officials, and even consumer and labor groups,
federalism remained foundational to American democratic governance and
the place-based social contract, ensuring that credit rules reflected local
conditions and responded to local interests.9
Federalism’s supporters nevertheless recognized that state-level
consumer credit regulation needed simplification and revision. When
lawmakers and legal reformers surveyed the state regulatory landscape,
they found local credit rules that were, as one legal scholar observed,
“poorly-organized, subject to redundancies, and unnecessarily complex.”
Methods for calculating, disclosing, and restricting interest varied
substantially within and among states. To be specific, in 1965 almost every
state maintained a general usury limit, a restriction on the maximum rate
lenders could charge on loans of money, usually between 6 and 12 percent
annually. General limits originated in the nineteenth century, and state
legislatures often updated them to reflect evolving conditions. States also
managed a host of exemptions to the general limit. Beginning in the 1910s,
states enacted small loan laws, enabling lenders to charge higher rates to
risky urban borrowers. Credit unions, industrial loan companies,
commercial banks, and even pawnbrokers gradually sought exemptions to
legitimately enter consumer markets. States obliged, often codifying the
innovative practices such lenders had used to circumvent existing rules.Legislatures also enacted laws governing installment sales—first auto loans
and then retail installment credit. Installment loans had traditionally been
exempted from usury limits under the “time-price doctrine,” a legal
distinction between lending money and selling goods over time—one which
revolving credit issuers still clung to. In all, by the mid-1960s each state’s
consumer credit laws reflected specific, layered responses to changing
market practices, constituted through legislation and legal interpretation and
constantly negotiated to balance creditor and debtor interests.10
For legal observers who sought consistency, uniformity, and
predictability, the multiplicity of regulations made it difficult to address
“the consumer-credit problem as a total process.” More directly, caked-on
local law impeded consumers’ ability to make informed credit decisions,
costing them money. States’ subdivision of usury exemptions by industry,
and the further division between loans of money and retail credit, meant
that states regulated substantially similar forms of lending in different ways.
Lenders calculated some rates, like those for small loans and revolving
credit, monthly instead of annually. In other transactions, lenders charged
add-on rates and discounts that made credit prices seem lower than they
were in fact. A charge of $6 in interest on a $100 installment loan looked
like a 6 percent annual rate but was actually 12 percent.11 Consumers also
paid extra for credit investigation or life insurance, non-interest costs that
increased the overall price of credit. In many transactions, no rates were
quoted at all. Rates did not have to be intentionally deceptive to be
unintelligible. During the exhaustive Truth-in-Lending hearings, supporters
and opponents used complexity to justify their cause: supporters to show
the need for simple annual rates, opponents to show that such rates were
impossible to compute. Ultimately, although state usury laws should have
established clear lines between legal and illegal lending, the Truth-in￾Lending debates demonstrated that lenders often benefited from the
profusion of local rules.12
Uniform credit disclosure would cast bright light into the dark corners
of this system without, Douglas continuously insisted, interfering with state
authority to regulate credit terms and prices. “The purpose,” Douglas
claimed, “is to require that the American consumer be given the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, about the interest rates and financecharges.” Douglas did not, he assured his colleagues, intend “to control
credit” or “to preempt State authority over the level of rates and charges.”
Instead, he wished to “invigorate competition in the consumer credit market
by requiring a return to price competition.” Through the nearly decade-long
fight over Truth-in-Lending, Douglas remained stubbornly consistent. He
refused to modify his demand for uniform annual disclosure of all consumer
credit prices. He also resisted more transformative proposals, like direct
federal credit controls and national usury ceilings. By enabling consumers
to police firm behavior in the market using standardized, comparable
information, disclosure—in credit markets and across the broader arena of
consumer protection policy—promised less intrusive government control of
ostensibly private economic activity. After Douglas lost his reelection bid in
1966, the bill’s new shepherd, William Proxmire (D-WI), continued to
reassure lawmakers and lenders that, “the bill does not regulate credit. The
bill does not tell lenders how much they can charge. The bill contains no
assumptions that credit is bad.”13
Despite their posturing, Douglas and Proxmire certainly recognized that
Truth-in-Lending’s nationally uniform disclosure standards would impose
nationally uniform methods of calculating interest rates and finance
charges. Over time, these standards would compel states to address their
byzantine usury laws once the disparities they created were spelled out in
simple interest. Douglas, the economist, hoped Truth-in-Lending would
eliminate rate regulation in favor of pure market competition. State interest
rate regimes, however, remained deeply entrenched, both as legal
mechanisms for managing competition among different lending firms and
as embodiments of social ideals about fair credit prices. Gradual change
was more likely than dramatic reform.
As Douglas cultivated support for Truth-in-Lending, he faced
intractable opposition from within the Senate Banking and Currency
Committee, whose members squelched the bill through four successive
Congresses. In committee hearings, Wallace Bennett (R-UT), whose family
owned the largest department store in Salt Lake City, peppered witnesses
with complicated credit scenarios to demonstrate the difficulties ordinary
clerks would have computing uniform rates. Bennett’s tactics frustrated
Douglas, but the more strident opposition came from the committee’schairman, A. Willis Robertson (D-VA). Robertson, a fierce civil rights
opponent, fought any expansion of federal authority. Writing Douglas in
March 1964, after Douglas finally advanced his bill to the full Banking
Committee and just as the Senate prepared to debate the 1964 Civil Rights
Act, Robertson laid out his objections in clear terms: “You are aware, of
course, of my strong opposition to the bill. I consider it unnecessary,
because the States can regulate the disclosure of credit terms as well as they
can regulate other matters relating to credit. . . . I consider it undesirable
because I think this is a field which should be left to the States under the
Constitution.” Still, Robertson agreed to allow the bill to come before the
full committee, “with the expectation that . . . the bill will be rejected.” It
was, by a single vote.14
Douglas and Robertson both failed to win reelection in November 1966,
clearing the way for action on Truth-in-Lending. Favorable appointments to
the Banking Committee in January 1967, followed by President Johnson’s
strong endorsement in February, convinced observers that the bill was likely
to succeed in the Ninetieth Congress. As the legislation advanced, however,
new forces pressed in on the debate. In urban uprisings, Black Americans
targeted exploitative lenders, vividly demonstrating the differences between
the privileged credit of the suburbs and the exploitative credit of the inner
city. Black demands for fair credit access flowed through legislative debates
as the bill neared passage, as did the concerns of poor borrowers who
likewise faced expensive and exploitative credit markets. Nevertheless, the
administration remained focused on protecting middle-class borrowers.
Reflecting on Truth-in-Lending, an aide wrote Johnson in June 1966, “I
think . . . you can pass about any bill you want [that] does not carry racial or
religious implications.” As Johnson put his full support behind the law, he
instructed staff he wanted “a bill and not an issue.” Ultimately, revolving
credit prices, not racist lending practices, made the bill an issue.15
For credit-granting firms, Truth-in-Lending’s fresh start dictated a
change in legislative strategy, from outright opposition to whittling down its
most onerous provisions. The law posed a special threat to national
retailers. Firms like J. C. Penney, Sears, and Montgomery Ward operated
nationally uniform credit plans across diverse state regulatory
environments. They relied on revolving credit to drive sales and generateprofits. J. C. Penney provides a case in point. Before World War II, the firm
grew by selling everyday necessities to working-class Americans for cash.
The middle name of the founder, James C. Penney, was, improbably,
“Cash.” As the postwar era progressed, however, the firm’s core customers
became more prosperous and moved to the suburbs. J. C. Penney followed,
and found that competitors there offered a broader array of goods, which
they sold on credit. Credit increased sales, and retailers gradually
transitioned from closed-end charge accounts that consumers repaid every
month to open-end revolving credit to keep consumers buying. Retailers
also raised credit prices, from 1 percent per month to 1.5 percent to make
their credit departments self-sufficient. J. C. Penney adopted revolving
credit in the late 1950s, though James Cash Penney voted against it. By
1968, the firm sold $1.2 billion of goods on credit, 36.1 percent of its total
sales on 6.5 million accounts. At Sears, J. C. Penney’s larger rival, 9 million
revolving credit users accounted for 31.3 percent of $8.2 billion in net sales.
Although bank card mailing and travel card marketing made universal card
plans increasingly visible, in the 1960s retailers still dominated revolving
credit.16
Before Truth-in-Lending, most states regulated installment credit but
not revolving credit. Instead, retailers relied on a nineteenth-century legal
distinction, the time-price doctrine, to shield their card plans from states’
general usury laws. Federal courts defined usury as dealing only with
money: “a loan and a taking of usurious interest, or the taking of more than
legal interest for the forbearance of a debt or sum of money due.” Such a
transaction was distinct from a time-price sale, where a seller established
different prices for an immediate cash sale and a sale made over time. In
1861, the Supreme Court formalized the rule as follows: “If A propose to
sell to B a tract of land for $10,000 in cash, or for $20,000 payable in ten
annual instalments, and if B prefers to pay the larger sum to gain time, the
contract cannot be called usurious.” Here, the difference in price
represented the time preferences of both parties, not a loan of money and
not usury. Retailers, and later banks, extended this logic to their card plans.
They argued revolving credit sales were likewise sales on time, not loans of
money.
17The time-price doctrine proved a durable legal fiction, but it provided
an unsteady foundation for billion-dollar credit plans. Large retailers, which
operated across heterogeneous state law environments, needed to maintain
this distinction rooted in federal precedent. With uniform price disclosure,
however, retailers recognized that their revolving credit plans would appear
to consumers—and courts—as what they were: loans of money. Then,
under the bill’s provisions, J. C. Penney would report its 1.5 percent
monthly revolving credit rate as 18 percent annually. In states without a
specific revolving credit exemption, such charges would look like egregious
violations of local usury laws. As Truth-in-Lending gained momentum,
large retailers lobbied vigorously to exclude revolving credit from the law’s
disclosure provisions.
Consumer and labor representatives, along with allied policymakers,
fought to include revolving credit in Truth-in-Lending, predicting that what
started as a small loophole would grow as retailers pushed consumers into
unregulated revolving accounts. Organizing against the exclusion of
revolving credit, National Consumers League representative Sarah Newman
argued that “to give the fastest growing segment of consumer credit
preferential treatment . . . would strike a blow at the very heart of the
protection this legislation should be extending.” Yet, to finally move the bill
out of the Senate Banking Committee, Proxmire cut revolving credit
regulation from the Senate version in 1967. Consumers objected and rallied
in the House, where they found allies in financial industry groups opposed
to giving retailers a regulatory advantage. Johnson administration staff
convinced installment lenders and banks to support the bill with revolving
credit included. With the administration’s support, House consumer
advocates eliminated the revolving credit loophole, and the House passed
the bill in February 1968. Johnson signed it into law on May 29, with the
disclosure provisions set to take effect on July 1, 1969. “Had the financial
community not fought the bill so bitterly, it would have been a milder one,”
Douglas later boasted. “This thought may not yet have dawned upon
them.”18
That the inclusion of revolving credit marked the finale of Truth-in￾Lending’s legislative saga indicates the extent to which the law remained
captive to its original suburban consumer politics. As the legislation movedthrough the House, liberal members, led by Missouri Congresswoman
Leonor Sullivan, also tried to address abusive credit practices, such as wage
garnishment, that disproportionately harmed poor and minority borrowers.
Yet the Johnson administration, focused on securing popular, middle-class
legislation, opposed the House provisions. If Johnson supported
garnishment limits, aides predicted, he would be criticized for “only
sending up legislation that benefits the Negroes and the poor.” Opponents
“may call it a ‘civil rights bill’ in disguise, one that rewards rioters,” aides
observed. Middle-class voters, meanwhile, “would conclude that you are
trying to bail out people who do not pay their debts.” Only after Truth-in￾Lending proved secure did Proxmire convene hearings on “the problem of
obtaining adequate consumer credit in the ghettos.” The law also remained
captive to financial federalism. The House version had contained an 18
percent national usury limit, which the conference committee firmly
rejected. Although interest rates needed reform, consumer credit remained a
matter for local regulation among state-level stakeholders. With disclosure,
Douglas argued, usury limits were unnecessary and potentially harmful.
Proxmire continued to support state rate caps to protect consumers and
manage competition among financial firms. Ultimately, Truth-in-Lending
generated state-level reform momentum not to eliminate usury limits but to
strengthen them.19Uniform Consumer Credit Code
When Paul Douglas drafted the Truth-in-Lending Act in the early 1960s,
he intended the federal law to transform the nation’s consumer credit
markets, but he also created a legal pathway for maintaining federalism’s
role within the financial regulatory system. Douglas favored extending
federal power directly to solve social and economic problems, especially in
his advocacy for civil rights legislation. He also recognized the value of
state administrative power, particularly in finance, and he needed the
support of conservative Democrats, who urged him not to extend federal
regulation to states with adequate disclosure laws. Douglas’s draft bill, in
addition to not intruding on state authority to regulate credit prices,
exempted states with “substantially similar” disclosure laws from the Truth￾in-Lending Act. Such states could continue to regulate financial activity
within their borders and try consumer credit cases in state courts.
Enforcement of consumer laws would then rely on state, not federal,
precedents, preserving and strengthening local control over consumer credit
markets.20
Douglas’s concession to local financial authority encouraged legal
reformers to address the tangle of state consumer credit law, moving
beyond price disclosure to consider the full sweep of local credit regulation.
The National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
undertook this project. Founded in 1891, the NCC was (and is) composed
of lawyers, judges, and law professors appointed by state governors to draft
model legislation. By publishing model statutes and encouraging state
legislatures to adopt them, the NCC promotes legal uniformity at the state
level in place of—and in opposition to—expanded federal regulation. By
the 1960s, the organization had promulgated dozens of model laws,
including the near-universally adopted Uniform Commercial Code, which
modernized and harmonized the law of commercial transactions. The Truth￾in-Lending debate and Douglas’s proposed state disclosure exemption
convinced the NCC to take up state consumer credit reform. In 1964, when
Truth-in-Lending remained stalled in the Senate, the NCC formed a special
committee (“credit committee”) to develop a Uniform Consumer CreditCode (UCCC). New York attorney Alfred Buerger headed the group, which
was staffed by financial industry lawyers and law professors with expertise
in consumer credit regulation. The committee intended the UCCC to
replace accreted state law with one statute, which balanced creditor and
debtor interests to regulate the rates and terms of credit. The code went
through several draft and comment stages before the NCC published the
final version in early 1968. The drafters wanted the UCCC to be available
for state legislatures to adopt before Truth-in-Lending went into effect on
July 1, 1969.21
Like Douglas, the drafters of the UCCC hoped to encourage more
robust competition in consumer credit markets. “The successful American
way of permitting competition to determine prices . . . should also be
allowed to apply to the pricing of money and credit,” declared the
commissioners when they introduced the final version of the code. Toward
this end, the UCCC offered a system of credit regulation based on defined
loan types—mortgage lending, auto loans, revolving credit, and time sales
—rather than by type of lender, as state law usually did. The code then
applied uniform interest rate limits to each lending category, rates that were
substantially higher than those allowed in most states. The commissioners
believed market rates would develop below the legal maximums as lenders
competed and borrowers shopped for low prices. High rate ceilings would
protect marginal consumers from “unconscionable” credit abuses. High
rates also compensated lenders for consumer-friendly provisions of the
code, like limitations on wage garnishment, that made offering credit riskier
and more expensive. Finally, the UCCC invited competition by removing
state-level barriers to entry that restricted participation in consumer lending
markets.22
Although competition remained a potent symbol, industry
representatives and consumers objected to the regulatory changes required
to achieve it. During drafting, Buerger’s committee struggled to unite the
politically divided credit industry. Lenders strongly favored competition in
the abstract, but they jealously guarded the legal exemptions, loopholes, and
niches created by their siloed credit markets. Retailers, for instance,
objected to plans to eliminate the time-price doctrine. They advocated
instead for a separate “retail credit code.” Commercial bankers adamantlyopposed the “free entry” of less regulated competitors, which drafters
included to promote rigorous price competition. Small loan companies,
credit unions, and even encyclopedia sales firms all lodged industry￾specific objections.23
The credit committee’s quest for competition shaped their strategy on
what would become the fundamental battle surrounding the UCCC: the
price of credit. At the beginning of its project, the committee recognized
that “the rate structure in each state is more the result of a fought-out
compromise between competing political forces than the rational selection
between alternative theories of rate regulation.” Commissioners described
state interest rate laws as “neurotic” and “highly haphazard.” As long as
segments of the consumer credit industry were regulated separately within
each state, they argued, rate limits would ensure profits for politically
connected businesses rather than protect the public. The UCCC offered a
radical simplification: it proposed bringing all consumer credit transactions
under the ambit of a single, unified, rational state law. Committee members
recognized their plan would be controversial. “I am every bit as aware as
anyone that so-called usury legislation involves political and emotional
implications of great magnitude,” committee member Walter Malcolm
explained to his colleagues in 1965, “but . . . we must first seek sound
solutions and only secondarily consider political feasibility.”
Commissioners understood the fraught politics of rate regulation. In their
high-minded ambition—and naiveté—they determined to eschew politics
altogether.
24
To establish uniform ceilings under which credit providers would
compete, the Buerger’s committee set the UCCC’s rates high. For revolving
credit, the code allowed 24 percent interest on the first $500 and 18 percent
on balances in excess of $500. These rates significantly exceeded what most
retailers and banks charged on their credit card plans. Still, retailers and
banks objected. With the time-price doctrine in place, most states did not
regulate revolving credit at all. Citing recent state-level litigation, the
committee argued that retailers’ sacred time-price doctrine would inevitably
wilt under the bright lights of price disclosure. When it did, it would also
undercut mushrooming bank card plans, which relied on the same legal
fiction. “Banks are now rushing headlong into the credit card business,”Malcolm observed in August 1968. “If bank credit card operations are . . .
loans, a charge of 18% per annum on credit card accounts will violate the
law . . . in 40 states.” Anticipating consumer pushback, committee members
insisted that market rates would develop below the code’s high ceilings as
creditors competed on price. Many observers were not so sure. In a
statement to the committee, New York City’s consumer affairs office
expressed the widely held view that “the trend is for the legal maximum
rate to become the final resting place for competition between creditors.” If
state law established high rates, then consumers would pay high prices.25
The UCCC drafters were undeterred, for they had invested their project
with deep moral purpose. With the War on Poverty as a backdrop, welfare
rights advocates pressing for credit access, and urban rioters targeting
exploitative merchants, committee members argued that raising rate ceilings
would expand the size of consumer credit markets and extend credit
citizenship to more Americans. “Are the poor to be denied the opportunity
to participate in the American economic life though the use of credit?”
asked William Pierce, president of NCC, of members of Congress who
criticized the UCCC’s rate ceilings. Robert W. Johnson, an economist for
the committee, went further. “The net result of a ceiling,” Johnson argued,
“is to throw out of the legal market the poor consumer, the ghetto consumer,
and to give only the image of protecting the consumer who deserves rates
well below the ceiling.” By contrasting poor and ghetto consumers with
consumers who deserved low rates, Johnson made a revealing shift between
structural and moral categories. Rate ceilings, market efficiency advocates
emphasized, excluded poor and Black consumers because of their structural
positions in America’s class and racial hierarchy. Poverty and racism made
them uncreditworthy and locked them out of regulated markets. To
overcome structural inequality, the committee proposed to charge for
access. High credit prices were the price of inclusion “in the American
economic life.” Then the shift: once inside legal credit markets, credit
prices reflected moral responsibility not structural hierarchy. Deserving
consumers, Johnson emphasized, were “entitled, because of [their] credit
worthiness, [their] bill-paying ability and record, and [their] affluence,” to
low credit prices. In UCCC’s framework, markets, not policymakers, would
divide the entitled from the unentitled, the deserving from the undeserving.Instead of addressing the inequalities that shaped assessments of
creditworthiness, the credit committee offered to transfer the burden of
inclusion to the market.26
Ultimately, members of the credit committee shared with liberal
members of Congress the goal of expanding consumer protections and
credit access, but they argued that achieving such goals would impose costs
on lenders best managed through less regulated price competition.
Consumer and labor groups, fresh from their Truth-in-Lending victory,
rejected this trade-off. For them, securing inexpensive credit was more
important than ensuring wide credit access. Although the UCCC’s drafters
sought to unify the concerns of privileged and nonprivileged borrowers
through competitive markets—arguing that privileged, deserving borrowers
might enjoy even lower rates in the absence of legal ceilings—consumers
sought to preserve their privilege outright. Consumer and labor groups
fought to maintain rate ceilings, not because they disputed Johnson’s moral
judgments but because they shared them. The New Deal had created the
expectation among middle- and high-income white borrowers that credit
would be inexpensive and widely available for them. This guarantee,
moreover, operated through the morally inflected credit decisions of private
lenders. White consumers believed they deserved low-cost credit. They
were entitled to it. And the credit markets they used provided it. In this
framework, rate ceilings ensured fair prices and also aligned with the new
consumer protection politics. Rate ceilings discouraged lenders from
lending too much. They shielded consumers from over-indebtedness and
bankruptcy. “If some customers, high- or low-income, are denied credit
occasionally because of the new law, then it will be to their advantage,” a
Wisconsin official argued after securing tight rate regulations. Indeed, if
such ceilings limited access for poor and minority borrowers, then they
rightly protected the undeserving from overextending themselves.27
When credit committee members unveiled the UCCC in 1968, they
were sure they had made a significant contribution. “In a social and
economic problem extending back for at least 4,000 years,” Walter
Malcolm declared, “the Code offers, for perhaps the first time in history, a
reasoned solution of the problem of the cost of money and credit.”
Members had reason to be confident (though not that confident). InSeptember, the committee received major funding from retailers to support
state-by-state promotion. The Johnson administration, which had
participated in the final comment stage, also endorsed the UCCC. The code,
Betty Furness, special assistant for consumer affairs, argued, was “a
significant and realistic step forward which will be of benefit to the
consumer.” In January 1969, Paul Douglas appeared before the
Massachusetts legislature to encourage consideration of the UCCC: “I
strongly indorse the Code’s attempt to foster meaningful price competition
on credit charges.” The code met quick success. Utah adopted it in March
1969; Oklahoma in May. According to internal committee data, by June
1969 the UCCC had been introduced or placed under official study by most
state legislatures.28
Resistance, though, developed quickly. Consumer and labor groups
sharply criticized the code, arguing that it was drafted to serve creditors, not
consumers. Organized labor groups headed the movement to restrain credit
prices, focusing, as they had during the Truth-in-Lending debate, on
revolving retail credit. Labor leaders, like their consumer allies, sought low
credit prices that would enhance consumer purchasing power. They also
believed, in an environment of credit scarcity, that revolving credit
necessarily grew at the expense of other forms of lending, like mortgages
and auto loans, that indirectly employed unionized workers. The AFL-CIO
had strongly supported the national 18 percent usury limit in the House.
When it failed, the union turned to the states. In November 1968, consumer
advocate Sidney Margolius highlighted the victory of Washington State’s
Labor Council in securing a 12 percent limit on revolving interest rates.
This, he argued in AFL-CIO News, “is a lesson for credit-exploited working
families and their organizations everywhere.” At its annual convention in
October 1969, the union initiated a nationwide campaign, directing its state
chapters to lobby for revolving credit limits of not more than 12 percent a
year. Contrasting its effort with the “outrageously high finance charges”
contained in the UCCC, the convention resolved that “the current exorbitant
interest rates on charge accounts border on usury and eat away at the hard￾won economic gains achieved at bargaining table.” Union leaders expected
low-cost credit access, but as an adjunct to wage-driven economic
citizenship not as a replacement for it.29Mounting opposition revealed the credit committee’s error in “only
secondarily consider[ing] political feasibility” of interest rate levels. The
UCCCs’ drafters were unprepared for the adverse national response. Over
the two-year drafting process, the committee had promoted consumer
interests against continuous industry pressure. Although the price of credit
was more favorable to lenders under the code, the terms of credit were far
more favorable to consumers than under the Truth-in-Lending Act or the
existing laws in most states. Within an intellectual framework that
prioritized market efficiency, committee members had made a good faith
effort to balance borrower and lender interests. The committee, however,
suffered from bad optics. Through September 1968, more than 90 percent
of the project’s funding had come from the credit industry. Its chairman,
Alfred Buerger, was a prominent lawyer and lobbyist for Marine Midland
Bank. Still, committee members were shocked by claims that the UCCC
aimed to subvert the Truth-in-Lending Act. Defending the code against such
criticism, Harvard law professor Robert Braucher contended (fairly) that the
Truth-in-Lending Act was equally influenced by business lobbyists, and that
it was “weaker than the [UCCC] on every point on which they differ.” By
then, the code had become a target for consumer organizing and a
springboard for state-level price regulation.30
As its members crisscrossed the country, lobbying state legislatures to
adopt the UCCC, the committee’s confidence faded. In state after state,
local opposition impeded the committee’s efforts. Consumer and labor
groups led the public fight against high prices. Meanwhile, state banking
associations undermined the law, which threatened to introduce new, less
regulated competitors into commercial banking markets. Writing in
September 1969, NCC educational director Nathaniel Butler confided that
“the rate has been the focus of consumer attack in the states,” yet “although
the most vocal opposition has come from consumers, we all know the more
important and effective opposition has come from banks.” With public
consumer and labor opposition and banks working behind the scenes,
Malcolm worried that the UCCC “can be another major accomplishment of
the Conference or it can be a complete flop.” The latter outcome looked
increasingly likely.
31The Fate of the UCCC
For the UCCC committee the national picture looked grim, in part
because its proposed code had landed amid perpetual state-level
negotiations over the price and terms of credit. These negotiations involved
not only state legislatures, the focus of committee lobbying, but also a fluid
mix of administrative officials and courts—a combination of market
structuring institutions that made local credit policies highly contingent.
Still, across states, broad trends are visible. Savvy state officials,
Republicans and Democrats alike, recognized the rising salience of
consumer protection. They understood, as Douglas had explained to the
Kennedy administration, that working on behalf of consumers made for
good politics. They attended the political winds. And they used their
positions within state bureaucratic institutions and interstate policy
networks to advance pro-consumer policies. The committee’s effort to
promote uniformity also ran into an abiding state-level tension between
local norms and national trends. State legislatures, regulators, and courts
looked to their peer states for guidance and authority—but never the final
word.32
In Wisconsin, state officials had long sought to regulate the price of
revolving credit. When Wisconsin retailers began charging consumers 1.5
percent per month on their charge accounts in 1956, their policies drew
scrutiny from the state’s supervisor of consumer credit, John Doyle. Writing
in Personal Finance Law Quarterly in 1958, Doyle disputed retailer claims
that revolving credit fell under the time-price doctrine—that it constituted a
difference in price, not a loan of money. “Revolving credit plans are not
time sales and cannot be considered as such,” Doyle argued. Doyle, though,
lacked authority to act. Instead, he sought an opinion from the state’s
attorney general on the legality of such transactions under Wisconsin law.
He waited—for seven years. In December 1965, attorney general Bronson
La Follette also concluded that retail credit plans were not time sales and
that they violated the state’s usury laws. Yet La Follette further determined
that a test case was necessary to settle the matter. His office, however, was
reluctant to single out one retailer for judicial action.33With their revolving credit plans on shaky legal ground, the Wisconsin
Retail Merchants Association lobbied for an explicit exemption to
Wisconsin’s 12 percent general usury limit. Association members met with
Republican governor Warren Knowles in 1967. He instructed them to work
with the state’s banking commissioner to craft “a bill which would be
agreeable to both parties.” Instead, retailers introduced their own bill, which
the Banking Commission blocked because it lacked balancing consumer
protections. A meeting of the two sides in April 1968 ended in acrimony.
Retail representatives predicted “chaos” if they “were to reduce the
revolving charge to 12 percent per annum.” Citing the industry’s earlier
subterfuge, the assistant attorney general suggested a test case might be
necessary to gain “leverage” over the industry. “Leverage or blackmail?”
the retailers replied.34
La Follette had hesitated to target one firm, but in 1968 his office sued
J. C. Penney, arguing that the national retailer’s revolving credit plan was
usurious, constituted a public nuisance, and should be enjoined. The trial
court initially found that Penney’s revolving plan did violate Wisconsin’s
usury law, but that the state had no legal right or interest in credit contracts
between individual consumers and J. C. Penney. Penney may have violated
the state’s usury law, but it did not constitute a public nuisance that the state
had the power to stop. On appeal, the Wisconsin Supreme Court upheld the
trial court’s determination that the plan was usurious and further held that
the issue was worthy of injunctive relief. “There is no reason defendant
should be permitted openly, notoriously, and flagrantly to violate our laws
enacted for benefit of our people,” the court concluded. “The state would be
weak indeed if it were powerless to prevent it.” The state was not weak, and
now it had leverage.35
J. C. Penney drew new battle lines in the national fight over the price of
credit. Doyle recognized that the trial court’s initial finding—that Penney’s
revolving credit plan was not a time sale—provided an opening for his
administrative counterparts in other states. In April 1969, he wrote several
state officials, boasting, “It can be finally said that . . . revolving charge
account plans cannot be considered time sales[, and] must be . . . subject to
the provisions of the Usury Statutes.” Doyle activated networks of state
administrative enforcement, which, when combined with national mediacoverage of the case, enabled peer states to press for advantage. Attorneys
general of Minnesota and Iowa, both of whose state legislatures were
considering the UCCC, used the Wisconsin precedent as the basis for
successful suits against major retailers in their states. Several state AFL￾CIO chapters also initiated private class actions against retailers and banks
on the same grounds. Nationally, the usury cases yielded mixed results.
Some state courts followed J. C. Penney. Others viewed it as an aberration.
Nevertheless, by pursuing Wisconsin’s strategy, state administrators and
private actors used the courts to exert significant pressure on ongoing
legislative negotiations over the price of credit.36
In Wisconsin, J. C. Penney polarized the local debate over retail credit
prices as the legislature considered the UCCC in 1970 and 1971. Consumer
interest rates remained the most contentious issue. The “credit community,”
led by the Wisconsin Bankers Association, advocated for the code’s high
rates, claiming that the code’s consumer-friendly credit terms necessitated
higher credit prices. The AFL-CIO and Wisconsin Consumers League
refused to budge from the 12 percent rate established by J. C. Penney. They
were encouraged by peer organizations in other states. The Washington
State Labor Council reported positively on that state’s 12 percent rate
referendum. “When Wisconsin consumers see this occurring in other
states,” a Wisconsin Consumers League representative explained to the
legislature’s UCCC advisory committee, “consumer advocates have a hard
time selling them the fact that Wisconsin must raise its rates.” With
legislators desperate for a compromise, the committee stalemated. Although
participants found considerable common ground, they recognized that “the
whole committee effort would die if the rate question is not answered.”
Neither side would budge. The legislature made what hash it could,
incorporating consumer-friendly credit terms while also compromising on
revolving credit prices. The Wisconsin Consumer Act—not, tellingly, the
Wisconsin Consumer Credit Code—cleared the legislature in 1971,
allowing 18 percent on the first $500 and 12 percent on all exceeding
balances.37
The terms of the compromise are less important than the process
through which it was achieved. At the state level, credit regulation
developed through iterative, multilayered, contingent, and imperfectlydemocratic negotiations. What the process lacked in system and method, it
made up for in pluralism—though certainly a circumscribed pluralism that
excluded poor and minority stakeholders. Sometimes creditor interests
succeeded (though siloed industries as often checked each other as
advanced a common interest). Sometimes consumers or other interest
groups won out. Most often, as in Wisconsin, idiosyncratic compromise
prevailed. Nevertheless, Wisconsin Democrats claimed the Wisconsin
Consumer Act as a major victory. “The consumer revolution has begun,”
legislative leaders rejoiced. The law constituted “a big gun in that
revolution.” The state’s banking industry also remained upbeat. The act was
“a victory” and “a testament to those who represented the industry in
negotiations.” Bankers achieved some concessions and maintained the
political good will necessary to negotiate again in the future. “The
agreement,” Wisconsin’s bankers concluded, “demonstrates the viability of
our political system.” Financial federalism worked.38
As credit committee members crisscrossed the country to sell their
uniform law, they invariably found similarly complex state credit
negotiations—and labor and consumer groups determined to undermine
their efforts to raise credit prices. The travels of Harvard law professor and
credit committee member Robert Braucher provide a glimpse of this
quixotic process. As the committee finished its work, Braucher was on a
visiting appointment at the University of Minnesota Law School. There,
state lawmakers believed “it imperative that the legislature enact statutes . .
. which would retain for the State of Minnesota administration of the federal
Truth-in-Lending Act.” They supported local control. Prospects for the
UCCC looked good. Braucher testified at legislative hearings in October
and November 1968. Many legislators felt the code’s rates did not compare
favorably with the state’s recently reaffirmed 8 percent general usury rate.
One state senator asked Braucher pointedly, “Are [we] in effect voting to
cost the borrower more money?” Bankers also remained staunch opponents
of the code’s free entry provisions. They sidelined the bill. Minnesota
bankers did want the code’s high revolving credit rates, but consumer
opposition defeated a separate bill setting revolving credit prices at 18
percent. In a later session, the legislature explicitly capped them at 12
percent.39In February 1969, Braucher went to Montana. There, he convinced the
House Business and Industry Committee to recommend the legislation. The
full bill, however, proved too large and expensive to print. The Montana
House debated it and defeated it without ever reading it. “The
misinformation that was circulated by consumer groups,” the credit
committee’s local correspondent explained, “and the failure to receive
affirmative recommendations from Labor groups was disastrous when we
requested the Legislature to accept the Code on faith.” Montana’s labor
groups may have been undecided when Braucher visited the state in
February; by September, when he visited Arizona, labor organizations there
had made up their minds. Arizona retailers supported the code, Braucher
found, but the state’s AFL-CIO chapter martialed decisive opposition. The
UCCC “is no more a consumer code than a corporate charter is a statement
of employee rights,” the union argued. Arizona instead passed less
ambitious regulations for retail charge accounts, setting interest rates at 18
percent for the first $1,500 and 12 percent thereafter.
40
The credit committee could not develop a viable strategy to achieve
widespread enactment of the UCCC. Bankers continued to undermine their
efforts, seeking to preserve their protected position by attacking the code’s
free entry provisions. At the same time, consumer and labor groups,
bolstered by J. C. Penney and the continued salience of low credit prices,
fought for lower rates. Of the first six states to adopt UCCC, five lowered
the revolving credit limits from 24 percent a year to 18 percent. The credit
committee’s argument that competition would generate prices below the
code’s high ceilings repeatedly failed to gain traction. State legislators and
policymakers applied their own experiences, which taught them that usury
limits always began as a rate ceiling and ended as a price floor. Moreover,
instead of accepting the idea that nationally consistent rates would make for
a uniform credit market, local lawmakers evaluated the code’s rates against
local conditions. “Are the rates proposed in [the] Uniform Act appropriate
in Michigan?” a legislative aide asked lawmakers considering the UCCC,
suggesting that “rates appropriate in California might not be appropriate in
Michigan.” Michigan’s lawmakers agreed. The legislature did not seriously
consider the UCCC.41By 1975, the UCCC had flopped. By then, nine states had adopted the
code. The final total would reach only eleven. Instead, most retained their
fragmented credit laws. “The dry pages of a law review article are
completely inadequate to portray the depths of distrust and bad feelings
between consumer and creditor groups,” concluded credit committee
member William Warren. “Their standoff on rate regulation reform leaves
undisturbed the present segmented, totally illogical patchwork of rate￾ceiling laws in most states.” The New Deal regulatory order, though, was
designed to be democratic, not logical. State-level credit regulation
encouraged constant local adjustment as firms found new ways to offer
credit or as market conditions changed. Within this system, state officials
developed local solutions through multifaceted negotiations with consumer
groups and financial firms. In state after state, local officials regulated
credit card interest rates, clustering around 18 percent annual interest as an
acceptable price for convenient credit.42
In the late 1960s, consumer and labor groups began an extended campaign
to control the price of revolving credit. In concert with enterprising state
officials, they extended price controls over credit card accounts, defeating
federal politicians, legal reformers, and industry participants who all
favored disclosure and price competition over price controls. Federal Truth￾in-Lending, in this sense, reflected the growing federal enthusiasm for
disclosure as a consumer protection strategy that aligned with percolating
ideas about the efficiency of less regulated markets. Disclosure, as an
alternative to more interventionist regulatory policies, promised to increase
overall consumer welfare by making more consumers market participants
and, as such, well-informed market regulators. Informed consumers, free to
choose, would vote with their dollars. The veil of market freedom cloaked
preexisting economic and social advantages, representing them instead as
categories of moral worth—creditworthiness, repayment record, affluence
—expressed in prices. As federal policymakers, in the wake of the civil and
women’s rights movements, sought to expand access to markets formerly
reserved for privileged consumers, disclosure gained momentum as a way
to simultaneously promote market safety and market access.
The story of state-level credit regulation, by contrast, demonstrates the
continued salience of proscriptive government controls over marketbehavior, pursued by organized citizens and bureaucratic officials through
democratic political institutions. Organized consumers, free to choose,
pursued their self-interest through the political process. Enterprising
bureaucrats, channeling consumer objectives, developed pro-consumer
strategies and disseminated them through their policy networks. Consumer
and labor groups, meanwhile, fought at once for pocketbook politics,
marketplace protection, and privileged status. Reflecting their self￾perception of innate creditworthiness, they expected low credit prices. They
also sought protection from dangerous levels of household debt. Price
ceilings offered both. As one Wisconsin official explained, “If the new law
increases the quality of credit-granting, and reduces the need for people to
resort to bankruptcy, all of us should be better off.” Indeed, although
industry opponents and free-market advocates portrayed rate ceilings as
irrational, credit price controls operated through a clear logic. Low legal
rates ensured that creditors lent only to the most creditworthy borrowers
and did not extend additional credit to those already burdened with debt. By
organizing to maintain their privileged status in credit markets, consumers
declined an alternative that offered more inclusion—and more risk.
Deregulated interest rates would enable lenders to expand the scope of
credit markets by charging poor and minority borrowers higher prices.
Consumers rejected predatory inclusion—out of paternalism, certainly, and
out of fear that they would be subject to it. Within the postwar political
economy, prosperity flowed through credit markets while price ceilings
shifted risk onto creditors and encouraged them to manage prosperity
safely: this was the foundational moral economy of the New Deal financial
order.
43
Banks launched their card mailing campaigns just as consumer and
labor groups mobilized against high credit prices. They could not have
chosen a worse moment. Bankers hoped cards would create new,
unregulated channels of consumer lending, and they joined retailers in
lobbying to maintain the dubious time-price doctrine. Federal Truth-in￾Lending debates focused attention on high credit prices and generated
momentum for state regulation. They also encouraged congressional
scrutiny of bank card mailing and other business practices that put
consumer households at risk. In the face of mounting criticism, bankerscontinued to assert that self-regulating markets would best serve consumer
interests; the countermovement to embed card plans in state-level price
regimes, however, proved robust and successful, at least in the short term.
In the long term, bank cards that increasingly crossed state lines would
provide the key to unraveling state price controls altogether.6Confronting Cards in Congress
“If There Was Ever an Unsound Banking Practice”
Elected in 1928 to represent the piney hills of northeast Texas, Wright
Patman tirelessly championed the political economy of small finance. As
chairman of the House Banking Committee beginning in 1963, the populist
crusader did so with institutional force and authority. For bankers and many
of his colleagues, “Rep. Don Quixote” was a relic, a gadfly, a crank—an
arthritic opponent of financial progress. Patman, though, was no fool. He
remembered well the bank failures that caused the Great Depression; he had
made his career fighting for fair consumer prices. He grasped the 1960s
consumerist revival. When Patman came to the House floor to denounce the
onslaught of unsolicited card mailing in August 1967, he launched a major
fight over bank card regulation. Recalling “those catastrophic days of the
1930’s,” Patman anticipated a new source of calamity: “If there was ever an
unsound banking practice, it has to be the sending out . . . of millions of
unsolicited credit cards to an unsuspecting public.” Indiscriminate card
mailing jeopardized bank stability. It diverted credit flows from national
social priorities. And it endangered consumer households. Patman called for
a “statutory moratorium on credit cards.” He would fight the “credit card
racket” for the remainder of his career.
1
Patman had reason to worry. From 1966 to 1970, more than one
thousand banks rushed into the credit card market, mailing tens of millions
of unsolicited cards in a mad scramble for market share. The card explosion
coincided with unprecedented turbulence in the postwar financial system.
The fragmented, siloed, and price-controlled financial markets strained
under the 1960s economic boom. Escalation of war in Vietnam added yet
more pressure. Inflation increased in the red-hot economy. Interest ratesfollowed as the Federal Reserve tried to cool things down. As it had during
the 1950s, tight money disrupted the regulatory channels that guided credit
toward national priorities. During the “credit crunches,” which squeezed
tightest in 1966 and 1969, money moved in unpredictable ways. The
groundswell of Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society, meanwhile, generated new
demands for scarce credit from poor and minority borrowers, who sought
access to federal credit programs that had subsidized white suburbia. With
interest rates up, however, bankers had little incentive to participate in
government-guaranteed, low-cost lending. Instead, where they could,
investors and bankers pulled money from low-yielding sectors, like
housing, small business, and municipal lending. They pursued the highest
returns available, snubbing social priorities in pursuit of profit.2
As Congress struggled to rebalance the regulatory structure—to coax
and compel private lenders to fund public priorities—credit cards piled up.
High-interest bank cards, already the target of state-level price control
efforts, became integral to larger debates about preserving the financial
structure. Many politicians imagined a zero-sum contest for finite
resources: credit delivered through cards did not build houses or schools.
Others viewed consumer credit as procyclical, inflationary, and in need of
direct federal control. Financial turmoil also invited regulatory skeptics:
They argued that freer competition, rather than continued regulation, would
ease flows of scarce credit. Such ideas, however, remained inchoate and
marginal. Most lawmakers remained committed to the New Deal’s
regulatory priorities—financial federalism, industry silos, and price controls
—even as they struggled to make them work. Confronted by unpredictable
financial flows, Congress shored up the regulatory structure with sandbags
and particleboard. Lawmakers even granted the president new authority to
enact peacetime credit controls, enlisting the administration in increasingly
difficult credit allocation decisions.3
The 1960s credit crunches made the debates over bank cards more
urgent. The sudden and massive shift into cards continued commercial
banks’ transition from primarily serving businesses to aggressively targeting
consumers. Lawmakers, too, saw the road to the future. Few, other than
Patman, yanked toward the off ramp. Congress’s financial policy
community was transforming, from a cohort dominated by Southern NewDeal veterans like Patman to a new generation of postwar politicians, most
prominently Senator William Proxmire. Unlike their senior colleagues,
Proxmire and allies like Senator Thomas J. McIntyre (D-NH) had not
navigated depression and war from seats in Congress. They were open to
new regulatory ideas. As they grappled with the onslaught of unsolicited
cards in the context of turbulent financial markets, they sought some middle
ground that would at once encourage competition and financial innovation,
preserve the regulatory structure, and protect consumers.4
The balance, however, was difficult to strike. On one side, bankers, the
Federal Reserve, and some Republican politicians argued that bank credit
cards would benefit consumers. To achieve these benefits, banks had no
choice but to mail cards to build adequate transaction volume. With time
and experience, bankers would adjust their practices to match consumer
preferences. Markets would self-correct. Legislative interference would
only stifle natural market evolution. Consumers, however, along with
congressional and administration allies, sought safety in the marketplace.
Unsolicited cards stoked consumer fears about financial insecurity, credit￾fueled inflation, and impersonal technology. Bankers pressed cards
unbidden into consumer homes, and into the hands of wives, children, and
not a few irresponsible husbands. One congressman labeled unsolicited
cards “financial pornography.” Criminals also stole cards, exposing
consumers to liability for cards they had never requested and never seen.
None of these problems could be solved by more efficient markets; rather,
they were the kinds of externalities, like environmental degradation and
product safety, that the larger 1960s consumer rights movement sought to
sharply limit through regulation. As Congress debated different ways to
maintain card mailing in the name of competition, consumers, federal
agencies, state legislatures, and outside experts pushed the process toward
limited consumer liability and an outright ban on unsolicited mailing.
Bankers could proceed down the road to the future, but they would do so
with guardrails firmly in place.5
The New Deal Regulatory Order in the 1960sThe explosive credit card growth came at a moment of intense concern
in Congress about the American financial system. Such concerns were not
new, of course. Since the New Deal, policymakers had struggled to balance
targeted policies, which channeled credit toward sectors including small
business, agriculture, housing, and public borrowing, against the Federal
Reserve’s blunt monetary tools, which allocated credit by raising or
lowering overall prices. When the Fed tightened the money supply, critics
like Paul Douglas and Wright Patman had argued in the 1950s, large firms
cornered scarce financial resources. In a June 1957 letter to Douglas,
Senator Joseph S. Clark Jr. (D-PA) explained his party’s position succinctly.
“I have no desire to leave our social priorities to the market place.” Yet, by
relying on private lenders to allocate credit-based social provision, liberal
policymakers had already left social priorities in the hands of market actors.
At best, well-designed policies would align private interest with the public
good. The Commission on Money and Credit, established by Eisenhower in
1958, arrived at different conclusions. It favored liberalizing financial rules
in order to free up credit and stimulate economic growth. Although
President John F. Kennedy praised the commission’s report upon its release
in 1961, Congress ignored its recommendations. By the mid-1960s, the
CMC was largely forgotten.6
The problems, however, remained. The credit crunch of 1966, the first
major financial crisis of the postwar era, validated many of the predictions
of the CMC report. For example, declining commercial bank profitability
led these firms, especially those that were large and publicly held, to expand
their balance sheets. As corporate, household, and municipal borrowing
increased during the 1960s boom, interest rates and inflation climbed
steadily higher. The Fed sought to temper credit growth by increasing the
legal reserves banks held against their loan portfolios. Raising reserve
requirements, however, only compounded banks’ scramble for funds to
meet existing loan commitments. Demand for money rose. So did its price.
By June 1966, market interest rates exceeded what banks could legally pay
on large-denomination certificates of deposit (CDs) and consumer savings
accounts. Investors sought higher returns elsewhere. Funds fled the banking
system. Bankers responded in two ways. First, they offered smaller,
negotiable CDs, diverting consumer savings from thrift institutions. Thrifts,which specialized in low-interest home mortgages, could not readily offer
high-interest deposits. Money moved from thrifts to banks; mortgage
lending froze. Second, banks stopped investing in low-yield municipal
bonds, freezing that market as well.7
At once, the credit crunch affirmed the convictions of regulatory
advocates and critics. In commercial bankers’ aggressive pursuit of funds,
congressional Democrats saw proof that big banks would always favor big
business over small borrowers. By leaving financial markets to sort the
winners and losers of tight credit policy, the Fed likewise appeared to favor
large corporations over national social priorities. Democrats renewed calls
for controls that placed credit allocation in the hands of policymakers, not
markets. For bankers and their allies, the crunch held the opposite lesson.
The system’s regulatory priorities were the problem; more controls were not
the solution. In the wake of the crisis, Congress sought to satisfy both sides.
It adjusted federal limits on deposit interest rates (Regulation Q), giving
thrifts a slight deposit-rate advantage over commercial banks. Congress also
authorized federal bank supervisors to adjust deposit ceilings, enabling
them to forestall rapid movement of deposits—a process called
disintermediation—between financial sectors. The law, though, had to be
renewed biannually, forcing congress to constantly revisit debates about
financial regulation. As inflation and interest rates reached new postwar
highs year after year, frustration mounted on all sides. Bank cards, which
appeared to channel credit away from social priorities and toward high￾interest consumer borrowing, added fuel to this volatile mix. Liberal
lawmakers did not trust banks to begin with. Unsolicited card mailing
cemented these views.8Unsolicited Mailing Comes to Congress
Bank card plans drew congressional attention during the Truth-in￾Lending debates. In House hearings in August 1967, Betty Furness, the
Johnson administration’s special assistant for consumer affairs, recounted
her experience receiving two unsolicited cards from the First National City
Bank of New York (Citibank). To launch its “Everything Card” that
summer, Citibank mailed more than a million cards in and around New
York City. “I bitterly resent having the card,” Furness explained. “I did not
ask for it, I do not want the card, and when you think of the unwise hands
those cards fall into, it is a shocking thing.” William Windall (R-NJ), the
subcommittee’s ranking Republican, agreed. He urged his colleagues to
investigate “mailing out [cards] without anybody looking into the
background of the person.” By then, national media had trained its spotlight
on the madcap mailings in Chicago the previous winter, while banks
continued to inundate their local markets. Eager to halt further mass
mailing, Patman introduced legislation prohibiting FDIC-insured banks
from issuing unsolicited cards. Mass mailing, Patman argued, endangered
bank safety and through federal deposit insurance it risked taxpayer dollars.
With public criticism mounting, Patman’s gambit earned wide approval.
Even the Wall Street Journal endorsed his goals: “Mr. Patman’s idea would
make bankers seem more like responsible businessmen. That impression
surely has not been enhanced by the seeming carelessness of the scattergun
mailings.”9
Patman convened hearings in November 1967 as a show trial for
unsolicited mailing. Ostensibly, participants debated the risks of financial
innovation and considered which groups—consumers, bankers, or taxpayers
—should bear them. Patman, however, as an aide later wrote, was
determined “to strike at the heart of the bank credit card system.” The New
Dealers had designed the political economy of small finance to limit the
market power of financial firms. With cards, Patman argued, big banks
sought to “totally dominate consumer credit.” Card issuers stood between
consumers and merchants, collecting charges from both. As Patman put it,
“I think the banks, ever since the moneychangers were driven out of thetemple of God, have been trying to perfect some plan whereby they can
collect from both sides.” Inflation was the likely outcome. Consumer prices
would necessarily rise to pay the new financial middlemen.10
Bank cards, other critics feared, threatened the tenuous balance between
ensuring widely available credit and protecting consumers from
unsustainable debt. Leonor Sullivan (D-MO), architect of the House’s
ambitious Truth-in-Lending bill, observed that “these cards are a
tremendous temptation when they get into the wrong hands.” By the
“wrong hands” she meant what Furness termed the “compulsive buyer.” “It
is usually those least able to handle and understand credit—the poor, the
uneducated—who become the most hopeless addicts,” Furness had
explained. Patman endorsed this critique. Cards were “anti-thrift.”
Impersonal technology compounded the danger. Banks’ use of “automatic
data processing equipment,” Patman warned, meant “numbers will displace
persons’ names.” Depersonalized credit encouraged households to sink into
debt. Outraged consumers demanded action. “I protest violently your act of
endangering my financial security, credit rating, and peace of mind,” a
North Carolina consumer wrote his local bank, forwarding a copy to
Furness. “If this is not illegal on your part, it should be.” Members of
Patman’s committee received “many letters from constituents . . . protesting
the credit card issued to them unsolicited from various banks.” Credit card
mailing, the Banking Committee feared, was completely out of control.11
To committee members, mass card mailing appeared random and
indiscriminate, upsetting their notions of creditworthiness as elementally
individual, rooted in the work and responsibility of the male head of
household. For the middle-class, white, married men that served as the ideal
type of creditworthiness, borrowing carried the cultural freight of personal
honor and self-worth—what Patman called “honest and honorable” credit.
Creditworthiness reflected prudence, diligence, and care, not something
mailed to every family on the cul-de-sac. Credit and individual identity
were inseparable. Bank solicitation flattened distinctions between
households. By targeting female dependents, banks also undermined male
household authority. “My wife and my two teenage daughters have these
cards and it tends to make me nervous,” Tom Gettys (D-SC) observed.
Furness, a former actress and Westinghouse spokeswoman, fretted about herown capacity to use cards responsibly. “I am only a girl and I have more
than nine credit cards. I use a great many of my credit cards, and I use them
with joy and I hope with wisdom.” As bank cards cascaded into consumer
mailboxes, committee members determined, they undermined the solvency
and social foundations of American households.12
The growing threat of credit card crime compounded consumer anxiety.
By mailing tens of millions of cards, banks provided easy targets for crooks
and con artists. When thieves lifted cards from the mail, they appropriated
consumers’ identities. When thieves used stolen cards, they exposed
consumers to liability for credit charges, often on cards consumers had not
requested—or even anticipated. Banning unsolicited mailing, Patman
argued, would solve the fraud problem. Yet widespread card use meant that
card fraud already exceeded the scope of unsolicited mailing; thieves stole
cards from wallets as well as from envelopes. Consumers feared financial
liability for charges made with lost or stolen cards. Card issuers and
merchants squabbled over fraud losses. Some lawmakers believed only
strong criminal sanctions would deter card criminals. Building on a
campaign led by American Express, two committee members introduced
bills to “prohibit transportation, use, sale, or receipt, for unlawful purposes,
of credit cards in interstate or foreign commerce.” Fraud provisions,
however, were outside Patman’s legislative jurisdiction. They belonged to
the House Judiciary Committee, where similar legislation had stalled since
the early 1960s.13
Faced with mounting consumer concerns, federal bank officials urged
calm, caution, and patience. Congress, they argued, should permit banks to
innovate. “We need to be careful,” Federal Reserve governor Andrew
Brimmer cautioned, “not to discourage banks from experimenting in
developing improved ways to serve the public.” Brimmer, the Federal
Reserve’s first Black governor, headed the system’s Task Group on Bank
Credit-Card and Check-Credit Plans. Some early initiatives, he
acknowledged, had been flawed. With Fed guidance, Brimmer assured,
bankers would learn from their colleagues’ mistakes. Officials were paying
close attention, collecting data, and documenting best practices. “Given the
fact that plans are just developing, the practices are just unfolding, and we
are still in the process of innovation, should we not permit some time forthe practices to settle down so that the best of the practices become the
general practices?” Brimmer asked. Through constant engagement with
banks, federal oversight officials were better positioned than Congress to
guide that process. Brimmer appealed to the ideal of fair competition. Many
banks had already launched card plans using unsolicited mailing.
Prohibiting the practice would advantage those incumbents over new
entrants. Bankers, their federal supervisors argued, could weigh the risks.14
Oversight officials urged congressional inaction until the Fed completed
its bank card study. “Time is available—and we think it should be used,”
Brimmer argued. After two days of hearings, Patman’s committee accepted
the wait-and-see approach. (Patman later blamed Fed officials for
preventing him from nipping card mailing in the bud.) Over the next several
months, numerous lawmakers introduced or cosponsored legislation to
mitigate the worst features of unsolicited mailing without eliminating the
practice and, with it, competition. As Senator Walter Mondale (D-MN)
argued, introducing legislation in December 1967, “Some form of Federal
regulation is required that will not hamper the generation of new business.”
While Congress waited on the Federal Reserve, banks flooded the mail with
plastic.15
In July 1968, the Fed Task Group on Bank Credit-Card and Check￾Credit Plans released its report, drawing congressional attention back to
unsolicited mailing. The Fed offered a wide survey of bank card plans. It
explored their impact on bank operations and market structure, along with
their implications for consumers. The task group endorsed bank cards as a
valuable service and argued that banks should be allowed to advance credit
innovation. The report raised and dismissed the concerns of Patman and
other card critics: cards did not raise consumer prices, lead consumers to
make larger purchases, draw consumers easily into debt, or contribute
significantly to inflation. Such fears reflected inexperience. They would
pass with practice and time. “In the final analysis, of course, it is the
consumer who stands to benefit most from the heightened competition
arising out of bank cards,” the task group reported. Ensuring competition
meant preserving unsolicited mailing. In this, the Fed fully adopted
bankers’ claims that mailing was the only reliable way to launch a card
plan. “Admittedly,” the report concluded, “unsolicited cards are a nuisanceto some recipients, but the problem is not large over-all.” For bankers, the
Fed’s report constituted a full-throated endorsement of unsolicited
mailing.16
William Proxmire did not accept the Fed’s judgment, and in October
1968 he convened hearings to consider the report’s findings and to build
support for a regulatory agenda that would allow competition while
rebalancing risk among consumers and card issuers. Proxmire was sensitive
to bankers’ arguments that banning card mailing would advantage
incumbent firms. As lead Senate sponsor of the recently enacted Truth-in￾Lending Act, Proxmire shared Paul Douglas’s faith that informed
consumers, acting in transparent, competitive markets, were their own best
advocates. To maintain competition among card issuers, Proxmire opposed
a ban on unsolicited mailing. Instead, he favored a two-pronged approach:
first, requiring card issuers to screen potential recipients against a uniform
set of credit standards; and second, shifting most financial risk from lost or
stolen cards from cardholders to card issuers.17
As with Patman’s hearings, Proxmire’s considered an avalanche of
consumer concerns; they also focused attention on difficult questions
surrounding credit access, creditworthiness, and credit risk that had been
central to the Truth-in-Lending debates. At that time, consumer and labor
groups accepted that low prices would limit credit access for borrowers
deemed less creditworthy. Similar concerns emerged in the Banking
Committee’s investigations of Black urban unrest, which revealed the sharp
credit practices of many “ghetto” retailers. In both contexts, arguments that
competition would make credit more widely available at lower prices ran
headlong into deeply entrenched assumptions about which groups were
inherently creditworthy. Proxmire probed these issues further. Although
bankers primarily targeted middle- and upper-income consumers,
unsolicited cards reached borrowers further down the income scale. The
national reliance on consumer borrowing—through home mortgages, auto
loans, and retail credit—created risks for moderate-income households.
Many teetered on the edge of insolvency. At the margins of the affluent
society, bankruptcies increased year after year, from just over 10,000 in
1947 (that is, 11 filings for every 100,000 Americans aged twenty and over)
to more than 190,000 in 1967 (161 per 100,000). For struggling households,a federal bankruptcy official explained, an unsolicited card “comes like a
gift from heaven.” In their courtrooms, bankruptcy judges saw how the
unrequested lifeline, carrying unrequested financial risk, often pulled
struggling families into bankruptcy.
18
Consumer advocates pressed these arguments, portraying unsolicited
cards as an acute danger to consumer households. Betty Furness accused
banks of turning consumers into “hopeless addicts.” Unsolicited cards were
like a drug—one that could ruin the lives of families as well as individuals.
Bank cards were uniquely addictive, others argued, because banks were
motivated to keep consumers in debt. “There is a reverse incentive for the
bank to try to get people who are not going to pay promptly to take the
credit card,” Proxmire observed. Law professor Eric E. Bergsten developed
this point. Retailers used card plans to facilitate goods purchases, on which
the retailer profited. Travel cards, like American Express, profited from
high merchant discounts and annual fees paid by cardholders. They did not
allow customers to run balances. “It may be that it is only with the bank
cards that we are talking about the credit aspect of credit cards being a
significant feature,” Bergsten explained. Banks, Proxmire and Bergsten
surmised, benefited from putting consumers into high-interest debt and
keeping them there. Proxmire advocated for “some minimum standard of
credit worthiness,” to protect the “low-income,” “slow payer . . . who will
be lured in.” More than half of banks, the committee learned, mailed cards
without performing adequate credit checks. Only responsible consumers
should receive addictive cards, and bankers could not be trusted to sort the
risks themselves.19
The framework of creditworthiness and responsibility, which would
remain consistent throughout the unsolicited mailing debate, obscured the
deeper mechanisms that at once made consumer debt necessary and
dangerous for American households. Credit, channeled by the public￾private welfare state, provided essential rungs up the social ladder, but only
for households fortunate to enjoy stable employment and rising incomes.
Creditworthiness was structural. Access to high incomes and government
support fell unevenly. So did the risks of credit-financed abundance. The
language of responsibility hid these fundamental inequalities, rooting them
in the agency of individuals rather than in the underlying economic andsocial structure. Rising bankruptcies cracked the picture window. Instead of
reevaluating credit-fueled abundance, liberals like Proxmire, who favored
more active market competition, doubled down on personal responsibility.
It had to be deadbeats not paying their bills. The alternative—that credit￾based social provision was flawed—remained unthinkable. Bank cards
entered at the boundary of this system, and Proxmire and his colleagues
were genuinely conflicted about how they fit. Were cards, by facilitating
consumer spending, consistent with national social goals? Did cards, by
introducing new risks of indebtedness and bankruptcy, undermine them?
Proxmire’s proposal placed cards on a spectrum of credit citizenship, where
creditworthiness (i.e., social class) determined access to affluence.
Protecting the low-income, slow payer from bankruptcy protected the
integrity of the system. It did so by placing the government, rather than
private lenders, in the business of drawing visible lines between
borrowers.20
Proxmire’s credit standards proposal proved controversial, and he was
on steadier ground with cardholder liability. In this, Proxmire looked to
recently enacted laws in Massachusetts and Illinois, which limited
cardholder liability for lost or stolen cards. As “laboratories of democracy,”
in Justice Louis Brandeis’s famous phrase, states often developed novel
regulatory policies ahead of federal lawmakers. Here, state legislatures
responded to state-level court decisions, which tended to hold cardholders
liable for charges made on lost or stolen cards. These decisions reflected a
major shift from rules governing checking accounts, explained
Massachusetts Consumers’ Council representative (and co-drafter of the
UCCC), William Willier. Liability for check forgery rested squarely with
banks. To distribute fraud risk more appropriately between consumers and
lenders and to encourage both to protect card systems, Massachusetts
limited cardholder liability to $100. In theory, consumers, facing $100
liability, had a significant incentive to report missing cards to issuers, after
which they were not liable for further charges. The law also deterred
reckless card solicitation, since it shifted the risk of mail theft squarely onto
banks.21
Proxmire also heard from federal bank officials, who created and
enforced regulatory standards, and from bankers, who had to abide by them.Brimmer echoed the findings of the Fed’s report. Focusing on banks’
mailing of cards without prior credit checks, Proxmire asked: did the Fed
want authority to create minimum standards of creditworthiness for
unsolicited card recipients? Brimmer demurred. Such authority was
unnecessary. Thomas L. Bailey, vice president of Marine Midland Bank,
responded more forcefully. Bailey’s bank had provided the Fed with its
most systematic evidence for unsolicited mailing’s effectiveness (the fact
that Midland had built the nation’s second largest card plan before 1966,
without unsolicited mailing, went unremarked).22 “Problems associated
with the mailing of credit cards are being solved by the banks themselves,”
Bailey assured the subcommittee. Like banning unsolicited mailing, fixing
credit standards would only create a “competitive disadvantage” for banks
not already in the market. Although they agreed about the efficacy of
competition, Brimmer and Bailey disagreed about consumer liability for
lost or stolen cards. Brimmer endorsed legislation to limit consumer card
liability: “The liability on the customer should be small, inasmuch as the
issuers are better able to bear the losses and control them.” Banks’ policies
on fraud losses were designed in consumers’ interests, Bailey countered,
and state laws could provide adequate protection. Consumers could also
look to the market: “Low-cost credit card insurance is available to holders
of all types of credit cards,” Bailey observed.23
Following the hearings, Proxmire drafted legislation designed to protect
consumers from the most harmful aspects of unsolicited card mailing
without erecting insurmountable barriers to bank card competition. The bill,
which Proxmire introduced with ten cosponsors in January 1969, required
the Fed to set guidelines for unsolicited card mailing, including credit
checking procedures. It also included a limited cardholder liability
provision, as pioneered in Massachusetts. Proxmire incorporated his
unsolicited mailing bill into a comprehensive strategy, which he explained
in Banking in April 1969. Card mailing, as testimony before both Patman’s
and Proxmire’s committees revealed, threatened consumers’ credit ratings.
Impugned credit, in turn, denied consumers access to basic credit
citizenship. Proxmire introduced a separate bill, the Fair Credit Reporting
Act, to authorize consumers to access their credit reports and “protect
themselves against arbitrary, erroneous, and malicious credit information.”As with Truth-in-Lending, Proxmire believed that informed consumers
could make competitive markets work better, without questioning the
fundamental premise of credit-financed social policy. He also recognized
the growing popularity of pro-consumer politics. Proxmire introduced a
“whole series of consumer protection bills,” complained Wallace Bennett,
Proxmire’s perpetual opponent on the Banking Committee, “whose real
purpose is not consumer protection but Proxmire election.”24The Credit Control Act
As card regulation gained momentum in congress, national credit
markets remained unsettled. The card debate dovetailed into wider concern
about how to ensure that the financial system supported national policy
goals without causing inflation. By the late 1960s, the U.S. economy had
never been stronger. Businesses continued to invest, especially in new,
high-tech industries. Government spending, through Lyndon Johnson’s
Great Society programs and the escalating war in Vietnam, remained high.
On the back of this stimulus, the unemployment rate fell below 4 percent in
February 1966. It remained there until the end of the decade. Robust
economic activity, however, fueled inflation and continued financial
disruption—what economist Hyman Minsky termed the “transition to
turbulence and fragility.” Inflation, held to just below 3 percent in 1966 and
1967, jumped to 4.2 percent in 1968, and to 5.4 percent in 1969. Rising
prices and tight monetary policy stoked rising interest rates. Markets for
home mortgages, municipal bonds, and other priorities remained, in
Minsky’s polite phrase, “disorganized.” Republican Richard M. Nixon,
elected president in November 1968, shared his predecessors’ commitment
to low-cost finance, especially for the Silent Majority’s suburban
mortgages. Yet Nixon offered little new policy substance. He filled his
administration’s core economic posts with bankers, including Continental’s
president David Kennedy as Treasury secretary. Administration officials, in
turn, sought vague regulatory “flexibility” to better nudge capital to and fro.
Like Dwight Eisenhower, Nixon also organized a presidential commission
to study the financial system. In the meantime, he left the difficult credit
allocation decisions to Congress and the Federal Reserve, which continued
to pull markets in competing directions.25
After the 1968 election, Democrats maintained control of Congress and
the legislative agenda. Without administration guidance, lawmakers
struggled to cope with rising credit prices. The New Dealers designed their
financial reforms in the 1930s to bring idle credit into circulation. In the
early postwar years, national expectations solidified in an environment of
inexpensive and abundant credit. Now, the nation’s social priorities andcredit-dependent interest groups remained. Indeed, they expanded as
Congress made new promises of mortgage access to Black Americans in the
1968 Housing Act. Credit, however, had become expensive and scarce. The
political task of balancing competing interests grew more onerous. In early
1969, lawmakers sought to shift some responsibility onto the
administration, offering Nixon unprecedented financial power. The Credit
Control Act (CCA), advanced by Proxmire in the Senate and Patman in the
House, authorized peacetime credit controls similar to those actively
employed in other developed economies. Whenever the president
determined controls were necessary for “preventing or controlling
inflation,” he could authorize the Federal Reserve “to regulate and control
any or all extensions of credit.” Republicans, led by Nixon, objected to new
power that “the administration did not request and does not desire.”
Democrats, however, viewed controls as necessary for mediating inflation,
rising interest rates, and social priorities. A House report stated the matter
clearly. “The unrestricted extension of particular forms of credit in
excessive volume, based only on the highest interest rate creditors can
obtain not only raises the level of interest rates” but also distorts “the whole
credit picture. Short of direct lending by government itself, there is no
mechanism available for channeling credit into those activities which
national policy requires.” Lawmakers could not contemplate direct
government lending. Under the still dominant New Deal framework, private
lenders, whether enticed or coerced, were responsible for directing credit
toward the public good.26
In their fight against rising prices and expensive credit, congressional
Democrats believed credit controls and a mass-mailing ban would work in
tandem. By putting millions of cards into consumer hands, unsolicited
mailing pressured small businesses to accept bank credit, raising their costs.
At the same time, small business owners had to pay higher rates on business
loans, meaning they paid bankers more to stock their shelves and to sell
their goods. Higher credit prices, plus high credit card service costs, meant
higher consumer prices. Some Democratic lawmakers hoped the
administration would use the Credit Control Act to restrain inflationary
consumer borrowing. “I am sure,” Leonor Sullivan contended, “most
Americans would be willing to forego or postpone some unnecessarypurchases.” Days before Congress enacted the CCA, Proxmire likewise
expressed outrage at the inflationary behavior of card-issuing banks. “It is
ironic,” the senator inveighed, “that in these inflationary times commercial
banks continue to send out still more credit cards urging the consumer to
buy more at a time of 18 percent-a-year interest.” Proxmire urged fellow
lawmakers to “bring unsolicited credit cards under control.” Despite his
reservations, Nixon considered invoking credit control authority but
ultimately declined. The authority, though, remained available. In time, one
of Nixon’s successors would use it to bring cards to heel.27Proxmire Takes Charge
Congressional inaction on unsolicited mailing opened the door for
consumer advocates elsewhere in the federal government. In May 1969, the
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) entered the fray, announcing a proposed
rule barring unsolicited card mailing. Paul Rand Dixon, a former counsel
for the Senate Antitrust and Monopoly Subcommittee, headed the FTC.
Appointed by John F. Kennedy in 1961, Dixon transformed the commission
from a lethargic patronage repository into an alert consumer watchdog.
Although consumer advocates like Ralph Nader criticized the agency for
inaction, in the 1960s Dixon expanded its autonomy and ambitions. The
agency issued important consumer rules, including on cigarette labeling,
and it had sought authority to craft Truth-in-Lending guidelines. Action on
unsolicited mailing reflected the agency’s new assertiveness. It also
revealed the growing scope of consumer anger: the FTC received more than
one thousand consumer complaints about the deluge of credit cards arriving
in their mail. Yet the agency’s proposed rule also threatened to create a
major disparity. The FTC could not regulate banks, and its rule, ironically,
would advantage bankers over retail and other card issuers.28
Despite these potential problems, the Nixon administration supported
FTC action. Like Kennedy and Johnson, Nixon embraced emergent
consumer politics, recognizing, as his Democratic rivals had,
consumerism’s strong pull in the affluent suburbs. To this end, Nixon
appointed Robert Meade director of legislative affairs for the President’s
Committee on Consumer Interests, replacing Betty Furness as the White
House’s consumer liaison to Congress. Before his appointment, Meade had
headed the Massachusetts attorney general’s Consumer Protection Division,
where he had enforced the state’s Truth-in-Lending law and other consumer
financial protections. Meade was exceptionally qualified to address
unsolicited mailing. At FTC hearings in September 1969, Meade argued
that consumers were justifiably concerned about card mailing on two
counts: first, “the [moral] principle involved,” and, second, “the direct
problem of jeopardy to his credit rating.” Meade made the administration’s
position clear: “unsolicited credit card mailings should be prohibited.”Although the FTC could not regulate banks, Meade was not deterred.
“Strong Federal Trade Commission regulation,” he argued, would “prompt
hearings on the practice as carried out by establishments not under FTC
jurisdiction.” Strong FTC regulation would force Congress to act.29
Retailers and other card issuers decried the FTC rule, especially since
bankers’ recklessness had sparked the public outcry. After describing
Montgomery Ward’s rigorous credit screening and fraud prevention
procedures, the department store’s representative argued, “The banks . . .
have drawn the most attention and been subjected to the greatest criticism.”
Yet, “under the proposed rule, banks . . . are, with impunity, free to engage
in mass mailings of unsolicited credit cards.” Bankers, “as a matter of
principle,” also opposed the FTC’s rule. In letters and testimony, they
uniformly invoked the Federal Reserve’s conclusion that generating a viable
customer base required mass card mailing. Bankers downplayed consumer
concerns and took little responsibility for problems, like card fraud, caused
by unsolicited mailing. Instead, they blamed the Post Office, arguing that
postal officials were not doing enough to protect the mail. Fed officials
continued to support the bankers. Speaking before a banking group two
week after the FTC hearings, Brimmer insisted again that federal bank
examiners, informed by the task force study, were guiding bank managers
to adopt appropriate practices. The invisible work of bank oversight,
though, offered small defense against the growing consumer outcry.
30
Members of Congress recognized the implications of FTC action and,
concurrent with the agency’s hearings, moved to address card mailing. The
House Postal Subcommittee, which led the regulatory effort in that
chamber, focused not on banning unsolicited mailing outright but on
requiring firms to send cards by registered mail. The subcommittee pursued
this approach in light of its ongoing efforts to regulate another form of
unwanted mail: pornographic solicitations. Throughout the late 1960s, the
subcommittee held constant hearings on the “Offensive Intrusion of
Sexually Oriented Mail.” Pornographers, the committee learned, bought
consumer lists from companies that specialized in mass-mail marketing and
widely distributed explicit advertisements, hoping for a small but profitable
uptake. These practices were not exclusive to porn: consumer information,
compiled, categorized, and sold by mass mailing firms, facilitated anonslaught of direct mail advertising. American consumers were drowning in
junk mail; pornography was merely the most contemptable case. Banks,
buying lists and mailing cards, operated a similar model. Although the
subcommittee heard many of the concerns raised during the Patman,
Proxmire, and FTC hearings—card mailing encouraged “families to go too
deeply into debt” and facilitated “criminal activities”—members invariably
read unsolicited cards through the lens of porn. One subcommittee member
criticized the “promiscuous use of credit cards.” Another warned that “the
mailing of unsolicited credit cards is much more serious and sometimes
more unsettling than pornography.” This rhetoric paralleled fears of credit
temptation, but more specifically it reflected concerns about consumers’
rights to privacy. Firms surveilled and commodified consumer households.
They sold private information to other businesses, which invaded private
space with unwelcome solicitations.31
Because Postal Subcommittee members conceptualized pornographic
and card mailings as parallel problems, they applied the subcommittee’s
same regulatory approach to both. In 1967, Congress authorized consumers
to insulate their households from “erotically arousing or sexually
provocative” mail by prohibiting senders from mailing to them. Mass￾mailing firms, however, challenged the law on free speech and other
constitutional grounds. With the outcome uncertain, lawmakers pivoted and
sought to make pornographic mailing “economically unfeasible,” requiring
advertisers to use more expensive registered mail. The subcommittee
applied this approach to cards, while also requiring card-bearing envelopes
to read “unsolicited credit card—addressee may refuse,” enabling recipients
to reject cards outright. Competition shaped this approach as well. Informed
consumers could shield their households from unwanted intrusion without
shutting down card marketing entirely.
32
When the subcommittee met in November 1969, administration
witnesses urged an outright prohibition of unsolicited card mailing. Robert
Meade repeated his concerns about morality and consumer risks. Registered
mail failed to address these problems. Speaking for the administration,
Meade explained, “We believe that the most effective solution . . . would be
. . . restrict[ing] the mailing of unsolicited credit cards without exception.”
Seymour Rotker, a Bronx district attorney, along with the Post Officegeneral counsel and chief postal inspector, shared Meade’s concerns. Rotker
and the postal officials had been policing card fraud since mass mailing
began in 1966. They had cooperated with card issuers, identified best
mailing practices, and built lines of communication with bankers.
Nevertheless, banks appeared willing to accept fraud losses to the extent
that the costs required to prevent fraud were greater than the losses
themselves. Banks, though, did not bear costs alone. Private actions
necessarily placed demands on public resources, especially on the Postal
Inspection Service, which investigated and prosecuted credit card crime.
Bankers continued to reject calls for regulation, now with vehemence.
Representing the Midwest Bank Card System—the network of Chicago
banks responsible for the 1966 fiasco—Earl Pollock challenged every
critique leveled against banks’ mailing campaigns as he sought to shift
blame from banks to the government. The imposition of an unsolicited
mailing ban, Pollock insisted, “would represent simply a tacit admission
that the Post Office Department is incapable of safely transporting such
mail.” Subcommittee members objected to Pollock’s charge. The hearings
dissolved in acrimony.
33
Before the House Postal Subcommittee finished its work—it held
additional hearings in early 1970—Proxmire convened hearings to consider
his unsolicited mailing bill. The FTC ban worried Proxmire. He continued
to believe that transparent, competitive markets best served consumers. A
ban would protect banks that had used unsolicited mailing to build large
customer bases; it would reward bad behavior with monopoly power.
Proxmire and ally Thomas McIntyre struggled to balance protection and
competition. The senators tested different ideas on a parade of consumer,
agency, and industry witnesses. They suggested mandating a “positive pre￾mailer,” a solicitation that would require a consumer to mail back an
acceptance before an offered card was issued. They considered requiring
issuers who had already used unsolicited mailing to renew these cards at
consumer request. There was no middle ground. Consumer advocates
demanded an outright ban. Banks and retailers pushed the subcommittee to
avoid regulations altogether.
34
Proxmire scheduled additional hearings for Friday, December 5, but
Senate Republicans employed an archaic procedural rule that prohibitedcommittees from meeting while the full Senate was in session. As they had
with Truth-in-Lending, Senate Republicans resisted Proxmire’s efforts.
They knew the issue was too popular to vote against and hoped that,
through delay, they would never have to vote at all. Proxmire outflanked
them, taking the unusual step of convening hearings on Sunday, when the
Senate was out of session. Wallace Bennett, the subcommittee’s ranking
Republican, “almost fell out of his chair.” As Ken McLean, the committee’s
professional staff member, recalled: “A hearing on Sunday! . . . He thought
this was sacrilegious.” Proxmire opened proceedings with a moment of
silent prayer to appease those with religious sentiments. He then got down
to business. The FTC and postal hearings had generated significant media
attention. Congress, the administration, and federal agencies appeared ready
to converge on significant card regulation. Proxmire had the spotlight. As
McLean recalled, “It was a Sunday, so it was the only game in town . . .
there were dozens of reporters . . . and TV cameras.” Proxmire and McLean
would not waste the opportunity. They had a surprise in store. But before
they could spring it, the Nixon administration delivered a surprise of its
own.35
Meade appeared first and initially offered unremarkable testimony. He
began as he had with the FTC and the House Postal Subcommittee,
recounting the importance of consumer credit in the economy and the
sudden recent rise of the bank card industry. He repeated his objections to
unsolicited card mailing. He assured that “the problem is one which is most
appropriate for Federal Regulation.” Previously, however, Meade had called
for restricting unsolicited card mailing “without exception.” Now he urged
a “limited prohibition on the mailing of unsolicited cards.” Previously he
had known what regulatory actions to take. Now he asked for time to study
which method would be most appropriate. Proxmire was incensed. “You
apparently have changed your position,” he snapped after Meade delivered
his statement. “This seems,” Proxmire continued, “to be a program of
delay.”36
Meade was in a tough spot, and not one of his making. In the weeks
prior to the hearings, Meade had requested clearance from the Nixon
administration to send Congress a strong consumer bill restricting
unsolicited mailing, requiring accepted cards be sent by registered mail, andlimiting consumer liability for unauthorized card use. As Meade explained
when he presented his plan, “Point is: Administration has taken position
favoring restrictive feature of” the House Postal Subcommittee bill, and
“will be required to take position on liability feature in [Proxmire’s bill] S.
721. Since the Administration will be thus committed anyway, and since
this is a persistently high consumer frustration, we believe Administration
should go ahead and introduce its own bill.” Instead of cementing Nixon’s
pro-consumer stance, Meade’s memo focused critics and turned the
administration against the legislation. In the internal debates, the Council of
Economic Advisers attacked both the unsolicited mailing restriction and the
limitations on consumer liability. The Commerce Department also objected
and suggested rolling study of card mailing into the National Commission
on Consumer Finance, a body authorized by the Truth-in-Lending Act.
Doing so would let the administration capture the issue and control its
outcome. Although administration officials initially decided they “could
afford to support the consumerists on this one,” more important interests
intervened. Meade, to that point a forceful advocate for consumer
protection, would have to take a different tack.37
Sitting across the committee room from Meade, Proxmire did not know
that an earlier failure of communication within the White House had led
Meade to slow walk the legislative process. Meade’s flip, though, was
emblematic of the very challenges Congress faced: Nixon administration
officials had no idea what to do about credit cards. They wanted time to
strike the right balance between regulation and competition, and they
wanted to capture the political credit for protecting consumers.
Proxmire would give them neither. Before the hearing, McLean had
handed Proxmire an unsolicited card the senator had received from the
North Carolina National Bank, along with a large pair of scissors. As he
admonished Meade for flip-flopping, Proxmire pulled out the card and
began cutting it into pieces. “This is a difficult process,” the senator
observed, “I imagine some consumers of the fair sex might have difficulty
cutting up this credit card.” Proxmire, scissors drawn, appeared on the front
page of the New York Times. News accounts reported the administration’s
change in policy, though they were more concerned with the testimony that
organized criminal groups were paying top dollar for lost or stolen cards.Ultimately, by December 1969 a reinforcing momentum had developed.
Consumer activists fought for financial safety, members of Congress sought
to capture a popular issue, new banks joined the card market and mailed out
more cards, criminals developed ingenious strategies to profit from ill￾gotten cards, and the media breathlessly sensationalized the consumer risks
and household dangers. Banker arguments that cards were a welcome
innovation collapsed.38
Proxmire moved quickly. In early February 1970, he convened his
subcommittee to advance his bill. The legislation charged the Federal
Reserve with creating unsolicited mailing standards, with guidelines to
“determine the creditworthiness of the prospective recipient.” The bill also
incorporated a $50 cardholder liability limit modeled on Massachusetts law,
which shifted most fraud risk from consumers to card issuers. Bennett, the
indefatigable opponent of Truth-in-Lending, objected that strict regulation
would hamper the long-term development of credit card technology.
“Looking down the line . . . the combination of the credit card and the
computer is going to represent the basis of our accounting between
companies and individuals and banks,” he predicted. With encouragement,
a private infrastructure of cards and computers would propel American
enterprise. He pled for his colleagues to embrace innovation instead of
being “overconcerned about making it difficult for people to get credit
cards.” Bennett spoke to Proxmire’s bill, but he was anticipating an
amendment from McIntyre, who sought to align the legislation with the
FTC’s mailing ban. Before they could take action, a floor vote interrupted
the meeting, pushing the decision to the full committee.39
When the Senate Banking Committee met on February 26, 1970,
Bennett and his Republican colleagues were unprepared. Coaxed by the
administration, Republicans had drafted a counterproposal that sought to
legislate simple mailing rules rather than empowering the Fed to write
regulations. They planned to authorize “negative pre-mailers,” to notify
consumers that an unsolicited card would come, unless they responded
declining the offer. The minority staff had secured administration approval,
but when they consulted with industry representatives, the lobbyists
objected. The proposal “would kill them,” they warned. A staff lawyer
pulled an all-nighter redrafting. “There are all kinds of cards out there,”Bennett discovered. Republicans—and indeed most committee members—
had ignored the issue. Now they had no constructive proposals to offer.
Only in the final negotiations did some senators bother to pull cards out of
their wallets, read the relevant liability provisions, and ask basic questions
about how the card systems worked. Proxmire and McIntyre, lawmakers
who built expertise and cultivated support, controlled the process.40
Still, the committee understood that either McIntyre’s or Bennett’s
proposal would replace Proxmire’s. The Fed’s reluctance to accept
rulemaking responsibility, combined with a preference for statute over
agency regulation, convinced the senators to support statutory restrictions.
By moving away from Proxmire’s proposal, the committee foreclosed a
novel regulatory path. Proxmire intended for the Fed to set minimum credit
standards for card recipients. “We had good testimony . . . that these credit
cards have come into the hands of people who have either erratic or low
income and poor credit records who have gone into bankruptcy because
they have run up enormous bills,” Proxmire reminded the committee. Under
Proxmire’s proposal, the federal government, rather than private lenders,
would establish the lower boundary for card access. The law would protect
“the Georgia janitor who ran up $3,000 in bills in less than a week” by
closing him—and with him a large class of low-income and minority
borrowers—out of card markets. State interest rate and consumer liability
limits had similar effects. Yet under these rules, private firms still struck the
balance between risk, price, and creditworthiness. Lenders decided who
would access credit, even as the legal system invisibly structured who could
meet private credit standards. Alarmed at the rising toll of consumer
bankruptcy that followed from channeling prosperity through credit
markets, Proxmire proposed shifting this decision from private lenders to a
public agency. Perhaps Proxmire’s policy would have made the
government’s role more visible and contestable, but his committee favored
shifting risk within ostensibly private markets rather than asserting public
power. They adopted McIntyre’s unsolicited mailing ban along party
lines.41
The Senate began the carefully choreographed movement of Proxmire’s
bill in April 1970. In the sweep toward passage, lawmakers advanced two
major changes. First, Harrison “Pete” Williams (D-NJ), supported byRepublican Banking Committee members, sought to fix the committee’s
awkward effort to preserve competition. McIntyre’s amendments required
all cards issued through unsolicited mailings to be reissued in line with the
new rules. Concerned that the renewal provision would cause “confusion
and inconvenience,” Williams and his cosponsors urged that cards already
accepted by consumers be eligible for automatic renewal. Although
automatic renewal would advantage firms that had already used unsolicited
mailing, Williams insisted that this outcome was preferable to the “undue
burdens” businesses and consumers would experience if every credit card
had to be replaced. Second, Russell Long (D-LA), advanced an amendment
making credit card fraud a federal crime. Fraud sat outside the Banking
Committee’s jurisdiction, and members expressed concern about adding a
criminal statute that they had not considered in hearings. They were
satisfied, however, that the issue could be worked out in conference with
the House. The Senate unanimously adopted the amendments and the
measure passed 79 to 1. The House, meanwhile, continued working on its
own legislation requiring card issuers to use registered mail. When the bill
came to the floor in September, some House members contrasted their
registered mail approach with the Senate’s mailing ban, arguing that
registered mail was a better solution to the problem of competition. Others
argued that, in light of the FTC ban, “permitting continued mailing of
unsolicited cards if they are sent registered mail no longer makes sense.”
How many of the 380 other House members who voted for the bill felt the
same way is unclear, but none voted against it.42
The conference committee, composed of members of both chambers’
Banking Committees, met in October and largely adopted the Senate bill.
The only change was an amendment that limited criminal penalties for use
of illegally obtained cards to cases involving amounts of $5,000 or more.
The high threshold was necessary, Proxmire explained, because “the Justice
Department felt such a provision would be extremely costly to administer.”
The Senate adopted the bill by voice vote on October 9, 1970. Leonor
Sullivan introduced the conference report to the House. Although she noted
the House conference committee members’ discomfort with adopting the
Senate’s liability provisions, since they had not been considered by the full
House, she insisted that the issue had been thoroughly examined by theHouse Banking Committee. Action was necessary, she argued. House
members could take it in good conscience. The House adopted the
conference bill by voice vote on October 13, 1970. President Nixon signed
the bill on October 26. Members of Congress took the bill home to their
districts just in time for the midterm elections. Proxmire bragged in his
constituent newsletter that “Prox Makes Triple Play for Consumers.” The
purpose of his bills was both consumer protection and Proxmire election.43
Bankers predicted Armageddon, but Congress’s unsolicited mailing ban
proved a godsend to the industry. Bankers had eagerly embraced credit
cards as a road to the future, one that led out of the New Deal’s price
controls and geographic confines. But that road also led into a tempest of
competition and spiraling costs, one that, with their experience within
tightly regulated local markets, bankers were ill-prepared for. By 1970, they
were ready to call a truce. By then the burst of unsolicited mailing had done
its work, establishing card plans for individual banks and the nationwide
bank card market. “There is much more of an awareness of the public about
credit cards,” Marine Midland’s Thomas Bailey testified in December 1969.
Consumers could now be solicited without “automatically sending out
cards.” When bank cards were new, bankers believed they needed
unsolicited mailing to convince consumers to take up an unfamiliar
financial product, but once the industry was established, card mailings were
unnecessary. Bankers settled into maintaining and gradually expanding their
card programs, while weeding out delinquent borrowers. Credit card debt
grew by 20 percent a year from 1970 to 1976, by which time
BankAmericard and Master Charge together claimed 100 million active
cardholders. In the mid-1970s, when cards next became an object of
congressional attention, lawmakers sought to extend these numbers to
include women and minority groups, who were still excluded from full
credit citizenship. By that time credit access, rather than credit prices, was
the dominant policy paradigm, in large measure because credit prices were
rigorously controlled by states.44
Congress adopted the unsolicited mailing ban and associated consumer
protections at a moment of wider turmoil for the postwar financial system.
“We are closer to a crisis than at any time since 1933,” Treasury secretary
and former Continental Illinois banker David Kennedy wrote PresidentNixon in December 1969. The credit crunches of 1966 and 1969 revealed
that the system of geographic restrictions, industry silos, and price controls
were under tremendous pressure as financial firms struggled to find profit in
a system racked by inflation. Congress was racked by its own divisions.
New Deal liberals favored reinforcing the system of government controls.
Postwar Liberals were willing to consider market-based solutions.
Republicans, ever the minority, favored greater liberalization, but like their
Democratic peers, they faced powerful industry constituencies seeking to
retain their advantages within the thicket of financial rules. In this
environment, Congress was only capable of patchwork, ad hoc policies. The
Credit Control Act was one of those. David Kennedy called it “a very bad
piece of legislation.” Nixon reluctantly signed it and declined to use its
authority. A decade later, President Jimmy Carter, operating in similarly
troubled financial circumstances, dusted it off. One legacy of this moment
was a policy tool that Carter, driven by impulses similar to those that led
lawmakers to label credit cards financial pornography in the 1960s, would
use to orchestrate his own countermovement against the credit card
economy in 1980. By then, though, it would be too late.45
Indeed, because the credit card debates largely occurred within the
framework of consumerism, lawmakers—Wright Patman and Wallace
Bennett perhaps excluded—did not consider how card technology and
newly expansive credit networks were reshaping the banking industry.
Cards, like banks, seemed bound in regulatory space. Lawmakers—and
indeed most bankers—believed that cards complemented local banking
relationships, drawing cardholders into bank offices, where they might
deposit money or take out a mortgage. The unsolicited mailing ban
reinforced this connection—and with it, the place-based social contract. The
mailing ban made it harder for banks to reach beyond their existing
markets. In concert with the Truth-in-Lending Act and state interest rate
ceilings, the legislation legitimized the bank card industry by regulating it,
in effect binding credit cards within postwar liberalism’s regime of
(relatively) low-cost, safe consumer credit. Cards, like other areas of closely
governed bank lending, were unlikely to generate significant profits.
Bankers, however, had gotten into the card business to break free of theNew Deal order’s onerous restrictions; some would continue to seek and
seize opportunities to innovate around the rules.7Risk ShiftingFraud Means Movement
In June 1970, the radical magazine Scanlan’s Monthly ran a feature
article, “How to Counterfeit Credit Cards and Get Away with It.” The
timing was opportune. Over the previous half decade, the card market had
grown feverishly. Gasoline, airline, and travel firms had expanded their
programs, and hundreds of banks entered the market frantic to reach
consumer-borrowers. To the dismay of card issuers, loosely organized
networks just as rapidly developed parallel, illicit markets in stolen and
counterfeit cards, building on established fraudulent practices and crafting
new, card-specific schemes. Scanlan’s offered readers a piece of that action.
The article’s protagonist, “Todd,” detailed various cons a “passer” could use
to turn stolen credit into ready cash. Fraudulent practices required
sophisticated knowledge. “I know how the cards work,” Todd bragged.
Todd’s schemes all hinged on a simple strategy: making moderate purchases
with cards issued by out-of-state firms. This way, Todd confided, even if he
was caught red-handed, the cost of prosecution was not worth the time or
expense for the card issuer or local law enforcement. Todd knew how
policing worked too. With that knowledge, the street-smart fraudster would
seldom lose.1
Card issuers had always been concerned about fraud, but in the late
1960s swindlers like Todd threatened to overwhelm the nation’s expanding
credit networks. Card firms quickly turned to government for help. Like
credit regulation, criminal policing remained primarily a state responsibility
within the federalist system. Most states had enacted basic card fraud laws
in the 1950s. These statutes reached only a limited range of fraudulent
actions, however, and state policing did not easily extend beyond state
borders. As card networks expanded nationally, and as criminal knowledge
spread with them, card firms faced a fraud problem that exceeded the
capacities of individual states. Seeking a greater quotient of government
power, card issuers turned to Congress. They lobbied for a federal “law
with teeth.” Federal officials, however, were not keen to serve as
nationwide card police. Card firms, officials argued, placed marketing and
convenience above system safety. As cards increased exponentially, so didcard fraud, a prosecutorial burden that threatened to overwhelm federal
resources. The Department of Justice was eager to pass.2
Lawmakers and law enforcement officials necessarily weighed
governments’ responsibilities for protecting credit markets against
preserving limited public resources when private firms ought to protect
themselves. As card firms sought to privatize the payment system,
transitioning consumers from public cash and semi-public checks to private
plastic, card networks needed to be secure to be legitimate. Card firms,
consumers, and government officials all negotiated the boundaries of card
crime and the responsibilities for system security, with each group seeking
to imprint their interests in the structure of nationwide card markets.
Consumers and their advocates bundled fraud protection within their larger
demands for market safety, which included restrictions on interest rates and
aggressive marketing practices. Card firms had placed liability for
fraudulent card use on consumers to encourage consumers to protect their
cards. Consumers resisted this responsibility and sought to renegotiate their
card contracts through the political process. Card issuers could generate
profits only through secure networks, yet security was expensive. If pursued
too vigorously, it could make credit inconvenient. Card issuers needed to
socialize the cost of policing by harnessing governments’ policing power;
they needed to disassociate card purchasing from fraud punishment by
outsourcing security to government actors; and they needed fraudsters
thrown in prison. Thus, even as card firms sought to limit government
oversight of their relationships with consumers, they sought active
government partnerships to punish illegitimate card users. They wanted the
feds to do their dirty work.3
Ultimately, at both the state and federal levels, legislatures responded by
undertaking a two-part risk shift: lawmakers shifted fraud risk from
consumers to card issuers by limiting cardholder liability, and they shifted
fraud policing from issuers to the state through more comprehensive card
fraud statutes. Travel card firms, like American Express, had hoped for
more. Led by Amex, card issuers promoted state-level card fraud legislation
by attaching their project to the politically salient War on Crime. Yet
reckless bank card mailings undercut the industry’s claims of vigilance,
increasing momentum for consumer protection. By 1970, when Congressenacted legislation containing both limited liability and a new federal card
fraud law, risk shifting offered a workable compromise. This compromise
proved short-lived: fraudsters and their attorneys undercut the expansion of
federal policing by asserting their rights through the courts. They rendered
the hastily drawn federal law practically unenforceable while also
hamstringing existing federal tools for combating organized card fraud
rings. In the 1974 case, U.S. v. Maze, the Supreme Court sharply curtailed
the federal policing role, cementing fraud prosecution in the states even as
card networks continued to expand beyond state borders. Despite card
issuers’ best efforts, through the 1970s the safety of their card plans rested
on the uncertain protection of state law.
4
Beginning in the mid-1960s, bankers had grasped credit cards as a
means of innovating around the New Deal’s restrictive financial rules,
especially state-level limits on the scope of banking markets and the prices
banks could charge consumers. Even as bankers used financial technology
to circumvent existing regulations, they also sought active government
intervention to structure the new markets they were creating. Bankers and
other card issuers wanted a strong state to protect their card plans. They got
less than they wanted. Nevertheless, together with the emerging consumer
protection regime, federal and state card fraud legislation legitimized the
national credit card industry, backing private payment networks with state
authority. Card networks became embedded in the fragmented institutions
—state and federal; legislative, administrative, and judicial—that structured
national and local financial markets.
From Status Stealers to Professional Criminals
During the 1960s, enterprising swindlers transformed credit card fraud
from a niche specialty into a booming business. In the previous decade, the
first generation of card crooks had primarily crafted false identities to
obtain cards from issuers and then use them to finance indulgent spending
sprees. Such fraud, which harmed companies and not consumers, aligned
with travel firms’ marketing narrative of risqué credit practices. When the
media ran breathless accounts of novel—and legal—travel card adventure,
reporters often included sensational stories of fraudsters creatively bilkingthe card companies. In 1959, Life magazine profiled Joseph Miraglia, a
nineteen-year-old New Yorker who financed an international spree using a
clutch of ill-gotten cards. “I had collected a truckload of loot and charged
almost $10,000 worth of fun,” Miraglia boasted. As cards became more
widespread, seasoned fraudsters learned how card systems worked. They
incorporated card fraud into existing networks of criminal labor that relied
on stealing consumer identities rather than fabricating them. At first, the
press incorporated organized card fraud into the still jaunty narrative of
fraudulent adventure. Yet mounting illicit activity soon threatened to
destabilize and delegitimize the industry. New practices not only harmed
card companies, as earlier crooks had by fashioning false identities, they
also endangered consumers, who faced potential liability when their cards
were misappropriated and misused. In response, the media narrative
gradually transformed from moral ambiguity into moral panic.5
Entrepreneurial fraudsters developed methods of harvesting value from
card systems while minimizing risk of punishment. Mirroring legitimate
practices, they engaged in intricate divisions of illicit labor. First, thieves
developed strategies for obtaining cards from cardholders. In an era when
business and heavy drinking were close companions, traveling businessmen
proved easy marks. Before the 1960s, the highwaymen and -women who
targeted unwary travelers usually discarded cards they found in stolen
billfolds. As card networks expanded and cards became more valuable,
market signals increasingly attracted the attention of low-level criminals.
Stolen cards became a commodity with a price. They could be sold up the
illicit supply chain. In addition to burglars, pickpockets, and prostitutes,
low-paid workers with access to cards—busboys, car attendants, hotel
clerks, and waiters—might lift cards from unwary victims. “With a little
help from one of the clerks,” Todd explained, tourists “often forget their
cards.” Once banks began mailing millions of unsolicited cards, mail theft
became easier still.6
Thieves passed cards into the illicit supply chain by selling to a “fence,”
a dealer in stolen goods, who commodified, bundled, and distributed them.
Pimps or dishonest barkeeps took this role; Todd “bought three wallets from
a pimp named Joey,” paying “a hundred a piece.” Fences made markets,
mediating a price hierarchy that reflected cards’ value in the legitimateeconomy. Affluent travel cards and airline cards, with the highest credit
limits and inherent mobility, commanded the highest prices. Bank cards,
with lower credit limits, were less valuable. Department store and gasoline
cards might be bartered or tossed in for free. In all cases, the physical
plastic remained necessary. Fraudsters could not yet make cards themselves
—their industry was distribution, not manufacturing. Timing also mattered.
Cards needed to be “fresh,” recently stolen. “Hot” cards, long on the lam,
were more likely to appear on a company’s stolen card list, increasing the
risk of detection.7
When a passer like Todd obtained the cards, many profitable
opportunities opened. Todd described using bank cards to obtain cash
advances, small swindles that netted several thousand dollars. “Jesse
James,” he bragged, “without a gun.” Most fraudsters bought goods, which
they either kept or sold back into the underground economy. Here again,
criminals incorporated cards into established practices of acquisitive crime,
like passing bad checks, which all became more common as inflation cut
into consumer purchasing power. From 1960 to 1965, consumer prices
increased 1.3 percent a year on average, before accelerating at 4.3 percent a
year for the remainder of the decade. Rates of acquisitive crime more than
doubled from 1960 to 1970, compounding with the rise in inflation. As the
cost of goods went up, many Americans were willing to sustain their
faltering purchasing power off the back of a truck.8
Fraudsters also got creative; they innovated. By the late 1960s, card
firms frequently complained about sophisticated airline ticket fraud: a
swindler in Los Angeles would buy or steal several airline or travel cards
and make for the airport. “There are five United Airlines clerks in a row,”
Todd reported. “I hit each end, buying tickets and working toward the
middle.” After buying fistfuls of tickets, some fraudsters hopped a plane to
New York. Upon arrival, they repeated the process, buying more tickets
before the issuer could freeze the account. Airline tickets were fully
transferable. Crooks offloaded them through established distribution
channels in the city, turning pilfered plastic into clean, untraceable cash. As
syndicates became better organized, customers could order “discount”
tickets in advance.9Card firms expected merchants to serve as the front line of fraud
defense, but some merchants colluded with fraudsters, an arrangement an
American Express security officer dubbed the “Unholy Alliance.” A thief
might feign to buy goods with stolen cards. The merchant would bill the
card company, but no merchandise would change hands. Once the card
issuer repaid the merchant for the goods they had supposedly sold, the
merchant split the proceeds with the thief. In another version, which two
Texas swindlers called the “split ticket,” the card thief ordered a $3 cocktail
from a friendly bartender, then tipped $97, which the two split. Merchant
collusion wasn’t always voluntary. Some merchants repaid Mafia debts by
knowingly accepting stolen cards. In one scenario, known as the “bust out,”
mob operatives would take over a company that owed them money and use
its travel and bank cards to purchase valuable merchandise and airline
tickets. The firm would eventually go bankrupt, leaving its legitimate
creditors with irredeemable debts.10
Card thieves were, in a manner of speaking, disruptive innovators who
actively reordered card markets in search of illicit profits. They, too,
innovated around the rules. Still, not all card crime was directed at feeding
black markets or maximizing the gains from illicit trade—though industry
and government sources both focused on “professional criminals . . .
attracted to the credit card as a new way of making a dishonest dollar.”
Thieves took joy rides and racked up charges for the pleasure of
consumption and status. Card fraud, in this sense, was plastic capitalism’s
dark mirror. Rising wages and widespread credit made affluence widely
available, especially for white male breadwinners and their families. Yet the
postwar political economy promised universal affluence that it did not and
could not deliver. Not everyone was paid well enough to enjoy mass
prosperity. Not everyone qualified for credit. Life circumstances, individual
“nonconformity,” and deep-rooted discrimination all barred access to
consumer abundance. As the postwar commitment to consumerism made
status seeking a defining feature of American life, fraudsters, to paraphrase
sociologist Robert Merton, ignored socially acceptable means to attain
socially approved goals. They participated in the affluent society while
avoiding the debt collector. They just had to stay ahead of the law.
11To combat status stealers, card issuers needed to get fraud laws on the
books. As with credit regulation, states oversaw most criminal lawmaking
within U.S. federalism. In the 1950s, state lawmakers had discovered that
card fraud did not map well onto traditional common law crimes, like fraud
and embezzlement. These crimes linked deception and harm, yet card
fraudsters often deceived merchants (posing as legitimate card users) but
harmed card issuers (who bore the loss). Modern credit relationships did not
fit squarely within inherited legal categories. With urging from local card
issuers, state lawmakers developed an eclectic mix of card fraud laws.
Enforcement, however, remained geographically circumscribed. Card
swindlers learned, as Todd explained, that “mobility [was] crucial.” State
laws, an attorney for gasoline retailer Standard Oil of Ohio (SOHIO)
complained in 1964, “are inadequate for use in apprehending credit card
criminals, who . . . sometimes make charges in several states in a single
day.” To supplement state-level enforcement, card issuers turned
increasingly to existing federal law and, when that failed, to Congress.12
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, when card fraud remained the
business of individual grifters rather than organized networks, card issuers
focused on the Stolen Property Act (1934), which outlawed transporting
stolen “securities” across state lines. Coordinating with local U.S. attorneys,
issuers argued that credit cards and the charge slips generated through card
transactions both constituted “evidence of indebtedness,” one category of
security defined in the law. Judges, however, were not persuaded. “A credit
card is nothing more,” a federal court in California ruled, “than a means of
identification which tells the merchant that the holder is entitled to charge
merchandise. . . . It is not a ‘security.’” After similar decisions eroded the
theory in 1960 and 1961, a U.S. attorney confided that “the general position
of the Department of Justice has been that credit cards are not covered by”
the act. The Ninth Circuit, an appeals court covering much of the western
United States, fully foreclosed the stolen securities argument in Barack v.
U.S. (1963), ruling that sales slips also did not constitute securities. The
decision, a Carte Blanche representative complained to House Judiciary
chairman Emanuel Celler, “effectively strips our company, as well as any
company issuing credit cards usable in more than one state, of all protection
under Federal law.”13As the judicial path faded and vanished, card issuers turned to Congress,
seeking to incorporate cards into the Stolen Property Act. In summer 1962,
SOHIO attorney Douglas Wick contacted Frances P. Bolton (R-OH), the
congresswoman who represented Cleveland’s suburbs. Card fraud, Wick
explained, was on the rise. Wick compiled data from gasoline and travel
firms showing that fraud losses increased from $266,850 in 1958 to
$1,915,556 in 1962. Wick pled for Bolton to act. Bolton took up the issue,
becoming a leading crusader against interstate card fraud. Working closely
with Wick, she introduced legislation in 1962 amending the Stolen Property
Act to include cards. Despite support from card issuers and House
colleagues, Bolton’s bill repeatedly stalled in Celler’s Judiciary Committee,
which through the mid-1960s remained focused on civil rights legislation.
In his frequent letters, Wick practically stamped the floor with impatience.14
Finally, in February 1966 Celler prepared to advance Bolton’s bill, but a
scathing evaluation from Lyndon Johnson’s Justice Department derailed the
legislation. The department, deputy attorney general Ramsey Clark
explained, had adequate authority to pursue card fraud cases under the
federal mail fraud statute. Merchants, Clark argued, always mailed charge
slips to card issuers. The time delay created by mailing the slips, Clark
continued, was an essential element of any fraud scheme, since it enabled
the swindler to escape detection. Mail fraud better fit the facts. Card issuers,
however, maintained that mail fraud did not provide adequate protection.
The law was reactive, not proactive. The government could only pursue
fraudsters after a transaction had occurred and sales slips were in the mail.
Federal authorities could not track down cards that had been stolen but not
yet used. Clark emphatically supported such limits. “The Department of
Justice,” Clark insisted, “would assume a staggering burden if it undertook
to investigate all cases of credit card misuse.”15
Ultimately, Clark opposed card issuer efforts to shift security costs onto
the federal government because card firms engaged in reckless marketing
and credit granting. Writing before the eruption of unsolicited bank card
mailing, Clark worried that Bolton’s bill would protect “credit arrangements
which are intrinsically loose and susceptible to fraud,” requiring the federal
government to investigate and prosecute “the users of a credit card which is
part of a system having no effective internal safeguards.” The legislationcould even be read, Clark argued, to apply to legitimate borrowers who did
not repay their debts. Card industry lobbyists disputed Clark’s
interpretation. “It is not the intention of credit card issuers to use the
Department of Justice as a collection agent,” a Shell Oil representative
responded. Nevertheless, Clark’s objections killed the bill and, with it, card
firms’ immediate hopes of securing federal legislation. The Justice
Department believed “the improper use of credit cards should be left for
state prosecution,” a resigned Bolton explained in July 1966, “in other
words, the department does not want to take on the responsibility.”16
To be clear, the Johnson administration and Congress did not oppose
expanding federal policing resources or prosecutorial authority. Rather, they
focused their attention on politically salient issues, primarily organized
crime and Black urban unrest, which Johnson brought together in 1965
under his War on Crime. A series of high-profile investigations by
Democrats Estes Kefauver, John McClellan, and Robert Kennedy had
trained national attention on organized criminal activity since the early
1950s. The waves of urban violence that accompanied the Civil Rights
Movement, meanwhile, gave momentum to racialized “law and order”
politics, which the Johnson administration sought to capture and redirect.
Beginning in 1965, Congress significantly increased federal spending on
policing, investments which would ratchet up over subsequent decades.
When Clark objected to Bolton’s bill in 1966, card fraud did not yet align
with federal policymakers’ understanding of the nation’s crime problems.
Individual swindlers, not organized gangs, remained the primary culprits.
Likewise, credit cards remained a middle- and upper-class product. Black
Americans, less likely to be legitimate card users, were less likely to be
illegitimate users as well. Thus, to harness federal and state policing
resources, card firms needed to make card fraud a salient political issue. As
organized rings became more active in card fraud, card firms drew attention
to these nascent operations, emphasizing the dangers they posed to
consumers and to social order more broadly.
17
American Express and the Return to the StatesWith the federal path foreclosed and card fraud mounting, American
Express led the effort to secure new state-level criminal legislation. Amex
cultivated a reputation for rigorous fraud policing: “From its entry into the
credit card field in 1958,” vice president Milton Lipson explained in the
FBI Enforcement Bulletin, “American Express has maintained the
philosophy that each and every known criminal misuser of a credit card
should be arrested and prosecuted.” By the mid-1960s, the firm employed
more than three hundred investigators, staff recruited after an average of
twenty years of law enforcement experience. Lipson, who headed corporate
security, had served as a Secret Service agent in Franklin D. Roosevelt’s
administration and an instructor in the army and navy intelligence schools.
Lipson’s overriding concern was the professional criminal. “The major
factor in credit card fraud losses is the professional thief,” he told a meeting
of police chiefs in 1969. “The amateur does not constitute a threat.” By
emphasizing the professional criminal, Lipson sought to shift attention to
evolving card fraud practices and encourage a media narrative that tied card
fraud to organized crime.18
Although it is difficult to disentangle panicked rhetoric from facts,
organized swindlers seem to have cornered a larger share of illicit markets
as the decade moved on. In cities like Los Angeles and New York, hubs of
both business travel and criminal activity, legitimate and illegitimate
markets converged. In Los Angeles, law enforcement observed a rapid
increase of card fraud in the first half of 1966. Cards lost in the area, city
police found, often turned up on the East Coast, and cards from around the
country likewise ended up in Los Angeles. “A loosely-organized import￾export operation is responsible,” one officer reported, leading city police to
establish a dedicated card fraud unit. In New York, the story was much the
same. In February 1966, the Nassau County paper Newsday ran a three-part
series, “The Hot Card Racket,” documenting the movement of New York
City’s crime families into the card fraud business. The card industry
estimated that 300,000 cards were stolen and fraudulently used each year,
the paper reported, amounting to over $20 million in card issuer losses.
Firms could not sustain such losses, while the growing association of cards
with fraud undermined the legitimacy of the business.19American Express took action in 1967. Working to provide local
officials new tools to combat professional fraudsters, it assembled a staff to
draft a model law. The company hired Columbia University law professors
Jack B. Weinstein and Tom J. Farer, along with a research staff of twenty￾five investigators, to compile and analyze all relevant federal and state-level
card fraud statutes and case law.
20 The final law and accompanying report
combined intellectual and—at nearly 450 pages—physical heft, reflecting
the diversity of state fraud rules. Consistent with Lipson’s concern with the
“professional criminal,” the model law, which Amex dubbed the State
Credit Card Crime Act, targeted the entire fraudulent supply chain, from
initial theft to ultimate card use. Weinstein and Farer gave prominent
attention to such schemes as airline ticket fraud and merchant collusion.
Overall, they tried to define and criminalize every card offence imaginable.
Their model law incorporated a host of weighty presumptions to increase
the power of state prosecutors working to protect card companies. “A
person,” the section on credit card theft read, “who has in his possession . . .
credit cards issued in the names of two or more other persons is presumed
to have violated” the law. In an era where criminals’ rights received
increased political and judicial attention—including, in later years, from
Weinstein himself—such presumptions pushed against the tide of legal
reform.21
With the model law drafted, American Express worked to sell state
lawmakers on the professional criminal narrative. The company created the
National Credit Card Fraud Legislation Project (NCCFLP), headed by
company attorney Guy Capel and incorporating other card issuers like
Diners Club and Bank of America. The NCCFLP coordinated with state
legislators and industry representatives to develop state-level policy
networks that linked local lawmakers across the country. The NCCFLP
initially focused on four states—California, North Carolina, Florida, and
New York—but the group’s goal was to enact the model bill nationwide.
Given the rising prominence of professionalized card crime and the spread
of law-and-order politics, Amex and its allies were right to feel optimistic.22
In New York, the NCCFLP partnered with Republican state senator
John R. Dunne, who would play a prominent role in efforts to protect card
issuers—and later consumers—from card fraud. Dunne, an attorney, wonelection to the New York State Senate in 1965, representing suburban
Nassau County. As a first-year lawmaker looking for signature issues, card
fraud drew his attention, especially after he read Newsday’s “Hot Credit
Card Racket” series. Governor Nelson Rockefeller appointed Dunne to the
state’s Temporary Commission on the Revision of the Penal Law and
Criminal Code (Penal Law Commission) in July 1966. Dunne, in turn, used
his appointment to call for a crackdown on credit card fraud. Dunne
pursued this agenda over the next several years, while Newsday provided
continuous favorable coverage, generating a partnership between card
firms, politicians, and friendly media—one which developed similarly in
other states. Dunne and Capel formed a close partnership. In February
1967, Dunne introduced Amex’s model bill, and in March, American
Express’s public relations firm organized a press conference to promote the
legislation, which quickly passed the New York Senate. The Penal Law
Commission, however, halted its progress. Inspired by a long-running penal
reform project organized by the American Law Institute, New York
undertook penal law revision to clear the detritus of old and outdated
criminal law. By introducing a host of new fraud categories, the
commission’s chairman Richard J. Bartlett argued, Dunne’s bill was
counterproductive. As Bartlett told the press, “If it passes both houses and
goes to the governor, we might have to take a stand.” Instead, the bill died
in the assembly’s Rules Committee.23
New York was an outlier. The three other states American Express
targeted (California, North Carolina, and Florida) adopted the State Credit
Card Crime Act in short order. In California, John F. McCarthy, a Bay Area
Republican, sponsored the law, which the legislature enacted with near
unanimity. In a letter to Governor Ronald W. Reagan, McCarthy explained
that the legislation was necessary because California’s 1961 card fraud law
had been narrowly interpreted by state courts. State prosecutors had pursued
card fraud cases using both common law crimes, such as forgery, and the
1961 card fraud statute. Presaging a flaw that would later plague federal
law, state courts determined that the legislature intended the card fraud law
to serve as the sole vehicle for pursuing card crime, invalidating other
approaches. This “grave defect,” McCarthy argued, “hampered efforts of
law enforcement officers and credit card issuers seeking to protectthemselves against criminal activities.” Reagan, a law-and-order champion,
needed little convincing. He signed the California Credit Card Crime Act
into law in September 1967. The legislation, the Los Angeles Times
emphasized, was part of a national project “to obtain more or less uniform
legislation throughout the country . . . aimed at curbing the activities of
nationwide rings.” The professional criminal had to be stopped.24
Dunne and his business allies prepared to push the legislation again, but
they faced the persistent counterweight of criminal law reformers who
opposed industry-specific crime statutes. In 1968, Dunne’s bill cleared both
legislative chambers, yet he failed to convince his colleagues on the Penal
Law Commission. “The bill is obviously a special interest one,” wrote
Richard Denzer, counsel to the commission, which “seeks to attach criminal
sanctions to every conceivable type of conduct relating to credit cards
which its sponsors feel might be injurious to their business.” Denzer was
uncompromising. He eviscerated the bill, provision by provision. In his veto
message, Rockefeller quoted Denzler’s memo extensively. Dunne again
returned to the drawing board, and in 1969 submitted a revised bill that
amended existing law rather than concocting a host of new credit card
crimes. He also scheduled hearings, set to meet in February 1969, to elicit
public support at the beginning of the next legislative session. In the
meantime, Massachusetts and New Jersey adopted American Express’s
model law, although it failed in New Hampshire. “Possibly the basis of the
bill is very good,” a state lawmaker noted, “but it had some horrible aspects
to it.” As ever, state lawmaking resisted uniformity.
25
Unsolicited Mailing and On-the-Ground Enforcement
As Dunne and his allies prepared to try again, the card fraud narrative
shifted. American Express had driven the debate about card fraud in 1966
and 1967, but bankers’ massive unsolicited mailing campaigns—and the
waves of fraud and consumer anxiety that accompanied them—changed the
current of conversation. Although American Express, with its three￾hundred-strong inspection force, could credibly claim to uphold security
standards even as it lobbied for more state policing, banks carelessly put
consumers at risk—and they did so while demanding governmentprotection, calls that taxed law enforcement resources and ultimately
alienated would-be allies. Federal officials who worked with banks to
prosecute card fraud rings quickly became vocal critics of banks’ reckless
marketing practices.26
In New York, Citibank initiated the state’s first major unsolicited
mailing campaign, one that was, from the outset, plagued by theft and
fraud. Citi launched its “Everything” credit card in 1967 by mailing one
million cards to New York consumers. As executive John Reynolds later
explained, thieves quickly discovered that stealing cards from the mail was
easier than stealing them from cardholder wallets. The bank had enrolled
hundreds of merchants to accept the cards, many of whom proved less than
trustworthy. By February 1968, fraudsters had used eighteen “Everything”
cards to make $80,000 in illicit charges in Bronx County alone, numbers
that rose to sixty cards and $125,000 two months later. When Citi
executives discovered the scale of their fraud problems, they enlisted the
Bronx district attorney. The DA had experience with card fraud and had
been investigating Unholy Alliance collusion between gas stations and card
crooks since 1966, pursuing cases under the federal mail fraud statute. In
Citibank’s case, assistant district attorney Seymor Rotker later explained,
officials arrested and charged eighteen individuals and five store owners
with illegal card use, all of whom, investigators believed, had ties to
organized crime. Although Rotker acknowledged Citibank’s assistance, he
attributed the scale of the fraud to the bank’s recklessness, especially cards
“which were mailed unsolicited.” Protecting card companies from their own
strategies, Rotker explained, required “many man hours,” detracting from
scarce law enforcement resources that could be better employed
elsewhere.27
Even with the Bronx DA’s help, Citibank endured almost $3 million in
fraud losses in 1968, figures bank executives attributed to Mafia infiltration
of the postal service in New York City. Anticipating similar losses in 1969,
Citi executives approached Emanuel Celler, whose congressional district
covered parts of Brooklyn and Queens. The bank sought not legislation but
influence. Local postal authorities were not taking card fraud seriously, Citi
executives complained. They hoped the powerful Judiciary chairman would
intercede.28When Celler made inquiries on Citibank’s behalf, he encountered
concerns like those expressed earlier by Ramsey Clark: federal officials
were frustrated that card issuers demanded protection even as their credit
systems lacked effective safeguards. Celler called on chief postal inspector
William Cotter. Initially, Cotter determined that the Brooklyn Post Office
lacked sufficient inspector manpower, and he assigned a special task force
to address New York’s security problems. Postal inspectors made quick
progress, arresting and charging two mail carriers accused of stealing
Citibank cards. Still, Citibank vice chairman Thomas Wilcox told Celler,
“We continue to face monthly fraud losses at an unacceptable level.” Cotter
now objected. Citi and other banks had brought the fraud problems on
themselves. When they saturated the mail with what Cotter described as
“‘attractive’ letters,” the postal service struggled to protect the public and
the banks. Writing to Celler, Cotter explained that “the continuing mass
mailings . . . together with the increasing general crime rate . . . are
imposing heavy and increasing demands on Postal Inspector manpower.”
While Citi’s security personnel were eager to work alongside state and
federal authorities, law enforcement officials struggled under the added
workload. The story repeated itself across the country. In 1964, before mass
mailings began, the Postal Inspection Service investigated only 15 cases of
mail theft and fraud involving credit cards. By the end of 1970, the service
had completed 754 mail fraud investigations and had 1,048 more underway.
The attractive letters had unattractive consequences for thinly stretched
federal investigators.29
Risk Shifting
In Albany, when Dunne convened hearings in February 1969 on his card
fraud bill, unsolicited bank cards topped the agenda. First, Dunne focused
on the challenges fraud posed for card issuers. In this vein, Citibank vice
president John Reynolds invoked the specter of the Mafia, concerns echoed
by representatives from the travel card, airline, and gasoline industries.
Dunne’s views, though, were evolving. “During the course of our study,”
Dunne later explained to a congressional committee, “an avalanche of new
credit cards—the bank credit card, in particular—appeared throughout thestate, bringing new problems for the consumer as well as an intensification
of prior problems faced by law-enforcement officials.” Banks’ headlong
rush into the card market reshaped the political landscape. Consumers
feared liability for charges accrued on unsolicited cards. Law enforcement
officials continued to criticize bank card marketing. And banks and other
card issuers howled about fraud losses. To make card markets functional
and legitimate, lawmakers had to balance these competing claims. At the
state and federal level, they followed a similar pattern: protecting
consumers from fraud liability by shifting fraud risk onto card-issuing
firms, and adopting stronger criminal laws to shift the policing burden from
card issuers to the state.30
Dunne’s newfound concerns for consumer protection did not weaken his
resolve to combat card fraud, and the hearings and redrafting drove the
fraud bill forward. Once the bill cleared the assembly in March, the Penal
Law Commission dropped its opposition. “Such legislation,” Richard
Denzler acknowledged, “must, of course, be viewed in the current setting of
an exploding credit card world beleaguered by fast growing criminal
activity already of gigantic proportions.” When Nelson Rockefeller signed
Dunne’s bill later the same month, lawmakers and industry representatives
emphasized that the law would “combat organized crime’s stolen credit card
racket.” At the signing ceremony, Milton Lipson asserted that, “without
question” the law “will be an effective weapon against professional
criminals.” In its article documenting the signing, Newsday emphasized its
own leadership on the card fraud issue, while continuing to stoke the fires
of moral panic, even naming the mobsters involved in ripping off the
industry.
31
Although initially championing the interests of his business allies,
Dunne turned to addressing consumers’ concerns about fraud liability and
their widespread resistance to banks’ unsolicited mailing campaigns. Dunne
pressed industry representatives to admit that they had compounded the
problem by mailing unsolicited cards. They had not, Dunne indicated, taken
adequate security measures to protect consumers from fraud. He also called
for follow-up hearings “to determine who should be responsible for losses.”
Soon after his fraud law was enacted, Dunne introduced bills to limit
cardholder liability for lost or stolen cards and to ban the unsolicitedmailing of credit cards. Dunne eventually accepted card industry claims that
an outright mailing ban would be too restrictive and prevent competition.
But Dunne was also losing control of the now popular issue. New York’s
attorney general, Republican Louis Lefkowitz, endorsed much stronger
measures. Reflecting the gender politics attached to the issue of card
distribution, Lefkowitz framed his effort as a salve to worried husbands. “I
have had numerous letters from husbands,” Lefkowitz told a meeting of the
National Association of District Attorneys in November 1969, “who have
said that the forwarding of these cards is nothing more than a temptation to
their wives to make purchases that are beyond their capacity to pay.” New
York adopted consumer liability protection in May 1970.32
In doing so, New York lawmakers completed the increasingly
commonplace risk shift, transferring fraud risk from consumers to card
issuers and at the same time shifting the policing burden from card issuers
to the state. Massachusetts, California, and Illinois took different paths to
the same point. The Massachusetts legislature first protected cardholders
through limited liability before later adopting Amex’s model fraud law.
California adopted the Amex law in 1967. After Congress enacted limited
liability in 1970, California lawmakers adopted a sweeping consumer
protection law that matched federal liability provisions and also included
new protections for credit billing and credit discrimination. Illinois had
enacted a card fraud law in the wake of the Chicago banks’ mass-mailing
debacle of 1966 and followed thereafter with limited liability. Into the early
1970s, Illinois lawmakers debated Amex’s model bill, but they remained
concerned about taking on additional law enforcement responsibilities when
card firms continued to recklessly market convenient credit. “We have
concluded that legal restrictions on the fraudulent use of credit cards in
Illinois are pitifully out of touch with reality,” a commission studying card
fraud reported in 1972, yet “mere legislation without a complementary
increase in security by the credit card companies will not deter the
mounting incidence of credit card frauds.” Card firms could not expect state
protection until they protected themselves.33
The same concerns vexed Congress members as they finalized a federal
consumer protection package that banned unsolicited card mailing and
imposed limited liability on a national basis in 1969 and 1970. Throughoutthe legislative process, Congress considered protecting consumers through
enhanced federal fraud policing (even if card firms were the ultimate
beneficiaries). But law enforcement officials repeatedly argued against
greater federal responsibility. Card issuers, they charged, willingly
sacrificed consumer safety to make credit convenient. When the House
Postal Subcommittee considered an unsolicited mailing ban, for instance,
Seymour Rotker and William Cotter recounted their experience
investigating Citibank’s fraud losses. Although bank security personnel
wished to reduce fraud losses, Rotker testified, bank marketing staff wanted
the widest possible card distribution. “It appears that from a business
standpoint,” he observed, “the firms may be willing to sustain losses to
some extent through illegal use which may be less than the necessary
expense to cut these losses.” If so, Rotker implied, card firms could hardly
expect the government to pick up the tab; if they wanted a policing partner
in the state, card issuers needed to put system security above credit
marketing.34
In the march to passage, Russell Long amended the Senate bill, adding a
provision making card fraud a federal crime under the Stolen Property Act.
Although the text had not been debated in either chamber, William
Proxmire, head of the conference committee, integrated the provision into
the final bill, possibly as a concession to card issuers to soften the impact of
the unsolicited mailing ban and liability provisions. Proxmire initially
supported an expansive federal fraud statute, but, he explained to Senate
colleagues, “The Justice Department felt such a provision would be
extremely costly to administer.” Instead, the committee amended the federal
Stolen Property Act, placing unauthorized card use under federal
jurisdiction only when fraudulent purchases aggregated to $5,000. The high
threshold limited the statute’s reach, but it accomplished the double move
adopted by states. At the federal level, the risks and costs of card fraud
shifted from consumers to issuers through limited liability, and from card
issuers to the federal government through the criminal law.
35
By instituting this double move, state and federal policymakers
buttressed the expanding scale and scope of private, nationwide card
networks. In the 1940s and 1950s, local card systems, whether department
store or charge account banking plans, relied on interpersonalembeddedness—trust created through webs of relationships among
consumers, store personnel, local bankers, and credit managers. With
national card systems and mobile consumers (and crooks), such linkages
were no longer sufficient. Policymakers thus created new legal, institutional
embeddedness more suitable to the era of impersonal credit. In doing so,
policymakers recognized and protected the methods of card use prescribed
by card firms, and they criminalized the methods of card use employed by
innovative fraudsters. Given lawmakers’ willingness to adopt card issuer
arguments before banks launched their unsolicited mailing campaigns,
firms like American Express might have secured a greater measure of state
protection, with fewer legal commitments to consumer welfare, had banks
not careened into the market. Nevertheless, the consumer and criminal
protections that emerged from the swell of credit activism in the late 1960s
provided the entire card industry with a foundation of state-sanctioned
legitimacy. The consumer protections, from expanded state usury laws, to
limited liability, to unsolicited mailing bans, all, in the sense that the social
theorist Karl Polanyi intended, embedded and legitimized plastic
capitalism. State policing commitments, in turn, represented a foundational
government investment in private card markets, which, despite
policymakers’ embrace of credit-driven purchasing power, was not
obligatory or guaranteed. All of this redounded to the benefit of bankers,
who would in turn use this foundation to launch sustained offensives
against the complex web of federalist financial regulation in the decades to
come.36
The Location of Credit Card Crime
When Proxmire set a $5,000 threshold for card fraud to mollify Justice
Department concerns, he hardly captured the department’s hostility to any
new card policing mandate. An October 1970 letter from Richard
Kleindienst, deputy attorney general, to Proxmire, as the conference
committee weighed fraud legislation, made clear the department’s position:
a federal card fraud law would overwhelm federal resources. “It has been
estimated that there may be as many as five million unauthorized use of
credit card violations in the United States annually,” Kleindienst objected.“The Federal Bureau of Investigation would not have the personnel to
investigate this large a number of cases.” Even if it could, he continued,
“there are not enough Federal prosecutors or judges to even begin to make a
dent in the volume of cases that would arise.” The problem had grown too
big for the federal government to handle.37
Kleindienst sought to preserve limited resources, but he was equally
concerned that new fraud legislation would interfere with ongoing and
successful efforts to prosecute organized card criminals: a joint task force of
Justice Department and Postal Inspection officers had been pursuing
organized card thieves using the mail fraud statute since 1964. The federal
government had long used the far-reaching mail fraud statute to combat
novel commercial crimes. When courts curtailed the reach of the Stolen
Property Act in 1963, U.S. attorneys turned to mail fraud, increasing card
fraud prosecutions from 5 in 1964 to 246 by 1970. “We believe,”
Kleindienst explained, “that the proposed amendments . . . are unnecessary
and possibly could adversely affect the enforcement program directed at the
prosecution of large scale, organized unlawful use of credit cards.”
Prosecutors often used mail fraud in areas where Congress had not yet
legislated, but once Congress defined card crime as distinct from mail
fraud, the elastic mail fraud statute might no longer apply.
38
Curiously, the federal government’s success prosecuting card swindlers
had remained outside the policy debates surrounding card fraud in the
1960s. There were several reasons for this absence. First, the federal court
that developed the most robust mail fraud jurisprudence, the Fifth Circuit,
covered Texas, Louisiana, and Mississippi. The cases involved gasoline
cards, issued by firms like Shell and Standard Oil, not the bank and travel
cards embroiled in the national debate. Until other federal jurisdictions
adopted the Fifth Circuit’s precedents, a process which began only around
1970, the court’s rulings remained a local curiosity, not settled law. Further,
mail fraud cases were the province of the Postal Inspection Service, an
effective investigatory agency housed in a much-maligned institution. The
mutual antagonism unsolicited mailing created between banks and the Post
Office meant neither party welcomed sustained working partnerships. Card
issuers wanted to call on the FBI. Finally, card firms and their attorneys still
believed that mail fraud was inherently limited: the mail became an elementof a fraudulent action only once a transaction was completed; it offered no
method for breaking up the criminal supply networks. Or at least that’s how
matters seemed in the mid-1960s.
As card firms lobbied to expand the Stolen Property Act and enact
Amex’s model card crime act, prosecutors and judges in the Fifth Circuit
crafted a wide-ranging interpretation of the mail fraud statute. They
reimagined card fraud, from a singular event that happened at a checkout
counter at a fixed moment, to a process that necessarily unfolded over space
and time. In doing so, they engaged in policy entrepreneurship through the
federal courts, in much the same way that state attorneys general, seeking to
hold card issuers accountable to usury statutes, had done at the state level.
That reimagining began with Felix Adams. When Adams deceived a gas
station clerk by offering his stolen Gulf Oil Company credit card, Adams’s
attorney argued in 1962, the fraud began and ended. At that moment, at one
of the many checkout counters where Adams racked up $2,953.55 in
charges over several months, nothing was being mailed. Adams’s actions
were deceptive, but they did not constitute mail fraud. On the contrary, the
court reasoned, “The practice of extending credit was inseparably
connected with the use of the mails to forward the sales slips to Gulf Oil
Company.” Adams’s fraud scheme depended on the use of the mails,
because it “occasioned a delay in . . . detection . . ., and that delay permitted
[Adams] to expand the scope of his operations.” Thus, the court concluded,
“When the scheme is viewed in its entirety, it is obvious that the use of the
mails constituted a part of it.” Adams never licked a stamp or sealed an
envelope, but he caused these actions to happen.39
Still, to establish criminal intent, judges inferred that fraudsters
understood the back-office processes that afforded the time delay. In their
appeals, convicts adamantly contested this claim. Their purchases were
immediate, they argued. Although possibly crooked in intent, that intent did
not contemplate the mail. The Fifth Circuit rejected these arguments. In a
1965 case, the court ruled that “the use of the mails . . . inheres in the credit
card system.” The mailing of sales slips could not be separated from the
credit-granting process. By 1970, the court brushed aside a defendant’s
claim that his scheme was complete at the time of purchase as not worthy of
oral argument. In the Fifth Circuit, card fraud was, per se, mail fraud.40The full scope of this theory became apparent in U.S. v. Kellerman, a
1970 case from the Second Circuit (Connecticut, New York, and Vermont)
that built on the doctrine developed in the Fifth. In 1967, a mechanic
working for Dashew Business Machines, which produced plastic cards for
Diners Club, Bank of America, and other card issuers, tried to sell
embossing equipment and card blanks to his neighbor, John Kellerman.
Kellerman and a group of coconspirators planned to establish a counterfeit
Diners Club ring, producing and selling cards into the black market. But the
would-be manufacturers could not get the embossing equipment to work. In
the meantime, one of the coconspirators used a stolen card for his own
amusement, got pinched, and offered details of the larger scheme to save his
skin. Kellerman and three others were subsequently convicted of conspiracy
to commit mail fraud. Appealing, Kellerman argued that all he tried to do
was buy the embossing machine and card blanks. He never contemplated
the use of the mails. The court was not convinced. “The card has no value
qua card,” the court argued, but only as a credit device the conspirators
would sell, and which they then knew would be used to commit fraud.
“Since the fraudulent use of a credit card constitutes mail fraud, so also
does a conspiracy to put spurious cards into circulation.” The government
did not need to wait for a transaction to take place—the possibility of a
future transaction involving the mail was enough. The reach of mail fraud
was wide indeed.41
Although Kleindienst had worried in October 1970 that the new card
fraud law would complicate federal prosecutions under the mail fraud
statute, initially such complications did not materialize. The Postal
Inspection Service extended the reach of its investigatory authority and its
monthly Enforcement Report teemed with descriptions of successfully
foiled fraud cases. Once Congress enacted the card fraud law, the Justice
Department placed investigative jurisdiction with the experienced Postal
Service, not the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Meanwhile, the Fifth
Circuit’s jurisprudence continued to spread to other courts. “Every court of
appeals case involving credit card schemes,” the Third Circuit (Delaware,
New Jersey, and Pennsylvania) observed in 1972, “has held that such
schemes fall within the mail fraud statute.” Disputes, however, soon crept
in. The first Kleindienst had anticipated. If Congress created a specificcategory of credit card fraud, could activities within that category also be
defined as mail fraud? The second centered on knowledge and intent. Could
courts reasonably assume that fraudsters understood card systems well
enough to contemplate the entire credit-granting process when they made
fraudulent purchases? Did fraud happen in the store or, by contractual
translocation and the convenience of the modern mail, in some far-off credit
office?42
These questions converged in the case of Thomas Maze. In early 1971,
Maze took up residence with Charles Meredith in Louisville, Kentucky. “In
the spring of that year,” Supreme Court Justice William H. Rehnquist later
wrote, Maze’s “fancy lightly turned to thoughts of the sunny Southland, and
he thereupon took Meredith’s BankAmericard and his 1968 automobile and
headed for Southern California.” Embodying the happy-go-lucky fraudster,
Maze made out for the California coast, lodging at hotels in Huntington
Beach and San Diego. Then he headed east for New Orleans, and on to Fort
Lauderdale, all financed by Meredith’s BankAmericard. Finally, Maze
returned to Kentucky, where Meredith’s ’68 Pontiac ran into some trouble.
Maze took it to a garage and borrowed a 1964 Chevy on Meredith’s credit.
Two days later, Maze, drunk, wrecked the Chevy. He was subsequently
arrested.43
Federal prosecutors indicted Maze for one count of auto theft and four
counts of mail fraud, one for each hotel bill charged to Meredith’s Bank￾Americard. A jury convicted Maze of all five counts, but in October 1972,
the Sixth Circuit Court (Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio, and Tennessee)
reversed the mail fraud convictions, arguing that Maze did not contemplate
the use of the mails as part of his fraud plan. In doing so, the court rejected
the expansive view of the card transaction—and of criminal knowledge—
implied by the other federal circuits. “It was immaterial to [Maze] how (or
whether)” the hotel owners “collected their money or who eventually paid
for the purchases,” the court argued. “As far as appellant was concerned,” it
continued, “his transaction was complete when he checked out of each
motel.” The court went further, asserting that Congress, in enacting the
1970 card fraud statute, shared this view. Card fraud was not, as the Fifth
Circuit would have it, per se mail fraud. Federal prosecution should belimited to cases over $5,000, as the law stated. “Casual or incidental
misuses,” among them Maze’s, should be left “to local prosecution.”44
The Sixth Circuit’s ruling, along with a similar one delivered by the
Tenth Circuit (Colorado and surrounding states) the same year, created
significant disagreement among the federal courts, encouraging the
Supreme Court to clarify the relationship between the card fraud and the
mail fraud statutes. The court heard Maze’s case in November 1973.
William T. Warner, a court-appointed Louisville attorney, represented Maze,
who was serving out his auto theft sentence in federal prison. Warner’s
argument was simple: courts could not assume that persons committing
credit card fraud knew their actions would involve the mail. The cases that
gave rise to the per se doctrine of the Fifth and other circuits involved
knowledgeable defendants and complex, long-term schemes, Warner
explained. Yet Congress’s and the card firms’ moral outrage over organized
crime should not shape the law for all defendants. Maze hadn’t thought
twice. The court should curtail the federal government’s reach, Warner
argued. If it did so, he assured, card systems would not go unprotected.
“Kentucky statutes are more than adequate to cover every aspect of the so￾called scheme.” State law could do the job just as well.45
A bare majority of justices accepted Warner’s argument, and only then
with some reservation. On the dissenting side, it was patently obvious to
Justice Harry A. Blackmun that card fraud contemplated the use of the
mails, as it was to Justice Byron White, who wrote the primary dissent.
Hoping to add meat to White’s dissent, Chief Justice Warren E. Burger
wrote a short treatise on the history of the mail fraud statute, arguing that
the court should maintain it as a robust tool for combating commercial
fraud. Enough justices, though, were persuaded. Justices Thurgood
Marshall and William J. Brennan Jr. believed that Proxmire’s amendments
demonstrated Congress’s intent to limit card fraud jurisdiction. In
conference, Justice Lewis Powell confessed that he “could toss a coin,” but
he concluded that “credit cards ought to be at the state level.” William
Rehnquist, a former president of the National Conference of
Commissioners for Uniform State Laws and strong advocate of state
prerogatives, likely agreed. But in his majority opinion, Rehnquist focused
only on criminal knowledge and intent. Maze’s “scheme reached fruitionwhen he checked out of the motel,” Rehnquist wrote. “There is no
indication that the success of his scheme depended in any way on which of
his victims ultimately bore the loss. Indeed, from his point of view, he
probably would have preferred to have the invoices misplaced by the
various motel personnel and never mailed at all.”46
In concluding his oral argument, Warner tried to clarify the stakes of the
case. “The Government,” Warner observed, “has lit off a kind of a smoky
bonfire,” that “unless the Court overturns the Sixth Circuit decision that the
entire credit card system is going to breakdown. I don’t think that’s true.”
From Warner’s perspective, states like Kentucky, which had adopted the
State Credit Card Crime Act proposed by American Express in April 1970,
were more than capable of defending national card systems using local law.
In Maze’s case, the Louisville Bank that issued Meredith’s BankAmericard
could provide all the evidence a local prosecutor would need. Because
Maze ultimately defrauded the Louisville bank, Kentucky had the necessary
jurisdiction, no matter how far Maze roamed. Justice White also saw the
continued primacy of state criminal enforcement as the ultimate outcome in
Maze, but with dramatically different consequences. Maze, in White’s view,
“must now be charged and tried in California, Louisiana, and Florida. This
result, never intended by Congress, may precipitate a widespread inability
to apprehend and/or prosecute those who would hijack the credit card
system.”47
Maze left federal card fraud law in a messy heap. In his dissent, Chief
Justice Burger emphasized that the majority ruling did not preclude the use
of the mail fraud statute to prosecute card crime. Prosecutors, though, had
to demonstrate that the use of the mail was an essential element of the fraud
scheme. And in areas like Unholy Alliance frauds, where colluding
merchants undoubtedly knew the mail was in play, the federal government
retained authority. At the same time, Proxmire’s fraud law proved difficult
to enforce. The $5,000 threshold Kleindienst requested applied to “a
transaction” involving an improperly obtained “credit card.” As written,
“transaction” and “card” were singular. If Congress imagined an
aggregation of multiple fraudulent purchases on a single card, or on many
cards, it had not said so. Only the Fifth Circuit took an expansive view of
the text, allowing that Congress meant an aggregation of multipletransactions on multiple cards. On the contrary, “the interpretation of the
majority of courts of the aggregation requirement,” one commentator wrote,
“renders the statute too narrow to effectively combat credit card fraud.”
Thus, while Justice White had been incensed that card fraud prosecutions
would have to rely on the hodgepodge of state law, even within the federal
courts, the location of specific fraudulent acts led to varied legal outcomes.
The place of prosecution still determined whether certain actions were
federal crimes or not.48
The issue of location permeated Maze in another way. The majority
concluded that prosecutors had to demonstrate that defendants knew how
card systems worked well enough to have incorporated the geographic
distances, which divided fraudulent purchases from the institutions
ultimately responsible for them, into their schemes. To commit mail fraud,
card fraudsters had to be sophisticated users of financial technology.
Criminals who understood their transactions as occurring, in Maze’s case,
in hotels in Florida and California, not in a bank office in Kentucky, were
literally pardoned for that lack of sophisticated understanding. As
consumers began to use cards from out-of-state banks, some confronted
situations where their lack of knowledge about the geographic scope of card
systems was, instead, distinctly punishing. The laws of the state where they
lived and used their card were not necessarily the laws that applied to their
credit card transactions. But unlike criminals, for whom knowledge and
intent had to be proven to be enforced, courts were more comfortable
assuming consumers knew what they were doing. The entire federal
consumer protection regime rested on just this notion of informed,
autonomous, discerning consumers.
Finally, for card issuers, who craved uniformity and predictability, the
saga demolished their faith that state policing could protect their card
systems. Instead, card firms turned their attention to new technologies,
which they hoped would enable stricter system security while still making
credit convenient. Magnetic strips, point-of-sale terminals, and electronic
funds transfer systems held out the promise of augmenting card issuers’
newly crafted institutional embeddedness with complex technological
systems that could defeat the most enterprising criminals. If constructed
properly, these new systems of surveillance and control would enablebankers to cut out untrustworthy merchants and extend bank control even
deeper into consumers’ lives. That, however, was a big if.498
The Marquette Decision
Where Is Fisher?
In the days preceding oral arguments in Marquette National Bank of
Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corporation, Justice Harry
Blackmun pondered a teasing question: “Who is Fisher?” The issue in
Marquette, argued before the Supreme Court in October 1978, was whether
the First National Bank of Omaha, Nebraska, could charge its credit card
customers living in Minnesota the 18 percent interest rate allowed under
Nebraska law, or if the bank instead had to conform to Minnesota’s 12
percent usury limit. The case hinged on the question of where First of
Omaha’s card plan was legally located, which in turn would dictate which
state’s interest rate applied. Nearly a decade of legal struggle culminated in
the case, as states sought to protect their citizens from high interest rates
delivered through border-crossing credit cards. The state of Minnesota
stood beside the Marquette bank as a plaintiff-respondent, with conservative
legal scholar Robert H. Bork delivering the oral argument for the Nebraska
bank. In a similar case, the Iowa Supreme Court had recently decided
against First of Omaha. Marquette would reshape the credit card market. It
began, indirectly, with a man named Fred Fisher. Blackmun wanted to
know who he was.1
In the decade before Marquette, state consumer leagues and labor union
chapters waged a pitched political battle against the financial community
over the price of credit, specifically the interest rates and fees tied to creditcard accounts. In some states, these groups secured new laws that limited
the rates lenders could charge. In others, state attorneys general challenged
the time-price doctrine and brought revolving credit under existing state
usury regulations. Across the country, consumers, politicians, credit
reformers, and bankers all understood consumer credit as bound within
space and properly regulated by states. This patchwork of local regulation
stood in the way of a unified, national credit card market. Growth-oriented
national banks, situated in states with less restrictive interest rate rules,
quickly put pressure on state-based consumer protections. Under federal
law, nationally chartered banks could charge interest according to the laws
of the state in which they were located. Although a bank’s location was
fixed, its cards could readily cross state lines. Bankers located in states that
allowed high interest used financial technology to offer profitable,
expensive credit in neighboring states. By mailing differently regulated
cards across state borders, they used financial technology to undermine
local democratic efforts to control credit prices.2
Consumers and state officials saw what was happening and tried to stop
it, developing legal strategies to hold out-of-state card-issuing banks
accountable to local interest rate rules. Examples in two states—Iowa and
Minnesota—involving two sets of cases—Fisher and Marquette—illustrate
the difficulties in doing so. The cases unfolded as consumer and labor
groups in both states successfully challenged the high rates promulgated by
the Uniform Consumer Credit Code, and as both states’ policymakers used
Wisconsin’s J. C. Penney decision to rein in retail credit prices. In both
states, the primary antagonist was the First National Bank of Omaha, a large
regional bank that used cards as a tool to break out of the New Deal’s
geographic and regulatory confines. From the late 1960s forward, states,
banks, and individual citizens worked to shape the institutional and legal
structures of the bank card market within the complex matrix of financial
federalism. For all parties, federalism offered legal instruments that might
advance their interests, though ultimately, in Marquette, the banks would
turn the system to their advantage. In the years after the decision, bankers
would relocate their card plans to states without any price restrictions and
use Marquette to export the rules from those states to cardholders across the
country.Geographic Structure of Bank Credit Card Networks
The questions at the heart of Fisher’s case—and later in Marquette—
grew out of bankers’ efforts to build nationwide card networks that linked
their geographically constrained credit card plans. Banks could not branch
across state lines when they began building networks in the mid-1960s, and
in many states, local law constrained their markets even further. Within
these confines, bankers envisioned cards as tools for recruiting local
customers—whether merchants or consumers: new customers would visit
local bank branches and use their other services. Over time, Bank of
America and Interbank built national card systems by combining
participating banks into nationwide branch networks, making cards at once
local in character and national in scope. Consumers held BankAmericard
and Master Charge cards that featured the name of their local bank and
often the insignia of a local card plan. Merchants joined card systems at the
urging of their community banker. Bankers built their card networks to
reinforce financial localism and to retain the interpersonal embeddedness
that undergirded older credit relationships. All participants expected these
local relationships to be regulated by local—that is, state—law.
Bank card plans remained fundamentally local in the 1960s, but bank
networking strategies ensured that cards crossed state lines, even when the
banks issuing them could not. Network builders had to deliver efficient
nationwide—and eventually global—infrastructure, while maintaining close
on-the-ground relationships. Bank of America executives approached this
challenge by adopting a hierarchical structure. Bank of America partnered
with large, regional banks, often assigning them multistate territories.
Regional, licensee banks then drew on “correspondent” relationships to
recruit smaller “agent banks” in their service area. The local agent banks
signed up merchants in their communities to accept BankAmericards and
recruited consumers, either by recommending them for direct solicitation by
the licensee bank or by accepting and forwarding applications to the
licensee bank. The licensee bank issued BankAmericards and extended
credit to consumers within its geographic territory. Bank of America’s
hierarchical network enabled agent banks to offer local card services. The
licensee bank and the network, in turn, gained the agent bank’s local
knowledge and community relationships. Interbank coalesced after the bankcard associations, like Chicago’s Midwest, had organized, and its
architecture was more decentralized. Nevertheless, large banks likewise
recruited agent banks to expand the network and embed the card system
locally.
3
Licensee banks distributed cards across multistate territories, yet
because state interest rate rules varied, licensee banks had to determine
which rates applied. This problem had two layers. First, when bank card
networks expanded in the late 1960s, it was often unclear within individual
states whether state interest rate rules applied to bank cards at all—because
of the time-price doctrine—and if so which of a state’s interest rate laws
applied. Rate rules within states could also work differently for state and
nationally chartered banks. Under the “most favored lender” doctrine,
national banks could charge the same rates as any competing state chartered
or licensed financial institution, including small loan companies that could
charge 30 percent a year or more. James Saxon, comptroller of the currency
(1961–66), who oversaw the national banking system, encouraged banks to
interpret this rule liberally to make their card plans profitable. State
policymakers challenged this approach. When two Oregon national banks
used the comptroller’s ruling to justify charging 18 percent interest on their
BankAmericard plans under the state’s small loan law, rather than the 10
percent allowed for commercial bank loans, Oregon’s attorney general ruled
that the card plans violated state usury laws. The banks backed down,
accepting that it was better to negotiate with state policymakers than to defy
them on the basis of federal authority—a stance which would only make
future negotiations more difficult. Within states, then, national banks tended
to defer to local authority and to work with local policymakers to set
statutory rates. Banks operating plans between states, however, had no
influence over rate policies in other states. When their cards crossed state
lines, bankers adopted the rate rules of their home states, but it brought
them into conflict with consumers and officials of other states, who fought
to enforce local rules.4
The Fisher and Marquette cases centered on one such bank, the First
National Bank of Omaha, Nebraska (First of Omaha). First of Omaha
pioneered charge account banking, introducing the “First Charge” service in
January 1953. First Charge experienced growing pains similar to those ofother charge account banks—resistance from large retailers, high consumer
defaults, cultural opposition from conservative bank executives. Still, the
program grew steadily in Omaha where the bank had its office (Nebraska
was effectively a unit banking state). When the card market took off in the
mid-1960s, First of Omaha joined the fray. In 1966, it launched a major
campaign in Omaha, increasing active accounts from 12,000 to
approximately 30,000. Executives soon looked to expand across Nebraska,
then regionally, relying on the new national card networks to facilitate
growth. First of Omaha considered joining Interbank, but in April 1968 it
joined BankAmericard instead. Bank of America assigned First of Omaha a
territory encompassing Nebraska, Iowa, and the Dakotas, where First of
Omaha would solicit customers, participating merchants, and agent banks.
First of Omaha adopted the BankAmericard with great fanfare. In
Nebraska, the bank’s “BankAmericard Girls” wore blue, white, and gold
uniforms and drove matching Volkswagen Beatles as they enrolled local
merchants. Five male employees, not dressed in card-themed uniforms,
traveled across the four-state region signing up agent banks to promote
“First Charge/BankAmericard” in their communities. Meanwhile, the bank
had also mailed 500,000 card applications and 250,000 unsolicited cards,
one of which landed in Fred and Edna Fisher’s mailbox. By the end of
1970, First Charge incorporated 227 agent banks, 8,000 merchants, and
675,000 consumer accounts.5Fig. 5: First of Omaha ran ads, such as this one in the July 1968 Northwestern Banker, to recruit
agent banks to its BankAmericard program. Bill Henry (pictured), who was employed and paid by
First of Omaha, traveled to “most cities” in Iowa “to enroll agent banks in the First of Omaha Service
Corporation“s BankAmericard plan.”
Source: Ad, First National Bank of Omaha, Northwestern Banker (July 1968); deposition of J.
William Henry, December 11, 1974, 6, Fisher Case File. Reprinted with permission from FNBO.
First of Omaha adopted BankAmericard’s corporate architecture, which
created legal divisions between the bank and the network to fix card lending
in the issuing bank’s home state. Under this agreement, First of Omaha
performed all credit card lending functions: it checked consumers’ credit,
issued credit cards, extended credit when consumers made purchases or
received cash advances, billed consumers, assessed interest, and accepted
repayment from consumers. First of Omaha undertook these functions in its
“BankAmericard Center,” a system-wide term for a licensee bank’s Bank￾Americard computer and operations division. The BankAmericard Center
sat on the tenth floor of First of Omaha’s downtown headquarters. Also
located there was First of Omaha Service Corporation (Omaha Service), a
subsidiary firm, which First of Omaha chartered to manage the
BankAmericard network. The service corporation maintained the day-to￾day functioning of the network, providing merchants and agent banks with
the logistical support and BankAmericard materials they needed—forms,
supplies, and equipment—to operate the program. It also solicited
merchants in Nebraska and agent banks in neighboring states, like the
Coralville Bank and Trust Company in Coralville, Iowa, where the Fishers
banked.6
Omaha Service was a legal fiction—a way to artificially divide banking
and non-banking aspects of card plans. Bank employees performed all
service corporation work. The blue, white, and gold clad BankAmericard
Girls signed up merchants for Omaha Service, but they were employed by
First of Omaha. Asked if he could distinguish between the firms, bank
executive Jim Doody conceded that “to a person who came to the bank and
wanted to see the Service Corporation[,] it would be impossible to locate.”7Fig. 6: This figure depicts the division of roles and responsibilities within the BankAmericard
network in the late 1960s.
Source: Bank of America, “Agent Bank Agreement,” January 10, 1969, plaintiff’s exhibit 4;
BankAmerica Service Corporation, “Participant Letter License Agreement,” June 10, 1969,
plaintiff’s exhibit 7; Contract between First National Bank of Omaha and First of Omaha Service
Corporation, ca. 1968, defendant’s exhibit G, Fisher Case File; “Bank Credit Card Service
Organization and the Bank Service Corporation Act,” Federal Reserve Bulletin 53, no. 11 (November
1967): 1912–1913.
The legal fiction was necessary because it fixed credit card lending at
the bank in Omaha, Nebraska, even as bank employees, under the guise of
the service corporation, built card infrastructure across state lines. As it
expanded its plan across the Midwest, First of Omaha charged cardholders
Nebraska’s installment credit rates, which before 1974 were 18 percent onbalances below $500 and 12 percent thereafter. In their agreements with the
bank, consumers accepted that “I may, by use of my BankAmericard, issue
drafts upon you for acceptance by you at Omaha, Nebraska,” and “I further
agree to pay my BankAmericard account to you at Omaha, Nebraska.”
From the perspective of banking law, such pronouncements were sound and
sensible. First of Omaha was located in Omaha. Omaha Service, however,
ranged more widely. It performed services for merchants and agent banks in
Iowa, South Dakota, and beyond. To function, First of Omaha’s Bank￾Americard program required those services as much as anything happening
in Omaha. Lending, in an abstract, legal sense, may have taken place in
Nebraska, but the card program—the infrastructure that made lending
possible—existed in all these states. As state officials and consumers fought
for low credit prices, they used the ambiguity between the bank and the
service corporation to hold First of Omaha accountable to local laws.8
Table 2. Division of Functions between First of Omaha and
Omaha Service.
First of Omaha (legally in Omaha) Omaha Service (location variable)
•Check credit and issue cards •Solicit merchant members
•Accept sales and cash advance drafts •Solicit agent banks
•Keep transactions records of service
corporation’s merchant members
•Provide BankAmericard materials to merchants
and agent banks
•Sell sales drafts to service corporation at its
request
•Assist the same in operating program
•Solicit consumer applications and mail credit
cards
•Collect merchant enrollment fees
•Acquire (i.e., pay for) improper sales and cash
advance drafts
Source: Contract between First National Bank of Omaha and First of Omaha Service Corporation, ca.
1968, defendant’s exhibit G, Fisher Case File.
Minnesota: Enforcing Local Credit LawsLicensee banks like First of Omaha began to construct cross-border card
programs at the height of consumer mobilization over high credit prices. In
Minnesota, political conflict over card rates emerged within national
debates about the Truth-in-Lending Act and the Uniform Consumer Credit
Code. In the late 1960s, Minnesota’s usury laws were in exactly the state of
confusion and haphazard accretion that the UCCC’s drafters hoped to
resolve. In 1957, lawmakers reenacted the state’s 8 percent general usury
rate. State law set distinct statutory rates for small loan companies, thrifts,
credit unions, bank installment loans, and auto loans. Minnesota exempted
most business loans, as well as federally insured home loans, from the 8
percent limit. Moreover, Minnesota’s courts had long observed the time￾price doctrine, exempting the sale of goods on credit from rate limits
because such transactions reflected a difference in price rather than a loan
of money. When the legislature took up the UCCC in the late 1960s,
lawmakers “really d[id]n’t know what the law is” regarding retail revolving
credit. They also did not know what to do about the out-of-state bank cards
that were pouring into Minnesota. Yet lawmakers knew enough to worry
that the state’s restrictive and uncertain rate rules were limiting the
development of the bank card industry in their state.9
Because of Minnesota’s low rate ceilings, the convenient credit
revolution was bypassing local banks. In the 1950s, several banks in
Minneapolis had run competing charge account plans, including the state’s
largest bank holding company, the Northwest Bank Group, known locally
as “Banco.” The plans had relied on merchant discounts for revenue. Yet
competition among the banks, without the cooperation later developed in
Chicago and elsewhere, meant none generated sufficient volume to turn a
profit. Banco and its competitors sold their card plans in 1960. Over the
next decade, firms like Bank of America shifted the emphasis of bank card
plans from merchant discounts to consumer financing. In the late 1960s, a
few Minnesota banks moved into the card field. In 1968, the Marquette
National Bank of Minneapolis (Marquette) joined BankAmericard and
began to solicit agent banks, merchants, and consumers. Banco and several
other banks chartered the Central States Bank Card Association, which they
planned to tie into the Interbank network. The only hang-up was
Minnesota’s low interest ceiling. To accommodate their new card plans,bankers lobbied the state legislature to establish card rates at 18 percent in
its 1969 session. They expected ready success.10
Lawmakers, wrapped in the UCCC debate, were not in an
accommodating mood. They defeated the rate increase, and bedlam ensued.
Banco’s Central States Bank Card Association, which had not yet issued
cards, sat frozen. “The things that are legal aren’t feasible, and the things
that are feasible aren’t legal,” Banco chairman John Moorhead complained.
Many Minnesota banks, including Banco, turned to agent bank agreements
to offer card plans. By September, a Minnesota Bankers Association
representative explained to state lawmakers that “bank credit card
operations are increasingly being conducted from banks outside the state.”
This situation was likely to become permanent, the representative
continued, once Minnesota banks became locked into agent bank
agreements, signing up local merchants for the card plans of out-of-state
banks. By the early 1970s, the card revolution was bypassing Minnesota’s
banks: In 1973, 1.84 percent of all national bank loans were card
receivables, but in Minnesota, only 0.18 percent were.11
As these figures indicate, a few Minnesota banks continued their card
programs despite the legislature’s unwillingness to raise permitted rates,
taking various degrees of legal risk as they sought to make their card plans
profitable—or at least viable. The state’s installment loan statute allowed
banks to charge 12 percent interest, and Minnesota authorities accepted
Marquette’s decision to charge consumers this rate on their outstanding
BankAmericard balances. Within these constraints, Marquette built a
sizable program. The bank claimed 110 agent banks, 7,000 merchants, and
50,000 cardholder accounts across Minnesota and the Dakotas. Taking a
greater risk, the small St. Cloud National Bank and Trust Company charged
its Master Charge customers an 18 percent annual rate on their outstanding
balances. Minnesota department stores charged similar rates on revolving
accounts under the time-price doctrine, as did Interbank banks operating in
other states. These prices drew closer scrutiny from Minnesota authorities,
though St. Cloud’s executives believed the rates were permitted under
federal law.
12
With the legal environment ambiguous, many Minnesota banks offered
cards through agent bank agreements, providing Minnesota consumerscards issued by out-of-state banks. The arrangement between the National
Bank of Omaha—a rival of First of Omaha—and the Olmstead County
Bank and Trust Company of Rochester, Minnesota, was typical. The
Olmstead bank contracted with local Minnesota merchants to honor Master
Charge cards and retained 1 percent of charge sales generated by these
merchants, along with their annual membership fees. The Olmstead bank
further agreed to “use its best efforts to obtain the names of persons who
might be eligible to become Master Charge Card holders” and to forward
those names to Omaha National Bank. Omaha National Bank ran its own
credit check and mailed a Master Charge card to each qualifying consumer,
for which the Olmstead bank received a $1 finder’s fee. The front of the
cards featured the name of the Olmstead bank, rooting the plan in Rochester
and suggesting that the cards were issued in Minnesota. But the Omaha
National Bank issued them in Nebraska, where, according to cardholder
contracts, it extended all credit and retained all income. The Nebraska bank
charged Minnesota consumers 1.5 percent a month, a rate legal in Nebraska
but of dubious legality in Minnesota.13
The Republican attorney general—and gubernatorial candidate—
Douglas Head recognized the problem and the political salience of high
credit prices. In October 1969, Head ordered his staff to determine whether
in- and out-of-state bank card plans violated Minnesota’s 8 percent usury
law. In doing so, he joined a bipartisan movement to hold card firms
accountable to local price restrictions, one advanced by both Democrats and
Republicans who sought to appeal to consumer-voters.
In July 1970, Head sued the St. Cloud National Bank as a card-issuing
bank located in Minnesota, to test the legality of St. Cloud’s 18 percent rate.
The parties delayed, hoping, in the words of St. Cloud’s attorney, that “the
Legislature would resolve this matter” in the 1971 session. Instead, the
legislature authorized retailers to charge 12 percent on their revolving
charge accounts, a compromise between retailers, who also sought 18
percent rates, and consumer and labor groups, who fought to keep the rate
at 8 percent. The compromise did not address bank cards. Although St.
Cloud’s executives maintained that they “were not subject to the limitations
of the usury law . . . in view of federal regulation,” the bank lowered its
Master Charge rate to 1 percent a month. The bank’s attorney also pleadedwith the attorney general’s office not to proceed with the litigation, drawing
on the antimonopoly ideals that had driven early bank card plans. “Our little
bank,” the attorney wrote, “is deeply concerned with the survival of the
smaller merchants and we are satisfied they cannot ultimately compete with
the [retail] giants, absent some kind of credit help such as we are trying to
give them.” The state dropped the case on the stipulation that the bank,
which at the time had fewer than 3,000 cardholders, keep its rate at 12
percent. As in Oregon, accepting local authority won out over fighting for
federal privileges.14
The state’s second action was more complicated—and ultimately more
consequential. The attorney general’s office sued the Olmstead County
Bank and the Omaha National Bank, beginning a fight against out-of-state
card issuers that would end at the Supreme Court. The question was
whether a national bank located in Nebraska could charge Minnesota
consumers Nebraska rates. At first glance, it looked like a hard case for
Minnesota to win. The attorney general’s office recognized that Section 85
of the National Bank Act allowed national banks to charge interest
according to the laws of their home state. Credit card loans originated in
Omaha, statements were mailed from Omaha, and consumers remitted
payments to Omaha: National Bank of Omaha’s card contracts clearly
explained these facts to consumers. Courts usually upheld such contracts,
Minnesota’s attorneys noted. But there were exceptions. “Courts are
hesitant to apply the Rule where it would work a gross injustice,” the
attorneys argued. Such injustice would occur if the parties were in
substantially unequal bargaining positions or if the entire transaction was
merely a pretense to evade the usury laws of one state. In these
circumstances—circumstances Minnesota’s attorneys believed matched
their case—local courts were more likely to intervene to protect local
citizens.15
Before a sympathetic Minnesota court could hear these arguments,
however, the attorney general had to convince such a court that it had
jurisdiction over a Nebraska bank. Just as national bank loans, for the
purposes of applying state usury laws, existed in their home states, so too
did national banks have the privilege of being sued only in their home states
(ostensibly so they wouldn’t have to cart their business records all over thecountry whenever they engaged in a legal dispute). Localism cut both ways.
National banks could give up this right, although Minnesota’s attorneys
could not imagine that any bank would do so. If these legal propositions
held—if card loans legally happened in Nebraska and the Omaha bank
could only be sued there—they had decidedly unsavory consequences for
Minnesota citizens. “Any Minnesota resident would be required to begin an
action in Nebraska for the penalties under a usurious contract.” As agent
bank agreements became more common in Minnesota, state residents
increasingly received unsolicited, high-interest cards from out-of-state
banks. Using these cards was convenient. Exercising legal rights would not
be.16
In their briefs to the Minnesota court, the state’s attorneys tried to make
the case about credit infrastructure, not just card lending. They asked the
court to look beyond the loan contract and consider the entirety of the
Master Charge plan. “The Omaha National Bank chose to enter this State
and set up an elaborate banking relationship for one motive: profit,” they
argued. The court should thus consider all aspects of that elaborate
relationship when considering jurisdiction. Minnesota state law required
out-of-state corporations doing business in Minnesota to register with the
secretary of state and accept legal service there. “Doing business,” meant
contracting with Minnesota citizens and performing some portion of the
contract in Minnesota. The Master Charge plan, Minnesota’s attorneys
contended, met these conditions. The Minnesota court was sympathetic,
but, compelled by federal statute and Supreme Court precedent, it dismissed
the Omaha National Bank from the suit. It did so reluctantly: “The policy
reasons advanced by the State of Minnesota for a different interpretation of
that federal statute are quite convincing . . . and may very well justify a
reversal.” Although the attorney general’s office chose not to pursue Omaha
National Bank in federal court (in Nebraska), it still hoped to clarify the
law. It maintained the case against the Olmstead Bank in order to determine
whether the state could take action against agent banks that facilitated high￾interest credit card plans, only ending its suit—without resolution—in
August 1973.17
Following the dismissal, state legal assistant Mary Gallagher filed a
lengthy memo evaluating Minnesota’s efforts to hold Omaha National Bankaccountable to Minnesota law and reflecting on the larger issues of credit
prices and credit citizenship raised by the case. “Few holders of Master
Charge cards are obviously poor or necessitous,” Gallagher began. “They
may nonetheless be in the usurer’s clutches, since it is difficult to achieve a
‘credit rating,’ to pay for airline tickets and the like by check, and in general
to operate as advertisements urge us to in a ‘credit society’ without a credit
card like Master Charge.” As Gallagher recognized, bankers were pushing
their private payments infrastructure to the center of middle-class American
life. To fully participate in the nation’s credit society, consumers needed
cards. Over the past half decade, Minnesota consumer groups, labor groups,
and their political allies had fought to define the terms of credit access.
They sought and attained safe, inexpensive credit in the state legislature.
Minnesota’s attorneys, in turn, fought to cement those rights in state courts.
State officials had to carry on fighting, Gallagher reasoned. Citizens might
take on the banks themselves, but at the risk of their credit standing. “On
behalf of such borrowers, and there are many, who hesitate to endanger
their status as high-quality debtors,” Gallager argued, “the state must bring
the action.” The state of Minnesota would get its chance again. But first,
borrowers with little left to lose would carry the fight to issuing banks’
home states.18
Iowa and the Fisher Cases
Minnesota’s case against the Olmsted and Omaha banks failed to clarify
how financial federalism’s geographically bounded system of state interest
rate regulations applied to out-of-state banks and their cross-border card
plans. Not long afterward, another series of cases picked up in Iowa that
would advance the question, though not in ways that favored consumers or
the states that sought to protect them. These cases were instituted on behalf
of Fred and Edna Fisher, and their story will begin to answer Justice
Blackmun’s question.
As were their colleagues in other states, Iowa policymakers were deeply
concerned about expensive revolving credit. Beginning in 1969, Iowa’s
legislature considered the Uniform Consumer Credit Code, which received
local support from J. C. Penney and other retailers and bank cardorganizations, such as the Mid-America Bankcard Association. Lawmakers
found the code exceedingly complicated; they moved slowly. Seeking
quicker resolution, Iowa’s Republican attorney general, Richard Turner,
followed the example set in Wisconsin, where the state sued J. C. Penney to
demonstrate that revolving credit plans were not time-price sales and thus
had to abide by state interest rate restrictions. Turner sued Sears, Standard
Oil, and Younker Brothers, a regional department store chain. He alleged all
three had violated the state’s 9 percent general usury limit with their
revolving charge plans. In September 1973, the state’s supreme court
followed J. C. Penney, holding that revolving credit was not a time-price
sale and setting retail credit rates at 9 percent. The ruling created
momentum for the Iowa Consumer Credit Code, which, when enacted in
June 1974, set revolving credit prices for both retail and bank cards at 18
percent for the first $500 and 15 percent on all exceeding balances.19
This legislative resolution, though, was in the future. The Fishers’ story
begins in February 1969, when they received in the mail a BankAmericard
from the First National Bank of Omaha, which neither Fred nor Edna had
requested. Their local bank, the Coralville Bank and Trust, was an agent
bank in First of Omaha’s BankAmericard program, and it seems to have
given First of Omaha the Fishers’ names as likely card prospects. They
were. The Fishers quickly used their BankAmericard: Edna made purchases
at two department stores and a local record shop. She favored the pop of
Johnny Mathis and Ed Ames, and the country of Roger Miller and Johnny
Horton. Fred used the card at local restaurants and a nearby Chrysler￾Plymouth dealer. Edna, who signed her name “Mrs. Fred J. Fisher” on her
card, also received a $250 cash advance at the Coralville Bank. For several
months the Fishers paid the minimum balance on their BankAmericard
account until February 1970, when they started to miss their payments. First
of Omaha began collection calls in July. The Fishers made a few more
payments, but by March 1971, the bank determined their remaining debt of
$490.18 was uncollectible. Then the lawsuits began.20
The issue was not the Fishers’ bankruptcy—we do not know the
outcome of their debt—but instead First of Omaha’s lending practices. The
bank charged the Fishers 1.5 percent per month on their outstanding
balances (18 percent annually), a rate permitted in Nebraska but not yet inIowa where the Fishers lived and used their card. First of Omaha also failed
to comply with the Truth-in-Lending Act’s disclosure rules. The Fishers’
attorney, Everett Meeker, accepted the case on contingency, meaning he
would be paid only if the Fishers prevailed. He also took advantage of new
civil procedure rules to file the suit as a class action, on behalf of Fred
Fisher and all others similarly situated. The First National Bank of Omaha
had 56,940 cardholders living in Iowa. If Meeker won judgments for all of
them, he stood to become a rich man (First of Omaha estimated its potential
liability at $43 million). The Fishers had also received and used a card from
the First National Bank of Chicago, which was charging them Illinois’s 18
percent interest on their Iowa purchases. Meeker, an entrepreneurial
litigator, sued the Chicago bank too.21
Like Minnesota’s attorneys, Meeker believed his best chance was to try
the Fishers’ cases locally, in a court in Iowa, and Meeker brought both suits
in federal court there in September 1971. (Although we’ll focus on First of
Omaha, early results in the First Chicago case were much the same.) In the
same way that Minnesota’s attorneys had urged the local court to consider
the “elaborate banking relationship” that constituted the card plan, Meeker
asked the Iowa court to examine the credit infrastructure that existed in
Iowa when determining jurisdiction. Meeker zeroed in on the specific link
between First of Omaha and its subsidiary Omaha Service. He sued the
bank since it had issued the Fishers’ card and assessed them allegedly
usurious interest. But Meeker argued that the two firms were legally
indistinguishable. Since Omaha Service was registered with Iowa’s
secretary of state to do business in Iowa and could be sued there, the bank,
if his logic held, could be as well. Predictably, First of Omaha fought this
argument and immediately petitioned to dismiss the case for improper
venue.22
Meeker’s argument focused on the slippery legal fictions that structured
regulatory place and space in bank card systems. Questioning First of
Omaha executive Jim Doody, Meeker asked if there was anything “that
would indicate that the service corporation is different from the bank?”
Doody pointed out that the “forms, with the First Service Corporation name
on it” were different. “But,” Meeker pressed, “to a person who came to the
bank and wanted to see the Service Corporation[,] it would be impossible tolocate a Service Corporation as such?” Yes, Doody agreed. Put another way
—and to paraphrase legal scholar Felix Cohen—when asked “Where is a
service corporation?” Doody conceded that nobody had ever seen a service
corporation. It did not, in any tangible sense, exist.23
Meeker countered Doody’s legal metaphysics by invoking the realness
of the Fishers’ location. If the service corporation had no concrete place,
Fred and Edna Fisher certainly did. They lived and shopped and banked in
Iowa. Under financial federalism, they expected their transactions would be
regulated by Iowa. When First of Omaha mailed the Fishers an unsolicited
card—on the letterhead of the Fishers’ Iowa bank—First of Omaha relied
on the place-based social contract to embed their card plan in Iowa. Fred
Fisher, Meeker explained, “is now and always has been an Iowa resident.
The card was accepted by plaintiff in Iowa and used in Iowa. It was used to
make a loan at an Iowa bank and to make purchases from merchants in
Iowa.” Ultimately, Meeker argued, “How can a state regulate banking
within its borders if it cannot bring an action against the bank in its own
state?” State officials across the Midwest were asking the same question.24
Meeker’s focus on Omaha Service—a strategy that would work in later
cases—was astute, but although the Iowa court was receptive to his
arguments, First of Omaha largely prevailed. “The court is in sympathy
with the argument that the venue privilege imposes a hardship on the
consumer.” It agreed that Omaha Service was “merely an adjunct of the
First National Bank of Omaha.” Moreover, by making “contracts to be
performed in whole or in part in Iowa,” Omaha Service could be sued in the
state. Meeker, however, had not sued Omaha Service. And Omaha Service
had not made high-interest loans to Fred and Edna Fisher. First of Omaha
had. The bank retained its venue privilege. Indeed, the court concluded,
First of Omaha’s use of a subsidiary corporation to conduct the parts of its
BankAmericard business that could not be strictly construed as happening
in Nebraska indicated that the bank intended to maintain a legal separation
between its lending to the Fishers and the elaborate infrastructure that made
that lending possible. The service corporation’s tangible existence was
irrelevant; its legal existence was what counted. Still, instead of dismissing
the case, as First of Omaha requested, the judge transferred it to federalcourt in Nebraska. The same result obtained in Meeker’s suit against First
of Chicago, sending that case to federal court in Illinois.25
The movement of the cases out of Iowa did impose a hardship on the
Fishers and on Meeker—Meeker made embarrassing filing errors because
he did not know the local rules of the Nebraska courts—but Meeker was
persistent. He carried the Fishers’ grievances from their home in Iowa to the
home states of First of Omaha and First of Chicago. At these sites, too,
Meeker claimed that the banks were shipping usurious rates into Iowa;
again he met frustration. The U.S. District Court for the Northern District of
Illinois ruled that Illinois law governed all loans made by First of Chicago,
“whether such loans are made in Illinois or elsewhere.” Meeker traveled
further still, appealing the cases to the federal Court of Appeals, for the
Seventh and Eighth Circuits, respectively, which held sway over Illinois
and Nebraska. Again, both courts ruled for the defendant banks,
determining that they could charge the rates allowed by their home states.
The Supreme Court declined to hear appeals, denying Meeker the
opportunity to carry the Fishers’ case to Washington. Everett Meeker was
forced to go home.26
The Fishers’ cases complicated new attempts by Iowa policymakers to
hold First of Omaha accountable to local law. In June 1974, the Iowa
legislature enacted the Iowa Consumer Credit Code (ICCC). The code
raised revolving credit limits to 18 percent for the first $500 and 15 percent
on all exceeding balances. These rates were comparable to, but still distinct
from, the 18 percent for the first $999.99 and 12 on all exceeding balances
charged by First of Omaha under then current Nebraska law. The ICCC also
charged the state’s attorney general with administering the act, empowering
the office to enforce these provisions on the state’s behalf. In November,
Richard Turner sued Omaha Service and the Central National Bank and
Trust Company, an Iowa agent bank for First of Omaha’s BankAmericard
plan. The case was a whirlwind. An Iowa state court signaled its intention to
issue an injunction, preventing First of Omaha from “assessing or
collecting” interest in excess of Iowa rates. Before the judge could sign the
order, Omaha Service moved the case to federal court. The federal court, in
turn, sent the case back to state court, which finally found that the banks
were violating the ICCC and issued an injunction. It then reversed itselfbecause of the precedent established in Fisher v. First Nat. Bank of Chicago
and granted summary judgment in favor of First of Omaha. With his head
likely still spinning, Turner appealed to the Iowa Supreme Court. But now
new cases advanced in Minnesota.27
Minnesota and Marquette
As the Fishers’ cases were moving through the courts, the bank card
market continued to develop in Minnesota. Following its settlement with
the state in 1972, the St. Cloud National Bank sought to “test the viability
of the plan at twelve percent,” but it soon discontinued its Master Charge
program. This left Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis as the only
card-issuing bank in Minnesota. Marquette, too, could not profitably
maintain its Bank-Americard program under the state’s 12 percent interest
rate ceiling. In 1973, the bank began charging cardholders a $10 annual fee.
The move was unprecedented: banks had always offered their cards as a
“free” service to consumers, in contrast to elite travel cards like American
Express. Most bank executives believed consumers would never accept an
annual service charge. When the fee went into effect, Marquette lost 40
percent of its cardholders. Its card program also began to generate profits.
By 1975, Marquette issued 80 percent of bank cards in Minnesota, with the
rest coming from out-of-state banks. The state’s low interest rates had taken
a clear toll on bank card growth: in 1975, 2.38 percent of all national bank
loans were for credit card accounts, whereas only 0.29 percent of Minnesota
national bank loans were.28
In stark contrast, Nebraska bankers took advantage of their state’s high
rates, so that in 1975, card loans—spread across the Midwest—accounted
for 5.11 percent of Nebraska national bank lending. First of Omaha led the
way and executives were eager to continue expansion. The Fisher cases had
been a boon to the bank. Although the suits remained unresolved, executive
Jim Doody recalled, competing national banks had stopped soliciting
customers in Iowa. On the advice of their attorney—who told Doody,
“Don’t worry . . . we’re going to win”—First of Omaha redoubled its
solicitation efforts. The bank used the conflict between state and federal law
to break down the barriers to a national card market. “We were taking thestate by storm,” Doody explained, “and, buoyed by these developments, we
decided to expand into Minnesota, which, like Iowa, also had a low usury
ceiling.” When First of Omaha turned its attention to Minnesota, Omaha
Service again solicited agent banks, merchants, and consumers to join the
BankAmericard plan. As in Iowa, First of Omaha planned to charge
consumers 18 percent on the first $999.99 of their outstanding card
balances, and 12 percent on any remainder. With these rates, First of Omaha
could offer their cards for “free.”29
Seeing its market in jeopardy, Marquette turned to the state for
protection. In early 1976, the Minnesota legislature took up the Bank Credit
Card Act, which formalized the 12 percent rate for bank card plans and
allowed banks to charge up to a $15 annual fee “for the privilege of using a
bank credit card.” The law also provided tools to fight out-of-state card
issuers. It applied to “any national banking association doing business in
this state.” Any bank operating in compliance with the law could seek
injunctive relief when “injured competitively” by a bank violating the
statute. As the state senator introducing the proposal explained to his
colleagues, the law represented an “attempt to limit the influx of credit
cards . . . from other states by requiring that . . . they must do what is
required by our laws.” Lawmakers understood that they were managing a
trade-off between consumer protection and local bank profits: they should
not “feel we are passing any ‘big piece’ of consumer legislation because we
are not,” “Baldy” Hansen, Labor and Commerce Committee chair told his
colleagues. Although the committee did not do the math, consumers who
carried an average balance of less than $166.67 would have been better off
under First of Omaha’s plan. Nevertheless, consumer and labor groups, who
wanted to preserve low-cost credit, supported the law, as did financial
institutions, which wanted state protection from price competition. Both
sides shared an interest in preserving Minnesota’s sovereignty over local
interest rates and with it the legislative forum to renegotiate the balance
between consumer and creditor interests in the future.30
When Minnesota’s Bank Credit Card Act went into effect, Marquette
promptly sued First of Omaha and Omaha Service, seeking to stop the
Nebraska bank from issuing cards in Minnesota. But the Minnesota state
court simply sent the case to federal court. Although the Fisher appeals hadnot yet been decided, Marquette’s attorneys feared a federal court would be
more sympathetic to the argument that First of Omaha’s card program was
governed by Nebraska law. Marquette’s attorneys then took a novel step:
they dropped their suit against First of Omaha, the bank, and sought
injunctive relief only against Omaha Service. In doing so, they followed the
course charted by Everett Meeker, focusing on the credit infrastructure that
made card lending, not the loans themselves, possible. Marquette’s
attorneys took Meeker’s strategy one step further. Although Meeker had
tried to keep his case in Iowa by piercing the legal veil between First of
Omaha and Omaha Service, his ultimate goal was recovering damages from
First of Omaha. The bank, after all, had the money. Marquette wanted to
halt First of Omaha’s card solicitation. Stopping Omaha Service achieved
that end. Omaha Service was licensed to do business in Minnesota and
could be sued in state court. The case transferred there.31
For a time, this proved a winning strategy. Articulating the core tenets
of financial federalism, the Minnesota court stated, “Since the founding of
our republic, Congress, by its legislation, has allowed states to set their own
interest rates.” Yet, it continued, “the defendants are arguing that they have
a right to export Nebraska’s high interest rate into the State of Minnesota.”
The court permanently enjoined Omaha Service from issuing cards in
Minnesota. The injunction effectively barred First of Omaha, which
actually issued the cards, making the bank a de facto defendant. On appeal,
a majority of the Minnesota Supreme Court argued that a “bank engaged in
the interstate business of credit card financing should not be able to avoid
the provisions of Minnesota law.” The court, though, could not accept the
procedural maneuvering employed by Marquette’s attorneys. The majority
reluctantly concurred with the Fisher rulings that First of Omaha was
subject only to Nebraska law. Justice George M. Scott dissented. “Should a
simple credit card transaction between a local citizen and a local merchant
be construed as a bank loan by the Nebraska bank to a Minnesota citizen, as
Fisher proclaims without question?” Scott demanded. “Minnesota,” he
added, “should reject such an extension as a misinterpretation of the
National Bank Act and exercise its own judgment.” It should, according to
Scott, retain its policy prerogative over in-state interest rates.32The Iowa Supreme Court, which heard Richard Turner’s appeal of the
Omaha Service case in June 1978, took just this position. The federal
courts’ rulings in the Fisher cases, the court contended, moved beyond the
principle of “competitive equality” between national and state banks.
Federal courts were “not arguing for equality but for superiority over All
other lenders.” Further, the Iowa court determined, the events that led to the
Fisher cases had occurred before Iowa enacted its consumer credit code,
which established explicit rates for credit card loans. “To follow the Fisher
decisions,” the Iowa court continued, would “ignore the express public
interest this state has in protecting its citizens from excessive finance
charges.” The Iowa Supreme Court thus commanded the trial court to
enjoin Omaha Service from charging excessive interest in Iowa. At the last
moment, the court stayed its order pending the resolution of Marquette,
which the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear in August 1978.33
The Iowa court’s ruling was not unanimous, and here dissent drew on a
growing Law and Economics movement, whose practitioners criticized
regulation, like usury laws, that interfered with the free play of competitive
markets. When viewed through the lens of legal economic reasoning, the
arguments advanced by First of Omaha’s opponents could look a little
ridiculous. “The majority seems to have adopted the State’s argument that
allowing defendants to charge a higher rate of interest gives them an
advantage over other lenders,” Justice Clay LeGrand observed in dissent.
“Really the contrary is true. Certainly there is no difficulty today in
obtaining credit cards; the problem is to avoid getting them.” First of
Omaha, LeGrand continued, “should be at a disadvantage when they
overprice their commodity credit in a highly competitive market.” Yet by
calling the bank card market “highly competitive” LeGrand invoked an
ideal. He did not describe reality. Despite the best hopes of the Truth-in￾Lending Act, card firms still did not compete on price. They would not for
decades to come. As a simplification and as a symbol, competition held
great power. Consumers and their allies, however, knew markets did not
deliver low rates automatically: they had to fight for them. Across the
decade, they had done so, in state after state. Using the tools of financial
federalism, they had bargained with local bankers to construct card systemsthat were safe, low cost, and—for banks—modestly profitable. Consumers,
however, could not negotiate with out-of-state banks.34
Whether charging high interest rates offered a competitive advantage
was peripheral to the more fundamental issue of whether a Nebraska bank
could charge high rates to Minnesota consumers. When the Supreme Court
agreed to hear Marquette in 1978, it chose to address the challenges mobile
bank cards and credit card infrastructure posed to a federalist financial
regulatory system built on immobile state boundaries. The key legal
question centered on the meaning of the word “located” as written in
Section 85 of the National Bank Act of 1864, which mandated that a
national bank assess interest based on the laws of the state in which it is
“located.” Was, the court contemplated, First of Omaha’s BankAmericard
program “located” in some state, and if so, where was it? When the law was
written, this would have been self-evident: in 1864, a bank had a concrete
location. Bank cards complicated this question. The program could have
been “located” in Minnesota, where a Minnesota citizen used a First Omaha
BankAmericard to purchase goods from a Minnesota merchant, as Judge
Scott’s dissent suggested, and therefore subject to Minnesota’s usury laws.
Initially, several justices shared this interpretation. Arguing that the court
should take the case in May 1978, Justice Blackmun wrote that the Fisher
ruling distorted the National Bank Act’s “original purpose of preventing
discrimination against national banks,” instead making the law “a sword for
discrimination in favor of out-of-state national banks.”35
This sword threatened to carve the very heart out of financial
federalism, negating local control over consumer credit markets inscribed in
the National Banking Acts and maintained under the New Deal regulatory
order. Through the legislative and legal challenges that culminated in
Minnesota’s Bank Credit Card Act, Marquette had reached an
accommodation with its local financial constituents. The bank’s
BankAmericard customers were, through the state’s democratic process,
also its regulators. The case threatened to undermine local political
negotiations by shifting regulatory decisions to places where Minnesota
consumers, bankers, and state officials had no say. “A law enacted by the
Nebraska legislature will determine the interest rates charged to
respondent’s Minnesota customers,” lawyers representing Minnesota’sAFL-CIO argued in a brief to the court. Yet “a consumer interest group in
Minnesota has no voice in the legislatures of other states.” The
ramifications of the court’s decision would not be limited to Nebraska,
Minnesota, and Iowa. If the court found for First of Omaha, the state of
Minnesota argued, it would “permit national banks to roam the country’s
market places free of the regulatory limitations which restrain the local
competition.” The specter of roving financial institutions, and with them the
steady erosion of local rulemaking power through regulatory arbitrage, was
antithetical to a regulatory system that confined banks to their home
states.36
First of Omaha’s attorney, William Morrow, had been sure of his firm’s
legal strategy as it expanded into low-usury states, but for the arguments
before the Supreme Court he brought in a ringer, former U.S. solicitor
general and experienced Supreme Court litigator Robert H. Bork. Bork
stood before the court as a representative of the Law and Economics
movement, and he scoffed at Marquette’s competitive arguments. “This
entire case—this entire attempt to change the structure of the National
Banking System turns out to be a fight over alternative advertising
techniques,” Bork joked. “The Marquette Bank would have done better to
take their case to an advertising agency than to a law firm.” Jokes aside, the
case hinged on the card plan’s location. Here Bork offered a different line of
reasoning than First of Omaha had previously employed. He began with the
bank’s basic premise, that all aspects of the credit transaction, its extension
and repayment, happened by mail in Omaha. The card program was
“located” there. Bork then reversed the language of export and
extraterritoriality mobilized by Minnesota’s courts and Marquette’s
attorneys. “Nebraska is not exporting interest rates,” Bork argued. “It is
more accurate to say that Minnesota is exporting its law to a Nebraska
bank.” By regulating credit prices within its borders, Minnesota pushed its
rules, through card networks, into bank offices in other states. Bork’s oral
argument—which “made” Justice Byron White “a def[inite]”—swayed the
Supreme Court.37
In a unanimous decision, the court chose business over consumer
politics, nationwide markets over local regulatory control. Speaking for the
court, Justice William Brennan offered: “If the location of the bank were todepend on the whereabouts of each credit card transaction, the meaning of
the term ‘located’ would be so stretched as to throw into confusion the
complex system of modern interstate banking.” Yet for Fred and Edna
Fisher, and for many other bank card users, the meaning of a bank’s
location was already confused. While the court fixed the “location” of a
bank at the physical place stipulated by its charter, credit cards and the
interfirm infrastructure that enabled them spread transactions further afield,
erasing boundaries between states. State rules still mattered, just those of
the states where cards were issued. The highest federal court tacitly
sanctioned a geographic divergence. Local relationships—whether between
a bank and its customers or a state and its citizens—might no longer have
any fixed relationship to consumer credit. Nebraska usury laws could
govern Minnesotans.38
Brennan’s ruling was decisive and suggests the question of whether
states like Minnesota or Iowa ever had viable arguments, or was the ten￾year legal and legislative battle to hold out-of-state banks accountable to
local laws just a long, expensive waste of time. First of Omaha had always
made its terms clear to cardholders. The small type explained that lending
took place in Omaha and was subject to Nebraska laws. A Minnesota
consumer, Bork argued, could just as easily travel to Omaha and take out
the same loan. What difference did it make if the consumer engaged in the
transaction through the mail? Yet Minnesota consumers had not traveled to
Nebraska. Nebraska had traveled to them—through unsolicited cards and
mailed solicitations, through agent bank agreements and merchant
contracts, and ultimately through the elaborate financial infrastructure First
of Omaha and Omaha Service established throughout the Midwest. State
efforts to protect consumers stood in the way of the efficient, interstate bank
card markets that made credit so convenient. It was not a foregone
conclusion that the court would choose national convenience over local
democratic control.
Brennan’s ruling was an end, but not the end. Eight months later First of
Omaha and Marquette were back in court. This time, First of Omaha had
sued Marquette, arguing that by lobbying for Minnesota’s Bank Credit Card
Act and then suing to enforce it, Marquette had intended to prevent price
competition in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. First of Omahafurther argued that Marquette’s actions constituted malicious prosecution,
abuse of legal process, and that they violated First of Omaha’s rights of
equal protection provided by the Fourteenth Amendment and secured
through the Civil Rights Act of 1871. First of Omaha was piling it on and
sending a message: the state usury regimes negotiated by consumer and
labor groups, local financial elites, and state policymakers under—in short,
the place-based social contract—would not stand in the way of bank card
growth. First of Omaha lost the case—a federal district court determined
that “a bank’s ability to charge a certain rate of interest . . . is not in the
nature of the rights protected by the Civil Rights Act [of 1871]”—but it had
already won the war.
39
In 1978, Marquette’s full consequences were not yet evident. Indeed,
the case received little attention, which puzzled Justice Lewis Powell Jr.
“Why has the banking industry taken so little interest in this case?” he
asked Bork during oral arguments. Perhaps a dispute between midwestern
banks was beneath the industry’s notice. More likely, most card-issuing
banks still focused on their local markets. Banks remained confined within
states. Bankers imagined their consumer markets as local, tied to their
branch networks. The most ambitious envisioned regional card markets.
Card networks remained a collective enterprise—a cooperative venture
linking local card plans. Few bankers recognized that consumer attention
was shifting, from the bank to the network. BankAmericard (soon Visa) and
Master Charge were transforming, as LeGrand surmised, into vectors of
commodity credit. It would take an aggressive bank, with a national vision,
to use Marquette to its full potential—not just to move regulation across
state borders, but to move the card-issuing bank into a state that would not
regulate rates at all. The prospect of national banks roaming the country’s
market places would soon become reality.
40
In August 1977, legislators in Missouri were engaged in the time-honored
tradition of tweaking their state’s consumer credit laws. The state’s small
loan law permitted a 26.62 annual rate on loans of up to $500 and 10
percent on remaining amounts. The problem was a clause that prohibited
lenders from circumventing the law by making multiple small loans under
$500 rather than consolidating these into a larger loan at a lower rate. Banks
operating credit card plans found that the law interfered with their ability tooffer cash advances to cardholders with existing credit balances. Each cash
advance looked like an additional small loan. As with similar state-level
legislation, the governor had a file full of reasoned letters from local
bankers urging the technical change. “The [Banking] Commissioner can’t
effectively enforce the law and lenders can’t comply with it, because neither
can determine whether a given rate is legal,” one correspondent wrote.41
One letter, though, imparted new urgency. “I have been informed that
First National City Bank of New York is in the process of putting together a
massive nationwide solicitation of cardholders for the Visa Credit Card,” St.
Louis attorney Hugh McPheeters wrote. “I understand . . . that Citibank will
use the same rate and fee structure it charges to its New York customers, as
it is authorized to do by recent case law.” The case McPheeters cited was
Fisher’s against the First National Bank of Omaha. “It is ironic that this
business can be solicited by banks in other states which are not even bound
by our rate limitations, while our law makes it illegal for Missouri banks to
do so if they already have a . . . relationship with the same customer.”42
McPheeters was well-informed. And right to be worried.9Profits AnywhereDispatches
The end of financial federalism began in August 1977. The first
dispatches came from Idaho. Bankers and state officials there were
surprised that New York’s Citibank had invited Idaho consumers to obtain a
Visa card from the far-off New York bank. The next day, newspapers
reported similar offers in Illinois, then Michigan. Georgia, California, and
Missouri soon followed. When reporters pressed for details, Citi’s
spokespeople declined to elaborate on the bank’s plans. With little concrete
information, rival bankers and breathless financial journalists estimated that
Citi had sent eight, twenty, even forty million card offers to consumers in at
least twenty-five states, breaking with the geographically restrained
marketing practices proscribed by the nation’s state-based banking system.
Some bankers brushed off the new, nationwide competition. A Long Beach,
California, banker expressed confidence in his firm’s “strong customer
loyalty.” Bankers in Idaho noted that out-of-state customers, having few ties
to the card-issuing bank, were often delinquent and unprofitable. But most
bankers who commented on Citi’s marketing blitz recognized a
fundamental change. “Citibank,” a Chicago banker predicted, “is trying to
establish a retail system on a nationwide basis.” They saw the same future
Citibank did, a technology-driven marketplace where the bank card, not the
physical bank, was the locus of consumer financial services. Many saw
their graves.1
Citibank’s secretive campaign bypassed the geographic boundaries that
structured American banking and the physical bank offices on which these
restrictions relied. When bankers first rushed into the card market in the
late-1960s, they invested cards with a vision of the industry’s future with
the physical bank at its center. Cards, they thought, would generate profits
from unregulated revolving credit while forging new, profitable
relationships with consumers and merchants inside the bank. By the early
1970s, this hopeful vision had fallen to hard reality. With the rush of
competition, few banks gained the first-mover advantages they anticipated.
High fraud and charge-offs dashed hopes for ready profits. New federal and
state regulations forced bankers to charge fixed credit prices, even as risingmarket interest rates drove up their cost of funds. Consumers used cards for
convenience, paying their balances every month without incurring interest.
Credit cards became a uniform, low-margin product, identified more with
the national network than with the local bank. Most bankers narrowed their
aspirations for card technology. They scratched out profitability in
competitive local markets. As industry optimism stalled, some financial
executives, among them Citibank’s Walter B. Wriston and BankAmericard’s
Dee W. Hock, imagined new futures for card technology, not as
undifferentiated revolving credit but as a hub for the full suite of consumer
financial services. Cards would not bring customers into the bank; instead,
cards would be the bank, and with them would come a means of upending
the New Deal regulatory order’s fixed geographic markets.2
Citibank—the First National City Bank of New York before 1976—was
materially and ideologically positioned to disrupt the card industry and the
wider financial regulatory system. Led by Wriston, a fervent advocate of
unbridled markets, the bank pressed hard at the edges of the regulatory
structure, seeking and prizing any profitable gaps. Wriston and Citibank
initially gratified their ambitions abroad, where the bank operated in less
and differently regulated markets and where Citi bankers became adept at
exploiting regulatory and tax differences across borders. Citi also led its
American peers in developing new sources of lendable funds, through
eurodollar markets and certificates of deposit, which the bank gathered and
channeled toward consumer lending in the United States and sovereign and
corporate lending around the world. In the mid-1970s, when Citibank was
earning more than 70 percent of its profits abroad, robust competition from
ascendant foreign banks ended easy revenues in international markets. The
time was ripe for Citi, largely confined to New York City by federal and
state regulation, to turn its attention, unregulated capital, and border￾crossing experience back to the United States. Building on the certainty
offered by the Fisher decisions, Citibank embarked on an ambitious,
nationwide consumer banking plan, redefining the scope of the card
networks and sparking renewed competition—and regulatory attention—in
the process.3
Citibank moved aggressively as the United States’ financial regulatory
system continued to list between the New Deal’s rigid financial structureand the new flexibility bankers were constructing alongside it. Prompted by
the credit crunches of the late 1960s, the Nixon administration initiated yet
another searching examination of the nation’s financial system, yet again
premised on injecting competition into financial markets, and yet again
concluding without significant reform. Mired in postwar credit politics,
Congress remained incapable of reinforcing the old system or bringing a
new one into being. Mired in the Watergate scandal, Nixon had no political
capital to spend. While debates stalled, bankers moved. They used credit
cards and related technologies, like point-of-sale (POS) terminals and
automatic teller machines (ATMs), to chip away at financial federalism’s
geographic restrictions. In doing so, bankers opened vexing regulatory
questions: What was a bank branch? Where did consumer transactions
occur? Which government unit would ultimately decide? Congress
considered these questions but did not act. Federal agencies, state
governments, and courts at both levels made their own ways as best they
could, ultimately—and inadvertently—nudging banks toward cards as the
most promising path toward geographic expansion. Citi pushed the
boundaries furthest of all. The bank risked everything to bestride the
national consumer market. It proved a daring and dangerous bet.Anywhere at a Profit
Founded as a small merchant bank in 1812, the City Bank of New York
—as Citibank was then called—was not predestined for financial glory.
During the Panic of 1837, it very nearly failed. At its nadir, merchant and
industrialist Moses Taylor took control. Taylor used City Bank as a treasury
for his expanding commercial empire, making the bank a safe, liquid
repository for business deposits. Taylor bolstered this reputation by securing
a national charter in 1865. By 1891, when control passed to financier James
Stillman, the National City Bank was prominent, if not predominant. Like
Taylor, Stillman managed the bank in support of his wider business
interests. Closely tied to powerful industrialists, most importantly the
Rockefeller family, Stillman molded National City into a leading
investment and overseas bank. In the 1910s, Stillman transformed National
City from a specialized firm serving corporate clients to a comprehensive
bank offering diversified financial services. Charles “Sunshine Charlie”
Mitchell went further, expanding National City’s branch network
throughout New York City, offering prosperous consumers savings deposits
and small personal loans. In the roaring 1920s, the firm spread brokerage
offices, under the National City Company, across the country to sell stocks
and bonds. Before “financial supermarkets” there were “financial
department stores.” National City was the prototype. By June 1929,
National City controlled over $2 billion in aggregate resources and was
“without question the world’s leading financial intermediary.”4
The Great Depression brought National City’s diversified financial
empire crashing to the ground. Sunshine Charlie, the embodied spirit of
unbridled financial optimism, became one of the crash’s prime scapegoats.
He resigned to protect what little reputation National City had left. Through
the Depression, the bank shored up its corporate-international-consumer
strategy, even as the New Deal financial reforms stripped away its
investment banking business. During World War II, National City
executives restored the bank’s reputation by funding the war effort. When
Wriston joined the bank in 1946, National City had invested almost half its
assets in government securities. It “was less a bank than a bond portfolio,”Wriston’s biographer wrote. Citi had been chastened, but it was also ready
to rebuild.5
Tall, lanky, hawk-faced, and sharp, Wriston came to National City by
way of an elite upbringing and wartime stints at the State Department and
Army Signal Corps. Wriston’s father, Brown University president and
prominent New Deal critic Henry Wriston, instilled an unwavering belief in
rugged individualism and an unwavering antagonism toward federal
regulatory authority. The younger Wriston started at National City as a
branch auditor but by the late 1940s was arranging complex oil tanker
financing for Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis. Combining
government subsidies, shell corporations, and international flags of
convenience, Wriston’s dealings with Onassis provided early lessons in the
ways an astute banker could profitably evade and manipulate the financial
regulatory structure. Wriston soon headed the bank’s Transportation
Department, before being tapped to revive Citi’s flagging Overseas
Division under future president (1959–67) and chairman (1967–70) George
S. Moore. International banking was the ideal place for Wriston. Although
the federal government discouraged geographic expansion within the
United States, policymakers encouraged banks to grow abroad. Under the
Bretton Woods Agreement, which made the dollar the center of the global
currency system, American banks projected U.S. political and economic
power. Citibank adjusted slowly to this new reality. When Wriston arrived
in the Overseas Division in the mid-1950s, “the London branch,” he
recalled, “was losing money,” and “the Paris branch . . . was losing money,
but elegantly.” Spurred by government favor and anticipating the revival of
global trade, Moore and Wriston reorganized and expanded the bank’s
international operations. The Overseas Division would provide Citi with a
steady infusion of funds, profits, and ideas as the bank continued to press
against the regulatory order within the United States.6
Citi executives focused on international operations in the 1950s
because, in common with peers like David Rockefeller’s Chase Manhattan,
Citibank struggled to raise funds and increase profits domestically. Seeking
higher returns, Citibank’s corporate clients shifted their idle cash out of the
bank’s interest-free demand deposits into treasury bills and other short-term
investments. As the bank’s senior management reported to shareholders in1959, “our principal problem . . . has been to meet greater loan demand in a
period when our deposits have shown little gain.” Wriston led Citi’s efforts
to generate more lendable funds. First, the Overseas Division began
collecting dollar deposits through Citi’s London branch in 1959. These
offshore dollars (eurodollars) provided an unregulated pool of money that
Citi lent abroad and channeled back into its domestic loan portfolio.
Second, with Wriston’s backing the bank developed the negotiable
certificate of deposit (CD), a high-denomination, high-interest security that
U.S. investors could buy and sell. With eurodollars and the CD, Citibank’s
deposit base no longer constrained its lending capacity. It could raise funds
at will. Unlike regulated demand deposits, however, these new funds were
expensive and variable. Their prices rose and fell with market interest rates,
solving the funding problem while compounding the squeeze on profits and
introducing new interest rate risk. The more Citi relied on high-cost
liabilities, the narrower the spread between its borrowing and lending rates
became. Citi, like its rivals, met the profit squeeze by aggressively
expanding its balance sheet, pursuing additional deposit-and-loan business
to compensate for the declining profitability of that business.7
By the 1960s, Wriston and a like-minded cohort of Citi executives,
including Moore and protégé John Reed (CEO, 1984–2000), sought to do
more than maximize the bank’s net interest income. Building on a report
produced by the consulting firm TEMPO, Citi executives revisited the
diversification strategies pursued by Stillman and Mitchell in the 1920s.
Wriston and his colleagues imagined Citi as more than a bank; they were
fashioning it into a global financial services company. TEMPO’s core
recommendation, Moore recalled, was “to perform every financial service
anywhere in the world [that] you can do at a profit, and that you can do
legally.” Moore and Wriston made the phrase Citibank’s unofficial moto.8
At Citibank, the transformation into a global financial services company
entailed three overlapping priorities: international diversification,
information technology, and consumer markets. Moore, Wriston, and Reed
had all spent formative time in the Overseas Division. They knew the
bank’s international operations enabled experimentation. During the 1950s,
Citi expanded its global branch network to serve the bank’s multinational
corporate clients. It eventually boasted more than two hundred internationalbranches, far more than its U.S. competitors. Under Wriston’s leadership,
the Overseas Division began offering financial services tailored to local
markets free of Citibank’s domestic restrictions. In Australia, for example,
Citi acquired a specialist consumer finance firm in the late 1960s and
transformed it into a nationwide consumer financial services business.
Likewise, in the early 1970s, Citi built on experience making large,
syndicated eurodollar loans to expand into investment banking through
London and Tokyo subsidiaries. Using branches in the Channel Islands,
Nassau, and Singapore, meanwhile, Citi executives became adept at
arbitraging regulatory and tax differences across borders, finding ways to
lend in one market while booking transactions in less regulated or less taxed
countries. Unhindered by the New Deal regulatory order, the Overseas
Division became Citi’s main profit center.
9
At home and abroad, Citi bankers viewed the bank’s future through the
lens of information technology. Computers, executives believed, would
streamline costs, enable new accounting and risk management systems, and
eliminate the reams of paperwork that clogged the bank’s back offices.
Most bankers shared these views. The TEMPO study encouraged Citi
executives to go a step further: to use technology to make an end run
around the New Deal regulatory order. The bank, the study’s authors
argued, should “use technology” to “do something that by the time the
regulators wake up to the fact, it’s too late.” This aggressive advice aligned
with Wriston’s own predilections. “Wriston,” his biographer Phillip Zweig
wrote, “never did anything by hand that could be done by machine.” Case
in point: A friend remembered giving Wriston and his wife potted flowers
for their anniversary, which Wriston proceeded to plant with a backhoe.
John Reed joined Wriston in this enthusiasm, if not the overzealous use of
construction equipment. Reed modernized the bank’s global back-office
systems before being elevated to head its domestic consumer business.10
Reed’s appointment signaled Citibank’s renewed emphasis on the U.S.
consumer market. Although Citibank had a legacy of consumer banking,
geographic restrictions confined the bank to New York City as affluent
consumers spread to the suburbs. New York State’s branching laws
prevented Citibank from expanding outside New York’s five boroughs
before 1960, and then only in neighboring Nassau and WestchesterCounties. New Jersey remained off limits, and so did Connecticut, where
Wriston lived. Still, Citibank expanded its branch network considerably.
Between 1960 and 1966, the bank added 43 branches within city limits and
an additional 36 branches in the suburbs, primarily to generate low-cost
consumer deposits to fund corporate lending. The bank also expanded its
consumer lending portfolio, adding home mortgages, check credit, and
eventually credit cards. Through the 1970s, however, the consumer strategy
disappointed the bank’s ambitions. Brick-and-mortar growth was slow and
geographically confined, branches were expensive to operate, and
competition in New York was fierce.11
Citi’s early forays into the card market aligned with its growth priorities
and underlined its persistent regulatory difficulties. In 1965, Citibank
announced plans to acquire Hilton’s Carte Blanche travel card program,
which would enable Citi to manage a global card plan and build
relationships with the business elites who used these cards. The Justice
Department blocked the merger on antitrust grounds and also prevented
Chase from acquiring Diners Club. The Antitrust Division argued that if
New York’s two largest banks purchased ongoing card plans, they would
attain unassailable positions in the credit card market. It would be better, the
Justice Department’s attorneys reasoned, if Citi and Chase started from
scratch, noting that Citibank “is especially qualified to enter the credit card
business on a national and international scale on its own,” adding, “such
entry is likely if the proposed merger is enjoined.” Chase had tried to enter
the card business de novo in the late 1950s. Its executives were not eager to
try again. Citibank, on the contrary, accepted the Justice Department’s
invitation.12
After the Justice Department decision, Citi executives turned to
consumer credit, launching “the Everything Card” in August 1967. The
Everything Card embodied 1960s card mania. To build transaction volume,
Citi mailed more than one million cards to consumers gleaned from the
bank’s lending rolls. Wriston, Citibank president from 1967, imagined the
Everything Card as an alternative to the BankAmericard and the basis for a
rival network. Other bankers weren’t interested. Hemmed in, the Everything
Card gained little traction outside New York. Localism, Wriston believed,
was not a viable strategy. “All of these cards are going to be taken at thepoint of sale by people who are not Rhodes scholars,” Wriston vented. In
other words, clerks could only keep tabs on a few card brands—they would
not recognize the Everything Card in Florida or California. Citi needed to
join a national system. In 1968, the bank dropped Everything and joined
Interbank, adopting the Master Charge brand then used by several
California banks. The move convinced other Interbank members, among
them Marine Midland in upstate New York, to unite nationally under Master
Charge. Citi then built out its local network, using agent banks to recruit
merchants and cardholders in New Jersey and Connecticut. When Congress
banned unsolicited card mailing in 1970, Citibank was one of sixty New
York banks competing in the local card market, though Citi was also the
nation’s leading Master Charge issuer.
13
Growth and restraint—the cycles that shaped Citi’s card business—also
channeled Wriston’s bolder efforts to transform Citibank into a full-service
financial conglomerate. In 1968, as it transitioned from Everything to
Master Charge, Citi created the First National City Corporation (Citicorp), a
new holding company parent for the global bank. The regulatory system’s
industry silos sharply limited the lines of business Citi, as a commercial
bank, could pursue. A holding company, however, could own a commercial
bank along with a variety of non-bank businesses. Congress had tried to bar
this door before. The Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 prohibited
holding companies that owned two or more banks from owning non￾banking businesses. The act’s framers, however, had excluded one-bank
holding companies. Congress’s target had been A. P. Giannini’s giant
conglomerate, Transamerica. The law left smaller holding companies intact
and created a slim legal gap. Wriston plunged Citibank into this loophole,
creating a corporate parent for the bank and with it gaining colossal new
financial powers. Wriston, seeking to minimize regulatory scrutiny,
downplayed the transformation. “Our goal,” Wriston explained to
shareholders, “is to preserve and strengthen our competitive position in the
financial services business, which we are convinced can best be achieved
by becoming a congeneric corporation, that is, a corporation which brings
together allied activities which had a common relationship.” What could be
less threatening than a “congeneric corporation?”14Behind its opaque language, Citi torched the regulatory system’s
industry silos. On Inauguration Day 1969, it announced plans to purchase
the Chubb Corporation, a major property and casualty insurer. The
regulatory machinery sprang into action. Both Wright Patman and the
newly minted Nixon administration introduced one-bank holding company
legislation to close the loophole. The bills initially hinted that existing
subsidiaries would be grandfathered in. Citi moved faster, buying or
chartering a flurry of diverse businesses as legislation coalesced. Wriston
targeted firms— mortgage companies, tax preparation services, computer
leasing firms, and the like—based far from New York. He planned to
enlarge the bank’s footprint and use congeneric subsidiaries to cross-sell
other Citicorp services. The Justice Department remained an aggressive
watchdog, blocking the Chubb acquisition. The 1970 Bank Holding
Company Act, in turn, required holding companies to divest all non￾banking businesses acquired since June 30, 1968. In Citibank’s case, that
meant all of them. In the future, the Federal Reserve would rule on
Citicorp’s acquisitions. Still, the straightjacketing of Citicorp was a
temporary setback. Since the 1970 Bank Holding Company Act obliterated
the distinction between holding companies that owned one bank and those
that owned many, Citicorp started buying banks.15
Wriston’s singular focus on profits anywhere placed him in a vanguard
of U.S. executives who sought to recast the corporation from an institution
responsible to diverse stakeholders, to a vehicle aimed unerringly at
returning value to shareholders. Wriston startled the banking and
investment community in October 1971 when he announced that Citi would
grow earnings by an aggressive 15 percent a year (it had averaged 7 percent
over the previous decade). Observers had expected Wriston to emphasize
the bank’s social and societal commitments, but he had other plans. Echoing
University of Chicago economist Milton Friedman’s recently articulated
doctrine “the social responsibility of business is to increase its profits,”
Wriston told investors, “We see no contradiction between our commitment
to increasing earnings-per-share growth and our responsibility to make a
constructive contribution to society.” Pitching an upward evaluation of
Citi’s stock price, Wriston explained the bank’s strategy of embracing
technology and pursuing new markets “as rapidly as possible.” Behind thescenes, Citi’s federal supervisors grew nervous that reckless earnings
growth might endanger the bank. “Mr. Wriston is thought of as one person
who ‘breaks the mold,’” a Fed analyst wrote to Fed chairman Arthur Burns
a year after Wriston’s announcement. Citi’s growth, as near as Fed staff
could tell, was driven by leverage, exacerbated by the bank’s habit of
funneling profits to the holding company instead of retaining them as
capital. “Without attempting to pass any refined judgment on the question
of what is ‘adequate’ equity capital,” the Fed analysts concluded, “we
believe that the highly-leveraged position of FNCB [the bank] and FNCC
[the holding company] raise important policy questions that will be difficult
to solve.” Wriston would not wait for the solution.16
Even as Wriston sought to convert his bold earnings target into tangible
profits, geographic and regulatory barriers limited the headway Citi could
make in the United States, and in the early 1970s the bank continued to
grow abroad. When Wriston announced his growth target in 1971, the bank
generated 42 percent of its earnings abroad. By 1976, that figure had
reached 72 percent. But Citi’s success brought new competition from
foreign banks, both in eurodollar markets and for Citi’s corporate customers
in the United States. Citi’s unimpeded international expansion was over.
With international markets increasingly competitive and corporate business
declining, Citibank renewed its attention on consumers and technology in
the mid-1970s. Wriston would later explain this strategy quoting the famous
bank robber Willie Sutton: Citibank turned to the consumer market because
“that’s where the money is.”17
Networks over Banks
To access consumers, Citi executives turned to the card market, which
remained unsettled after nearly a decade of rapid change. In the 1960s,
bankers had imagined cards as distinct, locally branded products, that
would forge relationships with merchants and consumers, drawing them
into the banks. Revolving credit was a small part of the hoped-for card
revolution. Yet politics intervened. Consumer and labor groups objected to
aggressive card marketing and high credit prices. With Congress’s 1970
unsolicited mailing ban and state-level interest rate ceilings, these groupsstructured the card market to provide safe and low-cost credit. The
unsolicited mailing ban proved a boon to bankers. It curbed banks’
breakneck competition. It also allowed bankers and card network builders
to refine their technological systems and business practices—to focus on
network management and maintenance, not just manic growth. All sought
to make cards profitable, but they faced a difficult road. In most states, new
usury laws fixed the prices bankers could charge. Since they could not
adjust credit rates, bankers worked to reduce operating costs and increase
transaction volume. Meanwhile, the bank card networks improved
transaction procedures and promoted the national card brands,
BankAmericard and Master Charge. Over time, consumer and operational
pressure narrowed the scope of cards, from locally distinct, bank-specific
products toward uniform, undifferentiated vehicles of commodified
revolving credit—from plastic capitalism to a plastic cage.18
Refining credit card interchange posed the most pressing challenge:
from the very beginning, operating national credit systems through
geographically fragmented markets failed catastrophically. In theory,
interchange was a straightforward process. When a consumer used a
BankAmericard issued by the National Bank of Commerce in Seattle to
purchase goods from a merchant enrolled by the First National Bank of
Omaha, she initiated a series of transactions. The merchant deposited the
charge slip with the Omaha bank. The Omaha bank credited the merchant’s
account, less the discount, and then forwarded the charge slip to Seattle.
The Seattle bank reimbursed the Omaha bank and added the charge to its
customer’s bill. Presto! This was the theory anyway. In practice, the Omaha
bank sorted and tallied its daily charge slips and immediately pulled funds
from the Seattle bank through the Federal Reserve System. Before it could
bill its cardholder, the Seattle bank had to wait for First of Omaha to sort
the relevant charge slips and physically mail them to Seattle. The Omaha
bank, though, had already been paid; it had little incentive to prioritize the
Seattle bank’s charge slips over its own local transactions. Lack of
processing capacity compounded the problem. As BankAmericard licensees
rushed to build transaction volume, a sea of paper inundated their
rudimentary systems. Merchant banks routinely processed charge slips
destined for interchange last, tying up the consumer bank’s funds.Merchants were paid but cardholders could not be billed. The waylaid
funds, which bankers called “the float,” existed physically in cigar boxes,
and then in warehouses, full of unprocessed charge slips. All that stalled-out
paper represented tens of millions of dollars in float drifting between banks,
idle money that cost money.
19
As early as 1968, BankAmericard licensees recognized that the
architects of their network had failed to develop a functional system of rules
and incentives. The float was just the beginning. Vexing questions emerged
as consumers, merchants, and bank employees operated and experimented
with national card infrastructure. What happened when the Seattle bank’s
customer wanted to return items she purchased in Omaha? Which bank was
responsible for absorbing fraud losses? What interest rate applied on out-of￾state transactions? Simple questions created administrative nightmare. Bank
of America had signed individual agreements with each participant bank; to
change network procedures, Bank of America had to renegotiate hundreds
of contracts. Worse, member bankers did not believe Bank of America
executives were committed to addressing their concerns. Bank of America
and the licensee banks had a shared interest as network participants in
extending the network. Yet Bank of America, as the network owner, also
collected a half percent toll on every system transaction, eating into
participant bank profits (or contributing further to their losses). Licensee
bankers knew as well that Bank of America would pursue nationwide
expansion at the first opportunity. “We all knew,” banker Dee Hock
recalled, “that BofA would swallow our banks like a snake swallows a
mouse if branch banking law didn’t prevent it.” Participant banks worried
that Bank of America would use the network they helped build to bring
competition to their local markets.20
Member banks rebelled, staging a palace coup led by Hock, who was
head of card operations at the National Bank of Commerce in Seattle.
Before joining the Bank of Commerce, Hock had been an itinerant credit
executive, largely self-educated and contemptuous of the hierarchal
structures—managerial, governmental, social—typical of mid-century
American life. At a meeting of licensee banks in 1968, Hock agreed to lead
the reorganization of the Bank-Americard network. He devised a system of
decentralized, regional committees to identify problems in operations,fraud, credit granting, and technology. Under Hock’s leadership—and
largely against Bank of America’s wishes—BankAmericard transitioned
from a network owned and controlled by Bank of America to a not-for￾profit cooperative owned collectively by the participating banks. The new
organization, National BankAmericard, Inc. (NBI), resembled Interbank’s
(Master Charge) decentralized, cooperative-competitive structure. Hock
never acknowledged this similarity; he preferred to view NBI as the sui
generis embodiment of his anti-hierarchical management philosophy. More
important, Hock’s organization of NBI ensured that both bank card
networks existed as distinct institutions, owned and controlled by their
member banks but with interests and identities distinct from the banks.21
Hock recognized that he had split the atom of network ownership and
network control, that under his leadership NBI would take on an
institutional life of its own. Hock made NBI a vehicle for his techno-futurist
enthusiasm: He, like Wriston, believed information technology would
massively disrupt existing financial and regulatory structures. Unlike
Wriston, Hock’s unit of analysis was the network, not the bank. Electronic
data, Hock imagined, was the future of personal finance. By moving data
among individuals and institutions, networks like NBI would facilitate the
“exchange of value,” not just the extension of credit. Even paired down to
the possibilities achievable with early 1970s technology, Hock’s vision
entailed radical, fundamental change. There was no reason that value qua
data should be held in banks. Organizing and expanding NBI, Hock worked
to make the network paramount. Though he had the good sense to keep his
most radical ideas mostly to himself.22
Through the early 1970s, both the networks and the banks focused their
managerial energy on overcoming the operations problems that plagued
card plans. Both NBI and Interbank constructed massive technical systems
to speed card authorization (making cards more convenient for consumers
and less susceptible to fraud) and interbank processing (diminishing the
float, managing abnormal transactions, and allocating fraud costs). The
American Bankers Association, through its Bank Card Standardization Task
Force, crafted uniform procedures for banks and networks and a uniform
experience for consumers and merchants. As the networks focused on
operations, so did individual banks. Once Congress’s unsolicited mailingban halted the industry’s madcap competition, many bankers turned inward,
focusing on mundane but critical activities such as analyzing personnel and
work-flow procedures, developing in-house data processing, and whittling
their cardholder lists. Bankers cultivated portfolios of active card users who
paid their bills and did not commit fraud. They pruned the rest. Total cards
outstanding declined from 1970 to 1972.23
As the industry caught its breath, bankers’ collective ambitions—their
vision of cards as a “road to the future” in David Kennedy’s words—
narrowed, squeezed by regulations that promoted uniformity, stifled
revenues, and increased costs. The Truth-in-Lending Act loomed over the
industry. Paul Douglas and other advocates believed that product
differentiation in consumer credit markets often sowed confusion and
harmed consumers. Uniform price disclosure, by contrast, enforced
uniformity. State usury laws that grew out of Truth-in-Lending likewise
imposed uniform credit prices. At the same time, new federal laws, enacted
in response to the unsolicited mailing boom, added costs. The Fair Credit
Reporting Act (1970), which William Proxmire yoked to the unsolicited
mailing ban, required creditors to explain to consumers why they were
denied credit. Consumers’ complaints about card billing errors yielded the
Fair Credit Billing Act (1974), which required card issuers to investigate
and report on billing complaints. By 1976, Fed analysts explained to
Chairman Burns that “credit cards have been the principal subject of by far
the majority of the consumer credit legislation proposed and/or enacted
since 1970.” Credit cards continued to animate consumer politics more than
any other financial issue.24
Consumer regulations also created a legal infrastructure that further
drove cards toward uniformity. The Truth-in-Lending Act authorized
plaintiffs to seek twice the finance charge if a creditor violated the law. In
the early 1970s, plaintiffs’ attorneys and consumer groups lined up to file
class action complaints, seeking millions of dollars in damages. The
Fishers’ attorney, Everett Meeker, joined the queue. Threats of legal action
stymied innovation. Nervous bankers reconsidered offering new services
through cards. Even if regulators approved their disclosure procedures,
bankers feared, they might not satisfy a consumer-friendly court. Plaintiffs
also brought antitrust suits, claiming that card networks were elaborateschemes to fix the price of credit. Banks all tended to charge the same rates
—the maximum rates allowed under state law (they would have charged
more if they could have). Damage requests grew with each successive case.
Hundreds of millions soon became billions. Bankers believed they would
prevail, and they most often did. But the avalanche of consumer lawsuits
chilled experimentation. “I don’t think about fraud any less than I used to,”
one Pittsburgh banker observed in 1971, “but I think about class actions just
as much.”25
Regulation and pressure for operational efficiency narrowed bank cards
down to uniform, undifferentiated vehicles for commodified revolving
credit, trends compounded by card networks’ national branding. Although
bankers had imagined cards as a lure to draw consumers into their banks,
the networks eroded banks’ local identity and the links between the card
plan and the physical bank. Bankers participated in this process. To achieve
national and global acceptance, cards needed a trusted, recognizable brand.
Local trademarks did not travel. Following Citibank’s lead, Interbank
members, which had operated local brands like Marine Midland’s Midland
Charge Plan and Continental’s Town & Country Charge, gradually united
under Master Charge. The networks soon launched competing national
marketing campaigns touting the benefits of Master Charge or
BankAmericard, while individual banks scaled down local advertising.
Bankers still linked their bank to the network, promoting, for instance,
“Continental Master Charge.” Such distinctions were lost on most
consumers. National branding focused consumer attention on the network
instead of the card-issuing bank.26
Indeed, consumers increasingly saw only the network. They carried a
Master Charge, not a Marine Midland Master Charge; they used a Bank￾Americard, not a First of Omaha BankAmericard. Although banks recruited
merchants and consumers, processed transactions, and extended credit
locally, the shift in emphasis from the bank to the network obscured these
ties between the network and the community bank. When bank card
managers looked at their cardholder lists, they saw this vividly. First of
Omaha carefully built a customer base in Nebraska and in neighboring
states though agent banks. By February 1973, a bank employee testified,
First of Omaha had “credit cards in the hands of residents of all states in theUnited States except Alaska and Hawaii.” When consumers moved, their
bank cards still worked. Their bills still came. Some consumers valued
having a card from a local bank. It could speed authorization at the
checkout counter, sparing the clerk the trouble of calling long distance.
Aside from this small convenience, balanced for many consumers against
the trouble of reapplying for credit, there was little obvious advantage in
maintaining local ties.27
The shift from distinct local plans into commodified revolving credit is
mostly visible in retrospect. In the early 1970s, bankers remained cautiously
optimistic. Following a short recession in 1970, the card market began to
grow again. As bankers trimmed their cardholder lists and focused on
operations, cardholders used their cards more often. Master Charge and
Bank-Americard systems generated $13.8 billion in purchases and cash
advances in 1973, up from $10.5 billion the previous year. They also
combined for nearly 60 million cardholders and more than a million
participating merchants. According to the comptroller of the currency, card
debt held by national banks had increased an average of 22 percent a year
from 1970 to 1973, reaching almost $500 million. Bank cards were firmly
entrenched as an important component of aggregate American purchasing
power. Credit card debt, likewise, was rapidly becoming an area of
significant policy concern.28
Market Structure in the 1970s
As the bank card industry developed, the ongoing problems of inflation
and financial instability compelled the Nixon administration, the
congressional Banking Committees, and the bank regulatory agencies to
carry on with their seemingly irresolvable financial reform debates. In the
late 1960s, prices were rising more than 5 percent a year. In response, the
Federal Reserve raised its discount rate in December 1968 and again in
April 1969, to a post–World War II high of 6 percent. It sought, in the
words of Fed chairman William McChensey Martin, to “disinflate without
deflating.” The Fed’s high rates encouraged savers to pull money from low￾yielding bank accounts and seek higher returns wherever they could.
Flexibility and inflexibility could not peacefully coexist. Disintermediation,and with it a renewed credit crunch, again threatened the financial system.
Congress’s paint-and-plaster expansion of Regulation Q ceilings to a wider
range of deposit rates failed to keep capital flowing in its proper channels.
Tight money disrupted flows of credit to social priorities like housing, small
business, and local government. Congressional liberals enacted the Credit
Control Act in December 1969 and urged Nixon to restrain inflationary
borrowing, especially by large corporations. Similar calls reverberated in
the press. Nixon recognized the economic-cum-political consequences of
clogged credit, but he and his economic staff resisted financial controls.
Market competition, they determined, would succeed where regulated
competition was clearly failing.29
To develop his administration’s pro-competitive financial agenda, Nixon
followed his former boss, Dwight D. Eisenhower, and called for a major
study of the financial system in 1970. Like Eisenhower’s Commission on
Money and Credit (CMC), Nixon’s Commission on Financial Structure and
Regulation (chaired by industrialist Reed O. Hunt and known as the Hunt
Commission) sought to inject competition into the financial system by
peeling back layers of industry silos, price controls, and geographic
restrictions. Nixon’s advisers wanted the commission to focus first on the
thrift industry, to “get savings flowing into mortgages and housing” and
into the suburbs, where Nixon enjoyed political support. David Kennedy,
formerly of Continental Illinois and now Treasury secretary, also lobbied
for a close examination of the commercial banking industry. More banks
were adopting the holding company structure to expand into new financial
fields. Some regulation of commercial banks was necessary, Kennedy
acknowledged in a January 1970 memo to Nixon, “yet excessively narrow
boundary lines kill innovation.” Kennedy sought to stop Congress from
drawing new boundaries and to push back old ones where he could.30
Whereas Eisenhower’s CMC had advanced an ambitious, idealistic
agenda and subsequently gathered dust, the Hunt Commission crafted what
members hoped were viable legislative proposals. Reflecting a growing
academic and elite consensus that associated New Deal regulation with
regulatory capture, the commission sought “to move as far as possible
toward freedom of financial markets and equip all institutions with powers
necessary to compete in such markets.” Instead of industry silos, thecommission proposed “specialization by choice, not by statute.”
Administration personnel were enthusiastic when the initial report was
released in December 1971, but they recognized that the political climate
was not yet suitable for reform. Small bankers and their influential trade
associations blocked the way. Small bankers remained committed to a
theory of competition that would preserve and protect numerous
competitors from the market power of large firms. “The idea of competition
in the report is used in its purest sense,” policy adviser Richard Erb
explained, devoid of considerations about market power. “As read by the
small town banker, competition turns out to be the big city bank
encroaching on his territory.” Lacking the political capital to move the
program forward, the administration waited. Following Nixon’s sweeping
victory in the 1972 election, it moved, introducing a legislative package
focused on broadening the powers of financial institutions and eliminating
the price controls on deposit interest rates.31
When the package arrived before a skeptical Congress in February
1973, members learned that the hypothetical “big city bank” was already
using cards and related technologies to encroach on the small bankers’
territory. Proxmire’s Senate Banking Committee pivoted from considering
cards as a consumer protection problem to examining how card technology
was reshaping the financial regulatory structure. Or obliterating it. Bankers,
the Hunt Commission’s members recognized, were using cards to rub out
the lines of financial federalism. “The issuance of bank credit cards has
allowed commercial banks to extend consumer credit into areas not
serviced by their branches,” the commission observed in its 1971 report.
Sharing his personal views before Proxmire’s committee, Hunt went further.
“What is your view about branching across state lines?” Proxmire asked. “I
think we have already done it. What is a credit card?” Hunt replied.
Presumably, it was a bank in miniature. With bankers using financial
technologies to innovate around the rules, Hunt insisted, efforts to preserve
the existing mix of siloed, geographically constrained firms were futile.
Hunt predicted a future of nationwide, homogeneous financial firms
offering a full suite of services. Already individual banks were charting
paths in that direction. Would technological innovation spell the end of the
nation’s diversity of firms? “I think that a few years ago that the credit carddidn’t exist,” Hunt observed, but now the erosion of industry silos and
small, specialized firms, “is moving awfully fast.”32
As the Senate Banking Committee considered the administration’s
proposals, boosters within the banking industry promoted a
reconceptualization of card plans that aligned with Hunt’s prediction.
Instead of a commodified revolving credit service that drew customers into
the physical bank, proponents reimagined cards as a diverse service
platform that extended outward from the bank. “No longer is the ‘piece of
plastic’ strictly a charge card,” the chairman of the American Bankers
Association’s Charge Account Bankers Division declared in September
1973. Instead, “the so-called ‘bank charge card’ (now held by 53,000,000
persons)” was becoming “a ‘bank card’ which provides entry to a wide
spectrum of banking and financial services via electronics.” John J.
Reynolds, former head of Citi’s Everything Card and now president and
CEO of Interbank, offered credit executives a similar vision: “The charge
card . . . can be the heart of an emerging personal finance ‘supermarket’”
where “instalment loans, personal checking and accident insurance
increasingly will be part of the product mix available through the card.” The
ABA and the networks promoted the “bank card” as a universal ideal,
achievable by small and large banks alike through the card networks. Yet
the bank card idea also held a latent tension: small banks depended on the
networks for technology, but large banks were developing proprietary
systems to promote their cards independent of the networks. The question
of who would control the bank card’s future—banks or networks—
remained open.33
The new bank card concept depended in part on an emerging cluster of
technologies grouped under the catchall term “electronic funds transfer”
(EFT). Like the bank card, EFT was a contested concept. These new
technologies would, some contemporaries believed, make existing
institutional arrangements, for example, the Federal Reserve’s check
clearing system, more efficient. EFT might also change relationships
between institutions, enabling private firms to take over some of the Fed’s
intermediary functions. It also promised to reshape relationships between
financial firms and their customers. Point-of-sale terminals could authorize
card transactions electronically at the checkout counter. Automatic tellermachines allowed bank customers to access account information, make
deposits, and withdraw cash—services formerly performed by bank
employees inside bank branches. In the mid-1970s, large banks invested
heavily in both technologies. Because they made banking functions
available outside the bank, consumer-focused EFT systems raised
fundamental questions about what, in the computer age, constituted a bank
in the first place. Hunt had asked Proxmire, “What is a credit card?” He
could have easily asked, “What is an ATM?”34
EFT played a minor role in debates over the Hunt Commission’s
recommendations, and enthusiasm for reform soon eroded as Nixon’s
presidency descended into the murky reaches of Watergate. The
commission’s study would burn as a beacon for financial reformers,
culminating in the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary
Control Act of 1980. In the early 1970s, though, financial industry interests
opposed competition in its purest sense. The bill passed the Senate but
failed in the House. Acknowledging the questions bank cards and EFT
technologies raised about the financial structure, Congress took tentative
action, establishing the National Commission on Electronic Funds Transfer
(EFT Commission) in October 1974. Before it could act, Congress needed
information and advice.35
Congress’s appeal for time confirmed Wriston’s conviction that
technological innovation would outpace regulatory action. As bankers, card
networks, and equipment manufacturers rushed to develop consumer￾focused EFT technologies, the federal agencies had to regulate in
Congress’s stead. Decisions came quickly. In late 1974, James E. Smith,
comptroller of the currency, confronted a variance in state laws on a
fundamental question: were customer-bank communication terminals
(CBCTs), a term that encompassed both POS terminals and ATMs, bank
branches? Washington State said they were not and allowed state-chartered
banks to install them; Nebraska said they were and restricted state banks
from doing so. In both states, national banks sought Smith’s permission to
install CBCTs, forcing Smith to decide whether, as a matter of national
policy, they could do so. He was hesitant, but he decided that “regulators
have some responsibility . . . to act as a bit of a proxy for free and open
competition.” In December 1974, Smith ruled that CBCTs were notbranches. National banks could install them, regardless of state branching
laws. In issuing his ruling, Smith sought to downplay fears that large banks
would blanket the nation with terminals and undermine the position of
smaller competitors. “I think that CBCT’s will be a cheap and effective
competitive weapon for smaller banks,” Smith predicted, citing the
industry’s credit card experience. Card networks enabled banks of all sizes
to compete, Smith argued. There was no reason to expect CBCTs would be
different.36
By allowing national banks to install CBCTs, Smith reinterpreted what
constituted a branch bank under national banking law. The controlling
statute, the McFadden Act (1927), was inherently vague. In its definition, a
bank branch included “branch bank, branch office, branch agency,
additional office, or . . . branch place of business,” but it provided nothing
more specific. The contemporary congressional debates shed little
additional light. Even in the 1920s, Smith explained, the lawmakers who
wrote and approved McFadden embraced competing theories. For some, a
branch was a physical place. For others, it was a cluster of banking
functions. Under either theory, CBCTs were not quite branches. “A CBCT
obviously is not an ‘office,’” Smith determined. There was, he averred, no
furniture. CBCTs also offered a limited suite of services. Customers could
not open accounts, apply for loans, or engage in other fundamental banking
functions. “The CBCT therefore is more closely analogous to a mail box or
a telephone.” Like credit cards, any transaction executed through a CBCT
happened, via electronic transmission, in a bank office. Smith urged banks
not to follow his mail and phone analogy too far, spreading CBCTs as far as
these utilities could reach. Rather, he asked bankers to wait on their home
states, proceeding at the pace of local law, not jumping ahead of it.37
With Congress’s EFT Commission on hold because President Gerald
Ford had not yet appointed any members, large commercial banks jumped
at Smith’s ruling. In January 1975, Chicago’s Continental Illinois
introduced the Continental Banking Card—“the card that means
convenience banking”—which allowed checking account holders to access
the bank’s new automatic banking centers. Through the terminals,
consumers could make deposits, withdrawals, and loan payments; transfer
funds between accounts; and receive cash advances through theirContinental Master Charge cards—all without waiting for a human teller. At
first, Continental placed the terminals inside its downtown office. But in
June, the bank began installing them off-site, expanding its banking
footprint without building physical branches. Illinois was a unit banking
state. Continental was allowed only one bank office. Four days after
Continental installed its first off-site terminal, the state’s commissioner of
banks sued both the bank and Comptroller Smith, charging them with
violating Illinois branching laws. A federal judge enjoined Continental from
building further terminals but allowed existing terminals to operate pending
a final ruling.38
Citibank initially encountered less opposition as it developed its
proprietary card and CBCT network in New York. The Citicard, which the
bank issued to its 800,000 checking account customers beginning in
October 1973, at first enabled cardholders only to check their balances at
bank terminals and to speed check cashing at the teller window. New York’s
Banking Board regulated CBCTs as branches. Since the state allowed
citywide branching, Citi faced little regulatory opposition. In April 1975,
Citibank introduced cash-dispensing ATMs in New York City. At this early
stage, the bank’s Citicard and Master Charge products remained distinct,
with Citicards linked to checking accounts and Master Charge cards
offering credit. The bank was also developing CBCT technology on the
credit side, including a POS network for the merchants enrolled in the
Master Charge program. The sales counter terminals, bank executives
explained, would speed transactions and help cut down on card fraud.39
And they could probably do more than that. As Comptroller Smith,
members of Congress, and federal judges all debated what constituted a
bank, Wriston and Reed were increasingly convinced that plastic cards
might be all the bank consumers needed. If true, they speculated, then a
full-service Citicard—with integrated checking, credit, and other functions
—could replace the bank’s brick-and-mortar network and circumvent the
fusty geographic regulations that had long ruled American banking.
Following the geography of its Master Charge network, Citi tested this
theory by installing POS terminals in northern New Jersey shopping
centers. In addition to approving Master Charge transactions, the terminals
enabled merchants to confirm that Citicard-holders’ checks would notbounce. With a few adjustments, New Jersey’s banking commissioner and
members of the New Jersey Bankers Association were sure, the terminals
could easily accept deposits and distribute cash. “There is no doubt that
these machines are bank branches,” a New Jersey Bankers Association
representative declared, “and hence an illegal branching across state lines.”
In July 1975, the New Jersey legislature banned all CBCTs. The banking
commissioner looked forward to a court battle with Citi.40
At the center of the state-level controversies over CBCTs was the
question, put directly to the parties in the Chicago case by Judge Hubert L.
Will, “What is a minimum bank?” Courts struggled to parse this question.
As CBCT cases multiplied across the country, bankers argued that the
terminals were not banks at all. Following the same logic developed in
interstate credit card cases and deployed by Comptroller Smith, bankers
claimed that terminals merely communicated information to a bank’s
computer, located in a legal banking office, the same way a customer might
by phone or through the mail. Courts rejected this analysis. Terminals were
simply too physical. Something bank-like had to be happening inside of
them. “How many things must be done before you have a bank?” Judge
Will wondered. In December 1975, his court ruled that terminals “could not
accept deposits, cash checks, make loans, or cash advances, or transfer
funds between accounts.” However, “they could be used for cash
withdrawals from existing accounts and for the payment of installment
loans.” An appeals court overturned even these concessions in May 1976,
banning all functions at remote terminals in Illinois. Mayor Richard J.
Daley secured a city ordinance allowing the machines, but without state
approval Chicago’s banks had to wait and see if the Supreme Court would
hear their case.41
In the meantime, several similar cases advanced around the country, the
most important of which pitted the Independent Bankers Association of
America against Comptroller Smith in the D.C. Circuit. The comptroller
argued that CBCTs were not branches because they lacked the furnishings
of a branch and because transactions were ultimately executed
electronically within the bank. The court found this claim “without merit.”
It nullified the comptroller’s ruling, a decision upheld on appeal in March
1976. “This court must decide whether the National Bank Act gives theComptroller the power to initiate this technological revolution in banking or
whether this initiative falls within the province of the states,” the appeals
court held. “The question we face is more of federalism and statutory
interpretation than of sound banking practice or competitive equality. The
Comptroller’s decision to classify CBCT’s as non-branches may be
technologically a step in the right direction,” yet “that is not for us to
decide.” As long as financial federalism reigned, bank branching policy
remained a political decision for states, not a regulatory decision for the
federal banking agencies. States would determine whether CBCTs were
branches. Citibank could operate CBCTs in New York but not in New
Jersey. Continental could not operate them at all.42
In the mid-1970s, federal judges struggled to apply 1920s law and their
own lived experience to a mobile, electronic, technological revolution in
banking. The resulting case law, which guided bank executives as they
worked to develop new, consumer-focused strategies, offered little
consistency or certainty. In the Fisher and Marquette cases, midwestern
courts found that card transactions happened, for the purposes of applying
local law, in a bank’s office. In the CBCT cases, similar transactions,
initiated with similar cards, happened at the terminals, not within the bank.
Following Citicorp’s annual meeting in Chicago in April 1978, Wriston
expressed his industry’s collective bafflement. “I don’t know what a branch
is,” he confessed. “Under the modern concept of electronic funds transfer,
you’re no longer talking about bricks, mortar, and bodies.” Citi executives
may have wanted to follow the concept to its ultimate conclusion, placing
CBCTs across the Hudson in New Jersey and perhaps farther afield, but
they discerned a logic in the era’s tortured judicial reasoning. Within
financial federalism, cards, not terminals, were the way to expand consumer
banking.43Convenience Users and Credit Utility
Although regulatory conflict over technology and market structure
roiled the banking industry, these struggles had little immediate impact on
cardholders’ experiences or policy concerns. Consumers and their advocates
continued to favor safe, easy-to-understand, inexpensive credit. They
lobbied for state-level interest rate restrictions and favorable lending terms.
They expected state attorneys general to enforce state laws on their behalf.
In Congress, consumer advocates sought and gained protection from the
billing errors that plagued card issuers’ computer systems. Although new
card-based services, like photo identification and check guarantees, likely
appealed to individual consumers, undifferentiated revolving credit
remained the paramount service consumers expected from plastic cards.
Banks had promised convenient credit; that’s what consumers wanted. In
effect, the unsolicited mailing campaigns had rooted universal bank cards in
the pocketbooks and wallets of middle-class consumers. With more than 65
million bank cards in circulation by 1973, bank cards had become an
indispensable component of consumer purchasing power.
44
As cards became a central feature of middle-class economic identity,
those excluded from credit access, especially women, racial minorities, and
poor Americans, increasingly asserted rights to credit through the political
process. As historians Lizabeth Cohen and Louis Hyman document, the
National Organization for Women (NOW) led a grassroots campaign
against discriminatory practices that often prevented women from
maintaining credit identities independent of male breadwinners. During this
organizing, which led to the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (1974) and its
subsequent amendments (1976), NOW encouraged women to share their
stories of credit exclusion. Many made credit cards central to their claims.
“It’s not the Master Charge card that concerns me as much as receiving my
rights as a [sic] EQUAL citizen,” one letter writer, Helaine Blythe, declared.
Blythe had it half right: the Master Charge was equal citizenship under
plastic capitalism. Daily participation in the credit economy depended on
admission to private credit networks. Bankers and other card issuers
guarded the entrances. When demanding admittance, women oftenarticulated the very features bankers promised: universal access and
convenience. “BankAmericard, as you know, is one of the handiest credit
cards,” Susan Burkhalter wrote her bank after being denied a card. “I see no
reason why I should not have [one].” Women also stressed their intention to
only use cards responsibly, not profligately. They wanted cards “for
emergencies” or “‘in between’ checks for necessities.” They understood that
creditworthiness was the currency of credit citizenship.45
Consumer claims for credit access resonated in an economy where card
use continued to expand, yet policymakers feared that credit card borrowing
was driving the period’s unyielding inflation. A short recession in 1970,
followed by federal wage-price controls from August 1971 to January 1973,
slowed price increases. Once controls ended, however, prices began to rise
faster—above 6 percent a year in 1973 and topping 11 percent in 1974.
With card networks blaring slogans like “Relax . . . you’ve got Master
Charge” and “BankAmericard: Think of it as Money,” the press named
bank cards a prime culprit. Consumers used cards to buy ahead of rising
prices, increasing demand that reinforced inflationary pressure. For their
part, Federal Reserve officials worried that card lending undermined
monetary policy. “Revolving-line consumer credit,” a Fed analyst wrote in
August 1974, “grows in relative importance during periods of aggregate
credit restraint.” As tight money made other forms of credit more expensive
or vaporized them completely, consumers doubled down on cards. In the
mid-1970s, bank card borrowing made “striking” gains, accounting for a
quarter of consumer debt increases. Yet policymakers remained uncertain
about whether credit cards, or any form of consumer credit, caused
inflation. No one seemed to know for sure. Correlation—between rising
card borrowing and rising prices—was all there was to go on.46
Although Fed policymakers and the national media worried that
consumers were borrowing too heavily, bankers saw the opposite problem.
In the early 1970s, bankers began to complain about a new category of
cardholder, the “convenience user.” These consumers employed their credit
cards as charge cards: they made purchases and paid off their balances each
month without accruing interest. Convenience users practiced thrift and
responsibility; they used convenient credit and did not get into debt. Yet
because they did not pay interest, they did not generate profits. Whereascharge account bankers in the 1950s had levied high merchant discounts to
profit strictly from convenience spending, bankers had since redesigned
their card plans to balance merchant-discount and revolving-credit income.
Convenience users enjoyed a month or more of free credit, while bankers
had to pay interest for funds that earned no interest. With inflation driving
up the cost of money, these liabilities were ever more expensive.47
One way to overcome the convenience user problem was to simply
charge cardholders a fee, as travel cards had always done, ensuring that
even convenience users paid for card services. Most bankers, however, did
not see fees as a viable option. Since the 1960s mass-mailing campaigns,
banks had marketed their cards as “free.” Could banks go back on this
promise? Vigorous competition between banks and the apparent uniformity
of revolving credit meant that no bank wanted to be the first to impose a
fee. With many card-issuing banks offering the same service, consumers
would simply choose another bank. Worse, bankers feared, consumers
would take their deposit accounts and other business with them. For years,
bankers agonized over fees. There was never a clear path out of the
industry’s feeless equilibrium. Outside of specific regulatory contexts like
Minnesota, where the state’s low local interest cap encouraged the
Marquette National Bank to adopt an annual charge, no bank was willing to
take the plunge. Marquette also proved the rule: its fee quickly drew
competition from out-of-state bankers.48
Where other bankers dared not go, Citibank strode boldly ahead. In
early 1976, Citi instituted a 50-cent monthly service fee on cardholders who
used the card but did not incur interest. Until that time, the bank had, in
accordance with New York law, granted its Master Charge customers
twenty-five interest-free days from their billing date to repay their balances,
before charging the statutory rates of 18 percent for the first $500 and 12
percent on subsequent amounts. “We feel that this small fee is well within
reason,” a Citibank executive explained to the New York Times in April.
“This revision is necessary to offset our rising costs and to improve our
level of customer service.” Most bankers looked at their card plans in the
aggregate, balancing total expenses against total revenues. Citi executives
expected each cardholder to be individually profitable for the bank. The fee
may have seemed sensible, but bank customers took the opposite view. Asone Citibank chronicler recalled, “Angry cardholders stormed into branches
and threw their cards in the tellers’ faces, forcing Citibank to take special
security measures.” Customer anger was understandable. Cardholders felt
that by paying their bills every month, they were using cards responsibly.
They were not succumbing to temptation. They were not going into debt.
They were not spending extravagantly. It hardly occurred to them that
convenience came with a cost, that they were committing the most
intolerable act of all: they weren’t making Citibank any money.
49
Consumers were outraged; Citi’s fellow bankers were thrilled. Banks
still struggled to make cards profitable. High operating expenses, expensive
funding costs, and continued problems with fraud and consumer
delinquencies all weighed on bank card issuers. Large banks tended to fund
their card programs directly through money markets, using instruments like
large denomination certificates of deposit, commercial paper notes, and
even eurodollar borrowing. Rising interest rates, which ratcheted up with
inflation, narrowed the spread between the cost of funds to banks and the
interest they could charge. “With the way the usury laws are,” one
Pennsylvania banker complained, “it’s very difficult to make a profit.”
Bankers eagerly studied Citibank’s policy. Many saw it as the industry’s
future. “I would be very surprised if the industry doesn’t follow Citibank’s
lead,” one California banker observed; another added, “Some change (in
pricing) is inevitable.” Other bankers criticized the move. Thomas Wilcox,
a former Citi executive who left for California’s Crocker National Bank
after losing the top post to Wriston, remained committed to evaluating his
new bank’s plan holistically: “We think our Master Charge should be
considered in light of its ability to bring other retail business to our bank.
We can consider it a loss leader.” Wherever bankers stood on card fees, they
all watched Citi’s experiment closely. And though many hoped fees would
stick, they would also take some delight if failure brought the aggressive
bank down a peg.50
The consumer furor, however, was more intense than Citi executives
anticipated. So was the regulatory and legal response. Representative Frank
Annunzio (D-IL), chairman of the House Banking Committee’s Consumer
Affairs Subcommittee, played for headlines. “Just like the spider who lured
the fly into its parlor and then trapped it in its web,” Annunzio vented, “thebank has lured customers into its credit card program with glossy promises
and is now trying to collect extra fees.” Annunzio introduced legislation to
ban bank card fees and threatened hearings. The congressman barked.
Consumer lawsuits bit. As a result of a class-action suit brought by three
Citi cardholders, a district court ruled such service charges illegal under
New York law and ordered Citibank to repay all collected fees.
Commenting on the case, John Reed snarled, “These people knew it was a
free ride—people like to beat the system.” One of those people, plaintiff
Richard Oster, received his 50-cent refund and “a lot of satisfaction.” The
outcome embarrassed the bank. It also firmly locked Citi cards into New
York’s strict interest rate regime—the full consequences of which would
become apparent later on.51Citibank Goes National
Even as the bank wrangled over convenience fees, Wriston and other
Citibank executives remained true to their faith that technology, and card
technology especially, would propel Citi beyond the geographic confines of
the New Deal regulatory order. The bank pressed out in all directions, yet
every move into new businesses and territories brought conflict with federal
regulators. Federal law still prohibited interstate banking. The Federal
Reserve and Justice Department sought to enforce those provisions; Citi
executives worked to creatively evade them. Citibank won many of these
battles. The results, though, often amounted to small, expensive-to-maintain
breeches in the regulatory structure. Through its Nationwide Financial
Services unit, Citicorp operated more than one hundred limited-service
offices in southern and western states, which provided consumer loans but
could not accept deposits. In cities like San Francisco and Miami,
meanwhile, Citi opened Edge-Act subsidiaries, special-purpose branches
that could only engage in international transactions. These and other
financial nodes marked significant incursions, but none matched Wriston’s
ambition. Cards, though, could redraft the regulatory map. In an interview
with American Banker, Reed made the bank’s ambitions plain. “My own
personal belief is that almost everything we have traditionally distributed
through branch system can be delivered on the card.” And cards could go
anywhere, enabling Citi to traverse federal and state branching boundaries
and build a truly nationwide card-based consumer bank.52
Visa inadvertently opened the gate for Citibank’s interstate expansion.
In late 1976, National BankAmericard Inc. (NBI) announced plans to drop
the BankAmericard name in favor of consolidating the network’s domestic
and international operations under a new name: Visa. Executives designed
the name change to distance NBI from Bank of America, the original issuer
of the BankAmericard, providing a unified brand for the thousands of card￾issuing members of NBI’s global payment network. Dee Hock chose the
name because, as he explained, the “adoption of the single name ‘Visa,’
surmounts language and cultural barriers and is the final step in assuring
instant recognition and acceptance around the world.” Hock also intendedthe rebranding to shift consumer attention away from the individual card￾issuing banks and toward the power and utility of the network. To inform
consumers of the change, NBI planned a national advertising campaign,
forewarning cardholders to expect a new Visa card from their local bank—
and presenting the artful executives at Citi with a unique opportunity.
53
Before 1976, the competing card networks did not allow their members
to issue more than one card brand. A Master Charge issuer like Citi could
not also issue BankAmericards. Forcing banks to choose between networks,
Hock believed, left open the possibility that additional networks might
emerge. By contrast, allowing banks to issue cards under both networks,
called “duality,” raised high barriers to entry at the network level. Hock saw
duality as a short step to a grueling antitrust fight or, worse, nationalization
of the card networks as public utilities. For merchants who accepted both
BankAmericard and Master Charge, however, the ban on duality meant they
had to maintain accounts with separate banks. Agent banks in small towns
sided with their merchants. Hock’s position constituted a restraint of trade
at the bank level, they argued, demanding the freedom to offer card services
of their choosing. After years of private litigation and an expanding Justice
Department inquiry, NBI relented.54
Citibank immediately joined NBI, as did many of its rivals. Citi did so
with different motives. The bank did not intend to target only its existing
New York market; instead, in August 1977, Citi began mailing tens of
millions of preapproved Visa applications to consumers across the country.
The bank bought up lists of potential cardholders from direct mailers and
phone companies and ran them through new, national credit bureaus. In
what newspapers dubbed “Citi’s Credit Card Blitz,” the bank capitalized on
the confusion caused by NBI’s rebranding and pushed aggressively into
markets previously controlled by other NBI banks.55
By sending preapproved applications instead of actual cards, Citi
dodged the 1970 unsolicited mailing ban and soon inundated the nation
with Citibank Visas. Rival bankers were not sure what to make of Citi’s
strategy. Some assumed Citibank planned to target their merchant
customers. Local banks had fought for generations against New York’s
financial dominance. Businesses, unlike consumers, could easily go to New
York or San Francisco for loans. Was this a new strategy to target businesscustomers? Other bankers recognized Citi’s consumer focus. “They must
feel the barriers against interstate banking will soon give way,” one Idaho
banker observed, “and they may be trying to establish a broad customer
base right now.” Citi executives did and were. The bank’s competitors
responded with incredulity and outrage, rooted in timeworn assumptions
about the link between consumer borrowing and financial geography.
Successful card plans depended on local embeddedness, on the close
connections between the issuing bank and its community. Bankers who
struggled to generate profits locally could not imagine issuing cards across
the country. “Competing banks,” the Los Angeles Times reported, “contend
that no matter how many new cardholders Citibank gets, it will end up
losing money on most of them.” A Seattle banker put the sentiment bluntly:
“They are foolish to do it.” Other NBI issuers responded with flat anger.
Missouri bankers, who had advance word of Citi’s plans, were irate that
Citibank dared encroach on their market. “The only thing bad about the
credit-card business,” fumed St. Louis banker William Travis, “is that some
banks are getting too greedy.” Citi’s greed paid off. Many consumers,
assuming Citi’s offer was part of the Visa name change, promptly mailed
the bank their acceptances—four million of them.56
Citibank’s break with accepted financial geography went further than
simply mailing cards across state lines. First of Omaha and other
midwestern banks had already built regional card plans by crossing into
neighboring states, but they did so while building the BankAmericard
network from the ground up. First of Omaha employees recruited hundreds
of agent banks, and through them thousands of merchants, introducing and
embedding the BankAmericard plan in local communities. Omaha
executives negotiated with local policymakers. Omaha lawyers fought
extended legal battles, including the Fisher cases that by 1977 gave Citi
relative certainty that its cards would be regulated in New York. First of
Omaha’s experience was, in theme if not precise detail, the experience of
card-issuing banks across the country. Although Wriston liked to portray
markets as neutral, natural phenomena, the bank card market in any given
place only existed because of the long, hard, expensive work put in by local
bankers. Now Citibank swept in to reap the rewards, appropriating the
infrastructure which local banks had created to make the card market in thefirst place. Citi signed up no agent banks. It enrolled no merchants. It came
for the consumers, offering them the same commodified revolving credit
they could get at their local bank. And local bankers took Reed and Wriston
at their word: Citi intended to offer these consumers much more in the
future.
Dee Hock imagined the adoption of Visa as a significant step toward
making the private network paramount, so that the information exchange
that facilitated economic life could occur without the involvement of either
the banks or the government. Instead, Citibank commandeered Hock’s
network, harnessing the system that thousands of Visa-née-BankAmericard
banks had built over the previous decade and transforming it into a conduit
for Citi’s ambitions. Citibank executives understood better than their rivals
the consequence of undifferentiated revolving credit. While local card￾issuing banks saw cardholders as their customers, cardholders did not
necessarily see themselves that way. The cards issued through
BankAmericard and Master Charge carried these logos prominently,
reorienting consumers’ focus away from the issuing bank and toward the
national network—the name on the card that gave it its purchasing power.
These card systems initially relied on local banking relationships to build
their merchant and customer bases, but they also eroded these boundaries as
BankAmericard and Master Charge became national, even international,
institutions, synonymous with mobility and surmountable distance—exactly
what Visa was meant to capture. Bank-Americard customers, Citi bankers
believed, were unaware of the local bank connections that linked them to
the payment networks. “The consumer,” a Citibank executive explained to
congress in September 1977, “has been telling us through his behavior that
he does not view the card as a ‘local’ geographically constrained product.”
By appropriating the network, Citi would no longer be a local
geographically constrained bank.57
In the face of Citibank’s aggressive salvo, what could its rivals do fight
back? “If other banks exercise their muscle,” Continental’s head of cards
explained, “we can’t just sit idly by.” And they did not. “Regional banks,”
the Wall Street Journal reported, “say the heavy national promotion has
forced them to step up their own marketing to compete.” Just as in the
heady days of the unsolicited mailing boom, in the late 1970s banksunleashed a rush of competition, one no longer confined by the extent of
their branch and agent-bank networks. Continental Illinois mailed 550,000
solicitations to select New Englanders, including one to the chairman of the
First National Bank of Boston, much to his shock. The Barnett Banks in
Florida, which had expanded statewide on the back of their BankAmericard
franchise in the late 1960s, defensively mailed 350,000 Visa offers, urging
Florida consumers, “don’t take Visa cards from strangers.” Bankers
compounded the competitive pressure through duality. Banks which had
formerly issued only BankAmericard or Master Charge cards now tried to
hook customers on a second brand. With credit offers raining down, the
nation’s headline writers competed pun for pun: in Chicago, “Consumers
[were] Charging through a Credit Card Blizzard”; in Los Angeles “Credit
Cards [were] Dealt in Game for Big Money.” By January 1979, Visa and
Master Charge banks were approving almost 75,000 new cards a day. Bank
credit card debt had grown by 15 percent a year from 1974 to 1977, but
over the next two years it leapt up at a 30 percent annual rate. In the
process, bank cards surpassed retail credit plans as the dominant form of
revolving credit.58
The explosion of card solicitations revived long-standing concerns that
cards drove inflation by increasing consumer demand for goods, enabling
anticipatory buying, and fueling inflation psychology. Price increases
slowed in 1976 to a still significant 5.7 percent a year but accelerated again
in 1977 and 1978 as the card boom raged. “We wonder whether the
proliferation of credit cards is actually plastic inflation,” a House Banking
Committee staffer told the Los Angeles Times, adding, “We have a time
bomb situation here.” For recently inaugurated Jimmy Carter, renewed card
expansion was a minor current in the sea of economic problems facing his
administration. As cards flooded the market, Carter’s staff revisited federal
credit controls as one means to stem the tide. In spring 1980, the
administration would make a daring effort to shift the course of plastic
capitalism.59
In the meantime, Citibank’s mass-solicitation strategy was wildly
successful and tremendously expensive. Purchasing third-party lists of
likely cardholders and screening them through credit bureaus exposed the
bank to bad debt and fraud losses. Credit bureaus, like the card networks,had embraced technology to create national systems by consolidating local
credit agencies, yet their screening methods remained far from perfect. Like
tides, Reed observed, each wave of solicitations echoed back again in a
wave of fraud and charge-offs. Citi’s consumer loan losses increased from
$54.5 million in 1977 to $93.9 million in 1978. Charge-offs hurt the bottom
line, but the real danger was interest rate risk. While the bank’s millions of
Master Charge and Visa customers paid rates held flat by New York law,
money markets around the globe set Citibank’s cost of funds. “Consumer
lending on a fixed-rate basis, which tends to penalize our earnings in high￾interest-rate environments such as today’s,” the bank reported in 1978, “will
contribute to earnings growth when rates decline.” Or, more accurately, if
rates decline. Unfortunately for Wriston and Citibank, over the next two
years interest rates went in the opposite direction. When Citibank started its
solicitation campaign in 1977, the bank’s cost of funds stood at 6.21
percent. By 1978, they rose to 9 percent. And Citi executives saw them only
going up from there.60
Through the 1970s, the bank card industry developed along the geographic
lines that had long ruled American banking. Local banks served local
markets, embedding card plans in community relationships that bound
consumers, merchants, and their banks together. Bankers built their
nationwide networks on these relationships. Even ambitious banks, like
First of Omaha, that pursued aggressive regional growth in the 1960s and
1970s did so through agent bank agreements. They built local credit card
markets from the bottom up. Consumers, though, had little knowledge of
the institutional and relational infrastructures that made the card systems
work. As networks developed stand-alone identities distinct from card￾issuing banks, the ties that bound cards to space and place faded from view.
Wriston and Reed, schooled in Citibank’s international operations and eager
to use technology to sprint past laggard regulators, stood ready to take
advantage.
Wriston and Reed were well-positioned to drive change, but their views
about the transformative power of financial technology were hardly unique.
Rather, they reflected a growing consensus among business leaders and
policymakers that information networks were eroding the traditional
geographies of finance. In the Carter administration, deregulation-mindedofficials were warming to similar views. “Our present banking laws are
based on a world in which most customers had to queue up at their local
bank, or local branch, to make deposits and withdrawals or to borrow
money,” Lyle Gramley, a former Fed staffer and member of Carter’s
Council of Economic Advisers, mused in October 1979. “The advent of
electronic funds transfer technology in recent years,” he continued, “had
called into question the whole concept of physical location as a relevant, or
desirable, basis of banking regulation.” Federal courts, however, had
restrained the very EFT technologies Gramley invoked, foreclosing one
technological path for bypassing place-based regulation and pushing
bankers toward another. The regulatory structure continued to shape bank
strategy even as bankers chose among technologies with which to work
around it.
Gramley also recognized that in Congress, where physical location
remained the basis for political representation, lawmakers were unlikely to
accept a world where local authority over finance was not protected.
Congressional leaders, among them William Proxmire, were increasingly
amenable to market-based deregulation. Yet they also sought to maintain
finance’s place-based social contract through legislation like the
Community Reinvestment Act (1977), which required banks to meet the
credit needs of the communities in which they operated, including low￾income neighborhoods. Proxmire and the Carter administration would
pursue some federal financial deregulation under the aegis of combatting
inflation, but Citi executives and their peers would need to pursue place￾based deregulation by a different road.6110Credit ControlA Ton of Bricks
Citibank’s massive nationwide marketing campaign changed the
composition and structure of American consumer credit markets. As in the
1960s, bankers rushed to compete, now no longer constrained by the
geographic reach of their branch networks. Shaken by the volatile 1970s
economy and hounded by seemingly untamable inflation, consumers
grasped cards as a lifeline to purchasing power and the previous
generation’s prosperity. Within a year, bank card debt surpassed department
store and similar retail borrowing for the first time. It would never turn
back. Politicians and policymakers watched these developments closely,
nowhere more so than within the Carter administration. From his first days
in office, Carter and his economic staff struggled to confront the nation’s
economic challenges, especially the ominous combination of high
unemployment and persistent inflation, known popularly as “stagflation.”
At first policymakers tried to solve both problems at once, vacillating
between expansion and contraction, and between the managed
Keynesianism of the past and new policy ideas, like deregulation, gaining
traction in the present. In late 1978, however, Carter and his advisers
decided to prioritize inflation. Carter invested the contest with a deep moral
urgency, embodied most forcefully in his “Crisis of Confidence” speech the
following summer. Yet the ongoing expansion of credit card lending flew in
the face of Carter’s calls for restraint. After much deliberation and a few
false starts, Carter took direct steps to curtail what one sympathetic
commentator called the “credit card craze.” In March 1980, Carter
exercised powers granted by the Credit Control Act (1969) and authorized
the Federal Reserve to institute controls on credit card lending.1
Ongoing credit market turmoil and an emphatic consumer response
combined to make the policy unexpectedly effective. In mid-1979, Carter
had appointed Paul A. Volcker Jr., president of New York Federal Reserve
Bank, as chairman of the Federal Reserve. Volcker soon began his well￾known experiment in monetary policy, strictly managing the supply of
money and allowing market interest rates to skyrocket. The policy violently
disrupted global credit markets. It hiked costs for card firms tremendously,yet state usury laws prevented lenders from passing higher interest rates on
to consumers. Lenders were desperate to cut back on credit extensions but
fearful of losing the market share they had so recently attained. Consumers
who accepted and used cards remained deeply uneasy about their reliance
on plastic purchasing power. When Carter announced controls in stern
moral language, consumers responded. Credit buying slammed to a halt,
and not just on cards but across the economy. The policy, as one
administration veteran recalled, “hit like a ton of bricks.” The nation’s gross
national product fell at a dramatic 8 percent annual rate in the second
quarter of 1980, the fastest drop since the Great Depression. The policy
quickly became a victim of its own success. So did Carter. The rise of
modern conservatism, the ongoing Iranian hostage crisis, and the
administration’s failure to address the nation’s persistent energy dependence
all contributed to Carter’s loss to Ronald Reagan in 1980. But the sharp
economic decline that year, caused by the credit control policy, was the
paramount cause of Carter’s defeat.2
Carter’s credit control policy mirrored the 1960s political response to
mass unsolicited card mailing. In both cases, politicians reacted to
breakneck credit marketing by enveloping card plans in the New Deal’s
restraining web of financial rules. Indeed, Carter’s policy built directly on
these earlier regulatory efforts. The Credit Control Act and the state-level
price controls that gave credit restraints their bite were products of the
initial countermovement against unrestrained card plans. By 1980, however,
the balance of forces had shifted. An unrelenting campaign to discredit New
Deal economic controls had borne fruit. Proponents of unrestrained
markets, like Paul Volcker, commanded the policy high ground. Meanwhile,
consumer credit, an auxiliary engine of consumer purchasing power—
ignited by New Deal credit policies, stoked by private lenders seeking
profits in consumer markets, and revved by consumers claiming access to
credit citizenship—propelled the economy with unprecedented force. While
state policymakers and some congressional Democrats remained committed
to controlling and channeling credit, the ideological and material balance
had shifted. Instead of driving a new countermovement against
unconstrained credit, Carter’s crusade was outflanked, cut off, and routed.Rejection of Credit Controls
Jimmy Carter focused his 1976 election campaign on themes of
economic recovery and national renewal. During the campaign, the
unemployment rate remained stubbornly above 7 percent, the federal
government continued to run a substantial deficit, and inflation, which
would become the true economic bugbear of his administration, fluctuated
between a 5 and 6 percent annual rate. As a candidate, Carter lambasted
incumbent Gerald Ford’s economic performance, repeatedly citing the
“misery index”—the sum of the inflation and unemployment rates—as the
leading indicator of Ford’s failings. Carter also assumed the mantle of
Washington outsider. He espoused a “populist” faith in the honesty and
integrity of the American people. Government, in light of Vietnam and
Watergate, had not lived up to its founding ideals. To regain Americans’
trust, it needed a fresh, values-driven approach. Carter’s varied career as a
naval officer, small-town businessman, Baptist missionary, and state
governor cemented his outsider appeal. The Georgian offered himself as the
embodiment of national spiritual revival. Voters hoisted him into the
nation’s highest office.3
Once in the White House, Carter struggled to turn his populism into
effective economic policy. Two conflicting currents propelled Carter’s
politics: a faith-driven compassion that aligned with Democratic social
priorities like racial and economic justice, and a deep-seated fiscal
conservatism that made Carter reluctant to open the national pocketbook to
pay for them. As he later reflected, “The Southern brand of populism was to
help the poor and the aged, to improve education and to provide jobs. At the
same time the populists tried not to waste money, having almost an
obsession about the burden of excessive debt.” Constrained by contrary
impulses, Carter could not chart a decisive course on economic policy.
Moreover, the administration’s economic ambivalence extended throughout
the economic policy staff. The stagflation of the 1970s, coupled with the
increasing prominence of free-market ideology among academic
economists, undermined the Keynesian ideas that had guided policy in the
postwar era. Carter’s staff, caught adrift in changing seas, adopted apragmatic approach. Advisers like Alfred E. Kahn and Charles L. Schultze,
chairs, respectively, of the Council on Wage and Price Stability and the
Council of Economic Advisers (CEA), relied on Keynesianism where it
seemed effective. They also gradually committed to deregulation and
adopted thinly veiled antagonism toward organized labor. Carter wanted to
move the Democratic Party beyond the political-economic orthodoxies of
the New Deal and the Great Society, especially as they seemed to crack
under the weight of slowing productivity growth and the transition from a
manufacturing- to a service-based economy. But the path forward was
dimly lit and treacherous.4
Carter and his economic team zigzagged between tightening and
expansion, matching the changing course of the economy. The economic
recovery that was underway in 1976 continued into 1977, ushering in a
period of strong economic growth. Growth, however, brought inflationary
pressure. Carter instituted voluntary wage and price controls and limited
pay raises for federal workers in early 1978. These policies fizzled. In
October 1978 the administration undertook “phase two” of its anti-inflation
strategy, which called for budgetary restraint and a more rigorous attempt to
stem wage and price increases. By then Carter had determined that inflation
was “our most serious domestic problem.” He urged Americans to join the
government in fighting inflation through their daily economic decisions.5
While Carter’s economic team debated inflation-fighting measures,
Citibank launched its nationwide Visa campaign, spurring a dramatic
upsurge in card use and fears of credit-induced inflation. As cards saturated
the market, inflation surged. By early 1979, the consumer price index was
increasing at double-digit annual rates. Americans appeared to be losing
confidence in the administration’s ability to combat rising prices, frustrating
White House officials. In early 1979, senior economic staff scrambled to
craft policies that might slow inflation’s steady climb. Within this
environment, credit controls emerged as one tool which might stem credit￾fueled consumption. Under authority granted by the Credit Control Act
(1969), Carter could authorize the Federal Reserve to regulate “the
extension of credit in an excessive volume.” Advisers argued that taking
this step would send a strong signal that the administration “will act on the
inflation crisis where it has the power to do so.” They emphasized creditcards as a prime target for controls. In March 1979, Treasury secretary W.
Michael Blumenthal informed Carter, “some consumers may be
overextending their debt positions to an extent that is not desirable,”
counseling further, “Your advisers also agree unanimously that action
should be taken to limit the most liberal terms of consumer credit.” Carter
agreed to pursue “preliminary discussions” regarding limitations on
consumer credit. Through April and May, the economic staff examined the
viability of a credit control policy.
6
With Carter’s mandate to pursue “preliminary discussions,” CEA
economists began examining options for a credit control policy. Initially,
proponents recommended shortening repayment periods, which would force
consumers to make larger monthly payments. Higher monthly payments,
the core feature of World War II and Korean War controls, increased the
price and thus reduced the demand for credit. Yet such controls had to be
monitored and enforced. As economist Lyle Gramley noted, “Installment
credit has grown tremendously in importance since the last time that
controls were used.” Staff estimated that there were likely 50,000 consumer
lenders in the market, meaning that instituting controls “would involve
monumentally heavy costs.” Further, the increasing fungibility of credit,
linked especially to the expansion of card plans, also frustrated Carter’s
economic team. “As the credit instrument has become divorced from the
asset purchased,” one report lamented, “consumer credit has become a more
generalized source of purchasing power.” This meant that “restraint
imposed in one area would lead to expansion from other sources.” Credit
controls, Carter’s advisers determined, were “essentially unworkable.” In
May 1979, they abandoned the idea.7
The essential unworkability of controls resulted from the size and scope
of consumer credit markets, a fact which raised further questions for
Carter’s economic staff. Controls had long been premised on the idea that
consumer credit was pro-cyclical, that it exacerbated swings in the economy
by adding momentum during the upswing and compounding decline in the
downswing. The upswing momentum was inflationary, economists
believed. Controls could impose moderation. Yet too much debt overall
might drag on the economy once recovery was underway. Overindebted
consumers could not spend the economy into recovery. Carter’s policy staffobserved steadily increasing consumer debt and steadily declining national
savings. They worried. In memos examining these concerns in spring 1979
one staff economist, K. Burke Dillon, reported that though “the total
outstanding debt of borrowers has increased substantially in relation to
disposable income,” this increase “has been offset by the lengthening of
maturities.” Consumers owed more, but they were able carry their debts
longer and pay less each month. There was, Dillon argued, no “true increase
in the debt repayment burden.” Consumers’ purchasing power was not
declining. Future aggregate demand was not in jeopardy. Dillon’s analysis
may have reassured administration economists, but it would have provided
little comfort to consumers who did not experience lengthening maturities
and total debt outstanding as cold economic facts but as real and growing
burdens in an unsettled world.8The Confidence to Fight Inflation
The economic concerns that prompted Carter’s staff to debate consumer
indebtedness and credit controls also animated deeper currents that flowed
through the administration in early 1979. A decade of high inflation had
eroded American incomes and undercut consumer prosperity. The long
energy crisis choked and stalled the nation’s perpetual optimism.
Throughout the decade, opinion shapers and public intellectuals challenged
the preeminence of affluence in American society—not from the upslope, as
critics like John Kenneth Galbraith and Vance Packard had in the 1950s—
but from the trough. Historian R. Christopher Lasch and sociologists Daniel
Bell and Robert N. Bellah figured prominently in these debates. Their
widely read books grappled with themes of renewed self-restraint and
religiosity, of re-embrace of national traditions and communal values, and
above all of abhorrence for degenerative self-indulgence. Americans, they
feared, were abandoning traditional goals of family, work ethic, and
spirituality in favor of hedonistic, individualistic consumption. “Social
scientists, worried that self-indulgence would undermine the fabric of
American society, expressed concern about the dangers of profligate
spending,” historian Daniel Horowitz argues. These concerns were not new,
of course, but they took on new urgency as Americans’ certainty in their
nation’s strength cracked and crumbled.9
Themes of self-restraint resonated profoundly with Carter. After two
and a half years battling inflation and fighting for a sustainable national
energy policy, which he termed the “moral equivalent of war,” Carter
concluded that the nation’s problems transcended economics and energy.
“Americans,” Carter recalled, “were rapidly losing faith in themselves and
in their country.” The president’s chief pollster, Pat Caddell, guided Carter
to this conclusion. Caddell had read widely about consumption and
confidence. He had seen, he believed, the concerns of Lasch, Bell, and
Bellah emerge vividly in his own polling data. Sharing his views with
Carter in an April 1979 memo entitled “Of Crisis and Opportunity,” Caddell
put it bluntly: “America is a nation deep in crisis.” In his seventy-five-page
report he examined the deep national malaise eroding citizens’ confidencein their government and themselves. Among its causes, Caddell cited non￾voting, the “Me” generation, consumer behavior, and lack of purpose. He
lamented that “the public . . . is spending as if there is no tomorrow,” and
further, “Live for today, financed by greater and greater debt has replaced
the stable rock of steady, prudent future planning in America.” Caddell
urged Carter to project a new national vision. The crisis, he wrote, “presents
you the opportunity, so rare in American history, to reshape the structure,
nature, and purpose of the United States in ways which your predecessors
only dreamed.” Carter took Caddell’s advice very seriously. The two began
reading from a shared list that included Lasch, Bell, and Bellah’s works.10
The themes of consumption and self-indulgence presented by Caddell
carried deep implications for the administration’s two most pressing
domestic concerns: inflation and energy. In early July 1979, with gas lines
again snaking into service stations, Carter reevaluated his approach to both
issues. That month, the president had been scheduled to address the nation
for the fifth time on the energy crisis. Instead, he abruptly scrapped the
speech and headed to Camp David for a period of reflection that would
redefine his presidency. Following ten days of consultations with numerous
advisers, including politicians, business and labor representatives, religious
and community leaders, and economists and energy experts, Carter
delivered a speech that defined a new direction for his administration.
Officially known as the “Crisis of Confidence” speech, though better
known as the “Malaise” speech, Carter drew on Caddell’s memo to offer a
bold critique of the nation’s direction and purpose. Borrowing the phrase “a
crisis of confidence” from Lasch’s Culture of Narcissism, Carter told
Americans that their inability to unite on energy reflected deeper problems:
“It is a crisis that strikes at the very heart and soul and spirit of our national
will.” Carter lamented Americans’ lost national purpose. “Too many of us
now tend to worship self-indulgence and consumption. Human identity is
no longer defined by what one does, but by what one owns.” Americans
could feel this too. “We’ve discovered that owning things and consuming
things does not satisfy our longing for meaning.” Carter also offered hope,
buttressed by faith in the inexhaustible resources of the American people.
He warned his audience, estimated at over 100 million, that although there
were no short-term solutions, with unity and sacrifice, the nation’s crisis ofconfidence—and with it the crises of energy and inflation—could be
overcome.11
The speech won immediate support from viewers and the media, but
Carter quickly squandered the momentum. After the speech, the White
House received a surge of letters and phone calls, 85 percent of which
lauded the president’s bold message. Americans embraced Carter’s call to
action. They too were troubled by the pervasiveness of consumerism and
self-interest they saw in themselves and their fellow Americans. But then
Carter reoriented his administration, requesting the resignation of his entire
cabinet. He declined most resignation offers. However, he showed a few top
advisers, including Treasury Secretary Michael Blumenthal, the door. The
apparent disorder reignited concerns about Carter’s ability to manage his
administration. The moves elicited comparisons to Nixon’s “Saturday Night
Massacre,” overshadowing Carter’s message and diminishing its impact.
Carter squandered the opportunity and was left with crisis.12
The cabinet shakeup created high-profile gaps in the president’s
economic team, which had to be plugged quickly for the administration to
address the problem of inflation. First, Carter had to replace Blumenthal at
the Treasury, which he did by selecting William G. Miller, then chairman of
the Federal Reserve. This left a crucial vacancy at the Fed, one that Carter
filled with the rangy economist Paul Volcker. Volcker was president of the
New York Federal Reserve Bank, the branch responsible for executing the
Fed’s monetary policies through purchases and sales of treasury securities.
Volcker came to the New York Fed after a long career straddling banking
and public service. He had assisted Chase’s David Rockefeller on the
Commission on Money and Credit in the 1960s and helped convince
Richard Nixon to decouple the dollar from gold in the 1970s. At the New
York Fed, Volcker established a clear record as an inflation hawk, favoring
policies to constrain the growth of the money supply and fight inflation at
all costs. Volcker’s appointment highlighted Carter’s increasingly firm
stance against inflation, though the administration’s record still left some
observers unconvinced. In a magnificent bit of underestimation, the New
York Times called Volcker’s appointment “largely symbolic.”13
Sensing the need for decisive action to curb inflation, Volcker steered
the Federal Reserve in a new direction, embarking on a dramatic policyshift in October 1979. The change Volcker instituted was, in some respects,
highly technical, but the shock waves it unleashed reverberated through the
global financial economy for a generation. Until then, the Fed had managed
inflation by manipulating interest rates. In theory, by increasing rates, the
Fed made it difficult for banks to attract deposits and other funds (in part
because of Regulation Q price restrictions). Higher rates reduced banks’
reserves and thus their capacity to make new loans, slowing, in turn, the
growth of the money supply and with it the rate of inflation. Traditional
monetary policy also kept interest rates stable and under the Fed’s control.
Volcker, though, believed that inflationary psychology was too deeply
entrenched. Bankers were not taking the Fed’s actions seriously enough.
They kept lending, and so the money supply kept growing.14
On October 6, 1979, Volcker called a secret meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee, the policymaking arm of the Federal Reserve, to
discuss a new direction. Volcker opened the meeting with a call for decisive
action: “We can’t walk away today without a program that is strong in fact
and perceived as strong in terms of dealing with the situation.” He proposed
that the Fed stop managing interest rates and move instead to control the
growth of the money supply directly. Volcker argued for tightening the
Fed’s supervision of bank reserves, which would directly curtail overall
bank lending. In doing so, the Fed would allow interest rates to “fluctuate
over a wider range.” Such a transition in policy, Volcker hoped, would lead
to “a change in the psychological atmosphere” that “will give us more bang
for the buck.” Not all Fed members fully embraced the new direction.
Governor Nancy Teeters, for one, felt “queasy about it.” But the final vote
was unanimous in favor of money aggregates. Volcker emphatically
demonstrated his seriousness to break inflation and inflationary psychology.
By ceding control of interest rates, the Fed willingly accepted a galloping
increase in credit prices.15
Credit Controls Renewed
Volcker’s determination to turn the monetary screws until inflation was
finally wrung from the economy marked an epochal shift in postwar
economic management. In the short term, however, rising interest rates didlittle to stem inflation. Instead, the price of money and the price of goods
climbed apace. When the Bureau of Labor Statistics released the producer
price index in mid-February 1980, it showed a 19.2 percent annualized
jump for the previous month, the highest such increase in five years.
Vacationing with his family in Florida, CEA chairman Charles Schultze was
summoned back to Washington to devise a new inflation strategy. Rising
producer prices, the administration feared, would soon reach consumers.
With the election only nine months away, Carter’s staff urged the president
“to increase the visibility of our anti-inflation effort.” Credit controls, which
had been scrapped in May 1979, reemerged amid a bundle of possible
policies aimed at taking strong, effective action on inflation.16
Outside the White House, surging inflation and Volcker’s strident
monetary policy created a growing constituency for targeted credit controls.
By abdicating direct control over interest rates, the Fed allowed rates to
surge across the board, squeezing home and construction financing, auto
loans, business investment—every economic activity that relied on credit.
Seeking relief, some proponents of controls, such as William Proxmire,
Senate Banking Committee chair, pressed the Fed to direct credit to
productive uses rather than damming the flows entirely. Others, such as
economist John Kenneth Galbraith, urged limits on consumer borrowing,
which was driving the national “inflationary psychosis” and consumer “dis￾saving.” Volcker opposed controls, which would interfere with the Fed’s
monetary policies and the natural workings of the market. As Volcker
argued, credit controls would “severely complicate the situation,” adding as
late as February 1980, “I’m no enthusiast of using direct controls” since
“they can be counterproductive” and “lead to anticipation of inability to
raise money and thereby actually increase demand.” In other words,
consumers, fearing impending credit scarcity, would leverage their credit
for all it was worth.17
Administration economists believed consumers were already using
credit to buy ahead of inflation, and they again began to evaluate a credit
control policy. In late February, Treasury staff reiterated concerns about
credit-driven anticipatory buying, arguing that credit controls “would
directly carry the message to the American public of the need for restraint.”
Revisiting the Credit Control Act, the Treasury again suggested imposinghigher monthly payments to stymie demand. CEA staff again rejected this
route as unworkable. Instead, Burke Dillon consulted with the Fed, which
would ultimately administer whatever controls were chosen, to find a new
path for the CCA. Volcker’s public stand against controls complicated
negotiations, generating concern that the Fed might not go along with the
administration. While the text of the CCA enabled the president to
“authorize the [Fed] to regulate and control any or all extensions of credit,”
it did not mandate that the Fed do so. Volcker, though, recognized that he
needed Carter’s support, given the rising congressional opposition to his
tight money policies. After two meetings with Carter and his economic
team in late February, Volcker assented to the administration’s credit control
plan.18
Under Volcker, the Fed developed a much different vision of what the
CCA could accomplish, one indicative of the shifting reliance on market
forces to allocate scarce economic resources. Instead of mandating credit
terms that increased the price of credit, and in turn decreased the demand,
Carter’s economic team decided to increase the cost of lending, thus
decreasing the supply. To do so, CEA and Fed economists planned to
effectively tax new consumer lending by requiring lenders to deposit a
percentage of all new loans in non-interest-bearing accounts with the
Federal Reserve. For each dollar lent to consumers, lenders would set aside
10, 15, or 20 cents—depending on what the Fed decided would be most
suitable. Instead of making loans subject to mandatory deposits,
policymakers hoped, lenders would redirect credit toward more profitable,
and less inflationary, activities. The policy relied on the nation’s patchwork
of state usury laws to ensure lenders would not simply pass high costs on to
consumers through higher interest charges. With state price ceilings in
place, lenders would have to internalize the costs of controls, creating a
strong incentive for them to reduce the availability of credit. “It will” Dillon
explained, “simply make consumer lending even less profitable than it is
now.”19
Carter’s staff had a strategy. Now they needed a conspicuous target.
They quickly built their plan around the most visible form of consumer
borrowing: credit cards. Since the 1950s, cards had symbolized profligate
spending and irresponsibility. Citi’s nationwide marketing blitz and theacceleration of card solicitations that followed only reinforced the
association of cards, credit buying, and rising prices. Placing controls on
cards, administration officials believed, would curtail inflationary spending.
It would also send a clear message that Carter meant to beat inflation.
Targeted controls also appealed to traditional Democratic constituencies,
particularly organized labor. Unions wanted wage-driven prosperity, not
credit-driven consumerism. By pushing up interest rates across the board,
Volcker’s policies dampened “productive” mortgage and auto lending
markets, which directly supported unionized employment. Under the still
resonant logic of the New Deal regulatory order, blocking the channel to
cards would send more credit flowing toward these other forms of lending,
increasing supply, lowering prices, and making it possible for consumers to
continue supporting unionized industrial work.20
In early March, Carter’s economic team convened at Camp David to
assess the potential response to the credit control policy and other anti￾inflationary initiatives under consideration. Administration staff invited
hundreds of representatives from various constituencies, including business,
the elderly, African Americans, consumers, organized labor, and ethnic
groups. Most groups, including African American, elderly, and ethnic
leaders, voiced strong support for credit controls. Business leaders,
predictably, expressed “universal opposition.” Bankers were incensed. If
left alone, they argued, credit markets would adjust without administration
interference. Volcker’s tight money policies had already driven up the cost
of consumer lending. Banks, pinned against state usury ceilings, were
scaling back their card programs. Controls would only make matters worse,
they argued, for their banks and the larger economy. Two days before the
meetings, Citibank took out full-page ads in the New York Times,
Washington Post, and Wall Street Journal denouncing credit controls.
“There may be policy makers who believe this to be in the national interest
but it is doubtful that many citizens will find it to be in theirs,” the bank
opined. Despite this opposition, on March 12 Carter gave the final go-ahead
on the program. He announced it to the nation two days later.
21
Carter’s March 14 announcement of the credit control policy had much
in common with his “Crisis of Confidence” speech nine months earlier.
Carter began by detailing inflation’s causes, most importantly “our failurein government and as individuals, as an entire American society, to live
within our means.” He called for discipline, strong medicine, and stern
measures. For government’s part, Carter promised to balance the 1981
budget. The state had not provided an example of frugality and fiscal
responsibility. As a consequence, Carter lamented, there would be “cuts in
good and worthwhile programs—programs which I support very strongly.”
Citizens, too, had not done their part. “Consumers have gone in debt too
heavily.” Like a disappointed father or a remonstrating pastor, Carter
implored Americans to shift from spending to saving. “In the fight against
inflation, what is at stake is more than material wealth or material comfort,”
he argued. “What is at stake is whether or not Americans—as a nation and
as a people—will retain control of our own destiny.” Though full of Carter’s
patented moralism, discussion of the Credit Control Act was relatively
brief. In a scant two sentences, Carter explained that he was implementing
the act, that the Federal Reserve would “establish controls for credit cards
and other unsecured loans,” and that loans for homes, cars, and other
durable goods would not be covered by the policy. Although his description
of controls was limited, Carter’s message was clear: Americans were living
beyond their means, and credit cards were partially to blame.22
What was less clear, however, was how the policy would actually work.
The Federal Reserve rolled out the full details a few hours after Carter’s
speech. The policy placed restrictions on credit cards, as well as “check
credit overdraft plans, unsecured personal loans and secured credit where
the proceeds are not used to finance the collateral,” which offered potential
substitutes or workarounds. The Fed required lenders who extended
unsecured consumer credit, and who had $2 million or more of such credit
already outstanding, to deposit 15 percent of all new credit extended with
the Federal Reserve in non-interest-bearing accounts. Under this plan, for
each dollar newly lent to consumers that earned interest, lenders had to set
aside 15 cents that did not. Because lenders still had to pay depositors or
money markets for funds that languished at the Fed, this special deposit
significantly increased the cost of consumer lending. Instead of providing
guidance on how to allocate these new costs, the Fed left it to lenders to
determine the best way to administer controls.23Headline writers understandably skipped the finer details of the Fed’s
policy. Instead, national media emphasized that credit card borrowing
would become much more expensive, if it was available at all. Under the
front-page headline “Credit Card Interest Rates to Rise,” the Los Angeles
Times warned consumers that “banks, department stores, and others issuing
credit cards will reduce the amount of credit available” and “individual
citizens may find it virtually impossible to get new cards.” Other papers
similarly made card restrictions central to their coverage of Carter’s anti￾inflation policies, magnifying the president’s message of credit restraint. In
light of the administration’s past unsuccessful bouts with inflation, some
observers argued that the White House was offering up yet another slate of
misguided policies. Credit controls, Washington Post editor Robert J.
Samuelson argued, amounted to a knee-jerk reaction from policymakers
bent on satisfying citizens’ calls to “do something.” They failed to attack
inflation’s underlying causes. “Anyone who believes credit cards have
much to do with the nation’s inflation,” quipped Samuelson, “probably also
thinks you can get to China with a pick and shovel.” Nevertheless, even
Samuelson’s criticism put cards at center stage, where consumers could
work out for themselves the relationship between credit and inflation.24
Carter’s policy elicited a searching examination of plastic capitalism.
Consumers embraced the president’s call for more judicious use of credit,
voicing support in the media and at the cash register. “Isn’t our present
dilemma caused by the ‘now’ syndrome,” one writer asked in the
Washington Post, “wanting things now instead of waiting until we can
afford them?” Others forwarded new credit offers to the White House,
suggesting that the card companies had given Carter “another kick in the
pants.” Inflation adviser Alfred Kahn remembered these letters years later.
“Some people sent me credit cards, wrote irate letters to the effect that Sears
Roebuck was still soliciting credit card accounts.” Carter’s moralizing
tapped deeper currents. The democratization and expansion of cards during
the previous decade contrasted sharply with oft-espoused ideals of thrift and
moderation. So did the increasing use of consumer debt to fund daily
consumption. As the 1970s economic crisis undercut Americans’ ability to
consume without resorting to credit, Carter’s credit crackdown offeredconsumers the opportunity to realign their financial practices with their
values.25
Card issuers recognized that the links between credit, anticipatory
buying, and inflation continued to threaten their legitimacy, and some
publicly supported the control policy. In a television ad set in front of the
Capitol in Washington, D.C., Interbank president Russell Hogg urged
consumers to use their Master Charge cards “only for necessities and
emergencies.” American Express voiced support for Carter’s policies while
distancing their cards from demon credit. “The American Express Card . . .
offers no revolving, open-end credit,” one ad noted. “You are expected to
pay your bill in full every month. Since this helps you live within your
means,” the ad continued, “you don’t get in over your head,” mirroring
Carter’s call to “live within our means.” Perhaps Amex executives believed
their customers identified with the president’s message. If so, they made a
safe bet. In April 1980, the American Retail Federation commissioned a
survey to gauge consumer attitudes about credit controls and inflation.
Conducting more than 1,500 interviews, researchers found that 63 percent
of respondents believed controls were necessary. Almost as many intended
to reduce credit purchasing in the months ahead. Other sources corroborated
these findings. A New York Times/CBS News poll taken in April found that
58 percent of Americans claimed to be using cards less than they had during
the previous year; only 5 percent claimed to be using them more.26
Faced with a potent mix of social momentum and policy ambiguity,
consumers rapidly retreated from credit purchasing, with dramatic
economic consequences. In March and April, major national retailers saw
double-digit declines in credit buying. Sears’s earnings fell by 60 percent
from the previous year, and J. C. Penney’s earnings shrank 58.9 percent.
Revolving credit, which had grown continuously over the previous decade,
stalled then fell. Consumers pulled back from installment borrowing as
well, so that total consumer debt decreased by $1.8 billion in April, marking
the first significant decline since the mid-1970s recession. The fall
continued in May, to the tune of $2.6 billion. Overall, the U.S. economy
experienced the largest postwar decline in consumer debt in the second
quarter of 1980, as consumers did what they could to rein in credit
spending. Although economists initially dismissed controls as largelysymbolic, some began to find that Americans were making a real effort to
alter their buying habits. “It may have been symbolic, but it was quite
shocking,” said S. Lee Booth, senior vice president and economist for the
National Consumer Finance Association, “It made a lot of people rethink
their credit practices.”27
Carter’s advisers met consumers’ withdrawal from credit spending with
a mix of pleasure and dread. Controls, they saw, were working. And they
may have gone too far. Preparing for a May meeting of the economic team,
Schultze worried that “many consumers believe the use of credit cards is
now illegal or unpatriotic.” He asked if the administration ought to counter
these notions. Carter had not wanted to face down high inflation during an
election year—he certainly did not want a crumbling economy. The meeting
did little to allay Schultze’s fear. A subsequent memo notified Carter that
Volcker was looking into whether consumers were overreacting to the
controls. As Volcker explained to the House Banking Committee two
months later, “We, in fact, took the mildest action that we could conceive
of, but there was clearly a physiological message.”28
In retrospect, consumers were, if not overreacting, at least responding
very strongly to controls. Their behavior partially stemmed from social
concern over credit card proliferation. The White House and the Federal
Reserve also failed to explain clearly how the government was
administering controls and what they were meant to accomplish. Although
Carter firmly asserted that Americans had lived beyond their means and that
cards were a notable culprit, the public did not readily grasp the mechanics
of the Fed’s non-interest-bearing special deposits. Rather, they knew the
president had instituted a control policy aimed at credit cards. As evidence
of consumers’ retreat from card spending mounted, the administration
decided to back off. They claimed a moral victory over inflationary
psychology while continuing to urge Americans to practice moderation. In
May, Volcker amended the policy, reducing the special deposit from 15
percent to 7.5 percent. The Fed enabled lenders to offer credit more easily.
Still, Carter did not encourage Americans to go shopping. “We must not,”
he warned, “permit the ravages of recession to damage the progress that
we’ve made.”29“Out of Proportion to the Mere Goal of Credit Restraint”
Credit industry executives had predicted such ravages when consulted
about the control policy in early March 1980. At that time, firms were
already responding to Volcker’s revolutionary monetary policies and the
escalating cost of money. As their costs ratcheted up, banks, retailers, and
other lenders could not pass higher prices onto borrowers. State usury limits
blocked the way. In early February 1980, more than a month before the
CCA went into effect, members of the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) noticed lenders withdrawing from consumer credit markets. “More
and more banks are cutting back on the availability of consumer credit and
are increasing the price and other factors,” its vice chairman Frederick H.
Schultz told other board members. “We’re also seeing that with . . . retail
establishments; Sears and Penneys and others have recently made those
kinds of announcements.” Lenders pursued a variety of strategies to cope
with the Fed’s tight money policy. Some simply lent less, allowing only the
most creditworthy customers to borrow. For cards, however, reducing
access was not always an option. Cardholders had prearranged lines of
credit that could not be easily altered or revoked, especially if the issuer
hoped to retain the customer in the future. Banks had recently invested
heavily in building their card businesses; they would not now cut off
customers and sacrifice hard-won market share. In a bid to eke out extra
income without exceeding state usury ceilings, card issuers restructured
their finance charges. Some banks began charging Visa and Mastercard
customers interest from the day they made purchases instead of allowing
the customary thirty-day grace period. Others gave up and tried to offload
their card portfolios entirely. On March 7, a week before credit controls
were implemented, FOMC member Thomas M. Timlen nonchalantly
observed, “There is also a good deal of concern regarding losses on
consumer credit cards, but that’s news to no one.”30
When business leaders consulted with the Carter administration in the
lead up to the CCA’s implementation, they expressed “Universal
Opposition” to credit controls. They argued that “market forces are seen as
working” to restrain consumer credit “and would handle the problem.” And
they pointed out that “credit controls would shift the blame of denial of
credit to the President when, because of market forces, credit institutionswould have to deny credit anyway.” This last observation proved especially
prescient.31
As the executives predicted, credit controls exacerbated the problems
that began with Volcker’s policies. Many firms complied with controls in
ways that complimented the administration’s objectives. Citibank and
Chase Manhattan stopped issuing new Visa and Master Charge cards
altogether, even refusing requests from current customers. Manufacturers
Hanover and Bank of America promised to “more rigidly scrutinize new
card applicants” to limit credit extensions. Further, Bank of America, along
with major retailers Sears and Montgomery Ward, raised the required
minimum monthly payments on credit card accounts in order to get
customers to repay their balances faster. Such changes in repayment policy,
however, violated many state consumer protection laws, which barred
lenders from abruptly manipulating repayment terms. Concerned that
variations in state law would cause enforcement to “vary 50 different
ways,” the Fed used its authority under the Credit Control Act to override
local statutes, allowing lenders to increase consumers’ monthly payments as
they saw fit. The landscape of state usury legislation gave the CCA much of
its potency, but the Fed was willing to dispense with other local protections
when those laws conflicted with its objectives.32
Limiting credit access and accelerating repayment periods served the
administration’s credit control goals; many actions taken by banks and other
lenders emphatically did not. For many banks, controls provided an
opportunity to rescue their card businesses from the Fed’s tight policy and
their own credit-issuing excesses. Though bankers howled at federal
intervention, many of the nation’s largest banks were at the same time
losing millions on their credit card portfolios, suffering under the combined
weight of tight monetary policy and restrictive usury ceilings. Carter thus
gave bankers carte blanche to re-price their card plans and point to the
president as the culprit: this is exactly what they did. Across the nation,
banks added annual fees, retroactively raised interest rates, booted
marginally profitable customers, and undertook a variety of other measures
to make their cards profitable under the guise of federal interference. After
examining the changes announced by eighty-nine bank card issuers, a
House Banking Subcommittee found that “some creditors took actions thatappear to be so drastic as to be out of proportion to the mere goal of credit
restraint.”
33
Bankers’ imposition of annual fees illustrates the point. According to the
subcommittee’s findings, more than half of banks examined began charging
an annual fee, $14 a year on average. Banks had long coveted annual fees
as a way to profit from “convenience users,” those who paid their card
balances each month without paying interest. Rigorous competition,
however, kept banks from instituting fees for fear that customers would
walk to the mailbox and find a better offer. When Marquette National Bank
imposed an annual fee on its Minnesota customers, the First National Bank
of Omaha quickly offered a higher interest, no fee, alternative. When
Citibank instituted a monthly service charge for convenience users in 1976,
cardholders threw their cards in tellers’ faces. Fees, once impossible,
rapidly became standard. Carter took the blame. “The annual fees and
higher interest rates brought on by President Carter’s credit-tightening
moves of three months ago may be here to stay,” the Christian Science
Monitor reported in June 1980. The Union National Bank of Wichita,
Kansas, explained its new annual fee by informing customers, “Now UNB
and other banks are forced, through changes in regulations, to also charge
for this service.” The Credit Control Act, spurred by the mass-solicitation
strategies bankers employed to get their cards into consumer hands, also
bailed these banks out, allowing them to restructure credit card pricing. By
1981, annual fees became the industry standard, helping to transform bank
cards into permanent profit centers.34
“Is It Easier for You to Go Shopping?”
Carter had asked the nation to examine its dependence on plastic
money, but he would soon lose the 1980 presidential election and his bully
pulpit. Consumers, convinced by Carter’s message if unsure of the CCA’s
implementation, cut credit spending just as banks and retailers curtailed
consumer lending. Consumer debt fell faster than it ever had in the postwar
period. The economy, dependent on consumer borrowing, contracted
sharply. From April to June, the nation’s gross national product plummeted
at an 8 percent annualized rate. Unemployment, which stood at 6.3 percentwhen controls were implemented, jumped to 7.8 percent by July, falling
only to 7.5 percent by November. The economic news was not all bad;
overall interest rates declined, with the prime rate falling from 19.5 percent
in April to 11 percent in July. Inflation also fell precipitously. Though Carter
later blamed Volcker’s tight monetary policy for the election year downturn,
credit controls prompted consumers to put the brakes on spending and push
the economy into recession.35
Carter, true to form, couched the dour economic news in terms of shared
sacrifice. His opponent, Ronald Reagan, offered a different vision of the
country’s future. The former actor and California governor crafted his
campaign in opposition to Carter’s “Crisis of Confidence” speech and the
moralizing tone of the incumbent’s presidency. Reagan spoke
enthusiastically about American greatness—not that which had passed but
that which had yet to come. In accepting the Republican nomination,
Reagan told his audience, “The American people . . . who created the
highest standard of living, are not going to accept the notion that we can
only make a better world for others by moving backwards ourselves.” He
further enjoined Americans, “We do not have inflation because, as Mr.
Carter says, we have lived too well.” Americans had not lived beyond their
means; their means, like those of their nation, were infinite.36
Carter fought tenaciously. On October 28 just seven days before the
election, he led Reagan in the most recent Gallup poll. That night, the
candidates squared off in their only televised debate, an event that
showcased the candidates’ contrasting visions. When asked about inflation,
Carter responded, “We have demanded that the American people sacrifice,
and they’ve done very well,” expounding on successful efforts of
conservation and responsible spending. Reagan countered, charging that
Carter “has blamed the people for inflation . . . he has then accused the
people of living too well and that we must share in scarcity, we must
sacrifice and get used to doing with less.” Reagan then repeated the line
from his nomination speech: “We don’t have inflation because the people
are living too well,” instead, “We have inflation because the Government is
living too well.” Reagan drove the message home most forcefully in his
closing statement, when he asked memorably: “Are you better off than you
were four years ago? Is it easier for you to go buy things in the stores than itwas four years ago?” The first line is often quoted. The second connects
national well-being directly to purchasing and consumption—convenient
consumerism facilitated by convenient credit. These questions emphasized
a new vision of society’s goals and signaled the death knell of Carter’s
presidency.
37
Reagan nailed Carter to a cross of plastic. The sharp economic decline
that had followed the credit control policy placed Carter’s presidency in an
untenable position. Though Volcker was cooling the economy before the
CCA went into effect, and would have continued to do so had controls not
been employed, publicly the White House, not the Federal Reserve, plunged
the economy into freefall with its March 14 action. Though voters may not
have entered the booth with the Credit Control Act top of mind, the CCA’s
effect on unemployment and the broader economy made it a central factor
in voters’ dissatisfaction with Carter’s economic performance. Although the
Iranian hostage crisis, the Panama Canal Treaty, and the rise of cultural
conservatism all influenced the outcome of the election, a New York
Times/CBS News poll of more than 10,000 voters found that “the biggest
issue in their minds was the nation’s economy.” In presidential elections,
the economy has consistently been the most important factor affecting voter
response. By confronting the nation’s credit dependence, Carter played into
Reagan’s hands. “Is it easier for you to go buy things in the stores than it
was four years ago?” For the millions of credit-wielding consumers who
responded in the negative, the cause may not have been clear, but the
answer certainly was. Reagan’s rhetoric made the experience of credit
concrete. He went on to win a landslide victory, claiming 489 electoral
votes to Carter’s 49, a result that transformed national politics and federal
economic policymaking.38
Reagan’s administration heartily embraced the free market as a panacea
for the nation’s economic and psychic woes. In doing so, Reagan rejected
the notion of limits. He offered citizens a vision of America that would
satisfy all their desires. “Morning in America,” though, proved expensive,
often paid for through increased reliance on consumer credit. As a card
industry newsletter rejoiced in April of 1981, “Consumers have rebounded
from the government’s curb on credit spending imposed one year ago this
month and now they’re using credit cards at a faster clip than ever.” Aftergrowing a mere 2.6 percent during 1980, outstanding credit card balances
expanded at a moderate pace during the 1981–82 recession, 10.8 and 8.9
percent a year respectively. With recovery in full swing and card
solicitations on the rise, outstanding balances jumped 19.1 percent in 1983,
then a full 27 percent in 1984. For card firms, Morning in America was
bright indeed.39
In the years that followed, Carter’s economic team deflected responsibility
for the control policy and the economic decline it unleashed. “The whole
thing,” Charles Schultze recalled to one interviewer, “was literally a
comedy of errors.” Only inflation adviser Alfred Kahn admitted supporting
controls, though he recognized that they “really helped plunge us into
recession.” “Nobody,” he continued, “contemplated that the response would
be so enormous.” In one sense, the reaction was unexpected because the
pressures underlying it were deep and slow-building. American consumers
had long been unsettled by their ever-greater reliance on credit to access
material prosperity. In the early postwar years, this credit remained largely
local, embedded in interpersonal relationships. Consumers drew on credit at
a time of economic expansion and wage growth. Their debts increased in
line with their incomes. Credit was a manageable, knowable risk. Still they
distrusted it. In the 1960s and 1970s, credit became increasingly impersonal
—a card mailed from a far-away bank. It seemed to become more
expensive, as inflation drove lenders to seek the highest allowable interest
rates. It became more binding, as firms spread debt repayment over longer
periods. Instead of using credit in the warm summer of prosperity,
consumers depended on credit to maintain their slipping purchasing power.
Inflation ate away their incomes. Surveys show they loathed it. Their
collective goal was to “not be in debt.” Carter’s control policy gave
consumers a chance to align their practices with their ideals. They mailed
cards to the White House by the dozen.40
Consumers, of course, were only one part of the story. Controls gave
bankers a chance to extricate themselves from the consequences of years of
frantic card competition. Since the late 1960s, bankers had been torn
between a hopeful quest for card-driven profits, built on visions of a future
where cards were at the center of consumer finance, and a fearful defense of
their existing markets, where cards were a necessary evil. Both impulsesdictated relentless marketing, especially once Citibank expanded the
geographic range of card competition. The frenzied promotions of the late
1970s exposed bankers to new challenges, the most pressing of which was
interest rate risk. In their zeal for promotion, many banks had shifted from
funding card receivables with price-controlled consumer deposits to relying
on variable and expensive market-rate liabilities. Because consumer and
labor groups had succeeded in extending state usury laws to cover card
plans in the late 1960s and early 1970s, bankers faced rigid price ceilings
with no cost floor. Volcker’s tight money policies, and then Carter’s credit
controls, put firms, like Citibank, with large card portfolios in a sudden and
vicious bind. Yet, while banks’ aggressive card marketing had made cards
conspicuous political targets, credit controls provided bankers political
cover to forge paths to stable profitability. Annual fees, for instance,
allowed banks to profit from convenience users who dutifully paid their
balances on time. But it would take more dramatic moves to circumvent
state regulation altogether.
As contests over consumer credit moved back to the states, where local
lawmakers would reassess their states’ usury laws and debate banks’ new
annual fees, concern for managing the flow of credit evaporated within the
executive branch. Administration officials fully committed to ceding credit
allocation to financial markets. Over the next generation, as wages—the
prime driver of postwar purchasing power—continued to stagnate for most
Americans, credit cards and other forms of consumer borrowing provided
necessary fuel for America’s consumption engine, filling the gap between
the promise of American prosperity and its realization. The veneer of
material prosperity made Reagan’s soaring rhetoric believable, and his
successors in the White House made ensuring wide credit access their
paramount goal. For a brief time, Jimmy Carter tried to chart a different,
more conservative path, suggesting that Americans ought to try and live
within their means. Americans, experiencing the economy’s shift toward
finance firsthand, agreed. But by then it was already too late.4111
Breakdown
Laboratories of Financialization
When they devised the administration’s credit control policy in early
1980, members of Jimmy Carter’s economic team relied on state usury laws
to force banks and other card issuers to internalize the costs of federal
controls, rather than passing them on to consumers. Many banks
circumvented cost internalization by imposing new, unregulated annual
fees, but still, usury laws gave controls their bite. Too much for Carter, as it
turned out. In the wake of controls, consumer advocates again turned to
state legislatures to roll back banks’ annual fees and reimpose the low-cost,
convenient credit regime they had secured through state regulation. They
had every reason to expect success.1
Yet at the same moment that Carter’s team was building a control
program on a state regulatory foundation, Citibank, whose massive
solicitation campaign had brought cards into the political spotlight, was
planning to make state usury regulations irrelevant. In March 1980, Citi
announced that it would relocate its card operation from New York to South
Dakota, a state with no applicable usury laws. From there, aided by the
Supreme Court’s 1978 Marquette decision, Citi could export South
Dakota’s rates to cardholders across the country. Citibank had already leapt
over the geographic restrictions on interstate banking by mailing cards
nationally in the late 1970s; now it gained new leverage to rewrite the terms
of the place-based social contract. Before 1980, bankers were oneconstituency among many negotiating over how ideals of economic fairness
and imperatives of profitability would be reflected in state-regulated credit
markets. After Citibank showed state policymakers and its banking peers
that bank capital could move, state debates shifted to focus on local jobs
and tax revenue, realigning the political calculous and putting bankers in
the driver’s seat. A state-driven deregulation of the credit card industry
followed, clearing the way for banks to recast cards, from instruments of
convenient credit to tools of long-term debt.
The state-level deregulation of credit card interest rates transformed the
structural incentives of consumer credit markets by shifting interest rate risk
from financial institutions onto consumer households. With rate caps in
place, banks bore the costs when market interest rates rose, and as a result
they rationed credit, granting access to borrowers—white, male, affluent,
straight—deemed most creditworthy. In the 1960s, bankers and their
political allies had argued that eliminating rate caps would expand the
boundaries of financial citizenship by making credit more widely available.
Mobilized consumers rejected these arguments. They preferred low-cost,
safe credit. In concert with state-level allies, they shaped market rules to
deliver on these preferences. By the late 1970s, however, deregulatory
arguments had gained traction. Across the political landscape, business
lobbying groups undermined and delegitimized the consumer movement
and the New Deal regulatory project. More narrowly, William Proxmire and
other congressional leaders, who pursued equal credit opportunity in the
name of expanding credit citizenship, gradually embraced financial
deregulation as a means of spreading the benefits of financial participation
to previously marginalized and excluded groups. Yet the scope of
congressional deregulation in the early 1980s remained limited, amounting
to a recognition that banks and other financial firms had already
undermined federal deposit controls by innovating around them. States
retained the power to impose credit price ceilings, and the broader
structures of financial federalism and industry silos largely remained in
place. State rules continued to decisively shape consumer credit markets,
and it was state-level deregulation that decisively transformed them. Banks
in states without price ceilings massively expanded national credit card
markets by charging higher prices and lending to more and riskierborrowers. Gresham’s law of plastic, where expensive, heavily marketed
credit pushed out lower cost, more highly regulated alternatives, prevailed.2
South Dakota: Reimagining Regulatory Space
In early 1980, Citibank was in an untenable position. Over the previous
two and a half years, the bank had built a nationwide portfolio of Visa card
accounts, more than four million in all. CEO Walter Wriston and protégé
John Reed had staked the bank’s future on the U.S. consumer market, with
cards—banks in miniature—as the centerpiece of their plans. Yet despite
the wide geographic reach of Citi’s cards, under financial federalism, the
bank’s millions of accounts remained regulated in New York, a state firmly
committed to controlling the price of consumer credit. New York’s limits on
revolving credit prices were low by national standards. The state allowed
Citi and its peer institutions to charge 18 percent on the first $500 of
revolving credit outstanding and 12 percent on any amount above that. State
court rulings, meanwhile, barred Citi from charging monthly or annual fees.
If consumers paid their bills on time, they enjoyed the convenience of credit
without the expense. Usury limits also shielded consumers from
fluctuations in the market price of credit. The cost banks paid for loanable
funds could rise or fall with market interest rates, but the price they could
charge consumers remained fixed. Put another way: state usury limits
forced banks to internalize the risk of rising market interest rates, and this
interest rate risk disincentivized banks from extending too much credit
through card plans. As market interest rates climbed in the 1970s and spiked
after Paul Volcker began the Fed’s monetarist experiment in October 1979,
interest rate risk became an outright danger.
Citibank and its competitors could not have predicted this outcome
when they began competing aggressively for new card accounts in the late
1970s. Bankers had significantly improved back-office efficiency, and in
the 1970s operating costs declined by 40 percent. Bankers still struggled to
squeeze profits from card plans, but doing so was increasingly possible.
State usury laws limited the amount of interest most banks could charge to
around 18 percent, but the total income from credit purchases, which also
included fees paid by merchants accepting banks’ cards, exceeded mostbanks’ expenses and costs of funds. In 1979, Visa reported that the average
income for bank cards had equaled 19 percent of outstanding balances in
June 1978. Subtracted from this were processing costs, at 7.7 percent, and
fraud and credit losses, at 1.7 percent. With a cost of funds averaging 7
percent, banks cleared a net income of 2.6 percent on their outstanding card
balances. But by 1979, those profits were under pressure. Fraud and credit
losses increased because of wide and sometimes unwise card distribution.
The real worry, however, came from interest rate risk as the cost of funds
rose ever higher. In the third quarter of 1977, when Citi began its
nationwide Visa campaign, its internal cost of funds stood at 6.21 percent, a
rate that compares favorably with industry figures. A year later that number
stood at 9 percent and the bank’s internal forecasts estimated that it would
rise to over 10 percent by the third quarter of 1979. At this rate, and taking
into consideration the high cost of administering card accounts, the bank
was losing money on every credit card transaction it financed.3Fig. 7: Annualized return on outstanding bank credit card balances, based on Visa System quarterly
member reports. The graph shows the steady decline in operating expenses during the 1970s and the
decisive importance of cost of funds in determining card plan profits—or losses. The first six months
of 1980 were Visa’s forecast.
Source: Visa USA Inc., “Credit Controls and Bank Credit Cards: Analysis and Proposals,” 794.01 (L)
Voluntary Credit Restraint March 1980, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Archives.
Citibank was in dire straits. It had invested enormous financial
resources to build a nationwide card-based bank; its executives had publicly
marked out the consumer market as the key to Citi’s growth: the firm’s
reputation was at stake. There was too much on the line to back out. In early
1980, Citi executives began looking for a political solution, reaching out to
New York’s governor and legislators to see if a repeal of the usury limit was
politically possible. But Citi’s executives knew their political environment
and knew they lacked leverage to overturn the state’s strong commitment to
consumer protection. The usury limit, noted one Citibank executive “is a
popular issue that even conservatives find themselves [siding with
consumers],” adding, “people see it as [akin to] motherhood and so on.”
Thus, even as they tested the political waters, Citi executives explored other
means of circumventing regulatory constraints, favoring a strategy that
would give them both local leverage and a clear way out of New York.
Citibank’s lawyers had puzzled out a way forward. They had the Marquette
decision.4
The 1978 Marquette decision turned on the meaning of the word
“located” as written in the National Bank Act (1864), specifically, any
national bank “may . . . charge on any loan . . . interest at the rate allowed
by the laws of the State . . . where the bank is located.” That word meant
one thing to the parties in the case, the First National Bank of Omaha and
Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis, which were located in fixed
places. It meant something else to Citibank executives, whose global
experience taught them that the “location” of a bank’s operations depended
on the legal fictions of a bank charter, not the physical infrastructure of a
bank building. With Marquette, Citi executives saw an opportunity to save
the card business and perhaps the bank itself by relocating its card operation
to a high-usury state. From there, Citi could project higher interest rates
back into New York and to its credit card customers across the country. Thebank would substitute a spatial solution for a political one, escaping the
challenges of local regulation by simply moving to a more favorable
location.5
Such a move was legally possible under conditions set out in the Bank
Holding Company Act of 1956, but only if another state explicitly invited
the bank in. In early 1980 Citibank’s lawyers set to narrowing a list, first to
states with usury ceilings at 22 percent or higher, then to states with
legislatures still in session, and finally to states other than California (it was
inconceivable that Bank of America’s home state would welcome Citi). The
final list was short: Missouri and South Dakota. With a large labor pool and
an established communications infrastructure, Missouri seemed the obvious
choice. The 2,000 jobs Citi promised guaranteed the bank a thoughtful
hearing from the state’s governor and legislators. The local banking
community was not as welcoming. St. Louis bankers were still irate that
Citi had blanketed “their market” with Visa solicitations; they blocked the
move.6
That left South Dakota, a state not generally known as a center of
banking and finance. In fact, when Citi executives began phoning the
governor’s office, the state was in dire financial straits. South Dakota had
long suffered from the decline of family farming in the face of globalized
agribusiness. For seven years running, its nonagricultural workers were the
lowest paid in the nation, contributing to an out-migration of young South
Dakotans seeking better opportunities. The money policies under Volcker’s
Fed wrought further havoc for South Dakota’s local banks. With their cost
of money rising as Volcker wrung inflation out of the economy, South
Dakota bankers were bumping up against the state’s already high usury
limit in their efforts to make local loans, squeezing out small borrowers and
virtually halting local economic activity. Looking back, then governor Bill
Janklow recalled, “The economy was, at that time, dead.”7
Before Citibank arrived, South Dakota bankers were working on their
own solution to the problems imposed by interest rate limits. If the state
lifted the regulatory constraints on lending, these men believed, they could
resurrect the local economy. At their annual policy meeting in November
1979, the South Dakota Bankers Association considered recommending a 2
percent increase in the state’s usury limit to keep pace with the rising costof money emanating from the Fed. To the surprise of those attending,
Thomas Reardon of the Western Bank of Sioux Falls proposed a more
dramatic move—that the state exempt all regulated lenders from the state’s
usury limit, a proposal that would allow South Dakota banks to charge any
interest the market would bear. Following a “short and compelling
argument” from Reardon and a quick second from his brother-in-law, the
CEO of Pierre National Bank, the motion carried. Although some bankers
were stunned, the association rallied support from the governor and the
legislature, and South Dakota’s anti-usury bill passed by a wide margin in
January 1980.8
This action, of which Citibank had no knowledge, clearly demonstrated
the power of South Dakota’s local banking community, authority rooted in
financial federalism and bankers’ role in the place-based social contract.
When Citi approached Janklow in February 1980 about relocating to South
Dakota, the first place Janklow turned was the South Dakota Bankers
Association. The bankers were deeply concerned about competing against
Citibank. They were also encouraged by the possibility of local jobs and the
banking services Citi could provide them. Though Citibank initially
promised only a few hundred positions—holding out hope that New York
would raise its rate caps to stave off the bank’s threatened move—the
potential economic impact of Citi’s entire card division was estimated at
between $63 and $68 million. “Citibank’s credit card operations are exactly
the type of business that will not only maintain but enhance the quality of
life we all enjoy in South Dakota,” Janklow told state lawmakers as they
considered Citibank’s offer the following month. “They won’t pollute our
air or water. They won’t place large strains on our highway system. . . .
They won’t exert any additional pressures on state or community services.”
Furthermore, Janklow was convinced, economic growth need not come
from Citibank alone; with Marquette and a new appreciation for federal
banking law provided by Citi’s executives, the governor saw the potential to
bring an entirely new industry to his state.9
Still, to approve the deal South Dakota’s bankers wanted protection, and
Janklow, the state legislature, and Citibank’s lawyers gave it to them.
According to the bill drafted by Citi’s attorneys, card-issuing banks, like
Citi, hoping to relocate to South Dakota would need to seek the approval ofthe state’s banking commission, a board controlled by local bank
executives. The “Citibank bill” further limited out-of-state banks to one
location and read, “Such single banking office shall be operated in a manner
and at a location which is not likely to attract customers from the general
public in the state to the substantial detriment of existing banks in the
state.” In practice, this meant that Citi’s “bank” was a nondescript office
building in an industrial park by the airport, not a cheerful storefront
downtown. Citibank’s South Dakota subsidiary could thus focus exclusively
on card operations. Citi’s lawyers designed the law’s competition
provisions, in part, to appeal to the bank’s federal regulators, who worried
about the competitive effects of full-service Citibank branches on the local
banking market. The offer proved compelling. On March 12, 1980, the
Citibank bill cleared both houses of the state’s legislature by a combined
vote of 97 to 3. State officials wasted little time trying to bring other banks
to the prairie: by the end of March, South Dakota’s director of banking and
finance was calling on bankers in New York, Pennsylvania, and Illinois,
eager to explain the new opportunities available in South Dakota.10
New York: Holding on for Dear Life
As they negotiated with Missouri and South Dakota officials, Citibank
executives did not forsake New York. In February 1980, the bank’s top
officers sought a deal that could restore the card business’s profitability and
keep it in the state. But brash actions by the bank had cooled the political
climate. First, in an effort to stem the bank’s immediate losses, Citi
exercised a loophole in national banking law that allowed it to charge one
percentage point higher than the Federal Reserve’s discount rate, which the
Fed had raised to 13 percent. Citibank now charged cardholders 14 percent
on balances over $500, instead of the state mandated 12. In making the
change Citibank had snubbed local authority, alienating potential allies.
Other New York banks, likewise suffering tremendous strain, continued to
abide by state rate rules. The day after Citi raised its rates, Wriston appealed
personally to Governor Hugh L. Carey, advising Carey that Citibank might
move its card operation out of New York if the legislature did not raise the
state’s usury limit. On the same day, other Citi executives launched acoordinated media campaign, advertising the bank’s negotiations with other
states and describing the likely loss of local jobs and credit access that
would result if the legislature failed to act. But the politicians were not yet
ready to bend to the bank’s threats. The governor’s office was eager to
explore options other than raising or removing the state’s usury laws. The
speaker of the State Assembly, Stanley Fink, was “very pessimistic” about
the possibility of raising rates.11
Citibank was playing hardball, but it was not the only bank seeking to
change New York’s interest rate laws. As market rates continued to rise in
early 1980, New York’s financial community lined up for interest rate relief.
The New York Bankers Association lobbied Carey for increases in credit
card and other lending rates. Meanwhile, as Citi became more adamant
about relocating, community stakeholders worried about the broader
economic consequences of losing Citi’s card operation. On Long Island,
where some New York City banks had located their card operations
(fittingly, in retrofitted shopping centers), business leaders and the local
press were especially concerned. “As a businessman,” one landlord
concluded, “it appears asinine to me that New York State is willing to suffer
so great an economic loss.” Finally convinced of the issue’s urgency, Carey
asked state banking superintendent Muriel Siebert to develop legislative
plans for addressing New York’s usury problem. In June, Carey submitted
legislation, prepared by the banking department in consultation with
bankers and consumer groups, that would raise rate ceilings on mortgages
and card accounts. Carey pushed hard for the legislation, and it cleared the
Republican-led state senate. Legislators in the Democratic assembly,
however, refused to raise rates. The banking bill, Fink argued, was
“everything good for the banks and nothing good for the consumer.” The
assembly refused to vote on the measure.12
Assembly members were committed to protecting consumers from high
credit prices. They also continued to operate under the expectation,
ingrained by the financial system’s geographic regulations, that banks did
not move. Wriston knew better. Soon after the legislation failed, Wriston
wrote Carey, expressing gratitude for his administration’s work on the bill
and urging Carey to continue to help “the Legislature recognize the
disparity between the banking and regulatory laws of this State and oursister states.” Wriston and Carey both knew the bill’s failure would send
New York banks down the path forged by Citi. Some had visited South
Dakota in April and May. Others were testing the waters in nearby
Delaware and Connecticut. “Many of the major banks are presently looking
to other states,” Wriston warned, “to obtain the relief we desperately need.”
Indeed, many states saw in New York’s banks the economic development
they desperately needed. In July, Siebert publicized a letter written by the
mayor of Wilmington, Delaware, urging New York’s banks to consider
Wilmington as a possible home for their consumer credit operations. Siebert
accused rival states of circling New York’s banks “like vultures.”13
Throughout the summer, the New York press speculated about bank
moves, while lawmakers fretted. Several wrote Carey, urging him to call a
special legislative session to change the usury law. They worried about
potential damage to New York’s economy, pointing to Citibank’s relocation
specifically and predicting dire consequences if the law was not changed.
“The specter of further joblessness stares us in the face,” a Republican state
senator wrote. To forestall these losses, Carey called the legislature into
special session in November 1980. When New York lawmakers finally
returned to Albany, Carey proposed more dramatic measures, asking
legislators to remove interest rate ceilings on consumer loans entirely,
“letting the free market set the rate according to the laws of supply and
demand.” With so many local jobs at risk, the legislature largely accepted
the governor’s proposals.14
Consumers were outraged as bankers, sensing their leverage, pried in
further. “You have been instrumental in screwing the citizens of New York,”
wrote one irate consumer. “Successful blackmail begets further attempts,”
wrote another. Bankers reinforced this message through thinly veiled
threats. Edward W. Duffy, chairman of Marine Midland Bank, thanked the
governor for his leadership reminding Carey of the “very adverse”
consequences of not securing the bank-friendly legislation. “Marine
Midland has its roots in New York State and we intend to continue to
headquarter as many of our operations within the State as possible,” Duffy
assured. Richard LaBlond, vice president of Chemical Bank, likewise told
the governor, “New York banking law should be competitive with other
jurisdictions and we are anxious to continue to maintain operations here aslong as we can operate competitively.” LaBlond’s Chemical Bank
colleagues had toured Sioux Falls earlier in the year. And although it was on
its way out, New York’s usury repeal likely benefited Citibank more than
any other firm. The new law allowed Citi to raise rates while federal
regulators evaluated its relocation application, saving the bank $100 million
in Wriston’s estimation.15
Delaware: “The Luxembourg of the United States”
Citibank was not the only large New York bank upside down on its card
business in early 1980. In the months after Citi announced its plans to
relocate its card program to Sioux Falls, executives from several New York
banks visited the state; they also cast about closer to home. Chase
Manhattan looked south seeking a new home for its 2.4 million Visa
accounts. Recognizing that they would need support from local bankers to
secure a relocation deal, Chase executives reached out to Delaware’s
banking community in spring 1980. Delaware had a long history of
favorable chartering policies and a business-friendly corporate law
environment (40 percent of NYSE listed companies held Delaware charters
in 1981). Like South Dakota’s, the state’s economy had suffered under the
shifting fortunes of postwar capitalism. Whereas South Dakota depended on
agriculture, Delaware relied on the chemical and auto industries. The state’s
leaders stared down the barrel of deindustrialization. In Delaware, the
relocation movement reached its apogee, and consumer groups at last
mounted a credible, if brief, resistance.16
Delaware’s negotiations with Chase took more work and proceeded
more slowly than Citi’s shotgun wedding with South Dakota. Delaware’s
banking community was lukewarm to Chase’s initial overtures: its bankers,
like their counterparts in other states, worried about inviting the nation’s
third-largest bank into their small market. Still, executives at the Bank of
Delaware, some of whom had previously worked at Chase, saw the
potential impact and pursued a deal. Through the spring, they worked to
keep Chase interested, to enlist the support of local business elites, and to
finally bring the banking and political community on board. They found
allies in local business leaders, especially DuPont CEO Irving I. Shapiro.Though not noted at the time, Shapiro was a member of Citicorp’s board of
directors. He likely understood what Delaware stood to gain by luring in the
bank card industry. Business leaders eventually convinced Delaware’s
bankers to consider the proposal. As in South Dakota, Delaware’s tight-knit
community of business and financial elites gave Chase executives a
streamlined path to the halls of local power. The quiet campaign culminated
at a June 11, 1980, meeting at the Wilmington Club, where Delaware’s
business and banking leaders gave their blessing. Governor Pierre S. “Pete”
du Pont agreed to pursue the matter. By July 1980, the mayor of
Wilmington felt negotiations had moved far enough to write the letters to
New York’s banks that so enraged Muriel Siebert.17
Delaware’s Intergovernmental Task Force became the locus of
negotiations and of an expanding vision of financial deregulation as state
development strategy. Working through the summer to court New York’s
banks, task force members fielded mundane but critical questions about the
local labor market and telecommunications capabilities. They also listened
to New York’s bankers. The Bank Holding Company Act, they discovered,
opened opportunities beyond cards and rates exportation. At meetings with
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, a wholesale bank that served
corporations, governments, and other large clients, Delaware’s developers
learned that New York banks chafed under the state’s high taxes. Because
banks were theoretically immobile, they were easy to tax. New York State
taxed bank profits at 25.8 percent. As state officials crafted a law to invite
banks into the state, they broadened it to include tax breaks, quietly
developing their plans in the fall and winter of 1980 as the du Pont
administration waited for the next legislative session to begin.18
To drive deregulatory growth, the task force crafted the Financial Center
Development Act (FCDA), a bill designed to pull banks into Delaware.
First, the bill plagiarized South Dakota’s provisions inviting holding
companies into the state while restricting their subsidiaries’ ability to
compete with local banks. The bill also abolished all usury restrictions on
consumer loans and specifically allowed firms to charge annual fees on
credit card accounts. In addition to the usury provisions, Delaware
sweetened the pot by including a regressive bank franchise tax, meant to
appeal not only to card-issuing banks but to all banking firms that used thestate as an offshore haven. Delaware banks paid only 8.7 percent of all
profits to the state, much less than New York’s 25.8 percent. The bill
maintained the 8.7 percent tax rate up to the first $20 million in profits, then
lowered the rate to 2.7 percent on all subsequent profits. At the time, the
state’s largest bank had profits of only $13 million a year. Chase and
Morgan Guaranty would likely generate much more. The law did require
relocating financial institutions to employ at least 100 people in Delaware
within a year, making the quid pro quo as clear as day.
19
Governor du Pont and his allies feared that the controversial provisions
would meet resistance in the state legislature; they also feared that if
Delaware did not act quickly, other states might seize the deregulatory
momentum. In January 1981, when du Pont placed the Financial Center
Development Act before the legislature, he already had commitments from
Chase and Morgan Guaranty that they would establish Delaware
subsidiaries. These commitments were contingent, du Pont explained, on
lawmakers acting quickly; the deal expired on February 4, 1981. If the bill
succeeded, du Pont declared, Delaware would become “the Luxembourg of
the United States.” Legislators and local media received the proposal with
cautious optimism. The Delaware House took up the bill first and quickly
passed it with little opposition. Local media remained skeptical but
supportive. “The most repeated argument for the bills,” a local columnist
wrote, “was that some state eventually would pass laws making it a mecca
for the banking industry, and it might as well be Delaware.”20
When the bill went to the state senate, it met more strident consumer
opposition led by the Consumer Federation of America (CFA). National
consumer groups had been caught off guard by Citibank’s negotiations with
South Dakota. Over the previous year they had resisted and rolled back the
rate increases and annual fees induced by Volcker’s monetary policies and
the Credit Control Act. They were now prepared to challenge the new trend
of interest rate exports. “The bill may be good for Delaware in attracting
more business,” James Boyle, CFA director of government relations
explained to Delaware senators during a special hearing, “but you will be
acting to supersede the laws of many other states.” Opposition legislators
introduced eighteen hostile amendments aimed at including more consumer
protections and forcing the bill back to the House, “where opposition ha[d]reportedly grown since overwhelming passage” two weeks prior. After
seven hours of debate, the lure of jobs and the banks’ looming deadline won
the senate over. “If Delaware doesn’t do it,” the Wilmington Evening
Journal’s political correspondent wrote, “the carpetbankers from New York
will find another pushover state legislature somewhere else.”21
With the guidance from New York’s bankers, Delaware followed South
Dakota down a path that promised to import jobs and tax revenues, and
export high interest rates and tax savings. Echoing remarks by South
Dakota’s William Janklow, du Pont explained to Delaware’s lawmakers,
“These are non-polluting jobs that pay well.” The press recognized that
these would also be white-collar jobs intended for white workers, reflecting
the continued racial tension and inequality in Delaware’s economy. On the
same day the Delaware Senate passed the FCDA, its House rejected a bill
honoring Martin Luther King Jr. with a state holiday. Still, Delaware’s
investment paid quick dividends. In Maryland, at the same moment
Delaware lawmakers debated the Financial Center Development Act,
Maryland lawmakers banned the new annual fees card-issuing banks had
instituted since Carter’s implementation of the Credit Control Act. The First
National Bank of Maryland, determined to keep the fees which had finally
made its card plan profitable, announced they were simply moving to
Delaware. The symbolism of Delaware’s new economy was soon imprinted
in the built environment: the First National Bank toured a recently
abandoned National Cash Register plant in Millsboro, a building that would
ultimately serve as the home of First Omni Bank’s card program. Bankers
repurposed the infrastructure of the industrial economy for the new age of
financialization.22
Relocation and Financial Structure
For South Dakota and Delaware policymakers, bringing card-issuing
banks into their states was initially about generating jobs and tax revenues,
not reshaping the nation’s financial regulatory structure. Their intentions,
though, were irrelevant. States had exercised an important restraining
influence under the New Deal regulatory order. Local usury laws in
particular, by shifting interest rate risk to card-issuing banks, acted as astructural check on consumer debt accumulation. Interest rate risk
compelled banks to keep repayment periods short and consumer credit
limits low. Credit cards provided convenience, not indebtedness; usury
limits enforced this bargain. Now, state interest rates and credit laws played
a new role in the consumer credit system, enabling banks to shape credit
policy in small places like South Dakota and Delaware and then export
those policies to their cardholders across the country. The system still
functioned, yet the flow of power had reversed. There is little evidence that
the lawmakers in Delaware or South Dakota thought very much about the
national financial system when they invited banks to enjoy deregulated
interest rates in their states. Neither state had significant bank card
industries before 1980. Consumer and labor groups, which had secured
interest rate caps on revolving credit and other protections, better
understood what local deregulation might mean for national consumer
credit markets. State regulators with more card experience, even those
friendly to banks, worried that the system was breaking down. “If our states
keep passing laws to steal banking jobs from other states, it could have an
adverse effect on the entire banking system,” Muriel Siebert warned.23
Citibank’s move to South Dakota required federal regulatory approval.
With protections against local competition in place, Citi’s greatest support
came from South Dakota’s banking community. These bankers’ prestige and
profits—not to mention their political influence—were intertwined with the
economic prosperity of their state. Citi, they hoped, would help attract
additional “desirable commerce and clean industry.” Consequently, they
testified at public hearings held by the comptroller of the currency and
wrote letters of support to the Federal Reserve. “Though it is not customary
for a banking institution to write in support of a potential competitor,”
wrote a Sioux Falls banker to the secretary of the Fed’s Board of
Governors, “we . . . feel the proposal has great future potential for Sioux
Falls and South Dakota and do support it wholeheartedly.” By supporting
Citi’s move and mediating between the bank, the federal government, and
their communities, South Dakota bankers reaffirmed their status of local
economic leadership even as they helped Citibank relocate.24
Federal regulators at the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal
Reserve, committed to the idea that competition, not controls, would bestserve consumers, approved Citibank’s move and with it a new regulatory
geography, still reliant on states, even as individual state decisions could be
projected nationally. Now a New York citizen, shopping at a New York
retailer, using a credit card from a nominally New York bank, could be
subject to the lending laws not of the state of New York but to those of
South Dakota—where they could not vote, hold office, or stand to sue.
Being able to “locate” in South Dakota, or any other non-usury state,
enabled Citibank to orchestrate a deft regulatory arbitrage, projecting the
local decisions of South Dakota legislators onto its cardholders across the
country. The bank broke the connection between finance and local
democracy that enabled consumers to enforce the place-based social
contract.
South Dakota and Citibank laid the groundwork for a new era in
American consumer finance. With no applicable usury ceiling, Citi could
set its credit card rates at will and project the laws of one small state onto
every Citi card transaction, circumventing local regulations by locating
transactions in South Dakota. Further, because Citibank’s South Dakota
subsidiary could not compete for local deposits, “the bank’s principal
source of funds” would, Citi reported in its national bank application, “be
obtained through money market instruments.” These money markets were
global, reflecting Citibank’s mastery of cross-border money movement. As
the comptroller explained, “Funding of the proposed bank . . . will be
managed through the global money market activities of the parent,
Citicorp.” The point is not that Citi drew on global money markets to
finance its card portfolio: that had always been the bank’s strategy. The
difference was that before 1980, Citi held the risk of market volatility.
Because of New York’s usury limits, it could not pass that risk on to
cardholders. With those limits removed in South Dakota, Citi would
intermediate directly between global capital markets and consumer
borrowers, transferring risk and volatility from one to the other. This was
the essence of financialization.25
Through its use of Marquette, the bank had brought its mastery of
regulatory arbitrage to bear on the domestic market, stretching the seams of
federalism as it had the sovereignties of nation-states. With locations across
the globe, Citi finessed differences in tax structure and regulatoryrequirements to great profitability throughout the 1970s. As the Securities
and Exchange Commission later found, Citibank subsidiaries in London
and Frankfurt regularly booked transactions through subsidiaries in Nassau
and the Chanel Islands, skillfully avoiding British and German currency
regulations, capital requirements, and taxes. Citi executives had, through
these means, long stretched the meaning of the term “located.” As one
commentator noted, “The real significance of Citibank’s activities . . .
relates not so much to the question of illegality or wrongdoing as to the ease
with which deals can be booked to any part of the world that happens to be
convenient and the possibilities presented thereby for regulatory
circumvention.” And, of course, profit.26
Citibank’s relocation reverberated through statehouses, transforming the
regulatory incentives for the bank card market. By the end of 1981, nine
banks had committed to opening offices in Delaware. Forced to react to
such moves, forty-four states either loosened or lifted their usury laws by
1983. Even states whose lawmakers and administrators had fought hard
against high rates throughout the 1970s made an abrupt about-face. By
1984, Iowa governor Terry Branstad was busy luring out-of-state banks.
“Effective July 1, 1984, there will no longer be a finance charge limit on
bank credit cards,” Branstad wrote the president of Washington’s Rainier
Bancorp, adding, “This assures Rainier Bancorp. a competitive position in
credit card operations regardless of fluctuating interest rates.” As Branstad’s
memo made explicit, the elimination of state usury limits effectively
removed the interest rate risk that had constrained card plans. Without them,
unrestrained banks could begin pumping capital into consumer credit and
credit card debt. This undoubtedly opened credit markets and made credit
available to underserved consumers. It also gave primacy to bankers in a
political debate where unrestrained markets and consumer protection were
at odds, at a moment when increasing credit availability replaced rising
wages as the foundation of economic citizenship and purchasing power.
27
Wriston and his political allies called this a victory for the market, yet in
the card industry, the market reigned in theory, not in practice. In the first
decade of the new consumer credit regime, the benefits market advocates
promised did not materialize. Credit was widely available but prices were
high, and they remained high for a long time—long after a truly competitivemarket should have brought them down. “Credit card interest rates have
been exceptionally sticky relative to the cost of funds,” economist
Lawrence M. Ausubel later observed. “Moreover, major credit card issuers
have persistently earned from three to five times the ordinary rate of return
in banking during the period 1983–1988.” Ausubel attributed these outsized
profits to “a class of [irrational] consumers who do not intend to borrow on
their accounts but find themselves doing so anyway.” But in an economy
where wages for middle-class Americans were stagnating, millions of
“rational” convenience users likely became irrational revolvers against their
will. “The data provide indirect empirical confirmation of the presence of
consumers who act as though they do not intend to borrow but who
continuously do so,” Ausubel observed.28
Card-issuing banks rationally took advantage. With New York’s usury
ceiling lifted, Citibank raised its card rates in December 1980 from 18
percent on the first $500 and 12 percent thereafter to 19.8 percent for all
balances, plus a $15 annual fee. Chase increased its rates to 18 percent for
all balances and also charged a $15 annual fee. The new rate laws in New
York, Delaware, and South Dakota allowed Citi and other banks to raise
rates at any time, as long as they notified consumers. In January 1982,
following a similar move by First National Bank of Chicago, Citibank
raised its fee to $20. When policymakers and consumers objected to rate
hikes, bankers blamed federal deregulation. In the first major financial
deregulatory action of the postwar era, Congress phased out the New Deal’s
federal price controls on deposit interest rates (Regulation Q) beginning in
1980. The phaseout, bankers argued, meant they had to pay higher rates on
consumer deposit accounts, costs they had to pass on through higher
consumer interest rates. Never mind that the largest banks financed their
card plans primarily through global money markets. Even as market interest
rates fell over the decade, and with them consumer deposit rates, banks kept
credit card rates high. Large banks continued to aggressively market cards.
Once ensconced in South Dakota, Citibank resumed nationwide card
solicitations. Its rivals followed suit. Yet while banks competed
aggressively for new card accounts, they did not compete on price. “Credit￾card rates will be the last to fall,” bankers declared as other interest ratesdeclined in 1984. They were in a position to know; credit prices in 1985,
and for the rest of the decade, proved them right.29
Fig. 8: Sticky credit card interest rates, 1982–1989. In 1991, economist Lawrence Ausubel found that
although market interest rates declined through the 1980s, credit card interest rates remained
“sticky,” fixed at a high level that suggested a lack of meaningful price competition despite the
elimination of state-level price controls.
Source: Reconstruction of graph in Lawrence M. Ausubel, “The Failure of Competition in the Credit
Card Market,” American Economic Review 81, no. 1 (1991): 54. Credit card interest rates are from
Federal Reserve Bulletin, “Terms of Consumer Installment Credit (Table 1.56),” FRASER. Cost of
funds is one-year Treasury bill yield plus .75 percent, from Federal Reserve Bulletin, “Interest Rates
(Table 1.35),” FRASER.”
Banks poured money into the credit card market. They did so first
through tried-and-true methods of balance sheet expansion, pulling in
money from capital markets and lending it out again through cards, growing
their liabilities and assets in the process. Bankers also developed new
financial strategies to ensure that the credit spigot stayed open.
Securitization, where banks bundled loans and resold them on secondarymarkets, had long been used in mortgage markets and was experiencing a
boom in the early 1980s. By the middle of the decade, a few investment
banks experimented with credit card securitization, but the strategy was
slow to catch on. Explaining why relatively few credit card securities had
been offered, two analysts argued that “the attractive gross margins
available on credit cards means that there is no shortage of lending capital
in this sector thus removing one of the most fundamental pressures for the
development of this market.” Bankers were happy to accumulate card loans
on their books and were even buying other banks’ card portfolios at
significant premiums.30
By 1986, the market’s magic act was wearing thin and Democratic
politicians began to pressure bankers to match their rhetoric with action.
“There is no . . . competition in the credit card industry,” Representative
Charles E. “Chuck” Schumer (D-NY) declared in a Washington Post op-ed,
demanding to know why card rates never seemed to fall. Schumer,
brandishing data from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, showed that
card loans were the most profitable line of bank lending. Bankers claimed
they were merely recouping losses their card plans had sustained in the
1970s and early 1980s. Such claims, Schumer pointed out, simply
confirmed that banks were maintaining artificially high prices, since truly
competitive markets would have little sympathy for past losses. Schumer,
though, did not call for new regulations. Instead, his office published a list
of small banks offering lower rates, relying on consumer initiative to
balance the market. Schumer’s list revealed how politics had narrowed.
Politicians could not demand price or credit controls; they could only prod
markets to work more perfectly.
31
The state regulatory changes initiated by Citibank favored large
financial institutions over their smaller competitors, and they help explain
why—in addition to Ausubel’s irrational consumers—card competition did
not work to pull down rates. Banks that offered less expensive cards could
not afford to market those cards heavily, whereas banks like Chase and Citi
could blanket consumers with credit promotions. Consumers, whether
rationally or irrationally, were in the market for accessible credit. It was
more convenient to take the credit offered. Put another way: search costs
were high, which was why Schumer published his list of low-cost lenders.This fact ultimately undermined the last state holdouts, which had tried to
keep their usury regimes into the mid-1980s. Massachusetts maintained an
18 percent interest ceiling and did not allow annual fees. Local banks still
offered low-cost cards. Following a now well-worn promotion strategy, out￾of-state banks—and Citibank in particular—flooded Massachusetts with
promotions beginning in 1983. Like Gresham’s law in reverse, expensive
credit pushed out inexpensive credit; Citi and its peers could justify high
marketing expenses while Massachusetts banks could not. Eventually
Massachusetts’s banks lost patience and threatened to move if the state
legislature did not raise rates. It was cheaper to fight for deregulation than
to fight for market share. Credit cards, which banks introduced in the 1950s
to help small businesses compete against monopolistic department stores,
became a bludgeon of corporate market power.
32
The Profits and Perils of Plastic Capitalism
Credit card banking was a windfall for South Dakota and Delaware, one
which bound the states’ fortunes to the card industry. In South Dakota, cards
accounted for just .28 percent of all national bank loans in 1980. In 1986,
before Citibank began securitizing its card portfolio, 82 percent of national
bank loans in South Dakota were for card accounts. At the time, that
represented 15 percent of all national bank card loans outstanding and 7
percent of all revolving credit outstanding. South Dakota workers processed
these transactions. As Janklow explained in a 2004 interview, “In my last
couple years in office, 16 percent of all the people in the state were
employed in the financial services industry.” Census data do not quite bear
out Janklow’s claim. Nevertheless, financial industry job growth was
significant, expanding from 4.7 percent of the workforce in 1980, to 7.4
percent two decades later. The state’s increase in tax revenue was also
impressive. From 1978 to 1988, bank franchise tax receipts increased from
$719,156 to $22,015,968, or from .43 percent of the state’s overall tax
revenue to 5.54 percent.33
The expansion in tax revenue reflected a subtle but telling shift in the
state’s relationship to banking institutions worked by the Citibank bill. In
1957, during the height of the New Deal regulatory order, the stateinstituted a bank franchise tax, applicable to all banks operating in South
Dakota. The law mandated that each bank pay 6 percent of its gross
revenues in taxes, 73.33 percent of which would be remitted to the county
in which the bank operated and 26.66 percent would go to the state
government. This system kept banks’ tax revenues within the communities
they served, strengthening the ties between banks and their local economic
constituents. The Citibank bill amended the bank franchise tax. Banks
entering the state to operate credit card businesses paid 95 percent of the tax
to the state, and only 5 percent to the county in which they operated. Credit
card banks owed their loyalty to South Dakota, not to the communities
where they resided. Though both methods of taxation fell under the bank
franchise tax, internal state documents distinguished between the local
“bank franchise tax” and the state “bank card tax,” marking the state’s
special interest in the success and profitability of its new credit-issuing
residents.34
Fig. 9: Finance, insurance, and real estate employment in Delaware, New York, South Dakota, and
the United States, 1970–2000. New York saw some increase in financial industry employmentthrough 1990 before experiencing a relative decline thereafter, while South Dakota and especially
Delaware saw significant increases in their financial industry workforces. These figures, though,
mask significant differences in the kinds of jobs located in each state.
Source: U.S. Decennial Census, accessed through Social Explorer.
Delaware experienced even greater financial industry growth. From
June 1981 to June 1985, bank assets in Delaware increased from $4.7
billion to $22.5 billion. This booming growth also held for individual firms.
At the end of June 1982, Chase Manhattan’s Delaware subsidiary had just
over $100 million in assets. Three years later, it had grown to $2.8 billion,
and by 1988, Chase had $6.3 billion in assets. By 1986, Delaware led the
nation in card loans. This all meant more revenue for the state. In 1988, the
state collected $36.9 million in bank franchise taxes. In 1989, more than
21,000 people worked for banks.35
Table 3. Bank Assets and Franchise Tax Collections in Delaware,
1979–1989 (in millions)
Total bank assets Bank franchise tax collections Chase Manhattan assets
1979 $4,402
$2.5
1980 $4,677
$2.1
1981 $4,732
$2.5
1982 $6,439
$2.2
$103
1983 $11,064
$4.11984 $16,242
$9.5
1985 $22,522
$17.8
$2,821
1986
$23.0
1987 $39,389
$32.4
1988 $56,420
$36.9
$6,312
1989
$53.6
Source: State of Delaware, Office of the State Bank Commissioner, “Consolidated Statement of All
Banks and Trust Companies in Delaware, 1979–1988, RG 1325 and RG 1340 (microfiche), Delaware
State Archives; Bank Franchise Tax and Banking Employment, RG 1325–147, State Reports,
Delaware State Archives; State of Delaware, Annual Report of the State Bank Commissioner, 1982–
1988.
Note: In 1979 and 1980, the fiscal year ended on December 31, for all other years June 30. Table
includes all available data.
In South Dakota and Delaware, the rapid growth of the financial
services industry gratified the ambitions of policymakers, but it also created
anxieties that the footloose firms might one day skip out. Critics voiced
these fears early and often. During summer 1980, at the comptroller’s
hearing in Sioux Falls, one local banker wondered, “If it leaves its
traditional home . . . because it is miffed at the State Legislature . . . how
much would it take to have Citicorp pull out of South Dakota?” Members of
Delaware’s Intergovernmental Task Force assured lawmakers and citizensthat the mobile banks would stay put. “They don’t move quickly,”
economic development secretary Nathan Hayward III assured the state
senate. “This is not going to be a one-night stand or even a torrid weekend.”
Quickly or not, banks now moved, and the threat weighed on state
policymakers. Other observers worried that once their state’s economy was
bound to the banking industry, state policy might become captive to the
interests of the industry rather than its citizens. “All of the down-home
testimony South Dakotans can muster won’t stand a chance against the
lobbying power of an operation like Citibank,” a Sioux Falls Argus Leader
columnist warned in December 1980.36
Although state policymakers had shown little concern for the national
financial structure when they invited banks to their states, they soon faced
enormous pressure to pursue regulatory innovation. Through the early
1980s, Citibank, Governor Janklow, and local development groups like the
Sioux Falls Chamber of Commerce worked to make South Dakota “the
Frontier of Modern Banking” by finding and widening gaps in the
regulatory structure. In 1983, at Citi’s insistence, the legislature allowed
state-chartered banks to acquire insurance companies. These companies, in
turn, could market insurance nationally but—copying the anti-competitive
language from the Citibank bill—not in South Dakota. The legislation,
which breached the Glass-Steagall Act’s barriers dividing commercial
banking and insurance, earned the state the dubious designation of “South
Dakota, Inc.” “We have no intentions of becoming the Liberian or
Panamanian registry for banks,” Janklow insisted. His actions, however,
evidenced a transparent desire to make South Dakota a haven for
swashbuckling financial firms. Citi moved quickly to acquire the American
State Bank of Rapid City, through which it planned to initiate a national
insurance operation regulated under South Dakota law. The Federal Reserve
finally had enough, belatedly chastising Janklow and South Dakota “for
placing job expansion concerns above considerations for the soundness of
the national banking system.” More pointedly, Paul Volcker, who sat quietly
by as Citibank found usury freedom in South Dakota, objected to Citi’s
move into insurance as “smart-ass” banking at its worst. Citibank was
hardly cowed; it would orchestrate the complete demise of Glass-Steagall
through its acquisition of Travelers Insurance a decade and a half later.
37As financial institutions fragmented and spread, so did financial labor.
In New York, the absolute number of financial industry workers declined,
but the Empire State retained the managerial workforce that now exercised
greater power across a wider space. South Dakota and Delaware lured
financial industry jobs, but mostly low-paid clerical positions. In essence,
banks followed a strategy long employed in manufacturing, disciplining
state policymakers by relocating low-wage production work. The products
were now financial rather than physical. Policymakers responded to these
incentives. In the 1990s, South Dakota lawmakers began to worry that other
card-friendly states, notably Nevada and Delaware, might offer Citibank a
more favorable tax climate. Though quick to assure citizens that Citi had
made no threats to leave, the House Republican leader Jerry Lammers
warned that “by a stroke of the pen, Citibank could, if it wished to do so.”
The legislature quickly instituted a new sliding tax scale, sharply
discounting all bank income above $500 million. Citibank was the only
South Dakota bank approaching this revenue figure, and the tax break came
in a year when a budget shortfall forced the state to raise taxes elsewhere.
“What has happened,” one concerned citizen understandably wondered, “to
our general sense of fairness that taxes should be borne most by those that
can most afford to pay them?” The legislation achieved the desired results.
Two years later, Mastercard—headquartered in New York City—sponsored
a study of employment and regulation in the card industry, which included
an index of “State Attractiveness of Credit Card Firms.” The study ranked
South Dakota at the top (Delaware was third). When the Sioux Falls Argus
Leader celebrated the news with a table of state employment and wages, an
astute reader crunched the numbers. South Dakota’s credit card employees
earned less than in every other state save one. “Thanks Argus,” the reader
wrote in exasperation, “for showing me being friendly doesn’t pay!”38
The bank has not left. Walking in Wriston’s footsteps, CEO Charles Prince
came to Sioux Falls in April 2006 to honor Citi’s twenty-fifth anniversary in
the state. At the celebration, Prince recalled the leaders who, in Citibank’s
hour of darkest need, found a solution to the bank’s credit card problem. “A
solution that was good for South Dakota—and that’s terrific!—but frankly
can be seen to have saved Citibank. Think of that,” Prince continued
reverently, “saved Citibank.” Prince sought to chart the path forward for hisgargantuan and often troubled bank. He urged his listeners to expand the
bank’s already dominant card business. And in the short term, Prince
succeeded. Citi’s net income from the U.S. Cards division rose an
impressive 41 percent in 2006, to $3.9 billion. But the crash also came
quickly. As the global financial crisis began to unfold, the bank’s card
income fell and then collapsed. Citi lost $523 million on its North American
credit card accounts, underscoring the massive growth in consumer
indebtedness that its relocation to South Dakota helped create. Outstanding
revolving consumer debt had doubled from 1980 to 1985, again by 1990,
again by 1995, and again by 2005, topping out in May 2008 at more than $1
trillion. The removal of usury limits, and with them interest rate risk that
restrained credit card accounts, made credit card debt an outsized
component of the newly financialized economy.
39
Banks turned a regulatory system meant to stymie their growth to their
advantage, enabling the booming expansion of consumer debt after 1981.
Indeed, a financial regulatory system founded on a bank’s location proved
incompatible with a new era of mobile financial instruments, which bankers
used to extend state regulation, through the national banking system, onto
the citizens of other states. “A law enacted by the Nebraska legislature will
determine the interest rates charged to respondent’s Minnesota customers,”
lawyers for Minnesota’s AFL-CIO argued in their Marquette brief, yet “a
consumer interest group in Minnesota has no voice in the legislatures of
other states.” What was true for card accounts was also true for a variety of
other financial products, including mortgages and money market checking
accounts that also moved across state lines. Once banks, aided by state
allies, embraced the possibilities of relocating beyond regulatory frontiers,
the politics of economic development mingled with those of financial
regulation, threatening states reluctant to accede to bank interests.
Freewheeling financial products reshaped a regulatory landscape that had
limited the political power of financial institutions by limiting their
mobility. Barriers to their mobility continued to fall.40
For Walter Wriston, the bank regulatory system’s polycentricity was not
a flaw but a feature, one the bank’s executives had long appreciated in their
international operations. Writing to Senate Banking Committee member
Charles Percy, Wriston stated his position clearly: “If a complicatedstructure is a concomitant of less regulation and more competition, then I
am for it.” Wriston meant competition between financial institutions, but his
bank’s actions also led to competition between states for bank jobs and tax
revenue. Yet Citibank’s use of regulatory barriers led other states to tear
them down, to the detriment of Citi’s partners in South Dakota who
continued to push regulatory innovation, first to bring more banks in and
then to ensure its banks didn’t leave.41
For Americans, this meant a diminished voice in the local political
economy of consumer credit, even as regulatory geography continued to
structure the bank card industry. In 1991, the Supreme Court extended
Marquette to include late fees and other card account charges. By 2003
almost three-quarters of credit card loans in the United States originated
from states, including South Dakota and Delaware, containing just 4
percent of the country’s population. Importantly, Citibank’s relocation did
not make state interest rate regulation irrelevant; rather, it made the interest
rate regulation of a few states national policy. Opponents of interest rate
limits might argue that they and other price caps impede market efficiency,
and that through the removal of interest rate and other pricing restrictions,
American consumers benefited from greater credit availability.
Financialization, though, is about more than just credit access. Whether
consumers should be able to shield themselves from high interest rates,
annual fees, and overdraft charges is also always a political question. The
extraterritoriality of bank credit cards reshaped this question in favor of the
banking industry, ultimately leading to the instability of political and
economic citizenship in America’s age of finance.42
Table 4. Top Ten States in National Bank Credit Card
Outstandings
1980 1986
New York Delaware
California South Dakota
Illinois California
Texas New York
Pennsylvania Illinois
Ohio Ohio
Michigan NevadaFlorida Florida
Washington Washington
Georgia Maryland
Source: Comptroller of the Currency, Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency,
“Outstanding Balances, Credit Cards and Related Plans of National Banks,” 1980 and 1986,
FRASER.
Table 5. Bottom Ten States in National Bank Credit Card
Outstandings
1980 1986
Delaware Hawaii
Hawaii Wyoming
South Dakota North Dakota
Vermont Vermont
Wyoming Maine
North Dakota Montana
Montana Alaska
Maine Mississippi
New Hampshire West Virginia
Alaska District of Columbia
Source: Comptroller of the Currency, Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency,
“Outstanding Balances, Credit Cards and Related Plans of National Banks,” 1980 and 1986,
FRASER.Epilogue
WHEN YOU BOUGHT THIS BOOK—if you bought it—you likely used a bank
card, either a debit card that transferred monetary data from your bank
account, or a credit card that obliges you to repay your balance every month
or pay some interest. Plastic Capitalism has focused on bank credit cards
and the networks bankers constructed to circumvent the place-based
regulatory order, which had long restrained their industry. Bank debit cards,
in turn, layered atop these earlier innovations, but with the flow of influence
reversed. In the 1960s, banks created BankAmericard (Visa) and Master
Charge (Mastercard) to offer nationwide consumer credit. In the 1990s,
Visa and Mastercard convinced reluctant banks to adopt and promote debit
cards. Since then, the collective effort to popularize debit in the United
States has shifted an increasing share of consumer transactions onto the
card networks and away from other payment media, especially cash and
checks. About 60 percent of purchases now occur via card payment, with
debit outpacing credit nearly 2 to 1 (though the aggregate value of credit
card transactions remains higher). Private card networks are the essential
infrastructure of consumer payments. Our money, as data, moves on private
rails.1
As with the emergence of bank credit cards, the transition to debit relied
on business strategy and political negotiation. Visa and Mastercard had to
convince bankers that debit cards would still generate sufficient revenue
through transaction fees and enhanced consumer relationships, without the
interest income from revolving credit. The networks also had to convince—or coerce—retailers, who resisted the high cost of debit transactions. When
they emerged in the 1950s and gained momentum in the 1960s, bank credit
cards had offered retailers an obvious value proposition: retailers could sell
on credit without the risk or cost of managing their own in-house credit
plans. They paid for the privilege and did so on the promise that consumers,
borrowing to buy, would spend more. Debit, by contrast, merely offered an
expensive substitute for cash and checks. The credit trap—when all
merchants offered credit, they all bore the cost without gaining any
competitive advantage—was reborn as a debit trap. To compel adoption, in
the 1990s Visa and Mastercard applied the full weight of their market
power: retailers accepting any of their cards had to accept all of them—
credit and debit. Retailers and their trade groups howled. They also sued.2
Merchant resistance to high transaction costs falls out of this book’s
narrative in the 1960s, when consumer politics moved to center stage.
Retailers and their allies had also—with less success than consumers—used
the available political and legal tools to shape the card market. As cards
became the dominant media for consumer payments, retailers mobilized
with greater urgency. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, they launched a
series of antitrust lawsuits aimed at Visa’s and Mastercard’s transaction
fees. Although the card networks originated in efforts by small banks to
help small firms compete against giant department stores, in the interchange
fee cases, Walmart—the epitome of monopolistic corporate retailing—was
the networks’ chief antagonist and retailers’ leading champion. Plastic
capitalism encouraged concentrated capitalism. Legal scholar Adam Levitin
called the contest the “Super Bowl of Antitrust,” Goliath versus Goliath.
The question of who will bear the costs of plastic payments remains
unresolved, having moved more recently from the courts to Congress. An
amendment to the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act, the core financial reform
legislation that grew out of the 2008 financial crisis, required the Federal
Reserve to regulate debit transaction fees. The lawmakers who secured
those rules now seek to extend them to credit card fees.3
With the majority of transactions occurring via electronic payment,
retailers—even Walmart—have little choice but to participate in card
networks; likewise, as card-based payments have become predominant,
consumers who lack access to cards are excluded from full participation inconsumer society. We can think about payments citizenship under the larger
rubric of financial citizenship, the idea that to fully realize economic and
social opportunity, consumers need access to affordable financial services.
Cards, in this sense, play a double role, at once markers of class status and
access keys to essential economic infrastructure. The divisions caused by
the latter function are especially apparent online, where internet commerce
has been built on the back of card-based payments. More recently,
payments citizenship has migrated from the digital realm to the physical
with the rise of no-cash policies at retailers and restaurants (a trend
preceding the Covid-19 pandemic and accelerated by it). No-cash policies
reflect employer distrust of often low-paid service employees and an effort
to exclude low-income clientele, who are more likely to pay in cash. Some
local governments have challenged the practice, seeking to democratize
payments by requiring retailers to accept hard currency. These policymakers
recognize that poor and minority consumers continue to pay more to access
basic financial services. In the case of electronic payments, predatory
inclusion manifests alternatively as high interest costs on credit cards or as
account maintenance and overdraft fees for debit cards linked to checking
accounts. The fruits of financial innovation have accrued to the privileged at
the expense of the marginalized.4
The tremendous growth of high-interest credit card debt and the
superabundant profits generated by credit card issuers also demonstrate the
extent to which the fruits of financial innovation have accrued to card
issuers at the expense of cardholders. Before the early 1980s, consumers
and their political allies used state interest rate caps to restrain credit card
profits and minimize financial risk for consumer households. Usury laws
capped topline credit costs, holding card issuers to a locally negotiated
standard of fair credit prices. More importantly, rate caps placed interest
rate risk squarely on card-issuing banks, discouraging them from ensnaring
consumers in long-term, high-interest debt.
Without interest rate risk to restrain them, banks and other card issuers
pumped capital into credit card markets. As they did so, the largest issuers
adhered to Gresham’s law of plastic: they crowded out low-cost card plans
with aggressively marketed high-cost alternatives. The most aggressive
firms—Citibank, J. P. Morgan Chase, Bank of America, and MBNA—cornered the bank credit card market. Over time, bad plastic money got
worse for many consumer households. Bankers and other lenders paired
sophisticated credit scoring and underwriting practices, which identified
and targeted the consumers most likely to rack up debts, with strategies like
lengthening repayment periods, which encouraged indebted consumers to
repay high-interest debts over longer periods of time. Bankers also
partnered with affinity organizations, like universities, and marketed cards
to credit-hungry undergraduates, complete with their school’s burly-yet￾cuddly mascot emblazoned on the card. Collectively, these strategies—and
others designed to encourage consumers to borrow to buy more—fueled a
massive expansion of credit card debt. In 1980, revolving debt per
household in the United States amounted to $658.32. By 2000, the figure
had jumped to $5,989.86, peaking at $8,542.29 at the start of the 2008
financial crisis. Adjusted for inflation, those figures amount to roughly
$2,500 (1980), $10,500 (2000), and $12,000 (2008) in January 2023
dollars. Through this process—and through parallel processes of financial
extraction—household finances became more fragile, consumers became
more stressed, and the economy became more unstable.5Fig. 10: Revolving debt per U.S. household, 1970–2021.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “G.19, Consumer Credit, Historical
Data,” https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/HIST/cc_hist_sa_levels.html; World Bank,
“Population, Total for United States (POPTOTUSA647NWDB),” FRED; United States Census
Bureau, “HH-4, Households by Size: 1960 to Present,” https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time￾series/demo/families/households.html.
All that debt, in turn, has been remarkably profitable for credit card
issuers, defying theoretical expectations that market competition—
infusions, say, of good plastic money—would bring card profits down. In
1991, economist Lawrence Ausubel marveled at the extraordinary
profitability of bank card plans. Thirty years later, a 2021 Federal Reserve
report found that “credit card earnings have almost always been higher than
returns on all bank activities.”6 Despite the intervening global financial
crisis, the government bailouts of the financial system, and the post-crisis
consumer reforms, high-interest lending remains a remarkably lucrative
business.Together, the financial intermediation of daily economic life (via private
card networks), the consequent requirement to engage with private payment
systems (as a buyer and a seller), and the continuous extraction of value by
financial intermediaries (at the moment of sale and over time) all point to a
process that scholars now call “financialization.” As a term of art,
financialization, like its cousin neoliberalism, can be vague, amorphous,
and unsatisfying. In simplest terms, financialization refers to the increasing
prevalence of financial profit-making as the dominant mode of profit
generation for firms and other owners of capital. Scholars understand this
rise of finance as at once a political solution to distributional challenges of
the 1970s, when building social claims for economic equity crashed against
a secular decline in economic growth, and as an intellectual response
among owners of capital to waning corporate profits in the same period.
These macro processes led, in turn, to the financialization of daily life, that
is, the shift of financial risk from corporations and the state onto
households, paired with the multiplication of financial products designed to
profitably help households manage those new risks.7
Though I have mostly avoided using the term in the preceding pages, I
wrote Plastic Capitalism to tell a new story about the processes that drove
financialization. The aim was to put financiers at the center of the action, to
show how they used financial technologies and business strategies to
innovate around market rules and, in doing so, to change the social and
political conditions under which market rules were created and maintained.
Looking at financialization in this way requires a long-term perspective.
Momentum for financial change began earlier than scholars have tended to
recognize, in the 1950s, when the postwar social contract appeared robust
and the financial regulatory order looked stable and strong. Bankers initially
developed regulatory circumvention strategies in alignment with the
prevailing regulatory norms—here the political economy of small finance
and the place-based social contract—and only slowly, incrementally, and
contingently undermined them. This perspective, in turn, recasts the pivots
on which financialization appeared to turn. Take the 1978 Marquette
decision. Critics of credit card industry practices have long understood
Marquette’s foundational role in allowing banks to shape the national credit
card market from states with the weakest regulations. But such analysestend to miss the ways that Marquette rested on bankers’ earlier efforts to
overlay standardized markets atop heterogeneous political spaces, using
networks that were themselves constructed to circumvent geographic limits
on physical expansion. Likewise, Marquette, on its own, did little to
fundamentally change consumer lending markets. It affirmed a status quo of
regional bank card plans still tightly regulated by state law. The ruling
became powerful only when banks began to relocate, to trade jobs for
favorable—and exportable—financial rules.8
At the same time, this book has been about the long-running efforts by
consumer and labor groups, in league with their political allies, to preserve
and reinforce the market rules that enacted their vision of economic fairness
and the appropriate role of credit in consumer society. These efforts flowed
through the New Deal regulatory order, the dynamic system of financial
federalism, industry silos, and price controls that constrained financial firms
and channeled their activities toward socially determined goals. Here,
geographic restrictions on banks played an especially important role. By
confining banks within individual states, the regulatory system compelled
bankers to negotiate the price and terms of credit with local stakeholders.
These negotiations were never perfectly democratic. Bankers were well
organized and politically influential. Minority groups, women, and low￾income consumers all enjoyed less influence than white, affluent
suburbanites. Nevertheless, the privileged consumers who shaped these
debates had a clear idea that unrestrained finance would lead to unrestrained
indebtedness and economic precarity. As bankers sought to escape financial
regulations through unregulated revolving credit, these consumers used
their power to forestall that fate. They harnessed the federalist political
institutions to maintain and extend the New Deal’s moral economy of
credit. Eventually, however, once banks showed state policymakers that
financial capital could move, consumers lost their grip on the regulatory
levers. The future they had anticipated, feared, and fought, rushed headlong
into being.NOTES
Abbreviations
Newspapers
AB
American Banker
BG
Boston Globe
BS
Baltimore Sun
CSM
Christian Science Monitor
CT
Chicago Tribune
FPRAY
Financial Public Relations Association YearbookLAT
Los Angeles Times
NYHT
New York Herald Tribune
NYT
New York Times
SFAL
Sioux Falls Argus Leader
WP
Washington Post
WWD
Women’s Wear Daily
Archives
Barclays
Archives
Barclays Group Archives, Wythenshawe, Manchester, UK
Carter
Library
Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, Atlanta, GAFRBNY
Archives
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Archives, New York, NY
HSBC
Archives
HSBC Archives, Brooklyn, NY
Johnson
Library
Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library, Austin, TX
Kennedy
Library
John F. Kennedy Presidential Library, Boston, MA
NARA I
National Archives of the United States, Washington, DC
NARA II
National Archives of the United States, College Park, MD
Nixon Library
Richard Nixon Presidential Library, Yorba Linda, CA
Reagan
Library
Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, Simi Valley, CAWisconsin
Archives
Wisconsin State Historical Society, Madison, WI
Archival Collections
Anderson
Papers
The Personal Papers of Thomas J. Anderson (RG 74-38, lot 2),
Archives of Michigan, Lansing, MI
Blackmun
Papers
Harry A. Blackmun Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress,
Washington, DC
Bolton Papers
Frances P. Bolton Papers, Western Reserve Historical Society,
Cleveland, OH
Bork Papers
Robert H. Bork Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress,
Washington, DC
Braucher
Papers
Robert Braucher Papers, Harvard University Law Library, Cambridge,
MA
Brennen
Papers
William J. Brennan Jr. Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of
Congress, Washington, DCBurns Papers
Arthur F. Burns Papers, Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library, Ann
Arbor, MI
Carey Subject
Files
Governor Hugh L. Carey Central Subject and Correspondence Files,
New York State Archives, Albany, NY
Celler Papers
Emanuel Celler Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress,
Washington, DC
CRR
Records of Consumers’ Research Inc., Rutgers University, New
Brunswick, NJ
Douglas
Papers
Paul H. Douglas Papers, Chicago Historical Society, Chicago, IL
Dunne Papers
John R. Dunne Papers, State University of New York, Albany, NY
Eccles Papers
Marriner S. Eccles Papers, University of Utah Libraries, Salt Lake
City, UT (accessed through FRASER)
FDIC Exam
Reports
Analysis of Examination Reports, Records of the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (RG 34), NARA II
Fisher Case File Civil case file 72-0-156, Fred Fisher, Etc. vs. First Natl. Bank of
Omaha, box 891, Records of the U.S. District Court for the District of
Nebraska, National Archives of the United States, Kansas City, MOJanklow
Papers
William J. Janklow Papers, University of South Dakota, Vermillion,
SD
Kennedy
Papers
David M. Kennedy Papers, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT
MBS Records
House Financial Institutions Committee and Senate Commerce
Committee, Subcommittee on Banking, Minutes, 1969–1970,
Minnesota Historical Society, St. Paul, MN
Mondale
Papers
Walter F. Mondale Papers, Minnesota Historical Society, St. Paul, MN
NJCL Papers
New Jersey Consumers League Papers, Rutgers University, New
Brunswick, NJ
Northwest
Papers
Northwest Bancorporation, Records of Member Banks, Minnesota
Historical Society, St. Paul, MN
NOW Records
Records of the National Organization for Women, Arthur and
Elizabeth Schlesinger Library, Radcliff Institute, Cambridge, MA
ONBCS
State v. Omaha National Bank, et al., box 3, Attorney General: Civil
Case Files (Series 3), Minnesota Historical Society, St. Paul, MNPatman
Papers
Papers of Wright Patman, Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library,
Austin, TX
Reed Papers
Philip D. Reed Papers, Hagley Museum and Library, Wilmington, DE
Reifler Papers
Winfield W. Reifler Papers, NARA II (accessed through FRASER)
SCSB Records
Select Committee on Small Business, United States Senate (RG 46),
NARA I
St. Cloud Case File Minnesota vs. St. Cloud National Bank and Trust Company, box 20,
Attorney General: Civil Case Files (series 3), Minnesota Historical
Society, St. Paul, MN
Teasdale
Papers
Joseph P. Teasdale Papers (RG 3.48), Missouri State Archives,
Jefferson City, MO
WHCF
White House Central File (common to post-Eisenhower Presidential
Libraries)
Online Archives
APP
The American Presidency Project, ed. Gerhard Peters and John T.
Woolley, http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
FRASER
Federal Reserve Archival System for Economic Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/.FRED
Federal Reserve Economic Data, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/.
Introduction
 1. Citigroup, Citigroup Annual Report 2006, 23,
https://www.citigroup.com/citi/investor/quarterly/2007/ar06c_en.pdf; “The Ultimate Player,”
Conference Board Review 44, no. 6 (December 11, 2006): 28–34; Arthur E. Wilmarth Jr.,
Taming the Megabanks: Why We Need a New Glass-Steagall Act (Oxford University Press,
2020), 181–184.
 2. Citigroup, Citibank South Dakota N.A., A State of Dreams. A World of Difference (2006),
author’s possession; Citigroup, Citigroup Annual Report 2006, sec. 1, 3.
 3. The Federal Reserve defines revolving debt as short- to intermediate-term debt held by
individuals, excluding loans such as those for automobiles, education, and mobile homes, and
those secured by real estate. Most is credit card lending, but the series includes other non￾negligible categories. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “G.19, Consumer
Credit, Historical Data,” https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/HIST/default.htm;
Regulatory Requirements and Industry Practices of Credit Card Issuers, 109 Cong. 30 (2005)
(statement of Anthony Jenkins, Executive Vice President, Citi Cards); Dean Corbae and Pablo
D’Erasmo, “Rising Bank Concentration,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report
No. 594 (March 2020), https://www.minneapolisfed.org/research/staff-reports/rising-bank￾concentration; James Freeman and Vern McKinley, Borrowed Time: Two Centuries of Booms,
Busts, and Bailouts at Citi (Harper Business, 2018), 297.
 4. Neil Fligstein, “Innovation and the Theory of Fields,” AMS Review 11 (2021): 287. I build here
on Richard R. John’s assertion that “political structure shaped business strategy” (Network
Nation: Inventing American Telecommunications [Harvard University Press, 2010], 8), showing
how business strategy in turn reshaped political structure. In this way, I challenge Richard H. K.
Vietor’s framework that divides the market structure and the political arena into “parallel
contexts,” a distinction between market strategy and political strategy that I do not see in
practice (Contrived Competition: Regulation and Deregulation in America [Harvard University
Press, 1994]). Rather, in alignment with Neil Fligstein, I focus on the ways individuals create,
maintain, and dissolve markets through social institutions, with a primary emphasis on political
institutions and formal rules (The Architecture of Markets: An Economic Sociology of Twenty￾First-Century Capitalist Societies [Princeton University Press, 2001]). This focus on innovation
as “strategic pragmatic action” provides a new perspective on the process of regulatory change,
commonly called deregulation. For foundational studies on deregulation and the political
movements behind it, see Martha Derthick and Paul J. Quirk, The Politics of Deregulation
(Brookings Institution, 1985); Angus Burgin, The Great Persuasion: The Reinvention of Free
Markets since the Depression (Harvard University Press, 2012); Kim Phillips-Fein, Invisible
Hands: The Businessmen’s Crusade against the New Deal (W. W. Norton, 2010); Jacob S.
Hacker and Paul Pierson, Winner-Take-All Politics: How Washington Made the Rich Richer—
and Turned Its Back on the Middle Class (Simon & Schuster, 2010); Judith Stein, Pivotal
Decade: How the United States Traded Factories for Finance in the Seventies (Yale UniversityPress, 2010); Benjamin C. Waterhouse, Lobbying America: The Politics of Business from Nixon
to NAFTA, Politics and Society in Twentieth-Century America (Princeton University Press,
2014); Shane Hamilton, Trucking Country: The Road to America’s Wal-Mart Economy
(Princeton University Press, 2008).
 5. Many contemporaries and later scholars would strongly object to applying the word “order” to
the postwar financial regulatory structure; indeed, Richard Vietor graphically demonstrates the
apparent regulatory, supervisory, and administrative chaos that reigned in the postwar years
(Vietor, Contrived Competition, 256). Yet such arguments often find regulatory chaos in the
service of regulatory retrenchment. Instead, following Hyman Minsky and Martin Wolfson, I
contend that the broad priorities articulated here were widely understood—if not universally
accepted—by market participants and policymakers (Wolfson, Financial Crises: Understanding
the Postwar U.S. Experience 2nd ed. [Routledge, 1994], 219–221). Scholars of financialization
and recent critics of deregulation also find order in the system (e.g., Greta R. Krippner,
Capitalizing on Crisis: The Political Origins of the Rise of Finance [Harvard University Press,
2012], 60–63]). The New Deal regulatory order was also a political order, and in this sense I am
building on the framework developed by Fraser and Gerstle (Steve Fraser and Gary Gerstle, The
Rise and Fall of the New Deal Order, 1930–1980 [Princeton University Press, 1989]; Gary
Gerstle, The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free Market
Era [Oxford University Press, 2022]). For histories of New Deal banking policy, see Susan
Estabrook Kennedy, The Banking Crisis of 1933 (University of Kentucky Press, 1973); Helen
M. Burns, The American Banking Community and New Deal Banking Reforms, 1933–1935
(Greenwood Press, 1974). Sociologists debate the extent to which American policymakers
substituted credit for welfare (Monica Prasad, The Land of Too Much: American Abundance and
the Paradox of Poverty [Harvard University Press, 2012]; Gunnar Trumbull, Consumer Lending
in France and America: Credit and Welfare [Cambridge University Press, 2014]). I side with
scholars who see New Deal and postwar credit policies as public welfare channeled through
private firms toward deserving (i.e., creditworthy) groups (see Louis Hyman, Debtor Nation: A
History of America in Red Ink [Princeton University Press, 2011]; Ira Katznelson, When
Affirmative Action Was White: An Untold History of Racial Inequality in Twentieth-Century
America [W. W. Norton, 2005]; Sarah L. Quinn, American Bonds: How Credit Markets Shaped
a Nation [Princeton University Press, 2019]). The use of private actors as conduits for public
benefits aligns with Brian Balogh’s associational state (The Associational State: American
Governance in the Twentieth Century [University of Pennsylvania Press, 2015]).
 6. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 1980 Annual Report of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (Government Printing Office, 1980), 290; Commission on Money and Credit,
Money and Credit: Their Influence on Jobs, Prices, and Growth (Prentice-Hall, 1961), 155. A
massive historical literature examines the migration of American industry in the postwar era, for
example, Bruce J. Schulman, From Cotton Belt to Sunbelt: Federal Policy, Economic
Development, and the Transformation of the South, 1938–1980 (Oxford University Press, 1991);
Thomas J. Sugrue, The Origins of the Urban Crisis: Race and Inequality in Postwar Detroit
(Princeton University Press, 1996); Jefferson Cowie, Capital Moves: RCA’s Seventy-Year Quest
for Cheap Labor (Cornell University Press, 1999); Elizabeth Tandy Shermer, Sunbelt
Capitalism: Phoenix and the Transformation of American Politics (University of Pennsylvania
Press, 2013). The literature on suburbanization is larger still, including Kenneth T. Jackson,
Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States (Oxford University Press, 1987);
Paige Glotzer, How the Suburbs Were Segregated: Developers and the Business of Exclusionary
Housing, 1890–1960 (Columbia University Press, 2020). The history of postwar U.S. banking
focuses on individual firms, e.g., Harold van B. Cleveland and Thomas F. Huertas, Citibank,1812–1970 (Harvard University Press, 1985); John Dover Wilson, The Chase: The Chase
Manhattan Bank, N.A., 1945–1985 (Harvard Business School Press, 1986); Vietor, Contrived
Competition, 234–309; though cf. Mark H. Rose, Market Rules: Bankers, Presidents, and the
Origins of the Great Recession (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2018). Scholars have paid
more attention to the post-1970s period, examining the runup to the global financial crisis:
Ranald C. Michie, Banks, Exchanges, and Regulators: Global Financial Markets from the
1970s (Oxford University Press, 2020); Wilmarth, Taming the Megabanks.
 7. Standard Oil Company of California, Annual Statement to Stockholders (1938), 11 (ProQuest
ID: 88187630); Phillips Petroleum Company, Twenty-First Annual Report (1938), 3 (ProQuest
ID: 88186889). Business histories of the credit card industry largely treat politics as exogenous
or outside the scope of inquiry: David Evans and Richard Schmalensee, Paying with Plastic:
The Digital Revolution in Buying and Borrowing (MIT Press, 1999); Lewis Mandell, The Credit
Card Industry: A History (Twayne Publishers, 1990); Joseph Nocera, A Piece of the Action:
How the Middle Class Joined the Money Class (Simon & Schuster, 1994); David L. Stearns,
Electronic Value Exchange: Origins of the VISA Electronic Payment System (Springer, 2011).
Popular and sociological accounts, meanwhile, to the extent that they consider politics at all,
tend to portray politicians as captured by industry interests: Charles R. Geisst, Collateral
Damaged: The Marketing of Consumer Debt to America (Bloomberg Press, 2009); Lloyd Klein,
It’s in the Cards: Consumer Credit and the American Experience (Praeger, 1999); Robert D.
Manning, Credit Card Nation: The Consequences of America’s Addiction to Credit (Basic
Books, 2000); Matty Simmons, The Credit Card Catastrophe: The 20th Century Phenomenon
That Changed the World (Barricade Books, 1995).
 8. On financial innovation as regulatory circumvention, see Fligstein, “Innovation and the Theory
of Fields”; William L. Silber, “The Process of Financial Innovation,” American Economic
Review 73 (2) (May 1983): 89–95. On the ways visions of the imagined future state of markets,
once innovation has been adopted, shape the process of innovation, see Bernardo Bátiz-Lazo,
Thomas Haigh, and David L. Stearns, “How the Future Shaped the Past: The Case of the
Cashless Society,” Enterprise & Society 15, no. 1 (March 2014): 103–131; Jens Beckert,
Imagined Futures: Fictional Expectations and Capitalist Dynamics (Harvard University Press,
2016).
 9. While concerned with business power, this book does not seek to affirmatively theorize it (Neil
Rollings, “‘The Vast and Unsolved Enigma of Power’: Business History and Business Power,”
Enterprise & Society 22, no. 4 [December 2021]: 893–920). Contra Davis and Kim, who
understand financialization as the “displacement of financial institutions by financial markets,”
this study emphasizes the preliminary and necessary process through which financial institutions
carve out intermediary roles in formerly un-intermediated economic relationships (Gerald F.
Davis and Suntae Kim, “Financialization of the Economy,” Annual Review of Sociology 41
[2015]: 203–221).
10. For Pocketbook politics, see Meg Jacobs, Pocketbook Politics: Economic Citizenship in
Twentieth-Century America (Princeton University Press, 2004). For third wave consumerism
and U.S. consumer politics generally, see Lizabeth Cohen, A Consumers’ Republic: The Politics
of Mass Consumption in Postwar America (Alfred A. Knopf, 2003); Lawrence B. Glickman,
Buying Power: A History of Consumer Activism in America (University of Chicago Press,
2009); Tracey Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise: Gender, Politics, and American
Grocery Stores in the Twentieth Century (University of North Carolina Press, 2010). Some of
these writers, like Deutsch, engage intermittently with state politics, but it is never a sustained
site of analysis.11. The role of federalism in enabling democratic control over financial institutions aligns with
Charles W. Calomiris and Stephen H. Haber’s theorization of the political economy of financial
governance (Fragile by Design: The Political Origins of Banking Crises and Scarce Credit
[Princeton University Press, 2014]), and contrasts the simple narrative of regulatory capture
(George J. Stigler, “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science 2, no. 1 [1971]: 3–21). On federalism in the postwar era, see Karen M.
Tani, States of Dependency: Welfare, Rights, and American Governance, 1935–1972
(Cambridge University Press, 2016); Brent Cebul, Karen Tani, and Mason B. Williams, “Clio
and the Compound Republic,” Publius: The Journal of Federalism 47, no. 2 (April 2017): 235–
259.
12. On the influence of Marquette, see Samuel Issacharoff and Erin F. Delaney, “Credit Card
Accountability,” University of Chicago Law Review 73, no. 1 (Winter 2006): 157–182; Johnna
Montgomerie, “The Financialization of the American Credit Card Industry,” Competition &
Change 10, no. 3 (September 2006): 301–319.
13. James A. White, “Consumers Are Charging through a Credit-Card Blizzard,” CT, January 22,
1978.
14. Ad, BankAmericard, “Think of It as Money,” WP, April 20, 1971; Bátiz-Lazo, Haigh, and
Stearns, “How the Future Shaped the Past.” Louis Hyman emphasizes the importance of
department store credit cards to consumer experiences, but he misses the importance of bank
cards to debates about consumer protection and banking market structure (Debtor Nation, esp.
98–99, 111–118, 145–148, 169–170). To avoid complex and contentious debates, this book
generally accepts the dominant intermediation theory of banking, i.e., banks intermediate
between savers and borrowers without creating new money in the process. I find the money
creation theory of banking convincing however, and see the development of the card industry,
especially in the later stages, as an effort by bankers to claim greater control over the creation
and movement of money. For an overview of competing monetary theories, see Michael
McLeay, Amar Radia, and Ryland Thomas, “Money Creation in the Modern Economy,” Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin 2014 Q1: 14–27.
15. On the 1970s as a transformative decade, see Bruce J. Schulman, The Seventies: The Great Shift
in American Culture, Society, and Politics (Simon & Schuster, 2001); Stein, Pivotal Decade. On
the transition from industrial to service work, see Claudia Goldin, “Labor Markets in the
Twentieth Century,” in Cambridge Economic History of the United States, ed. Stanley L.
Engerman and Robert E. Gallman. vol. 3. (Cambridge University Press, 2000), 549–623;
Gabriel Winant, The Next Shift: The Fall of Industry and the Rise of Health Care in Rust Belt
America (Harvard University Press, 2021). On concerns about American affluence, see Daniel
Horowitz, The Anxieties of Affluence: Critiques of American Consumer Culture, 1939–1979
(University of Massachusetts Press, 2004). Scholars chronicling the Carter presidency tend to
ignore or minimize the credit control policy (Kaufman and Kaufman, The Presidency of James
Earl Carter [University of Kansas Press, 1993]; Erwin Hargrove, Jimmy Carter as President:
Leadership and the Politics of the Public Good [Louisiana State University Press, 1988]). Those
interested in Reagan’s ascent, often more interested in long-term social and cultural
developments, also neglect credit controls, e.g., Gil Troy, Morning in America: How Ronald
Reagan Invented the 1980s (Princeton University Press, 2005); Sean Wilentz, Age of Reagan: A
History, 1974–2008 (Harper, 2008); Donald T. Critchlow, The Conservative Ascendency: How
the GOP Right Made Political History (Harvard University Press, 2007).
16. Scholars tend to accept that the Volcker Shock fundamentally transformed domestic and global
financial markets (for example, by precipitating the savings and loan crisis in the U.S. and the
Latin American sovereign debt crisis), but detailed examination of this assumption is rare. Forthe Volcker Shock, see Iwan Morgan, “Monetary Metamorphosis: The Volcker Fed and
Inflation,” Journal of Policy History 24, no. 4 (2012): 545–571. For Volcker’s influence
generally, see David Harvey, A Brief History of Neoliberalism (Oxford University Press, 2007).
17. Lawrence M. Ausubel, “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market,” American
Economic Review 81, no. 1 (1991): 50–81. Financialization is a burgeoning field. For key texts,
see Krippner, Capitalizing on Crisis; Davis and Kim, “Financialization of the Economy”;
Natascha van der Zwan, “Making Sense of Financialization,” Socio-Economic Review 12, no. 1
(January 1, 2014): 99–129. My focus on the conflict between capitalism and democracy aligns
with Wolfgang Streek, Buying Time: The Delayed Crisis of Democratic Capitalism, trans.
Patrick Camiller (Verso, 2014).
Chapter 1. The New Deal Regulatory Order
 1. Gary Richardson, “Categories and Causes of Bank Distress during the Great Depression, 1929–
1933: The Illiquidity versus Insolvency Debate Revisited,” Explorations in Economic History
44, no. 4 (2007): 593; Marriner S. Eccles to A. P. Giannini, October 12, 1934, folder 1, box 9,
Eccles Papers, FRASER.
 2. Raymond Moley, After Seven Years (Harper & Brothers, 1939), 155; A. P. Giannini, draft
editorial, folder 8, box 20a, Eccles Papers, FRASER. Giannini’s editorial was published as “A.
P. Giannini Says: Average Man Pays His Debts,” San Francisco Examiner, August 12, 1936;
“Banks Should Make More Personal Loans,” Bankers Magazine 131, no. 4 (October 1936):
351–352.
 3. Blanche Bernstein, The Patterns of Consumer Debt, 1935–1936 (National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1940), 124; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Instalment
Credit, part 1, vol. 1 (Government Printing Office, 1957), 201. Bernstein’s figures for 1936 are
for “non relief families,” so the percentage of households holding installment debt at that time
was likely somewhat higher.
 4. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, All Bank Statistics: United States, 1896–
1955 (Government Printing Office, 1959), 33, FRASER; Bray Hammond, Banks and Politics in
America from the Revolution to the Civil War (Princeton University Press, 1957); Charles W.
Calomiris and Stephen H. Haber, Fragile by Design: The Political Origins of Banking Crises
and Scarce Credit (Princeton University Press, 2014), 153–189; Henry M. Dawes, “In Defense
of Unit Banking,” Selected Articles on Chain, Group and Branch Banking, ed. Virgil Willit (H.
W. Wilson, 1930), 255; Louis Hyman, Debtor Nation: A History of America in Red Ink
(Princeton University Press, 2012), 76–77; Mehrsa Baradaran, The Color of Money: Black
Banks and the Racial Wealth Gap (Harvard University Press, 2017).
 5. Anne Fleming, City of Debtors: A Century of Fringe Finance (Harvard University Press, 2018),
213–245. Fleming examines financial federalism in the narrower context of consumer
protection, rather than, as I do here, the wider framework of financial structure, contra studies,
like Krippner, focused solely on federal regulations (Greta R. Krippner, Capitalizing on Crisis:
The Political Origins of the Rise of Finance [Harvard University Press, 2011]).
 6. Eugene N. White, “Banking and Finance in the Twentieth Century,” in The Cambridge
Economic History of the United States, ed. Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman
(Cambridge University Press, 2000), 748–752.
 7. Marriner S. Eccles, Beckoning Frontiers: Public and Personal Recollections, ed. Sidney Hyman
(Alfred A. Knopf, 1951), 54–55, 175; Ira Katznelson, When Affirmative Action Was White: AnUntold History of Racial Inequality in Twentieth-Century America (W. W. Norton, 2005).
 8. Eugene N. White, “State-Sponsored Insurance of Bank Deposits in the United States, 1907–
1929,” Journal of Economic History 41, no. 3 (1981): 537–57; Edwin J. Perkins, “The Divorce
of Commercial and Investment Banking: A History,” Banking Law Journal 88, no. 6 (June
1971): 483–528; Helen M. Burns, The American Banking Community and New Deal Banking
Reforms, 1933–1935 (Greenwood Press, 1974); Susan Estabrook Kennedy, The Banking Crisis
of 1933 (University of Kentucky Press, 1973), 205–209, 211–212, 215–216, 218–219; Calomiris
and Haber, Fragile by Design, 189–190.
 9. Richard Vietor, Contrived Competition: Regulation and Deregulation in America (Harvard
University Press, 1994), 246–252; Carter Glass, Operation of the National and Federal Reserve
Banking Systems, S. Rep. 70–584, April 22, 1932, 10. Whether Glass’s diagnosis was accurate is
disputed; cf. Calomiris and Haber, Fragile by Design, 190–191; Paul G. Mahoney, Wasting a
Crisis: Why Securities Regulation Fails (University of Chicago Press, 2015).
10. Krippner, Capitalizing on Crisis, 63; Veitor, Contrived Competition, 250; Banking Act of 1935,
74 Cong. 218, 330 (1935) (statements of Dr. Oliver M. W. Sprague, Harvard University, and
Marriner S. Eccles, Governor Federal Reserve Board).
11. Memorandum, Marriner Eccles to Franklin Roosevelt, November 12, 1936, folder 6, box 5,
Eccles Papers, FRASER; Perkins, “Divorce of Commercial and Investment Banking.”
12. Jason Scott Smith, Building New Deal Liberalism: The Political Economy of Public Works,
1933–1956 (Cambridge University Press, 2005); Elis W. Hawley, The New Deal and the
Problem of Monopoly: A Study in Economic Ambivalence (Princeton University Press, 1966);
Julian E. Zelizer, “The Forgotten Legacy of the New Deal: Fiscal Conservatism and the
Roosevelt Administration, 1933–1938,” Presidential Studies Quarterly 20, no. 2 (June 2000):
332–359; Arthur Schlesinger Jr. Coming of the New Deal (Houghton Mifflin, 1959), 496–503;
Franklin D. Roosevelt, “Address to the Bankers’ Convention at Constitution Hall, Washington
D.C.,” October 24, 1934, APP.
13. Marriner S. Eccles, “Reconstructing Economic Thinking,” October 27, 1933, folder 5, box 74,
Eccles Papers, FRASER; Winfield Reifler, “Housing Program,” April 19, 1934, folder 5, box 1,
Reifler Papers, FRASER; Mark Wayne Nelson, Jumping the Abyss: Marriner S. Eccles and the
New Deal, 1933–1940 (University of Utah Press, 2017), 145–156.
14. Calder, Financing the American Dream, 156–208; Hyman, Debtor Nation, 10–12, 20–42;
Fleming, City of Debtors, 109–113; Vicki Howard, From Main Street to the Mall: The Rise and
Fall of the American Department Store (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2015), 74–75, 87–89.
15. William Leach, Land of Desire: Merchants, Power, and the Rise of a New American Culture
(Pantheon: 1993), 299–302; Calder, Financing the American Dream, 71–72; Meg Jacobs,
Pocketbook Politics: Economic Citizenship in Twentieth-Century America (Princeton University
Press, 2005), 18.
16. Christina D. Romer, “The Nation in Depression,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 7, no. 2
(Spring 1993): 29–31; Martha Olney, “Avoiding Default: The Role of Credit in the
Consumption Collapse of 1930,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, no. 1 (February 1999):
319–335; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Instalment Credit, part
1, vol. 1 (Government Printing Office, 1957), 236–239; memo, Marriner Eccles to Jacob Viner,
September 4, 1934, folder 2, box 41, Eccles Papers, FRASER; Eccles, Beckoning Frontiers,
144–147; Nelson, Jumping the Abyss, 133–175.
17. Gail Radford, Modern Housing for America: Policy Struggles in the New Deal Era (University
of Chicago Press, 1996), 179–180; Hyman, Debtor Nation, 53–58; Winfield Reifler, “A Plan to
Provide ‘Consumer Credit’ for Home Modernization,” April 19, 1934, folder 5, box 1, Reifler
Papers, FRASER; Eccles, Beckoning Frontiers, 148. Harnessing private interest to direct capitaltoward the public good was a longstanding strategy of the American political economy, e.g.,
Louis Hartz, Economic Policy and Democratic Thought: Pennsylvania, 1776–1860 (Harvard
University Press, 1948).
18. David M. P. Freund, Colored Property: State Policy and White Racial Politics in Suburban
America (University of Chicago Press, 2007).
19. Hyman, Debtor Nation, 73–97; Reifler, “Plan to Provide ‘Consumer Credit’”; Ronald C. Tobey,
Technology as Freedom: The New Deal and the Electrical Modernization of the American Home
(University of California Press, 1997), 107–108; memo, Ronald Ransom to Board Members
(individually), December 9, 1946, folder 5, box 41, Eccles Papers, FRASER.
20. Marriner Eccles, “Comments on Public Works,” November 1934, folder 5, box 9, Eccles Papers,
FRASER (I attribute this document to Eccles based on similarity to 1933 speech quoted above);
Chloe N. Thurston, At the Boundaries of Homeownership: Credit, Discrimination, and the
American State (Cambridge University Press, 2018); Louis Hyman, “Ending Discrimination,
Legitimating Debt: The Political Economy of Race, Gender, and Credit Access in the 1960s and
1970s,” Enterprise & Society 12, no. 1 (Spring 2011): 200–232. For the parallel idea of
“financial citizenship,” see Andrew Leyshon and Nigel Thrift, “Geographies of Financial
Exclusion: Financial Abandonment in Britain and the United States,” Transaction of the Institute
of British Geographers 20, no. 3 (1995): 312–341.
21. Eccles to Giannini, October 12, 1934, folder 1, box 9, Eccles Papers, FRASER; Sarah L. Quinn,
American Bonds: How Credit Markets Shaped a Nation (Princeton University Press, 2019),
124–149.
22. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Meeting Minutes, June 25, 1941, FRASER;
Eccles, Beckoning Frontiers, 350, 372–374; Franklin D. Roosevelt, “Message to Congress on an
Economic Stabilization Program,” April 27, 1942, APP; Hyman, Debtor Nation, 100.
23. Federal Reserve System, Meeting Minutes, June 25, 1941; Leon Henderson to Carl E. Perry,
July 25, 1941, folder 3, box 41, Eccles Papers, FRASER; Roosevelt, “Message to Congress on
an Economic Stabilization Program”; Rolf Nugent, Consumer Credit and Economic Stability
(Russell Sage Foundation, 1939); Hyman, Debtor Nation, 100–102; Fleming, City of Debtors,
64–68, 81–82, 130–134.
24. Federal Reserve, Consumer Instalment Credit, part 1, vol. 1, 296, 305; Hyman, Debtor Nation,
114–118.
25. Federal Reserve, Consumer Instalment Credit, part 1, vol. 1, 296; Hyman, Debtor Nation, 114–
118; Josh Lauer, “Plastic Surveillance: Payment Cards and the History of Transactional Data,
1888 to Present,” Big Data & Society (January 2020): 5.
26. Hyman, Debtor Nation, 118–130; Howard, Main Street to the Mall, 123, 147–149.
27. Eccles, Beckoning Frontiers, 417, 426–433. More specifically, controls were lifted in 1947,
reimposed in September 1948, and authority expired in 1949 (U.S., President and Council of
Economic Advisers, Economic Report of the President [Government Printing Office, 1949], 16–
17, FRASER).
28. Robert M. Collins, More: The Politics of Economic Growth in Postwar America (Oxford
University Press, 2000), 16–22; Federal Reserve, Consumer Instalment Credit, part 1, vol. 1,
244–245; Consumer Credit Control, 80 Cong. 15 (1947) (statement of Marriner Eccles), 15;
memo, Clark L. Fauver, February 11, 1949, folder 8, box 41; memo, Chad F. Calhoun, February
19, 1949, folder 11, box 41, Eccles Papers, FRASER.
29. Consumer Credit Control, 84 (statement of Gary M. Underhill, Executive Director, Consumer
Bankers Association); Howell John Harris, The Right to Manage: Industrial Relations Policies
of American Business in the 1940s (University of Wisconsin Press, 1982), 150.30. U.S., President and Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Report of the President
(Government Printing Office, 1950), 12; U.S., President and Council of Economic Advisers,
Economic Report of the President (Government Printing Office, 1956), 94; Hyman, Debtor
Nation, 127–129; Federal Reserve, Consumer Instalment Credit, part 1, vol. 1, 1–6; Michael R.
Glass and Sean H. Vanatta, “The Frail Bonds of Liberalism: Pensions, Schools, and the
Unraveling of Fiscal Mutualism in Midcentury New York,” Capitalism: A Journal of History
and Economics 2, no. 2 (Summer 2021): 427–472.
31. Henry H. Heimann, “Sound Credit, Our First Line of Defense,” Credit World 39, no. 11 (August
1951): 4; Gary Gerstle, The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order (Oxford University Press,
2022), 20–27; Calder, Financing the American Dream, 242–249, 251; Paul Mazur, The
Standards We Raise: The Dynamics of Consumption (Harper & Brothers, 1953), 31, 100–101,
129, 144.
32. Federal Reserve, Consumer Instalment Credit, part 1, vol. 1, 162, 203, part 3, 24, 98, 138, 226–
229; John Kenneth Galbraith, The Affluent Society (Riverside Press, 1958), 201; Daniel
Horowitz, The Anxieties of Affluence: Critiques of American Consumer Culture, 1939–1979
(University of Massachusetts Press, 2004); “Regulation of Consumer Instalment Credit: Views
of the Board of Governors,” Federal Reserve Bulletin (June 1957), 647–648. In a later edition,
Galbraith amended the quote to read, “Can the bill collector or the bankruptcy lawyer be the
central figure in the good society?” a change that reflected unfolding negative consequences of
credit-fueled prosperity for individual American households.
33. Eric Monnet, Controlling Credit: Central Banking and the Planned Economy in Postwar
France, 1948–1973 (Cambridge University Press, 2018), 1, 247–282; Stuart Aveyard, Paul
Corthorn, and Sean O’Connell, Politics of Consumer Credit in the UK, 1938–1992 (Oxford
University Press, 2018).
34. David Michael Kennedy, “What the New Deal Did.” Political Science Quarterly 124, no. 2
(2009): 253–254; Joseph A. Schumpeter, Business Cycles, vol. 2 (McGraw Hill, 1939), 1004,
quoted in Consumer Instalment Credit, part 1, vol. 1, 240; Giannini, “Banks Should Make More
Personal Loans.” In this sense, private credit and public welfare were compliments within the
New Deal financial order, though they would become substitutes after that order collapsed in the
1980s. Monica Prasad, The Land of Too Much: American Abundance and the Paradox of
Poverty (Harvard University Press, 2012); Gunnar Trumbull, Consumer Lending in France and
America: Credit and Welfare (Cambridge University Press, 2014).
Chapter 2. Charge Account Banking
 1. G. L. Toole, “Development and Progress of a Bank Charge Account Service: Part I,” AB, April
28, 1955; G. L. Toole, “Development and Progress of a Bank Charge Account Service: Part II,”
AB, May 16, 1955; Otto C. Lorenz, “21 Charge Account Bankers Show Profits for 3rd Quarter,”
AB, November 30, 1955; Otto C. Lorenz, “5 More Banks Enter Charge Account Profit Column,”
AB, August 25, 1959; brochure, Upper Darby National Bank, “Upper Darby National Bank:
Charge-Rite Revolving Credit Plan,” box 1294, Douglas Papers. A version of this chapter
appeared as Sean H. Vanatta, “Charge Account Banking: A Study of Financial Innovation in the
1950s,” Enterprise & Society 19, no. 2 (June 2018): 352–390.
 2. My emphasis on postwar antimonopoly politics runs counter to Richard Hofstadter (“What
Happened to the Antitrust Movement?” in The Paranoid Style in American Politics and Other
Essays, ed. Richard Hofstadter [Alfred A. Knopf, 1965]). Instead, I follow Richard John’s callfor renewed focus on antimonopoly (“Robber Barons Redux: Antimonopoly Reconsidered,”
Enterprise & Society 13, no. 1 [March 2012]: 1–38). Financial historians view charge accounts
as a failed path toward innovation (David Evans and Richard Schmalensee, Paying with Plastic:
The Digital Revolution in Buying and Borrowing [MIT Press, 1999], 55–56; Louis Hyman,
Debtor Nation: The History of America in Red Ink [Princeton University Press, 2011], 145–148;
Lewis Mandell, The Credit Card Industry: A History [Twayne Publishers, 1990], 26–29; David
L. Stearns, Electronic Value Exchange: Origins of the VISA Electronic Payment System
[Springer, 2011], 18–19; Timothy Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your Pocket’: The Early
History of the Credit Card at Bank of America and Chase Manhattan,” Enterprise & Society 1,
no. 2 [June 2000]: 322–324).
 3. Consumer Credit Control, 80 Cong. (1947); Hyman, Debtor Nation, 100–127; Samuel Feinberg,
“From Where I Sit: ‘To Thine Own Self Be True,’” WWD, February 18, 1953; Thomas F.
Conroy, “Credit Drive Urged to Expand Sales,” NYT, January 10, 1946; “Retail Executive:
Credit Sales Promotion Gains Ground,” WWD, February 18, 1946.
 4. Hyman, Debtor Nation, 114–125; 148–156; Vicki Howard, From Main Street to the Mall: The
Rise and Fall of the American Department Store (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2015), 132–
153; A. L. Trotta, “Bank Charge Account Plans,” Stores (March 1953): 19; “Costs May Cause
Stores to Merge,” NYT, July 11, 1949.
 5. “For the Smaller Businessman: Sales Promotions, Office Procedures, Credit & Collection
Problems,” Credit World 40, no. 9 (June 1952): 24; Frank W. Price, “Credit Operations in a
Specialty Store, “Credit World 40, no. 12 (September 1952): 5; Feinberg, “From Where I Sit: To
Thine Own Self Be True”; “Store Operations: Smaller Stores Given Methods to Meet Chains,”
WWD, June 30, 1950. For retail antimonopoly, see Laura Phillips Sawyer, “California Fair
Trade: Antitrust and the Politics of ‘Fairness’ in U.S. Competition Policy,” Business History
Review 90, no. 1 (Spring 2016): 31–56; Marc Levinson, The Great A&P and the Struggle for
Small Business in America (Hill and Wang, 2011).
 6. “Store Operations: Smaller Stores Given Methods to Meet Chains”; Shopping Centers-1959, 86
Cong. (1959); Theodore Philip Kovaleff, Business and Government during the Eisenhower
Administration: A Study of the Antitrust Policy of the Antitrust Division of the Justice
Department (Ohio University Press, 1980), 11; The Impact of Suburban Shopping Centers on
Independent Retailers: Report of the Select Committee on Small Business, 86 Cong. (1960);
Levinson, Great A&P.
 7. Toole, “Charge Account Service: Part I”; Federal Reserve, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, Consumer Instalment Credit, part 1, vol. 1 (Government Printing Office,
1957), 36–37; Johnathan Levy, Ages of American Capitalism: A History of the United States
(Random House, 2022), 524–527.
 8. “Bank Starts First Credit Plan,” Newsday, August 16, 1946.
 9. “Manufactures Trust Co. Buys Flatbush National,” NYT, May 8, 1946; ad, First National Bank
and Trust Co. of Bay Shore, Newsday, October 22, 1946, 6; “Bank Starts First Credit Plan,”
Newsday, August 16, 1946; C. Kenneth Fuller, “A Bank’s ‘Charg-It’ Plan for Merchants,”
Burroughs Clearing House (November 1950), 28. Prior accounts of Biggins’s plan claim it
operated within four blocks of the Flatbush bank, but I have found no contemporary evidence to
support these claims. The Bay Shore bank had a long-standing correspondent relationship with
Manufacturers Trust (though Biggins may also have licensed the program independently of his
position with the bank).
10. “Charge It—With the Bank,” Business Week (September 23, 1950), 58, 60; Toole, “Charge
Account Service: Part I”; Hyman, Debtor Nation, 123–124.11. “A Bank’s Retail Charge Account Service,” Banking 44, no. 12 (June 1952), 122; Edward M.
Donohue, “Charge Account Financing by Banks,” Bulletin of the Robert Morris Associates 35,
no. 10 (June 1953): 333.
12. Donohue, “Charge Account Financing by Banks,” 334; J. H. Peters, “From Where We Sit: Bank
Credit via Charge Accounts,” Bankers Monthly (June 1952), 4. For embeddedness, see Mark
Granovetter, “Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness,”
American Journal of Sociology 91, no. 3 (November 1985): 481–510.
13. Toole, “Charge Account Service: Part II”; David C. Hopper, “’Easy Charge’ Credit Plan Proving
Profitable for Jersey Bank, Aiding Other Departments,” AB, September 27, 1956; Lizabeth
Cohen, A Consumers’ Republic: The Politics of Mass Consumption in Postwar America (Alfred
A. Knopf, 2003), 278.
14. Donohue, “Charge Account Financing by Banks,” 334; Peters, “From Where We Sit,” 4.
15. Charles H. Landrain, “Charge Accounts Offer Banks Chance to Provide Valuable Service,” AB,
June 16, 1959; Otto C. Lorenz, “Will Revolving Check-Credit Vie with Charge-Account
Banking?” AB, January 26, 1959; Toole, “Charge Account Service: Part I”; Elaine Tyler May,
Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era (Basic Books, 1988). Typical
applications asked first for the occupation of “Mr. or Miss,” with space for “wife’s occupation”
below. Brochure, Upper Darby National Bank, “Upper Darby National Bank: Charge-Rite
Revolving Credit Plan,” box 1294; ad, Florida National Bank, “A New Source of Revenue for
Orlando Merchants,” (n.d.), box 1298, Douglas Papers.
16. “Charge It—With the Bank”; “Bankers Move In on Charge Credit,” Business Week (April 11,
1953), 42; “A Bank’s Retail Charge Account Service,” Banking 44, no. 12 (June 1, 1952): 122;
“Bank Devises A Small-Store Charge-It Plan,” NYHT, May 1, 1952; Dean J. Madsen, “The
Charge Account Road to Bank Growth,” FPRAY (1958), 284; G. L. Toole, “Community Service
with Reciprocal Benefits,” FPRAY (1958), 292; Toole, “Charge Account Service: Part I.”
17. Fuller, “A Bank’s ‘Charg-It’ Plan for Merchants,” Otto C. Lorenz, “Wham! . . . In the Gold with
Charge Account Banking,” AB, February 26, 1957; “A.B.A. Charge Plan Panel Urges Caution in
Adopting Method,” AB, March 26, 1953; “3 Banks Map New Shopper Credit Service,” CT,
January 14, 1953; “Single Check Shopping,” WSJ, February 9, 1953; William Henry Herrman,
“Charge Account Banking” (master’s thesis, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania,
1960), 26–30; Donohue, “Charge Account Financing by Banks,” 334.
18. Frederick L. Vesperman, History of Charge Account Banking (Charge Account Bankers
Association, 1968) (though cf. “Charge Account Firm Sues Bank, Company Selling Like
Services,” WSJ, March 20, 1953; “LI Bank Says Ex-VP Stole Charge Plan,” Newsday, March
24, 1953); Jens Beckert, Imagined Futures: Fictional Expectations and Capitalist Dynamics
(Harvard University Press, 2016). On business associations as social, meaning-making
institutions, see Lyn Spillman, Solidarity in Strategy: Making Business Meaningful in American
Trade Associations (University of Chicago Press, 2012).
19. Otto Carl Lorenz and Harold Meade Mott-Smith, Financial Problems of Instalment Selling:
Practical Methods for the Determination of Capital and Discount Requirements, Earned
Income, Yield, etc. (McGraw Hill, 1931); “Otto C. Lorenz Dead, Was Associate Editor of
‘American Banker,’” AB, January 26, 1960; Otto C. Lorenz, “From the Consumer Credit Desk:
Charge Account Bankers Show Great Improvement,” AB, April 28, 1955; Otto C. Lorenz, “Bank
Retail Charge Account Service Volume $726,098 for May, ’53,” AB, June 19, 1953; Otto C.
Lorenz, “21 Charge Account Bankers Show Profit for 3rd Quarter,” AB, November 30, 1955;
Otto C. Lorenz, “From the Consumer Credit Desk: About Figures . . . and Surveys,” AB, August
26, 1954.20. J. C. Gilliland, quoted in Vesperman, History of Charge Account Banking, 5; Vesperman,
History of Charge Account Banking, 5, 7, 10; “Urges Bankers Ease Credit to Spur Economy,”
CT, March 25, 1954; “Chge-Acct Bankers Form Association to Exchange Information,” AB,
March 23, 1954; Lorenz, “From the Consumer Credit Desk: Charge Account Bankers Show
Great Improvement”; “Florida National Starts Charge Account Plan,” AB, December 27, 1957.
21. Robert H. Cole, Financing Retail Credit Sales through Charge Account Bank Plans, Business
Management Survey No. 5 (Bureau of Business Management, 1962), 36; Otto C. Lorenz,
“Credit Engineering—For Bank Examiners,” AB, May 29, 1956; Vesperman, History of Charge
Account Banking, 22; “Five Charge Account Banks Earn Net Rate of 10%,” AB, November 27,
1957; Otto C. Lorenz, “Charge Account Bankers Announce Gains for 2nd Quarter,” AB, August
21, 1958.
22. Here and elsewhere, I convert monthly to annual interest charges by multiplying the former by
12. With monthly compounding, the true annual rate would be higher, but states often prohibited
compound interest on consumer loans. Bank, press, and government sources from the period
uniformly use the simple calculation. Computing the “true” rate of interest was complicated and
contentious, as we will see in later chapters.
23. Herrman, “Charge Account Banking,” 59. On state credit rules generally, see Barbara A. Curran,
Trends in Consumer Credit Legislation (University of Chicago Press, 1965).
24. “Over $4.4 Million Outstandings in Charge Account Banking at Year End,” AB, January 28,
1954; Toole, “Community Service with Reciprocal Benefits”; Donohue, “Charge Account
Financing by Banks”; Harold G. Vatter, The U.S. Economy in the 1950’s: An Economic History
(W. W. Norton, 1963), 98–113.
25. Otto C. Lorenz, “Want More Persons to Use Bank Services?,” AB, November 27, 1956; Otto C.
Lorenz, “Charge Account Bankers Create Surplus Demand Deposits in Tight Money Market,”
AB, June 26, 1957. Contra the business and economics literature on two-sided markets, this
chapter demonstrates that these markets are not merely coordinated though carefully balanced
prices. Rather, they developed through more complex, embedded structures of interfirm and
interpersonal relationships. Evans and Schmalensee, Paying with Plastic; Jean-Charles Rochet
and Jean Tirole, “Two-Sided Markets: A Progress Report,” RAND Journal of Economics 37, no.
3 (Autumn 2006): 645–667; Marc Rysman, “The Economics of Two-Sided Markets,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 23, no. 3 (Summer 2009): 125–143.
26. Ad, Pan American Bank of Miami, “Mr. Merchant: Here’s a New Avenue of Revenue!,” (n.d.);
ad, Florida National Bank, “A New Source of Revenue for Orlando MERCHANTS,” (n.d.), box
1298, Douglas Papers; ad, Northwestern National Bank, “Introducing . . . NWCP: The
Northwestern Charge Plan,” (n.d., ca. 1960), box 8, Northwest Papers.
27. Donald H. Maffly and Alex C. McDonald, “The Tripartite Credit Card Transaction: A Legal
Infant,” California Law Review 48, no. 3 (1960): 459–500. The holder-in-due course doctrine,
which limited consumer remedies in cases of dissatisfaction or fraud, was the subject of
significant debate throughout the era (Robin P. Hartmann and H. William Walker, “The Holder
in Due Course Doctrine and the Consumer,” Commercial Law Journal 77, no. 4 [1972]: 116–
127).
28. “Three Banks Introducing Charge-Plate Accounts for Chicago Merchants,” AB, January 20,
1953; “Bankers Move In on Charge Credit”; ad, First National Bank and Trust Co. of Bay
Shore, Newsday, October 22, 1946; “Denver Nat’l Adopts Retail Sale Charge Plan Service,” AB,
July 6, 1953; John R. Markley, “Charge Account Banking for an Atlanta Bank” (master’s thesis,
Emory University, 1959), 5, 41; Northwestern Banks, “Northwestern Charge Plan Fee Schedule
and Refund Chart,” box 8, Northwest Papers; “Charge Account Banking,” AB, February 26,
1960.29. Donohue, “Charge Account Financing by Banks”; L. S. Crowder, “Bank and Central Charge
Plans,” Credit World 41, no. 12 (September 1953): 32; Trotta, “Bank Charge Account Plans.”
30. First National Bank and Trust of Kalamazoo, “First National Charge Account Service Shoppers
Guide,” First National Bank and Trust of Kalamazoo Clipping File, Kalamazoo Public Library;
Northwestern Banks, “Directory of NWCP Members,” box 8, Northwest Papers; “Clothing
Stores Lead ‘Handy-Charge’ Outlets for South Bend Bank,” AB, December 15, 1953; Norman
Townshend-Zellner, “The Bank-Charge-Account Plan and Retail Food Marketing,” Agricultural
Economics Research 12, no. 4 (October 1, 1960): 85–104.
31. Trotta, “Bank Charge Account Plans”; “Florida National Starts Charge Account Plan”; D. A.
Freeth, “What’s Wrong with Midland Charge Plan?,” March 1962, NA0339–1619, HSBC
Archives; “Smaller Stores Find Favor in Charge Plans,” WWD, January 25, 1954; Lloyd
Schwartz, “Store Criticism Aimed at Bank Credit Drives,” WWD, May 12, 1959; Samuel
Feinberg, “From Where I Sit: Banks Cutting In on Retail Territory,” WWD, June 17, 1959;
“Hess Tells Consumer Bankers Retail Charge Service for Merchants Is Here to Stay,” AB,
October 23, 1953.
32. William F. Hoffman, “The Experience of Industrial Trust and Savings Bank in the Field of
Charge Account Banking” (master’s thesis, Ball State Teachers College, 1959), 105–107;
Review of Report of the Commission on Money and Credit, 87 Cong. 293 (1961) (statement of J.
Irwin Miller, Chairman of the Board, Cummins Engine Co.).
33. Robert H. Wilson, “Charge Account Banking—Advantages and Disadvantages,” FPRAY (1959),
98; Clarence Mead, “Credit Cards on Main Street,” FPRAY (1966), 203–205; “Almost 1,000
New Stores Join Charge Account Bank Plans since June 1954—Total Now 8,905,” AB, October
29, 1954; Albert J. Wood, “A Charge Customer Is Worth Nearly Four Times as Much as a Cash
Customer,” Credit World 42, no. 3 (December 1953): 5.
34. Charles E. Groover, “Citizens Commercial, Flint, Mich., Offers New Service to Correspondent
Banks,” AB, May 29, 1956.
35. “Second Correspondent Charge Account Plan Successful, First NB&T, Kalamazoo, States.” AB,
May 1, 1959.
36. First National Bank and Trust of Kalamazoo, “First National Charge Account Service Shoppers
Guide,” First National Bank and Trust of Kalamazoo Clipping File, Kalamazoo Public Library.
37. Freeth, “What’s Wrong with Midland Charge Plan?”; J. C. Gilliland, “Bank Charge Account
Plans,” Credit World 42, no. 2 (November 1953): 14–15; “Chge-Acct Bankers Form Association
to Exchange Information”; David Hopper, “Key to Success—Training Merchants,” FPRAY
(1958), 288; Charles H. Landrain, “Getting Started and Building Momentum,” FPRAY (1958),
296; Wilson, “Charge Account Banking—Advantages and Disadvantages,” 99; Feinberg, “From
Where I Sit: You Can Bank on It!”, WWD, October 28, 1955.
38. Freeth, “What’s Wrong with Midland Charge Plan?”; Donohue, “Charge Account Financing by
Banks.”
39. Otto C. Lorenz, “Charge Account Bankers Are Now Facing New Competition from Seaboard
International,” AB, November 24, 1959.
40. Robert L. Rudolph, “Charge Account Operations Successful in Miami,” AB, July 24, 1956;
Raymond H. Alm, “Charge Account Banking” (master’s thesis, Stonier Graduate School of
Banking, Rutgers University, 1962), 37–39.
41. “Bank Retail Charge Account Volume $986,098 for September, 1953,” AB, October 30, 1953;
“Charge Account Volume 1st Quarter ’56 up 36% to $9.17 Million from Year Ago,” AB, May
29, 1956; Otto C. Lorenz, “Charge Account Bankers Announce Gains for 2nd Quarter,” AB,
August 21, 1958.42. Alm, “Charge Account Banking,” 53–54; Cohen, Consumers’ Republic, 123; Pan American
Bank of Miami, “Apply for Your Pan American Bank Charge Plan Credit Card Now!”; Florida
National Bank, “Apply for Your F.N.B. Charge Plan Credit Card Today!,” box 1298, Douglas
Papers.
43. Hyman, Debtor Nation, 98; “Charge It, Please,” Time, April 9, 1951, 102. The story was first
recounted in “Dining on the Cuff,” Newsweek, January 29, 1951, 73. It has been reproduced
widely, including: Peter Z. Grossman, American Express: The Unofficial History of the People
Who Built the Great Financial Empire (Crown Publishers, 1987), 261–262; Mandell, Credit
Card Industry, 1–10; Evans and Schmalensee, Paying with Plastic, 53–54. The original spelling
was Diners’ Club. For simplicity, the modern spelling has been used throughout.
44. Matty Simmons, The Credit Card Catastrophe: The 20th Century Phenomenon That Changed
the World (Barricade Books, 1995), 26. Lana Swartz, “Gendered Transactions: Identity and
Payment at Midcentury,” Women’s Studies Quarterly 42, no. 1/2 (Spring/Summer 2014): 137–
153.
45. Ad, Diners’ Club, “Indispensable New Convenience,” LAT, December 12, 1950; “Charge It,
Please,” 102; J.R. Carll Tucker, “Credit System Lures 40,000 Eaters-Out in 1st Year of
Operation,” WSJ, March 28, 1951; “Diners’ Club Opens Offices on Continent,” LAT, November
29, 1953; H. Eugene Dickhuth, “Diners’ Club Gathering Popularity,” NYHT, November 1, 1953.
46. Ad, Diners’ Club, “Say ‘Charge It,’” NYT, October 10, 1950; “Charge It, Please,” 102; Joseph
Kaselow, “Advertising Field: Credit Where Due,” NYHT, January 3, 1954; ad, Diners’ Club,
“Indispensable New Convenience,” CT, December 19, 1950.
47. Simmons, Credit Card Catastrophe, 23–24, 41, 46–47; John Linehan, “Diners’ Club,” Barron’s
(January 9, 1956), 15.
48. “Charge Everything,” Newsweek, January 3, 1955.
49. “Diners’ Club Pays in Stock,” LAT, April 28, 1956; Quarterly Charge Account Banking Reports,
AB; Vanatta, “Charge Account Banking,” 21.
50. “Five Charge Account Banks Earn Net Rate of 10%, 11 Reach 6%, among 35 Making Quarterly
Report”; Otto C. Lorenz, “Past Lessons in Charge Account Banking Show Pitfalls Which Must
Be Avoided If Full-Scale Operation Is to Succeed,” AB, November 20, 1958.
51. On small-firm ecosystems as a context for innovation, see Philip Scranton, Endless Novelty:
Specialty Production and American Industrialization, 1865–1925 (Princeton University Press,
1997).
52. “Hess Tells Consumer Bankers Retail Charge Service for Merchants Is Here to Stay,” AB,
October 21, 1953; Peters, “From Where We Sit,” 4.
Chapter 3. Profits Squeeze
 1. David Rockefeller, Creative Management in Banking (McGraw Hill, 1964), 20–22; Timothy
Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your Pocket’: The Early History of the Credit Card at Bank of
America and Chase Manhattan,” Enterprise & Society 1, no. 2 (June 2000): 342.
 2. Commission on Money and Credit, Money and Credit: Their Influence on Jobs, Prices, and
Growth (Prentice-Hall, 1961); David Rockefeller and John F. Kennedy, “A Businessman’s Letter
to J.F.K and His Reply,” Life, July 6, 1962, 30–34; “President Lauds Study on Financial
Reforms,” LAT, June 20, 1961; “Report Is Praised,” NYT, June 20, 1961; Rockefeller, Creative
Management, 5. 3. Raymond J. Saulnier, Constructive Years: The U.S. Economy under Eisenhower (University
Presses of America, 1991), 19–21; John W. Sloan, Eisenhower and the Management of
Prosperity (University of Kansas Press, 1991), 32–38; Dwight D. Eisenhower, “Annual
Message to the Congress on the State of the Union,” January 10, 1957, APP; Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Instalment Credit (Government Printing
Office, 1957).
 4. Kim Phillips-Fein, Invisible Hands: The Making of the Conservative Movement from the New
Deal to Reagan (W. W. Norton, 2009), 31, 61; Benjamin Waterhouse, Lobbying America: The
Politics of Business from Nixon to NAFTA (Princeton University Press, 2014), 19; Karl
Schriftgiesser, The Commission on Money and Credit: An Adventure in Policy-Making
(Prentice-Hall, 1973), 3–21.
 5. Joseph B. Treaster, Paul Volcker: The Making of a Financial Legend (John Wiley & Sons,
2004), 37; Perry Mehling, “An Interview with Paul A. Volcker,” Macroeconomic Dynamics
(December 5, 2001): 440; Hyman Minsky, “Financial Crisis, Financial Systems, and the
Performance of the Economy,” in Private Capital Markets: A Series of Research Studies
Prepared for the Commission on Money and Credit (Prentice-Hall Inc., 1964); Robert M.
Collins, More: The Politics of Economic Growth in Postwar America (Oxford University Press,
2000). For a transnational comparison, see Gunnar Trumbull, Consumer Lending in France and
America: Credit and Welfare (Cambridge University Press, 2014).
 6. Commission on Money and Credit, Money and Credit, 2, 167, 177–178; Raymond W.
Goldsmith et al., Studies in the National Balance Sheet of the United States, vol. 2 (Princeton
University Press, 1963), 88–89, 114–115, 162–163.
 7. American Bankers Association, The Commercial Banking Industry: A Monograph Prepared for
the Commission on Money and Credit (Prentice-Hall, 1962), 4, 63 (emphasis added), 132–134;
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, All Bank Statistics: United States, 1896–
1955 (April 1959), FRASER, 31; Carl T. Arlt, “The Changing Character of Bank Deposits,” in
The Changing World of Banking, ed. Herbert V. Prochnow and Herbert V. Prochnow Jr. (Harper
& Row, 1974), 59.
 8. American Bankers Association, Commercial Banking, 72, 81–82; Commission on Money and
Credit, Money and Credit, 164–165.
 9. Arlt, “Changing Character of Bank Deposits,” 46; American Bankers Association, Commercial
Banking, 72, 76–81, 131–132; Chase Manhattan Bank, Chase Manhattan Bank Annual Report
to Stockholders for 1961, 4 (ProQuest ID: 88194403); Commission on Money and Credit,
Money and Credit, 167; David Rockefeller, Memoirs (Random House, 2003), 197. The profits
squeeze prefigured the later problem of disintermediation (Gerald F. Davis, Managed by the
Markets: How Finance Reshaped America [Oxford University Press, 2009], 112–115).
10. John Donald Wilson, The Chase: The Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A., 1945–1985 (Harvard
Business School Press, 1986), 43–45, 56–73; “Chase Manhattan Bank (National Association),”
box 165, FDIC Exam Reports, NARA II; Commission on Money and Credit, Money and Credit,
165; Paul Heffernan, “Merger Confirms New Banking Era,” NYT, January 16, 1955; “Celler
Plans Inquiry,” NYT, January 15, 1955; Coleman A. Harwell, “Long Fight on Monopoly in
Business Waged by Estes in House and Senate,” WP, May 15, 1956; Nancy Beck Young, Wright
Patman: Populism, Liberalism, and the American Dream (Southern Methodist University Press,
2000), 227; American Bankers Association, Commercial Banking Industry, 9–21.
11. Wright Patman in Review of Report of the Commission on Money and Credit, 87 Cong. 110, 310
(1961) (statements of J. Irwin Miller, Chairman of the Board, Cummins Engine Co. and Leon
Keyserling, President of Conference on Economic Progress).12. Young, Wright Patman, 226–235, 237–240; American Banking Association, Commercial
Banking Industry, 14; memo, John F. Kenney to Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers
et al., March 12, 1962, FI2 (executive), box 215, WHCF; John F. Kenney to Frazar B. Wilde,
June 21, 1962, FI5 (executive), box 220, WHCF; memo, Douglas Dillon to John F. Kennedy,
August 23, 1962, FI2 (executive), box 215, WHCF, Kennedy Library; Eugene N. White,
“Banking and Finance in the Twentieth Century,” in The Cambridge Economic History of the
United States, ed. Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman (Cambridge University Press,
2000), 779–780.
13. On generational change and the rise of market fundamentalism among the American business
elite, see Kim Phillips-Fein, Visible Hands: The Making of the Conservative Movement from the
New Deal to Reagan (W. W. Norton, 2009); Edward J. Balleisen, Fraud: An American History
from Barnum to Madoff (Princeton University Press, 2017), 342–347.
14. Otto C. Lorenz, “26 Charge Account Banks Wind Up ’57 with Net Profits,” AB, February 25,
1958; Thomas P. Hughes, Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880–1930
(Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983), 15.
15. Bord of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Forty-Fifth Annual Report of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1958), 126–127, FRASER; Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, Bank Credit-Card and Check-Credit Plans (Government Printing
Office, 1968), 86; Chase Manhattan Bank, The Chase Manhattan Bank Annual Report, 1958
(ProQuest ID: 88193381), 27; Bank of America, Bank of America National Trust and Savings
Association Annual Report, 1958 (ProQuest ID: 88192321), 16; Chase Manhattan Bank, The
Chase Manhattan Bank Annual Report, 1957 (ProQuest ID: 88192043), 11; Thomas P. Hughes,
“The Evolution of Large Technological Systems,” The Social Construction of Technological
Systems: New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology, ed. Wiebe E. Bijker,
Thomas P. Hughes, and Trevor F. Pinch (MIT Press, 1989), 51–82.
16. Wilson, The Chase, 57–67, 74–88; Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your Pocket,’” 337–338,
342–345.
17. “Chase Manhattan Plans to Begin Charge Account Banking on Dec. 1,” AB, October 17, 1958;
brochure, Chase Manhattan Bank, “A Brand New Way to Shop without Cash”; brochure, Chase
Manhattan Bank, “How Chase Manhattan Bank Charge Plan Benefits Retailers,” box 1294,
Douglas Papers; Rockefeller, Creative Management, 21; ad, Chase Manhattan Bank, “Send
Them Back to School in Style,” NYHT, August 17, 1960, 9; ad, Chase Manhattan Bank, “Busy
Mother of 4,” NYT, September 1, 1959, 18.
18. Chase Manhattan Bank, The Chase Manhattan Bank Annual Report, 1959 (ProQuest ID:
88191683), 24; Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your Pocket,’” 340–341, 346; Clinton W.
Schwer, “Chase Manhattan Observations,” Banking (November 1959), 101; “Chase Manhattan
Bank (National Association),” box 165, FDIC Exam Reports, NARA II. Wolters stresses that the
commercial banking background of Chase executives compelled the retailer focus of their
program. This seems likely; however, as the previous chapter demonstrated, a retailer focus was
the prevailing strategy for bank card plans at the time. Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your
Pocket,’” 350.
19. Rockefeller, Creative Management, 21. Wilson, The Chase, 93–94; The Chase Manhattan Bank
Annual Report—1959, 7; Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your Pocket,’” 347–348; “A Brand
New Way to Shop without Cash”; “How Chase Manhattan Bank Charge Plan Benefits
Retailers,” box 1294, Douglas Papers; “Chase Manhattan Bank (National Association),” box
165, FDIC Exam Reports, NARA II.
20. Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your Pocket,’” 325; Bank of America Annual Report—1958, 9–
10, 12, 18; “Bank of America National Trust and Savings Association,” box 11, FDIC ExamReports, NARA II.
21. James L. McKenney, Waves of Change: Business Evolution through Information Technology
(Harvard Business School Press, 1995), 52, 66–67; Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your
Pocket,’” 325–332; Bank of America Annual Report, 1958, 18. Sterns, Electronic Value
Exchange, 19–21.
22. Joseph Nocera, A Piece of the Action: How the Middle Class Joined the Money Class (Simon &
Schuster, 1994), 23–26.
23. The available statistics make this a difficult claim to validate. Charge account advertisements
are ambiguous. American Banker’s statistics give service charge as a percentage of quarterly
charge volume. For this to mean anything, you’d have to know what percentage of quarterly
volume is subject to the charge, which is not provided. Looking at individual bank brochures (in
Douglas Papers, box 1294), the Florida National Bank’s F.N.B. Charge Plan charged “one cent
per dollar . . . on the remaining unpaid balance,” as did the Pan American Bank of Miami.
Charge Rite, as of the early 1960s, charged 1.5 percent a month on outstanding balances. The
Northwestern Banks NWCP Charge Plan promised to assess “a small additional charge on the
unpaid balance,” without ever saying how much that charge would be (box 8, Northwest
Papers).
24. Charge Account Banking Statistics, AB, November 20, 1958 (19 of 33 banks); Wolters, “‘Carry
Your Credit in Your Pocket,’” 329; D. A. Freeth, “What’s Wrong with Midland Charge Plan?,”
March 1962, NA0339–1619, HSBC Archives.
25. Charles Landrain, “Charge Account Bank Problems Can Be Solved by Study of Other Systems,”
AB, November 20, 1958; Bob Hershon, “Store Credit Men Call Credit Cards ‘Added
Headaches,’” WWD, October 14, 1960. For a similar logic in the rollout of Barclaycard in the
UK, see memo, H. E. Darvill et al., to The Local Directors and Branch Managers, Barclays
Bank Limited, January 21, 1966, 415/488, Barclaycard, 1966–1989, Barclays Archives.
26. Otto C. Lorenz, “Past Lessons in Charge Account Banking Show Pitfalls Which Must Be
Avoided If Full-Scale Operation Is to Succeed,” AB, November 20, 1958; “Bank America
Achieves New Yearly Highs,” LAT, January 18, 1961; Ronald Roy Horcher, “Charge Account
Banking and Check Credit Systems” (master’s thesis, Ohio State University, 1960), 23; Nocera,
Piece of the Action, 27.
27. Nocera, Piece of the Action, 27; ad, Bank of America, “Bank of America Announces a
Revolutionary New Service,” Fresno Bee, September 18, 1958. Bank of America’s card
program was originally called the Bank of America Charge Account Plan.
28. Stanley A. Dashew and Josef S. Klus, You Can Do It! Inspiration and Lessons from an Inventor,
Entrepreneur, and Sailor (Constellation Press, 2010), 159–174; Nocera, Piece of the Action, 28.
For the role of federal contractors in Silicon Valley’s development, see Bruce Cumings,
Dominion from Sea to Sea: Pacific Ascendency and American Power (Yale University Press,
2009), 424–470. Thanks to Paris Spies-Gans for pointing me to Dashew’s memoir.
29. Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your Pocket,’” 324–333; Bank of America, Bank of America
National Trust and Savings Association Annual Report—1959 (ProQuest ID: 88193355), 19.
30. ‘There Ought to Be a Law . . .,” Consumer Reports, January 1960, 44; Wolters, “‘Carry Your
Credit in Your Pocket,’” 333–336, 348; Nocera, Piece of the Action, 31; Mandell, Credit Card
Industry, 30; “Charge Account Banking: Getting Started and Building Momentum,” FPRAY
(1958), 296–297; “The Charge-It Plan That Really Took-Off,” Business Week, February 27,
1965, 58.
31. Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your Pocket,’” 333–335.
32. Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your Pocket,’” 341–342, 350; Rockefeller, Memoirs, 168–169;
Wilson, The Chase, 94–95.33. “Otto C. Lorenz Dead,’” AB, January 26, 1960; Wolters, “‘Carry Your Credit in Your Pocket,’”
333–336, 348; Mandell, Credit Card Industry, 30.
Chapter 4. Deluge
 1. David M. Kennedy, “Required Reading: Credit Cards Provide Meaningful Approach to Banking
Procedures,” AB (n.d., ca. January 1967), folder 4, box 5, Kennedy Papers.
 2. Richard R. John, Network Nation: Inventing American Telecommunications (Harvard University
Press, 2010), 8. For the theory of “system style,” see Thomas P. Hughes, Networks of Power:
Electrification in the Western Society, 1880–1930 (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983).
Histories of the card industry miss this connection to earlier interbank networks (David S. Evans
and Richard Schmalensee, Paying with Plastic: The Digital Revolution in Buying and
Borrowing [MIT Press, 2005]; Lewis Mandell, The Credit Card Industry: A History [Twayne
Publishers, 1990]). For correspondent banking in the U.S, see John A. James and David F.
Weiman, “From Drafts to Checks: The Evolution of Correspondent Banking Networks and the
Formation of the Modern U.S. Payments System, 1850–1914,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 42, no. 2/3 (2010): 237–65.
 3. James J. Groome, “Plastic Credit,” Burroughs Clearing House (December 1967), 22;
“Chicago’s Credit Card Crisis,” Business Week, July 15, 1967, 35; Thomas J. Sugrue, Sweet
Land of Liberty: The Forgotten Struggle for Civil Rights in the North (Random House, 2009),
414–422; “The Treasury Secretary Discusses Equal Employment Opportunity,” Banking
(October 1970), 52. On racial exclusion in postwar housing and credit markets, see Lizabeth
Cohen, A Consumers’ Republic: The Politics of Mass Consumption in Postwar America (Alfred
A. Knopf, 2003), 170–172, 212–227, 355–356; Louis Hyman, Debtor Nation: The History of
America in Red Ink (Princeton University Press, 2011), 137–145, 173–219; Mehrsa Baradaran,
“Jim Crow Credit,” UC Irvine Law Review 9, no. 4 (2019): 887–952.
 4. U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Gross Domestic Product (GDP),” FRED; James T.
Patterson, Grand Expectations: The United States, 1945–1974 (Oxford University Press, 1996),
450; Lyndon B. Johnson, “Radio and Television Remarks upon Signing the Tax Bill,” February
26, 1964, APP; Robert Frost, “Note of Confidence Sounded on Quality of Credit,” NYT, July 11,
1965, F1; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “G.19, Consumer Credit,
Historical Data,” https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/HIST/default.htm.
 5. Glenn Armon, “The Business Front: After the Morning After,” Barron’s (March 23, 1964), 11;
Sidney P. Allen, “Credit Card Operation That’s Hit the Jackpot,” Burroughs Clearing House
(September 1964), 50–51, 103–104; “The Charge-It Plan That Really Took Off,” Business Week
(February 27, 1965), 58; Harlan Paterson, “What Spells Success for Bank Charge Plans?,”
Banking (February 1964), 53; George A. Nikolaieff, “Bank in the Billfold,” WSJ, December 1,
1965; “Credit-Card Plan Set in Arizona,” Banking (June 1965), 73; “Personality: Guiding a
Bank into New Fields,” NYT, September 5 1965; Burroughs Clearing House (December 1966),
cover.
 6. “Banking: At the Crossroads,” Forbes (June 15, 1968), 22–24; Mark H. Rose, Market Rules:
Bankers, Presidents, and the Origins of the Great Recession (University of Pennsylvania Press,
2018), 13–38; Hyman Minsky, Stabilizing an Unstable Economy (Yale University Press, 1986),
87–91.
 7. Mellon National Bank and Trust Company, Annual Report, 1965, 10 (ProQuest ID: 88197003);
Crocker-Citizens National Bank, Annual Report, 1966, 4 (ProQuest ID: 88197219); “BankOffers Credit Card,” Banking (April 1966), 110; “Credit Card an ‘Explosion’ or a ‘Business
Revolution,’” Banking (December 1967), 88; Bernardo Bátiz-Lazo, Thomas Haigh, and David
L. Stearns, “How the Future Shaped the Past: The Case of the Cashless Society,” Enterprise &
Society 15, no. 1 (March 1, 2014): 103–131; Wyatt Wells, “Certificates and Computers: The
Remaking of Wall Street, 1967 to 1971,” Business History Review 74, no. 2 (Summer 2000):
193–235; Amy Weaver Fisher and James L. McKenney, “The Development of the ERMA
Banking System: Lessons from History,” IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 15, no. 1
(1993): 44–57; James L. McKenney, Waves of Change: Business Evolution through Information
Technology (Harvard Business School Press, 1995), 66–67; “Banking: At the Crossroads.”
 8. Armon, “After the Morning After”; Richard Rutter, “Personal Finance: The Era of the Credit
Card,” NYT, February 8, 1965; Alfred Bloomingdale, “Readers Say: Credit Cards,” Forbes
(October 15, 1966), 10.
 9. Ad, Bank of America, “Important Message for California Shoppers,” LAT, October 13, 1959; ad,
Bank of America, “Your Wallet’s Never Empty . . . When You Carry a BankAmericard!,” LAT,
August 24, 1959; ad, Bank of America, “Popping Up All Over Town,” LAT, March 22, 1960;
“Boundary-Jumping—Electronic-Style,” Forbes (September 15, 1966), 39–40. On market
segmentation by gender, see Cohen, Consumers’ Republic, 312–315; Lana Swartz, “Gendered
Transactions: Identity and Payment at Midcentury,” Women’s Studies Quarterly 42, no. ½
(2014): 137–53.
10. “Hilton Credit Cites Overseas Expansion,” NYT, August 25, 1965; “New York Bank, Hilton
Hotels Unit Set Merge Plan,” WSJ, September 22, 1965; Brett Christophers, Banking across
Boundaries: Placing Finance in Capitalism (John Wiley & Sons, 2013), 161–169; Harold van
B. Cleveland and Thomas F. Huertas, Citibank, 1812–1970 (Harvard University Press, 1985),
253–254, 260–268, 272–275, 277–297, 324–345; H. Erich Heinemann, “Diners’ Club Stock
Would Cost Chase $56.5 Million Cash,” NYT, November 18, 1965; “Hilton Seeks to Sell 50% of
Carte Blanche to New York City Bank,” WSJ, August 25, 1965.
11. Heinemann, “Diners’ Club Stock Would Cost Chase $56.5 Million Cash”; Richard Phalon, “City
Bank Weighs Credit-Card Move,” NYT, August 24, 1965; memo, Board of Directors, “Uni-Serv
Corporation,” April 6, 1965, box 2, series 2, Reed Papers; “Chase Drops Bid for Diners’ Club,”
NYT, April 13, 1965; “Court Bars Sale of Carte Blanche,” NYT, December 31, 1965; “Carte
Blanche Sale to Bank Hit by U.S. Suit,” LAT, December 31, 1965; “Saxon Puzzled by Suit to
Bar Credit Card Deal,” WP, January 2, 1966; “Chase Bank, Diners’ Club End Merger Plan after
Justice Unit Threatens Trust Suit,” WSJ, April 13, 1966.
12. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Annual Report (1966), xi.
13. Otto C. Lorenz, “Charge Account Banking Show Pitfalls Which Must Be Avoided If Full-Scale
Operation Is to Succeed,” AB, November 20, 1958; McKenney, Waves of Change, 67; Oral
History, Alan H. Duncan, August 11, 1998, ref: 725/3, Barclays Archives; Kenneth V. Larkin,
“Launching a National Card,” Pacific Banker & Business (October 1966), 24; Paul Chutkow,
VISA: The Power of an Idea (Harcourt, 2001), 69–70. Chutkow refers to a March 25, 1966,
memo from Larkin to bank management as the origin of the expansion program. My account of
the importance of software marketing to the later development of the BankAmericard network is
inferred from the Barclays and Midland archives (HSBC Archives).
14. David L. Stearns, Electronic Value Exchange: Origins of the VISA Electronic Payment System
(Springer, 2011), 27; Thomas W. Bush, “B of A Opens Its Credit Card Plan to Rival Banks,”
LAT, May 25, 1966; Larkin, “Launching a National Card”; Dee W. Hock, One from Many: VISA
and the Rise of the Chaordic Organization (Berrett-Koehler, 2005), 60–61; Chutkow, VISA, 69.
15. “Bank Credit Card Expansion,” Bankers Monthly (July 1966), 44; “Bank of America Plans
Nationwide Licensing of Its Credit Cards,” WSJ, May 25, 1966; Bush, “B of A Opens Its CreditCard Plan to Rival Banks”; “The Charge-It Plan that Really Took Off”; “Enlarging the Charge
Card,” Business Week (May 28, 1966), 42; “Boundary-Jumping—Electronic Style,” Forbes
(September 15, 1966), 39; Patrick E. Doyle, “Small Bank Opportunities in Charge Card
Banking,” Bankers Monthly (June 15, 1969), 29–34. Larkin, “Launching a National Card.” Bank
of America also recruited banks with large branch networks when it expanded the
BankAmericard globally (Bernardo Bátiz-Lazo and Gustavo A. Del Angel, “The Ascent of
Plastic Money: International Adoption of the Bank Credit Card, 1950–1975,” Business History
Review 92, no. 3 [Autumn 2018]: 509–33).
16. Mandell, The Credit Card Industry, 31; Sterns, Electronic Value Exchange, 27, 35–37; Arnold
H. Lozowick, “Compatible Bank Credit Cards (Part I),” Bankers Monthly (June 15, 1967), 29.
17. Chutkow, VISA, 70.
18. Karl Hinke Oral History, July 29, 1981, in Frank H. H. King and Christopher Cook, The
Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Investment in Marine Midland Banks,
Incorporated, part 1, vol. 2, 457.
19. Martin B. Hickman, David Matthew Kennedy: Banker, Statesman, Churchman (Deseret Book,
1987), 92–102, 109–137, 129.
20. Hickman, David Matthew Kennedy, 138–140, 158–177, 183–185, 188–192, 211–214; Austin C.
Wehrwein, “Personality: The Head of a Big-Little Bank,” NYT, January 16, 1966; Alison
Isenberg, Downtown America: A History of the Place and the People Who Made It (University
of Chicago Press, 2004), 166–175, 188–192, 199–202, 207–229; Sugrue, Sweet Land of Liberty,
414–422; “The Treasury Secretary Discusses Equal Employment Opportunity”; Kennedy,
“Required Reading.”
21. Elrick and Lavidge, Inc., “Bank Charge Cards (Exploratory Research): Report for Continental
Illinois National Bank and Trust Company of Chicago,” 1966, box 29, David Kennedy Papers;
“Bank Offers Credit Card.”
22. Elrick and Lavidge, “Bank Charge Cards”; Hyman, Debtor Nation, 174–180.
23. Elrick and Lavidge, “Bank Charge Cards.” For assumption of whiteness, see Josh Lauer,
Creditworthy: A History of Consumer Surveillance and Financial Identity in America (Columbia
University Press, 2017), 67, 141–142, 236; S. Roxanne Hiltz, “Black and White in the
Consumer Financial System,” American Journal of Sociology 76, no. 6 (May 1971): 987–998.
We lack demographic data on card distribution, but at least some Black Chicagoans received
cards (“Inquiring Photographer,” Chicago Daily Defender, December 13, 1966). A 1968
examination of Continental’s plan did not use race as a category of analysis (Thomas X. Gatlin,
The Demographic Analysis of the Town and Country Bank Charge Card [master’s thesis,
Northern Illinois University, 1968].)
24. “Banks Study Credit Cards,” CT, June 24, 1966; “Four Biggest Illinois Banks Plan to Issue
Credit Card,” WSJ, June 24, 1966; “Credit Card Program Set by 10 Banks,” CT, August 13,
1966; Kenneth Ross, “Explain Why Banks Take to Credit Cards,” CT, October 16, 1966;
Kenneth Ross, “Banks Report Credit Cards in High Gear,” CT, October 25, 1966; Groome,
“Plastic Credit,” 22; Lozowick, “Compatible Bank Credit Cards (Part I),” 28–29, 32, 40; Harold
S. Taylor, “The Chicago Bank Credit Card Fiasco,” Bankers Magazine 151, no. 1 (Winter 1968):
49–52. Weit v. Continental Illinois Nat. Bank Trust Co., 467 F. Supp. 197 (N.D. Ill. 1978).
25. Kenneth Ross, “Bank Credit Cards Make Hasty but All-Out Debut,” CT, January 9, 1967;
Kennedy, “Required Reading”; “Banks Study Credit Cards”; Weit v. Continental Illinois Nat.
Bank Trust Co., 467 F. Supp. 197, 200–224.
26. “Four Major Banks to Weigh Universal Credit Card Plan,” LAT, May 24, 1966; “Four California
Banks Form Credit-Card Plan Set for Mid-1967 Start,” WSJ, October 24, 1966; Garrison A.
Southard Jr., “California Master Charge Plan,” Bankers Monthly (February 15, 1968), 40–42,50, 53; “Explain New St. Louis Credit Card,” Northwestern Banker (December 4, 1967), 1;
Stephen P. Coha, “Credit Card Pace Accelerates,” Bankers Monthly (October 15, 1968), 21–22,
24, 27.
27. Hinke Oral History, 455; Minutes of the Board of Directors, Marine Midland Corporation,
December 3, 1958, NA0339/1834; “Remarks of Baldwin Maull, President, and Karl Hinke,
Executive Vice President, Marine Midland Corporation before the St. Louis Society of Financial
Analysts,” February 26, 1963, NA0339/1620; Gerald C. Fischer, “Wall to Wall Banks: The
Marine Midland Story,” ch. 10, 11–13, HSBC Archives.
28. Bush, “B of A Opens Its Credit Card Plan to Rival Banks”; Hinke Oral History, 455; Minutes,
Bankers Trust Board of Directors, November 19, 1968, box 4, series 2, Reed Papers;
“BankAmericard to Be Used Here,” NYT, November 4, 1968. Midland executives’ fears were
realized when Bankers Trust secured a BankAmericard license in November 1968.
29. Hinke Oral History, 455–456.
30. Donald Moffitt, “Credit-Card Competition,” WSJ, May 24, 1966; Hinke Oral History, 454–459;
Marine Midland Board Minutes, October 19, 1966, NA0339/1718, HSBC Archives.
31. Hinke Oral History, 457; Edward E. Bontems, “The Story of Interbank,” Bankers Monthly (July
15, 1968), 39; “Midwest Card Joins Interbank,” Northwestern Banker (January 1969), 14.
32. Hinke Oral History, 457–458; Bontems, “Story of Interbank”; Groome, “Plastic Credit,” 21–22;
ad, Interbank, Bankers Monthly (June 15, 1968), 9.
33. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Bank Credit-Card and Check-Credit Plans
(Government Printing Office, 1968), 86; Andrew F. Brimmer, “Statement to Congress,” Federal
Reserve Bulletin (June 1970), 500; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Annual
Report of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1970), 238; “Half of All
Banks Have BAC or Master Charge,” Banking (April 1970), 126; N. E. Magnis Jr. and T. C.
Franklin Jr., “The Newest Venture in Charge Card Banking,” Banking (January 1970), 39–40;
Thomas L. Bailey, “The Unique Role of the Bank Card Association,” Banking (October 1970),
34–35; Andrew Brimmer, “New Horizons in Credit Card Banking: Remarks before the Seattle
Clearing House Association at the Rainier Club, Seattle, Washington,” September 23, 1969,
Statements and Speeches of Andrew F. Brimmer, FRASER.
34. Coha, “Credit Card Pace Accelerates”; Moffitt, “Credit-Card Competition”; Groome, “Plastic
Credit,” 21; “Focusing on the Credit Card Conference,” Banking (January 1968), 78.
35. Sugrue, Sweet Land of Liberty, 414–422; Elrick and Lavidge, “Bank Charge Cards”; Taylor,
“Chicago Bank Credit Card Fiasco,” 51; Kennedy, “Required Reading.”
36. Taylor, “Chicago Bank Credit Card Fiasco,” 50–52; Ross, “Banks Report Credit Cards in High
Gear”; Ross, “Bank Credit Cards Make Hasty but All-Out Debut”; Joanne Knoch, “Banks Tell
First Year of Credit Cards-Hectic,” CT, September 24, 1967.
37. Taylor, “Chicago Bank Credit Card Fiasco”; Illinois Legislative Investigating Commission,
“The ‘Todd’ Story,” Credit Card Fraud in Illinois (September 1972), 55–60.
38. Letter quoted in Kennedy, “Required Reading”; The Doctrine and Covenants of the Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, 19:35; Hickman, David Matthew Kennedy, 190.
39. Kennedy, “Required Reading” (emphasis added); Taylor, “Chicago Bank Credit Card Fiasco”;
Knoch, “Banks Tell First Year of Credit Cards-Hectic”; Unsolicited Bank Credit Cards, 90
Cong. 12–14 (1967) (statement of Andrew Brimmer, Member, Board of Governors, Federal
Reserve System).
40. Continental Illinois Bank, Annual Reports, 1962–1972, esp. Mid-Year Report to Shareholders,
June 30, 1967 (ProQuest ID: 88199101); Joanne Knoch, “Banks Confident Pain of Credit Cards
Past,” CT, September 25, 1967; Kennedy, “Required Reading”; Taylor, “Chicago Bank Credit
Card Fiasco”; David D. Jordan, “Curbs of Credit Cards Issued by Banks Being Sought byPatman in House Bill,” WSJ, August 28, 1967; Federal Reserve, Bank Credit-Card and Check￾Credit Plans, 73.
41. “Bank Credit Card Report,” Bankers Monthly (December 15, 1967), 30; Unsolicited Bank
Credit Cards, 90 Cong. 14 (statement of Andrew Brimmer).
42. “Bank Credit Card Report”; William Clark, “Bank Credit Cards May Pose Problems,” CT,
October 26, 1966; John Kirk and Theodore Fischer, “Credit Card Survey Ready,” Banking
(September 1967), 98; John L. Gibson, “Word of Caution: Keep an Eye on Costs,” Bankers
Monthly (August 15, 1967), 23; Robert W. Pullen, “Bank Credit Card and Related Plans,” New
England Business Review, December 1966, 2; Paul O’Neil, “A Little Gift from Your Friendly
Banker,” Life (March 27, 1970), quoted in Joseph Nocera, A Piece of the Action: How the
Middle Class Joined the Money Class (Simon & Schuster, 1994), 59; Groome, “Plastic Credit.”
Reliable data show that mid-sized banks often mailed 100,000 cards at a time, with larger banks
sending upwards of 1 million. By the end of 1970 more than 1,000 banks issued cards, and other
card issuers like retailers and oil companies likewise engaged in mass, unsolicited mailing.
43. Robert E. Nichols, “B of A’s Peterson Cautions Banks on ‘Credit-Card Race,’” LAT, March 17,
1967; Clark, “Bank Credit Cards May Pose Problems”; “The Bank Credit Card,” Banking (May
1967), 100; Bank Credit-Card and Check-Credit Plans, 90 Cong. 24 (1968) (statement of
Thomas L. Bailey, Vice President, Marine Midland Banks, Inc.); William Howard Jr., “Bank
Consumer Credit: Present and Future,” Bankers Monthly (August 15, 1967), 21.
44. O’Neil, “Little Gift from Your Friendly Banker.”
45. Groome, “Plastic Credit,” 22; Elenor Gould Murphy and United States Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Economic Forces in the United States: In Facts and Figures: Its People, Its Labor
Force, Its Economy, Bulletin of the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, No. 1384
(Government Printing Office, September 1963), FRASER, 53; Sylvia S. Small and United
States Bureau of Labor Statistics, Black Americans: A Chartbook, Bulletin of the United States
Bureau of Labor Statistics, No. 1699 (Government Printing Office, 1971), FRASER, 37–51.
46. Walter R. Miller Jr., “Challenge of Change in Consumer Credit,” Bankers Monthly (June 15,
1968), 19.
Chapter 5. Regulating Revolving Credit
 1. State of Washington, 1967 Session Laws of the State of Washington (reg. sess., 40 leg.) vol. 1,
ch. 234, 1130–1147; State of Washington, Attorney General, “Banks and Banking—Sale—
Regulation of Bank Credit Card Transactions,” Attorney General Opinions 1968 No. 6; Daryl
Lembke, “Washington State Adopts Limitation,” LAT, November 8, 1969.
 2. Meg Jacobs, Pocketbook Politics: Economic Citizenship in Twentieth-Century America
(Princeton University Press, 2007), 252; Scholars have documented federal-level efforts to
secure credit access but have neglected contemporaneous state-level contests to secure low
credit prices (Louis Hyman, Debtor Nation: A History of America in Red Ink (Princeton
University Press, 2011), 173–219; Lizabeth Cohen, A Consumers’ Republic: The Politics of
Mass Consumption in Postwar America (Alfred A. Knopf, 2003), 370–386; Felicia Ann
Kornbluh, The Battle for Welfare Rights: Politics and Poverty in Modern America (University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2007), 114–131.
 3. William Warren, “The Case for Re-Examination of Consumer Credit Laws,” September 23,
1964, box 50, Braucher Papers; Robert L. Jordan and William D. Warren, “The Uniform
Consumer Credit Code,” Columbia Law Review 68, no. 3 (1968): 392. Gunnar Trumbull,Consumer Lending in France and America: Credit and Welfare (Cambridge University Press,
2014), 152–158, 181–182. For a recent critique of the information model of consumer
protection, see Oren Bar-Gill and Elizabeth Warren, “Making Credit Safer,” University of
Pennsylvania Law Review 157, no. 1 (2008): 1–102.
 4. Hyman, Debtor Nation, 137–145, 173–219; Mehrsa Baradaran, “Jim Crow Credit,” UC Irvine
Law Review 9, no. 4 (2019): 887–952; Walter D. Malcolm, “The Uniform Consumer Credit
Code,” Business Lawyer 25, no. 3 (1970): 945.
 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Instalment Credit (Government
Printing Office, 1957); Robert Collins, More: The Politics of Economic Growth in Postwar
America (Oxford University Press, 2000), 45; David Caplovitz, The Poor Pay More: Consumer
Practices of Low-Income Families (Free Press of Glencoe, 1963); Hillel Black, Buy Now, Pay
Later (William Morrow, 1961).
 6. Edward L. Rubin, “Legislative Methodology: Some Lessons from the Truth-in-Lending Act,”
Georgetown Law Journal 80, no. 2 (December 1991): 233–308; Paul H. Douglas, In the
Fullness of Time: The Memoirs of Paul H. Douglas (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1972), 64–65,
350, 372, 530; Ken McLean, Oral History, September 11, 2009, 33, William Proxmire
Collection, Wisconsin Archives,
http://content.wisconsinhistory.org/cdm/ref/collection/proxmire/id/1930; Paul H. Douglas to
Morton I. Goldman, March 21, 1960, Banking and Currency Committee, box 249; speech,
Douglas before the National League of Insured Savings Associations, May 10, 1960, Douglas
Statements 1960, box 1297; Douglas to Winnie Christmas, August 9, 1961, Douglas
Correspondence 1961, box 1299, Douglas Papers. Disclosure, a regulatory approach for
requiring consistent and reliable information, was a regulatory strategy New Dealers used to
made markets, like those for investment securities, function more effectively, and which was
widely used in consumer-oriented regulatory policy in the 1960s and 1970s.
 7. Douglas, Fullness of Time, 525–531. Rubin, “Legislative Methodology,” 243.
 8. Cohen, Consumers’ Republic, 347–355; Paul H. Douglas to Theodore Sorensen, December 6,
1962, LE/FI 8–LE/FI 10, box 475, WHCF, Kennedy Library; John F. Kennedy, “Special
Message to the Congress on Protecting the Consumer Interest,” March 15, 1962, APP; Lyndon
Johnson, “Special Message to the Congress on Consumer Interests,” February 5, 1964, APP.
 9. Martha Derthick, “Crossing Thresholds: Federalism in the 1960s,” in Keeping the Compound
Republic: Essays on American Federalism, ed. Martha Derthick (Brookings Institution, 2001),
138–152.
10. Barbara A. Curran, “Legislative Controls as a Response to Consumer-Credit Problems,” Boston
College Industrial and Commercial Law Review 8, no. 3 (Spring 1967): 409; Barbara A. Curran,
Trends in Consumer Credit Legislation (University of Chicago Press, 1965).
11. For a $100 loan, at 6 percent annual interest, spread over twelve equal monthly installments, the
consumer would pay a total of $3.28 in interest, because over time they would pay down the
principal, applying the 6% charge to a dwindling principal balance.
12. Curran, “Legislative Controls,” 410; Truth in Lending Bill, 87 Cong. 2–3 (statement of Sen. Paul
H. Douglas).
13. Consumer Credit Labeling Bill, 86 Cong. 1–2 (statement of Sen. Paul H. Douglas); Truth in
Lending—1967, 90 Cong. 1 (statement of Sen. William Proxmire).
14. A. Willis Robertson to Paul H. Douglas, December 12, 1961, Douglas Correspondence 1961,
box 1299; Robertson to Douglas, March 17, 1964, Douglas Correspondence 1964, box 1307,
Douglas Papers; “Truth-in-Lending Drive Is Urged by Proxmire,” WP, December 30, 1966.
15. “‘Truth-in-Lending’ Bill’s Chances Improve with New Senate Banking Panel Makeup,” WSJ,
January 13, 1967; memo, Harry H. Wilson Jr, to Lyndon Johnson, June 14, 1966; memo, JosephW. Barr to Califano, Sanders, and Obrien, October 25, 1967; Joe Califano to Lyndon Johnson,
August 15, 1967, LE/FI 5, box 49, WHCF, Johnson Library.
16. Truth in Lending—1967, 90 Cong. 274 (statement of Bronson C. La Follette, Attorney General,
State of Wisconsin); Hyman, Debtor Nation, 148; Mary Elizabeth Curry, Creating an American
Institution: The Merchandising Genius of J. C. Penney (Garland Publishing, 1993), 306, 312; J.
C. Penney Company, Inc., J. C. Penney Company, Incorporated Annual Report—1968, 14
(ProQuest ID: 88200657); Sears, Roebuck and Co., Sears, Roebuck and Company Annual
Report—1968, 16, 19 (ProQuest ID: 88199402).
17. Curran, Trends in Consumer Credit, 102; Hogg v. Ruffner, 66 U.S. (1 Black) 115, 118–119
(1861).
18. Consumer Credit Protection Act, 90 Cong. 682–683, 749–751, and 803; Sarah Newman to
Susanne Zwemer, June 14, 1967, NJCL Papers; memo, Barefoot Sanders to Lyndon B. Johnson,
January 25, 1968; memo, Sanders to Johnson, January 26, 1968; memo, Sanders to Johnson,
January 30, 1968; memo, Sanders to Johnson, February 1, 1968; memo, Joseph Barr to Johnson,
February 7, 1968, LE/FI 5, box 50, WHCF, Johnson Library; Douglas, In the Fullness of Time,
535.
19. Memo, Joe Califano to Lyndon Johnson, August 15, 1967, LE/FI 5, box 49; memo, Jack T.
Conway to Walter P. Ruether, February 20, 1968, LE/FI 5, box 50, WHCF, Johnson Library;
Consumer Credit and the Poor, 90 Cong. 1 (1968) (statement of Sen. William Proxmire). For
Proxmire’s views on usury regulations, see William Proxmire, in Consumer Credit in the United
States: Report of the National Commission on Consumer Finance (Government Printing Office,
December 1972), 221.
20. Frank E. Moss to Paul H. Douglass, April 26, 1960, Douglas Correspondence 1960, box 1295,
Douglas Papers; “Consumer Credit Protection Act,” PL 90–321 § 123; William Rehnquist,
“Foreword,” in Walter Armstrong, A Century of Service: A Centennial History of the National
Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws (West Publishing, 1991), 1; Consumer
Credit Labeling Bill, 6.
21. Lawrence Bugge, “Preface,” in Armstrong, Century of Service, 3; Allison Dunham, “A Project
for a Uniform Law on Consumer Credit,” January 10, 1964 (though I think that may be 1965),
box 50, Braucher Papers.
22. National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, Uniform Consumer Credit
Code: Official Text with Comments (West Publishing, 1968), xix.
23. Federated Department Stores, Inc., “Comments on First Tentative Draft: Uniform Consumer
Credit Code,” September 19, 1966, box 48; memo, J. C. Penney and Co., “Draft No. 6 of the
Uniform Consumer Credit Code,” January 1968, box 34; memo, John Rolph, III, “The
American Bankers Association to National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State
Laws, Special Committee on Retail Instalment Sales, Consumer Credit, Small Loans and
Usury,” September 16, 1966, box 48, Braucher Papers.
24. Marion Benfield, “Money, Mortgages, and Migraine—The Usury Headache,” Case Western
Reserve Law Review 19, no. 4 (June 1968): 819; William Warren, “The Case for Re￾Examination of Consumer Credit Laws,” September 23, 1964, box 50; Walter D. Malcolm to
William Wemple, August 17, 1968, box 33; Walter Malcolm, “Malcolm Comments on Warren￾Jordan Preliminary Draft of September 25, 1965—Coverage, Disclosure and Other Provisions,”
box 36, Braucher Papers.
25. National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, Uniform Consumer Credit
Code, 33–39, 45–46; memo, Leslie Dix to Special Committee on Retail Instalment Sales,
Consumer Credit, Small Loans and Usury of the National Conference of Commissioners on
Uniform State Laws, January 11, 1968, box 34; Walter Malcolm to William Wemple, August 27,1968, box 33; City of New York Mayor’s Council on Consumer Affairs, “Statement to be
presented at a public hearing of The National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State
Laws, in Chicago on January 18, 1968,” box 34, Braucher Papers.
26. Consumer Credit Regulation (Proposed Uniform Consumer Credit Code), 91 Cong. 106, 177
(statements of William Pierce, President, National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform
State Laws, and Robert W. Johnson, reporter-economist of the Uniform Consumer Credit Code);
Kornbluh, Battle for Welfare Rights, 114–131; Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor, Race for Profit: How
Banks and the Real Estate Industry Undermined Black Homeownership (University of North
Carolina Press, 2019), 5–6.
27. Memo, Fred Willman to All Democratic State Representatives, April 19, 1972, “Doyle—WCA
General” folder, box 2, Consumer Credit Division: Litigations and Investigations Part 4
(2002/089), Wisconsin Archives.
28. Walter Malcolm, “The New Maximum Charges,” April 1, 1969, box 46, Braucher Papers;
Consumer Credit Regulations (Proposed Uniform Consumer Credit Code), 142 and 147;
“Statement of Paul H. Douglas Before the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
on the Uniform Consumer Credit Code,” January 29, 1969; memo, Alfred Buerger to Members
and Ex-Officio Members, June 19, 1969, box 33, Braucher Papers.
29. “Statement by the AFL-CIO Executive Council on the Uniform Consumer Credit Code,”
February 17, 1969, Committee on Consumer Credit, 1968–1970, box 2, House of
Representatives: Committee Records (RG 76-80), Archives of Michigan; “A Consumer Credit
Code . . . for Lenders,” Consumer Reports (March 1969), 121–126; “A Code to Legalize
Usury,” WP, February 10, 1969; Consumer Credit Regulations (Proposed Uniform Consumer
Credit Code), 5, 17, and 143; Sidney Margolius, “Labor Led Voters to Clamp Lid on
Washington Credit Charges,” AFL-CIO News, December 7, 1968; John Oravec, “Convention
Urges Action: Consumers’ Need Termed ‘Pressing,’” AFL-CIO News, October 11, 1969.
30. Alfred Buerger to Members and Ex-Officio Members, June 19, 1969, box 33; memo, Nathaniel
Butler to U3C Special Committee, September 1969, box 47; memo, Allison Dunham to
Consumer Credit Committee, October 23, 1968, box 33; Robert Braucher to Robert J. Klein,
April 28, 1969, box 33, Braucher Papers; “Consumer Code: Another View,” WP, March 2, 1969.
31. Memo, Nathaniel Butler to U3C Special Committee, September 1969, box 47; Walter Malcolm
to Albert Jenner Jr., December 31, 1969, box 47, Braucher Papers.
32. State officials, in this sense, acted as bureaucratic entrepreneurs (Daniel P. Carpenter, The
Forging of Bureaucratic Autonomy: Reputations, Networks, and Policy Innovation in Executive
Agencies, 1862–1928 [Princeton University Press, 2001]).
33. John Doyle, “Charges for Revolving Credit and Charge Accounts, Subject for Scrutiny,
Wisconsin Supervisor Suggests,” Personal Finance Law Quarterly Report 12 no. 2 (Spring
1958): 65–68; John Doyle, “Conference with Assistant Attorney General Roy Tulane,” April 8,
1958; Bronson La Follette to William Nuesse, December 31, 1965; John Doyle, “Revolving
Charge Account Plans Held Usurious in Wisconsin,” (n.d., ca. October 1970), Consumer Credit
Division: Litigations and Investigations Part 1 (1998/151), box 3, Wisconsin Archives.
34. Minutes, “Conference on Revolving Credit and Charge Account Plans,” April 3, 1968,
Consumer Credit Division: Litigations and Investigations Part 1 (1998/151), box 3, Wisconsin
Archives.
35. Bronson La Follette to William Nuesse, December 8, 1967, Consumer Credit Division:
Litigations and Investigations Part 1 (1998/151), box 3, Wisconsin Archives; “Revolving
Credit,” Northwestern University Law Review 55, no. 3 (July–August 1961): 335; State v. J. C.
Penney Co., 48 Wis. 2d 125, 179 N.W.2d 641 (1970).36. John Boyle to Joseph Riley, April 25, 1969, box 14, NJCL Papers; “Wisconsin Supreme Court
Service Charge Decision against J. C. Penney Starts Chain Reaction,” Personal Finance Law
Quarterly 25, no. 1 (Winter 1970): 26–27; Rollinger v. J. C. Penney Co., 86 S.D. 154, 157, 192
N.W.2d 699 (1971), overruled by Smith v. Tobin, 311 N.W.2d 209 (S.D. 1981); Sliger v. R. H.
Macy & Co., 59 N.J. 465, 283 A.2d 904 (1971); Maine Merchants Ass’n, Inc. v. Campbell, 287
A.2d 430 (Me. 1972); Johnson v. Sears Roebuck & Co., 14 Ill. App. 3d 838, 303 N.E.2d 627
(1973); Sidney Margolius, “Major Gains Noted in Battle to Ease Credit Charge Rates,” AFL￾CIO News, April 24, 1971; “Alabama Labor Sues Banks for Credit Gouge,” AFL-CIO News,
August 21, 1971.
37. Membership roster, Advisory Committee on the Uniform Consumer Credit Code, box 38;
Minutes, Wisconsin Legislative Council Uniform Consumer Credit Code Advisory Committee,
April 19, 1971 and June 21, 1971; Lawrence Kenney to Arlene Miller, October 16, 1970;
Lawrence Kenney to Ken Clark, June 25, 1971; Minutes, Wisconsin Legislative Council
Uniform Consumer Credit Code Advisory Committee, April 19, 1971, and May 17, 1971; Jack
B. Reihl to Lawrence Kenney, January 23, 1974, box 38, Wisconsin State AFL-CIO Records,
Wisconsin Archives; Eugene Harrington, “Compromise Bill on Credit Ready,” Milwaukee
Journal, February 13, 1972; State of Wisconsin, Wisconsin Session Laws 1971, ch. 239 §
422.201, 689–691.
38. Memo, Fred Willman to All Democratic State Representatives, April 19, 1972; “W.I.B.A.: Our
Role in 1057A,” n.d.; “WCA—Banks,” box 2, Consumer Credit Division: Litigations and
Investigations Part 4 (2002/089), Wisconsin Archives.
39. State of Minnesota, Senate, Report Committee on Commerce Subcommittee on Consumer
Credit and Banking, Interim Activities and Recommendations, December 11, 1968; Alfred
Burger to Harold Reed Jr., September 13, 1968; Minutes, Meeting of Subcommittee on
Consumer Credit and Banking of the Senate Committee on Commerce, October 23, 1968, and
November 14, 1968; Robert Braucher to Walter Malcolm, November 7, 1968, box 39, Braucher
Papers; “Minutes, Banking Subcommittee of the Senate Commerce Committee,” March 5, 1970,
MBS Records; Jim Fuller, “Interest Ceiling Cools Banks to Credit Cards,” Minneapolis Tribune,
August 10, 1969.
40. Robert Sullivan to Alfred Buerger, May 13, 1969, box 39; James Bush to Robert Braucher,
September 26, 1969; James M. Bush to Robert Braucher, September 12, 1969; Statement of
Arizona AFL-CIO to Arizona Interim Legislative Study Committee on UCCC and Creditors
Rights, September 11, 1969, box 38, Braucher Papers; Kimberly Graber, “Arizona Usury
Laws,” Arizona State Law Journal 1981, no. 1 (1981): 132.
41. John L. C. Black, “State Variations of the Uniform Consumer Credit Code: The Case for
Legislative Restraint,” Denver Law Journal 48, no. 2 (1972): 244; memo, Jim Starr to Members
on the Special Committee to Study the Uniform Consumer Credit Code,” April 16, 1969,
Committee on Consumer Credit, 1968–1970, box 2, House of Representatives: Committee
Records (RG 76-80), Archives of Michigan.
42. William D. Warren, “Consumer Credit Law: Rates, Costs, and Benefits,” Stanford Law Review
27, no. 3 (February 1975): 966. By 1980, twenty-three states permitted a flat 18 percent rate on
revolving credit, and another thirteen states allowed 18 percent on a portion of the balance and a
lower amount thereafter. Seven allowed more than 18 percent, and seven capped rates below 18
percent (Visa USA Inc., “Credit Controls and Bank Cards,” March 1980, 794.01 (L) Voluntary
Credit Restraint March 1980, FRBNY Archives).
43. Memo, Fred Willman to All Democratic State Representatives, April 19, 1972, “Doyle—WCA
General” folder, box 2, Consumer Credit Division: Litigations and Investigations Part 4
(2002/089), Wisconsin Archives. For predatory inclusion, see Taylor, Race for Profit.Chapter 6. Confronting Cards in Congress
 1. Richard Halloran, “Rep. Don Quixote,” WP, June 22, 1969; Rep. Wright Patman, “Chairman
Patman Suggests Moratorium on Bank Credit Cards—‘A Dangerously Unsound Banking
Practice’—Questions Legality,” 113 Cong. Rec. 21545–21546 (1967); memo, Lee Morse to
Chairman Patman, February 15, 1968, “Banks and Credit Cards” folder, box 611, Patman
Papers.
 2. Hyman Minsky, Stabilizing an Unstable Economy (Yale University Press, 1986), 87–91; L.
Randall Wray, “The 1966 Financial Crisis: Financial Instability or Political Economy?,” Review
of Political Economy 11, no. 4 (1999): 415–425.
 3. Greta R. Krippner, Capitalizing on Crisis: The Political Origins of the Rise of Finance (Harvard
University Press, 2011), 59–73.
 4. Proxmire’s concerns for expanding credit access and fostering financial innovation were a
necessary precursor for his mobilization of these arguments in support of market liberalization
in the late 1970s (Krippner, Capitalizing on Crisis).
 5. The Plastic Jungle, 91 Cong. 107 (1969) (statement of Rep. Arnold Olsen). For the emergence
of consumer politics, see Lizabeth Cohen, A Consumers’ Republic: The Politics of Mass
Consumption in Postwar America (Alfred A. Knopf, 2003), 345–397.
 6. Joseph S. Clark Jr. to Paul H. Douglas, June 15, 1957, box 248, Douglas Papers; Commission on
Money and Credit, Money and Credit: Their Influence on Jobs, Prices, and Growth (Prentice￾Hall, 1961), 160; John F. Kennedy, “Remarks to the Members of the Commission on Money and
Credit,” June 19, 1961, APP.
 7. Minsky, Stabilizing an Unstable Economy, 87–91; Albert M. Wojnilower, Benjamin M.
Friedman and Franco Modigliani, “The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Recent Financial
History,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1980, no. 2 (1980): 277–339, esp. 287.
 8. Ernest Bloch, “Two Decades of Evolution of Financial Institutions and Public Policy,” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 3, no. 2 (1971): 555–570; Krippner, Capitalizing on Crisis, 67–
71.
 9. H. Erich Heinemann, “Credit Cards,” NYT, August 1, 1967; Consumer Credit Protection Act,
part 1, 90 Cong. 118 (1967) (statements of Betty Furness, Special Assistant to the President for
Consumer Affairs, and Rep. William B. Windall); “U.S. Business: Midwest Banks Find Credit
Cards Pose Problems,” NYT, August 6, 1967; David D. Jordan, “Curbs on Credit Cards Issued
by Banks Being Sought by Patman in House Bill,” WSJ, August 29, 1967; “What the Banks
Have to Sell,” WSJ, September 8, 1967.
10. Morse to Patman, February 15, 1968, Patman Papers; Unsolicited Bank Credit Cards, 90 Cong.
1–4, 25–26 (1967) (statement of Rep. Wright Patman).
11. Unsolicited Bank Credit Cards, 4, 6–7, 26–27 (statements of Furness and Rep. Florence P.
Dwyer).
12. C. R. Stevens to Betty Furness, October 21, 1967, in Unsolicited Bank Credit Cards, 57;
Unsolicited Bank Credit Cards, 34, 58 (statements of Furness and Rep. Tom S. Gettys); Lendol
Glen Calder, Financing the American Dream: A Cultural History of Consumer Credit (Princeton
University Press, 2001), 217.
13. Unsolicited Bank Credit Cards, 59–60 (statement of Rep. Seymore Halpern); Milton Lipson,
“Law Enforcement and the Credit Card,” Symposium of International Association of Chiefs of
Police, September 30, 1969, “Crime 6–1 Check and Credit Card Fraud” folder, box 28, 91
Cong., SCSB Records.14. Unsolicited Bank Credit Cards, 8, 12–13, 22, 61, 78 (statements of Andrew F. Brimmer,
Member, Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System, and K. A. Randall, Chairman, Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation).
15. Unsolicited Bank Credit Cards, 8, 16 (statement of Brimmer); Patman, “Regulation of Credit
Card Mailings,” 116 Cong. Rec. 30875 (1970); Rep. Joseph Karth (MN), Bill 90, H.R. 13829,
“To Restrict the Mailing of Unsolicited Credit Cards,” 113 Cong. Rec. 32946 (1967); memo,
Philip B. Byrne to Senator Mondale, November 13, 1967, “Credit Card Abuses” folder,
153.L.12.9B, Mondale Papers; Sen. Walter Mondale (MN), “Restriction on Mailing of
Unsolicited Credit Cards,” 113 Cong. Rec. 36845 (1967).
16. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Bank Credit-Card and Check-Credit Plans
(Government Printing Office, 1968), 4, 27, 42–43, 55, 59.
17. Bank Credit-Card and Check-Credit Plans (hearings), 90 Cong. 1 (1968) (statement of Sen.
William Proxmire).
18. Louis Hyman, Debtor Nation: The History of America in Red Ink (Princeton University Press,
2011), 173–219; David A. Skeel, Debt’s Dominion: A History of Bankruptcy Law in America
(Princeton University Press, 2003), 131–159; Bank Credit-Card and Check-Credit Plans
(hearings), 32 (statement of Royal E. Jackson, Chief of the Bankruptcy Division, Administrative
Office, U.S. Courts).
19. Bank Credit-Card and Check-Credit Plans (hearings), 15–16, 22, 32, 65, 83 (statements of
Furness, Proxmire, Jackson, Eric E. Bergsten, Professor of Law, University of Iowa, and
Thomas L. Bailey, Vice President, Marine Midland Banks, Inc.).
20. Abbye Atkinson, “Rethinking Credit as Social Provision,” Stanford Law Review 71, no. 5
(2019): 1093–1162.
21. Stewart Macaulay, “Private Legislation and the Duty to Read—Business Run by IBM Machine,
the Law of Contracts and Credit Cards,” Vanderbilt Law Review 19 (1966): 1051; Donald H.
Maffly and Alex C. McDonald, “The Tripartite Credit Card Transaction: A Legal Infant,”
California Law Review 48, no. 3 (August 1960): 479–488; Bank Credit-Card and Check-Credit
Plans (hearings), 73 (statements of Proxmire and William F. Willier, Professor of Law, Boston
College).
22. The bank’s “control group” included only 731 “selective” mailings, of which 139 were activated
—hardly a conclusive study when placed against the tens of millions of cards sent out by banks
each year.
23. Bank Credit-Card and Check-Credit Plans (hearings), 4, 8, 16, 22–24 (statements of Andrew
Brimmer, Member, Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System, and Bailey).
24. Sen. William Proxmire, “S. 721—Introduction of Bill to Establish Ground Rules for the
Issuance of Credit Cards,” 115 Cong. Rec. 1947–1952 (1969); Proxmire, “Consumer Credit
Legislation: The Future,” Banking (April 1969), 47, 106, 108; Josh Lauer, Creditworthy: A
History of Consumer Surveillance and Financial Identity in America (Columbia University
Press, 2017), 217–229; Wallace F. Bennett to Bryce N. Harlow, July 8, 1969, FI5 (general), box
41, WHCF, Nixon Library.
25. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Unemployment Rate (UNRATE),” FRED; Minsky, Stabilizing
an Unstable Economy, 90, 284; U.S., President and Council of Economic Advisers, Economic
Report of the President (Government Printing Office, 1970), 34–39, 101–104; Justin Douglas,
“Translating the Blueprint for Financial Deregulation: The American Bank Lobby’s Unyielding
Quest for Legislative Profits, 1968–1982,” Enterprise & Society 20, no. 2 (June 2019): 290.
26. Krippner, Capitalizing on Crisis, 63–71; Eric Monnet, Controlling Credit: Central Banking and
the Planned Economy in Postwar France, 1948–1973 (Cambridge University Press, 2018),
250–254; Expanding the Mortgage Market, 91 Cong., S. Rep. No 91–516 (1969); David M.Kennedy to Richard Nixon, December 22, 1969, FI5 (executive), box 41, WHCF, Nixon
Library; Richard Nixon, “Statement on Signing a Bill Affecting Interest, Credit, and Lending,”
December 24, 1969, APP; Lowering Interest Rates, Fight Inflation, Help Housing, Small
Business, and Employment, 91 Cong. 10, H. Rep. No. 91–755 (1969).
27. Rep. Leonor Sullivan (MO) “Congresswoman Sullivan Introduces Bill for Standby Powers to
Regulate All Forms of Credit, Including Business Credit,” 115 Cong. Rec. 35615 (1969);
William Proxmire, quoted in “Credit Craze? Senators Push for Action to Tighten Credit-Card
Controls,” CSM, December 16, 1969.
28. Sidney M. Milkis, “The Federal Trade Commission and Consumer Protection: Regulatory
Change and Administrative Pragmatism,” Antitrust Law Journal 72, no. 3 (2005): 911–41;
Cohen, Consumers’ Republic, 346; “FTC Proposes to Ban Unsought Credit Cards Mailed by
Some Issuers,” WSJ, May 14, 1969; Unsolicited Credit Cards, 91 Cong. 33 (1969) (statement of
Paul Rand Dixon, Chairman, Federal Trade Commission). On the ways autonomous agencies
used leverage to direct the policy process, see Daniel P. Carpenter, The Forging of Bureaucratic
Autonomy: Reputations, Networks, and Policy Innovation in Executive Agencies, 1862–1928
(Princeton University Press, 2001).
29. Cohen, Consumers’ Republic, 346; Judith Stein, Pivotal Decade: How the United States Traded
Factories for Finance in the Seventies (Yale University Press, 2010), 24, 26. Christopher Lydon,
“Richardson To Go Easy on Changes,” BG, January 22, 1967; Cornelius J. Noonan, “State
Enforcing New Consumer Law,” BG, March 29, 1968; “Testimony by Robert L. Meade,
Director of Legislative Affairs, President’s Committee on Consumer Interests before the Federal
Trade Commission,” September 10, 1969, “Crime 6–1 Check and Credit Card Fraud” folder,
box 28, 91 Cong., SCSB Records.
30. Alan Bible to Federal Trade Commission, August 11, 1969; “Statement by W. J. Bittles, Jr.,
General Manager Retail Marketing—Shell Oil Company,” September 10, 1969; Robert C. Pier,
President, New England Bankcard Association to Federal Trade Commission, August 14, 1969;
Charles R. McNeill to Federal Trade Commission, August 13, 1969; “Statement of Earl E.
Pollock on Behalf of Midwest Bank Card System, Inc., at Federal Trade Commission Hearing
on Unsolicited Credit Cards,” September 10, 1969, “Crime 6–1 Check and Credit Card Fraud”
folder, box 28, 91 Cong., SCSB Records; Andrew Brimmer, “New Horizons in Credit Card
Banking: Remarks before the Seattle Clearing House Association at the Rainier Club, Seattle,
Washington,” September 23, 1969, Statements and Speeches of Andrew F. Brimmer, FRASER.
31. H.R. 858 folder, box 7; H.R. 1092 folder; H.R. 1232 folder, box 9; H.R. 6487 folder; H.R. 6488
folder, box 25; H.R. 9778 folder, box 43; H.R. 14527 folder, box 66, 91 Cong., Legislative Files,
Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives (RG 233), NARA I; Plastic Jungle 1, 3–8
(1969) (statements of Rep. Robert N. C. Nix and Rep. Wright Patman); Protecting Postal
Patrons from Obscene Mail, 89 Cong. (1965); Obscene and Pandering Advertising Mail Matter,
90 Cong. (1967); Postal Revenue and Offensive Intrusion of Sexually Oriented Mail, 91 Cong.
(1969); Plastic Jungle, 8, 10, 18, 21, 107 (statements of Reps. Glenn Cunningham, Benjamin
Rosenthal, and Arnold Olsen). On consumer surveillance, see Lauer, Creditworthy, 212–229.
32. Walker B. Lowman, “Federal Pandering Advertisements Statute: The Right of Privacy versus
the First Amendment,” Ohio State Law Journal 32, no. 1 (Winter 1971): 149–150; Rowan v.
Post Office Dept., 397 U.S. 728 (1970); Plastic Jungle, 28 (statement of Rep. William D. Ford).
33. Plastic Jungle, 61, 64, 74–75, 88, 92, 94 (statements of Robert Meade, Legislative Director,
Office of Special Assistant to the President on Consumer Affairs, Seymour Rotker, executive
assistant to the district attorney, Bronx County, NY, David A. Nelson, General Counsel, Post
Office Department, and Earl E. Pollock, attorney for Midwest Bank Card System, Inc.).
34. Unsolicited Credit Cards, 91 Cong. (1969).35. “Session Blocked, Proxmire Sets Hearing for Tomorrow,” BS, December 6, 1969; Ken McLean,
Oral History, September 11, 2009, 38–39, William Proxmire Collection, Wisconsin Archives,
http://content.wisconsinhistory.org/cdm/ref/collection/proxmire/id/1930; Robert J. Samuelson,
“Credit Card Foes Clash at Hearing,” WP, September 9, 1969; John D. Morris, “Credit Card
Industry Is Mobilizing against Curbs,” NYT, September 10, 1969; “Credit Card Regulation Gets
White House Nudge,” WP, November 20, 1969.
36. Unsolicited Credit Cards, 63–65, 67 (statement of Robert Meade, Legislative Director, Office of
Special Assistant to the President on Consumer Affairs); Plastic Jungle, 61 (statement of Robert
Meade).
37. Memo, Virginia Knauer to Wilfred Rommel, November 26, 1969; Paul W. McCracken to
Wilfred Rommel, December 2, 1969; note to Jon Rose, December 5, 1969; press clip “The
President’s Committee on Whose Interests,” WP, December 11, 1969; memo, Jonathan Rose to
Peter M. Flanigan, December 11, 1969, FI5 (executive), box 41, WHCF, Nixon Library.
38. Unsolicited Credit Cards, 70 (statement of Proxmire); “Senators Hear Stolen Credit Card Is
Worth $100,” NYT, December 8, 1969; “Senators Told: Criminals Use Credit Cards,” BG,
December 8, 1969; “Stolen Credit Card Price of $100 Told,” CT, December 8, 1969; “$100
Reported Tag on Stolen Credit Cards,” LAT, December 8, 1969; Robert J. Samuelson, “Credit
Card Ban Seen Expanded,” WP, April 13, 1970.
39. S. 721—“Unsolicited Credit Cards” (Executive Session) (HRG-1970-BCS-0026), 91 Cong. 2,
6–7 (statements of Ken McLean, professional staff member, and Sen. Wallace Bennett);
“Elementary and Secondary Amendments of 1969,” 116 Cong. Rec. 3037 (1970).
40. S. 721 [Unsolicited Credit Cards] (Executive Session) (HRG-1970-BCS-0027), 91 Cong. 5
(Bennett).
41. S. 721 [Unsolicited Credit Cards], 91 Cong. 39, 70 (statement of Sen. Proxmire).
42. “Unsolicited Credit Cards,” 116 Cong. Rec. 11827–11845 (1970); Rep. Halpern and Rep.
Bingham, “Regulation of Credit Card Mailings,” 116 Cong. Rec. 30889–30890 (1970).
43. “Unsolicited Credit Cards,” Congressional Quarterly Almanac 26 (91 Cong., 2d Sess.), 621–
624; Sen. Proxmire, “Bank Records and Foreign Transactions; Credit Cards; Consumer Credit
Reporting—Conference Report,” 116 Cong. Rec. 35939 (1970); Rep. Sullivan (MO),
“Conference Report on H.R. 15073, Bank Records and Foreign Transactions; Credit Cards;
Consumer Credit Reporting,” 116 Cong. Rec. 36572 (1970); H. Rep. 91–1587, at 28 (1970)
(Conf. Rep.); Rep. Windall, “Conference Report on H.R. 15073, Bank Records and Foreign
Transactions; Credit Cards; Consumer Credit Reporting,” 116 Cong. Rec. 36572 (1970);
Newsletter, “U.S. Senator William Proxmire Reports to you from Washington,” November
1970, Proxmire Collection, Wisconsin Archives,
http://content.wisconsinhistory.org/cdm/compoundobject/collection/proxmire/id/4972/show/480
4/rec/16.
44. Unsolicited Credit Cards, 110, 114 (Thomas L. Bailey, Vice President, Marine Midland Banks);
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, “Outstanding Balances, Credit Cards and Related
Plans,” Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency, 1970 to 1980; “Everything Up but
Delinquencies,” Banking (August 1976), 50; Robert A. Bennett, “Citibank’s Credit Card Blitz,”
NYT, July 23, 1978.
45. Memo, David M. Kennedy to Richard Nixon, December 22, 1969, FI5 (executive), box 41
WHCF, Nixon Library.
Chapter 7. Risk Shifting 1. Elihu Blotnick, “How to Counterfeit Credit Cards and Get Away with It,” Scanlan’s Monthly 1,
no. 4 (June 1970): 21–28, box 471, CRR; Illinois Legislative Investigating Commission, Credit
Card Fraud in Illinois (September 1972), 55–60.
 2. H. W. Dugdale to Alfred A. Buerger, September 7, 1966, folder 247, box 15, Bolton Papers;
Richard G. Kleindienst to William Proxmire, October 5, 1970, Headquarters Case Files, case file
36-HQ-00, serial 33, box 41, classification 36 (Mail Fraud), Records of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (RG 65), NARA II.
 3. For the sociology of law and illicit markets, see Richard Swedberg, “The Case for an Economic
Sociology of Law.” Theory and Society 32, no. 1 (2003): 1–37; Jens Beckert and Matías Dewey,
The Architecture of Illegal Markets: Towards an Economic Sociology of Illegality in the
Economy (Oxford University Press, 2017).
 4. On government’s role as risk manager, see David A. Moss, When All Else Fails: Government as
the Ultimate Risk Manager (Harvard University Press, 2004).
 5. Miraglia, “My $10,000 Credit Card Binge,” Life, October 26, 1959, 53–54; “Credit Card
Companies Put Squeeze on Cheats, Improve Fiscal Health,” WSJ, October 30, 1962; Anthony R.
Scaiza, “Strictly on the Cuff,” Barron’s (November 12, 1962).
 6. Blotnick, “How to Counterfeit Credit Cards,” 22; Kenneth B. Wilson, “A $20 Million Dollar
Racket,” Supervision (ca. 1967), “Legislative Files, Unsolicited Credit Cards” folder, box 418,
Anderson Papers; James Snyder, “A Multimillion-Dollar Racket Sweeps the United States—
Guard Your Credit Cards,” Parade, October 22, 1967; Lipson, “Crime and the Credit Card.” On
the relation of legitimate and illegitimate markets, see Wendy A. Woloson, “’Fence-ing
Lessons’: Child Junkers and the Commodification of Scrap in the Long Nineteenth Century,”
Business History 61, no. 1 (2019): 38–72.
 7. People v. Buckley, 202 Cal. App. 2d 142, 147, 20 Cal. Rptr. 659, 662 (Ct. App. 1962); Blotnick,
“How to Counterfeit Credit Cards,” 22; The Plastic Jungle, 91 Cong. 107, 108 (1969)
(statement of Rep. Arnold Olsen); U.S. v. Kellerman, 431 F.2d 319, 322 (2d Cir. 1970); Illinois
Legislative Investigating Commission, Credit Card Fraud in Illinois.
 8. Blotnick, “How to Counterfeit Credit Cards,” 23; Richard Rosenfeld and Aaron Levin,
“Acquisitive Crime and Inflation in the United States, 1960–2012,” Journal of Quantitative
Criminology 32, no. 3 (September 2016): 436, 443 (Rosenfeld and Levin define acquisitive
crime as “crimes committed for monetary gain”); William Estes, “Check Frauds Heading for
Another Record,” LAT, March 19, 1967; World Bank, “Inflation, Consumer Prices for the
United States (FPCPITOTLZGUSA),” FRED.
 9. U.S. v. Kelem, 416 F.2d 346 (1969); U.S. v. Chason, 451 F.2d 301 (1971); U.S. v. Madison, 458
F.2d 974, 974 (2d Cir. 1972); Illinois Legislative Investigating Commission, Credit Card Fraud
in Illinois, 9–10.
10. Milton Lipson, “Law Enforcement and the Credit Card,” Symposium of International
Association of Chiefs of Police, September 30, 1969; Seymour Rotker to William D. Dixon,
September 11, 1969, “Crime 6–1 Check and Credit Card Fraud” folder, box 28, 91 Cong., SCSB
Records; Harold S. Taylor, “The Chicago Bank Credit Card Fiasco,” Bankers Magazine 151, no.
1 (Winter 1968): 50; James A. Kaufman to Donald E. Holbrook, April 5, 1967, “Legislative
Files: Unsolicited Credit Cards” folder, box 418, Anderson Papers; Enforcement Report of the
Postal Inspection Service, November 1970 and December 1970, “Enforcement Report” folder,
box 20, Office of the Postmaster General, Records of the Post Office Department (RG 28),
NARA I; U.S. v. Mikelberg, 517 F.2d 246, 253 (5th Cir. 1975).
11. Lipson, “Law Enforcement and the Credit Card”; Illinois Legislative Investigating Commission,
Credit Card Fraud in Illinois, 119–336; Clayton M. Christensen and Michael E. Raynor, The
Innovator’s Solution: Creating and Sustaining Successful Growth (Harvard Business SchoolPress, 2003); John K. Galbraith, The Affluent Society (Riverside Press, 1958), 201; Vance
Packard, Status Seekers: An Exploration of Class Behavior in America and the Hidden Barriers
that Affect You, Your Community, and Your Future (D. McKay, 1959), esp. 122–123; Robert K.
Merton, Social Theory and Social Structure, 1968 enl. ed. (Free Press, 1968), esp. 195–203.
12. Donald H. Maffly and Alex C. McDonald, “The Tripartite Credit Card Transaction: A Legal
Infant,” California Law Review 48, no. 3 (August 1960): 459–500; Blotnick, “How to
Counterfeit Credit Cards,” 22; Douglas Wick to Frances Bolton, November 13, 1964, box 15,
Bolton Papers.
13. U.S. v. Fordyce, 192 F. Supp. 93, 94, 96 (S.D. Cal. 1961); Williams v. United States, 192 F.
Supp. 97 (S.D. Cal. 1961); United States v. Jones, 182 F. Supp. 146 (W.D. Mo. 1960);
Brockman Adams, quoted in Douglas Wick to Frances Bolton, September 17, 1962, box 15,
Bolton Papers; Barack v. United States, 317 F.2d 619 (9th Cir. 1963); H. Rawlins Overton to
Emanuel Celler, June 12, 1963, box 15, Bolton Papers.
14. Frances Bolton to Emanuel Celler, June 4, 1962; Celler to Bolton, June 14, 1962; Douglas Wick
to Bolton, July 25 1962; Wick to Bolton, October 18, 1963; Norman F. Page to Bolton, February
19, 1963; Arthur J. Prink to Bolton, August 17, 1964; James E. Bromwell to Bolton, November
8, 1963; John B. Simpson to Wick, November 7, 1963; Wick to Bolton, March 18, 1966, box 15,
Bolton Papers.
15. Ramsey Clark to Emanuel Celler, February 15, 1966, box 15, Bolton Papers.
16. H. W. Douglas to Alfred A. Buerger, September 7, 1966; Ramsey Clark to Emanuel Celler,
February 15, 1966, Frances Bolton to Douglas Wick, February 21, 1966; Bolton to Wick, March
30, 1966; Bolton to C. L. Phillips, July 29, 1966, box 15, Bolton Papers.
17. Elizabeth Hinton, From the War on Poverty to the War on Crime: The Making of Mass
Incarceration in America (Harvard University Press, 2016); Jonathan D. Cohen, “‘Put the
Gangsters Out of Business’: Gambling Legalization and the War on Organized Crime,” Policy
History 31, no. 4 (2019): 533–556.
18. Lipson, “Crime and the Credit Card,” 12, 24; Lipson, “Law Enforcement and the Credit Card.”
19. “L.A. Unit to Fight Credit Card Fraud,” LAT, November 6, 1966; William Estes, “Credit Card
Theft Growing Problem,” LAT, July 10, 1966; Tom Renner, “The Hot Credit Card Racket,”
Newsday, February 1, 1966; Tom Renner, “Bonanza for Hoodlums,” Newsday, February 2,
1966; Tom Renner, “Curbing the Chiselers,” Newsday, February 3, 1966.
20. Lyndon Johnson appointed Jack Weinstein to the federal bench just after the model law was
published. Asked about the report, Weinstein wrote, “My files for the period are destroyed and I
remember nothing of the circumstances. I’m sorry I can’t help. I don’t even remember who
asked me to do the draft—-I think I received a small honorarium.” Email, Jack Weinstein to
Sean Vanatta, October 16, 2014, in author’s possession.
21. Milton Lipson to Calista Cooper Hughes, January 27, 1967, “Credit Cards” folder; Alfred
Buerger to Edward J. Speno and Alexander Chananau, February 29, 1968, S2234-A folder,
Dunne Papers; Jack B. Weinstein and Tom J. Farber, State Credit Card Crime Act (American
Express Company, 1967), 6, Columbia University Law Library. The Card Crime Act’s
circumscribed criminal rights contrast sharply with Weinstein’s record as a federal judge.
Edward J. Rymsza, “Hon. Jack B. Weinstein Judicial Profile,” Federal Lawyer 63 (2016): 24–
25. The Dunne Papers were being processed and re-boxed when I viewed them, so only folder
titles have been provided.
22. Guy Capel to John R. Dunne, September 19, 1967, S2234-A folder, Dunne Papers.
23. “Dunne Asks New Law on Credit Card Thefts,” Newsday, July 21, 1966; “Propose Curb On
Credit Card Racket in NY,” Newsday, February 22, 1967; Renner, “Hot Credit Card Racket”;
Renner, “Bonanza for Hoodlums”; Renner, “Curbing the Chiselers”; telephone conversationwith John R. Dunne, September 9, 2013, notes in author’s possession; Dunne to Thomas V.
LaFauci, February 16, 1967; John Scott Fones, “Credit Card Bill Press Conference,” February
27, 1967, “Credit Cards” folder, Dunne Papers; Peter Z. Grossman, American Express: The
Unofficial History of the People Who Built the Great Financial Empire (Crown Publishers,
1987), 272; Alan Eysen, “Dunne Fears Credit Card Bill Doomed,” Newsday, March 31, 1967;
“Legislator Wants Stiffer Laws Governing Credit Card Crimes,” Newsday, November 22, 1967.
Michigan lawmaker Thomas J. Anderson read an article by Renner in the Kiwanis Magazine,
which inspired him to advance card fraud legislation before being contacted by Capel. Tom
Renner, “Crime and the Credit Card,” Kiwanis Magazine (Summer 1966), 21; State of
Michigan, Public and Local Acts of the State of Michigan Passed at the Regular Session of
1967, Act no. 255, 484–485; Guy Capel to Thomas Anderson, July 17, 1967, “Legislative Files:
Unsolicited Credit Cards, 1968–1969” folder, box 418, Anderson Papers.
24. John P. Heinz, Robert W. Gettleman, and Morris A. Seeskin, “Legislative Politics and the
Criminal Law,” Northwestern University Law Review 64, no. 3 (July–August 1969): 277; People
v. Swann, 213 Cal. App. 2d 447, 28 Cal. Rptr. 830 (Ct. App. 1963); John F. McCarthy to Ronald
Reagan, August 8, 1967, Bill file, Senate Bill 1055, Chapter 1395 (1967), California State
Archives; Guy Capel to John R. Dunne, June 27, 1967; Guy Capel to John R. Dunne, June 1,
1967; Guy Capel to John R. Dunne, September 19, 1967, S2234-A folder, Dunne Papers;
Thomas W. Bush, “New California Law Tightens Penalties for Credit Card Thefts,” LAT,
September 6, 1967.
25. “Minutes of Meeting of Model Penal Code—Special Advisory Board,” March 9–10, 1962, box
5616, American Law Institute Collection, Biddle Law Library, University of Pennsylvania;
Robert R. McMillan to John R. Dunne, February 9, 1968; Lynn J. Ellins to J. Robert Thomas,
January 31, 1968, S2234 folder, Dunne Papers; letter of Richard Denzler, Temporary
Commission on Revision of the Penal Law and Criminal Code, June 3, 1968, bill jacket
(vetoed), L. 1968 Veto 304, New York State Archives; Nelson Rockefeller, “To Amend the Penal
Law, in Relation to Illegal Use of Credit Cards,” Public Papers of Nelson A. Rockefeller (State
of New York, 1968), 501; Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Acts and Resolves Passed by the
General Court of Massachusetts during the Session of 1969, ch. 832, 795–798; Bill file 1969
S482, New Jersey State Archives; State of New Hampshire, Journal of the Honorable Senate of
the State of New Hampshire January Session of 1969 (statement of Sen. John Bradshaw), 578.
26. Bernard S. Meyer to Allard Lowenstein, February 7, 1969, H.R. 164 folder, box 1, 91 Cong.,
Legislative Files, Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives (RG 223), NARA I.
27. H. Erich Heinemann, “Credit Cards,” NYT, August 1, 1967; John Kirk and Theodore Fischer,
“Bank Charge Card Creates Climate for Change,” Banking (April 1968), 88; Phillip L. Zweig,
Wriston: Walter Wriston, Citibank, and the Rise and Fall of American Financial Supremacy
(Crown Publishers, 1995), 230, 540; Seymour Rotker to William D. Dixon, September 11, 1969,
“Crime 6–1 Check and Credit Card Fraud” folder, box 28, 91 Cong., SCSB Records.
28. Citibank, “Re: Report on Security Department,” November 27, 1968, in John J. Reynolds to
Emanuel Celler, May 13, 1969; Celler notes on conversation with Citibank executives, May 7,
1969, “Post Office—Credit Cards” folder, box 328, Celler Papers.
29. Thomas Wilcox to Emanuel Celler, September 19, 1969; W. J. Cotter to Emanuel Celler, May
28, 1969, “Post Office—Credit Cards” folder, box 328, Celler Papers; John Kirk, “Losses Are
Still in the Cards for Bankers!,” Banking (December 1970), 84.
30. “Probe Starts Today in Credit Card Thefts,” Newsday, January 31, 1969; Val Adams, “Banker
Says Postal Employes Are Paid to Steal Credit Cards,” NYT, February 1, 1969; Plastic Jungle
233 (1969) (statement of John R. Dunne, New York State senator).31. Richard Denzler to Robert R. Douglass, March 14, 1969, Bill file, Chapter 115 (1969–1970
Regular Session), New York State Archives; “Tough Credit-Card Bill Signed,” Newsday, March
27, 1969.
32. Adams, “Banker Says Postal Employes Are Paid to Steal”; Tom Renner, “Credit Card Liability
Limit Urged,” Newsday, February 1, 1969; “Memorandum in Support of an Act to Amend the
General Business Law in Relation to Limitations on Liability for Use of Lost or Stolen Credit
Cards,” n.d. (ca. March 1969), S5174 folder; “Memorandum in Support of an Act to Amend the
General Business Law in Relation to the Issuance of Unsolicited Credit Cards,” n.d. (ca. March
1969), S5175 folder, Dunne Papers; Fred Bruning, “Lefkowitz on Husbands’ Side,” Newsday,
November 11, 1969; “Credit Card Law Signed,” NYT, May 25, 1970.
33. Bill file, Senate Bill 97, Chapter 1019 (1971), California State Archives; James F. Carrig,
California State Banking Department, “Enrolled Bill Report,” October 4, 1971, SB97 (1) folder,
box L269, Legislative Unit, Ronald Reagan Gubernatorial Papers, Reagan Library; Heinz,
Gettleman, and Seeskin, “Legislative Politics and the Criminal Law,” 303–305; Illinois
Legislative Investigating Commission, Credit Card Fraud in Illinois, vii–viii.
34. Plastic Jungle 88 (1969) (statement of Seymour Rotker, Executive Assistant to the District
Attorney, Bronx County, Bronx, NY).
35. 116 Cong. Rec. 35939 (1970) quoted in brief for the Respondent, U.S. v. Maze, 1973 WL
172278 (U.S.), 18–19 (U.S., 2004); 1970 amendment to the federal Truth in Lending Act, 15
U.S.C. 1644.
36. Karl Polanyi, The Great Transformation (Beacon Press, 1957 [1944]).
37. Richard G. Kleindienst to William Proxmire, October 5, 1970, Headquarters Case Files, case file
36-HQ-00, serial 33, box 41, classification 36 (Mail Fraud), Records of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (RG 65), NARA II.
38. Richard G. Kleindienst to William Proxmire, October 5, 1970, Headquarters Case Files, case file
36-HQ-00, serial 33, box 41, classification 36 (Mail Fraud), Records of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (RG 65), NARA II. On the use of the federal mail fraud statute as a tool for
confronting new varieties of fraud, see Edward J. Balleisen, Fraud: An American History from
Barnum to Madoff (Princeton University Press, 2017), 128–140, 155–173; U.S. v. Maze, 414
U.S. 395, 405–408, 94 S. Ct. 645, 646, 38 L. Ed. 2d 603 (1974).
39. Adams v. U.S., 312 F.2d 137, 140 (5th Cir. 1963).
40. Kloian v. U.S., 349 F.2d 291, 293 (5th Cir. 1965); U.S. v. Reynolds, 421 F.2d 178 (5th Cir.
1970); U.S. v. Thomas, 429 F.2d 408 (5th Cir. 1970).
41. U.S. v. Kellerman, 431 F.2d at 322.
42. Kloian v. U.S., 349 F.2d; U.S. v. Chason, 451 F.2d 301 (2d Cir. 1971); Enforcement Report of
the Postal Inspection Service, January-December 1970, “Enforcement Report” folder, box 20,
Office of the Postmaster General, Records of the Post Office Department (RG 28), NARA I;
memo, Will Wilson to Director, November 2, 1970; memo, Director to Assistant Attorney
General, Criminal Division, November 6, 1970, Headquarters Case Files, case file 36-HQ-00,
serial 33, box 41, classification 36 (Mail Fraud), Records of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(RG 65), NARA II; US v. Kelly, 467 F.2d 262 (7th Cir. 1972); U.S. v. Ciotti, 469 F.2d 1204 at
1206 (3d Cir. 1972); People v. Swann, 213 Cal. App. 2d.
43. U.S. v. Maze, 414 U.S. at 396; brief for the United States, U.S. v. Maze, 1973 WL 172277
(U.S.), 5 (U.S., 2004).
44. U.S. v. Maze, 468 F.2d 529, 534, 536 (6th Cir. 1972), aff’d, 414 U.S. 395, 94 S. Ct. 645, 38 L.
Ed. 2d 603 (1974).
45. United States v. Lynn, 461 F.2d 759 (10th Cir. 1972); William T. Warner to Michael Rodak,
March 8, 1973, 72–1168, box 565, U.S. Supreme Court Appellate Case Files, Supreme Court(RG 267), NARA I; preliminary memo, J. Harvie Wilkinson III, 17 April 1973, 72–1168 folder,
box 179, Blackmun Papers; William T. Warner oral argument, “United States v. Maze,” Oyez,
November 14, 1973, https://www.oyez.org/cases/1973/72–1168.
46. Draft memo, Harry A. Blackmun, November 13, 1973; Harry A. Blackmun conference notes,
November 16, 1973, 72–1168 folder, box 179, Blackmun Papers; U.S. v. Maze, 414 U.S. at 402.
47. Warner oral argument, “United States v. Maze”; Commonwealth of Kentucky, Acts of the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Regular Session (1970), ch. 83, 356–365;
U.S. v. Maze, 414 U.S. at 416.
48. U. S. v. Mikelberg, 517 F.2d.; Brian F. Caminer, “Credit Card Fraud: The Neglected Crime,”
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 76, no. 3 (1986), 755.
49. James B. Rule, Private Lives and Public Surveillance (Allen Lane, 1973), 223–268.
Chapter 8. The Marquette Decision
 1. Harry A. Blackmun, case notes, September 6, 1978, 77–1265 folder, box 285, Blackmun Papers.
 2. For similar legal efforts in the nineteenth century to use federal law to blunt state regulation, see
Charles W. McCurdy, “American Law and the Marketing Structure of the Large Corporation,
1875–1890,” Journal of Economic History 38, no. 3 (1978): 631–49.
 3. Scholars have not examined the interfirm relationships that undergirded national bank card
systems. David L. Stearns documents the computer systems that processed transactions
(Electronic Value Exchange: Origins of the VISA Electronic Payment System [Springer, 2011]).
Dee Hock, president of Bank-Americard Inc. and later VISA documents the corporate and
organizational culture (One from Many: VISA and the Rise of the Chaordic Organization
[Berrett-Koehler, 2005]). David S. Evans and Richard Schmalensee are concerned with payment
systems economics (Paying with Plastic: The Digital Revolution in Buying and Borrowing 2nd
ed. [MIT Press, 2005]).
 4. Jerry G. South, “Credit Cards: A Primer,” Business Lawyer (January 1968): 330–331,
“Correspondence” folder, ONBCF; Tiffany v. National Bank of Missouri, 85 U.S. 409, 413, 21
L. Ed. 862 (1873); United States, Comptroller of the Currency, Comptroller’s Manual for
National Banks: Laws, Regulations, Rulings (Government Printing Office, 1968), Ruling 7310;
State of Oregon, Attorney General, Biennial Report and Opinions of the Attorney General of the
State of Oregon 1966–1968 33, no. 6250 (March 8, 1967), 160; memo, John S. Cushman to
Arne Schoeller, November 25, 1969, “Bank Credit Cards” folder, St. Cloud Case File.
 5. Stephen Szmrecsanyi, The First National Bank Story (First National Bank of Omaha, 1996),
61–65, 116; “Single Check Shopping,” WSJ, February 9, 1953; “Chge-Acct Bankers Form
Association to Exchange Information,” AB, March 23, 1954; First National Bank of Omaha,
“1969 Certificate of Sales Volume,” May 18, 1970, plaintiff’s exhibit 49, Fisher Case File.
 6. Bank of America, “Agent Bank Agreement,” January 10, 1969, plaintiff’s exhibit 4;
BankAmerica Service Corporation, “Participant Letter License Agreement,” June 10, 1969,
plaintiff’s exhibit 7; contract between First National Bank of Omaha and First of Omaha Service
Corporation, ca. 1968, defendant’s exhibit G, deposition of Marvin L. Jablonski, December 11,
1974, 4; deposition of James Doody, December 11, 1974, 3–5; deposition of J. William Henry,
December 11, 1974, 5, 9–10, Fisher Case File; “Bank Credit Card Service Organization and the
Bank Service Corporation Act,” Federal Reserve Bulletin (November 1967), 1912–1913.
 7. Deposition of James Doody, December 11, 1974, 3–5, Fisher Case File. 8. BankAmericard promotional mailer, First National Bank of Omaha, ca. 1969, plaintiff’s exhibit
48; BankAmericard application, First National Bank of Omaha, November 1974, plaintiff’s
exhibit 41.5, Fisher Case File.
 9. State of Minnesota, Session Laws of the State of Minnesota, Enacted by the Legislature at the
Session Commencing January 8, 1957 and at the Extra Session Commencing April 30, 1957, ch.
347, 418–419; Minutes, Banking Subcommittee of the Senate Commerce Committee, March 5,
1970, MBS Records; Jim Fuller, “Interest Ceiling Cools Banks to Credit Cards,” Minneapolis
Tribune, August 10, 1969, “Bank Credit Cards” folder, St. Cloud Case File; State of Minnesota,
Senate, “Report, Committee on Commerce, Subcommittee on Consumer Credit and Banking:
Interim Activities and Recommendations, July 1967–December 1968,” December 11, 1968, box
39, Braucher Papers.
10. “Northwest National Bank Credit Card Materials, ca. 1960” folder, box 8, Northwest Papers;
“Twin Cities Banks Sell Credit Plans,” NYT, September 17, 1960; “Form ‘Central States’ Card,”
Northwestern Banker (October 1968), 78.
11. Fuller, “Interest Ceiling”; “Statement of Dean F. Scott Before the Interim Subcommittee, House
Financial Institutions Committee,” September 22, 1969, MBS Records; United States, Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency, Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency (1973),
253–254.
12. “The Bank Credit Card with a $10 Annual Fee,” Business Week, March 3, 1973, 23, box 471,
CRR; Memo, John R. Kenefick to George Reilly, October 13, 1971, “Correspondence” folder;
memo, Richard A. Emerick to Douglas Head, December 1, 1969, “Bank Credit Cards” folder,
St. Cloud Case File; Fuller, “Interest Ceiling.”
13. R. V. Sullivan to Steven. M. Gunn, December 16, 1971; Omaha National Bank, Agent Bank
Agreement, ca. 1968, “Research” folder, ONBCF.
14. Memo, Douglas M. Head to Jerome D. Truhn, October 31, 1969; Memorandum of Law,
Douglas M. Head, Jerome D. Truhn, and John R. Kenefick, October 5, 1970, “Correspondence”
folder, ONBCF; “3 Banks Are Sued Under Usury Law: Minnesota Charges Limits Exceeded on
Credit Cards,” NYT, July 31, 1970; memo, Fred J. Hughes to John R. Kefenick, October 12,
1971, “Pleadings” folder, St. Cloud Case File; Douglas Cray, “Revolving Credit Plans under
Fire,” NYT, August 15, 1971; Fred J. Hughes to John Kenefick, October 6, 1971; Fred J. Hughes
to John Kenefick, October 6, 1971, “Correspondence” folder, ONBCS; memo, George Reilly to
John Kenefick, October 18, 1971; memo, John Kenefick to George Reilly, October 13, 1971;
Stipulation for Dismissal, State v. St. Cloud National Bank & Trust Co., “Pleadings” folder, St.
Cloud Case File.
15. Memo, John R. Kenefick to Douglas Head, November 24, 1969, “Research” folder, ONBCF.
16. Memo, John R. Kenefick to Douglas Head, November 24, 1969; memo, Arne Schoeller and
John R. Kenefick to Douglas Head, December 15, 1969; memo, Steven M. Gunn to file,
November 23, 1971; C. R. Servoss to Janice Eckstrand, October 13, 1971, “Research” folder,
ONBCF.
17. Memorandum of Law, Douglas M. Head, Jerome D. Truhn, and John R. Kenefick, October 5,
1970; Complaint, Douglas M. Head and John R. Kenefick, July 29, 1970, “Correspondence”
folder; memo, O. Russell Olson, June 30, 1971, “Pleadings” folder; John R. Kenefick to John
Troyer, July 22, 1971; Curtis D. Forslund to John Troyer, December 6, 1972, “Correspondence”
folder; Notice of Dismissal by Plaintiff, August 8, 1973, ONBCF. These questions were also
central to the Uniform Consumer Credit Code, which bared nonconforming out-of-state lenders
from using its remedies.
18. Memo, Mary Gallagher to William Kuretsky, August 9, 1973, “Research” folder, ONBCF.19. Memo, John S. Cushman to Arne Schoeller, November 24, 1969, “Bank Credit Cards” folder,
St. Cloud Case File; Minutes, Financial Institutions Subcommittee of the Standing Committees
on Commerce, October 22, 1969; memo, Burnette E. Koebernick to All Members of the
Financial Institutions Subcommittee, November 5, 1969, “Financial Institutions” folder, box 14,
Minutes and Supporting Materials, 1967–1970, Interim Study Committee, Legislative Service
Bureau, Iowa State Archives; “Sears, Iowa Retailer, Indiana Standard Face Usury Charge in
Suit,” WSJ, November 4, 1970; State ex rel. Turner v. Younker Bros., 210 N.W.2d 550 (Iowa
1973); State of Iowa, Acts and Joint Resolutions Passed at the 1974 Regular Session of the
Sixty-Fifth General Assembly of the State of Iowa, ch. 1250, 879–956.
20. M. L. Jablonski, Answers to Interrogatories—Second Series, July 11, 1974; First of Omaha
Service Corporation and Coralville Bank and Trust, Agent Bank Agreement, January 10, 1969,
plaintiff’s exhibit 4; Order on Pretrial Conference, Fred Fisher v. First National Bank of Omaha,
Nebraska (No. CV 72-0-156); sales draft signed by Mrs. Fred J. Fisher, Harmony Hall, July 3,
1969; sales draft signed by Fred J. Fisher, Hawkeye Chrysler Plymouth, n.d.; Analysis of
Account No. 418–731–194–969 (Fred Fisher), plaintiff’s exhibit 52, Fisher Case File.
21. M. L. Jablonski, Answers to Interrogatories, February 12, 1973; brief of Appellee, March 10,
1976, 39, Fisher Case File; John C. Coffee Jr. Entrepreneurial Litigation: Its Rise, Fall and
Future (Harvard University Press, 2015). Meeker’s strategy was increasingly common. Bankers
complained that bankrupt debtors would file Truth-in-Lending claims, hoping that banks would
forgive the debt rather than incur the cost of defending themselves. Oversight on Consumer
Protection Activities of Federal Banking Agencies, 94 Cong. 121 (statement of Jonathan
Landers, Visiting Scholar, American Bar Foundation).
22. Plaintiff’s brief, January 14, 1972, Fisher Case File.
23. Deposition of James Doody, January 3, 1975, Fisher Case File.
24. Plaintiff Memorandum of Authorities and Argument, November 1, 1971; plaintiff’s brief,
January 14, 1972, Fisher Case File; Felix Cohen, “Transcendental Nonsense and the
Functionalist Approach,” Columbia Law Review 35, no. 6 (June 1935): 809–849.
25. Memorandum Opinion and Ruling and Order on Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss, February 22,
1972, Fisher Case File.
26. Fisher v. First Nat’l Bank of Omaha, 338 F. Supp. 525 (S.D. Iowa 1972); Fisher v. First National
Bank of Omaha, 548 F.2d 255 (8th Cir. 1977); Fisher v. First National Bank of Chicago, 538
F.2d 1284 (7th Cir. 1976), cert. denied, 97 S. Ct. 786 (1977).
27. State of Iowa, Acts and Joint Resolutions (1970), ch. 1250; news release, Iowa Department of
Justice, November 1, 1974, box 1, Consumer Protection Press Releases and Reports, Attorney
General, Iowa State Archives; Iowa ex rel. Turner v. First of Omaha Serv. Corp. of Omaha,
Neb., 401 F. Supp. 439 (S.D. Iowa 1975); State ex rel. Turner v. First of Omaha Serv. Corp. of
Omaha, 269 N.W.2d 409 (Iowa 1978).
28. “The Bank Credit Card with a $10 Annual Fee”; “Banks Edging toward Card Service Charges,”
Banking (August 1976), 58; First Nat. Bank of Omaha v. Marquette Nat. Bank of Minneapolis,
482 F. Supp. 514, 516 (D. Minn. 1979); United States, Comptroller of the Currency, Annual
Report of the Comptroller of the Currency (1975), 138–139.
29. Jim Doody quoted in Szmrecsanyi, First National Bank Story, 126–127.
30. State of Minnesota, Session Laws of the State of Minnesota, Enacted by the Sixty-Ninth
Legislature at the 1976 Regular Session Commencing January 26, 1976 and Adjourning April 5,
1976, ch. 196, 664; First Nat. Bank of Omaha, 482 F. Supp. at 516; Minutes, Minnesota Senate
Labor and Commerce Committee, February 3, 1976, Senate Labor and Commerce vol. 58, box
129.C.7.4F, Senate Committee Books, Minnesota Historical Society.31. Brief of the Minnesota AFL-CIO, as Amicus Curiae Supporting Petitioner Minnesota, at 5,
Marquette Nat’l Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Serv. Corp., 439 U.S. 299 (1978) (Nos.
77–1265, 77–1258), 1978 WL 223582; Minn. Stat. § 48.185 (1976); Marquette, 439 U.S. at 304;
Marquette Nat’l Bank of Minneapolis v. First Omaha Serv. Corp., 262 N.W.2d 358 (1977) at
366n.2.
32. Brief for Petitioner the Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis, at 8, Marquette, 439 U.S.,
1978 WL 223581 (U.S.); Marquette, 262 N.W.2d at 365.
33. Julian B. Garrett to Clerk of the Supreme Court, June 26, 1978; Order, Justice Harry A.
Blackmun, No. A-500 (78–846), First of Omaha Service Corporation, dba Bankamericard, et al.
vs. Iowa, et al., November 28, 1978; State v. 1st of Omaha, 61053, box 84, Supreme Court of
Iowa, Iowa State Archives; State ex rel. Turner, 269 N.W.2d at 415; William E. Morrow Jr. to
Robert H. Bork, November 10, 1978; Morrow to Bork, November 21, 1978, box I:27, Bork
Papers.
34. Daniel T. Rodgers, Age of Fracture (Harvard University Press, 2011), 56–63; George J. Stigler,
“The Law and Economics of Public Policy: A Plea to the Scholars,” Journal of Legal Studies 1.1
(1972): 1–12; State ex rel. Turner, 269 N.W.2d at 416; Lawrence M. Ausubel, “The Failure of
Competition in the Credit Card Market,” American Economic Review 81, no. 1 (March 1991):
50–81. In chapter 11 I argue that banks charging higher rates can afford to heavily market cards
and can market cards to riskier borrowers, crowding out low-margin, low-priced rivals.
35. State ex rel. Turner, 269 N.W.2d; Harry Blackmun to William Brennan, November 28, 1978,
77–1265 folder, box I:479, Brennan Papers. Blackmun (or his clerk) borrowed the sword
metaphor from Marquette’s brief (brief for Marquette National Bank, at 11, 1978 WL 223581).
36. Brief of the Minnesota AFL-CIO, at iii, 1978 WL 223582; brief of Petitioner State of
Minnesota, at 13, 1978 WL 206921. For a regulatory arbitrage, see Bruce G. Carruthers and
Naomi R. Lamoreaux, “Regulatory Races: The Effects of Jurisdictional Competition on
Regulatory Standards,” Journal of Economic Literature 54, no. 1 (2016): 52–97.
37. Justice Blackmun, dissent draft memorandum, May 10, 1978 (emphasis original); Blackmun
conference notes, November 1, 1978, 77–1265 folder, box 284, Blackmun Papers; Robert H.
Bork oral argument, “Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service
Corporation,” Oyez, October 31, 1978, www.oyez.org/cases/1978/77–1265; Robert H. Bork to
William E. Morrow Jr., September 12, 1978, box I:27, Bork Papers.
38. Marquette, 439 U.S. at 312; William H. Rehnquist to William Brennan, December 11, 1978, 77–
1265 folder, box I:479, Brennan Papers.
39. First Nat. Bank of Omaha, 482 F. Supp.; First Nat. Bank of Omaha v. Marquette Nat. Bank of
Minneapolis, 636 F.2d 195, 198 (8th Cir. 1980).
40. Bork oral argument, “Marquette”; Bork worried about the lack of industry attention and urged
William Morrow to drum up support (Robert Bork to William E. Morrow Jr., November 6,
1978, box I:27, Bork Papers).
41. Memo, Hugh McPheeters to Paul M. Ross, April 1, 1977, S317 folder, box 6, Legislative Files,
Teasdale Papers.
42. Hugh McPheeters to Paul M. Ross, August 3, 1977, S317 folder, box 6, Legislative Files,
Teasdale Papers.
Chapter 9. Profits Anywhere 1. “Citibank Trying to Acquire Idaho Visa Card Business,” NYT, August 17, 1977; Leonard
Wiener, “Citibank Recruiting for Visa Here,” CT, August 18, 1977; “Competitor Criticizes
Credit Card Letters,” Detroit Free Press, August 19, 1977; Robert Lenzner, “Competition Is
Keen for Bank Card Credit,” BG, August 1, 1978; “Citibank Offering Visa Cards to
Pittsburghers,” Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, August 27, 1977; Roger Smith, “Citibank Blitz,” LAT,
March 9, 1978; Alex W. Hart, quoted in “A Visa-Card Offensive Angers the Opposition,”
Business Week, September 5, 1977, 31.
 2. Jens Beckert, “Imagined Futures: Fictional Expectations in the Economy,” Theory and Society
42, no. 3 (2013): 219–240.
 3. Citicorp, “Operating Earnings after Tax,” in Citicorp Annual Report and Form 10K (1978), 42
(ProQuest ID: 88205180); Brett Christophers, Banking across Boundaries: Placing Finance in
Capitalism (John Wiley & Sons, 2013), 187–188; Arturo C. Porzecanski, “The International
Financial Role of U.S. Commercial Banks: Past and Future,” Journal of Banking and Finance 5,
no. 1 (March 1981): 10; Ranald C. Michie, Banks, Exchanges, and Regulators: Global
Financial Markets from the 1970s (Oxford University Press, 2020), 37–43.
 4. Harold van B. Cleveland and Thomas F. Huertas, Citibank, 1812–1970 (Harvard University
Press, 1985), 5, 24, 32–34, 83–84, 156–157. See also Peter James Hudson, Bankers and Empire:
How Wall Street Colonized the Caribbean (Chicago University Press, 2017).
 5. Cleveland and Huertas, Citibank, 217–224; Phillip L. Zweig, Wriston: Walter Wriston, Citibank
and the Rise and Fall of American Financial Supremacy (Crown Publishers, 1995), 46; National
City Bank of New York, Report to the Shareholders of the National City Bank of New York and
the City Bank Farmers Trust Company, December 31, 1946 (ProQuest ID: 88184365).
 6. Zweig, Wriston, 8, 14, 24–27, 63–67; Walter B. Wriston, “Tanker Financing for Independent
Operators,” Oil Forum (Mid-November 1955): 465–466; Christophers, Banking across
Boundaries, 146–184; Cleveland and Huertas, Citibank, 261–263; Wriston, quoted in Zweig,
Wriston, 87.
 7. Monroe Kimbrel and Arnold A. Dill, “Other Sources of Funds,” in The Changing World of
Banking, ed. Herbert V. Prochnow and Herbert V. Prochnow, Jr. (Harper & Row, 1974), 75–97;
Cleveland and Huertas, Citibank, 243–257; First National City Bank of New York, Report to the
Shareholders of the First National City Bank of New York and the First National City Trust
Company, December 31, 1959 (ProQuest ID: 88192475), 6; Zweig, Wriston, 113, 142–143, 193;
First National City Bank of New York, The 1967 Annual Report of the First National City Bank
(ProQuest ID: 88199682), 3. On the origins of the eurodollar markets, see Catherine R. Schenk,
“The Origins of the Eurodollar Market in London: 1955–1963,” Explorations in Economic
History 35, no. 2 (April 1, 1998): 221–238.
 8. Zweig, Wriston, 196–199; Cleveland and Huertas, Citibank, 259–260
 9. Cleveland and Huertas, Citibank, 264–268; Porzecanski, “International Financial Role of U.S.
Commercial Banks,” 10; Zweig, Writson, 199–202; 263–265; 398–409; SEC and Citicorp, 97
Cong. (serial no. 97-193) (1982); Richard Dale, The Regulation of International Banking
(Woodhead-Faulkner, 1984), 195–204; Robert A. Hutchison, Off the Books (William Morrow,
1986).
10. Cleveland and Huertas, Citibank, 291; Thomas O. Paine, quoted in Zweig, Wriston, 197–198;
Lee Silberman, “Presidency Contest at First National City,” WSJ, May 5, 1967.
11. Cleveland and Huertas, Citibank, 247–252, 272–275.
12. “Hilton Credit Cites Overseas Expansion,” NYT, August 25, 1965; “New York Bank, Hilton
Hotels Unit Set Merge Plan,” WSJ, September 22, 1965; H. Erich Heinemann, “Diners’ Club
Stock Would Cost Chase $56.5 Million Cash,” NYT, November 18, 1965; “Hilton Seeks to Sell
50% of Carte Blanche to New York City Bank,” WSJ, August 25, 1965; “Carte Blanche Sale toBank Hit by U.S. Suit,” LAT, December 31, 1965; “Chase Bank, Diners’ Club End Merger Plan
after Justice Unit Threatens Trust Suit,” WSJ, April 13, 1966; “Court Bars Sale of Carte
Blanche,” NYT, December 31, 1965.
13. Christine Zumello, “The ‘Everything Card’ and Consumer Credit in the United States in the
1960s,” Business History Review 85, no. 3 (Autumn 2011): 551–575; H. Erich Heinemann,
“Credit Cards,” NYT, August 1, 1967; Wriston, quoted in Zweig, Wriston, 230; Andrew F.
Brimmer, “Statement to Congress,” Federal Reserve Bulletin (June 1970), 479–505.
14. “One-Bank Holding Companies: The Case against a Legislative Roadblock,” University of
Chicago Law Review 36, no. 4 (1969): 803–829; Cleveland and Huertas, Citibank, 296–297.
15. Zweig, Wriston, 255–261; “Implementation of the Bank Holding Company Act Amendments of
1970: The Scope of Banking Activities,” Michigan Law Review 71, no. 6 (1973): 1170–1211;
Treasury Department, “Summary of the Background of Development of the One-Bank Holding
Company Problem and a General Outline of the Principle Points to be Included in a Legislative
Resolution of this Problem,” February 18, 1969, FG 267 (executive), box 1, WHCF, Nixon
Library; First National City Corporation, First National City Corporation Annual Report—1971
(ProQuest ID: 88201283), 5.
16. Milton Friedman, “A Friedman Doctrine,” NYT, September 13, 197; Zweig, Wriston, 182, 194,
215; Robert Metz, “Market Place: A Big Bank Tells What Its Goal Is,” NYT, October 28, 1971;
memo, Sam B. Chase and Ed Wess to Chairman Burns and Governor Mitchell, October 10,
1972, “First National City Bank” folder, box B48, Burns Papers. On the shareholder value
revolution, see William Lazonick and Mary O’Sullivan, “Maximizing Shareholder Value: A
New Ideology for Corporate Governance,” Economy and Society 29, no. 1 (2000): 13–35.
17. Richard Sylla, “United States Banks in Europe: Strategies and Attitudes,” in European Banks
and the American Challenge: Competition and Cooperation in International Banking under
Bretton Woods, ed. Stefano Battilossi and Youssef Cassis (Oxford University Press, 2002), 53–
73; Brett Christophers, Banking across Boundaries: Placing Finance in Capitalism (John Wiley
& Sons, 2013), 146–184; Citicorp, Citicorp 1972, 40–41 (Proquest ID: 88201321); Citicorp,
Citicorp Reports/1976 (1976), 20 (ProQuest ID: 88204130); “Yankee Doodle Comes Home,”
The Economist, March 4, 1978, 35; “Harder Times,” The Economist, January 22, 1977, 21;
Wriston in Carol Loomis, “Citi’s Rocky Affair with the Consumer,” Fortune, March 24, 1980.
18. Andrew L. Russell and Lee Vinsel, “After Innovation, Turn to Maintenance,” Technology and
Culture 59, no. 1 (January 2018): 1–25; Lewis Mandell, The Credit Card Industry: A History
(Twayne Publishers, 1990), 35. In this sense, bank adoption of cards, their utilization of
unsolicited mailing, and their construction of parallel networks offers a case study in DiMaggio
and Powell’s theory of institutional isomorphism (Paul J. DiMaggio and Walter W. Powell, “The
Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational
Fields,” American Sociological Review 48, no. 2 (1983): 147–160).
19. Dee W. Hock, One from Many: VISA and the Rise of the Chaordic Organization (Berrett￾Koehler, 2005), 77; Joseph Nocera, A Piece of the Action: How the Middle Class Joined the
Money Class (Simon & Schuster, 1994), 66–69; David L. Stearns, Electronic Value Exchange:
Origins of the VISA Electronic Payment System (Springer, 2011), 30–32. The crisis in credit card
processing paralleled the back-office crisis among securities firms (Wyatt Wells, “Certificates
and Computers: The Remaking of Wall Street, 1967 to 1971,” Business History Review 74, no. 2
[2000]: 193–235).
20. Stearns, Electronic Value Exchange, 32–39; Hock, One from Many, 83–85. Hock’s National
Bank of Commerce was ultimately acquired by Bank of America in 1992.
21. Nocera, Piece of the Action, 62–66; Hock One from Many, 89–91, 108–113, 115–124; Stearns,
Electronic Value Exchange, 39–49.22. Hock One from Many, 91–99, 246.
23. Stearns, Electronic Value Exchange, 53–90; “Interbank Card Association Report to the
Membership, 1973,” box 471, CRR; John Getze, “Bankamericard Profit Eludes Many Banks,”
LAT, December 29, 1971; Richard W. Plumb, “The Story of Mellon Bank’s Charge Card
Success and Plans for Future,” Banking (December 1971), 21, 36, 43; David T. Cook, “Banks
Trim Credit Cards but Purchases Rise,” CSM, June 12, 1972; “Bank Credit Card Picture
Brightens,” Banking (December 1971), 19. The networks recruited the Federal Reserve to
process charge slips, but the Fed declined (Federal Reserve, Subcommittee on the Payments
Mechanism, Report No. 2, 5 July 1973, 33, FRBNY Archives).
24. David M. Kennedy, “Required Reading: Credit Cards Provide Meaningful Approach to Banking
Procedures,” AB (n.d., ca. January 1967), folder 4, box 5, Kennedy Papers; Josh Lauer, “Plastic
Surveillance: Payment Cards and the History of Transactional Data, 1888 to Present,” Big Data
& Society 7, no. 1 (January 2020): 5–6; memo, Robert M. Fisher and James F. Smith to Board of
Governors, February 23, 1976, box 20, Burns Papers.
25. Richard Phalon, “Credit Suits May Result in Refunds for Millions,” NYT, September 19, 1970;
“$3 Billion Antitrust Suit Charges 5 Chicago Banks,” CT, August 5, 1970; Robert A. Wright,
“Consumers Suing Bank of America,” NYT, December 8, 1971; “178 Banks Accused on Excess
Interest,” NYT, April 10, 1972; “$26 Billion Sought in Bank Credit Card Suit,” LAT, July 16,
1972; Plumb, “Story of Mellon Bank’s Charge Card Success,” 21, 36, 43; Frances Cerra,
“Dispute Over Truth-in-Lending Act Grows,” NYT, July 4, 1977.
26. “Bank Credit Card Picture Brightens,” 19–20, 46; “Charge It, but . . .,” CSM, March 12, 1971.
27. M. L. Jablonski, Answers to Interrogatories, February 12, 1973, Fisher Case File; Beverly K.
Jakub to Lyn Dean, August 14, 1973, box 44, NOW Records.
28. Master Charge press kit, box 471, CRR; John H. Allan, “As Prices Soar, Bank-Card Use
Jumps,” NYT, April 22, 1974; John J. Reynolds, “Expanding Financial Services through Credit
Cards,” Credit World 62, no. 10 (July 1974): 12; “Outstanding Balances, Credit Cards and
Related Plans of National Banks,” in United States, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,
Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency, 1970–1973, FRASER.
29. World Bank, “Inflation, Consumer Prices for the United States (FPCPITOTLZGUSA),” FRED;
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Discount Rate Changes: Historical Dates
of Changes and Rates (Discontinued) (Discount),” FRED; Edwin Dale Jr., “Federal Reserve
Pledges Measures to Halt Inflation,” NYT, February 27, 1969; William Proxmire to Richard
Nixon, December 24, 1969, FI5 (executive), box 41, WHCF, Nixon Library; “Credit Controls
Are Essential,” BG, January 12, 1970; Rowland Evans and Robert Novak, “Selective Credit
Controls Weighed By Administration as Last Resort,” WP, March 12, 1970.
30. U.S., President and Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Report of the President
(Government Printing Office, 1970), 9; memo, David M. Kennedy, Robert P. Mayo, and Paul W.
McCracken to Richard M. Nixon, January 8, 1970, FG 267 (executive), box 1, WHCF, Nixon
Library.
31. Edward J. Balleisen and David A. Moss, “Introduction,” Government and Markets: Toward a
New Theory of Regulation, ed. Balleisen and Moss (Cambridge University Press, 2010), 1–9;
President’s Commission on Financial Structure and Regulation, The Report (Government
Printing Office, 1972), 9; H. Erich Heinemann, “Structural Unity Favored for Financial
Businesses,” NYT, November 9, 1971; memo, Richard Erb to Peter Flannigan, December 21,
1971, FG 267 (executive), box 1, WHCF, Nixon Library; Financial Structure and Regulation,
93 Cong. 20–38 (1973) (statement of William E. Simon, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury).
32. President’s Commission on Financial Structure and Regulation, The Report, 46; Financial
Structure and Regulation, 93 Cong. 17–18 (statement of Reed O. Hunt, Chairman, President’sCommission on Financial Structure and Regulation).
33. Charles A. Elfrank, “New ‘Jobs’ Ahead for Bank Cards,” Banking (September 1973), 115;
Reynolds, “Expanding Financial Services through Credit Cards,” Credit World, 12; John J.
Reynolds, “The Future of the Bank Card,” Credit World 62, no. 3 (December 1973): 21; Stearns,
Electronic Value Exchange, 159–163, 171–175.
34. Stearns, Electronic Value Exchange, 159–163; “Contrasting Viewpoints on How to Attain
Electronic Funds Transfer,” Banking (May 1974), 30; Bernardo Bátiz-Lazo, Cash and Dash:
How ATMs and Computers Changed Banking (Oxford University Press, 2018).
35. Thomas McIntyre and John Tower to Colleague, December 9, 1975, box 41, series [1]D,
Thomas J. McIntyre Papers, University of New Hampshire; Sen. Thomas McIntyre, “S. 3266, A
Bill to Establish a Commission on Electronic Funds Transfer,” 120 Cong. Rec. 8674 (1974);
United States, Public Law 93–495, Title II: National Commission on Electronic Funds Transfer
(1974).
36. “Customer-Bank Communication Terminals,” FR Doc. 74–29950, Filed December 23, 1974,
Federal Register, vol. 39, no. 248, 44416–44422; Electronic Funds Transfer Moratorium Act of
1975, 94 Cong. 14–20 (1975) (statement of James E. Smith, Comptroller of the Currency).
37. “Customer-Bank Communication Terminals”; Electronic Funds Transfer Moratorium Act of
1975, 94 Cong., 36, 46–51 (statement of Smith).
38. Robert Lindsey, “Consumers Test Electronic Banking,” NYT, April 6, 1975; advertisement,
Continental Illinois Bank, CT, July 23, 1975; Rudolph Unger and Leonard Wiener, “Continental
Bank Stations Challenged,” CT, June 24, 1975.
39. “Citibank Mails Out Bank Cards Encoded through New Process,” WSJ, October 25, 1973;
Reginald Stuart, “Personal Finance: Cashing of Checks,” NYT, May 9, 1974; Avery Hunt, “A
Little Bank without Bankers,” Newsday, April 28, 1975.
40. Zweig, Wriston, 541–549; “‘Invasion’ by Banks Is Feared,” NYT, June 1, 1975; “Measure to
Restrict Electronic Banking Shelved in Senate,” WSJ, July 10, 1975; “Curb on Electronic Banks
Expected to Be Contested,” NYT, July 18, 1975.
41. Leonard Wiener, “Judge Ponders: What Is Bank?,” CT, November 13, 1975; Richard Phillips
and Leonard Wiener, “Appeals Court Says ‘No’ to Money Machines,” CT, May 29, 1976.
42. Indep. Bankers Ass’n of Am. v. Smith, 402 F. Supp. 207, 209 (D.D.C. 1975), aff’d, 534 F.2d 921
(D.C. Cir. 1976); Indep. Bankers Ass’n of Am. v. Smith, 534 F.2d 921, 933 (D.C. Cir. 1976);
“Curb on Electronic Banks Expected to Be Contested,” NYT, July 18, 1975; Bloom v. Indep.
Bankers Ass’n of Am., 429 U.S. 862, 97 S. Ct. 166, 50 L. Ed. 2d 141 (1976); State of Ill. ex rel.
Lignoul v. Cont’l Illinois Nat. Bank & Tr. Co. of Chicago, 409 F. Supp. 1167 (N.D. Ill. 1975),
aff’d in part, rev’d in part sub nom. State of Ill. ex rel. Lignoul v. Cont’l Nat. Bank & Tr. Co. of
Chicago, 536 F.2d 176 (7th Cir. 1976).
43. Fisher v. First National Bank of Omaha, 548 F.2d 255 (8th Cir. 1977); Fisher v. First National
Bank of Chicago, 538 F.2d 1284 (7th Cir. 1976), cert. denied, 97 S. Ct. 786 (1977); William
Gruber, “Citibank Chief Urges Change in Local Branch Banking Laws,” CT, April 19, 1978.
44. Allan, “As Prices Soar, Bank-Card Use Jumps.”
45. Louis Hyman, Debtor Nation: A History of America in Red Ink (Princeton University Press,
2011), 173–219; Lizabeth Cohen, A Consumers’ Republic: The Politics of Mass Consumption in
Postwar America (Alfred A. Knopf, 2003), 370–386; Felicia Ann Kornbluh, The Battle for
Welfare Rights: Politics and Poverty in Modern America (University of Pennsylvania Press,
2007), 114–131; Josh Lauer, Creditworthy: A History of Consumer Surveillance and Financial
Identity in America (Columbia University Press, 2017), 233–241; Helaine Blythe to National
Organization for Women, January 23, 1973; Susan M. Burkhalter to National BankAmericard,
July 13, 1973; Alice Omohundro to Instalment Loan Department, United Virginia Bank ofFairfax, March 12, 1973, box 44; Erma Bursne to Carole de Saram, December 5, [1972], box
45; NOW Records.
46. Memo, Richard L. Peterson to Board of Governors, “Additional Information on Consumer
Credit,” August 7, 1974; memo, Robert M. Fisher and James F. Smith to Board of Governors,
“Growth of Credit Card Credit Outstanding, 1970–1975,” February 23, 1976, box 20, Burns
Papers; Allan, “As Prices Soar, Bank-Card Use Jumps.”
47. Plumb, “Story of Mellon Bank’s Charge Card Success,” 21, 36, 43.
48. “Bank Credit Card Picture Brightens,” 19–20, 46.
49. Will Lissner, “Citibank Imposes Credit Card Fee,” NYT, April 13, 1976; Stanley Strachan,
“Rising Cost of Plastic Money,” NYT, May 9, 1976; Zumello, “The ‘Everything Card,’” 551–
575; James A. White, “Consumers Are Charging through a Credit-Card Blizzard,” CT, January
22, 1978; “Service Fee Is Absurd,” Newsday, April 27, 1976; Zweig, Wriston, 550–551. Citi’s
John Reed argued that in an average year, convenience users earned the bank $14 in merchant
discounts and cost the bank $20 in processing costs; the $6 fee enabled Citi to break even.
50. Frank Claus, quoted in Jane Shoemaker, “Bank Credit Cards,” Philadelphia Inquirer, April 25,
1976; John Getze, “‘Free Ride’ Ending for Credit Card Holders,” LAT, April 19, 1976; Strachan,
“Rising Cost of Plastic Money,” NYT, May 9, 1976; William D. Harrington, “Use of the
Proceeds of Commercial Paper Issued by Bank Holding Companies,” Business Lawyer (ABA)
29, no. 1 (1973): 207–26.
51. “Bank Cards,” Newsday, April 20, 1976; “Consumers Play Fly to Bank Spider,” CT, April 26,
1976; Zweig, Wriston, 550–551; Roy R. Silver, “Citibank’s Card Fee Ruled Illegal,” NYT, June
14, 1978; Sternberg v. Citicorp Credit Servs., Inc., 69 A.D.2d 352, 419 N.Y.S.2d 142 (1979),
aff’d, 50 N.Y.2d 856, 407 N.E.2d 1350 (1980); “Banks Edging toward Card Service Charges,”
Banking (August 1976), 58; White, “Consumers Are Charging through a Credit-Card Blizzard”;
“Citicorp Unit Ordered to Refund Service Fees to Credit Card Users,” WSJ, June 14, 1978;
“Court Orders Citibank to Refund 50¢ to Customer,” LAT, August 9, 1979.
52. Sam Chase to Chairman Burns, October 7, 1974, “First National City Bank” folder, box B48,
Burns Papers; Loomis, “Citi’s Rocky Affair with the Consumer”; Cleveland and Huertas,
Citibank, 276, 294–295; Zweig, Wriston, 205–206, 362–636, 534; Reed quoted in Smith,
“Citibank Blitz.”
53. Brad Knickerbocker, “Credit Card Decides on a New Name,” CSM, January 25, 1977; Hock,
One from Many, 213–231; Nocera, Piece of the Action, 144–145.
54. Hock, One from Many, 181–182; David S. Evans and Richard Schmalensee, Paying with
Plastic: The Digital Revolution in Buying and Borrowing, 2nd ed. (MIT Press, 2005), 275–279.
55. Smith, “Citibank Blitz”; John F. Lawrence, “Bank’s Credit Card Blitz May Backfire,” LAT,
March 12, 1978; Robert A. Bennett, “Citibank’s Credit Card Blitz,” NYT, July 23, 1978; Zweig,
552–553.
56. “Citibank Trying to Acquire Idaho Visa Card Business”; Smith, “Citibank Blitz”; “Citibank’s
Credit Card Blitz”; Zweig, Wriston, 553; Walter Wriston, “Looking Backward at the Nineteen
Eighties,” March 31, 1980, “Citibank 1980–1982” folder, box 35, accession 94–4, Janklow
Papers.
57. The Consumer Credit Protection Act Amendments of 1977, Part 1, 95 Cong. 365 (1977)
(statement of David Phillips, Senior Vice President, Card Product Division, Citibank).
58. Wiener, “Citibank Recruiting for Visa Here”; “Perils of Plastic,” WSJ, July 3, 1979; Lenzner,
“Competition Is Keen for Bank Card Credit”; White, “Consumers Are Charging through a
Credit-Card Blizzard”; David J. Ginzl, Barnett: The Story of “Florida’s Bank” (University of
Tampa Press, 2001).59. Priscilla Meyer, “Citicorp Is Apparently Trying to Become a Major Force in the Credit Card
Industry,” WSJ, August 19, 1977; Smith, “Citibank Blitz.”
60. Lauer, Creditworthy, 245–248; Zweig, Wriston, 552–553, 615–616; Citicorp, Citicorp Annual
Report and Form 10-K 1978, 5, 28 (ProQuest ID: 88205180); Dan Dorfman, “Grim Citibank
View of Interest Rates,” WP, October 25, 1978; Citicorp, Citicorp Annual Report and Form 10-
K 1979, 32, 40 (ProQuest ID: 88205999).
61. Memo, Lyle Gramley to Robert Carswell, October 18, 1979, Staff Files: Gramley, Lyle [3], Staff
Office—CEA, box 153, Carter Library; Lawrence, “Bank’s Credit Card Blitz May Backfire”;
Rebecca K. Marchiel, After Redlining: The Urban Reinvestment Movement in the Era of
Financial Reregulation (University of Chicago Press, 2020), 135–146.
Chapter 10. Credit Control
 1. Jerry L. Hunter, “Letters,” Newsweek, April 14, 1980.
 2. Lyle Gramley, quoted in W. Carl Biven, Jimmy Carter’s Economy: Policy in an Age of Limits
(University of North Carolina Press, 2002), 249. Scholars chronicling the Carter presidency
ignore the CCA’s place in Carter’s March 1980 inflation-fighting measures, often glossing over
this crucial policy action en route to discussions of Edward Kennedy’s challenge for the
Democratic nomination (Kaufman and Kaufman, The Presidency of James Earl Carter
[University of Kansas Press, 1993], 204–208; Erwin Hargrove, Jimmy Carter as President:
Leadership and the Politics of the Public Good [Louisiana State University Press, 1988], 104).
Scholars concerned with Carter’s economic policies have similarly downplayed the CCA
(Anthony S. Campagna, Economic Policy in the Carter Administration [Greenwood Press,
1995], 96; Biven, Jimmy Carter’s Economy, 246–249; Bruce J. Schulman, “Slouching toward
the Supply Side: Jimmy Carter and the New American Political Economy,” The Carter
Presidency: Policy Choices in the Post-New Deal Era, ed. Gary M. Fink and Hugh Davis
Graham [University Press of Kansas, 1998], 57–62). For the Volcker Shock, see Iwan Morgan,
“Monetary Metamorphosis: The Volcker Fed and Inflation,” Journal of Policy History 24, no. 4
(2012): 545–71.
 3. Hargrove, Jimmy Carter as President, 6–7, 87; Kaufman, James Earl Carter, 8–12; Campagna,
Economic Policy in the Carter Administration, 6–9, 22–23.
 4. Jimmy Carter, Keeping Faith: Memoirs of a President (University of Arkansas Press, 1995), 79;
Schulman, “Slouching toward the Supply Side,” 54–55; Hargrove, Jimmy Carter as President,
69–70, 92; Angus Burgin, The Great Persuasion: Reinventing Free Markets since the Great
Depression (Harvard University Press, 2015); Elizabeth Popp Berman, Thinking Like an
Economist: How Efficiency Replaced Equality in U.S. Public Policy (Princeton University Press,
2022); Thomas K. McCraw, Prophets of Regulation (Harvard University Press, 1984), 222–310;
Allen V. Kneese and Charles L. Schultze, Pollution, Prices, and Public Policy (Brookings
Institution, 1974); Biven, Jimmy Carter’s Economy, 44; Bruce J. Schulman, The Seventies: The
Great Shift in American Culture, Society, and Politics (Simon & Schuster, 2001), 129–131.
 5. Kaufman, James Earl Carter, 52, 80–81, 113–114; Jimmy Carter, “Anti-Inflation Program
Address to the Nation,” October 24, 1978, APP.
 6. Kaufman, James Earl Carter, 139; Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, “The Consumer Price
Index (Estimate), 1800–,” https://www.minneapolisfed.org/about-us/monetary-policy/inflation￾calculator/consumer-price-index-1800-; Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development, “Consumer Price Index: Total All Items for the United States(CPALTT01USM661S),” FRED; memo, Charles B. Holstein to Ester Peterson, March 12, 1979,
box 13, Special Advisor—Inflation, Kahn; document, “Selective Control of Consumer Credit,”
March 13, 1979, box 108, Staff Office—CEA; memo, Department of the Treasury to President
Carter, March 30, 1979; memo, Department of the Treasury to President Carter, March 12,
1979; memo, Burke Dillon to Charlie Shultze, April 10, 1979, box 13, Special Advisor—
Inflation, Kahn; memo, Department of Justice to Charlie Schultze, April 12, 1979, box 14;
memo, Charlie Schultze to President Carter, May 25, 1979, box 54, Staff Office—CEA, Carter
Library.
 7. Memo, Lyle Gramley to Charlie Schultze, January 25, 1979; memo, “Selective Controls of
Consumer Credit,” March 13, 1979; memo, “A Proposal to Limit the Terms of Consumer
Credit” (n.d., ca. April 1970), box 14; memo, Charlie Schultze to President Carter, May 25,
1979, box 54, Staff Office—CEA, Carter Library.
 8. Memo, “Selective Controls of Consumer Credit,” March 13, 1979; memo, Burke Dillon to
Charlie Schultze, April 10, 1979, box 14, Staff Office—CEA, Carter Library. The Fed was also
worried about household debt burdens during this period (memo, “Burden of Consumer Debt,”
Division of Research and Statistics [Charles A. Luckett] to Board of Governors, June 20, 1977;
memo, “Consumer Credit Developments,” Division of Research and Statistics [Charles A.
Luckett] to Chairman Burns, June 29, 1977, box 20, Burns Papers).
 9. Meg Jacobs, Panic at the Pump: The Energy Crisis and the Transformation of American Politics
in the 1970s (Hill and Wang, 2017); Daniel Horowitz, The Anxieties of Affluence: Critiques of
American Consumer Culture, 1939–1979 (University of Massachusetts Press, 2004), 205–206;
Daniel Bell, The Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism (Basic Books, 1976); Robert N. Bellah,
The New Religious Consciousness (University of California Press, 1976); Christopher Lasch,
The Culture of Narcissism: American Life in an Age of Diminishing Expectations (W. W.
Norton, 1978).
10. Carter, “The Energy Problem: Address to the Nation,” April 18, 1977, APP; Carter, Keeping the
Faith, 120–121; memo, Pat Caddell to President Carter, April 23, 1979, box 40, Staff Offices:
Press, Jody Powell, Carter Library; Horowitz, Anxieties of Affluence, 229; cf. Jimmy Carter,
White House Diaries (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2010), 323.
11. Carter, Keeping the Faith, 121–125; Daniel Horowitz, Jimmy Carter and the Energy Crisis of
the 1970s: The “Crisis of Confidence Speech,” A Brief History with Documents (Bedford/St.
Martins, 2005), 126, 152; Carter, “Address to the Nation on Energy and National Goals: ‘The
Malaise Speech,’” July 15, 1979, APP.
12. J. David Woodard, The America That Reagan Built (Praeger, 2006), 4–7; Biven, Jimmy Carter’s
Economy, 273; Kevin Mattson, “What the Heck Are You Up to Mr. President:” Jimmy Carter,
America’s “Malaise,” and the Speech That Should Have Changed the Country (Bloomsbury,
2009), 159–161.
13. Thomas Karier, Great Experiments in American Economic Policy: From Kennedy to Reagan
(Praeger, 1997), 40; “Straight and Narrow with Mr. Volcker,” NYT, July 26, 1979.
14. Biven, Jimmy Carter’s Economy, 240; Karier, Great Experiments, 41, 43; Paul A. Volcker,
“Monetary Policy Transmission: Past and Future Challenges,” Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Economic Policy Review (May 2002): 8–9; Allan H. Meltzer, A History of the Federal
Reserve, vol. 2, book 2 (1970–1986), 1008–1018.
15. Biven, Jimmy Carter’s Economy, 240; Paul Volcker and Nancy Teeters quoted in, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Open Market Investment Committee for the Federal
Reserve System, “Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee: October 6, 1979,” Federal Open
Market Committee Meeting Minutes, Transcripts, and Other Documents, 1933–2018, FRASER;“Support Mr. Volcker,” WSJ, October 8, 1979; Meltzer, Federal Reserve, vol. 2, book 2, 1019–
1043.
16. Steven Rattner, “Inflation Rise Seen,” NYT, February 16, 1980; interview with Charles Schultze,
July 25, 2013, notes in author’s possession; memo, Anne Wexler to President Carter, February
23, 1980, box 172, Presidential Handwriting File; memo, Ester Peterson to Stuart Eizenstat,
February 19, 1980, box FI-25, WHCF, Carter Library.
17. Herbert J. G. Bab, “The Fed’s Latest Folly,” CSM, November 23, 1979; “Pro & Con: Would
U.S. Credit Controls Whip Inflation?,” CT, February 24, 1980; Paul Volcker, quoted in “Volcker
Says That Any Political Pressure on Fed to Ease Its Policy Will Be Resisted,” WSJ, October 29,
1979; Volcker, quoted in Stacey L. Schreft, “Credit Controls: 1980,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, Economic Review 76 (November/December 1990), 33.
18. Memo, CEA and Treasury Staff to Economic Planning Group, February 26, 1980, box 95, Staff
Office—CEA; memo, William Miller to President Carter, February 28, 1980, box 172,
Presidential Handwriting File; memo, Burke Dillon to Charlie Schultze, February 27, 1980, box
147, Staff Office—CEA, Carter Library; Shreft, “Credit Controls: 1980,” 33; Schultze
interview.
19. Memo, William Miller to President Carter, February 28, 1980, box 172, Presidential
Handwriting File; letter, Alfred Kahn to Betsy Hamilton, February 2, 1980, box 13, Special
Advisor—Inflation, Kahn, Carter Library; “Withdrawal Pain for Credit-Card Holders,”
Newsweek, March 31, 1980, 29; memo, Burke Dillon to Charlie Schultze, February 27, 1980,
box 147, Staff Office—CEA, Carter Library; Stephen H. Axilrod, Inside the Fed: Monetary
Policy and Its Management, Martin through Greenspan to Bernanke (MIT Press, 2011), 94.
20. Memo, Burke Dillon to Charlie Schultze, April 10, 1979, box 14, Staff Office—CEA, Carter
Library; Biven, Jimmy Carter’s Economy, 246–247.
21. Memo, Al McDonald to President Carter, March 7, 1980; memo, Department of the Treasury to
President Carter, March 12, 1980, box 173, Presidential Handwriting File, Carter Library; ad,
Citibank, “Credit Controls—Pushing a String,” NYT, March 3, 1980 (the ad also appeared in
WP, March 3, 1980, and WSJ, March 3, 1980); Shreft, “Credit Controls: 1980,” 33.
22. Carter, “Anti-Inflation Program Remarks Announcing the Administration’s Program,” March
14, 1980, APP.
23. Roger S. White, “Federal Reserve System Special Anti-Inflation Programs Announced March
14, 1980: A Brief Description,” Congressional Research Service Rep. No. 80-73 E, April 2,
1980, 5.
24. “Federal Reserve Clamps Controls on Credit Cards,” Atlanta Constitution, March 15, 1980;
Robert A. Rosenblatt, “Credit Card Interest to Rise,” LAT, March 15, 1980; John M. Berry,
“Restraints Imposed on Credit,” WP, March 15, 1980; Stephen E. Nordlinger and James A.
Rousmaniere Jr., “Federal Reserve Seeking to Discourage People from Living beyond Their
Means,” BS, March 15, 1980; Robert J. Samuelson, “Credit-Card Debt Isn’t the Problem,” WP,
April 8, 1980.
25. Hewitt Crosby, “‘Now’ Syndrome,” WP, March 19, 1980; letter, Lloyd C. Yager to Alfred Kahn,
April 19, 1980, box 13, Special Advisor—Inflation, Kahn, Carter Library; “Alfred E. Kahn Oral
History, Chairman of the Council on Wage and Price Stability; Advisor to the President on
Inflation,” December 10–11, 1981, University of Virginia, Miller Center for Public Affairs,
Presidential Oral Histories, https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-oral￾histories/alfred-e-kahn-oral-history-chairman-council-wage-and.
26. Steve Lohr, “Buying Habits Found Unexpectedly Curbed by Controls on Credit,” NYT, May 9,
1980; ad, “How Washington’s New Credit Guidelines Affect the American Express Card,”
Newsweek, April 14, 1980, 7; “Americans View Inflation, The Public Policy Response, and theRetail Industry (Cambridge Reports, Inc., April 1980), box 25, Special Advisor—Inflation,
Kahn, Carter Library.
27. Lohr, “Buying Habits Found Unexpectedly Curbed”; “Consumer Debt Down Sharply,” NYT,
June 7, 1980; Schreft, “Credit Controls: 1980.” The decline in 1980 remained the largest, as a
percentage of total revolving debt outstanding, until the 2008 recession. Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, “G.19, Consumer Credit, Historical Data,”
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/HIST/default.htm.
28. Memo, Charlie Schultze to President Carter, May 5, 1980, box 54, Staff Office—CEA, Carter
Library; Federal Reserve’s Second Monetary Policy Report for 1980, 96 Cong. 110 (statement
of Paul Volcker, Chairman, Federal Reserve Board); Volcker, “Monetary Policy Transmission,”
8.
29. Schreft, “Credit Controls: 1980,” 42; Jerry Knight, “Confusion Cited on Credit Curbs,” WP,
May 20, 1980; Memo, Charlie Schultze to President Carter, May 5, 1980, box 54, Staff Office—
CEA, Carter Library; Jimmy Carter, “White House Briefing for Community Leaders,” May 27,
1980, APP.
30. Frederick H. Schultz quoted in Federal Reserve, “Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee:
February 4–5, 1980,” FRASER; Molly Sinclair, “Credit Card Users Face Higher Charges,” WP,
February 22, 1980; Thomas Timlen quoted in Federal Reserve, “Meeting of Federal Open
Market Committee: March 7, 1980,” FRASER.
31. Memo, Al McDonald and Anne Wexler to EPG Steering Group, March 5, 1980, box 25, Special
Advisor—Kahn, Carter Library.
32. Isadore Barmash, “Debtor Beware,” NYT, March 30, 1980; “Bank of America Reins in Its
Lending, Calls on U.S. to Push Monetary Restraint,” WSJ, March 27, 1980; Jerry Knight,
“Sears, Ward’s Move to Restrain Credit,” WP, March 18, 1980; Jerry Knight, “Fed Tightens
Crackdown on Credit Cards,” WP, April 3, 1980.
33. Walter Wriston, “Outsmarting Inflation,” WP, March 13, 1980; Credit Controls: An Evaluation,
Comm. Print 96–20, at 5 (1980) (staff rep.), emphasis original.
34. Marquette Nat. Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corp., 439 U.S. 299 (1978);
Credit Controls: An Evaluation, 4, 11–12; Robert D. Manning, Credit Card Nation: The
Consequences of America’s Addiction to Credit (Basic Books, 2000), 5, 294; Phillip Zweig,
Wriston: Walter Wriston, Citibank and the Rise and Fall of American Financial Supremacy
(Crown Publishers, 1995), 550–551; Lucia Mouat, “To Charge or Not to Charge,” CSM, June
30, 1980.
35. Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Consumer Debt Down for May,” NYT, July 10, 1980, quoted in Schreft,
“Credit Controls: 1980,” 43–46. The literature on the 1980 recession is surprisingly thin, but for
evidence that controls caused the sharpness and timing, see Victor Zarnowitz and Geoffrey H.
Moore, “The Timing and Severity of the 1980 Recession,” in Business Cycles, Inflation, and
Forecasting, 2nd ed., ed. Geoffrey H. Moore (Ballinger, 1983), 14; Raymond E. Owens and
Stacey L. Schreft, “Identifying Credit Crunches,” Contemporary Economic Policy 13, no. 2
(April 1995): 63–76.
36. Ronald Reagan, “Address Accepting the Presidential Nomination at the Republican National
Convention in Detroit,” July 17, 1980, APP; Dick Wirthlin, with Wynton C. Hall, The Greatest
Communicator: What Ronald Reagan Taught Me about Politics, Leadership, and Life (John
Wiley & Sons, 2004), 35–36; Woodard, America That Reagan Built, 27. John Anderson, a
moderate Republican from Illinois ran as an independent but was never a serious contender.
37. Martin Schram, “Carter Goes into Debate with Lead in New Poll,” October 28, 1980, WP;
Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan, “Presidential Debate in Cleveland,” October 28, 1980, APP;
Kaufman, James Earl Carter, 205.38. Ronald Reagan, “Presidential Debate in Cleveland,” October 28, 1980, APP; Hedrick Smith,
“President Concedes: Republican Gains Victory in All Areas and Vows to Act on Economy,”
NYT, November 5, 1980. There is an extensive political science literature on the phenomenon of
economic voting in presidential elections; for a comprehensive overview, see Richard Nadeau
and Michael S. Lewis-Beck, “National Economic Voting in U.S. Presidential Elections,”
Journal of Politics 63, no.1 (February 2001): 159–181; Masoud Moghaddam and Hallie Elich,
“Predicting the Incumbent Party Vote Share in U.S. Presidential Elections,” CATO Journal 29
(Fall 2009): 455–468. Sides and Vavreck attribute 40 percent of the popular vote outcome to
GDP growth (John Sides and Lynn Vavreck, The Gamble: Choice and Chance in the 2012
Presidential Election [Princeton University Press, 2013], 12n2).
39. Daniel T. Rodgers, Age of Fracture (Harvard University Press, 2011), 15–40; “New Credit-Card
Spending Boom Ahead,” Nilson Report 257 (April 1981), 1–2; Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, “G.19, Consumer Credit, Historical Data,”
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/HIST/default.htm.
40. Schultze interview; “Alfred E. Kahn Oral History”; Yankelovich, Skelly, and White, Inc., A
Study of the American Family and Money (General Mills Consumer Center, 1975).
41. Cf. CEA Staff Files, Reagan Library. For the relationship between credit, wages, and the
promise of prosperity, see: Dirk Krueger and Fabrizio Perri, “Does Income Inequality Lead to
Consumption Inequality? Evidence and Theory,” Review of Economic Studies 73, no. 1 (2006):
163–193; Colin Crouch, “Privatized Keynesianism: An Unacknowledged Policy Regime,”
British Journal of Politics & International Relations 11, no. 3 (2009): 382–99; Dan Herman,
“The Missing Movement: A Polanyian Analysis of Pre-Crisis America,” International Journal
of Social Economics 39, no. 8 (2012): 624–641.
Chapter 11. Breakdown
 1. This chapter significantly revises portions of my article, “Citibank, Credit Cards, and the Local
Politics of National Consumer Finance, 1968–1991,” Business History Review 90, no. 1 (Spring
2016): 57–80.
 2. On the wanning influence of the consumer movement, see Lizabeth Cohen, A Consumers’
Republic: The Politics of Mass Consumption in Postwar America (Alfred A. Knopf, 2003), 288–
397; Benjamin C. Waterhouse, Lobbying America: The Politics of Business from Nixon to
NAFTA, Politics and Society in Twentieth-Century America (Princeton University Press, 2014),
140–173.
 3. Visa USA Inc., “Credit Controls and Bank Credit Cards: Analysis and Proposals,” 794.01 (L)
Voluntary Credit Restraint March 1980, FRBNY Archives; Dan Dorfman, “Grim Citibank View
of Interest Rates,” WP, October 25, 1978; Citicorp, Citicorp Annual Report and Form 10-K
1979, 32, 40 (ProQuest ID: 88205999).
 4. Jon Walker, “Citibank Could Bring 300–2,000 Jobs to S.D.,” SFAL, March 5, 1980.
 5. For an alternate account, cf. Robert Wright “Wall Street on the Prairie: Citibank, South Dakota
and the Origins of Financial Deregulation,” Financial History 106 (Spring 2012): 24–26.
 6. Phillip L. Zweig, Wriston: Walter Wriston, Citibank, and the Rise and Fall of American
Financial Supremacy (Crown Publishers, 1995), 553, 678–681; “Memorandum on National
Bank Issues in Missouri” (n.d.), “Citibank—Visa ‘80” folder, box 40, Issue Files, Teasdale
Papers. 7. “Still Last in Salary Scale,” Pierre Daily Capital Journal, January 24, 1980; William Janklow,
interview, “Secret History of the Credit Card,” Frontline, PBS, April 24, 2004,
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/credit/interviews/janklow.html.
 8. Douglas Hajek, “South Dakota Takes Center Stage: Remembering the Father of the ‘Citibank
Bill,’” North Western Financial Review 189 (September 2004): 13–14, 16; Thomas Reardon, “T.
M. Reardon’s First-Hand Account of Citibank’s Move to South Dakota,” North Western
Financial Review 189 (September 2004): 15; cf. Paul H. Nordstrom to William Janklow,
October 26, 1979, “Banking, 1979–1984” folder, box 34, accession 94–4, Janklow Papers.
 9. William Janklow to Charles E. Long, March 12, 1980, “Citibank 1980–1982” folder, box 35,
accession 94–4, Janklow Papers; “Executive Council Minutes,” March 3, 1980, South Dakota
Bankers Association, Pierre, SD; Walker, “Citibank Could Bring 300–2,000 Jobs.”
10. Charles E. Long to William Janklow, February 19, 1980; Houston Haugo to William Janklow,
March 5, 1980; William Janklow to Charles Long, March 12, 1980; mhb [Janklow’s secretary]
to Bill [William Janklow], March 27, 1980; C. F. Muckenfuss III, “Opinion of the Comptroller
of the Currency on the Application to Charter Citibank (South Dakota), N.A.” November 19,
1980, “Citibank 1980–1982” folder, box 35, accession 94–4, Janklow Papers; “Executive
Council Minutes”; State of South Dakota, 1980 Session Laws of South Dakota, ch. 331, 536–
537; Hajek, “South Dakota Takes Center Stage.”
11. Robert Bennett, “Citibank to Bypass State Usury Laws,” NYT, February 27, 1980; Morgan and
Gianotti, “Citibank Warns of Loan Curb,” Newsday, February 28, 1980; Robert Bennett, “Carey
Said to Study Usury Limit,” NYT, February 28, 1980; “Citibank Intensifies Usury-Limit Fight of
Credit Card Unit,” WSJ, February 28, 1980.
12. Richard K. LeBlond to Hugh L. Carey, March 3, 1980; Robert M. Stevens to Robert J.
Morgado, April 8, 1980; Richard K. LeBlond to Hugh L. Carey, March 25, 1980; Walter
Wriston to Hugh L. Carey, March 25, 1980; Morton Rechler to Hugh L. Carey, April 2, 1980;
Muriel Siebert to [X Banker, n.p.], July 23, 1980, reel 11, second term, Carey Subject Files;
Peter M. Gianotti, “Carey Seeks to Ease Usury Law,” Newsday, March 23, 1980; Niell S.
Rosenfeld, “Banking Bills Unresolved in Albany,” Newsday, June 10, 1980; Stanley Fink quoted
in Selwyn Raab, “Legislators Fail to Agree on a Plan to Raise Some Bank Loan Rates,” NYT,
June, 15 1980.
13. Walter Wriston to Hugh L. Carey, June 30, 1980, reel 11, second term, Carey Subject Files;
Siebert, quoted in Peter Gianotti, “Del. Makes Bid to NY Banks,” Newsday, July 24, 1980.
14. Peter M. Gianotti, “Divisions Linger on Bank Law,” Newsday, July 3, 1980; James L. Emery to
Hugh L. Carey, August 28, 1980; Walter J. Floss Jr. to Hugh L. Carey, August 30, 1980; Hugh L.
Carey to News Director, November 14, 1980, reel 11, second term, Carey Subject Files; letter of
the AFL-CIO, n.d. (ca. November 1980) at 37, bill jacket L. 1980, ch. 883, New York State
Archives.
15. Leon E. de Kalb to Hugh L. Carey, December 8, 1980; Arthur Berman to Hugh L. Carey,
December 23, 1980; Richard K. LeBlond to Hugh J. Carey (emphasis added), December 1,
1980; James P. Murphy to Hugh J. Carey, December 2, 1980; Edward W. Duffy to Hugh L.
Carey (emphasis added), December 5, 1980, reel 11, second term, Carey Subject Files; Zweig,
Wriston, 733.
16. Isadore Barmash, “Credit Cards at Crossroads,” NYT, August 3, 1980; “Citibank, Chase Raise
Interest Rates, Charge Fees on Their Credit Cards,” WSJ, December 19, 1980; David C.
McBride, “Birth of a Banking Bonanza,” Delaware Lawyer 1, no. 2 (Fall 1982): 32, 36–37, 54–
55; Zweig, Wriston, 692; Robert A. Bennett, “Banks May Shift Units out of State,” NYT, June 11
1980; Joan FitzGcrald, “Making It in . . . Delaware,” BG, March 24, 1981; William W. Boyer
and Edward C. Ratledge, Pivotal Policies in Delaware: From Desegregation to Deregulation(University of Delaware Press, 2014), 142–144. For the ways policymakers reimagined urban
economies in light of deindustrialization, see Tracy Neumann, Remaking the Rust Belt: The
Postindustrial Transformation of North America (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016).
17. Citicorp, Citicorp Annual Report and Form 10-K 1980, 11 (ProQuest ID: 88207562); Zweig,
Wriston, 692; Celia Cohen and Bill Boyle, “Consumer Advocates Wary of Bank Enticement
Bills,” Wilmington Evening Journal, January 22, 1981; McBride, “Birth of a Banking Bonanza,”
32; “New York Bankers Invited to Delaware,” NYT, July 23, 1980.
18. Larry Nagengast, Pierre S. du Pont IV: Governor of Delaware, 1977–1985 (Delaware Heritage
Press, 1985), 106–112; Boyer and Ratledge, Pivotal Policies in Delaware, 153; E. J. Dionne Jr.,
“Further Liberalization of Banking Laws Is Not Planned,” NYT, March 18, 1981.
19. Eric R. Chabrow, “Bank Bill Debate Heated, Lengthy, but Bankers Win,” Delaware State News,
February 4, 1981. For the development of offshore finance, see Vanessa Ogle, “Archipelago
Capitalism: Tax Havens, Offshore Money, and the State, 1950s–1970s,” American Historical
Review 122, no. 5 (December 2017): 1431–58.
20. Pierre du Pont, IV, quoted in Bill Boyle, “Delaware: Banking Mecca?,” Wilmington Evening
Journal, January 15, 1981; Eric R. Chabrow, “Two Large New York Banks Eye State Units,”
Delaware State News, January 15, 1981; Celia Cohen and Bill Boyle, “Consumer Advocates
Wary of Bank Enticement Bills,” Wilmington Evening Journal, January 22, 1981; Celia Cohen,
“’Bank Mecca’ Bills Go to Senate,” Wilmington Evening Journal, January 23, 1981.
21. Bill Boyle, “Bank Bills Await Governor’s Signature,” Wilmington Evening Journal, February 4,
1981; Ralph S. Mayed, “Del. and the Banks: Shotgun Wedding?” Wilmington Evening Journal,
January 23, 1981.
22. Chabrow, “Two Large New York Banks Eye State Units”; Broderick Perkins, “Delaware May
Draw New Industries but Job Outlook for Blacks Is Bleak,” Wilmington Evening Journal,
January 29, 1981; Celia Cohen, “Delaware House Narrowly Rejects King Holiday Bill,”
Wilmington Evening Journal, February 4, 1981; Eric R. Chabrow, “Maryland Bank Opts for
Delaware,” Delaware State News, February 5, 1981.
23. Siebert quoted in Robert A. Bennett, “State’s Banks Warned on Moving Out,” NYT, January 30,
1981.
24. Curtis Kuehn to Theodore Allison, “Citicorp Application for a National Bank Charter in Sioux
Falls, South Dakota,” March 19, 1980, Citibank Correspondence Binder, Sioux Falls Chamber
of Commerce.
25. Citicorp, “Application to Organize a National Bank,” March 12, 1980, “Citibank 1979” folder;
Muckenfuss, “Opinion of the Comptroller of the Currency on the Application to Charter
Citibank (South Dakota), N.A.,” November 19, 1980, 4, “Citibank 1980–1982” folder, box 35,
accession 94–4, Janklow Papers. In its 1980 annual report, the bank wrote: “At Citicorp, we
believe the most effective way to raise billions of dollars of funds daily in the money markets of
the world is to have highly-trained market-tested treasurers in every market” (Citicorp, Citicorp
Annual Report and Form 10-K 1980, 29 [ProQuest ID: 88207562]).
26. SEC and Citicorp, 97 Cong. (serial no. 97-193) (1982); Richard Dale, The Regulation of
International Banking (Woodhead-Faulkner, 1984), 195–204; Robert A. Hutchison, Off the
Books (William Morrow, 1986).
27. Eugene Carlson, “Delaware Grabs Early Lead in Luring Out-of-State Banks,” WSJ, December
15, 1981; David R. Francis, “State after State Is Lifting the Ceilings on Interest Rates,” CSM,
August 11, 1981; State of Delaware, Laws of the State of Delaware 63 (1981) ch. 2, 2–19; “Why
Is Plastic So Costly,” Time, April 4, 1983; Terry Branstad to C. W. Strong Jr., June 29, 1984, box
2, Office of Program Research, Financial Institutions and Insurance Committee, House of
Representatives, Washington State Archives.28. Lawrence M. Ausubel, “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market,” American
Economic Review 81, no. 1 (1991): 70, 72. On U.S. wage stagnation, see Jon D. Wisman, “Wage
Stagnation, Rising Inequality and the Financial Crisis of 2008,” Cambridge Journal of
Economics 37, no. 4 (July 1, 2013): 921–45.
29. Robert A. Bennett, “Citibank Sets $15 Fee on Its 2 Credit Cards; Loans to Cost 19.8%,” NYT,
December 18, 1980; “Citibank, Chase Raise Interest, Charge Fees on Their Credit Cards,” WSJ,
December 19, 1980; Robert A. Bennett, “Citibank Will Raise Fee on Charge Cards to $20,”
NYT, January 11, 1982; Daniel F. Cuff, “Waiting for Consumer Rates to Fall,” NYT, September
5, 1982; Daniel Kahn, “Falling Rates Bypass Credit Cards,” Newsday, October 17, 1982; “Cash￾Rich Banks Seek Credit-Card Customers,” CT, September 27, 1983; Julie Salamon, “Citicorp
Again Touts Credit Cards Despite Lofty Rates, Other Risks,” WSJ, August 28, 1981; Daniel
Hertzberg, “Consumer Credit Rates Will Fall Little,” WSJ, December 10, 1984; John M. Broder,
“Huge Marketing Push for Credit Cards,” LAT, June 2, 1985; Irvin Molotsky, “The High Cost of
Credit Card Credit,” NYT, October 13, 1985.
30. “Statement of Robert L. Clarke, Comptroller of the Currency, before the Senate Committee on
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, May 21, 1987,” in Comptroller of the Currency,
Quarterly Journal 6, no. 3 (1986–1987), 18, 24; John Henderson and Jonathan P. Scott,
Securitization (New York Institute of Finance, 1988), 88; James A. Rosenthal and Juan M.
Ocampo, Securitization of Credit: Inside the New Technology of Finance (John Wiley & Sons,
1988), 119–155; Ausubel, “Failure of Competition,” 65–68.
31. Charles E. Schumer and Julius Ganachowski, “The Credit Card Puzzle: Why the Rates Never
Fall,” WP, January 12, 1986; “Credit Card Rate List Released,” NYT, November 19, 1985;
Barbara Bradley, “At Last, Some Banks Cut Credit Card Rates,” June 17, 1986; William Gruber,
“Banks Resolute about Cards’ Interest,” August 31, 1986.
32. Jan Wong, “Out-of-State Credit Cards Flooding In: Citibank Most Aggressive,” BG, November
15, 1983; Jan Wong, “3 Banks May Move Credit Card Operations,” BG, October 22, 1984; Paul
R. Watro, “The Bank Credit-Card Boom: Some Explanations and Consequences,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary (March 1988).
33. United States, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Annual Report of the Comptroller of
the Currency, 1980, FRASER; Quarterly Report of the Comptroller of the Currency, 1986;
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “G.19, Consumer Credit, Historical Data,”
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/HIST/default.htm; Janklow, Frontline interview;
U.S. Decennial Census, Industry by Occupation for Employed Civilian Population 16 Years and
Over, 1970–2000, accessed through Social Explorer database, http://www.socialexplorer.org. It
is possible that financial services jobs were also categorized under retail employment in the case
of department store credit processing centers or “other” services, which also increased
significantly in South Dakota from 1980 to 2000.
34. South Dakota Codified Laws (Michie, 1996), 1996 Revision, V.4A, 474–475; V.15A, 26–27;
document, “Tax or User Fee: Bank Franchise Tax,” “BOF & M, 1990–1994” folder, box 5727,
Exec. Mgmt/ Gubernatorial Div/Gov. George Mickelson/General Files/Bureau of Finance &
Mgmt, 1987–1993, South Dakota State Historical Society, Pierre, SD.
35. State of Delaware, Office of the State Bank Commissioner, “Consolidated Statement of All
Banks and Trust Companies in Delaware,” August 20, 1982, RG1325 (microfiche); Delaware,
Sixty-Third Annual Report of the State Bank Commissioner of Delaware for the Fiscal Year
Ended June 30, 1982, 57; Delaware, Sixty-Sixth Annual Report of the State Bank Commissioner
of Delaware for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1985, 8, 71; Delaware, Sixty-Ninth Annual
Report of the State Bank Commissioner of Delaware for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1988, 6,
89, Delaware State Archives.36. Vincent E. Rossiter, quoted in Gary Bingner, South Dakota Banking: The Lowdown on High
Finance in Middle America, A History of the Citibank Revolution, 1980–1983 (1983), draft
copy, South Dakota State Library, Pierre, 68; Nathan Hayward III quoted in Eric R. Chabrow,
“Bank Bill Debate Heated, Lengthy, but Bankers Win”; Tim Schreiner, “Citibank May Bring
Bitter Aftereffects,” SFAL, December 29, 1980.
37. Memo, Office of the Governor, Bureau of Industrial and Agricultural Development, “South
Dakota: The Frontier of Modern Banking,” October 28, 1985, “Banking Laws” folder, Sioux
Falls Chamber of Commerce; Michael L. Millenson, “How South Dakota Beckons the Banking
Giants: Fast Governor and Liberal Laws,” CT, November 20, 1983; “Janklow Defends
Legislation That Attracts Banks to State,” SFAL, September 20, 1983; “Fed Dims the Luster of
South Dakota Inc.,” SFAL, August 4, 1985; Zweig, Wriston, 810–811; Rudolph A. Pyatt Jr.,
“Bitter Harvest in Maryland for Bankers,” WP, January 18, 1984.
38. Terry Woster, “Bill Puts Citibank on Sliding Tax Scale,” SFAL, February 1, 1991; Terry Woster,
“Governor Defends Tax-Hike Plans,” SFAL, January 17, 1991; Dale Gullickson, “Citibank Tax
Break Doesn’t Make Sense,” SFAL, February 7, 1991; Saskia Sassen, The Global City: New
York, London, Tokyo, 2nd ed. (Princeton University Press, 2001); Randall Smith, “Handling
Money: Some Unlikely Places Benefit from the Boom in Financial Services,” WSJ, March 31,
1983; DRI/McGraw-Hill and MasterCard International, “A Study of Employment, Regulations
and the Credit Card Industry,” January 1993, California State Library; Anne Saker, “South
Dakota Is Friendly to Credit Card Industry,” SFAL, March 5, 1993; Jim Hass, “Credit Industry Is
Cheap, not Friendly,” SFAL, March 12, 1993. On worker relocation in industrial strategy, see
Jefferson Cowie, Capital Moves: RCA’s Seventy-Year Quest for Cheap Labor (Cornell
University Press, 1999).
39. Citigroup, Citibank South Dakota N.A., A State of Dreams: A World of Difference (2006),
author’s possession; Citigroup, Citigroup Annual Report 2006, sec. 1, 3,
https://www.citigroup.com/citi/investor/quarterly/2007/ar06c_en.pdf; Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, “G.19, Consumer Credit, Historical Data,”
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/HIST/default.htm.
40. Brief of the Minnesota AFL-CIO, as Amicus Curiae Supporting Petitioner Minnesota, at iii,
Marquette Nat’l Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Serv. Corp., 439 U.S. 299 (1978) (Nos.
77–1265, 77–1258), 1978 WL 223582.
41. Walter Wriston to Charles Percy, April 23, 1976, box 33, Walter B. Wriston Papers, Tufts
University Library.
42. Smiley v. Citibank (South Dakota), N.A., 517 U.S. 735; Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E.
Strahan, “What Drives Deregulation? Economics and Politics of the Relaxation of Bank
Branching Restrictions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, no. 4 (November 1999): 1460–
1462.Epilogue
 1. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, “2022 Findings from the Diary of Consumer Payment
Choice,” May 2, 2022, https://www.frbsf.org/cash/publications/fed-notes/2022/may/2022-
findings-from-the-diary-of-consumer-payment-choice/; Federal Reserve Board, “Federal
Reserve Payments Study: 2022 Triennial Initial Data Release,” April 21, 2023,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/fr-payments-study.htm; David S. Evans and
Richard Schmalensee, Paying with Plastic: The Digital Revolution in Buying and Borrowing,
2nd ed. (MIT Press, 2005), 240–244. Banks began experimenting with debit cards in the mid￾1970s, but the cards did not become a significant factor in payments until the 1990s.
 2. In the 1990s and early 2000s, there were two major fights about network “honor all cards” rules
and interchange fees. One focused on debit fees (Paul Beckett, “Visa, MasterCard Battle with
Retailers,” WSJ, November 24, 1998). The other focused on issuer fees tied to reward cards
(Adam J. Levitin, “The Antitrust Super Bowl: America’s Payment Systems, No-Surcharge
Rules, and the Hidden Costs of Credit,” Berkely Business Law Journal 3, no. 1 [2005]: 265–
336; Steven Semeraro, “Settlement without Consent: Assessing the Credit Card Merchant Fee
Class Action,” Columbia Business Law Review 2015, no. 1 [2015]: 186–272).
 3. Vladimir Mukharlyamov and Natasha Sarin, “Price Regulation in Two-Sided Markets:
Empirical Evidence from Debit Cards,” (November 2022),
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3328579; Kate Fitzgerald, “Credit Card
Fees in the Crosshairs as Sen. Durbin Revisits Interchange,” AB, May 6, 2022.
 4. Andrew Leyshon and Nigel Thrift, “Geographies of Financial Exclusion: Financial
Abandonment in Britain and the United States,” Transaction of the Institute of British
Geographers 20, no. 3 (1995): 312–341; Oren Bar-Gill, “Seduction by Plastic,” Northwestern
University Law Review 98, no. 4 (2004): 1373–1434; Rachel E. Dwyer, “Credit, Debt, and
Inequality,” Annual Review of Sociology 44 (2018): 237–261; Paola Boel and Peter Zimmerman,
“Unbanked in America: A Review of the Literature,” Economic Commentary, no. 2022–07 (May
2022); Ed Shanahan and Jeffery C. Mays, “New York City Stores Must Accept Cash, Council
Says,” NYT, January 24, 2020; Raphael Auer, Giulio Cornelli, and Jon Frost, “The Pandemic,
Cash and Retail Payment Behaviour: Insights from the Future of Payments Database,”
December 6, 2022, https://www.bis.org/publ/work1055.htm; Susanne Soederberg, “The U.S.
Debtfare State and the Credit Card Industry: Forging Spaces of Dispossession,” Antipode 45, no.
2 (2013): 493–512; Mehrsa Baradaran, How the Other Half Banks: Exclusion, Exploitation, and
the Threat to Democracy (Harvard University Press, 2018); Lisa J. Servon, The Unbanking of
America: How the New Middle Class Survives (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2017).
 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “G.19, Consumer Credit, Historical Data,”
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/HIST/cc_hist_sa_levels.html; World Bank,
“Population, Total for United States (POPTOTUSA647NWDB),” FRED; United States Census
Bureau, “HH-4, Households by Size: 1960 to Present,”
https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/families/households.html; Andrea
Freeman, “Payback: A Structural Analysis of the Credit Card Problem Financial Reform during
the Great Recession: Dodd-Frank, Executive Compensation, and the Card Act,” Arizona Law
Review 55, no. 1 (2013): 151–200; Randy Hodson, Rachel E. Dwyer, and Lisa A. Neilson,
“Credit Card Blues: The Middle Class and the Hidden Costs of Easy Credit,” Sociological
Quarterly 55, no. 2 (May 1, 2014): 315–340; Devin Fergus, The Land of Fee: Hidden Costs andthe Decline of the American Middle Class (Oxford University Press, 2018). Inflation
adjustments made using Bureau of Labor Statistics CPI Inflation Calculator,
https://www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm.
 6. Lawrence M. Ausubel, “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market,” American
Economic Review 81, no. 1 (1991): 64; Board of Governors for the Federal Reserve System,
Report to the Congress on the Profitability of Credit Card Operations of Depository Institutions
(July 2021), https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/ccprofit2021.pdf, p. 6.
 7. For overviews of the financialization literature, see Natascha van der Zwan, “Making Sense of
Financialization,” Socio-Economic Review 12, no. 1 (2014): 99–129; Gerald F. Davis and
Suntae Kim, “Financialization of the Economy,” Annual Review of Sociology 41 (2015): 203–
221.
 8. An important factor for the further diminution of state authority over finance was the rise of
federal preemption of state rules, a process implicit in Citibank’s relocation (with the approval
of federal authorities) and use of Marquette and made explicit by later rulings from federal
regulators like the Comptroller of the Currency that nationally chartered banks had no obligation
to abide by state consumer protection rules. Robert A. Burgess and Monica A. Ciolfi,
“Exportation or Exploitation—A State Regulator’s View of Interstate Credit Card Transactions
Survey: Consumer Financial Services,” Business Lawyer (ABA) 42, no. 3 (1987): 929–942. For
arguments in favor of preemption on economic efficiency grounds, see Julie L. Williams and
Michael S. Bylsma, “Federal Preemption and Federal Banking Agency Responses to Predatory
Lending,” Business Lawyer 59, no. 3 (2004): 1193–1205; Joseph R. Mason, Robert Kulick, and
Hal J. Singer, “The Economic Impact of Eliminating Preemption of State Consumer Protection
Laws,” University of Pennsylvania Journal of Business Law 12, no. 3 (2010): 781–806.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I BEGAN THIS BOOK WITH A STORY of some money I once owed a bank. I end it
here tallying the personal and professional debts I have accrued since that
experience, which have enabled this project to come fully, finally, to
fruition. It is an immense privilege to owe so much to so many and to have
the chance, however briefly, to say thank you.
This book is the culmination of a long academic journey. As an
undergraduate at the University of Georgia, I was fortunate to learn from
several historians who managed to steer me away from a career in
marketing, including John Inscoe, Ari Levine, Kevin McCarthy, and John
Morrow. One reason I applied to graduate school was Levine’s claim that he
did not work on Fridays, an appealing prospect to an aimless twenty￾something. The appeal of that misinterpreted remark, likewise, reflected my
preparation for serious graduate study (Levine meant that he did not come
to campus on Fridays). In my first attempt, I was rejected by every PhD
program I applied to. I reentered UGA as a master’s student, thrilled at the
prospect of two more college football seasons. I stumbled unwittingly into a
seedbed for the new history of capitalism, a then-nascent movement to
revive historical analysis of economic topics. My teachers there, especially
Steve Berry, Kathleen Clark, Jim Cobb, Shane Hamilton, Allan Kulikoff,
Stephen Mihm, Bethany Moreton, and Pamela Voekel dramatically
reoriented my perspective. They taught me, especially, that capitalism could
be carved open, dissected, and scrutinized—and that doing so would reveal
that its inner workings were not what they appeared on the surface. My Bev
Com colleagues Levi Collins, Ashton Ellett, Franklin Sammons, and Kurt
Windisch provided camaraderie and an appropriate amount of mayhem. Iemerged from UGA with a research project and some idea of what it would
mean to be a professional historian.
After Georgia, I was immensely lucky and privileged to make my way
to Princeton University. When I arrived, William Chester Jordan promised
our cohort one thousand free lunches, a reflection both of Princeton’s
largess and the deep commitment to continuous scholarly engagement (over
lunch—often, but not always). The department was more than good for it. I
had the opportunity to learn from many inspiring teachers, scholars,
mentors, and now friends, especially Jeremy Adelman, Margot Canaday,
Angela Creager, Alison Isenberg, Harold James, Matthew Karp, Kevin
Kruse, Alan Krueger, Beth Lew-Williams, Rosina Lozano, Susan Naquin,
Philip Nord, Daniel Rodgers, Emily Thompson, Keith Wailoo, Sean
Wilentz, and Viviana Zelizer. If I had space, I would write a paragraph for
each of them. At Princeton, I learned how to ask the next question and to
recognize that American history is impoverished without an appreciation of
its global context. Though good for instilling a global perspective,
Princeton, New Jersey, is, otherwise, a very small town—the upside of
which was many close, enduring friendships. Rich Anderson, Dan Barish,
Olivier Burtin, Katlyn Carter, Matt Chan, Peter Conti-Brown, Henry
Cowles, Patrick De Oliveira, Andrew Edwards, Christian Flow, Josh
Garrett-Davis, Mike Glass, Dylan Gottleib, Jane Manners, Nikhil Menon,
Brian Pietras, Randall Pippenger, Em Prifogle, Morgan Robinson, Joel
Suarez, Fidel Tavarez, Veronica Valentin, David Walsh, Jess Winderweedle
—many on this list read prodigious amounts of research and writing that
evolved into this book, some read none of it, but all made it—and the odd
experience of graduate school—infinitely better. In all, Princeton provided
what every aspiring writer needs: Time, Strength, Cash, and Patience!
I want to especially thank my dissertation committee: Meg Jacobs, Dirk
Hartog, Jon Levy, and Julian Zelizer. If, as the wise scholars say, you can
understand a book best by reading the acknowledgments first, then that list
is a pretty easy cipher for what appears on the forerunning pages. This is
emphatically a book about pocketbook politics, about the things law does
and doesn’t do, about the career of many forms of risk, and about political
institutions and democratic governance. These scholars were and remain
enormously supportive. They motivated me to do my best work and still do.
I live daily with Julian’s admonition: keep writing.This book examines the ways governments—especially state
governments—construct, maintain, and reformulate markets. As such, it has
relied heavily on government archives and the hard work of often
overextended and under-resourced librarians and archivists. I want to
especially thank the staffs at the California State Archives, the Chicago
Historical Museum, the Delaware Public Archives, the Gerald R. Ford
Presidential Library, the Hagley Museum and Library, Harvard Law School
Historical and Special Collections, the Illinois State Archives, the State
Archives of Iowa, the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library, the Lyndon B.
Johnson Presidential Library, the Library of Congress Manuscript Division,
the Massachusetts Archives, the Archives of Michigan, the Minnesota
Historical Society, the Missouri State Archives, the National Archives (in
Washington, D.C., College Park, and Kansas City), New Hampshire
University Special Collections, the New Jersey State Archives, the Richard
M. Nixon Presidential Library, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the
New York State Archives, the New York City Municipal Archives, the
Princeton University Mudd Manuscript Library, the Schlesinger Library, the
Ronald W. Reagan Presidential Library, Rutgers University Special
Collections, the South Dakota State Historical Society, SUNY Albany
Special Collections and Archives, Tennessee State Archives, Tufts
University Archives, University of Georgia Special Collections, University
of Pennsylvania Law School Archives and Special Collections, the
Washington State Archives, and the Wisconsin Historical Society. In
addition to these public and educational institutions, I also want to thank:
the staff at the Sioux Falls Chamber of Commerce, who let me rummage
around in their basement long before I knew what I was doing; the archival
staff at HSBC and Barclays, the two banks whose records I accessed
directly; and the archivist at Citigroup, who offered to let me search for
records among 2 million boxes held in an abandoned iron mine (I declined,
a decision I now regret). Special thanks to staff at the National Archives
who helped me track down the Fisher case file and shipped it to Kansas
City for me to view, and to the librarians at the Kalamazoo, Michigan,
Public Library who kept marketing pamphlets from the First National Bank
of Kalamazoo’s Charge Account Service from the early 1950s.
So much travel was expensive, combining long road trips, cheap hotels,
and more than a few craft breweries. I was fortunate to receive researchfunding from the University of Georgia and Princeton University, as well as
the Business History Conference, the Center for the Study of Social
Organization, the Harvard Business School, the Institute for New Economic
Thinking, the Lyndon Baines Johnson Foundation, the National Endowment
for the Humanities, and the University of Illinois Foundation. I also
benefited from archivists who made material available remotely, whether by
request (Brigham Young University, South Dakota State University, and the
Western Reserve Historical Society) or through dedicated online collections
(Federal Reserve Archival System for Economic Research).
My friends at FRASER, particularly Genevieve Podleski, made a few
last-minute scans of images that appear in this book, which I deeply
appreciate. I would also like to thank Sally Christensen at First National
Bank of Omaha, Jim Griffin at PNC Bank, Patricia Gonzalez at Unisys,
Nils Huehnergarth, and Helen Koshy at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago for their kind assistance securing permissions for the other images
and copyrighted material that appear herein. Also, thanks to Cambridge
University Press for their permission to republish two articles initially
published in their journals Business History Review and Enterprise &
Society.
A number of scholarly communities offered me opportunities to refine
my arguments, present my work, and receive valuable and supportive
feedback. I’d like to thank the American Bar Foundation, the American
Society for Legal History, the Columbia University Seminar in Economic
History, the Hagley Museum and Library, the Law and Society Association,
the Policy History Conference, Seminar in American Capitalism at Johns
Hopkins University, the Social Science History Association, and the
Triangle Legal History Seminar. All provided important forums for working
out my ideas, but my true scholarly home has been and will remain the
Business History Conference. The BHC has been an enormously
welcoming, encouraging, and generative group of scholars. It is a great
pleasure to thank so many of them for nurturing me as a young scholar (and
to occasionally—if quietly—curse them for the many “service
opportunities” they will no doubt offer me in the future): Marcelo Bucheli,
Bernardo Bátiz-Lazo, Manuel Bautista-González, Brent Cebul, Christy
Chapin, Nathan Delaney, Walter Friedman, Bart Elmore, Eric Hilt, Lou
Galambos, Shane Hamilton, Roger Horowitz, Vicki Howard, Louis Hyman,Pam Laird, Naomi Lamoreaux, Marc Levinson, Carol Lockman, Jan
Logemann, Ashton Merck, Stephen Mihm, Sharon Murphy, Dael Norwood,
Julia Ott, Atiba Pertilla, Andrew Popp, Mark Rose, David Sicilia, Jesse
Tarbert, David Thompson, Dan Wadhwani, Ben Waterhouse, and Mark
Wilson. Five members of that community—Ed Balleisen, Dan Bouk,
Richard John, Josh Lauer, and Susie Pak—read this manuscript cover to
cover. They improved it immeasurably through their incisive comments and
thoughtful feedback, even if I failed to follow their more radical advice to
consolidate or cut various chapters (readers may have appreciated it if I
had).
Like many early career academics, I revised this book while spending
many nail-biting years watching the job boards, Hail Marying applications,
and bouncing across temporary appointments. Still, I was fortunate. I had
some lucky breaks. At the Princeton Writing Program, under the inspired—
if often silly—leadership of Amanda Irwin Wilkins, I learned the mechanics
of scholarly writing by trying to teach them. An NEH fellowship at the
Hagley gave me the space to write the proposal for this book. Colleagues at
New York University’s Gallatin School, especially Millery Polyne, Ngina
Chiteji, and Kim Phillips-Fein, encouraged me to develop courses which
shaped many of my ideas about American capitalism and American
democracy. I finished my last semester at NYU over Zoom from a
gardening shed in our backyard and then relocated to the University of
Glasgow under Covid’s dark shadow. Colleagues at the University of
Glasgow, especially Hannah Clark, Rose Elliot, Jeff Fear, Ewan Gibbs,
Chris Miller, Niall MacKenzie, Jim Phillips, Neil Rollings, Duncan Ross,
and Ray Stokes, have been incredibly welcoming and supportive. They
have helped shield me as best they could from my other duties as I worked
to complete this book.
The last of my professional acknowledgments goes to my editor Adina
Popescu and to the staff at Yale University Press. I secured a contract early
because I thought it would help me on the job market. Delivery of the
manuscript was delayed, delayed, and delayed again. Adina was more
patient than I had a right to expect. Eliza Childs provided thorough and
thoughtful copy editing. Enid Zafran contributed expert indexing. Margaret
Otzel and Eva Skewes provided additional—essential—support to move the
manuscript through to publication.This book owes its greatest debt to the love and support of my family,
whom I appreciate all the more being an ocean away from home. My mom,
Kathy Lamb, has been unstintingly supportive, insisting on weekly phone
calls to keep the communication channels open. She has always listened
closely and carefully, eager to understand this arcane business, to better
celebrate the small triumphs, and to offer genuine encouragement when it is
needed. My parents-in-law, Kevin and Nancy Vogelsang, have been
unrelentingly helpful as we have done our best to build a family on the
uncertain foundation of academic life. They embody love and kindness;
they open their door wide to our family’s mobile chaos machine. Greg,
Alison, Justin, Penelope, Junior, Oliver, Amy, Gerry, and Sandy: their love
has meant the world to me.
More than anyone else, Sara Vanatta, my partner and faultless navigator,
has lived with this book through its long development, its many revisions,
interruptions, and frantic pushes. It has been the background music to the
life we have built together, under Japanese magnolias and steely Scottish
skies. When this book quietly gathers dust, that life will continue
flourishing through the boundless unpredictability of our children—Elliot,
Sawyer, Finlay, our dear, sweet, adventurous girls; Cole, our spirited baby
boy. Scotland may be a cold, dark country, but we have made a warm home,
full of light.
Lastly, I want to thank my dad, Lee Lyon Vanatta. My dad was a history
buff, the kind who would fall asleep reading the latest Churchill biography.
He was a Southerner, who inherited from his Texan parents an admiration
for the bravery and heroism of the losing side. Becoming a historian has
meant wrestling with that legacy, often by needling him about the many
points—social, cultural, political—on which we disagreed. My dad was the
best man he knew how to be. He was unfailingly proud of me. This book is
dedicated to his memory.INDEX
Italicized page numbers refer to figures and tables.
ABA. See American Bankers Association
Adams, Felix, (i)
affiliate system, illustration of, (i)
affinity organizations partnering with banks, (i)
AFL-CIO, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi)
African Americans. See Black consumers; race
agent bank structure: Bank of America and, (i), (ii); Citi and, (i), (ii); First of Omaha and, (i), (ii),
(iii), (iv); Midwest Bank Card and, (i); Minnesota banks and, (i), (ii); Omaha Service and, (i);
role of agent banks, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
Agriculture, U.S. Department of, (i)
airline ticket fraud, (i)
Alm, Raymond, (i)
American Banker (newspaper): on charge account growth and revenues, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); on
Charge-O-Matic, (i); discontinuing charge account coverage, (i); on discounting of charge
accounts, (i); on service charges, (i)n23
American Bankers Association (ABA): on bank cards as entry to multiple financial services, (i);
Bank Card Standardization Task Force, (i); on commercial banks, (i), (ii); on competition
pressures and unsolicited mailing of cards (1967), (i); National Installment Credit Conference
(1954), (i)
American Express (Amex), (i); Carter’s policies and, (i); bank credit cards competing with, (i), (ii);
fraud investigators employed by, (i); funded through merchant discounts and cardholder fees, (i);
growth in 1950s, (i); lobbying for sanctions to deter card criminals, (i); model card fraud
legislation developed by, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); origin of, (i); Uni-Serv acquisition by, (i)
American Law Institute, (i)
American Retail Federation, (i)
American State Bank of Rapid City, (i)
annual fees and service fees: after Carter’s policy changes, (i), (ii); Amex, (i); Chase and, (i); Citi
and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)n49; convenience users and, (i), (ii), (iii); debit cards and transaction
fees, (i); Delaware legislation to allow, (i); Diners Club, (i); legislation introduced to ban, (i);
Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis and, (i), (ii); Maryland’s ban on annual fees, (i), (ii);Massachusetts’s ban on annual fees, (i); New York class action over, (i); travel cards and, (i), (ii),
(iii)
Annunzio, Frank, (i)
antimonopoly/antitrust, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi)n2
ATMs (automatic teller machines), (i), (ii), (iii)
Ausubel, Lawrence M., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
automatic renewal of credit cards, (i)
automobile loans, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
Bailey, Thomas L., (i), (ii), (iii)
Balogh, Brian, (i)n5
BankAmericard: branch banks providing customer base for, (i); commercial banks affiliated with
(1970), (i); creditworthiness approach of, (i), (ii), (iii); criticism of launch approach, (i); direct-to￾consumer marketing by, (i); discounting, (i); Everything Card as rival to, (i); family shopping
focus of, (i); First of Omaha and, (i); Fisher cases and, (i); franchising of, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v);
fraud and, (i); geographic coverage, (i); increased consumer use of (1970–1973), (i); launch of,
(i), (ii), (iii); local bank name on card, (i); losses accrued by, (i); Marquette joining, (i); Maze case
and, (i); rebrand as Visa, (i); modeled after retail cards, (i); national competition to, (i); network
structure (top-down), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii)n15; number of cardholders (mid￾1970s), (i); regional bankcard associations competing against, (i), (ii); reorganization under Hock,
(i); success of (1960s), (i), (ii), (iii); travel features added to, (i); as uniform vehicle of revolving
credit, (i); unsolicited card mailings, (i), (ii), (iii); women and, (i), (ii). See also Visa
BankAmericard Service Corporation (BASC), (i)
Bankers Monthly: on competition for consumers, (i); on credit interviews, (i); on Interbank Card
Association, (i)
bank failure: from 1930 to 1933, (i); from 1943 to 1974, (i); FDIC protection, (i), (ii)
Bank Holding Company Act (1956 & 1970), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Banking Act (1933). See Glass-Steagall Act
banking concentration, (i), (ii), (iii); concentrated capitalism resulting from plastic capitalism, (i), (ii);
Douglas on, (i); financial technology encouraging, (i); megabanks, arrival of, (i); restraints to, (i),
(ii), (iii), (iv). See also relocation to states with less regulation
Bank Merger Acts (1960 & 1966), (i)
Bank of America: agent bank structure and, (i), (ii); California banking regulation shaping strategy
of, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); charge account approach tied to consumers, (i), (ii), (iii); charge
card launch (1958), (i), (ii); Chase Manhattan vs., (i), (ii); financial technology and, (i), (ii), (iii),
(iv), (v), (vi)n13; Hock’s reorganization of BankAmericard, disapproval of, (i); individual
agreements with licensees, (i); as largest bank in U.S., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); MBNA acquired by, (i),
(ii); Midland Trust and, (i); minimum monthly payment amounts, (i); National Credit Card Fraud
Legislation Project and, (i); national network, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii)n15; overseas
branch networks, (i); plastic card embosser and, (i); profitability from credit cards by 1962, (i); as
a top issuer of credit cards, (i); as trailblazer and model for other banks, (i). See also
BankAmericard; Visa
Bank of Delaware, (i)
Bank of Virginia, (i)
bankruptcies: low-income, slow payers and, (i), (ii); rate of, (i), (ii), (iii); Truth-in-Lending claims
filed in, (i)n21
Bankruptcy Abuse and Consumer Protection Act (2005), (i)
Barack v. U.S. (1963), (i)Baradaran, Mehrsa, (i)
Barclays (England), (i)
Barnett Banks (Florida), (i)
Barron’s: on credit card expansion, (i); on prescribed geographic and product markets, (i)
Bartlett, Richard J., (i)
Bell, Daniel, (i)
Bellah, Robert N., (i)
Bennett, Wallace, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Bergsten, Eric E., (i)
Biggins, John C., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)n9
Black consumers: in Chicago, (i); credit card fraud as non-issue for, (i); credit controls favored by,
(i); “ghetto” credit practices and, (i), (ii), (iii); mortgage access of, (i); Truth-in-Lending and, (i),
(ii). See also creditworthiness; race
Blackmun, Harry A., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Bloomingdale, Alfred, (i), (ii)
Blumenthal, W. Michael, (i), (ii)
Blythe, Helaine, (i)
Bolton, Frances P., (i)
bonds, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); municipal, (i), (ii), (iii)
Booth, S. Lee, (i)
Bork, Robert H., (i), (ii)
Boyle, James, (i)
branch banking: California allowing, (i); CBCTs not deemed to be, (i); definition of “bank branch,”
(i); establishment of, (i); federal branching rules liberalized, (i), (ii); New York restrictions, (i),
(ii); POS terminals in New Jersey as, (i); restrictions, effect of, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv). See also
geographic restrictions
Brandeis, Louis, (i)
Branstad, Terry, (i)
Braucher, Robert, (i), (ii)
Brennan, William J., Jr., (i), (ii)
Bretton Woods Agreement (1944), (i)
Brimmer, Andrew F., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Brooklyn, New York, small retail businesses in, (i)
Buerger, Alfred, (i), (ii)
Bureau of Labor Statistics, (i)
Burger, Warren E., (i)
Burkhalter, Susan, (i)
Burns, Arthur, (i), (ii)
Burroughs Clearing House, as bullish on credit cards (1966), (i)
Butler, Nathaniel, (i)
CABA (Charge Account Bankers Association), (i), (ii)
Caddell, Pat, (i)
California: Amex’s model fraud law adopted by, (i), (ii); Bank of America’s structure influenced by,
(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); branch banking in, (i), (ii); cooperative bankcard association to
compete against BankAmericard, (i); National Credit Card Fraud Legislation Project and, (i);
revolving credit in, (i); State Credit Card Crime Act and, (i), (ii)
California Bankcard Association, (i)Calomiris, Charles W., (i)n11
Capel, Guy, (i)
capitalism: consumer credit becoming part of, (i); inherent instability of, (i); New Deal regulatory
order saving, (i), (ii). See also plastic capitalism
Capital One, (i)
card networks. See network-building strategies of bank credit cards
Carey, Hugh L., (i)
Carte Blanche, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Carter, Jimmy, (i), (ii); 1976 election win, (i); 1980 election loss to Reagan, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv);
background of, (i); cabinet disorder and, (i); confidence to fight inflation, (i); Credit Control Act
and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); “Crisis of Confidence” speech (1979), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); criticism of credit
control policy as out of proportion, (i); deregulation and, (i), (ii), (iii); inflation and credit control
policy, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi)n15; self-restraint calls by, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi);
technology’s impact recognized by, (i)
cash advances, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii)
cashless/checkless society, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
CBCTs (customer-bank communication terminals), (i)
CCA. See Credit Control Act
Celler, Emanuel, (i), (ii), (iii)
Central National Bank and Trust Company (Iowa), (i)
Central States Bank Card Association, (i)
certificates of deposit (CDs), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Champion, George, (i)
Charga-Plate technology, (i)
Charge Account Bankers Association (CABA), (i), (ii)
charge accounts, retail, (i); bank cooperation, (i), (ii)n25; banking standards, applicability of, (i);
consumer relationships, (i); correspondent charge account plans, (i); credit trap, creation of, (i);
department stores, use of, (i), (ii); discounting, (i); geographic restrictions, (i), (ii); grocery stores
and, (i); growth of (1953–1960s), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); interchange system and, (i), (ii)n25;
marketing and promotion, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); merchant approach of 1950s, (i); origins of, (i);
purpose of, (i), (ii); revolving credit and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); Rockefeller’s view of failure, (i); state
regulation and, (i); success of, (i); women (white, married, and affluent) as market for, (i), (ii),
(iii), (iv), (v)n15; WWII approach to, (i), (ii)
Charge-It, (i), (ii), (iii)
charge-offs: charge accounts, (i), (ii); Visa losses, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Charge-O-Matic, (i), (ii)
Charge-Rite, (i), (ii), (iii)n23
Charg-It, (i), (ii), (iii)
Chase Manhattan Bank: annual fees, (i); Bank of America vs., (i), (ii); Carter’s policies, effect of, (i);
charge card launch (1958), (i), (ii); charge card losses (1961), (i), (ii); Chase Manhattan Charge
Plan (CMCP), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); Chase National Bank merged to become, (i), (ii); credit card
approach (late 1950s), (i); credit card approach (early 1960s), (i); credit card growth after
relocation (1980s), (i), (ii); credit card promotions (1980s), (i); Diners Club purchase enjoined,
(i), (ii); merchant focus, (i)n18; overseas branch networks, (i); relocation to Delaware, (i); travel
card business and, (i); urban location of, (i). See also J. P. Morgan Chase
Chemical Bank (New York), (i)
Chicago, Illinois. See Continental Illinois Bank; Midwest Bank Card System
Christian Science Monitor on Carter policies’ effect (1980), (i)Chubb Corporation, (i)
circumventing New Deal regulatory pillars. See financial federalism; geographic restrictions; price
controls
Citibank/Citi, (i), (ii), (iii); agent banks and, (i), (ii); American State Bank of Rapid City acquired by,
(i); annual fees, (i); branch banking, (i); card customers and debt load, (i); Carte Blanche
acquisition enjoined, (i), (ii); Carter’s policies, effect of, (i); CBCTs use by, (i); Chubb
Corporation acquisition enjoined, (i); circumventing geographic restrictions, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv),
(v); Citicard issued by, (i); Citicorp as holding company, (i), (ii), (iii); consumer credit market
becoming focus of, (i), (ii), (iii); credit card promotions (1980s), (i); credit controls denounced
by, (i); divestment of acquisitions under Bank Holding Company Act (1970), (i); early history of,
(i); Edge-Act subsidiaries, (i); Everything Card, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); Fisher’s impact on, (i);
formerly City Bank of New York, (i); formerly First National City Bank, (i), (ii), (iii); fraud
losses (1968), (i), (ii); Glass-Steagall’s demise orchestrated by, (i); global financial acumen of, (i),
(ii)n25; global financial crisis (2008), effect of, (i); insolvency in New York, (i); Interbank
membership, (i); international operations of, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); national expansion of, (i), (ii),
(iii), (iv); NBI membership of, (i); New York interest rates and, (i), (ii), (iii); pre-approved
application mailings, (i); service fee on convenience users, (i), (ii), (iii)n49; struggles in 1950s,
(i); too big to fail, (i), (ii); as a top issuer of credit cards, (i); transaction volume as key to
profitability, (i); travel card business and, (i); unsolicited card mailings, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); urban
location of, (i); Visa nationwide campaign, (i), (ii); vision of bank card as locus of consumer
financial services, (i), (ii); Volcker’s policies and, (i). See also South Dakota; Visa
Citigroup, (i), (ii); too big to fail, (i), (ii)
Citizens and Southern National Bank (Atlanta), (i)
Citizens Commercial and Savings Bank of Flint, Michigan, (i)
Civil Rights Act (1871), (i)
Civil Rights Act (1964), (i), (ii), (iii)
Civil Rights Movement, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
Clark, Joseph S., Jr., (i)
Clark, Ramsey, (i), (ii)
class: Community Reinvestment Act (1977) and low-income neighborhoods, (i); competition for
white middle- and high-income suburban consumers, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); credit as way to rise up
social ladder, (i), (ii), (iii); credit card as part of middle-class identity, (i), (ii); economic growth
for white, suburban middle class (1960–1967), (i); Great Society pressure for access to credit, (i);
low-cost credit and, (i), (ii), (iii); moderate-income households’ risk for consumer borrowing, (i);
no-cash policies excluding low-income consumers, (i); poor and minority consumers excluded
from access to financial services, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); predatory inclusion, (i), (ii), (iii);
retail charge accounts and, (i), (ii); travel card users and, (i); Truth-in-Lending protections and,
(i), (ii), (iii); UCCC to expand access to credit, (i); wage stagnation of middle-class workers, (i).
See also white, male-centered society; women
class actions: chilling effect on bank experimentation, (i); against Citi for adding service fees, (i);
Fisher as, (i); Truth-in-Lending Act encouraging, (i)
Cohen, Felix, (i)
Cohen, Lizabeth, (i)
Commerce Department, (i)
commercial banks, (i); in BankAmericard or Interbank network (1970), (i); branching restrictions,
effect of, (i); breaching Glass-Steagall separation of insurance, (i); checking accounts, non￾interest bearing, (i), (ii); credit markets and, (i), (ii), (iii); deposits, 1945–1958 growth from, (i),
(ii); favoring large corporations over small borrowers, (i); holding company structure asadvantageous for, (i), (ii); New Deal policies and, (i); pivot to consumer markets (1958), (i), (ii);
vs. postwar growth of thrifts, (i), (ii); rates fixed by Federal Reserve, (i); risk-adverse to
consumer lending in 1940s, (i); South Dakota allowing insurance company acquisition by, (i);
UCCC opposed by, (i). See also charge accounts, retail; network-building strategies of bank
credit cards
Commission on Financial Structure and Regulation (Hunt Commission), (i)
Commission on Money and Credit (CMC), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Committee for Economic Development (CED), (i)
Community Reinvestment Act (1977), (i)
Comptroller of the Currency: CBCTs and, (i); Citi’s move to South Dakota approved by, (i)
congressional action, (i); on unsolicited card mailings, (i), (ii). See also specific acts and members of
Congress
Connecticut: Citi network extending to, (i); as possible venue for relocation, (i)
consumer advocacy: Citi taken off guard, (i); on Delaware and South Dakota concessions to bank
cards, (i); deregulation as counterargument to, (i); financial federalism as essential to, (i);
government policing as goal of, (i), (ii); inability to block bank card growth, (i); for interest rate
disclosures, (i), (ii); low-cost credit as goal of, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii); at odds with
bankers seeking unrestrained markets, (i); politicians’ responsiveness to, (i), (ii); state usury
limits sought by legislation, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); tradeoffs in legislation, (i), (ii); Truth-in￾Lending advocacy, (i), (ii), (iii); UCCC high rates challenged by, (i); unsolicited cards opposed
by, (i), (ii). See also Truth-in-Lending Act
Consumer Bankers Association, (i)
consumer credit approach of other countries, (i), (ii)
consumer credit history prior to Great Depression/New Deal, (i)
Consumer Federation of America, (i)
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, (i)
consumer protection, history of, (i), (ii). See also consumer advocacy; specific legislation
Consumer Reports on BankAmericard, (i)
Continental Illinois Bank (Chicago), (i), (ii); competition for middle- and higher-income
suburbanites, (i); conservative background of, (i); consumer banking business and, (i);
Continental Banking Card introduced by, (i), (ii); fraud from unsolicited mailing of cards, (i), (ii),
(iii); reaction to Citi’s Visa national promotion, (i); urban location of, (i). See also Midwest Bank
Card System; Town & Country Charge
convenience users, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii)n49
Cooley, Richard, (i)
Coralville Bank and Trust Company (Iowa), (i), (ii)
correspondent banks. See agent bank structure
correspondent networks, (i), (ii), (iii)
Cotter, William, (i), (ii)
Council of Economic Advisers (CEA), (i), (ii)
countermobilizations to banks’ aggressive strategies. See consumer advocacy; labor groups;
Proxmire, William; Truth-in-Lending Act; Uniform Consumer Credit Code
Covid-19 pandemic, (i)
credit bureaus, (i)
Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act (2009), (i)
credit card debt: Citi’s rise in amount of, (i); increase per household (1970–2021), (i), (ii);
outstanding balances by state of issuance (1980 vs. 1986), (i); purchasing by credit cardsurpassing cash and checks, (i); rise in amount of, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii). See also
bankruptcies; unsustainable credit card debt
credit citizenship: cards on spectrum of, (i); exclusion from full participation in society for those
lacking access to cards, (i); extension to minority groups, (i), (ii); extension to women, (i), (ii);
privileged, (i), (ii); UCCC aim to broaden, (i); War on Poverty and, (i); young suburban families
(white and middle/upper class), (i), (ii). See also creditworthiness; white credit privileges
Credit Control Act (CCA, 1969): benefits of Act’s use to bankers, (i); benefits of Act’s use to
borrowers, (i); Carter and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); Fed using authority under, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v);
David Kennedy’s criticism of, (i); Nixon and, (i); Proxmire and Patman advancing in Congress,
(i); purpose of, (i); Volcker’s view of, (i)
credit crunches (1966 & 1969), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
credit reports, consumer access to, (i)
credit unions, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi)
creditworthiness: BankAmericard approach to, (i), (ii); Chase evaluating for CMCP customers, (i);
civil rights and women’s rights movements, effect of, (i), (ii); competition to sign up most
desirable customers, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); congressional proposals on credit access and, (i);
department store accounts, (i); Franklin National Bank customers, (i); merchant approach to
determining, (i); New Deal political economy increasing Americans with, (i); privileged groups
based on race, class, gender, and sexual orientation, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix),
(x), (xi), (xii), (xiii); revolving credit and, (i); UCCC drafting and, (i), (ii). See also credit
citizenship; race; sexual orientation; unsustainable credit card debt; women
cyclical credit swings, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii)
Daley, Richard J., (i), (ii)
Dashew Business Machines (DBM), (i), (ii)
Databosser, (i)
Dawes, Henry M., (i)
debit cards, (i), (ii)n1
decentralized credit allocation, (i)
Delaware: Chase relocation to, (i); economic problems prior to Chase’s arrival, (i); employment in
financial industry in, (i), (ii), (iii); Financial Center Development Act (FCDA), (i); financial
industry growth in, (i); Intergovernmental Task Force, (i), (ii); MBNA chartered in, (i); as a prime
choice for bank relocation, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii); profits and perils of credit card
banking in, (i); tax breaks in, (i), (ii), (iii)
Democrats: Carter attempting to change path of, (i); consumer movement and, (i), (ii); credit controls
and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); social priorities of, (i); Wisconsin Consumer Act as victory for, (i). See
also Southern Democrats
Denzler, Richard, (i), (ii)
department store credit cards, (i), (ii); consumer experience and, (i)n14; history prior to Great
Depression, (i); mailing of unsolicited cards (late 1960s/early 1970s), (i); stand-alone credit
departments, (i); theft of, (i); Truth-in-Lending as threat to, (i). See also charge accounts, retail
Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act (1980), (i), (ii)
deregulation: bankers blaming for rate hikes, (i); banking concentration encouraged by, (i); Carter
and, (i), (ii), (iii); federal approach to broaden access to credit, (i); Proxmire and, (i); state-driven,
(i)
Dillon, K. Burke, (i), (ii)
DiMaggio, Paul J., (i)n18
Dine-n-Sign, (i)Diners Club: Chase enjoined from acquiring, (i), (ii); bank credit cards competing with, (i), (ii), (iii);
discounting and membership fee, (i); global network of, (i); growth in 1950s, (i), (ii); National
Credit Card Fraud Legislation Project and, (i); origin story, (i), (ii)n43; plastic card embosser and,
(i)
disclosure requirements. See Truth-in-Lending Act
discounting: Amex, (i); BankAmericard, (i); charge cards, (i); Chase Manhattan Charge Plan, (i), (ii);
Diners Club, (i); Northwest Bank Group, (i)
disintermediation, (i), (ii)
Dixon, Paul Rand, (i)
Dodd-Frank Act (2010), (i), (ii)
Donohue, Edward, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Doody, Jim, (i), (ii), (iii)
Douglas, Paul H.: as author of Truth-in-Lending Act, (i), (ii); believing in informed consumers, (i);
on confusion created by product differentiation, (i); defending New Deal’s political economy of
small finance, (i), (ii); Fed criticized by, (i); opposed to high consumer credit prices, (i), (ii);
opposed to state rate ceilings, (i), (ii); on purpose of Truth-in-Lending Act, (i), (ii); on restraints
to concentrated financial power, (i); UCCC adoption urged by, (i)
Doyle, John, (i)
dual banking system, (i)
Duffy, Edward W., (i)
Dunne, John R., (i), (ii)
du Pont, Pierre S. (“Pete”), (i)
Eastern States Bankcard Association, (i)
Eccles, Marriner S.: on Commission on Money and Credit, (i); on consumer spending as priority, (i);
on federal rebalance of economy, (i), (ii); as Federal Reserve chairman, (i), (ii); inflation worries
post-WWII, (i); National Housing Act and, (i); on New Deal’s rescue of private banking system,
(i), (ii); on WWII credit controls, (i)
economic fairness, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Economic Report of the President (Truman and Eisenhower), (i)
economy and economic growth: consumer borrowing driving, (i), (ii); consumer borrowing
outpacing (1963–1967), (i); contraction in response to Carter’s credit policies, (i); primacy as
voting issue, (i); for white, suburban middle class (1960–1967), (i). See also Great Depression;
inflation; prosperity; recession
Eisenhower, Dwight D., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
electronic funds transfer (EFT), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Electronic Recording Machine, Accounting (ERMA), (i), (ii)
Elmer, Jack, (i)
Employment Act (1946), (i)
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (1974, amended 1976), (i), (ii)
equal protection violations, (i)
Erb, Richard, (i)
Esquire Club, (i)
eurodollars, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Everything Card, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
fair competition, (i), (ii), (iii)
Fair Credit Billing Act (1974), (i)Fair Credit Reporting Act (1970), (i), (ii)
Fair Housing Act (1968), (i)
Farer, Tom J., (i)
Farrington Manufacturing Company, (i)
FBI investigations of credit card fraud, (i)
federal deposit insurance, (i)
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), (i), (ii)
Federal Housing Administration (FHA), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
federal preemption of state rules, (i)n8
Federal Reserve (Fed): 1957 study of consumer credit use, (i); on check clearing system vs. EFT, (i);
on Citicorp’s acquisitions, (i); Citi’s move to South Dakota and, (i), (ii); consumer response to
rate changes by, (i); credit card concerns of, (i); Credit Control Act authority and, (i), (ii), (iii),
(iv), (v), (vi); debit transaction fees regulated by, (i); favoring large corporations over national
social priorities, (i); Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), (i), (ii); fighting inflation, (i), (ii);
interest rate adjustments, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); interstate banking prohibitions enforced by, (i);
minimum monthly payments, credit cards allowed to raise, (i); monetary tools and tightening of
money supply, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); Nixon administration and, (i); pro-credit cards as benefit to
consumers, (i); on profitability of credit cards, (i); reserve requirements increased by, (i); retail
charge accounts, World War II controls of, (i), (ii); Task Group on Bank Credit-Card and Check￾Credit Plans report (1968), (i); unsolicited card mailing standards and, (i); on unsolicited mailing
of cards, (i), (ii), (iii). See also specific chairmen
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), (i), (ii), (iii)
fees. See annual fees and service fees
financial crisis (2008). See global financial crisis (2007-2008)
financial federalism: bankers’ voice in state policy and, (i), (ii); charge accounts and, (i); commercial
banks and, (i), (ii); consumer protection and, (i)n5; credit cards as bankers’ means to end, (i), (ii);
credit card systems developed within constraints of, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); end of (late 1970s), (i),
(ii); Fisher cases and, (i); flexibility within, (i); Interbank Card Association and, (i); interchange
system and, (i); lobbyists for, in 1940s, (i); local finance as base for, (i), (ii), (iii); Marquette case
and, (i); McFadden Act and, (i); as New Deal pillar, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); shaping bank card
market within, (i), (ii), (iii); state regulation of financial institutions, (i); Truth-in-Lending and,
(i); Wisconsin Consumer Act as victory for, (i). See also place-based social contract
financial industry: change from merchant to consumer focus (1960s), (i); distribution of assets of
financial institutions (1945–1958), (i); employment, (i), (ii); end of industry siloing (1999), (i);
growth, (i); history prior to Great Depression, (i); postwar boom, (i); South Dakota workers
employed in, (i); states friendly to, (i); Truth-in-Lending and, (i). See also financial innovation;
financial technology and fintech; industry siloing
financial innovation: benefits accruing to the privileged at expense of marginalized, (i); Bennett
invoking to protect unsolicited card mailings, (i); card networks as, (i); charge accounts as failed
path toward, (i)n2; Chase’s credit card approach and, (i); Congress’s resistance to, (i), (ii);
electronic payments and linking to checking accounts, (i); revision of New Deal structure, (i); as
strategic pragmatic action, (i)n4; Wriston as master of, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v). See also financial
technology and fintech
financial technology and fintech, (i), (ii); Bank of America and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii)n13;
benefits accruing to the privileged at expense of marginalized, (i); card authorization and
interbank processing, improving speed of, (i); cost savings through, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); driving
expansion of bank services, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)n13; facilitating discrimination between low￾and high-risk borrowers, (i); impersonalization of, (i); incremental innovation through, (i); largebanks’ advantage in, (i); mail fraud and, (i); potential to change existing financial structures, (i),
(ii), (iii), (iv), (v); Wriston’s vision for, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv). See also financial innovation
financialization, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii)n5, (viii)n9
Fink, Stanley, (i)
First National Bank and Trust of Bay Shore, (i), (ii)n9
First National Bank and Trust of Kalamazoo, (i), (ii)
First National Bank of Chicago, (i), (ii), (iii)
First National Bank of Maryland, (i)
First National Bank of Omaha: agent banks for BankAmericard program, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v);
BankAmericard Center, (i); card industry role of, (i); competing with Marquette National Bank,
(i); division of functions between First of Omaha and Omaha Service, (i); First Charge service,
(i), (ii); Fisher cases and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); legal fiction of Omaha Service, (i), (ii); out-of-state
solicitation by, (i), (ii), (iii). See also Marquette case
First National City Bank (New York), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv). See also Citibank/Citi
First National City Corporation (Citicorp), (i)
First of Omaha Service Corporation (Omaha Service), (i), (ii), (iii); division of functions between
First of Omaha and Omaha Service, (i); Iowa attorney general suit against, (i); legal fiction of, (i),
(ii); ruled in violation of ICCC but reversed by Fisher precedent, (i); soliciting agent banks,
merchants, and consumers for BankAmericard in Minnesota, (i). See also Fisher cases;
Marquette case
First Omni Bank (Millsboro, Delaware), (i)
First Wisconsin National Bank, (i)
Fisher, Fred and Edna, (i), (ii). See also Fisher cases
Fisher cases (Fisher v. First Nat’l Bank of Omaha, 7th Cir. 1976, 8th Cir. 1977), (i), (ii), (iii); card
transactions found to be within bank’s office, (i); as deciding precedent in Iowa suit against
Omaha Service, (i); in federal Courts of Appeals (7th and 8th Cirs.), (i); in federal district court,
(i); Iowa state court transferring case to federal court, (i); national impact of, (i), (ii), (iii); stayed
order pending Marquette resolution by U.S. Supreme Court, (i); Supreme Court declining to hear
appeals, (i); viewed as distortion of National Bank Act, (i)
Flatbush National Bank (Brooklyn), (i)
Fleming, Anne, (i)n5
Fligstein, Neil, (i)n4
float, (i), (ii)
Florida National Bank of Orlando, (i), (ii)n23
Ford, Gerald, (i), (ii)
Ford Foundation, (i)
Fordist economy, (i)
Fowler, Henry, (i)
franchise arrangements, (i), (ii), (iii); Bank of America and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
franchise tax, (i), (ii), (iii)
Franklin National Bank (Long Island), (i), (ii), (iii)
fraud: Amex employing its own investigators, (i); Amex model legislation, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v);
BankAmericard and, (i); card issuers’ increasing concerns with, (i); Chase Manhattan Charge
Plan and, (i); Continental cards and, (i); credit card fraud as federal crime, (i); criminal penalties
for illegally obtained cards, (i); government policing of, (i); House Judiciary Committee’s
jurisdiction over, (i); location of credit card crime, (i); mail fraud statute, (i); merchant collusion,
(i); professional criminals, emergence of, (i); state card fraud laws, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); UnholyAlliance collusion, (i), (ii), (iii); unsolicited mailing of cards and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii),
(viii), (ix); Visa issuers’ losses due to, (i), (ii), (iii)
free-market principles, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix)
Freeth, Douglas A. (“Doug”), (i); “What’s Wrong with Midland Charge Plan?,” (i)
Fresno, California, as BankAmericard testing grounds, (i)
Friedman, Milton, (i)
FTC (Federal Trade Commission), (i), (ii), (iii)
Furness, Betty, (i), (ii), (iii)
Galbraith, John Kenneth, (i), (ii), (iii); The Affluent Society, (i), (ii)n32
Gallagher, Mary, (i)
gasoline cards, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); mail fraud cases and, (i)
gender. See white, male-centered society; women
geographic restrictions, (i), (ii), (iii); bank credit card networks circumventing, (i); Bank of America
circumventing, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); charge accounts and, (i), (ii); Chase circumventing, (i); Citi
circumventing, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); credit crunches (1966 & 1969) and, (i); downtown banks in
racially diverse neighborhoods, (i); financial technology enabling circumvention of, (i); home
state rules vs. local rules, (i); interfirm relationships circumventing, (i); interstate branches and,
(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); profitability impact of, (i); regional bankcard associations
circumventing, (i), (ii); suburban customers as target market, but out of reach, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv),
(v)
Gettys, Tom, (i)
Giannini, A. P., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Glass, Carter, (i), (ii)n9
Glass-Steagall Act (1933), (i), (ii), (iii)
global financial crisis (2007-2008), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
Golden Key, (i)
Gourmet Guest Club, (i)
Gramley, Lyle, (i), (ii)
Great Depression, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii). See also New Deal regulatory order
Great Society, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Gresham’s law of plastic, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
grocery stores and charge cards, (i)
Haber, Stephen H., (i)n11
Hansen, “Baldy,” (i)
Harris Trust (Chicago), (i)
Hayward, Nathan, III, (i)
Head, Douglas, (i)
Heimann, Henry H., (i)
Henderson, Leon, (i), (ii)
Henry, J. William (“Bill”), (i)
Hess, W. Albert, (i)
Hinke, Karl, (i), (ii)
Hock, Dee W., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
Hofstadter, Richard, (i)n2
Hogg, Russell, (i)
holders in due course, (i), (ii)n27holding companies, (i); advantages of commercial bank adopting, (i); Citicorp using status as, (i). See
also Bank Holding Company Act
“honor all cards” rules, (i)n2
Horowitz, Daniel, (i)
House Banking Committee: on Black urban unrest, (i); on Carter’s policies, effect of, (i); on inflation
driven by credit card use, (i); on unsolicited card mailings, (i), (ii)
House Business and Industry Committee, (i)
House Judiciary Committee, (i), (ii)
House Postal Subcommittee, (i), (ii)
Hunt, Reed O., and Hunt Commission, (i)
Hyman, Louis, (i), (ii)n14
Illinois: branching laws violated by CBCTs, (i); card fraud law, (i); limited cardholder liability law,
(i), (ii); Town & Country Charge card in, (i); unit banking laws, (i), (ii)
Illinois Bankcharge, (i)
Independent Bankers Association of America, (i)
independent system, illustration of, (i)
Indiana, Town & Country Charge card in, (i)
Industrial Savings and Trust of Muncie, Indiana, (i)
industry siloing, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); credit card systems developed within constraints of, (i); credit
crunches (1966 & 1969) and, (i); end of (1999), (i), (ii), (iii); New Deal pillar, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv),
(v), (vi); Nixon administration seeking to reform, (i)
inflation: in 1960s, (i), (ii); in 1970s, (i); banks suffering effects of, (i), (ii); Carter and, (i); consumer
spending and, (i); credit card use associated with, (i), (ii); Credit Control Act and, (i); interest
rates increased by, (i); Nixon administration and, (i); post-WWII concerns, (i)
installment credit: Bank of America and, (i); federal control efforts during WWII, (i); history prior to
Great Depression, (i); reduced use after Carter’s pleas for self-restraint, (i); rise from 1952 to
1956, (i); state laws on, (i), (ii)
institutional isomorphism, (i)n18
Interbank Card Association, (i), (ii); Central States Bank Card Association and, (i); compared to Bank
of America structure, (i); geographic coverage, (i), (ii); Master Charge and, (i), (ii), (iii); National
BankAmericard Inc. resembling structure of, (i)
interchange system: BankAmericard’s network and, (i), (ii); for charge accounts, (i); illustration of,
(i); Midwest Bank Card System, (i); nineteenth-century development of, (i)
interest rates: battle between consumer organizations and financial community over, (i); Carter
policies, restructuring interest rates after, (i); controlled by state in which bank is located, (i);
disclosure of annual terms, (i), (ii); inflation as cause of rise in, (i); non-interest costs added to
loans, (i); “sticky” despite removal of state usury limits, (i), (ii); thrifts paying on savings, (i);
UCCC and rate ceilings, (i). See also savings; usury limits
interfirm relationships as foundation for card networks, (i), (ii)n25, (iii)n3
intermediation theory of banking, (i)n14
interstate banking. See branch banking; geographic restrictions
investment companies, (i), (ii)
Iowa: attorney general suits against retailers, (i), (ii); Consumer Credit Code (ICCC), (i), (ii); Fisher
cases, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); revolving credit and, (i); usury laws, (i), (ii)
J. C. Penney, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
J. C. Penney (Wisconsin v. J. C. Penney, 1970), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)J. P. Morgan Chase, (i), (ii)
Janklow, William, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Jim Crow, (i), (ii)
Jim Crow credit, (i), (ii)
John, Richard, (i)n2
Johnson, Lyndon: civil rights movement and, (i); credit card fraud and, (i); economy and, (i); tax cuts
(1963), (i); Truth-in-Lending and, (i), (ii), (iii); UCCC endorsement by, (i). See also Great
Society; War on Poverty
Johnson, Robert W., (i)
Joint Economic Committee (JEC), (i)
Justice Department: Antitrust Division, (i), (ii); card fraud amendment to Stolen Property Act, (i);
card fraud and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); on credit card fraud outside purview of Stolen Property Act, (i);
interstate banking prohibitions enforced by, (i); joint task force with Postal Inspection officers, (i)
Kahn, Alfred E., (i), (ii), (iii)
Kefauver, Estes, (i), (ii)
Kellerman, U.S. v. (2d Cir. 1970), (i)
Kennedy, David M.: background of, (i); on cards as “road to the future,” (i); as chairman of
Continental Illinois Bank, (i); competition for middle- and high-income suburban consumers and,
(i); on convenience and advantage of bank cards over local cards, (i); on credit crisis of 1960s,
(i); on mass mailing campaigns, (i); on Midwest Bank Card System, (i); as Treasury secretary
(Nixon administration), (i), (ii); on urban problems, (i)
Kennedy, John F., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
Kennedy, Robert, (i)
Kentucky, credit card fraud laws in, (i)
Keynes, John Maynard, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
King, Martin Luther, Jr., (i), (ii)
Kleindienst, Richard, (i), (ii), (iii)
Knowles, Warren, (i)
Korean War, (i), (ii)
LaBlond, Richard, (i)
labor groups: Carter’s antagonism toward, (i); on Delaware and South Dakota concessions to bank
cards, (i); federal usury limits sought by, (i); financial federalism as essential to, (i); inability to
block bank card growth, (i); low-cost credit as goal of, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii);
Minnesota’s Bank Credit Card Act supported by, (i); state usury limits sought by legislation, (i),
(ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); targeted controls on cards as goal of, (i); tradeoffs in legislation, (i), (ii);
Truth-in-Lending advocacy, (i), (ii), (iii); UCCC and, (i), (ii), (iii); unsolicited cards opposed by,
(i), (ii)
La Follette, Bronson, (i)
Lammers, Jerry, (i)
Landrain, Charles, (i), (ii)
large banks: Bank of America’s franchise strategy and, (i), (ii), (iii); financial technology, advantage
over small banks, (i); growth of big business necessitating, (i); megabanks, arrival of, (i); new
services needed to continue growth, (i); overseas markets offering opportunities to, (i), (ii); price
controls circumvented by, (i); suburban flight’s effect on, (i). See also agent bank structure;
Midwest Bank Card System; unsolicited card mailings
Larkin, Ken, (i), (ii)n13Lasch, R. Christopher, (i); Culture of Narcissism, (i)
Lauritzen, John R., (i)
Law and Economics movement, (i), (ii)
Lefkowitz, Louis, (i)
LeGrand, Clay, (i), (ii)
Levitin, Adam, (i)
liability for credit card losses due to fraud, theft, etc. See fraud; lost or stolen cards; risk shifting
Life (magazine), on credit card fraud (1959), (i); on unsolicited card mailings (i), (ii)
life insurance companies, (i), (ii)
Lipson, Milton, (i), (ii)
lobbyists: in 1940s to end federal credit controls, (i); deregulatory arguments of, (i); on mailing
restrictions on card promotions, (i); time-price doctrine, retention of, (i); Truth-in-Lending
drafting, (i). See also consumer advocacy; labor groups
local banks: 1950s keeping credit local, (i); Bank of America’s franchise strategy capitalizing on, (i);
lobbyists for, in 1940s, (i); network replacing with national brand in cardholder’s mind, (i), (ii),
(iii), (iv), (v), (vi); New Deal preserving structure of, (i), (ii); tension with national, centralized
credit management, (i), (ii). See also agent bank structure; financial federalism; place-based
social contract
Long, Russell, (i), (ii)
Lorenz, Otto C.: death of, (i); on networking of bank card plans, (i); on retail charge accounts, (i),
(ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii); Rockefeller and, (i); on unsolicited mailing of cards, (i)
Los Angeles, credit card fraud in, (i)
Los Angeles Times: on Carter credit measure resulting in higher borrowing costs (1979), (i); on Citi’s
nationwide Visa campaign (1977), (i); on State Credit Card Crime Act (1967), (i)
lost or stolen cards: consumers’ liability for, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); criminal use of, (i), (ii); Proxmire
proposing to shift risk to card issuers, (i)
Mafia. See organized crime
mail fraud statute and jurisprudence, (i), (ii)
mailings of unsolicited credit cards. See unsolicited card mailings
Malcolm, Walter, (i), (ii), (iii)
Manhattan Company, merger with Chase Manhattan, (i), (ii)
Manning, Robert: Credit Card Nation, (i)
Manufacturers Hanover, (i)
Manufacturers Trust Company (New York), (i), (ii)n9
Margolius, Sidney, (i)
Marine Midland Bank (New York): Bank of America’s proprietary software and, (i); card industry
role of, (i); charge card (Marine Midland Charge Plan), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); on effectiveness of
unsolicited card mailings, (i); Master Charge issued by, (i); nationwide network development, (i).
See also Midland Trust (Buffalo)
marketing and promotion: charge accounts, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); Chase Manhattan Charge Plan, (i). See
also unsolicited card mailings
Marquette case (Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corp., 1978), (i),
(ii); Citi move to South Dakota predicated on, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); continued application of, (i);
financial federalism and, (i); First of Omaha’s actions in Minnesota, (i), (ii); Fisher as deciding
precedent for appellate court, (i); Iowa Supreme Court distinguishing Fisher, (i); Minnesota law
and, (i); Minnesota’s Bank Credit Card Act and, (i); negating financial federalism, (i), (ii), (iii);
subsequent suit by First of Omaha for malicious prosecution and equal protection violations, (i);transfer to federal court and suing solely Omaha Service, (i); U.S. Supreme Court’s grant of cert.
as stay on Iowa Supreme Court, (i); where is credit plan “located” as determinative, (i), (ii), (iii)
Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis: annual fee charged for BankAmericard, (i), (ii); joining
BankAmericard, (i); as only card-issuing bank in Minnesota, (i); state installment loan rate used
for BankAmericard balances, (i). See also Marquette case
Marshall, Thurgood, (i)
Martin, William McChensey, (i)
Maryland National Bank, (i)
Maryland’s ban on annual fees, (i), (ii)
Massachusetts: Amex’s model fraud law adopted by, (i), (ii); lost or stolen cards, cardholder liability
limited in, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); usury laws, (i)
Master Charge (MasterCard): background of, (i); Carter’s policies, effect of, (i); CBCT network and,
(i), (ii); Citi as leading national issuer of, (i); Citicard as distinct from, (i); consumers associating
credit card with, (i); convenience users, (i); increased consumer use of (1970–1973), (i);
Interbank Card Association and, (i), (ii), (iii); launch of, (i); local bank name on card, (i);
lucrative business of, (i); national branding of, (i); national scope of, (i); number of cardholders
(mid-1970s), (i); Omaha National Bank (Nebraska) in arrangement with Olmstead County Bank
and Trust Company (Minnesota), (i); POS terminals in New Jersey, (i); St. Cloud National Bank
and Trust Company and, (i); as uniform vehicle of revolving credit, (i), (ii); women demanding
equal access to, (i)
Mayer, John A., (i)
Maze, U.S. v. (1974), (i), (ii)
MBNA, (i), (ii), (iii)
McCarthy, John F., (i)
McClellan, John, (i)
McCloy, John J., (i)
McFadden, Louis T., (i)
McFadden Act (1927), (i), (ii)
McIntyre, Thomas J., (i), (ii), (iii)
McLean, Ken, (i)
McNamara, Frank X., (i)
McPheeters, Hugh, (i)
Meade, Robert, (i)
Meeker, Everett, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)n21
megabanks, arrival of, (i)
Mellon National Bank (Pittsburgh), (i), (ii), (iii)
Meredith, Charles, (i)
merger and acquisition of banks, (i), (ii); state and federal restrictions against, (i), (ii). See also
antimonopoly/antitrust; specific banks involved in mergers and acquisitions
Merton, Robert, (i)
Michigan: card fraud legislation in, (i)n23; Town & Country Charge card in, (i); UCCC rejected by,
(i)
Mid-America Bankcard Association, (i)
Midland Trust (Buffalo), (i), (ii). See also Marine Midland Bank (New York)
Midwest Bank Card System, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
Miller, J. Irwin, (i)
Miller, William G., (i)
Miller-Tydings Act (1937), (i)minimum monthly payments, (i)
Minnesota: attorney general suits against banks, (i); attorney general suits against retailers, (i); Bank
Credit Card Act (1976), (i), (ii), (iii); card rate increase defeated (1969), (i); Marquette and, (i),
(ii), (iii); Master Charge plan “doing business” in, (i); revolving credit controls in, (i), (ii); time￾price doctrine and, (i), (ii); Truth-in-Lending and, (i), (ii); UCCC and, (i); usury laws, (i), (ii)
Minnesota Bankers Association, (i)
Minsky, Hyman, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)n5
Miraglia, Joseph, (i)
Missouri: Citi encroachment in, (i); Citi evaluating as possible relocation state, (i), (ii), (iii);
consumer credit law, (i)
Mitchell, Charles (“Sunshine Charlie”), (i), (ii)
Mobil Oil, (i)
Mondale, Walter, (i)
monetary policy. See Federal Reserve
Montana, defeat of UCCC in, (i)
Montgomery Ward, (i), (ii), (iii)
Moore, George S., (i)
Moorhead, John, (i)
moral economy, (i), (ii), (iii)
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, (i)
Morgenthau, Henry, Jr., (i)
Morrow, William, (i)
mortgages: Bank of America and, (i); credit crunch (1966) effect on, (i); Fair Housing Act and, (i);
federal insurance on, (i); low-cost credit for white borrowers, (i); National Housing Act and, (i);
thrifts as major lenders for, (i), (ii)
most favored lender doctrine, (i)
Nader, Ralph, (i)
National Bank Acts (1863 and 1864), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi)
National BankAmericard Inc. (NBI), (i), (ii)
National Bank of Commerce (Seattle), (i)
National Bank of Omaha, in arrangement with Olmstead County Bank and Trust Company, (i)
national banks: branch banking and, (i); CBCTs and, (i); deferring within states to local authority, (i);
establishment of, (i); Iowa customers not solicited by out-of-state banks, (i); jurisdictional issues,
(i); Marquette’s effect on, (i)
National Commission on Consumer Finance, (i)
National Commission on Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT Commission), (i)
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws (NCC), (i), (ii); credit committee, (i),
(ii)
National Consumers League, (i), (ii)
National Credit Card Fraud Legislation Project (NCCFLP), (i)
National Housing Act (NHA, 1934), (i), (ii)
National Organization for Women (NOW), (i)
National Recovery Administration, (i)
National Retail Credit Association, (i)
National Retail Dry Goods Association, (i)
nationwide expansion. See geographic restrictions
Nebraska bank laws, applicability of, (i). See also Fisher cases; Marquette casenetwork-building strategies of bank credit cards, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); BankAmericard structure (top￾down), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii)n15; circumventing geographic restrictions, (i), (ii),
(iii), (iv); competing with Diners Club, (i); consolidation, (i); determining which state’s interest
rate laws applied, (i); duality ban, (i); geographic structure, (i); illustration of types of consumer￾merchant-bank connections, (i); local bank less important to consumer, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi);
Marquette’s effect, (i); nationwide networks, (i), (ii); place-based regulatory system, (i), (ii), (iii);
proliferation of cards (1965–1969), (i); regional cooperation with competition, (i), (ii), (iii);
regulatory structure dictating, (i); self-fulfilling prophecy, (i). See also names of regional and
other networks
New Deal regulatory order, (i); in 1960s, (i); bankers seeking freedom from, (i), (ii); business
lobbyists undermining, (i); Carter and, (i); Congress’s commitment to, (i); constraints on bank
growth and profits, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); consumer credit and economic planning, (i), (ii), (iii),
(iv); encouraging borrowing and lending, (i), (ii), (iii); Hunt Commission proposed modifications,
(i); legacy of, (i); lenders circumventing and eroding, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix);
low-cost credit as priority, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); Marquette and, (i), (ii); pillars of, (i), (ii),
(iii), (iv), (v); political economy of, (i)n5; purpose of, (i), (ii), (iii); regulatory capture of, (i); roots
of postwar financial system in, (i), (ii). See also financial federalism; geographic restrictions;
industry siloing; place-based social contract; price controls; usury limits
New England Bankcard Association, (i)
New Jersey: POS terminals as branch banks in, (i); State Credit Card Crime Act and, (i)
Newman, Sarah, (i)
Newsday: on NY fraud bill (1969), (i); “The Hot Credit Card Racket” (series), (i), (ii)
New York (state): Amex’s model bill on credit card fraud in, (i); Banking Board regulating CBCTs,
(i); branching restrictions in, (i); consumer credit regulation in, (i); National Credit Card Fraud
Legislation Project and, (i); Temporary Commission on the Revision of the Penal Law and
Criminal Code (Penal Law Commission), (i), (ii); usury limits in, (i), (ii), (iii)
New York Bankers Association, (i)
New York City: consumer affairs office, (i); credit card fraud in, (i)
New York Times: on Bank of America’s acquisition of MBNA (2005), (i); on “New Banking Era”
(1955), (i); Proxmire on front page cutting up credit card (1970), (i); on Volcker’s appointment as
Fed chair (1979), (i)
Nixon, Richard M.: Bank Holding Company Act and, (i); challenged by credit card issues, (i), (ii);
decoupling dollar from gold, (i); financial reform measures and, (i); FTC action and consumerism
supported by, (i); low-cost credit and, (i); Saturday Night Massacre, (i); Watergate scandal, (i),
(ii)
no-cash policies. See cashless/checkless society
Nocera, Joseph, (i)
non-recourse basis, (i)
Northwest Bank Group (“Banco”), (i)
Northwestern Banks NWCP Charge Plan, (i)n23
Nugent, Rolf, (i), (ii)
Office of Price Administration (OPA), (i), (ii)
Olmstead County Bank and Trust Company (Minnesota): in arrangement with Omaha National Bank
(Nebraska) to offer Master Charge, (i); in Minnesota-based suit over its agent bank role, (i)
Omaha Service. See First of Omaha Service Corporation
Onassis, Aristotle, (i)
O’Neil, Paul: “A Little Gift from Your Friendly Banker,” (i), (ii)Oregon, interest rates in, (i), (ii)
organized crime’s entry into credit card fraud, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Oster, Richard, (i)
out-of-state card-issuing banks, litigation over. See Fisher cases; Marquette case
out-of-state card mailings. See unsolicited card mailings
overextension of credit. See unsustainable credit card debt
overseas financial services: of Chase, (i); of Citi, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); of Continental Illinois, (i); of
large banks, (i), (ii)
Packard, Vance, (i)
Pan American Bank of Miami, (i), (ii), (iii)n23
Panic of 1837, (i)
Parsons, Richard, (i)
paternalism, (i), (ii)
Paterson Savings and Trust Company (New Jersey), (i)
Patman, Wright: Bank Holding Company Act and, (i); Credit Control Act and, (i); criticizing
unsolicited credit card mailings, (i); defending New Deal’s political economy of small finance,
(i), (ii), (iii), (iv); Fed criticized by, (i); as House Banking Committee chair, (i); introducing
legislation to stop unsolicited cards, (i), (ii); on restraints to concentrated financial power, (i)
pawnbrokers, (i), (ii)
pension funds, (i), (ii)
Percy, Charles, (i)
Peters, J. H., (i)
Peterson, Rudolph A., (i)
Phillips Petroleum, (i)
Pierce, William, (i)
Pittsburgh National Bank, (i)
place-based social contract, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi), (xii), (xiii). See also
financial federalism
plastic capitalism: Carter’s policy on plastic capitalism, (i); concentrated capitalism resulting from
plastic capitalism, (i), (ii); consumer credit becoming part of, (i); inherent instability of, (i);
participation in plastic capitalism, (i); profits and perils of plastic capitalism, (i). See also
capitalism
plastic cards, Bank of America as pioneer of, (i)
Playboy Club, (i)
point-of-sale (POS) terminals, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Polanyi, Karl, (i)
political economy of small finance, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii)n11
Pollock, Earl, (i)
pornographic solicitations, compared to unsolicited card mailings, (i), (ii), (iii)
Postal Inspection Service, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Powell, Lewis, Jr., (i), (ii)
Powell, Walter W., (i)n18
predatory inclusion, (i), (ii), (iii)
price controls: Bank of America challenging, (i); consumer and labor groups seeking low-cost credit,
(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix); credit crunches (1966 & 1969) and, (i); giving way to
bank relocations, (i); large banks circumventing, (i); limits on what banks could pay for deposits,
(i), (ii); as New Deal pillar, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii); Nixon administration seekingto reform, (i); state regulation, (i); UCCC battle over price of credit, (i). See also
antimonopoly/antitrust; Credit Control Act; usury limits
Prince, Charles, III (“Chuck”), (i), (ii), (iii)
profitability, (i), (ii); Carter policies causing restructuring for, (i); Chase Manhattan vs. Bank of
America, (i); Citi’s goals, (i), (ii); commercial banks’ expectations of credit cards, (i);
convenience users’ effect on, (i), (ii), (iii)n49; creative management in banking, (i); of credit
cards (1980s), (i); Fed recognizing credit cards for, (i); financial technology, cost savings enabled
by, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); increase in consumer credit debt (1970–2021) and, (i); lobbyists for, in
1940s, (i); most favored lender doctrine and, (i); novel corporate strategies, (i), (ii); post-New
Deal boom of financial business and, (i); profits squeeze of 1950s, (i), (ii), (iii); retail charge
accounts, (i); snubbing social priorities for, (i); state usury laws, effect of, (i), (ii), (iii);
transaction volume as key to, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
prosperity associated with credit, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi), (xii)n32
Proxmire, William: believing in informed consumers, (i); card fraud amendment to Stolen Property
Act and, (i); Credit Control Act and, (i); cutting up credit card at hearings, (i); deregulation and,
(i), (ii); Fair Credit Reporting Act and, (i), (ii); reaction to Volcker Shock, (i); seeking legislative
balance in credit regulation, (i), (ii)n4; on Senate Banking Committee, (i); Truth-in-Lending and,
(i), (ii), (iii); unsolicited card mailings, hearings on, (i), (ii); unsolicited card mailings, legislation
on, (i), (ii)
Pullman Bank Group (Chicago), (i)
race: bank jobs in Delaware, (i); Black urban unrest, (i), (ii); competition for white middle- and high￾income suburban consumers, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); exclusion from credit card target market, (i), (ii),
(iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi), (xii), (xiii), (xiv); exploitative credit practices and,
(i), (ii), (iii); Jim Crow and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); poor and minority consumers excluded from access
to financial services, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); predatory inclusion, (i), (ii), (iii); redlining, (i),
(ii); UCCC to expand access to credit, (i). See also Black consumers; Civil Rights Movement;
white, male-centered society; white credit privileges
Rainier Bancorp (Washington State), (i)
Reagan, Ronald W.: 1980 election win over Carter, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); as California governor, (i)
Reardon, Thomas, (i)
recession (1970), (i), (ii)
recession (1981–82), (i)
redlining, (i), (ii)
Reed, John, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii)n49
regional bankcard associations, (i), (ii), (iii). See also network-building strategies of bank credit cards
Regulation Q, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi)
Rehnquist, William H., (i)
relocation to states with less regulation, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); bottom ten states (1980 vs. 1986), (i);
financial structure and, (i); majority of credit card loans from, (i); top ten states (1980 vs. 1986),
(i). See also Delaware; South Dakota
Republicans: on automatic renewal of credit cards, (i); consumer movement and, (i), (ii); Credit
Control Act and, (i), (ii); local price of credit favored by, (i); pro-credit cards as benefit to
consumers, (i); suburban voters and, (i); unsolicited card mailings, position on, (i), (ii)
retailers: antitrust suits against Visa’s and Mastercard’s transaction fees, (i); discounting by credit
cards, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); forced to accept debit cards, (i); no-cash policies, (i), (ii), (iii),
(iv); suffering sales losses after Carter’s pleas for consumer self-restraint, (i). See also small
businessesretailers’ charge cards. See charge accounts, retail; department store credit cards
revolving credit, (i); bank cards becoming dominant by late 1970s, (i), (ii); charge accounts and, (i),
(ii), (iii), (iv), (v); defined, (i)n3; fate of UCCC, (i); introduction of, (i); J. C. Penney (Wis. 1970),
(i), (ii), (iii), (iv); politics and consumer mobilization on, (i); reduced use after Carter’s pleas for
self-restraint, (i); state regulation, (i), (ii), (iii)n42; Truth-in-Lending Act and, (i); Uniform
Consumer Credit Code (UCCC) and, (i); uniformity of bank offerings, (i). See also time-price
doctrine
reward cards, (i)n2
Reynolds, John J., (i), (ii), (iii)
Richards, Vernon, (i)
risk shifting, (i); consumers’ liability, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); interest rate risk from banks to
consumers, (i), (ii); location of credit card crime, (i); Proxmire proposing to shift risk to card
issuers, (i); state law shifting risk to card issuers, (i), (ii). See also fraud
Robertson, A. Willis, (i)
Robinson-Patman Act (1936), (i)
Rockefeller, David, (i), (ii), (iii); Creative Management in Banking, (i)
Rockefeller, John D., (i)
Rockefeller, Nelson, (i), (ii), (iii)
Rockefeller Foundation, (i)
Roosevelt, Franklin D., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv). See also New Deal regulatory order
roots of postwar financial system, (i)
Rotker, Seymour, (i), (ii), (iii)
St. Cloud National Bank and Trust (Minnesota), (i), (ii)
Salomon Smith Barney, (i)
Samuelson, Robert J., (i)
savings: credit spending vs., (i); interest rates (Regulation Q), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi); postwar
accrual of, (i); wartime accrual of, (i)
savings and loans, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv). See also thrifts
Saxon, James, (i)
Scanlan’s Monthly: “How to Counterfeit Credit Cards and Get Away with It,” (i)
Schultz, Frederick H., (i)
Schultze, Charles L., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Schumer, Charles E. (“Chuck”), (i)
Scott, George M., (i), (ii)
scrip plan, (i), (ii)
Sears, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii)
Securities and Exchange Commission, (i)
securities speculation, (i)
securitization, (i)
Senate Banking Committee: on cards’ effect on financial regulatory structure, (i), (ii); Proxmire and
Bennett on, (i), (ii); Truth-in-Lending and, (i), (ii)
service fees. See annual fees and service fees
sexual orientation, straight men as desired credit customers, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
Shapiro, Irving I., (i)
Sherman Antitrust Act, (i)
Siebert, Muriel, (i), (ii), (iii)
small banks: Bank of America’s franchise strategy and, (i); experimentation with credit in 1950s, (i);
favoring retention of industry siloes, (i). See also political economy of small financesmall businesses: Charg-It (1950) for, (i); Chase Manhattan Charge Plan and, (i); department charge
cards as threat to, (i); unsolicited card mailings, effect of, (i)
small loans: Bank of America and, (i); state laws on, (i); UCCC opposed by small loan companies, (i)
Smith, James E., (i)
social priorities: cards viewed in light of, (i); Carter’s conflicted handling of, (i); Fed favoring large
corporations over, (i); in New Deal financial order, (i), (ii)n34; private lenders’ responsibility for,
(i); profitability deemed more important than, (i); self-restraint and religiosity, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv),
(v), (vi); Truth-in-Lending and, (i)
solicitation campaigns. See unsolicited card mailings
South Dakota: Citi bill provisions, (i), (ii); Citi relocation to, (i), (ii), (iii); economic problems prior
to Citi’s arrival, (i); employment in financial industry in, (i), (ii), (iii); federal regulatory approval
for Citi’s relocation to, (i); insurance companies acquisition permitted in, (i); as a prime choice
for bank relocation, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); profits and perils of credit card banking in, (i); tax breaks
in, (i), (ii)
South Dakota Bankers Association, (i)
Southern Bankcard Association, (i)
Southern Democrats, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)
specialization. See industry siloing
stagflation (1970s), (i), (ii)
Standard Oil Company, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
State Credit Card Crime Act: adoption in California, North Carolina, and Florida, (i); drafting of
model law, (i); as sole law to pursue card crime, (i), (ii)n21
state exemption clause of Truth in Lending Act (1968), (i), (ii)
state regulation: bottom ten states in national bank credit card outstandings (1980 vs. 1986), (i); card
fraud laws, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); CBCTs and, (i); charge accounts and, (i); failure to regulate credit
card lending (1950s–1960s), (i), (ii), (iii); federal preemption and, (i)n8; installment sales, (i);
pluralism of state credit regulation, (i), (ii), (iii); as restraint on consumer indebtedness, (i), (ii);
small loans, (i); state-chartered banks, (i); top ten states in national bank credit card outstandings
(1980 vs. 1986), (i); UCCC negotiations at state level, (i), (ii); unsecured lending practices and,
(i). See also usury limits; specific states
Steagall, Henry B., (i)
Stillman, James, (i), (ii)
Stolen Property Act (1934), (i), (ii); amendment adding provision on card fraud, (i)
student loan debt, (i)
suburban consumers. See class; creditworthiness; white flight to suburbs
Sullivan, Leonor, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Suncard, (i)
Supreme Court, U.S. See Marquette case (1978); Maze (1974)
Sutton, Willie, (i)
Taylor, Keeanga-Yamahtta, (i)
Taylor, Moses, (i)
technology. See financial technology and fintech
Teeters, Nancy, (i)
TEMPO consulting report, (i)
third-wave consumerism, (i)
thrifts: commercial banks vs., (i), (ii), (iii); mortgages, as prime lenders for, (i), (ii); Nixon focusing
on, (i). See also credit unions; savings and loansTime (magazine) on Diners Club, (i)
time-price doctrine, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix)
Timlen, Thomas M., (i)
Title I (Federal Housing Administration), (i), (ii)
too big to fail, (i), (ii)
Toole, G. L., (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
Town & Country Charge, (i), (ii), (iii)
transaction fees. See annual fees and service fees
Transamerica, (i)
travel cards: BankAmericard adding travel features, (i); bank credit cards competing with, (i), (ii),
(iii), (iv); expansion in 1960s, (i), (ii); fraud, (i); global reach compared to confined retail cards,
(i); market and gender of users, (i), (ii), (iii); origin story of, (i)
Travis, William, (i)
Treasury Department, (i)
Trip-Charge, (i)
Truman, Harry S., (i)
Truth-in-Lending Act (1968), (i); damages available, encouraging class actions, (i); Douglas as
author of, (i), (ii); effects of, (i), (ii), (iii); exemption of states with substantially similar disclosure
laws, (i); federal-state split of authority over credit and, (i); First National Bank of Omaha
violations, (i); FTC guidelines, (i); goals of, (i); Minnesota and, (i), (ii); National Commission on
Consumer Finance authorized by, (i); Nebraska and, (i); organized labor’s advocacy, (i), (ii), (iii);
privileged credit economy and, (i); Proxmire and, (i), (ii), (iii); Southern Democrats and, (i)
Turner, Richard, (i), (ii), (iii)
Tydings, Millard, (i)
Uniform Commercial Code, (i)
Uniform Consumer Credit Code (UCCC), (i); bad optics of drafting committee and, (i); consumer
and labor groups opposing, (i); high interest rates promulgated under, (i); Minnesota and, (i);
NCC campaigning to secure adoption of, (i); NCC credit committee formed to develop, (i);
privileged credit economy and, (i); proposed (1968), (i); purpose of, (i); rate ceilings, (i); state
banking associations opposing, (i); state consideration and adoption of, (i), (ii)
unions. See labor groups
Uni-Serv, (i), (ii)
universal credit cards: advantages of, (i), (ii); bank credit cards envisioned as, (i); Diners as first type
of, (i); momentum for, (i), (ii); as private form of money, (i); retail credit accounts vs., (i); as
solution to regulatory challenges, (i)
university partnering with banks to target students and alumni, (i), (ii)
unsolicited card mailings: alternatives to, congressional consideration of, (i), (ii); American Bankers
Association on, (i); BankAmericard, (i), (ii), (iii); ban passage (1970), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); ban
proposals, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v); Citi and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); congressional hearings on, (i), (ii);
congressional response to, (i); consumers fearing liability from, (i), (ii), (iii); Continental Illinois
Bank, (i), (ii), (iii); failure to perform credit checks prior to mailings, (i), (ii); Fed on, (i), (ii);
First National Bank of Omaha, (i); fraud and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix); FTC
action on, (i); government refusing to bear security costs from, (i); House Postal Subcommittee
on, (i); issuer as liable party for losses, (i), (ii); Lorenz’s disapproval of, (i); loss of social
connection with consumer, (i); mass mailings to launch bank card programs, (i), (ii); new bank
entry at competitive disadvantage for, (i), (ii); Patman legislation to stop, (i), (ii); Proxmire’shearings on, (i), (ii); Proxmire’s legislation on, (i), (ii); registered mail proposed as alternative to,
(i), (ii), (iii); targeted customers and, (i); Visa, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
unsustainable credit card debt: Carter’s policies and calls for self-restraint, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi);
compulsive buyers and temptations, (i), (ii); consumer and labor groups seeking protection from,
(i); promiscuous use of credit cards, (i), (ii), (iii); rate ceilings to protect against, (i); risk to low￾income households, (i); targeting of consumers most likely to rack up debts, (i); unsolicited
mailings, likelihood to create, (i). See also bankruptcies
Upper Darby National Bank (Philadelphia), (i)
U.S. v. See name of opposing party
usury limits: fair credit prices associated with, (i); loosening and lifting in state competition to attract
out-of-state banks, (i); profitability affected by, (i), (ii), (iii); revolving credit and, (i); state laws
on, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi), (xii), (xiii); states without restrictions, (i),
(ii); time-price doctrine, exemptions under, (i); Truth-in-Lending and, (i). See also specific states
Valley National Bank (Phoenix), (i), (ii)
VA mortgage guarantees, (i)
Vietnam War, (i), (ii)
Vietor, Richard H. K., (i)nn4–5
virtuous credit cycle, (i), (ii), (iii)
Visa: background of, (i); Carter’s policies, effect of, (i); created as successor to BankAmericard, (i);
debit cards replacing credit cards, (i); issuers’ operating expenses, decline in, (i), (ii); lucrative
business of, (i); nationwide mailing campaign, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv). See also Citibank/Citi
Volcker, Paul A., Jr., (i); background of, (i); Carter blaming for economic downturn, (i); Citi’s move
into insurance as objectionable to, (i); on Commission on Money and Credit, (i); on consumers
overreacting to controls, (i); Credit Control Act and, (i); as Fed chair, (i), (ii); Volcker Shock
(monetarist experiment unleashing interest rates, 1979), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii),
(ix), (x)n16
Voting Rights Act (1965), (i), (ii)
Wall Street Journal: on Chicago bank consortium (1966), (i); on Citi’s Visa national promotion
(1979), (i); on Continental unsolicited mailing of cards (1967), (i); on Patman introducing
legislation to stop unsolicited cards (1967), (i)
Walmart, (i)
Warner, William T., (i)
War on Crime, (i), (ii)
War on Poverty, (i), (ii)
War Powers Act, (i)
Warren, William, (i)
Washington State: CBCTs allowed in, (i); credit disclosure law, (i)
Washington State Labor Council, (i), (ii), (iii)
Weinstein, Jack B., (i), (ii)n20
Wells Fargo, (i)
White, Byron, (i), (ii)
white, male-centered society: bankers’ fraternity and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)n18; credit citizenship and, (i),
(ii), (iii); low-cost credit intended for, (i), (ii), (iii); mortgages at low cost, (i); retail charge cards,
market of white, married, and affluent women and, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)n15; travel cards and, (i),
(ii); unsolicited card mailings as contrary to, (i)
white credit privileges, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi), (xii), (xiii), (xiv), (xv)white flight to suburbs, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi)
Wick, Douglas, (i)
Wilcox, Thomas, (i), (ii)
Will, Hubert L., (i)
Williams, Harrison (“Pete”), (i)
Williams, Joseph P., (i)
Willier, William, (i)
Windall, William, (i)
Wisconsin: Consumer Act (1971), (i); J. C. Penney (Wis. 1970), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); UCCC and, (i);
usury limits, (i)
Wisconsin Bankers Association, (i)
Wisconsin Consumers League, (i)
Wisconsin Retail Merchants Association, (i)
Wolfson, Martin, (i)n5
women: as BankAmericard users, (i), (ii); Chase Manhattan Bank Charge Plan and, (i); as Master
Charge users, (i); as retail charge card users, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v)n15; separate credit identities
from spouses, (i); unsolicited card mailings targeting female dependents, (i), (ii)
Women’s Wear Daily: on BankAmericard, (i); on charge cards, (i), (ii)
World War II: credit controls during, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)n27; National City funding for, (i)
Wriston, Walter B., (i), (ii); appeal to Carey and NY government to retain Citi, (i); on bank regulatory
system’s polycentricity, (i); consumer credit made into Citi’s future by, (i); on deregulation of
interest rates, (i); on EFTs ruled to be branch banks, (i); on possibility of credit card replacing
physical banks, (i), (ii); on technology’s ability to outpace regulatory action, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv);
Visa strategy of, (i)
Younker Brothers, (i)
Zweig, Phillip, (i)
