Plastic 
Waste Trade
Sedat Gündoğdu Editor
A New Colonialist Means 
of Pollution TransferPlastic Waste TradeSedat Gündoğdu
Editor
Plastic Waste Trade
A New Colonialist Means of Pollution 
TransferISBN 978-3-031-51357-2 ISBN 978-3-031-51358-9 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2024
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microflms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar 
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a specifc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the 
editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
Paper in this product is recyclable.
Editor
Sedat Gündoğdu
Faculty of Fisheries
Department of Basic Sciences 
Çukurova University
Adana, Türkiyev
Foreword
Trade refers to the exchange of goods between states, companies, or individuals. 
Although the term implies a transaction between two parties, its impact can directly 
or indirectly affect multiple other parties. One of the “other parties” is the environ￾ment. Hence, commercial activities inevitably entail environmental costs.
Despite the benefts, the production and transportation of goods derived from the 
exploitation of nature has also an environmental impact. In other words, the produc￾tion and transportation of commodities from point A to point B has a signifcant 
environmental impact due to accidents, losses, and operational issues, leading to 
greenhouse gas emissions. Hence, it is evident that the trade of essential commodi￾ties has negative consequences for the environment, indicating that the nature of 
trade has the potential to cause environmental harm. So, how do we set the frame￾work in the case where the commodities being traded are in the form of waste? It is 
important to consider that waste materials, such as packaging for milk, cheese, and 
fruit and vegetables consumed in your kitchen, can suddenly become “proftable” 
objects. What perspective should we take when discussing this “dirty trade”, which 
goes far beyond the traditional understanding of trade? Similarly, how should we 
approach the commercial aspect of exchanging unwanted waste from nuclear or 
thermal power plants? To answer these questions, it is imperative to understand the 
underlying reasons behind waste transfer in pursuit of generating value. Trading of 
a commodity that poses a threat to both the environment and human health neces￾sitates careful examination in relation to public health concerns. The generation and 
transportation of waste present signifcant hazards and may be intertwined with 
other potentially illicit activities. It is clear that waste traffcking is often linked to 
other types of potentially illicit traffcking. Hence, waste cannot be assessed in the 
same way as trade in commodities.
This book provides a comprehensive overview of the waste trade, specifcally 
emphasising plastic waste in connection to the aforementioned subject matter. 
Beginning with a historical viewpoint rooted in the colonialist framework of the vi
plastic waste trade, it also addresses the transboundary movement of waste and its 
resulting environmental pollution. Consequently, readers of this book will under￾stand how the waste trade has become a colonialist pollution transfer.
Çukurova University, Adana, Türkiye Sedat Gündoğdu
Forewordvii
Preface
“Western” colonialism commenced in the 1500s when European countries con￾quered and exploited vast territories worldwide. Even though colonialism appears 
to have ended as a phenomenon in contemporary times, it continues to be deeply 
ingrained into our economy. The most apparent illustration of this is the plastic 
waste industry. The phrase “waste colonialism”, established in 1989, refers to one 
set of people dominating another in their homeland through waste and pollution. 
The shipping lanes utilised by the Global North to import coffee, tea and spices are 
now being used to transport toxic waste to the Global South. Despite gaining inde￾pendence, formerly colonised nations are still held under the weight of colo￾nial forces.
Modern-day colonialism is no longer based on direct colonisation, as in its his￾torical context, but has taken on a toxic form by reversing the old ways of exploita￾tion of toxic commodities, including plastic wastes. The harmful wastes of the 
civilisation that developed with the wealth obtained from the formerly colonised 
countries have now become the new form of exploitation. In the feldwork I con￾ducted in Adana to investigate the illegal dumping of imported plastic waste, farmer 
İzzettin summarised this situation as follows: “We send them vitamins, they send us 
toxic waste”. It is essential to understand all the contextual factors of the fow of 
toxic plastic waste in order to decolonise the fertile lands that have been polluted as 
a result of this situation that İzzettin summarised. 
The book provides a historical perspective on the pollution generated by the 
transfer of plastic waste from the global north to the global south. It offers concrete 
examples and data to support its arguments. The book strives to convey a compre￾hensive understanding of all aspects of the plastic waste trade and is perhaps the frst 
of its kind to do so.
Adana, Türkiye Sedat Gündoğduix
Contents
Part I The Theory, Background and the History of the Plastic 
Waste Trade
Plastic Waste Colonialism: A Typology of Global Toxicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Peter Stoett
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Harriet Freeman
Major Six-Year Trends in Global Plastic Waste Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Jan Dell
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping 
of Plastic Wastes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Jim Puckett
Part II The Illicit Activities in the Plastic Waste Trade 
and Its Toxic Effects
Plastic Waste and Criminality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Virginia Comolli
Toxic Contamination Caused by Plastic Waste in Countries 
of the Global South . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
Jindrich Petrlik, Bjorn Beeler, Yuyun Ismawati, and Lee Bell
The Human Rights Impacts of Plastic Waste Exports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Krista Shennum
The Darker Side of Dutch Colonialism: Exporting Plastic Waste 
Is Plastic Pollution Trafficking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
Helena Danton and Tony R. Walkerx
Part III The Receiving Country’s Perspectives
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response 
to Waste Trade Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
Yuyun Ismawati, Mochamad Adi Septiono, Nindhita Proboretno, 
and Krishna Zaki
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination 
in Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
Florin-Constantin Mihai and Simona Roxana Ulman
An Imported Problem? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
Ezgi Ediboğlu Sakowsky and Sedat Gündoğdu
The Waste Trade as a Tool of Colonialism in Our Age: A Sociolegal 
Analysis for Türkiye . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
Sezai Çağlayan and Firdevs Yüzbaşi Tobaz
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
Pui Yi Wong
On the Plastic Waste Route: Latin America Is the New Port 
of Destination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 291
Ela Zambrano and Magdalena Donoso
A Story of Waste Colonialism: An Italian-Tunisian Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
Semia Gharbi and Nidal Attia
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
ContentsPart I
The Theory, Background and the History 
of the Plastic Waste Trade3
Plastic Waste Colonialism: A Typology 
of Global Toxicity
Peter Stoett
Introduction
This chapter will construct a brief typology of plastic waste colonialism, beginning 
with the broader term “classical waste colonialism,” which characterized the formal 
colonial empire periods. The production and deliberate spread of waste was a core 
component, alongside structural racism, attempts at cultural annihilation, and 
extreme labor exploitation, of the spread of empire as well as global capitalism. The 
chapter then describes “waste neocolonialism,” the direct export of toxic waste into 
former colonial states (and other areas of the economic periphery); this is the more 
common defnition of the term “waste colonialism,” frst articulated at a meeting 
related to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of 
Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal in 1989 (at the time, it was less plastic, more 
other hazardous wastes and a burgeoning supply of electronic wastes that prompted 
the assertion).
These colonialisms are not contingent on state-state relations, since the core 
economy (where most industrial production takes place and most key political deci￾sions are made) and the affected periphery (where most resource extraction and 
waste disposal takes place and the least key political power is located) are often 
coterminous, found within the same territorial borders imposed on geography and 
natural ecosystems by the evolution of the international legal order. And so are 
efforts to overcome this iniquitous reality, which are themselves transnational in 
nature: waste colonialism has, arguably, become a central feature of the broader 
concept of environmental justice (as has plastic justice), but it has also become a 
source of employment for millions of people living on the periphery of peripheral 
(low-income) economies.
P. Stoett (*) 
Faculty of Social Science & Humanities, Ontario Tech University, Oshawa, Ontario, Canada
e-mail: Peter.Stoett@ontariotechu.ca
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_14
I will also describe two other categories of waste relations that are in my view 
highly relevant to any discussion of transnational plastic waste today: indirect waste 
accumulation, or “incidental” waste that arrives on the shores of islands and other 
areas as part of the broader global capitalist system of production; and the criminal 
waste trade – illegal, hidden, unreported waste exports/imports – which are often 
quite systemic in nature. Both of these are ongoing sources of harm to vulnerable 
communities, many of which are also engaged in resistance and occur within the 
broader context of the colonial relations that have shaped the present interna￾tional system.
I then briefy discuss the concept of waste decolonization, which is intimately 
tied to environmental justice – and which may involve moving beyond the waste 
exporter-importer relationship but will ultimately demand de-plasticization and the 
acceptance of limits to industrial growth, a far-off horizon at this stage despite the 
strong rhetoric and limited policy advances pertaining to the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs – see Elliff et al., 2021).
Waste Colonialism and Imperialism
The inseparability of pollution from colonialism has been explored at length in the 
North American context of settler colonialism; readers are especially encouraged to 
see Max Liboiron’s engaging work (Liboiron, 2021). I will present a less nuanced 
perspective here, but it is informed by the knowledge that the spread of colonialism 
as an exercise in controlling new territory is central to the historical arc of pub￾lic waste.
Broadly, colonialism refers to the regularized exploitation of one community by 
another. This may be accompanied by elaborate coercive governance mechanisms, 
or it can be much less formal or organized. While we are accustomed to imagining 
colonialism as a political relationship between an imperial power and “its” colonies, 
clearly the term is used to convey less formal relationships where a dominant entity 
has a disproportionate impact on the life of another and the processes, often geno￾cidal, of land acquisition, cultural destruction, religious indoctrination, racialized 
oppression, and other forms of violence (Wolfe, 2006). Though there are many 
types of colonialism, most of the authors in this text are referring to North-South 
relations with colonial precedent, and thus the colonization that accompanied impe￾rialism and capital accumulation is perhaps the most relevant here.
From the beginning of this form of classical colonialism, arguably, there has 
always been a product life cycle that involves social relations formed coercively to 
extract natural and human resources, and this evolved to include the process of 
primitive capital accumulation and the creation of captive marketplaces. What is 
often overlooked, in terms of both formal colonial relations and informal structural 
inequity, is the waste aspect of that product life cycle. This has taken many forms 
over the centuries and remains relatively underexplored by historians and sociolo￾gists alike.
P. Stoett5
However, it is a signifcant aspect of the toxic colonial legacy. Indeed, one could 
argue that in terms of harm to present and future generations, it has been among the 
most impactful – next, perhaps, to the human extraction that characterized the slave 
trade, and outright land-use change and other permanent ecological transforma￾tions. Resource industries produce copious waste at the site of extraction, and then 
again when the resources are utilized in productive processes, agriculture, com￾modifcation, and other enterprises. Then, there are the waste products associated 
with transporting the extracted resources and/or products back to the colonizing 
country/center of empire (or, as intra-colonialism is quite common, other parts of 
the same country). Today, this transport waste is most commonly measured as the 
greenhouse gas emissions involved in moving extracted resources, though even 
these have largely escaped the limitations imposed by climate policy (Bullock et al., 
2022). Then, some of the products made using the extracted material (timber, oil 
and gas, minerals) are exported back to captive or semi-captive markets organized 
in the country or region of origin, resulting in even more waste associated with 
transportation and ultimately the discarding of end products.
Plastic production fows neatly enough into this narrative. Much of the oil 
extracted from countries such as Nigeria contributes to plastic production else￾where. While a small segment of fossil fuel production today (around 4%) goes to 
plastic production, it’s been predicted that under present scenarios it could be nearly 
20% by 2040 (UNDP, 2022). Plastic products are made largely in industrialized 
countries and many of them are shipped back to the countries from whence the oil 
and gas originated; much of this is single-use plastic such as bottles containing soft 
drinks; these are then necessarily discarded in the host country. The plastic lifecycle 
runs from natural resource extraction right through to the disposal of fnished prod￾ucts, and there are waste components at each stage of the cycle, and much of both 
of the extractive and the end-product waste stages take place in what can be termed 
the economic periphery. This has been widely recognized by the international com￾munity, which is currently engaged in the process of establishing an international 
treaty to control the global plastic pollution problem.
The Resolution adopted by the ffth UN Environment Assembly on March 2, 
2022 (UNEP/EA.5/L.23/Rev.1.), suggested that a muscular approach was accepted 
by member states that will cover the full lifecycle of plastic: design, production, 
consumption, and disposal; this should, presumably, also cover the fossil fuel 
extraction phase where it is involved. Elsewhere I’ve described the waste (including 
massive accidental spills) associated with fossil fuel extraction as a form of ecovi￾olence (Stoett & Omrow, 2021). Quite often, indigenous peoples and local commu￾nities are most vulnerable to pollution resulting directly from both resource 
extraction and the distribution of end-of-life products. Some have even suggested 
that waste fows are a more accurate way of gaging the global, epochal infuence of 
humankind – Armiero suggests the term “wastocene” to replace the more popular 
conception of the “anthropocene” today (Armiero, 2021). The important point here, 
however, is that colonialism served as the foundational relationship that enabled 
subsequent patterns. That much of this occurred through outright violence and, 
even, genocidal policy, should not surprise us.
Plastic Waste Colonialism: A Typology of Global Toxicity6
Neocolonial Waste Relations
Viewed from this angle, waste disposal has always been an integral part of struc￾tured colonial exploitation. Yet in the neocolonial era, which largely followed the 
upheavals of the Second World War, a new form of “waste colonialism” emerged. 
This was by any measured view a continuation of the past pattern of extraction of 
raw materials from the global south, the production of commodities in the industri￾alized north, and the return of commodities and related waste products to the global 
south. The added element was the deliberate, direct, transboundary dumping of 
waste along distributive lines previously established by colonial relations, though in 
many cases there was no formal colonial relationship between sender and recipient. 
There was, and remains, a wide variety of waste products involved, refecting trends 
in industrial production and consumption in the broader northern industrialized 
economies. As Liboiron (2018) succinctly describes it, in its
Most common usage, usually by actors in formal governments and NGOs, the term waste 
colonialism is used to describe the transboundary disposal of a variety of hazardous and 
toxic wastes, including electronic-waste, persistent organic pollutants (POPs), industrial 
waste, decommissioned ships, municipal solid waste, radioactive waste, and other toxic 
waste. In these uses of the term, waste colonialism, as well as its sister terms garbage impe￾rialism, toxic colonialism, nuclear colonialism, and toxic terrorism, among others, are 
almost always about the transboundary movement of waste from areas of privilege and 
affuence to areas with lower economic status and infuence, and discussions tend to focus 
on legislative solutions and channels.
This continues in the classic colonial tradition, with the main difference being that 
the fnal product would not even be primarily intended for sale or use (though much 
of it is in fact sold and used) in peripheral states (note that in the neocolonial era, 
previous colonies had been christened as “states”). Indeed, the “product” is waste 
itself. The transportive technology helping to drive globalization leads directly to 
waste distancing (the physical distance between production, consumption and 
dumping; see Clapp, 2002), and the uneven governance of plastic has relocated 
large amounts of waste away from well-off consumers and toward low-income level 
jurisdictions and the global commons, with resultant social and environmental harm 
(Dauvergne, 2018). Arguably, this emerges as common practice as early as the 
1950s when various forms of toxic waste are exported from industrialized countries, 
mainly southward and eastward; it is not a coincidence that this takes place with the 
rise of agribusiness and mass production in core economic countries and regions. 
But it reached new heights, arguably, with the advent of recycling programs in the 
northern industrialized states, where concern for the unsightly landfll situation 
arose in the 1970s and beyond, and as the plastics industry unleashed a sustained 
publicity campaign aimed at selling recycling as the ultimate solution to the collec￾tive action problem of its own waste (see, for example, Sullivan, 2020).
Global fows of trade in plastic waste (ostensibly for recycling) from high￾income countries to low-income countries became common practice in the 1990s, 
providing an “out of sight, out of mind” (Barnes, 2019) model for domestic waste 
management (Wen et al., 2021). Recipient countries often have inadequate waste 
P. Stoett7
management infrastructures and are unable to cope with the excessive waste load, 
leading to plastic leakage (Chow, 2015; Barnes, 2019), and the deleterious health 
impacts of burning plastic waste, which has become a serious facet of air pollution 
in many areas. Meanwhile, higher-income per capita correlates with lower imports 
of hazardous waste; this is sometimes referred to as a pollution haven effect (Baggs, 
2009). A Tearfund report summarized the human health impacts of the plastic waste 
trade, which often involves simply dumping or burning:
• It blocks waterways and drains, which causes fooding, resulting in waterborne 
diseases and death by drowning.
• It creates a breeding ground for disease-carrying fies, mosquitos, and vermin. 
Mosquitoes spread malaria and dengue. Flies carry and transmit a number of 
diseases such as typhoid fever and tuberculosis, while rats spread rabies 
and plague.
• It doubles the incidence of diarrheal disease for people living among misman￾aged waste. Diarrheal disease is the second leading cause of death in children 
under 5 years old.
• It is openly burnt, releasing pollutants that increase the risk of diseases such as 
heart disease and cancer, respiratory ailments, skin and eye diseases, nausea and 
headaches, and damage to the reproductive and nervous systems. Outdoor air 
pollution is responsible for 3.7 million deaths a year, and recent estimates sug￾gest that open burning could be responsible for as much as a ffth of this death toll.
• It poses direct risks to life through large informal dumpsites. In 2017, landslides 
at waste dumps accounted for more than 150 known deaths.
• It pollutes water and soil and enters the food chain. Much of the plastic in water 
and on land disintegrates into tiny pieces. Microplastic is entering the food chain 
and being ingested by humans (Williams et al., 2019).
The North-South pattern of waste colonialism applied to many forms of toxic 
waste, and plastic exports were common, but the majority of European and American 
plastic waste exports between 2000 and 2018 were destined for one country: China 
has acted as the world’s main recycling depot. However, an axiomatic decision to 
launch a policy initiative (defantly named Operation National Sword) in 2017 
changed that. China began to refuse to accept so-called dirty plastic (most of which 
was unrecyclable anyway, ending up in landflls or fres). This remarkable develop￾ment has transformed the global recycling industry as other countries have begun 
accepting imports (both legally and illicitly) and northern exporters have scrambled 
to cope with the true costs of recycling at home. The ban immediately affected the 
global structure of plastic waste fows, as China received more than 50% of global 
exports of postconsumer plastics (7.3 Tg of postconsumer plastics from 43 different 
countries) in 2016 (Brooks et al., 2018), and reduced its share in the import of plas￾tic waste exported by G7 countries from 60% during the frst half of 2017 to less 
than 10% during the same period a year later (Hook & Reed, 2018). An estimated 
cumulative 111 million metric tons of plastic waste will be displaced by 2030, an 
amount equal to nearly half of all the plastic waste that has been imported globally 
since the frst reports in 1988 (Brooks et  al., 2018) (Another change of global 
Plastic Waste Colonialism: A Typology of Global Toxicity8
proportions accompanied the COVID-19 pandemic: the related increase in plastic 
production and waste has yet to be accurately measured, but there is no doubt it is 
tremendous. Indeed, it would have been diffcult to predict, back in 2019, that dis￾carded plastic bags and bottles would be challenged for dominance in the plastic 
pollution inventory by facemasks and rubber gloves  – see Hantoko et  al., 2021; 
Prata et al., 2020.).
After the Chinese decision, the global supply chain for plastic waste exports 
shifted from China to a few Southeast Asian countries, which had preliminary recy￾cling capabilities (Qu et al., 2019), and many recycling programs in Japan, Europe, 
and the United States have been discontinued because of the additional costs of 
either redirecting waste exports or assuming the processing burden locally. Malaysia 
has become a major importer of waste plastics from the UK, with a total import 
volume of 105,000 tons in 2018, which was 68% higher than in 2017 (Wang et al., 
2019). Poland, Indonesia, and the Netherlands followed closely, with imports of 
plastic wastes increasing by 60,000 tons in 2018. Turkey also became one of the 
world’s primary destinations for the global plastic waste trade (Gündoğdu & Walker, 
2021; Brooks et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018). Between 2017 and 2018, the amount of 
plastic waste imports in Turkey nearly doubled and kept steadily increasing in 2019 
and 2020, resulting in widespread plastic waste mismanagement in Turkey and in 
indiscriminate sources of plastic marine pollution in the Mediterranean Sea 
(Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021). In Africa, as Kutoma Wakunuma writes, “Ghana, 
Uganda, Tanzania, Ethiopia, Senegal and Kenya are fnding themselves fooded 
with plastic waste. This is overwhelmingly affecting poor, socially marginalised 
people, and women in particular” (Wakunuma, 2021).
Initial hopes that the Chinese ban would prompt high-income countries to fnd 
local solutions to plastic pollution instead of exporting plastic waste to other coun￾tries with inappropriate management and infrastructure for recycling seem to be 
dissipating; less optimistically, it is equally possible that vast increases in the illicit 
international trade are looming, a theme I will return to shortly.
It is also evident that the urge to “go green” is leading to the intensifcation of 
some neocolonial activities such as the mining of rare earths, which come complete 
with their own waste problems. Despite the obvious urgency of the climate crisis, 
governments and corporations alike need to exercise precaution as they move 
toward a greener or, in the case of the oceans, a bluer economy.
This is part of a broader pattern. Literature critically linking the plastic pollution 
crisis in the southern hemisphere to a bland neoliberal approach to resource man￾agement has emerged (see Millington and Lawhon, 2019). For example, one study 
based on plastic recycling in Sekondi-Takoradi, a midsize city in Ghana, sug￾gests that:
Sustainable development has been embraced by neoliberalism in the form of marketising 
the environment in a ‘green way’. While political economists have considered this move￾ment in terms of the emissions trading scheme and other price based mechanisms posited 
as solutions to global environmental crises, the particular nature of such discourses at the 
urban level in Africa is not well understood … the tenets and approaches of sustainable 
urban development are fundamentally inconsistent with green metropolitan neoliberalism. 
P. Stoett9
In turn, it is highly unlikely that recycling, a medium of ‘marketising the environment to 
save it’, can provide a sustainable solution to the plastic waste glut, engendered by the pri￾vate provision of urban water. (Obeng-Odoom, 2014:115)
Another dimension of waste neocolonialism involves the redistribution of discarded 
clothing. While millions of North Americans and Europeans donate their unwanted 
clothing to thrift shops and charities, it has been estimated that “almost half” of 
unsold items are shipped to the southern hemisphere, particularly to African desti￾nations (Huang, 2022). This overwhelms local markets, harming domestic textile 
and clothing industries, and also produces waste in itself, since polymers are so 
common in contemporary clothing. Indeed, the washing of clothing is a major 
source of microplastics in water systems around the globe, a problem even more 
pronounced in countries where there is little water sanitation infrastructure (De 
Falco et al., 2019). There are other examples, but the pattern remains largely the 
same: former colonies accepting waste from northern states that adds to the plastic 
pollution burden in the former. Millions of people are formally or informally 
employed in processing this waste, so it will be diffcult indeed to break frmly from 
this dependence.
Indirect Transboundary Plastic Waste
It is important to note that there are direct and indirect modes of waste neocolonial￾ism. For example, islands are particularly susceptible to receiving the infow of 
plastic waste (see especially Manglou et al., 2022), and “trash seasons” related to 
tourism (Kerber & Kramm, 2021) are quite common in much of the sunny, sandy 
southern hemisphere. Their marine geographic position makes islands obvious end￾points for massive amounts of nonpoint source pollution. Tsunamis and storm 
events can both bring unwanted plastic waste to shorelines. Microplastics are even 
moving around through atmospheric transmission. As mentioned above, plastic pol￾lution can also carry invasive species and other undesirables. This is not colonial￾ism, in the classic or even neoclassical sense. And the tide is turning, since so much 
plastic waste is entering global systems today from highly populated Asian and 
African and Latin American countries themselves.
However, there are discernible shades of the systemic neglect that accompanied 
colonial relations visible here: even though the delivery of waste onto foreign shores 
is not intentional, there exists plausible foreknowledge that it will end up there. 
Indeed, one set of researchers refers to recycling in Europe as a marine pollution 
“pathway,” a term usually reserved for disease pathogens and invasive species 
(Bishop et al., 2020). Lack of effective waste management in one area, usually a 
heavily industrialized large-scale market economy, will affect others in a detrimen￾tal fashion. This is akin to the arguments over climate justice (those who contribute 
the least to the problem are suffering the most from it) and other cases where envi￾ronmental injustice exposes some to more risk than others. Indeed, plastic injustice 
Plastic Waste Colonialism: A Typology of Global Toxicity10
has quickly emerged as an animating theme for those engaged in environmental and 
social justice work (including “blue justice”: see Bennett et  al., 2021; Zamboni 
et al., 2021). Corporate efforts to contribute to the solutions available are often dis￾missed as greenwashing, but the more interesting question may be whether power￾ful multinational corporations will permit northern governments to force them to 
contribute to remedial action in far-off pathway/recipient states, including funding 
local cleanups.
Illicit Trade Along Neocolonial Lines
Much of the plastic waste trade is in fact beyond the purview of the United Nations, 
World Trade Organization, World Health Organization, and other international 
agencies, because it takes place illegally, often with the collaborative nod of corrupt 
government offcials. This is why actually regulating the overall global plastic waste 
trade will be nearly impossible without INTERPOL and other crime detection agen￾cies, local police forces, and even adamant and courageous local citizen groups 
willing to testify against illegal operatives. The illegal plastic waste trade, which 
received a quantitative boost from the Chinese decision to ban imports, is so bounti￾ful and regular – and based on core-periphery exploitation patterns – that it might 
well qualify as a form of neo-colonialism today. INTERPOL reports that the illegal 
waste trade is growing in Southeast Asia, Africa, Eastern Europe, and Latin America 
(INTERPOL, 2020).
Efforts to tighten regulatory oversight on plastic waste trade have been sporadic 
over the years and left largely to exporting and importing countries. A signifcant 
move occurred in 2019 at the 14th meeting of the Conference of the Parties of the 
Basel Convention, a multilateral agreement in force since 1992, to reduce the move￾ments of hazardous waste between nations and specifcally to prevent transfer of 
hazardous waste from developed to less developed countries. A suite of Plastic 
Waste Amendments was approved. These amendments became effective on January 
1, 2021, and flled some of the gaps in previous iterations of the Basel Convention 
regarding plastic waste, especially on mixed and contaminated plastics, which are 
most likely to complicate recycling. Plastic waste trade between member and non￾member states without a special binational or multilateral agreement was prohib￾ited, and a new partnership on plastic waste with more than 50 multi-stakeholder 
members was launched to “facilitate information gathering and sharing, undertake 
pilot projects, and promote the development of policies to minimize plastic waste” 
(UNEP, 2021b: 47).
However, there is no Basel Convention police force patrolling the seas or rail￾ways looking for illegal plastic shipments. This level of complexity in illicit trade is 
daunting; it involves corrupt offcials, shipping companies, brokers of shipping con￾tracts, recipient organized crime groups, local people employed to illegally burn and 
bury plastic waste, and others.
P. Stoett11
Waste Decolonization and Post-Plastic Life
China’s move – while perfectly understandable from a public health perspective – 
has created chaos and has no doubt resulted in harm to new receiving communities 
on the wrong end of the colonial stick. But perhaps it was what was desperately 
needed. Other countries, such as the Philippines, have rejected northern waste, 
embarrassing exporting countries such as Canada and causing legal complications. 
The pertinent fact is that elites in southern countries are less inclined to reject the 
fnancial opportunities presented by the waste trade, though this may be changing. 
The Basel Convention has an illustrious future if states begin to utilize it more 
forcefully to protect themselves from toxic waste imports, but that will be meaning￾less if corrupt offcials facilitate the illicit trade referred to above.
The disproportionate impact on southern states animated by the plastic waste 
trade industry has sparked various campaigns calling for global and regional inte￾grated instruments (Agamuthu et al., 2019; Stoll et al., 2020). Meetings between the 
Group of 7 (G7; 2017) and Group of 20 (G20; 2018) have addressed the issue of 
marine plastic pollution devising coordinated action plans, and UNEP’s Regional 
Seas Conventions have developed efforts to protect the marine environment from 
solid waste, encompassing 18 different regions of the world, considering multisec￾toral approaches and including governments that can directly orchestrate gover￾nance parameters on a cross-national scale (Da Costa et al., 2020). As mentioned 
previously, the 2017 United Nations Environment Assembly (UNEA) meeting in 
Nairobi, Kenya passed a draft resolution on marine litter and microplastics and rec￾ognized multiple challenges addressing marine plastic pollution with the urge to all 
countries and stakeholders to act (UNEA, 2022). Negotiations toward a global plas￾tics treaty have commenced; industry will no doubt continue with the usual promise 
that recycling will make everything fne, but this is unlikely to convince southern 
government representatives who have seen frsthand the deleterious impacts of dis￾carded plastic pollution and other forms of toxic waste. As of late 2023, the negotia￾tion process seems stalled, though another meeting will take place in April in Ottawa.
In contrast, framing plastic pollution as a human rights violation instead of a 
marketing opportunity for recycling frms is gaining steam. Inspired by living in 
Gambia, Caroline Schurman-Grenier has done this in a recent monograph, where 
she argues that plastic pollution “violates Article 24 of the African Charter, which 
stipulates a healthy environment as a human right” (Schurman-Grenier, 2019:24). 
Sustainable development is ultimately a manifestation of the pursuit of justice: 
international, intranational, intergenerational, and intergender. Until the conun￾drums posed by the plastic justice dilemma are treated openly in international dip￾lomatic circles, constructing a more cohesive global approach to the broader marine 
pollution problem, those facing the immediate health and development challenges 
posed by plastic pollution will have their human security compromised.
NGOs are working hard to decolonize and dismantle the extraction-production￾waste core-periphery structure – will the new international plastics treaty serve this 
purpose? What of the millions of waste pickers who are now dependent on the 
Plastic Waste Colonialism: A Typology of Global Toxicity12
importation of waste and will need a “just transition” to modify or move away 
entirely from this precarious source of employment (Adama, 2014; Wittmer, 2021)? 
Human health concerns have already proven to be lightning rods, igniting women 
activists in particular in Brazil and elsewhere (see Hanson, 2017; Smith, 2017).
This shouldn’t surprise us, since the plastic industry is to some extent based on a 
colonial model that the global governance superstructure has not managed to over￾come either, leaving the hard work to local activists. It is heartening, however, that 
the international community has listened to the science (Rocha-Santos et al., 2020) 
and accepted the need for some form of global governance on this issue. Those 
engaged in the process of forging a new international plastic treaty would do well to 
read the subsequent chapters in this book, in order to gain a deeper understanding of 
the historical and current context. The negotiators should be acutely aware of the 
largely colonial relationship that has structured the global plastics industry since its 
inception, which itself folds into historical patterns of resource extraction and waste 
disposal. Then the diplomats will have a better idea of the magnitude of the oppor￾tunity to advance decolonization through a justice-oriented treaty, as complicated as 
that will prove. And they will also, hopefully, recognize that reliance on recycling is 
decisively not the golden answer: not only has it failed spectacularly in the empiri￾cal sense, but it has in many cases deepened the neocolonial structure discussed in 
this book.
However, waste decolonization is far too important to be left to chemists and 
diplomats. The interrelated costs to human health, biodiversity, and climate (see 
Stoett & Vince, 2019, 2021; CIEL, 2019) are far too great and long-lasting, and 
legal solutions need to be framed within a justice perspective to acquire the neces￾sary public legitimacy in both colonizing and colonized, core and periphery, and 
countries and regions. Indeed, as part of the broader processes of colonization and 
neocolonization discussed in this chapter, waste colonialism will never be “over” in 
the structural sense until the world economy is freed from its reliance on fossil fuels 
and their byproducts. And even if we managed to make plastic waste exports univer￾sally outlawed (and, given that it is, in essence, a collective action problem, such a 
ban would need to be near-universal in scope), the substantive illicit trade will need 
to be rooted out in a painstaking manner, challenging governments to face internal 
corruption and redirect scarce resources toward what has customarily been consid￾ered a fringe legal realm. But this is in tune with the broader theme of waste colo￾nialism: once a relatively obscure topic, the global plastic crisis has brought it to the 
fore, hopefully encouraging the concrete actions necessary to consign it to history.
References
Adama, O. (2014). Marginalisation and integration within the informal urban economy: The case 
of child waste pickers in Kaduna, Nigeria. International Development Planning Review, 36(2), 
155–180.
Agamuthu, P., Mehran, S. B., Norkhairah, A., & Norkhairiyah, A. (2019). Marine debris: A review 
of impacts and global initiatives. Waste Management & Research, 37(10), 987–1002. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0734242X19845041
P. Stoett13
Armiero, M. (2021). The case for the Wasteocene. Environmental History, 26(3), 425–430. https://
doi.org/10.1093/envhis/emab014.003
Baggs, J. (2009). International trade in hazardous waste. Review of International Economics, 
17(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9396.2008.00778.x
Barnes, S. (2019). Out of sight, out of mind: Plastic waste exports, psychological distance and con￾sumer plastic purchasing. Global Environmental Change, 58, 101943. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2019.101943
Bennett, N.  J., Blythe, J., White, C.  S., & Campero, C. (2021). Blue growth and blue justice: 
Ten risks and solutions for the ocean economy. Marine Policy, 125, 104387. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104387
Bishop, G., Styles, D., & Lens, P.  N. (2020). Recycling of European plastic is a pathway for 
plastic debris in the ocean. Environment International, 142, 105893. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2020.105893
Brooks, A., et al. (2018) “The Chinese import ban and its impact on global plastic waste trade.” 
Science Advances, 20 June. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat0131
Bullock, S., Mason, J., & Larkin, A. (2022). The urgent case for stronger climate targets for 
international shipping. Climate Policy, 22(3), 301–309. https://doi.org/10.1080/1469306
2.2021.1991876
Chow, L. (2015, October 15). These 5 countries account for 60% of plastic pollution in oceans. 
Available at: EcoWatch. https://www.ecowatch.com/these-5-countries-account-for-60-of￾plastic-pollution-in-oceans-1882107531.html
CIEL (Center for International Environmental Law). (2019). Plastic & health: The hidden costs 
of a plastic planet. Available at: https://www.ciel.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Plastic-and￾Health-The-Hidden-Costs-of-a-Plastic-Planet-February-2019.pdf
Clapp, J. (2002). The distancing of waste: Overconsumption in a global economy. In T. Princen, 
M. Maniates, & K. Conca (Eds.), Confronting consumption (pp. 155–176). MIT Press.
Dauvergne, P. (2018). Why is the global governance of plastic failing the oceans? Global 
Environmental Change, 51, 22–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.05.002
da Costa, J. P., Mouneyrac, C., Costa, M., Duarte, A. C., & Rocha-Santos, T. (2020). The role of 
legislation, regulatory initiatives and guidelines on the control of plastic pollution. Frontiers in 
Environmental Science, 8, 104.
De Falco, F., Di Pace, E., Cocca, M., et al. (2019). The contribution of washing processes of syn￾thetic clothes to microplastic pollution. Scientifc Reports, 9, 6633. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-019-43023-x
Elliff, C. I., Mansor, M. T. C., Feodrippe, R., & Turra, A. (2021). Microplastics and the UN sustain￾able development goals. In T. Rocha-Santos, M. Costa, & C. Mouneyrac (Eds.), Handbook of 
microplastics in the environment. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-10618-8_24-1
Gündoğdu, S., & Walker, T. R. (2021). Why Turkey should not import plastic waste pollution from 
developed countries? Marine Pollution Bulletin, 171, 112772.
Hanson, A.-M. (2017). Women’s environmental health activism around waste and plastic pollution 
in the coastal wetlands of Yucatán. Gender and Development, 25(2), 221–234. https://doi.org/1
0.1080/13552074.2017.1335450
Hantoko, D., Li, X., Pariatamby, A., Yoshikawa, K., Horttanainen, M., & Yan, M. (2021). Challenges 
and practices on waste management and disposal during COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of 
Environmental Management, 286, 112140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.112140
Hook, L., & Reed, J. (2018). “why the World’s Recycling System Stopped Working.” 
Financial Times magazine October 25, https://www.ft.com/content/360e2524-d71a￾11e8-a854-33d6f82e62f8
Huang, C. (2022, February 9). What is waste colonization? Remake. https://remake.world/stories/
what-is-waste-colonization/
INTERPOL. (2020). Strategic analysis report: Emerging criminal trends in the global plastic 
waste market since January 2018. INTERPOL.
Liboiron, M. (2018). Waste colonialism. Discard Studies. https://discardstudies.com/2018/11/01/
waste-colonialism/
Plastic Waste Colonialism: A Typology of Global Toxicity14
Liboiron, M. (2021). Pollution is colonialism. Duke University Press.
Liu, Z., Adams, M., & Walker, T. (2018). Are exports of recyclables from developed to devel￾oping countries waste pollution transfer or part of the global circular economy? Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling, 136, 22–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.04.005
Kerber, H., & Kramm, J. (2021). On- and off-stage: encountering entagled waste-tourism relations 
on the Vietnamese Island of Phu Quebec. The Geographical Journal, 187:2, 98–109. https://
doi.org/10.1111/geoj.12376
Manglou, M., Rocher, L., & Bahers, J.-B. (2022). Waste colonialism and metabolic fows in Island 
territories. Journal of Political Ecology, 29(1), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.2458/jpe.2836
Millington, N., & Lawhon, M. (2019). Geographies of waste: Conceptual vectors from 
the Global South. Progress in Human Geography, 43(6), 1044–1063. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0309132518799911
Obeng-Odoom, F. (2014). Green neoliberalism: Recycling and sustainable urban develop￾ment in Sekondi-Takoradi. Habitat International, 41, 129–134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
habitatint.2013.07.009
Prata, J., Silva, A., Walker, T., Duarte, A., & Rocha-Santos, T. (2020). COVID-19 pandemic reper￾cussions on the use and management of plastics. Environmental Science & Technology, 54(13), 
7760–7765. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c02178
Qu, S., Guo, Y., Ma, Z., Chen, W. Q., Liu, J., Liu, G., et al. (2019). Implications of China’s for￾eign waste ban on the global circular economy. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 144, 
252–255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.01.004
Rocha-Santos, T., Costa, M., & Mouneyrac, C. (Eds.). (2020). Handbook of microplastics in the 
environment (pp. 1–23). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-10618-8_26-1
Schurman-Grenier, C. (2019). Plastic pollution as a violation of the right to a healthy environment 
in the African Charter of Human and People’s Rights. McGill Centre for Human Rights and 
Legal Pluralism, Working Paper Series 7:1. https://www.mcgill.ca/humanrights/fles/human￾rights/ihri_v7_2019_shurman-grenier.pdf
Smith, A. (2017). Micro plastics and their implications for human health: An environmen￾tal justice approach. ENV 334 Environmental Justice, 3. https://digitalcommons.salve.edu/
env334_justice/3
Stoett, P., & Omrow, D. (2021). Spheres of transnational ecoviolence: Environnmental crime, 
human secuirty, and justice. Palgrave Macmillan.
Stoett, P., & Vince, J. (2019). The plastic-climate nexus: Linking science, policy, and justice. In 
P. Harris (Ed.), Climate change and ocean governance: Politics and policy for threatened seas
(pp. 345–361). Cambridge University Press.
Stoett, P., & Vince, J. (2021). The marine debris nexus: Plastic, climate change, biodiversity and 
human health. In B. Siebenhuner & R. Djalante (Eds.), Adaptiveness: Changing earth system 
governance (pp. 83–101). Cambridge University Press.
Sullivan, L. (2020). How big oil misled the pubic into believing plastic would be 
recycled. National Public Radio. https://www.npr.org/2020/09/11/897692090/
how-big-oil-misled-the-public-into-believing-plastic-would-be-recycled
UNEP  – United Nations Environment Programme. (2009). Marine Litter: A global chal￾lenge. UNEP.
UNEP – United Nations Environment Programme. (2012). The honolulu strategy: A global frame￾work for prevention and management of marine debris. Available at: https://wedocs.unep.org/
handle/20.500.11822/10670
UNEP  – United Nations Environment Programme. (2019). Marine plastic litter in East Asian 
Seas: Gender, human rights and economic dimensions. Coordinating Body on the Seas of East 
Asia, and Stockholm Environment Institute. UNEP.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (2022). What do plastics have to do with cli￾mate change? https://stories.undp.org/what-do-plastics-have-to-do-with-climate-change
P. Stoett15
United Nations Environment Assembly (UNEA). (2022). Resolution adopted by the United 
Nations Environment Assembly on 2 March 2022. End plastic pollution: Towards an interna￾tional legally binding instrument. UNEP/EA.5/L.23/Rev.1.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). (2021a). Neglected: Environmental justice 
impacts of marine litter and plastic pollution, Nairobi. https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/han￾dle/20.500.11822/35417/EJIPP.pdf
United Nations Environment Programme. (2021b). From pollution to solution: A global assess￾ment of marine litter and plastic pollution, Nairobi. https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/han￾dle/20.500.11822/36963/POLSOL.pdf
Wakunuma, K. (2021). Plastic waste is hurting women in developing coun￾tries  – But there are ways to stop it. Conversations. https://theconversation.com/
plastic-waste-is-hurting-women-in-developing-countries-but-there-are-ways-to-stop-it-166596
Wang, J., et al. (2019). High levels of microplastic pollution in the sediments and benthic organ￾isms of the South Yellow Sea, China. Science of the Total Environment, 651:2, 1661–1669, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.10.007
Wen, Z., Xie, Y., Chen, M., & Dinga, C. D. (2021). China’s plastic import ban increases pros￾pects of environmental impact mitigation of plastic waste trade fow worldwide. Nature 
Communications, 12(1), 1–9.
Williams, M., Gower, R., Green, J., Whitebread, E., Lenkiewicz, Z., & Schröder, P. (2019). No time 
to waste: Tackling the plastic pollution crisis before it’s too late. Tearfund. https://opendocs.
ids.ac.uk/opendocs/bitstream/handle/20.500.12413/14490/J32121_No_time_to_waste_web.
pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Wittmer, J. (2021). “We live and we do this work”: Women waste pickers’ experiences of well￾being in Ahmedabad, India. World Development, 140, 105253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
worlddev.2020.105253
Wolfe, P. (2006). Settler colonialism and the elimination of the native. Journal of Genocide 
Research, 8(4), 387–409.
Yalwaji, B., John-Nwagwu, H. O., & Sogbanmu, T. O. (2022). Plastic pollution in the environment 
in Nigeria: A rapid systematic review of the sources, distribution, research gaps and policy 
needs. Scientifc African, 16, e01220.
Zamboni, N. S., et al. (2021). Unfolding differences in the distribution of coastal marine ecosys￾tem services values among developed and developing countries. Ecological Economics, 189, 
107151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2021.107151
Plastic Waste Colonialism: A Typology of Global Toxicity© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 17
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_2
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste 
or a Resource?
Mapping and Characterising the Waste Trade 
Regime
Harriet Freeman
Introduction
The concept of waste is intensely familiar to us; it is something we meet every day. 
Although to defne exactly what makes something ‘waste’ is far from obvious. The 
transboundary trading of waste has been governed at the global level for three 
decades – with governance scope increasing by the year. From the outset in the 
1980s, the impetus for global waste trade governance has been to signifcantly 
restrict and control the export of ‘hazardous’ waste streams, primarily to developing 
countries. Yet, this mandate is no longer clear because the normative interpretation 
of various wastes as ‘good’ or ‘bad’ – for us, for the environment – appears to be 
inconsistent across contemporary transnational governing entities. This is despite 
these entities all mutually governing under the logics of circular economy and sus￾tainable development. Whether waste is a risk, resource or livelihood is simply not 
apparent. Thus, whether waste trade is dangerous or advantageous is not apparent 
either (Barsalou & Picard, 2018; Lepawsky, 2017). Such confusion has escalated at 
a time when the waste trade regime – as with the climate change, forestry and other 
environmental regimes  – has mushroomed in terms of quantity and diversity of 
governing actors and instruments at the global institutional level (Kleinschmit et al., 
2009). Meanwhile, evidence suggests cross-border waste fows (particularly illegal 
waste fows) that cause danger to humans and the environment have never been so 
‘prosperous’ (Kellenberg & Levinson, 2014:139; Kellenberg, 2015:111; O’Neill, 
2019; Wheeler, 2019). A study understanding the contemporary waste trade regime 
at the global level thus seems urgent if we are to understand how such activity is 
continuing in spite of extensive transnational governance. However, although much 
H. Freeman (*) 
International Relations Department, London School of Economics, London, UK 
Commercial, Notpla Ltd, London, UK18
academic energy has been poured into systemically understanding other environ￾mental regimes and their recently accelerated complexity, the waste trade regime 
has been neglected. This is both puzzling and troubling. As part of this book’s 
attempt to rectify the literature’s defciency, this chapter lays the requisite ground￾work for a thorough insight into the contemporary waste trade regime and future 
research into the ‘effciency’ of transnational waste trade governance (De Vos et al., 
2013). Following Biermann et al.’s (2009) notable contribution to environmental 
regime literature, I undertake two research endeavours to understand which public 
and private treaties, agreements, regulatory standards, operational/fnancing activi￾ties and data collection/sharing bodies constitute the waste trade regime and what 
kind of relationship these institutional elements have with one another.
Specifcally, I ask:
Research Q1 How ‘fragmented’ is the waste regime structure? In other words, 
what is the diversity, quantity and intra-regime coordination of a regime’s constitut￾ing governance bodies?
Research Q2 Is the waste trade regime more synergistic or conficting in its overall 
approach to governance?
Respectively, a mapping exercise and a characterisation process are used to 
answer these questions. Greater regime fragmentation does not necessarily cause 
greater intra-regime confict (Young, 2011:19856). Hence, there is a need to follow 
the frst research activity with the latter. Both research activities have been applied 
to the climate change (Biermann et al., 2009; Abbott, 2012a) and forestry regimes 
(Fernández-Blanco et al., 2019). I posit these frameworks are suffciently adaptable 
to carry out an assessment on a different environmental regime, which has nonethe￾less been party to the same paradigmatic shift of governance structures at the global 
level (Abbott, 2012b). The desire to identify and exploit potential gains from better 
management of decentralised governance entities is an important rationale for map￾ping and characterising a contemporary environmental regime. To go a step further, 
I pursue such a study to also shed light on the oft-overlooked yet distinctly political 
and fractious nature of common-place ‘environmentalisms’ – such as circular econ￾omy and sustainable development (Hajer & Versteeg, 2005:176). By surfacing gov￾erning actors’ interests and ideas, I show that a lot of normative fragmentation 
between governance entities lies behind these ostensible ‘consensus concepts’ 
(Mert, 2009).
I make the following hypotheses:
1. Contemporary global waste trade governance cannot be fully understood as it 
stands without a comprehensive account of the regime’s structure and an analy￾sis of the interplay of regime elements’ ideas and interests.
2. There are suffcient similarities between environmental regimes to deem Abbott’s 
(2012a) transnational regime complex and Fernández-Blanco et  al.’s (2019) 
intra-regime characterisation frameworks suitable for my research on the waste 
trade regime.
H. Freeman19
3. Global waste trade governance can be defned as a transnational regime complex 
with some level of confict between the many regime elements, giving way to 
inconsistent waste defnitions and waste trade control. Confict may be hidden 
by different elements using the same broad environmental narratives.
This research explores each hypothesis in turn, with a conclusion giving refec￾tions on their holding power. The next section gives a short history of the global 
waste trade, followed by a briefng on the literature this research is building from 
and adding to, before engaging with my research endeavours.
Waste Trade Motivations and Its Governance: Then and Now
I think the economic logic behind dumping a load of toxic waste in the lowest-wage country 
is impeccable and we should face up to that…I’ve always thought that countries in Africa 
are vastly under polluted; their air quality is probably vastly ineffciently low compared to 
Los Angeles… Just between you and me, shouldn’t the World Bank be encouraging more 
migration of the dirty industries to the Least Developed Countries?
Lawrence Summers, confdential World Bank memo, 12/12/1991 (Nixon, 2011:1)
Wastes, born locally, can be separated from their locale of consumption and pro￾duction and shipped globally. Hence, a local environmental phenomenon becomes 
a global one; a local pollutant becomes a global pollutant.
Waste fows across borders are relentless and increasing, as developed countries 
continue their heated scramble for waste management solutions – a pattern begin￾ning in the 1970s (Hurley, 2016). Wealthy nations, in building stricter environmen￾tal standards, started inadvertently incentivising waste exports at a time when the 
cost of and barriers to international transport, communication and trade were declin￾ing (O’Neill, 2000:34–36). Wastes that were causing national trouble via proft￾friendly management methods (e.g. burying of industrial wastes in the case of Love 
Canal, New York, 1984: Dorsner, 2018) could now disappear from national borders 
entirely. Some of these exports, of extremely hazardous nature, travelled to poorer 
nations’ shores, causing a string of much-publicized events. The most famous is the 
1986 Khian Sea Incident where the US exported 14,000 tons of ash from waste 
incinerators initially to the Bahamas. The ash waste ended up dumped in Haiti – 
labelled as ‘fertiliser’ – as well as the Atlantic and Indian Ocean, after continued 
foreign import rejections (Howard, 1990:224).
It was the uproar of civil society organisations (CSOs) in response to Khian Sea 
and other waste disasters which pressured states and international bodies to form the 
frst and still the most comprehensive international platform for governing the 
global waste trade: The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary 
Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal (Basel) under UNEP. Basel 
entered into legal force in 1992 – coinciding with UN’s historical Rio Earth Summit. 
Geared with the principal aim of safeguarding developing countries from hazardous 
waste imports, North-South dichotomies were frmly entrenched in Basel’s 
DNA. Nonetheless, today the developed world generates over 10 times more waste 
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?20
Fig. 1 Annual tons of global waste (for disposal, recycling and reuse) traded internationally 
(1992–2012) (Kellenberg, 2015:111)
per capita than the developing world (SBC, 2018:7) with much of it still ending up 
in the global South (Kellenberg & Levinson, 2014:139; Kellenberg, 2015:111; 
O’Neill, 2019; Wheeler, 2019). Figure 1 below illustrates such.
Interestingly, within multilateral policymaking, hazardous waste is one of the 
isolated materials that has seen strong emphasis to reduce trade rather than encour￾age it (Baggs, 2009:1). Yet, more recently, this call for reduced trade has been 
diluted by many competing interests.
Waste trade and its governance has changed dramatically over the recent years, 
not least a factor of contemporary patterns of globalisation and urbanisation. The 
waste trade regime, similar to other environmental regimes, now appears to be a 
diverse and ‘fragmented’ nexus of corporate social responsibility initiatives, 
industry-CSO partnerships and public-private market solutions (O’Neill, 2019). 
However, a substantial commonality across this nexus appears in the ubiquitous 
touting of sustainable development (meeting human development goals, sustaining 
natural systems and growing the economy) and circular economy (CE) logic 
(designing out waste and pollution by keeping products and materials in use) 
(Linnér, 2006; Gregson et al., 2015).
At the same time, there is evidence to suggest that a much greater diversity and 
volume of (legal and illegal) waste trade has been occurring in keeping with higher 
rates of waste generation. Indeed, a ‘new global waste economy’ has surfaced 
(O’Neill, 2019:5). From big multinational companies to small-scale trash pickers, 
hordes of actors now have direct economic interests in further extending and deep￾ening waste supply chains. Waste Management Inc., one of the largest global com￾panies engaged purely in waste management, generated US$14.8 billion in 2017, 
ranking 549  in Forbes’ Global 2000 list of top public companies in the world 
H. Freeman21
(ibid:58). Used plastics and electronics are no longer seen as destined only for dis￾posal but to secure multiple ‘afterlives’ in ‘circular’ productive use – an industry 
input perhaps, or converted into energy.
Whilst the primary reason for shipping waste abroad has been traditionally 
rooted in cost effciency, two other motivations for waste trade are widely cited 
today: environment-effcient management and resource-effcient management and 
growth (Sembiring, 2019).
Cost-Effcient Management A large percentage of contemporary waste trade is 
constituted by mixed (not a single type, e.g. PVC and PE plastics), contaminated 
(not fully cleaned) and diffcult-to-recover waste loads, driven by comparative 
advantage-led reasoning (Jain, 2020). Such logic is made clear in Summers’ 1991 
‘confdential memo’: exporting to foreign nations with lower disposal costs allows 
parties to proft from regulatory, technical and wage differentials. Yet, under Basel 
law, such trade is illegal, compounded by a low social legitimacy of such logic 
(BFFP, 2019). Hence, much of this waste is exported under the guise of ‘recycla￾bles’ (illegally) to ostensibly maximise environment-effcient management 
(Jain, 2020).
Environment-Effcient Management As environmentalism has become a well￾embedded international norm (Falkner, 2012), a common reason cited for waste 
trade has been to secure the most ‘environmentally sound management’ (ESM) 
solution across regions (BRS, 2011). For example, superior waste management 
technology may exist in a different region (e.g. Sweden), or countries may band 
together to create joint management facilities to manage waste streams not large 
enough to justify independent facilities. However, to fnd such worked examples of 
this happening on the ground is rare. It is uncommon to see trade waste occurring 
driven by environment effciency over cost effciency (Puckett, 2020).
Resource-Effcient Management and Growth Developed nations, the core waste 
exporters (SBC, 2018:7), seek to engage in secondary materials markets (some 
remarkably prosperous), using waste as an industry to grow one’s own economy. To 
give an indication of the value of waste exports, all raw materials present in the 
electronic waste (e-waste) stream was circa $55 billion in 2016 (O’Neill, 2019:5). 
Simultaneously, waste imports are used to grow economies of developing, industri￾alising nations in providing a source of cheaper scarce raw materials and ‘green 
business’ (e.g. recycling, waste-sorting) opportunities. The latter element of this – 
promoting ‘inclusive and sustainable’ industrialization whilst reducing international 
inequality (SDGs 8, 9 & 10) – is often discussed as if it were the primary reason 
actors engage in waste exports (SBC, 2011; Oswald & Reller, 2011; Lepawsky, 2015).
What is now obvious is that waste does not have a ubiquitous character through 
space and time (Lepawsky, 2017). Exporting wastes can cause risk for human and 
environmental health over great distances, offer an additional source of raw materi￾als for industry and provide a livelihood to millions through the collecting, sorting, 
recycling and selling of valuable waste components.
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?22
Scholars and practitioners commonly understand that existing transboundary 
waste fow governance is (at the very least) ‘inadequate’, for one reason or another. 
The evidence cited for this varies, from illustrating resources and market ineffcien￾cies to degraded ecosystems (IPEN, n.d.) and even behaviours understood as 
Western colonialism (BAN, 2019a). However, there does seem to be a common tacit 
yet unexplored theory across many of these individuals and groups: waste trade 
governance is inadequate because the governance structure is fragmented and con￾ficting, giving way to conficting classifcation and control systems for waste 
(Kummer, 1994; Bontoux & Leone, 1997; O’Neill, 2019). Countering this though, 
simple intuition – as well as some scholars (Arts & Babili, 2013) – would suggest 
that with sustainable development and CE now promoted across waste governing 
bodies, this commonality should reduce intra-regime confict and promote 
synergism.
Isolated studies implicitly map the fragmentation of different various waste 
regimes, employing undeveloped methodology (Dauvergne, 2018: marine plastic 
waste; Ilankoon et al., 2018 and Lepawsky, 2015: e-waste; O’Neill, 2019: plastic, 
food and e-waste; Mulinaris, 2020: end-of-life ships). Nonetheless, no comprehen￾sive assessment qualifying the degree of fragmentation nor nature of this fragmenta￾tion in the transnational waste regime exists to make a judgment on the above 
either way.
International and Transnational Regime Literature
When international regimes became a focus in IR in the 1980s, it was Krasner’s 
institutionalist liberal understanding of them that marked the mainstream approach: 
an international regime is where rational (state) actors’ interests converge, under￾standings are shared, objectives are mutually met and coordination issues are over￾come (Krasner, 1983:2) Undermining the realist theoretical premise of a Hobbesian 
‘state of nature’ by which to understand relationships in international fora, a regime 
was commonly depicted as a voluntary, cooperative arena owning community￾esque characteristics.
Much contemporary regime research is still signifcantly infuenced by realist/
neorealist premises (Brown, 2001). Yet, literature has since signifcantly developed 
responding to the radical transformations which have occurred in global governance 
structures. Delineating ‘government’ the institution from ‘governance’ the process, 
James Rosenau (mid-1990s, rather precociously) defned the emergence of a new 
network of authority: ‘transnational governance’. This concept is used to depict 
global-level fora where industry, civil society organisations (CSOs), social move￾ments and epistemic communities govern alongside state entities, where a mixture 
of legal and non-legal instruments steer behaviour ‘in the crazy-quilt nature of mod￾ern interdependence’ (Rosenau, 1995:15).
IR has since invested much energy in developing a more granulated understand￾ing of the character and consequences of transnational governance regimes, now 
H. Freeman23
readily construed as a collection of social institutions that guide individuals’ behav￾iour affecting a given issue-area (Young & Osherenko, 1993:3). Given how many 
previously national affairs now constitute the concern of globally operating bodies, 
much regime literature now tends to focus on which issues are being dealt with in 
various regimes, delineating a regime’s boundaries by topic arena (Levy et al., 1995; 
Abbott, 2012a). Furthermore, many have dropped assumptions of cooperation, 
although without starting from neorealist premises that regimes are pure embodi￾ments of interstate power relations (Auld & Green, 2012). Instead, much literature 
has engaged with exploring the decentralised, non-state-directed construction of 
regimes as well as the notion that regimes can be sites of confict.
Hence, analysis of institutional diversity in global governance now dwells upon 
patterns and symptoms of complexity. A plethora of conceptualisations have arisen 
in the literature to patch together an understanding of decentralised governance 
structures.
For example, ‘regime clustering’ refers to proactive institutional merging 
(Oberthür, 2002); ‘treaty congestion’ depicts harm arising from multiple and over￾lapping agreements (Lukitsch-Hicks, 1999); and ‘polycentricity’ is used to advo￾cate decision-making and organisation at local scales (Ostrom, 2010). Most relevant 
to my research are the terms ‘fragmentation’ – decentralised and diverse institu￾tional structures (ILC, 2006) – and ‘regime complex’, loosely coupled institutional 
structures (Raustalia & Victor, 2004).
Environmental Regime Complex Literature
The regime complex framework is well recognised in IPE literature for depicting a 
regime’s level of fragmentation. It supports analysis into how growing interdepen￾dence between issues and institutions reshapes the structure and coherence of 
regimes, particularly environmental regimes (Kleinschmit et al., 2009:309; Keohane 
& Victor, 2011; Abbott, 2012a).
Raustalia and Victor (2004) introduced the ‘regime complex’ (RC) concept to 
describe a regime with signifcant fragmentation. They saw that rules made by insti￾tutions in one regime (e.g. intellectual property rights) were not ‘self-contained’ and 
are likely to ‘functionally overlap’ with rules made by institutions born in another 
regime (e.g. plant genetic resources). Yet, due to the uncoordinated nature of 
regimes’ inceptions, ‘agreements reached in one forum do not automatically extend 
to, or clearly trump, and agreements developed in other forums’ and hierarchical 
confict resolution may not exist (ibid:279–280).
Keohane and Victor (2011) embedded the RC framework in mainstream IPE 
environmental scholarship via its application to the climate change regime. They 
helpfully elucidate a contemporary environmental regime’s diversity of governance 
scope (e.g. multilateral, bilateral, regional), governance instruments (e.g. scientifc 
assessment, fnancial/capacity assistance, law, regulatory guidance), issue angles 
(e.g. technological, fnancial, social) and diversity of ‘overlap’ with other regimes 
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?24
forming the international response to a particular issue (e.g. nuclear, trade, 
development).
Abbott (2012a) further builds upon these two studies to appropriately emphasise 
the weighty contribution of non-state actors in regimes. Mirroring Rosenau’s (1995) 
use of the term, Abbott’s (2012a) RC framework is prefxed with ‘transnational’ to 
highlight the ‘messy’ nexus of state and non-state governance at the global level. 
This is a signifcant given regime literature that ‘typically casts nonstate actors as 
infuences on authority rather than as potential or actual authoritative agents’ 
(Conca, 2005:190), e.g. Betsill and Corell (2008).
Along with others (Giessen, 2013; Rayner et al., 2010), Fernández-Blanco et al. 
(2019) use the RC framework to map forest governance and extend Biermann et al.’s 
(2009) means of assessing the synergistic vs conficting nature of an RC. The antici￾pation of synergies and conficts arising from environmental regime fragmenta￾tion  – and their knock-on effects in governance  – has led many academics and 
practitioners in the last 20 years to invest a lot in understanding how to promote the 
former and eliminate the latter (Medvedieva et al., 2018). References to ‘win-win￾win’ synergism is commonplace in mainstream international institutions (e.g. WTO, 
UN) in the context of environmental policy (Linnér, 2006:279). Synergies can be 
understood in a limited, technocratic manner (e.g. cross-organisational savings 
from sharing administrative and organisational burdens). Much scholarship though – 
such as Fernández-Blanco et al. (2019) – tends to understand synergies more holis￾tically as complementarities between governance approaches.
Fernández-Blanco et al. (2019) successfully depart from scholarship’s tendency 
to (rather bluntly) assess the overall character of an RC (Biermann et al., 2009) and 
instead comprehensively characterise each inter-regime relationship within the 
complex. This micro-lens approach promotes the accuracy and theoretical nuance 
of synergistic vs conficting regime evaluations and is novel in the literature 
(Fernández-Blanco et al., 2019:187). Furthermore, this paper briefy but crucially 
touches upon how mainstream environmental narratives can shroud true confict 
within a regime. However, this study is insuffciently developed to explore the 
implications of discourse on inter-regime relationships.
Discourses in Environmental Governance Literature
Political ecology, alongside a smattering of constructivist-leaning IPE scholars, 
does well bringing discourse to the analysis of intra-regime relationships, where 
discourse is widely understood as the ‘ensemble of ideas, concepts and categories 
through which meaning is given to social and physical phenomena’ (Hajer & 
Versteeg, 2005:175). In Foucauldian style, it is recognised that environmental pol￾icy is a site ripe for discourse analysis, given such regimes are ‘sites of linguistic 
contestation’, suasion, exclusion and societal ‘education’ on why an environmental 
phenomenon is of concern (Gellers, 2015:484–488). Contestation exists around 
winning the dominant ‘framing’ of a particular issue, documented extensively in 
H. Freeman25
environmental negotiation literature (Woolcock & Bayne, 2016), because discourse 
is a powerful precursor to policy prescriptions (Litfn, 1994:37; Hajer & 
Versteeg, 2005).
Some studies paint an optimistic picture of proliferating ‘greening’ discourses 
such as sustainable development, proposing that the widespread institutional adop￾tion of these narratives induces institutional cohesion and synergism (Giessen, 
2013:65). Arts and Babili’s (2013) assessment of the forest RC adopts this reasoning.
In contrast, Backstrand and Lovbrand (2006) take a more nuanced approach and 
look beyond ‘central narratives’. They illustrate how there are signifcant ‘lines of 
confict between discursive framings’ amongst transnational institutions governing 
climate change (ibid:67). They propose that institutions’ core interests and ideas are 
refected in the specifc discursive framings they adopt to problematize a phenom￾enon. For example, the institutionalised ‘Ecological Modernisation’ discourse rep￾resents interests and ideas focused on ‘fexible markets’ and cost-effective 
environmental problem-solving. This characterisation can confict with ‘Civic 
Environmentalism’, which focuses on building participatory and equitable environ￾mental governance structures (ibid:52–57). These authors posit that tracing institu￾tionalised framings that are ‘overlapping’ (synergistic) and ‘competing’ (conficting) 
gives us a solid illustration of how climate change governing organisations support 
or undermine one another’s approaches (ibid:50).
Theoretical Framework: A Transnational Waste Trade 
Regime Complex Plus Discourse
Mapping the Waste Trade Regime
Environmental RC complex literature and constructivist insights form the bedrock 
of my theoretical framework.
For the frst part of my research, I use Abbott’s (2012a) extended RC framework 
to map the degree of fragmentation in the waste trade regime.
Abbott’s (2012a) classifcation of a transnational RC is useful in specifying the 
‘complexity’ of a regime’s structure by looking at the regime’s institutional ele￾ments (i.e. the regime’s ‘building blocks’).
Specifcally:
• Are governance operations diverse and shared amongst multiple-state and non￾state organizations?
• Do a signifcant number of institutional elements hold their origin in different 
issue-areas outside that of the regime’s?
• Is governance decentralized with little, if any, central coordination?
• These three criteria analytically identifying a transnational RC are broadly rec￾ognised in the literature.
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?26
Scholars researching whether decentralised environmental regimes are ‘eff￾cient’ (i.e. impactful) often use RC framework to proxy fragmentation (Hulme, 
2010; Cole, 2011; Orts, 2011; Young, 2011). Some advocate that given existing 
world politics, an environmental issue will be managed most optimally at the global 
level by a regime exhibiting many (Falkner et al., 2010) if not all (Keohane & Victor, 
2011) RC characteristics.
Yet, before drawing inferences about a transnational regime complex and the 
effciency of its governance, it is vital to understand the relationships that character￾ise the regime (Biermann et al., 2009). Fragmentation does not necessarily beget 
inconsistent and patchy governance (Young, 2011:19856), hence the necessity of 
the second part of my research.
Characterising the Waste Trade’s Intra-regime Relationships
For the second part of my research, I employ aspects of Fernández-Blanco et al.’s 
(2019) theoretical approach to assessing the regime’s character at the micro-level, 
confguring a measure of synergism vs confict for each institutional element’s rela￾tionship to one another. Two limitations of the paper need addressing though.
Firstly, although there is an attempt by the authors to reach beyond the traditional 
assumption in regime literature that institutions constituting the regime are inter￾nally synergistic in terms of their goals, they do not set any social context when 
identifying institutional elements that internally confict (ibid:197). This is because 
the authors do not come from the ontological premise that institutions themselves 
are multi-actor social settings pregnant with different interests and ideas, causing 
goals to be continually redefned. Yet, this has been widely shown to be evident and 
signifcant (Betsill & Corell, 2008; Mert, 2009:329). Regimes and IEs have a mul￾titude of competing ‘script-writers’ (Mert, 2009). This may cause elements to 
become internally self-contradictory in their governance approach, or at least refect 
a more ambiguous approach. The determination of an element’s relationship to 
other elements is therefore much less straightforward than is put by Fernández￾Blanco et al. (2019).
Secondly, this paper briefy explores how environmental narratives can shroud 
true confict within a regime (ibid:199–200). Yet the authors leave such important 
analysis undeveloped, turning a blind eye to the wealth of discourse analysis in 
environmental policy research. ‘Various studies have shown how distinct actors 
exercise power through trying to impose a particular frame or discourse… in envi￾ronmental policy-making’ (Hajer & Versteeg, 2005:177). Hence, it is imperative 
that my research is rooted in the understanding that knowledge is not a way to 
objectively make our real world comprehensible, as positivists would have it. An 
actor’s framing of waste and the waste trade – whether or how it’s an issue – refects 
principled and casual beliefs and interests (Goldstein & Keohane, 1993). A frame 
can be deployed strategically, to garner legitimacy by aligning with contemporary 
H. Freeman27
norms. It also delimits policy options that may go against actors’ political and mate￾rial interests (Humphreys, 2009:319).
For example, defning different waste streams as ‘hazardous’ or ‘non-hazardous’ 
has enormous implications for the value and/or viability of industrial production 
and (potentially very proftable) international trade fows – as well as the well-being 
of the millions across the world working in waste management (O’Neill, 2019:2; 
Puckett, 2020). Thus, waste’s institutionalised defnition has far-reaching repercus￾sions for broader international equity, economy and environment concerns – the 
classical IR tension (Young, 2016; Linner). Recognising this, we can see how and 
why environmental governance ‘is not just an issue concerning the relationship 
between humans and nature but also an issue where people exercise power over 
other people’ (Slaughter, 2005:217).
In sum of the insights above, we can see that by critically observing an IE’s gov￾erning discourse and how it problematizes waste and the waste trade, we may get a 
better sense of an IE’s broader interests and ideas. It is these broader interests and 
ideas which form an IEs’ governing approach. Hence, following Backstrand and 
Lovbrand (2006), I posit that by locating an IE’s broader interests and ideas, one can 
locate an IE’s governing character and can from there assess how synergistic or 
conficting it is with others.
Methodology
Mapping the Waste Trade Regime
To begin mapping the waste trade regime, I seek to identify each institutional ele￾ment constituting the regime. This is to gauge the regime’s fragmentation using 
Abbott’s (2012a) RC framework.
For this identifcation process, I use a three-step method, to supply rigour and 
lessen any potential selection bias. The waste trade regime’s ‘institutional elements’ 
(IEs), which I use as my basic unit of analysis following Fernández-Blanco et al. 
(2019), I specifcally defne public and/or private treaties, agreements, regulatory 
standards, operational activities, and data collection and sharing bodies, which sig￾nifcantly contribute to waste trade governance, operating at multilateral or regional 
levels. Governance is understood along constructivist lines, where norms and dis￾course play signifcant ‘steering’ roles on ‘the governed’ – alongside formal law 
(Appelstrand et al., 2012).
Following Fernández-Blanco et  al.’s (2019) attempt to capture the forestry 
regime in time, July 2020 was established to represent the most contemporary snap￾shot frame of the waste trade regime. This is to include the regime’s developments 
over 2019 and 2020 such as Basel’s amendments (Norwegian Amendment from 
4/5/2019, Basel Ban Amendment from 5/12/2019) and actors’ responses to such 
(e.g. EU’s ‘Delegated Regulation’ outlining EU’s intention not to fully implement 
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?28
Norwegian Amendment’s new trade controls on diffcult-to-recycle plastics within 
the EU: GAIA, 2020). Such developments are emblematic of contemporary waste 
trade governance.
To begin with, I review core academic, institutional and media articles discussing 
waste trade governance entities (e.g. O’Neill, 2019; Kaza et al., 2018; Dauvergne, 
2018; Kellenberg & Levinson, 2014; www.ban.org).
Secondly, in order to critically assess secondary-source materials and bring per￾spectives beyond websites, I then triangulate my fndings with semi-structured 
video interviews through July 2020 with core academic, institutional and media 
representatives in waste trade governance: Rolph Payet (Seychellois UN Executive 
Secretary for the Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Convention); Jim Puckett 
(Canadian Founder & Director of BAN); Kate O’Neill (American IR academic; 
expertise in waste governance); Sedat Gündoğdu (Turkish IR academic; expertise in 
marine pollution); Angus Crawford (British BBC reporter; investigated UK exports 
of plastic waste in 2020); Nicola Mulinaris (Italian Communication and Policy 
Offcer; NGO Shipbreaking Platform).
Thirdly, I use Fernández-Blanco et al.’s (2019) method of focusing on the most 
comprehensive regime element – in the case of waste trade, Basel – and apply a 
qualitative content analysis of its structural organisation, reports and news, identify￾ing any additionally referenced entities ftting my defnition of an IE. This simulta￾neously allows me to develop an understanding of Basel’s relationships and the 
extent of hierarchy present in the regime.
Importantly, I ensure an openness to institutions which fall outside of how the 
waste trade regime is typically bounded (O’Neill, 2019) but which still maintain a 
signifcant direct or indirect effect on waste trade governance.
Characterising the Waste Trade Institutional Elements
The second half of the research aims to systematically characterise the relationship 
between each IE of the transnational waste trade regime to understand the extent to 
which the regime displays synergism or confict overall. My sources remain the 
same as in the Mapping the Waste Trade Regime section.
Adopting mainstream scholarship’s defnitions, I defne synergy as the presence 
of co-supportive normative ‘complementarities’ between IEs’ governance 
approaches (UNDP, 1997:3). Confict is the undermining of such (Linnér, 2006:280). 
To most fully capture IEs’ approaches, following Backstrand and Lovbrand (2006), 
I posit IEs’ approaches are most accurately defned by their ideas and interests with 
respect to global balances of equity, economy and environment. This is in light of 
the far-reaching implications of transnational waste governance into global soci￾ety’s well-being.
Hence, a thorough understanding of IEs themselves needs to be established 
before any judgment of their inter-relations can be made. As it stands, the most 
comprehensive study assessing relationships between governance entities in an 
H. Freeman29
environmental regime, Fernández-Blanco et al. (2019), is inadequate in laying down 
robust methodology to capture the essence of an IE. These authors only use only an 
element’s self-proclaimed ‘goals’ to defne its governance approach (ibid:192).
Finding this aspect of their methodology vague and insuffcient, I identify the 
following four core areas of an IE to assess:
• Mission statement and strategy
• Governance structure
• Reported activity and governance instruments
• Funding and other partnerships
These areas indicate how and why an element conjures and conducts authority 
much more fully than ‘goals’. Amongst other things, this extended scope will allow 
the ‘where, what and how’ of actor interests to be explored more accurately.
Moreover, Table 1 below serves to systematically assess the overall normative 
character of each IE according to four qualitative indicators with accompanying 
descriptions made relevant in preliminary analysis. These indicators are an attempt 
to proxy each elements’ general position on ‘the classical tension’. I also pay atten￾tion to the kind of subjectivities being given to various actors in elements’ gover￾nance activities to understand where action, responsibility and vulnerability is 
being dealt.
Crucially, I recognise how familiar and broad environmental frames can serve 
variegated governance approaches (Gellers, 2015:484–488), between and within 
IEs. Departing from mainstream regime literature, I recognise there are highly 
likely to be variations of interests and ideas within IEs; hence, I account for these 
variations and record the overall ‘net’ character of elements.
Table 1 An IE characterisation framework
Indicator Broad clusters of IE’s interests and ideas
Primary broad interests leading 
institution
Maximise economic and political utility
Maximise human and environmental health
Belief in the existence of a 
complementary symbiosis between 
trade, economic growth, 
environment, development and 
human well-being
Free-trade complements environmental and human 
well-being; CE is a feasible and morally correct way to 
alleviate current environment and human ills whilst 
generally maintaining status-quo proft maximisation
Lower international trade barriers can undermine 
environmental and human well-being; CE is not being 
actioned fast or extensively enough and may distract real 
ways to alleviate current environment and human ills; 
business operations need changing
Understanding of the state’s primary 
role in human-environment issues
Provide fnancial incentives and risk-reduction support 
for green business
Provide participatory multilateral regulation and strong 
global legal protections for most vulnerable
Understanding of the primary 
purpose of human-environment 
governance
Matter of addressing the lack of resource and market 
effciency
Matter of addressing lack of environmental and social 
justice
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?30
These steps to thoroughly characterise IEs will require undertaking discourse 
analysis when interpreting my sources. I undertake a Foucauldian approach to such, 
informed by Hajer and Versteeg (2005), and observe the sources listed in the 
Mapping the Waste Trade Regime section for textual regularities, techno-scientifc 
language, emotive/exaggerated language, contradictory language and moralising 
language.
Characterising the Waste Trade’s Intra-regime Relationships
Having rigorously assessed the nature of the constitutive elements of the waste trade 
regime, I can then use these holistic architectures of IEs to accurately translate how 
compatible their specifc governing rules, prescriptions and conduct are with one 
another. Hence, the data I collected from the Characterising the Waste Trade 
Institutional Elements section is directly used to make this part’s assessment.
Thus, I am measuring both potential and active relationships between elements 
based on the knowledge and narratives they choose to steer with, almost regardless 
of which waste domain their governance has an infuence on. How a set of wastes is 
controlled by an institution is one facet of a much greater ‘storyline’ replete with 
principled and causal beliefs that set strong normative visions of how the world 
should work. The Characterising the Waste Trade Institutional Elements section is 
an attempt to unveil which storyline of ‘reality’ the IE adheres to.
Loosely following Biermann et al. (2009), Fernández-Blanco et al. (2019) and 
Abbott’s (2012a) methods, I classify an element-element relationship using the 
terms ‘synergistic’ and ‘confictive’. The relationships are symmetrically inter￾preted, meaning A’s relationship with B will be the same as B’s relationship with 
A. Departing from previous studies however, I reject binary characterizations of IEs 
and international regimes – as strictly synergistic or confictive – and instead use a 
scale of 1–5 to depict such.
This gives a more nuanced, fne-grained understanding of IE interactions as well 
as allowing for the ‘push and pull’ fows between heterogeneous interests and ideas 
within IEs. IEs do not simply represent one coherent set of interests and ideas; 
hence, their engagement with other IEs do not represent a black or white, synergis￾tic’ or ‘confictive’, relationship (Table 2).
Table 2 Interpreting 
the intra-regime 
relationship scores
Relationship score Interpretation of score
1 No areas of synergism; mutually 
undermining
2 Minimal synergism; mutually undermining
3 Neither synergistic nor undermining
4 Mutual synergism; minimal undermining
5 Very strong mutual synergism; no 
undermining
H. Freeman31
Results
Mapping the Transnational Waste Trade Regime Complex
Above, I engage in mapping and characterising the waste trade regime, estimating 
frst the level of fragmentation and secondly the degree of synergism vs confict 
present. Here, I lay the results in turn.
My mapping results show that the waste trade regime is constituted from 32 IEs 
and exhibits a number of structural qualities, which qualify it to be understood as a 
transnational RC.  These results are displayed in Figs.  2 and 3 and Table  3 in 
Appendix 1.
Figures 2 and 3 represent my identifcation of all public and private treaties, 
agreements, regulatory standards, operational activities, and data collection and 
sharing bodies, which signifcantly contribute to waste trade governance, operating 
at multilateral or regional levels. Where a governance entity has more than one rel￾evant specifc agreement, guideline or activity governing the waste trade (see col￾umn C, Table 3), they are understood as one IE for my analysis. This pragmatic 
representation follows Fernández-Blanco et al. (2019). For example, the EU has 
multiple agreements, guidelines and activities, which seek to infuence actors’ 
behaviours in waste management, such as the 2006 Waste Shipment Regulation, 
2018 EU plastic strategy, 2019 Single Use Plastics Directive and the 2013 EU Ship 
Recycling Regulation. In aggregate, they sum to the EU’s net governance approach 
to waste management and trade.
Fig. 2 Mapping the institutional elements in the waste trade regime
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?32
Fig. 3 Mapping the institutional elements in the waste trade regime
To add detail, over one-third of IEs are non-state governed (Fig. 2). Furthermore, 
60% of today’s governing institutions were created in the last 20 years and 84% in 
the last 30 years. WTO/GATT is the oldest IE, followed by UDHR at 70+ years. In 
contrast, EMF has only been operating relevant governing activities for 2 years.
In terms of transboundary waste governance activities, there appear to be a wide 
variety across the regime, with the exception of legally binding rule making by any 
non-state actor:
• Creating rules to limit waste trade
• Monitoring policy uptake
• Establishing reuse and recycling facilities of a standard consistent with ESM
• Adjudicating rule contravention (formally or via name-and-shame)
• Providing credible research and insight into waste trade and, more generally, 
waste management dangers and options (for public, scientists, policymakers)
• Monitoring and measuring global waste trade fows
• Supporting industrial design for CE
In fact, 72% of IEs govern without legal instruments.
In addition, most IEs’ governance concerns wastes in general. When there is a 
particularistic focus, e-waste is subject to the most IE governance, followed by plas￾tic and chemical and lastly end-of-life ships. This pattern mimics the degree of 
Western-public attention devoted to waste types – not their degree of potential risk. 
To answer the frst criteria for transnational RC identifcation:
H. Freeman33
1. Are governance operations shared among multiple state and non-state organiza￾tions? Yes.
With regard to assessing the diversity of elements that are predominately dedi￾cated to issue felds outside of waste management and waste trade, Fig. 3 clearly 
shows that 14/32 institutional elements have a more predominant membership in 
‘separate’ regimes: human rights, climate change, marine pollution, trade in general 
and (sustainable) development. To thus answer the second framework criteria,
2. Do a signifcant number of institutional elements hold their origin in a variety of 
different issue-area outside that of the regime? Yes.
These governance entities may appear at a distance from waste trade issues. Yet, 
each has a signifcant and important bearing on waste management and trade. 
Looking frst at those which originate in the human and labour rights regime – the 
1948. UN Universal Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR), the International 
Labour Organisation (ILO), Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives (GAIA) 
and the Centre for International Environmental Law (CIEL) – these elements are 
pertinent to the stream of human and labour rights abuses endemic to illegal waste 
fows and ‘dumping’ in less-developed countries. UDHR’s Article 23 declares the 
right to ‘just and favourable conditions of work…worthy of human dignity’, whilst 
Article 7 declares the right of freedom from discrimination. Both apply strongly to 
the issue of life-threatening working environments for millions disproportionately 
located in less-developed countries involved in unregulated waste collection, scrap 
extraction and recycling industries. Alternatively, the ILO has dedicated specifc 
resources in the last decade to undertaking waste-worker research and creating 
novel regulation guidelines (e.g. 2012 paper, ‘The global impact of e-waste: address￾ing the challenge’) as well as hosting global forums (The Global Dialogue Forum 
on Decent Work in the Management of Electrical and Electronic Waste, 2019). 
Additionally, as an anti-incinerator alliance of over 800 grassroots groups from all 
over the world, GAIA specifcally supports recycling workers and waste-picker 
rights through bottom-up knowledge regulatory guidance dissemination.
Next, the World Bank (WB) and WTO are immensely infuential in defning 
international development and trade objectives, respectively. They directly fuel the 
debate as to whether reuse and recycling centres in developing countries positively 
and sizeably (or have the potential to) contribute to local GDP – or stunt a country’s 
human development. The WB nor WTO has engaged signifcantly in governance 
specifcally tailored to waste trade or waste management, yet their enormous pres￾ence and extended genealogy in international policy means that their mere existence 
has conspicuous repercussions on the global political imagination (Conca, 
2000:488). WTO’s predecessor, GATT, enshrines the right to erect trade barriers for 
environmental reasons (Article 20), whilst both overwhelmingly operate to the logic 
of comparative advantage – where is the cheapest to manage waste? – and the liberal 
norm of non-interference in market activity. Hence, almost all waste trade is actively 
condoned and facilitated rather than barred (Slaughter, 2005:210).
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?34
Such free-market logic is embedded in the ever-renewing UN agenda on sustain￾able development (UNSD) similarly prolifc in the global policy feld. Agenda 21, 
established at the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development, set an 
overall target in Chapter 20 of ‘preventing or minimizing the generation of hazard￾ous wastes as part of an overall integrated cleaner production approach’. This theme 
is carried through to today’s UN SDGs, a number of which seek to meet waste 
management issues. SDG 12, ‘ensure sustainable consumption and production pat￾terns’ does not set any target for reducing global waste production though; only a 
target for increased national recycling rates by 2030 is set (UN, n.d.-a).
The Cotonou Agreement (CA) between EU and African, Caribbean and Pacifc 
Group of States also originates in the (sustainable) development regime. The CA, 
active since 2003, is ‘the most comprehensive partnership agreement between 
developing countries and the EU’ based on development, economic and trade coop￾eration (EUR-Lex, n.d.-a). Only vaguely nodding to waste management, CA in 
Article 32 proclaims loyalty to the ‘protection and sustainable utilisation and man￾agement of natural resources … taking into account issues relating to the transport 
and disposal of hazardous wastes’ (ibid). CA is necessarily of great signifcance to 
waste trade patterns, if not directly, given the CA (along with EU policy represented 
here) institutionalises the way the EU balances equity, economy and environment in 
their relationship with developing nations. Waste trade data, whilst very hard to col￾lect accurately, suggests a signifcant proportion of EU waste (e.g. electronic, plas￾tic, ships) fows to ACP and Asian nations (Nordbrand, 2009:7; Lewis, 2010; SBP, 
n.d.-a; Pratt, 2011; UNU, 2015). The CA has not outlawed such though, whilst the 
EU’s Waste Shipment Regulation has.
Many IEs illustrated here govern with a stated objective to reduce marine pollu￾tion (given current media focus on the issue) although the only IE predominantly 
dedicated to such is UNEP’s 2013 Global Partnership on Marine Litter (GPLM). 
This partnership’s governance scope signifcantly extends to the waste trade and 
waste management arena by seeking to maximise resource-from-waste effciency 
and further spread CE ‘knowledge’.
Contrastingly, IEs barely govern with a stated objective to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions as part of waste management governance, despite many proclaiming the 
need for a ‘life cycle’ governance approach. Waste (e.g. electronic, plastic, ships, 
chemical) contains high levels of embodied carbon due to the objects’ associated 
resource extraction, production and transportation processes (Cole et al., 2019:417; 
Lepawsky, 2017). Even the central pillar of transnational climate change gover￾nance, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 
seems to make no apparent connection between greenhouse gas emissions and 
waste management and trade activities. This lack of governance matters consider￾ably as the UNFCCC is highly infuential in framing what is and is not a climate 
change issue (Abbott, 2012a:581).
Lastly, there are waste trade regime elements originating in chemical gover￾nance: the International Pollutants Elimination Network (IPEN) and the trio of UN 
H. Freeman35
chemical conventions which IPEN works to improve – Stockholm (SC), Rotterdam 
(ROC) and Minamata (MC). Each of the four elements work to improve and control 
the production, use, disposal and trading of various chemicals – Stockholm dealing 
specifcally with persistent organic pollutants and Minamata with Mercury.
I aim to highlight in both Figs. 2 and 3 that I found the waste trade regime to be 
very loosely and sporadically structured around Basel as the ‘coordinator’. In these 
fgures, the proximity of an element to Basel is roughly mapping the strength of 
their institutionalised ties to Basel, relative to other elements.
In theory, just as the WTO is seen as hierarchically superior to regional trade 
agreements, so too could Basel – ‘the most comprehensive multilateral environmen￾tal agreement on hazardous and other wastes’ (SBC, n.d.) – be seen as hierarchically 
superior to regional implementations of Basel (Abbott, 2012a:581). The core 
regional implementations are CAC, EU, OECD, WC and BAC. They lift much of 
Basel’s language and principles (e.g. Prior Informed Consent (PIC), ESM) and (on 
paper) pursue the same broad goals as Basel: reduced waste production and con￾trolled hazardous waste trade. Basel also encourages the creation of alternative mul￾tilateral, regional or bilateral governing bodies for the waste trade under the premise 
that they are at least as ambitious as Basel’s rules.
Furthermore, since 2012 Basel, Stockholm and Rotterdam have deliberately 
‘clustered’ (Levy et al., 1995). The Ad Hoc Joint Working Group on enhancing 
cooperation and coordination between these conventions recognized that the coor￾dinated hosting of Conference of the Parties could help promote a life-cycle 
approach to the management of chemicals and wastes and strengthen their capacity 
building efforts.
Yet overall, coordination – especially of the hierarchical nature – remains weak. 
Most transnational schemes have weak or very weak ties with Basel. Additionally, 
the regional implementations have substantial fexibility for national/regional inter￾pretations of waste, hazardousness and ESM facilities (Puckett, 2020).
Hence, as is found in the climate change and forestry regimes, ‘there is no strong 
mechanism for ordering the fragmented array of transnational schemes’ nor ‘resolv￾ing any rule inconsistencies’ in the waste trade regime (Abbott, 2012a:581; 
Fernández-Blanco et al., 2019).
Although interestingly, when the fouting of Basel rules has precipitated inter￾state tensions, free-trade governance entities with international tribunals – some￾thing that Basel is sorely lacking – have sometimes handled rule interpretation. For 
example, it was the WTO that adjudicated the European Commission’s contention 
with Brazil’s ban of waste tire imports, with the Commission complaining this was 
a case of disguised protectionism contravening the founding disciplines of GATT/
WTO (CIEL, 2008). Similarly, in 2000, the North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) tribunal was the site to handle a complaint from an Ohio-based toxic 
waste disposal company against the Canadian government for denying to import 
hazardous polychlorinated biphenyls. NAFTA ruled in favour of the US company, 
ordering Canada to pay US$50 million (IATP, 2000).
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?36
To see to the third RC criteria:
3. Is governance decentralized with little if any central coordination? Yes.
Characterising the Waste Trade Institutional Elements
Here I attempt to capture the overall character of each of the 32 IEs as a prerequisite 
to analysing the relationships between the regimes’ IEs (data displayed in Tables 4, 
5 and 6, Appendix 1.)
The chief result is that two broad classifcations of IEs arise, according to the 
patterns of represented ideas and interests identifed. Meanwhile, as expected, there 
is an adherence to the same foundational narratives of CE and sustainable develop￾ment across all IEs.
The two classifcations identifed show strong comparability to the type of envi￾ronmental actors Backstrand and Lovbrand (2006) have identifed in environmental 
policy circles.
Hence, following their typology, one character classifcation present amidst 
waste trade IEs could be referred to as ‘The Ecological Modernizer’.
This character is motivated to govern by the notion that the common collective 
good is optimally realised through market competition and protection of individual 
liberties to pursue self-interest (Humphreys, 2009:320). Capitalist growth can go 
hand in hand with, and can even promote, environmental safeguarding. Equity and 
poverty issues are a-politicized.
About 18 IEs appear to belong to this camp (see Table 5).
Their key narratives include the following:
• Maximising synergies
• Resource effciency
• Redefned growth
The other character, ‘The Civic Environmentalist’, is motivated to strengthen 
state regulation for social and environmental justice at local levels. There is a com￾mon belief that at least some reduction of industrial production is needed. This 
camp houses both reform-oriented and revolution-oriented IEs. Respectively, these 
are IEs focusing on encouraging cross-sectoral cooperation between the market, 
state and civil society for democratic and equitable governance, and IEs disillu￾sioned with such and challenge contemporary capitalist practice and power struc￾tures to stop environmental crises.
About 14 IEs appear to belong to this camp.
Their key narratives include the following:
• North-South equity
• Environmental and social justice
• Toxic colonialism
H. Freeman37
Characterising the Institutional Elements’ Relationships
Accounting for each relationship between the 32 institutional elements which con￾stitute the transnational global waste trade regime, it appears the overall nature of 
the regime is marginally more synergistic than conficting. I undertake symmetric 
relationships assessments of each IE to every other IE and its self, resulting in 1024 
assessments overall using a 1–5 measure (1 = strongly conficting; 5 = strongly syn￾ergistic). The result is that the total mean relationship score for the regime is 3.37 
(see Tables 7 and 8, Appendix 1), which lies above the synergism threshold of 3. 
Furthermore, the most common score by far was 4 constituting over 33% of total 
regime relationships (342/1024).
Fernández-Blanco et al. (2019) produce a similar volume of symmetric intra￾regime relationship assessments for the forestry regime, but only a binary ‘synergis￾tic’ vs ‘conficting’ label is given to relationships (as discussed in Part 5 (iii)).
The most confictive element is the Hong Kong Convention (HK) governing end￾of-life ships, with a mean relationship score of 2.53 – more than 2 standard devia￾tions under overall mean – and a mode of 1. Fourteen relationships were deemed as 
strongly conficting, including that with itself, given how at odds HK’s mission 
statement of governing to eliminate ‘any unnecessary risk to human health and 
safety and to the environment’ is with its ruling stipulations.
Although not (yet) enforced at the interstate level, HK currently operates as a 
voluntary private governance instrument for businesses to ‘prove’ their environmen￾tal credentials (SBP, n.d.-c).
HK is governed de facto by the shipping industry and appears to be one of the 
most internationally discredited waste governing entities – by legal experts, devel￾oping nations, ILO, SPB, and more (Mulinaris, 2020). It strongly undermined 
Basel’s rulings on recycling end-of-life ships, given the thrust of HK is to continue 
the cost-effcient movement toxic ships to India, Bangladesh and Pakistan where 
over 80% of all ships are currently dismantled, by hand (Mulinaris, 2020; TME, 
2012). Hence, it is somewhat surprising that even 10 IEs had synergistic relations – 
where complementarity is found in similar steadfast devotions to the logic of cost￾effcient resource movements, e.g. WTO.
The UNFCCC is almost as conficting, with a score of 2.6. This is because of the 
UNFCCC has a highly infuential role in framing what is and is not a climate change 
issue (Abbott, 2012a:581) and waste (producing high levels of GHGs at every stage 
of its life cycle: Lepawsky, 2017) is apparently not included. Furthermore, unfa￾vourable to many ‘Civic Environmentalists’ (e.g. GAIA), UNFCCC advocates 
waste-to-energy processing, and, more broadly, voluntary responsibility for envi￾ronmental action without suffcient protections for the most vulnerable.
Two institutions stand out for scoring particularly highly: UNEP’s Green 
Custom’s Initiative (GCI) at a mean of 4.290 and International Customs Police 
(ICP) at 4.161 – both over 2 standard deviations above overall mean. Often display￾ing ‘functional synergism’ with each other, both specifcally invest in strengthening 
nations’ customs sectors to block illegal waste trade. This enforcement of 
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?38
incumbent regulation in turn stymies revenue state revenue loss and waste fows 
laden with human-environment risk, as well as bolsters the credibility of property 
rights and legally binding waste bans. It is of little surprise that IEs show synergism 
with these, except where core IE actors may proft from illegal fows (e.g. shipping 
industry in HK) and or/undermine the legitimacy of legally binding waste law (e.g. 
UNFCCC).
Discussion
This section draws out core analytical musings upon this research, prefaced with a 
discussion on the study’s merits and limitations.
In attempt to draw scholarship’s attention to the undeniable relevance of waste 
trade to IPE, this research is seemingly the frst attempt to comprehensively map 
and characterise the contemporary waste trade regime. This study builds from 
frameworks used frequently to assess climate change and forestry regimes, intro￾ducing requisite ontological adaptations (e.g. regime IEs are not necessarily harmo￾nious) and methodological novelty and rigour (e.g. semi-structured interviews 
which include non-Western actors; expansive IE character assessment; graduated IE 
relationship assessment).
Such research lays the requisite groundwork for future research into the impact – 
‘effciency’  – of transnational waste trade governance. Additionally, this study 
makes no commitment to addressing the causes of waste trade regime fragmentation 
or synergism/confict but will hopefully inspire such research endeavours by others 
to continue the exploration into a strong IPE arena. Additionally, by adopting frame￾works well accepted in environmental IPE, comparisons between the waste trade 
and other environmental regimes can be readily made using my research. 
Furthermore, given the paucity of environmental regime assessments which locate 
language as an indicator of actors’ governance approaches, this research is valuable 
in underlining the potential importance of integrating discourse analysis and social 
context into future study.
It is vital, however, for future research to account for my research limitations, the 
main ones being:
• Firstly, as interpretivist research, there is a degree of subjectivity in the assess￾ment of my primary and secondary resources. Strict objectivity is impossible, but 
I remained keenly refective of the effect of my own interpretation, belief system 
and experiential biases on the research outcome. To avoid IE selection bias, I 
create a three-tiered identifcation methodology and precise IE defnition. 
Furthermore, I remained aware of the danger of exaggerating IE-IE confict 
whereby I normatively support the governance approach of one and not another.
• Secondly, and related, an IE’s overall interests and ideas cannot be verifed, even 
if I were an ‘insider’ of each and every IE. My research is highly dependent on 
the accessibility of necessary material, which in some areas is lacking. 
Specifcally, whilst there is a lot of critical analysis on Basel, RC, SC, HK, R2 
H. Freeman39
and RIOS due to these institutions being the target of CSO attention, there is far 
less on lower profle or younger IEs (e.g. MC, GESP, GPML). Semi-structured 
interviews with a diversity of different regime actors (in terms of institutional 
affliation, interests, nationality, regime experience, etc.) somewhat balance 
this skew.
Discrete Confict
This research importantly draws on insights from other arenas of environmental IPE 
to regime analysis to highlight that heterogeneity of interests and ideas exists 
between and within a regime’s IEs. This heterogeneity can cause confict. My 
research suggests that heterogeneity nor confict in the waste trade regime may be 
obvious at frst glance.
Let us frst observe cases of intra-IE tussles, taking particular recent confict 
instances within Basel and Rotterdam respectively. Figure 4 below illustrates such. 
At Basel’s 2019 CO14, no approval was granted for passing the ‘Technical 
Guidelines’ on e-waste trade; legislation which would stop companies and states 
profting from current ‘repairable loopholes’ (i.e. control exemptions for e-wastes 
labelled for repair) in Basel’s e-waste rules. This is due to a number of actors infu￾ential to Basel’s governing decisions (including other waste trade IEs), having 
differing interests and ideas on how to achieve ‘an ethical circular economy’ and 
thus ‘acceptable’ balances between equity, economy and environment (BAN, 2019b).
Fig. 4 Mapping intra-element ‘tussles’ in the waste regime
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?40
Similarly, at Rotterdam’s 2019 COP9, infuential actors diverged in their opinion 
as to whether chrysotile asbestos (a chemical compound found in end-of-life ships, 
causing 100,000+ occupational exposure deaths/year: WHO, 2014) should be 
included from Annex III hazardous chemical list (George & Kazan-Allen, 2019). 
Rules stipulate listed chemicals require ‘PIC’ – a mechanism similarly used in Basel 
which demand parties only export a listed (hazardous) item to another if the import￾ing nation has been fully informed and consents to this trade. Asbestos remains a 
‘non-hazardous chemical’ as voted for by six member states (vs 120 understanding 
asbestos as hazardous).
Given these internal tussles, Basel and Rotterdam’s overall interests, ideas and 
governing approaches internally pull in different directions and are far from straight￾forward to determine. However, it can be said that the realisation of progressive 
impetus is necessarily stunted in both given their ‘decision-making by consensus’ 
institutional structure.
Alternatively, confict between IEs may not be conspicuous given common pub￾lic declarations to environmentalisms such as CE. Let us observe a few CE ‘variet￾ies’ between IEs.
Under EMF’s governance (where CE reasoning is EMF’s raison d’etre), Coca￾Cola is a compliant party. Supporting a ‘vision’ of CE for Coca-Cola equates to 
integrating recycled plastic into supply chains comprising less than 10% of their 
total plastic usage (Sauven, 2017 from Dauvergne, 2018:28). BFFP condones such 
an understanding of CE, instead imbuing the concept with an imperative to reduce 
waste and engage democratically with waste-workers and communities. Corporate 
action compliant under BFFP could be a shift to fully biodegradable materials, or 
rental (not selling) of goods (ZWE, 2016).
R2, as one of the two global voluntary e-waste recycling certifcates (alongside 
ESS) similarly governs via non-legal standard-setting but defnes recycling and 
repair of wastes under CE logic very loosely (SERI, 2016). Open-ended waste def￾nitions reduce bureaucratic friction between transboundary movements which R2 
profts from. ESS, BAN and Basel contest this kind of CE defnition (BAN, 2016).
For the EU though, CE governance includes legal and non-legal instruments and 
is overall understood as keeping materials within the EU to reuse and recycle. Waste 
exports leaving the region is seen as draining the EU market for secondary raw 
materials and depletes opportunities for green jobs and growth – all the whilst erod￾ing their self-perceived international identity as a global pioneer in environmental 
action (EC, 2019).
Overall Marginal Synergism
Overall though, there appears to be marginal synergism between waste trade IEs, as 
shown in the result section (section Characterising the Institutional Elements’ 
Relationships).
H. Freeman41
The section Characterising the Institutional Elements’ Relationships makes 
sense of this. It shows the waste trade regime to be roughly constituted from two 
groups of IEs which, within these groups, share a lot a number of similar interests 
and ideas on societies’ equity, economy and environment balances: The Ecological 
Modernizers (n = 18) and The Civic Environmentalists (n = 14). Within each group, 
IE-IE synergism is likely, but IE-IE relationships between groups are likely to be 
confictual. Hence, with just over half of all total relationships assessed being within 
their own groups, overall marginal synergism makes sense.
Conclusion
Addressing my hypotheses of introduction,
1. I show the governance of global waste trade is currently underdeveloped by 
scholarship, leading to untested assumptions about what is causing continued 
and severe harm to humans and environment from (legal and illegal) waste 
exports. As has been shown in much research observing other environmental 
regimes, drawing a relationship between global governance and human￾environment outcomes cannot be made without a comprehensive account of the 
regime’s structure and the cohesion of this structure (i.e. whether it works syner￾gistically or confictingly).
2. I show that the RC framework, prolifc through environmental IPE research, is 
well suited to mapping the waste trade regime’s structure given the waste trade 
regime has similarly undergone a ‘Cambrian explosion’ of governing actors and 
instruments – akin to other environmental regimes (Keohane & Victor, 2011:9). 
Abbott’s (2012a) transnational RC framework is particularly suitable given its 
rightful emphasis on non-state actors and non-legal instruments. Subsequently, I 
show that adapting and extending Fernández-Blanco et al.’s (2019) characterisa￾tion of institutional elements’ relationships grants a thorough and politicised 
calculation of synergism and confict in a regime. This is supported by the work 
of Backstrand and Lovbrand (2006) linking climate change discourses to actors’ 
interests and ideas.
3. I show that global waste trade governance can be defned as a transnational RC, 
allowing the waste trade regime to be readily comparable to other environmental 
regimes which the literature has invested energy in exploring (e.g. climate 
change, forests). Subsequently, I show the regime to be roughly constituted from 
two approximate sets of interests and ideas by which IEs can be grouped under: 
‘Ecological Modernizers’ and ‘Civic Environmentalists’. Whilst much confict 
between and within IEs exists, I show the regime to be overall marginally 
synergistic.
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?42
Appendix 1Interviewees
Table 3 The structure of the waste trade regime: Illustrating a transnational regime cdomplex
H. Freeman43
Table 4 Characterising an institutional element (IE): An illustration of interests and ideas ‘net leading’ an IE’s
Indicator Score: −2 to −1 Score: 0 Score: 1 to 2
A. Primary broad interests leading 
institution
Maximise economic and political utility Differing interests are 
cancelled out to 
ambiguous/null effect
Maximise human and environmental health
B. Belief in the existence of a 
complementary symbiosis between trade, 
economic growth, environment, 
development and human well-being
Free-trade complements environmental 
and human well-being; The CE is a 
feasible and morally correct way to 
alleviate current environment and human 
ills whilst generally maintaining status 
quo proft maximisation
Differing ideas are 
cancelled out to 
ambiguous/null effect
Lower international trade barriers can 
undermine environmental and human 
well-being; The CE is not being actioned fast 
or extensively enough and could be 
distracting the real ways to alleviate current 
environment and human ills; Business 
operations need changing
C. Understanding of the state’s primary 
role in human-environment issues
Provide fnancial incentives and 
risk-reduction support for green business
Differing ideas are 
cancelled out to 
ambiguous/null effect
Provide participatory multilateral regulation 
and strong global legal protections for the 
most vulnerable
D. Understanding of the primary purpose 
of human-environment governance
A matter of addressing a lack of resource 
and market effciency
Differing ideas are 
cancelled out to 
ambiguous/null effect
A matter of addressing a lack of 
environmental and social justice
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?44
Table 5 Characterising an institutional element (IE): The ecological moderniser (TEM) and the 
civic environmentalist (TCE)
H. Freeman45
Table 6 Correlation between 
an institutional element’s 
ideas and interests
CORREL (A,B) 0.8916520183
CORREL (A,C) 0.9480882828
CORREL (A,D) 0.8509358703
CORREL (B,C) 0.9073084545
CORREL (B,D) 0.84973813
CORREL (C,D) 0.8575985571
Angus Crawford
• British BBC reporter
• Investigated UK exports of plastic waste in 2020 
Jim Puckett
• Canadian Founder; Director of Basel Action Network (BAN) 
Kate O’Neill
• American IR academic 
• Department of Environmental Science, Policy and Management at UC Berkeley
• Expertise in waste governance
Nicola Mulinaris
• Italian Communication and Policy Offcer
• NGO Shipbreaking Platform
Rolph Payet
• Seychellois UN Executive Secretary for the Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm 
Convention 
Sedat Gündoğdu
• Turkish IR academic
Expertise in marine pollution
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?46
Table 7 Characterising IE-IE relationships in the waste trade regime: An illustration of degrees of 
synergism and confict between and within IEs
H. Freeman47
References
Abbott, K. (2012a). The transnational regime complex for climate change. Environment and 
Planning C: Government and Policy, 30, 571–590.
Abbott, K. (2012b). Engaging the public and the private in global sustainability governance. 
International Affairs, 88(3), 543–564.
Appelstrand, M., Kleinschmit, D., Pulzl, H., & Visseren-Hamakers, I. (2012). Discourses, actors 
and instruments in international forest governance. In R. Jeremy (Ed.), Embracing complex￾ity  – Meeting the challenges of international forest governance. Prepared by the Global 
Forest Expert Panel on the International Forest Regime (IUFRO World Series) (Vol. 28, 
pp. 57–74). IUFRO.
Arts, B., & Babili, I. (2013). Global forest governance: Multiple practices of policy performance. 
In Forest and nature governance policy: World forests series (Vol. 14, pp. 111–132). Springer.
Auld, G., & Green, J. (2012). Unbundling the regime complex: The effects of private authority, 
comparative research in law & political economy (Research Report No. 15/2012).
Backstrand, K., & Lovbrand, E. (2006). Planting trees to mitigate climate change: Contested 
discourses of ecological modernisation, green governmentality and civil environmentalism. 
Global Environmental Politics, 6(1), 50–75.
Baggs, J. (2009). International trade in hazardous waste. Review of International Economics, 
17(1), 1–16.
Barsalou, O., & Picard, M. H. (2018). International environmental law in an era of globalised 
waste. Chinese Journal of International Law, 17(3), 887–906.
Basel Action Network (BAN). (2016). R2: Non-compliance by design. Viewed 22 July 2020, 
https://wiki.ban.org/images/2/23/R2_Non-Compliance_by_Design.pdf
Basel Action Network (BAN). (2019a). Global ban on exporting hazardous waste to developing 
countries becomes law. Viewed 18 July 2020, https://www.ban.org/news/2019/9/8/global-ban￾on-exporting-hazardous-waste-to-developing-countries-becomes-law?rq=colonialism
Table 8 Characterising IE-IE relationships in the waste trade regime: Relationship score averages
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?48
Basel Action Network (BAN). (2019b). International e-waste export guideline 
deemed unready. Viewed 18 July 2020, https://www.ban.org/news/2019/5/12/
international-e-waste-export-guideline-deemed-unready?rq=cop14
Bernstein, S., & Cashore, B. (2012). Complex global governance and domestic policies: Four 
pathways of infuence. International Affairs, 88(3), 585–604.
Betsill, M., & Corell, E. (2008). NGO diplomacy: The infuence of nongovernmental organizations 
in international environmental negotiations. MIT Press.
Biermann, F., Pattberg, P., Asselt, H., & Zelli, F. (2009). The fragmentation of global governance 
architectures: A framework for analysis. Global Environmental Politics, 9(4), 14–40.
Bontoux, L., & Leone, F. (1997). The legal defnition of waste and its impact on waste management 
in Europe. A Report Prepared by IPTS for the Committee for Environment, Public Health and 
Consumer Protection of the European Parliament (EUR 17716 EN), pp. 1–119.
Break Free From Plastic (BFFP). (2019). Long awaited global ban on exporting hazardous waste to 
developing countries becomes law today. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://www.breakfreefromplas￾tic.org/2019/12/07/global-ban-exporting-hazardous-waste-developing-countries-becomes-law/
Brown, K. (2001). Cut and run? Evolving institutions for global forest governance. Journal of 
International Development, 13(1), 893–905.
BRS. (2011). https://www.brsmeas.org/Decisionmaking/DecisionsandDocuments/Documents/
tabid/2833/language/en-US/Default.aspx
Bulkeley, H. (2012). Governing climate change transnationally: Assessing the evidence from a 
database of sixty initiatives. Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy, 30(1), 
591–612.
Centre for International Environmental Law (CIEL). (2008). WTO Brazil Retreaded Tires 
trade dispute. Viewed 28 July 2020, https://www.ciel.org/project-update/brazil-retreaded￾tires/#:~:text=The%20WTO%20Brazil%2DRetreaded%20Tires,World%20Trade%20
Organization%20(WTO).&text=Used%20tires%20and%20tire%20material,for%20
example%20by%20tire%20retreading
Cipet, D., & Roberts, T. (2017). Climate change and the transition to neoliberal environmental 
governance. Global Environmental Change, 46(1), 148–156.
Clapp, J. (1998). The privatization of global environmental governance: ISO 14000 and the devel￾oping world. Global Governance, 4(3), 295–316.
Clapp, J. (2001). Toxic exports: The transfer of hazardous wastes from rich to poor countries. 
Cornell University Press.
Cole, D. (2011). From global to polycentric climate governance (EUI Working Papers, No. 
2011/30).
Cole, C., Gnanapragasam, A., Cooper, T., & Singhac, J. (2019). An assessment of achievements 
of the WEEE directive in promoting movement up the waste hierarchy: Experiences in the 
UK. Waste Management, 87, 417–427.
Colgan, J., Keohane, R., & Van de Graaf, T. (2012). Punctuated equilibrium in the energy regime 
complex. The Review of International Organizations, 7(1), 117–143.
Conca, K. (2000). The WTO and the undermining of global environmental governance. Review of 
International Political Economy, 7(3), 484–494.
Conca, K. (2005). Old states in new bottles? The hybridization of authority in global environmen￾tal governance. In R. Eckersley & J. Barry (Eds.), The state and the global ecological crisis. 
MIT Press.
Crang, M., Hughes, A., Gregson, N., Norris, L., & Ahmed, F. (2013). Rethinking governance and 
value in commodity chains through global recycling networks. Transactions of the Institute of 
British Geographers, 38(1), 12–24.
Cullen, J. (2013). Circular economy: Theoretical benchmark or perpetual motion machine? 
Journal of Industrial Ecology, 21(3), 483–486.
Dauvergne, P. (2016). Environmentalism of the rich. MIT Press.
Dauvergne, P. (2018). Why is the global governance of plastic failing the ocean? Global 
Environmental Change, 51, 22–31.
H. Freeman49
De Vos, M., Janssen, P., Kok, M., Frantzi, S., Dellas, E., Pattberg, P., Peterson, A., & Biermann, 
F. (2013). Formalizing knowledge on international environmental regimes: A frst step towards 
integrating political science in integrated assessments of global environmental change. 
Environmental Modelling & Software, 44(1), 101–112.
Dorsner, K. (2018). 6.5 Case study: The Love Canal disaster, in environment and sus￾tainability. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/envirobiology/
chapter/6-4-case-study-the-love-canal-disaster/
Down to Earth (DTE). (2019). Basel fnal day: Rich nations can’t dump toxic waste 
on poor nations. Viewed 18 July 2020, https://www.downtoearth.org.in/indepth/
basel-fnal-day-rich-nations-cant-dump-toxic-waste-on-poor-nations%2D%2D34313
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (EMF). (n.d.). Concept: Circular economy. Viewed 25 July 2020, 
https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy/concept
EUR-Lex. (n.d.-a). Cotonou Agreement. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/en/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM:r12101
EUR-Lex. (n.d.-b). Communication from the commission to the European parliament, the coun￾cil, the European economic and social committee and the committee of the regions: Closing 
the loop – An EU action plan for the circular economy. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://eur-lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52015DC0614
European Commission (EC). (2019). Communication from the commission to the European parlia￾ment, the European council, the council, the European economic and social committee and the 
committee of the regions: The European Green Deal. Viewed 23 July 2020, https://ec.europa.
eu/info/sites/info/fles/european-green-deal-communication_en.pdf
Falkner, R. (2008). Business power and confict in international environmental politics. Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Falkner, R. (2012). Global environmentalism and the greening of international society. International 
Affairs, 88(3), 503–522.
Falkner, R., Stephan, H., & Vogler, J. (2010). International climate policy after Copenhagen: 
Towards a ‘building blocks’ approach. Global Policy, 1(3), 252–262.
Fernández-Blanco, C.  R., Burns, S.  L., & Giessen, L. (2019). Mapping the fragmentation of 
the international forest regime complex: Institutional elements, conficts and synergies. 
International Environmental Agreements, 19, 187–205.
GAIA. (2020). EU promotes greater global responsibility on plastic waste  – But 
not for internal market!. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://www.no-burn.org/
eu-promotes-greater-global-responsibility-on-plastic-waste-but-not-for-internal-market/
Gellers, J. (2015). Greening critical discourse analysis. Critical Discourse Studies, 12(4), 482–493.
George, O., & Kazan-Allen, L. (2019). The Rotterdam convention 2019. International Ban 
Asbestos Secretariat. Viewed 23 July 2020, http://ibasecretariat.org/og-lka-the-rotterdam￾convention-2019.php
Giessen, L. (2013). Reviewing the main characteristics of the international forest regime complex 
and partial explanations for its fragmentation. International Forestry Review, 15(1), 60–70.
Goldstein, J., & Keohane, R. (1993). Ideas and foreign policy: Beliefs, institutions and political 
change. Cornell University Press.
Gregson, N., Crang, M., Fuller, S., & Holmes, H. (2015). Interrogating the circular economy: The 
moral economy of resource recovery in the EU. Economy and Society, 44(2), 218–243.
Hajer, M., & Versteeg, W. (2005). A decade of discourse analysis of environmental politics: 
Achievements, challenges, perspectives. Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning, 7(3), 
175–184.
Howard, K. (1990). The basel convention: Control of transboundary movements of hazard￾ous wastes and their disposal. Hastings International and Comparative Law Review, 1(14), 
223–246.
Hoornweg, D., & Bhada-Tata, P. (2012). What a waste: A global review of solid waste management
(Urban Development Series: Knowledge papers no. 15). World Bank Group.
http://www.wcoomd.org/en/about-us/what-is-the-wco/annual-reports.aspx
https://www.who.int/ipcs/assessment/public_health/chrysotile_asbestos_summary.pdf?ua=1
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?50
Hulme, M. (2010). Moving beyond climate change. Environment: Science and Policy for 
Sustainable Development, 52(3), 15–19.
Humphreys, D. (2009). Discourse as ideology: Neoliberalism and the limits of international forest 
policy. Forest Policy and Economics, 11(1), 319–325.
Hurley, A. (2016). From factory town to metropolitan junkyard: Postindustrial transitions on the 
urban periphery. Environmental History, 21(1), 3–29.
Ilankoon, I. M. S. K., Ghorbani, Y., Chong, M. N., Herath, G., Moyo, T., & Peterson, J. (2018). 
E-waste in the international context  – A review of trade fows, regulations, hazards, waste 
management strategies and technologies for value recovery. Waste Management, 82, 258–275.
Institute for Agriculture & Trade Policy (IATP). (2000). NAFTA fouts global 
toxic waste dumping treaty. Viewed 27 July 2020, https://www.iatp.org/news/
nafta-fouts-global-toxic-waste-dumping-treaty
International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD). (2018). UNFCCC technical paper 
highlights mitigation benefts of circular economy. Viewed 23 July 2020, https://sdg.iisd.org/
news/unfccc-technical-paper-highlights-mitigation-benefts-of-circular-economy/
International Labour Organisation (ILO). (2018). Circular economy a source of job creation and 
re-creation. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://www.ilo.org/brussels/information-resources/news/
WCMS_619122/lang%2D%2Den/index.htm
International Law Commission (ILC). (2006). Fragmentation of international law: Diffculties 
arising from the diversifcation and expansion of international law. Viewed 24 July 2020, 
https://legal.un.org/ilc/documentation/english/a_cn4_l682.pdf
International Maritime Organisation (IMO). (n.d.). Recycling of ships: The development of the 
Hong Kong Convention. Viewed 25 July, http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/
ShipRecycling/Pages/Default.aspx
International Pollutants Elimination Network (IPEN). (n.d.). About IPEN. Viewed 20 July 2020, 
https://ipen.org/about
International Solid Waste Association (ISWA). (2018). ISWA position paper on the pro￾posal to amend the Basel Convention regarding the international movement of plas￾tics waste. Viewed 11 July 2020, https://www.iswa.org/home/news/news-detail/article/
iswa-position-paper-on-the-proposal-to-amend-the-basel-convention/109/
Jain, A. (2020). Trash trade wars: Southeast Asia’s problem with the world’s waste. 
Council on Foreign Relations. Viewed 22 July 2020, https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/
trash-trade-wars-southeast-asias-problem-worlds-waste
Jasanoff, S. (2004). States of knowledge: The co-production of science and social order. Routledge.
Kaza, S., Yao, L., Bhada-Tata, P., & Van Woerden, F. (2018). What a waste 2.0: A global snapshot 
of solid waste management to 2050 (Urban Development). World Bank Group.
Keeley, J. (1990). Toward a Foucauldian analysis of international regimes. International 
Organization, 44(1), 83–105.
Kellenberg, D. (2015). The economics of the international trade of waste. Annual Review of 
Resource Economics, 7(1), 109–125.
Kellenberg, D., & Levinson, A. (2014). Waste of effort? International environmental agreements. 
Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 1(1), 135–169.
Keohane, R., & Victor, D. (2011). The regime complex for climate change (Discussion Paper 
10-33). Belfer Centre, Harvard Project on International Climate.
Khan, S. A. (2014). Solving the E-Waste Problem (StEP) Green Paper: Differentiating EEE prod￾ucts and wastes. United Nations University/StEP Initiative.
Kleinschmit, D., Bocher, M., & Giessen, L. (2009). Discourse and expertise in forest and environ￾mental governance – An overview. Forest Policy and Economics, 11(1), 309–312.
Kobayashi-Soloman, E. (2019). You wouldn’t believe what country is becoming a sus￾tainability leader. Forbes. Viewed 11 July 2020, https://www.forbes.com/sites/
erikkobayashisolomon/2019/08/21/you-wouldnt-believe-what-country-is-becoming-a￾sustainability-leader/#adf72fe1f994
Krasner, S. (1983). International regimes. Cornell University Press.
H. Freeman51
Kummer, K. (1994). Transboundary movements of hazardous wastes at the interface of environ￾ment and trade (UNEP’s Environment and Trade Series) (pp. 1–104). UNEP.
Lepawsky, J. (2015). The changing geography of global trade in electronic discards: Time to 
rethink the e-waste problem. The Geographical Journal, 181(2), 147–159.
Lepawsky, J. (2017). Reassembling rubbish & worlding electronic waste. Viewed 10 August 2020, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yr0MwogZdkA&t=1146s
Levy, M., Young, O., & Zürn, M. (1995). The study of international regimes. European Journal of 
International Relations, 1(3), 267–330.
Lewis, A. (2010). Europe exporting electronic waste despite ban. BBC News. Viewed 2 August 
2020, https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-10846395
Li, T. (2007). The will to improve: Governmentality, development and the practice of politics. 
Duke University Press.
Linnér, B.-J. (2006). Authority through synergism: The roles of climate change linkages. European 
Environment, 16, 278–289.
Litfn, K. T. (1994). Ozone discourses. Science and politics in global environmental cooperation. 
Columbia University Press.
Lövbrand, E., Rindefjäll, T., & Nordqvist, J. (2009). Closing the legitimacy gap in global environ￾mental governance? Lessons from the emerging CDM market. Global Environmental Politics, 
9(2), 74–100.
Lukitsch-Hicks, B. (1999). Treaty congestion in international environmental law: Need for greater 
international coordination. University of Richmond Law Review, 32(5), 1643–1674.
Manners, I. (2002). Normative power Europe: A contradiction in terms? Journal of Common 
Market Studies, 40(2), 235–258.
McElwee, P. (2016). Forests are gold: Trees, people and environmental rule in Vietnam. University 
of Washington Press.
Medvedieva, M., Sopilko, I., Guliev, A., Bilotsky, S., Nevara, L., Lovin, A., & Sirokha, D. (2018). 
Fragmentation and synergies in international climate change regime. Journal of Legal, Ethical 
and Regulatory Issues, 21(3), 1–14.
Mert, A. (2009). Partnerships for sustainable development as discursive practice: Shifts in dis￾courses of environment and democracy. Forest Policy and Economics, 11(5–6), 326–339.
Moncayo, G. (2017). Testing the boundaries between the Basel and MARPOL regimes: Are they 
complementary or mutually exclusive? Transportation Research Procedia, 25, 233–250.
NGO Shipbreaking Platform (SBP). (n.d.-a). Shipbreaking: A dirty and dangerous industry. 
Viewed 11 July 2020, https://www.shipbreakingplatform.org/
NGO Shipbreaking Platform (SBP). (n.d.-b). Hong Kong convention. Viewed 11 July 2020, https://
www.shipbreakingplatform.org/issues-of-interest/the-law/hkc/
NGO Shipbreaking Platform (SBP). (n.d.-c). HKC statements of compliance. Viewed 11 July 
2020, https://www.shipbreakingplatform.org/issues-of-interest/the-law/hkc-soc/
Nixon, R. (2011). Slow violence and the environmentalism of the poor. Harvard University Press.
Nordbrand, S. (2009). Out of control: E-waste fows from the EU to developing coun￾tries. SwedWatch. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://www.somo.nl/nl/wp-content/uploads/
sites/2/2009/04/Out-of-Control.pdf
O’Neill, K. (2000). Waste trading among rich nations: Building a new theory of environmental 
regulation. MIT Press.
O’Neill, K. (2019). Waste. Polity Press.
Oberthür, S. (2002). Clustering of multilateral environmental agreements: Potentials and limita￾tions. United Nations University.
Oberthür, S., & Gehring, T. (2006). Institutional interaction in global environmental governance: 
Synergy and confict among international and EU policies. MIT Press.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2004). Addressing the 
economics of waste. Viewed 21 July 2020, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/
addressing-the-economics-of-waste_9789264106192-en
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?52
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2008). OECD Legal 
Instruments: Decision of the council on the control of transboundary movements of wastes 
destined for recovery operations. Viewed 28 July 2020, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/
instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0266
Orts, E. (2011). Climate contracts. Virginia Environmental Law Journal, 29(1), 1–197.
Ostrom, E. (2010). Beyond markets and states: Polycentric governance of complex economic sys￾tems. The American Economic Review, 100(3), 641–672.
Oswald, I., & Reller, A. (2011). E-waste: A story of trashing, trading, and valuable resources. 
GAIA – Ecological Perspectives for Science and Society, 20(1), 41–47.
Parajuly, K., & Fitzpatrick, C. (2020). Understanding the impacts of transboundary waste ship￾ment policies: The case of plastic and electronic waste. Sustainability, 12, 1–14.
Pratt, L. (2011). Decreasing dirty dumping? A reevaluation of toxic waste colonialism and the 
global management of transboundary, hazardous waste. William and Mary Environmental Law 
and Policy Review, 35(2), 581–623.
Raustalia, K., & Victor, D. (2004). The regime complex for plant genetic resources. International 
Organisation, 58(2), 277–309.
Rayner, J., Buck, A., & Katila, P. (2010). Embracing complexity: Meeting the challenges of inter￾national forest governance. A global assessment report (World Series) (Vol. 28). International 
Union of Forest Research Organisations.
Rosenau, J. (1995). Governance in the twenty-frst century. Global Governance, 1(1), 13–43.
Schmidt, A. (1992). Transboundary movements of waste under EC law: The emerging regulatory 
framework. Journal of Environmental Law, 4(1), 57–80.
Secretariat of the Basel Convention (SBC). (2011). Where are WEee in Africa? Findings from the 
Basel Convention—Waste Africa programme.
Secretariat of the Basel Convention (SBC). (2014). Basel Convention text and annexes. 
Viewed 20 July 2020, https://www.basel.int/Portals/4/Basel%20Convention/docs/text/
BaselConventionText-e.pdf
Secretariat of the Basel Convention (SBC). (2018). Waste without frontiers II. Viewed 20 July 2020, 
http://www.basel.int/Portals/4/Basel%20Convention/docs/pub/WasteWithoutFrontiersII.pdf
Secretariat of the Basel Convention (SBC). (n.d.). Basel Convention overview. Viewed 10 July 
2020, http://www.basel.int/TheConvention/Overview/tabid/1271/Default.aspx#:~:text=a%20
glance...-,The%20Basel%20Convention%20on%20the%20Control%20of%20
Transboundary%20Movements%20of,on%20hazardous%20and%20other%20wastes
Sembiring, M. (2019). Global waste trade chaos: Rising environmentalism or cost-beneft analy￾sis? (NTS Insight, No. IN19-02).
SERI. (2016). The R2 Standard and the new circular economy. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://sus￾tainableelectronics.org/news/2016/05/31/r2-standard-and-new-circular-economy
Slaughter, S. (2005). The republican state: An alternative foundation for global environmental 
governance. In R.  Eckersley & J.  Barry (Eds.), The state and the global ecological crisis. 
MIT Press.
Stripple, J. (2008). Beyod the public and private divide: Remapping transnational climate gover￾nance in the 21st century. International Environmental Agreements, 8(1), 367–388.
Sweeney, V. (2013). Global partnership on marine litter. UNEP & Regional Seas Partnership. 
Viewed 21 July 2020, https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/11004/gpa￾fmeb-unep_presentation_on_global_partnership_on_marine_litter_-_vincent_sweeney.pdf?se
quence=1&isAllowed=y
The Maritime Executive (TME). (2012). 178 Countries agree to allow the ban on exports of toxic 
wastes to developing countries to become law. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://www.maritime- -
executive.com/article/178-countries-agree-to-allow-the-ban-on-exports-of-toxic-wastes-to￾developing-countries-to-become-law
The Recycling Industry Operating Standard. RIOS Brochure. Viewed 20 July 2020, http://www.
rioscertifcation.org/docs/default-source/default-document-library/rios-brochure.pdf?sfvrsn=4
H. Freeman53
Tladi, D. (2000). The quest to ban hazardous waste import into Africa: First Bamako and now 
Basel. The Comparative and International Law Journal of Southern Africa, 33(2), 210–226.
Tromans, S. (2001). EC waste law – A complete mess? Journal of Environmental Law, 13(2), 
133–156.
United Nations (UN). (n.d.-a). Global partnership on martine litter. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/partnership/?p=7471
United Nations (UN). (n.d.-b). Goal 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and produc￾tion patterns. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/
sustainable-consumption-production/
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (1997). Synergies in national implementa￾tion: The Rio agreements. Viewed 26 July 2020, https://catalogue.unccd.int/1001_synergies_
implem_nat_ConvRio.pdf
United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP). (n.d.-a). Bamako convention treaty text. 
Viewed 20 July 2020, https://www.informea.org/en/treaties/bamako-convention/text
United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP). (n.d.-b). Rotterdam convention text. 
Viewed 20 July 2020, http://www.pic.int/TheConvention/Overview/TextoftheConvention/
RotterdamConventionText/tabid/1160/language/en-US/Default.aspx
United Nations University (UNU). (2015). Discarded electronics mismanaged within Europe 
equals ~10 times the volume of e-waste exported. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://unu.edu/
media-relations/releases/discarded-electronics-mismanaged-in-europe-is-10x-volume-of-e￾waste-exports.html#:~:text=The%20study%20estimates%201.3%20million,%3B%20and%20
70%25%20functioning%20equipment
Wen, X., Wei-Qiang, C., Daqian, J., Chao, Z., Zijie, M., Yan, R., & Lei, S. (2020). Evolution of 
the global polyethylene waste trade system. Ecosystem Health and Sustainability, 6(1), 1–16.
Wheeler, P. (2019). Waste Management, Casella announce halt to plastic waste exports to 
countries with poor waste management. Greenpeace. Viewed 20 July 2020, https://www.
greenpeace.org/usa/news/waste-management-casella-announce-halt-to-plastic-waste-exports￾to-countries-with-poor-waste-management/#:~:text=In%202018%20alone%2C%20the%20
United,Thailand%2C%20Turkey%2C%20and%20Vietnam
Woolcock, S., & Bayne, N. (2016). The new economic diplomacy: Decision-making and negotia￾tion in international economic relations. Routledge.
World Customs Organisation (WCO). (2019). Annual report 2018–2019. Viewed 20 July 2020.
World Health Organisation (WHO). (2014). Chrysotile asbestos. Viewed 20 July 2020.
World Trade Organisation (WTO). (2017). Notifcation from Ministry of Environmental Protection 
of the People’s Republic of China, WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade (G/TBT/N/
CHN/1211). Submitted 18 July 2017, pp. 1–2.
Young, O. (2011). Effectiveness of international environmental regimes: Existing knowledge, 
cutting-edge themes, and research strategies. PNAS Perspective, 108(50), 19853–19860.
Young, O. (2016). On environmental governance: Sustainability, effciency, and equity. Routledge.
Young, O., & Osherenko, G. (1993). Polar politics: Creating international environmental regimes. 
Cornell University Press.
Zero Waste Europe (ZWE). (2016). My zero waste event zero waste Europe presents 12 actions to 
start a zero waste process. Viewed 22 July 2020, https://www.zerowasteeurope.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2016/12/Zero-Waste-Events.compressed.pdf
What’s in a Name? Is it a Waste or a Resource?55
Major Six-Year Trends in Global Plastic 
Waste Trade
Jan Dell
Introduction
The Basel Plastic Waste Amendments, enacted on January 1, 2021, were designed 
to reduce the fows of dirty and mixed plastic wastes, in particular to developing 
countries.
The Basel Action Network’s (BAN) Plastic Waste Trade Data website (BAN, 
2023) was created in January 2021 to provide much needed transparency on plastic 
waste trade. The data is sourced from the publicly available government trade cus￾toms data published by the United Nations Comtrade database, the United States 
Trade® Online database, and the United Kingdom (UN Comtrade, 2023; U.S. Trade®
Online, 2023; U.K. Trade Info, 2023). BAN’s website enables fact-based assess￾ment of global plastic waste trade data.
The data presented on the BAN Plastic Waste Trade Data website was evaluated 
to determine major trends in plastic waste exports.
Circulating postconsumer plastic waste around the world doesn’t create the clean 
economy needed to protect human health and ecosystems. Actions to fnd markets 
for discarded plastic materials collected in high-income countries should not nega￾tively impact communities in other countries.
There are many harmful impacts of exports of plastic wastes from high-income 
countries to middle- and low-income countries:
• Food chain contamination
• Harm to domestic waste collection and recycling system development in coun￾tries that need it most
• Health and safety impacts to workers and communities
J. Dell (*) 
Independent Engineer, The Last Beach Cleanup, Laguna Beach, CA, USA
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_356
More than 100 investigations and reports have shown serious environmental and 
social harms in receiving countries (The Last Beach Cleanup, 2023).
Results
The following major trends in plastic waste export were seen between 2017 
and 2022:
1. Global: Decrease in plastic waste exports seen from almost all major Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries. However, 
plastic waste trade to non-OECD countries has plateaued at unacceptably 
high levels.
2. United Kingdom (UK): Signifcant shift of plastic waste exports to Turkey from 
previous exports to non-OECD Countries.
3. Japan: Signifcant shift of plastic waste exports from going to China to other 
countries in Asia.
4. United States (USA): Decrease in plastic waste exports to Asia, but an increase 
in exports to Latin American countries.
5. European Union (EU): Increase in exports to Turkey and the Netherlands became 
the major exporter of plastic waste to countries in Asia. Increase in plastic waste 
exports to Asia seen in late 2022 as energy costs rose in the EU and EU recyclers 
shut down.
Global: Decrease in Plastic Waste Exports Seen from Almost 
All Major OECD Countries (2017–2022)
Figure 1 shows that there has been a signifcant decrease in total plastic waste 
exports from major OECD countries from 2017 to 2022. In aggregate, the plastic 
waste exports from the USA, Japan, EU, UK, Canada, and Australia declined 57% 
from 6,664,105 tonnes/year in 2017 to 2,835,631 tonnes/year in 2022.
Figure 2 shows that there has been a signifcant decrease in plastic waste exports 
from major OECD countries to non-OECD countries from 2017 to 2022. In aggre￾gate, the plastic waste exports from the USA, Japan, EU, UK, Canada, and Australia 
to non-OECD countries declined 73% from 4,836,935 tonnes/year in 2017 to 
1,302,841 tonnes/year in 2022.
While a signifcant decline in plastic waste exports occurred, the plastic waste 
exports to non-OECD countries that are not equipped to safely and securely manage 
even their own plastic waste has plateaued and remains stubbornly high. The export 
of 1,323,011 tonnes/year in 2022 is equivalent to 682 20-foot shipping containers 
per day of plastic waste exported to non-OECD countries.
J. Dell57
Fig. 1 Plastic waste exports from major OECD countries (2017–2022)
Fig. 2 Plastic waste exports from major OECD countries to non-OECD countries (2017–2022)
Major Six-Year Trends in Global Plastic Waste Trade58
Fig. 3 2022 OECD country exports to non-OECD countries
Table 1 Plastic waste exports from major OECD countries
2017 (tonnes/year) 2022 (tonnes/year) % Decline (−) or increase (+)
OECD Non-OECD OECD Non-OECD OECD (%) Non-OECD (%)
U.S. 228,540 1,443,045 275,176 163,287 +20 −89
Japan 38,457 1,392,990 44,363 519,091 +15 −63
E.U. 246,114 2,299,772 587,064 526,677 +139 −77
U.K. 198,291 459,693 410,159 49,028 +107 −47
Australia 1592 158,469 23,450 50,873 +1373 −68
Figure 3 shows that the EU was the largest plastic waste exporter to non-OECD 
countries in 2022, with 40% of plastic waste exports (526,677 tonnes/year). Japan 
was the second largest exporter to non-OECD countries with 39% of plastics waste 
exports (519,091 tonnes/year).
Table 1 shows that while plastic waste exports to non-OECD countries were 
reduced from 2017 to 2022, most countries increased exports to OECD countries 
during the same period. These trends are described in more detail in subsequent 
sections.
J. Dell59
United Kingdom: Signifcant Shift of Plastic Waste Exports 
from Non-OECD Countries to Turkey and Netherlands
Figure 4 shows that the UK has largely shifted plastic waste exports from non￾OECD countries to Turkey, Netherlands, and other OECD countries. The overall 
decline of plastic waste exports from the UK to the world was only 30% from 
2017 to 2022, much less of an overall reduction than seen from other OECD 
countries.
The UK increased plastic waste exports to Turkey from 40,934 tonnes/year in 
2017 to 112,947 tonnes/year in 2020. When Turkey implemented a ban on plastic 
waste imports in 2021, the UK shifted to exporting more plastic waste to the 
Netherlands. Numerous investigations and media reports have shown the harms of 
UK plastic waste exports to Turkey. In May 2022, the Guardian reported on how UK 
plastic waste is “dumped abroad by Dutch middlemen” (Gatten, 2023). In section 
“European Union: Increase in Exports to Turkey and the Netherlands Became the 
Major Exporter of Plastic Waste to Countries in Asia”, Fig. 10 shows the increase in 
plastic waste exports from the Netherlands to Asia from 2017 through 2022.
Fig. 4 UK plastic waste exports to from UK to Turkey and non-OECD countries (2017–2022)
Major Six-Year Trends in Global Plastic Waste Trade60
Japan: Signifcant Shift of Plastic Waste Exports from China 
to Other Countries in Asia
Figure 5 shows how Japan largely shifted plastic waste exports from China and 
Hong Kong to other non-OECD countries from 2017 to 2022. The non-OECD 
countries that Japan increased exports to are primarily Asian countries who lack the 
ability to manage their own plastic waste. As shown in Table 2, Japan signifcantly 
increased exports to many Asian countries.
United States: Decrease in Plastic Waste Exports to Asia, 
But an Increase in Exports to Latin American Countries
During 2017 to 2022, the USA signifcantly decreased plastic waste exports to Asia, 
while increasing plastic waste to Latin American countries. Figure 6 shows a 94% 
decrease to six key Asian countries, from 1,252,308 tonnes/year in 2017 to 80,092 
tonnes/year in 2022. Figure  7 shows an increase in US plastic waste exports to 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and most notably Mexico. The US 
plastic waste exports to Mexico increased 81% from 47,222 tonnes/year in 2017 to 
85,515 tonnes/year in 2022.
Fig. 5 Japan plastic waste exports to China and other non-OECD countries
J. Dell61
Table 2 Japan plastic waste exports to Asian countries (2017–2022)
Country 2017 (tonnes/year) 2022 (tonnes/year) % Increase (%)
Indonesia 2700 10,670 +295
Malaysia 75,435 178,716 +137
Vietnam 126,219 152,489 +21
Fig. 6 US plastic waste exports to key Asian countries (2017–2022)
European Union: Increase in Exports to Turkey 
and the Netherlands Became the Major Exporter of Plastic 
Waste to Countries in Asia
While the EU reduced plastic waste to non-OECD countries (Fig. 2 and Table 1), 
the EU signifcantly increased plastic waste exports to Turkey (Fig. 8). A partial ban 
on plastic waste imports, implemented by Turkey in 2021, resulted in a slight decline 
in plastic waste imports from the EU in 2022. Nevertheless, the 2022 EU plastic 
waste exports of 346,383 tonnes/year is signifcant as it is equal to 179 truckloads 
of plastic waste per day shipped from the EU to Turkey.
While the EU initially reduced plastic waste exports to Asia after China’s 
National Sword policy was enacted in 2018 and the Basel Plastic Waste 
Amendments were enacted in 2021, the EU increased plastic waste exports to Asia 
in 2022, as shown in Fig. 9. The 2022 EU plastic waste exports of 433,878 tonnes/
Major Six-Year Trends in Global Plastic Waste Trade62
Fig. 7 US plastic waste exports to Latin American countries
Fig. 8 EU plastic waste exports to Turkey (2017–2022)
J. Dell63
Fig. 9 EU plastic waste exports to Asia (2017–2022)
Fig. 10 Netherlands plastic waste exports to Asia (2017–2022)
Major Six-Year Trends in Global Plastic Waste Trade64
year to three key countries (Indonesia, Malaysia, and Vietnam) is signifcant as it 
is equal to 224 container loads of plastic waste per day shipped from the EU to 
countries with high plastic pollution rates who are not equipped to manage their 
domestic plastic waste.
As shown in Fig. 10, the Netherlands has signifcantly increased plastic waste 
exports to Asia from 2017 to 2022. As described by the Guardian, it appears that the 
Netherlands has become a trader of plastic waste for other countries and a transit 
point for shipments to Asia (Gatten, 2023). In 2022, the Netherlands accounted for 
32% of EU plastic waste exports to non-OECD countries. But on a population basis, 
the Netherlands only has 3.9% of the EU population (Trading Economics, 2023).
Summary and Conclusions
The major six-year trends (2017 through 2022) in the international trade of plastic 
waste show that while the Basel Plastic Waste Amendments initially reduced the 
fows of plastic waste from high-income to low- and middle-income countries, a 
high level of plastic waste trade remains. This analysis supports the conclusion 
stated in IPEN’s Plastic Waste Trade: The Hidden Numbers report (IPEN, 2023), 
“Countries that are major producers of plastic wastes must take responsibility for 
their own plastic waste and stop exporting all plastic wastes to other countries, and 
especially to countries that lack the capacity to manage their own plastic wastes in 
an environmentally sound manner.”
Now that the harms of plastic waste exports have been exposed, the responsible 
response is to stop plastic waste exports. While exporting may help high-income 
countries meet “diversion goals” and avoid the problem and cost of disposing their 
plastic waste to landfll or incineration in their own countries, there’s no denying 
that rich countries are offshoring the problem, harming other countries and making 
a carbon-intensive, long-distance contribution to the plastic pollution to the ocean.
Bans on exports of plastic waste from high-income countries are urgently needed 
as the predicted future increases in plastic production are likely to increase plastic 
waste exports from high-income countries to low- and middle-income countries.
References
Basel Action Network. (2023). Plastic waste trade data. https://www.ban.org/plastic-waste￾transparency-project-hub/trade-data. Accessed 12 May 2023.
Gatten. (2023, May 16). UK plastic recycling ‘dumped abroad by Dutch middlemen’. The 
Guardian. https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2023/05/16/uk-plastic-recycling-dumped￾abroad-netherlands/
IPEN. (2023). Plastic waste trade: The hidden numbers. https://ipen.org/documents/
plastic-waste-trade-hidden-numbers#:~:text=Estimates%20show%20we%20will%20
produce,non%2Dhigh%2Dincome%20countries
J. Dell65
The Last Beach Cleanup. (2023). Harms of plastic waste exports. https://www.lastbeachcleanup.
org/plastic-waste-exports
Trading Economics. https://tradingeconomics.com/netherlands/population-as-a-percent-of-eu￾population-eurostat-data.html#:~:text=Netherlands%20%2D%20Population%20as%20a%20
%25%20of%20EU%20population%20was%203.90%25,EUROSTAT%20on%20May%20
of%202023. Accessed on 19 May 2023.
United Kingdom (U.K.) Trade Info. https://www.uktradeinfo.com/trade-data/ots-custom-table/. 
Accessed 12 May 2023.
United Nations (U.N.) Comtrade Database. https://comtradeplus.un.org/. Accessed 12 May 2023.
United States Trade® Online. https://usatrade.census.gov/. Accessed 12 May 2023.
Major Six-Year Trends in Global Plastic Waste Trade67
Global and National Instruments to Stop 
the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes
Jim Puckett
Introduction
Waste on the Move: A History
In the last half century the discovery of devastating impacts from hazardous and 
other wastes generated by by large, medium and small industries in North America 
and Europe spawned sweeping legislation to better control industrial activity. In the 
period between 1975 and 1990, new laws to strictly regulate the generation, treat￾ment, storage, transport, disposal, and export of wastes were passed and imple￾mented in most developed countries. The legislative effort in the United States 
resulted in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA, 1976) regulating 
the treatment, storage, and disposal of hazardous wastes, as well as the ground￾breaking Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability 
Act (CERCLA, 1980). The latter, known commonly as “superfund” made genera￾tors of wastes strictly liable for the impact and cleanup of their wastes and thus 
provided funding for the cleanup and remediation of growing discoveries of con￾taminated sites. In Europe, things got off the ground with the Waste Framework 
Directive (1975) followed by numerous new laws governing best practices for haz￾ardous waste management and control, as well as a classifcation system for wastes 
known as the European Waste Catalogue (Decision 94/3/EC of 20 December 1993).
The increased concern and legislation to mitigate the impacts of improperly dis￾posed hazardous waste in the developed world resulted generally in a welcome inter￾nalization of costs onto the ledgers of waste generators. In other words, polluters 
began to have to pay far more in waste management and reduction costs to assure 
J. Puckett (*) 
Basel Action Network, Seattle, WA, USA
e-mail: jpuckett@ban.org
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_468
the public of new obligations to achieve proper, safe, and nonpolluting waste man￾agement. The game changing policy of internalizing real costs  came to be 
known popularly as “the polluter pays” principle.
But such a principle will only function in fact, if there are no escape routes or 
loopholes that might move wastes outside of one’s accounting. While stricter rules 
made at the national level increased the cost of pollution (costs internalized), so too 
did they increase  incentives to avoid such costs completely (costs externalized). 
Sadly, avoidance was all too easy, given the norms of free trade and the effciencies 
and convenience  of intermodal transport. The most obvious strategy to avoid 
national obligations and the higher costs of meeting them was to sweep the hazard￾ous wastes out the global backdoor via international shipping, usually fnding their 
way  on board  container ships, moving from rich, industrialized countries of the 
“Global North” to the poorer, less industrialized countries of the “Global 
South.” There, the opportunities to avoid costs and exploit weaker economies and 
their concurrent lack of environmental and labor protections, awareness, commu￾nity, and labor rights, as well as infrastructure to manage the new threats of imported 
pollution were greatest. 
Sometimes the recipients of these wastes did not fully understand the harm they 
represented. At other times, they did not really care, seeking only to proft in the 
short term from the waste trade deals offered. Such deals ignored long-term impacts 
of the wastes and thus, in effect, externalized the real costs to future generations 
in the importing country.
“Recycling,” the word coined by the “green movement,” in the late 1960s, was 
ironically almost always invoked and played a critical role as justifcation for the 
waste shipments with varying degrees of legitimacy. At the end of the scale, the 
word “recycling” served as merely a pretext for blatant dumping, but increasingly 
the exports did involve some form of recycling, at least in part. Nevertheless, despite 
some recycling taking place, it could be very partial with many fractions dumped 
and burned, and very often the operations themselves were highly polluting and 
harmful. Most importers were complicit in the deal made with the exporters, each 
receiving value. The importers resold some of the recycled  materials, while 
the exporters received value by avoiding the greater costs of proper waste manage￾ment in the home country. This was often made possible by being able to dump 
or burn residual materials with little cost. In this way, recycling in developing coun￾tries could in fact be far worse for human health and the environment than would 
have been the case had the wastes simply been placed in a landfll in the exporting 
country.
It is this externalization of pollution costs that makes waste move in the frst 
place. This principle is as true to this day as it was in the early days of the waste 
trade. Trade in wastes will continue to fourish as long as it can serve as a convenient 
escape route to avoid the better solution of appropriate product design to foster lon￾gevity, ease of recycling and proper end-of-life management of products.
The international waste trade then was born of efforts to internalize waste man￾agement costs domestically, while failing to prevent the escape avenue of export. By 
the early 1980s, this new waste trade phenomenon – the search for pathways of 
J. Puckett69
greatest opportunities for exploitation via cost externalization  – became epi￾demic  when  the frst wave of ships laden with the toxic effuent of the affuent 
began  plying the waters of Latin America, Africa, and Asia, looking for willing 
importers, corrupt offcials, and unsuspecting recipients.
The frst organization to examine and attack the global trade in wastes was 
Greenpeace, which waged a campaign against it from 1989 to 1997. In 1990, 
Greenpeace published their ffth and last version of The International Trade in 
Wastes: A Greenpeace Inventory. It contained hundreds of catalogued waste trade 
schemes around the globe. Greenpeace’s media and investigative campaigning pub￾licized and, at times, helped abort hundreds of dirty waste trade deals. Some of the 
cases made beaches and ships infamous, including the names Karin B, the Khian 
Sea, Jolly Rosso, Koko Beach, and the Islip Garbage Barge. The headline grabbing 
dumping schemes at times became known too by the corporate identities involved 
in examples of dirty and sham recycling. These included Thor Chemicals in South 
Africa, Formosa Plastics in Cambodia, and Bharat Zinc in India.
As early as 1987, enough cases had been recorded and headlined in the media of 
dumping cases in Africa that the issue got the attention of the Organization of 
African Unity (OAU) and the Economic Community  of Waste African States 
(ECOWAS). Soon thereafter, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD) took the frst legally binding decisions to better control waste 
trade with a notifcation procedure that came to be known as prior informed consent 
(PIC). This was seen by the OECD as being the more reasonable substitute to ban￾ning the waste trade, particularly where recycling was involved. But increasingly, 
and framed by a very effective and vocal Greenpeace campaign (Fig. 1), a call was 
Fig. 1 Logo of the 
Greenpeace Waste Trade 
campaign, created by 
graffti artist Keith Haring
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes70
heard to ban waste trade, or at least ban the export of hazardous wastes moving from 
rich to poorer countries.
It was not too long after the journey of the vessel Khian Sea (1986), carrying 
Philadelphia incinerator ash across the globe looking for dumping grounds (Müller, 
2023), that the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP), headed up by 
Egyptian Executive Director Mostafa Tolba, took decisive action. He declared that 
due to the transboundary and criminal nature of the waste trade that a global treaty 
was wanted. On June 17, 1987, the UNEP Governing Council decided to authorize 
the Executive Director to convene a working group of legal and technical experts to 
organize a global convention on the control of transboundary movements of hazard￾ous wastes (UNEP, 1989). The treaty became known as the Basel Convention after 
the Swiss chemical industry reeling from the horrifc 1986 fre and spill of toxic 
chemicals into the Rhine River, agreed to bankroll the initial negotiations and the 
Secretariat of the Convention in Geneva, if the Convention could be named after the 
city of Basel where the disaster occurred.
The initial negotiations of the Basel Convention were characterized by an 
incensed developing world, led by the African Group, seeking to ban waste trade 
especially from rich to poorer countries on the one hand, and the “JUSCANZ” 
group, an international negotiating bloc made up principally of Japan, the United 
States, South Korea, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, on the other. International 
law, which relies at the outset on achieving consensus, meant that in this important 
negotiation, the United States acted as that lowest common denominator and worked 
with the rest of the JUSCANZ to insist that trade bans be avoided in the fnal text.
After all efforts by developing country delegates to achieve some kind of waste 
trade ban were rejected by the JUSCANZ group, it was at last proposed that at least 
language to the effect that it would be unlawful for any country to export wastes to 
countries with lesser environmental standards and rigor than their own, the United 
States State Department representative Mr.  Andy Sens took the foor.  He com￾plained that “Such a prohibition would be very prejudicial to my country as we have 
the highest standards in the world and thus would be unable to export our wastes to 
any other country” (Puckett, 1989). Following this cynical statement, the notion of 
banning waste trade, at least in the original 1989 treaty text, was lost. It would not 
be until 2019, 30 years later, would the envisaged ban become a reality.
The resulting text adopted at the fnal meeting of the Plenipotentiaries in March 
of 1989  in Basel, Switzerland, failed to include a ban on exports of hazardous 
wastes to developing countries, even though it was the expressed wish of the vast 
majority of assembled countries. The only ban included was a ban on hazardous 
waste exports to Antarctica.
While being a key detractor of global environmental justice, it must be noted 
that the United States did play a strong role in providing the current defnitions of 
hazardous waste and the concept of prior informed consent (PIC) based in large part 
on the work of Harvey Yakowitz of the US Environmental Protection Agency. These 
defnitions and policy advances were pioneered in the US RCRA legislation and 
also via his work at the OECD which, from 1986 to 1990 created a series of deci￾sions to defne and control waste trade. It was OECD Decision-Recommendation 
J. Puckett71
C(86)64(fnal) that became the precursor document of the Basel Convention with 
the H and Y codes later found in Basel’s Annexes I and III derived from the initials 
of Harvey Yakowitz’s frst and last name.
The resulting treaty agreed at Basel in 1989, absent as it was of the anxiously 
anticipated ban, was considered a disappointment by most participating countries. 
The African group walked out of the meeting without signing the agreement, vow￾ing to create their own regional agreement which would ban the import of hazardous 
and other wastes into the continent of Africa. This would later become the Bamako 
Convention (Fig. 2) signed in Mali in 1991.
Nevertheless, as time would tell, the Convention did provide the basis for more 
rigorous things to come, and the decision to achieve a legally binding ban on the 
exports of hazardous wastes was adopted in 1994 followed by a decision to amend 
Fig. 2 Copy of the New York Times, March 22, 1989. Photographed by the author who was quoted 
as denouncing the treaty as being too weak because it did not include a ban on the export of hazard￾ous waste to developing countries
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes72
the Convention accordingly in 1995. The long-sought Basel Ban forbidding the 
export from developed to developing countries of hazardous wastes fnally came 
into force in 2019 (Basel Action Network [BAN] and International Pollutants 
Elimination Network [IPEN], 2019) and, that same year, new listings to begin to 
control the trade in plastic wastes were adopted for the frst time.
As the Basel Convention lies at the heart of efforts to stem the tide of problematic 
waste trade and control that which remains legally acceptable, it is important to 
begin our journey with a comprehensive understanding of the Basel Convention, 
how it works, and how it applies to the trade in plastic waste.
The Basel Convention
While the Basel Convention was considered a disappointment by most developing 
countries in its original iteration, it has now, after more than 30 years, realized much 
of its promise. It now provides the legal framework to control and provide transpar￾ency for most hazardous wastes. It now bans the most egregious forms of cost exter￾nalization and injustice caused by the transboundary movement of wastes. Indeed 
the Convention can now be declared as the most signifcant instrument for global 
environmental justice in existence and considered as providing the basic rules of the 
road for those that might confuse the “circular economy” with a circulation of 
global waste. What does it do and how does it work?
Soft Law: General Obligations
After laying out defnitions and scope in Articles 1–3, Article 4 of the Basel 
Convention lays down its vital general obligations. Parties are bound to honor these 
principles but as they are “general obligations” for the Parties, it is unlikely anybody 
will be prosecuted directly for ignoring them. Nevertheless, they form the basis for 
the Convention’s reason for being and help shape national policy and legislation for 
what are, as of this writing, 191 Parties. The most important of these obligations on 
Parties are summarized as follows:
1. The generation of hazardous and other wastes shall be reduced to a minimum 
(Art. 4, 2, a).
2. Parties shall seek to ensure that they each can manage their own wastes (national 
self-suffciency principle) (Art. 4, 2, b).
3. Parties shall minimize transboundary movements of wastes (Art. 4, 2, d).
4. Parties will maintain and ensure environmentally sound management of wastes 
at all times (Art. 4, 2, c, d, e, and g).
Environmentally sound management (ESM) is defned as “taking all practicable 
steps to ensure that hazardous and other wastes are managed in a manner which will 
protect human health and the environment against the adverse effects which may 
result from such wastes.”
J. Puckett73
Hard Law: Scope and Trade Controls
The Convention also provides for what must happen if waste trade can not be mini￾mized and must occur under its strict trade rules – the violation of which for persons 
within the jurisdiction of Parties is considered illegal traffc and a criminal act. 
These rules frst defne “hazardous” and “other wastes,” which together comprise 
the full scope of what materials are controlled under the Convention. Hazardous 
waste is defned by being on Annex I unless it can be demonstrated that the materi￾als do not possess an Annex III characteristic (Article 1, 1, a). Alternatively, they 
can be defned nationally by any Party declaring an additional waste as hazardous 
(Article 1, 1, b). “Other” waste is a term of art and are “wastes requiring special 
consideration,” which may or may not be hazardous but are all listed in Annex II 
(Article 1, 2).
“Hazardous and other wastes” alone are subject to strict controls on their trans￾boundary movement and management. Any wastes that are not hazardous or other 
wastes are considered nonhazardous wastes and are not subject to Basel control. 
The controls mentioned place trade and management obligations on all Basel Parties 
and persons within their jurisdiction. These obligations range from strictly adhering 
to the prior informed consent (PIC) notifcation scheme (Article 6) to full  trade 
prohibitions. The key hard law obligations of the Basel Convention are noted as fol￾lows along with the indicated primary trade control measure imposed (in bold):
• No Export to Parties banning Import: Parties shall not permit the export of con￾trolled wastes to Parties that have prohibited their import (Art. 4, 1, a and 
b). (Ban)
• No Export without Prior Consent: Parties shall not permit the export of con￾trolled wastes to Parties that have not frst consented to their import (Art. 4, 1, c) 
by the prior informed consent mechanism described in Article 6. (PIC)
• Party to non-Party Ban: Parties shall not permit the export of controlled wastes 
or import controlled wastes to or from a non-Party except through a valid Article 
11 agreement (Art. 4, 5). (Ban)
• No ESM Ban: Parties shall not permit the export or import of controlled wastes 
if there is reason to believe it will not be managed in an environmentally sound 
manner (Art. 4, 2, e and g). (Ban)
• No export without shared information and proper packaging: Information as to 
the nature of the controlled waste and its proposed management will be shared 
before any transboundary movement can take place (Art. 4, 2, f and Art. 4, 
7). (Ban)
• Additional controls respected: Parties may impose additional controls, and these 
must be respected by other trading Parties (Art. 4, 11). (other)
• No export to Antarctica: Parties must not export controlled wastes to Antarctica 
(Art. 4, 6). (Ban)
• Basel Ban Amendment: Parties that have ratifed the Basel Ban Amendment or 
became Parties to the Convention after the amendment entered into force, which 
are listed in Annex VII (OECD, EU, and Liechtenstein), shall prohibit all 
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes74
transboundary movements of hazardous wastes for operations listed in Annex 
IVa (fnal disposal) and for wastes referred to in Article 1(1)(a) for operations 
listed in Annex IVb, (recovery operations) to States not listed in Annex VII (e.g. 
developing countries).
Below we further highlight and elaborate on two of the aforementioned bans and 
discuss the related matter of Article 11 agreements.
Party to Non-Party Ban and the Case of the United States
As noted above, Parties are not allowed to trade hazardous or other wastes with non￾Parties to the Convention unless a valid bilateral or multilateral Article 11 agree￾ment is in place. As further explained below, to be valid, the Article 11 agreements 
must provide an equivalent level of control to that of the Basel Convention.
Many of the current problems in global governance of waste trade stem from the 
fact that the United States, the world’s most wasteful country per capita, is not Party 
to the world’s only global waste treaty – the Basel Convention. The United States is 
the only developed country that has failed to ratify the Convention and is only one of 
two signatories (those that signed the fnal act in 1989 indicating intent to ratify) that 
have failed to ratify it. The other is Haiti. Among all nations, there are only a handful 
of UN countries in the world that have failed to ratify Basel. As of June 2023, there 
are 191 Parties with but 5 UN member states that remain as non-Parties. The remain￾ing non-Parties include East Timor, Fiji, Haiti, South Sudan, and the United States.
As the United States is a major generator and trader of Basel-listed wastes, and 
so much of the rest of the world are Parties, the Party to non-Party trade ban means 
that in the absence of a special agreement described by Article 11 of the Convention, 
the 191 Basel Parties cannot trade (export or import) controlled wastes with the 
United States. This creates signifcant incoherence as there is nothing in the law, 
national or international, that prohibits the actors in the United States from export￾ing Basel-controlled wastes to Basel Party countries, even while those waste 
exports, once on the high seas and heading toward a Basel Party, must be considered 
illegal traffc under the terms of the Convention as any importer will violate the 
Party to non-Party ban.
Illegal traffc is a criminal act according to Basel (Article 4, 3), but due to the 
United States not being a Party, such perpetrators can only be prosecuted in the 
Basel Party state – not in the exporting state – the United States. In practice, this is 
problematic as the best and most effcient place to enforce trade controls is in the 
exporting state where the criminal traffc can be prevented in the frst place. Few 
countries in the world have the capacity to monitor their ports suffciently enough to 
discover all incoming illegal traffc, and of course, by then, such discoveries are too 
late to be able to properly prosecute and require repatriation, compensation and the 
application of extraterritorial accountability or enforcement.
As a result, far too many private operators in the United States regularly export 
controlled plastic and other wastes with impunity, and the US government will not 
act to ensure that activities of their citizens will not aid and abet the violation of the 
laws of the 191 Basel Parties in the global neighborhood of the United States.
J. Puckett75
The Basel Ban Amendment (Article 4a)
In December of 2019, the Ban Amendment, which was adopted frst as a decision in 
1994 (Decision II/12) (Puckett & Fogel, 1994) and 1 year later as an amendment 
proposal in 1995 (Decision III/1), fnally entered into force and is now part of the 
Convention text (Article 4a). The Ban Amendment is the ban most of the Parties 
originally wanted back in 1989 when the treaty was frst negotiated. It is a full ban 
on the export of hazardous wastes for both fnal disposal and for recycling, from 
those Parties listed in Annex VII that have ratifed the amendment to all Parties 
not listed in Annex VII. Annex VII consists of member states of the OECD, the EU, 
and Liechtenstein. The Ban Amendment also logically applies to trade from Annex 
VII countries that have not ratifed the Amendment to those Annex VII countries 
that have ratifed it (BAN & IPEN, 2019). The Basel Ban Amendment had a signif￾cant effect on the global waste market even before its entry-into-force, due largely 
to the fact that the European Union implemented it in their waste shipment regula￾tion in 1997. Currently 103 Parties out of 191 total Basel Parties have ratifed 
Decision III/1 – new Article 4a.
Further, and of great importance to plastic wastes, the 27 member states of the 
European Union have implemented the Basel Ban in a manner that also adds Basel 
Annex II wastes. This then includes a prohibition on exporting not only hazardous 
plastic wastes but Y48 Annex II plastic wastes as well (see below).
The Basel Convention and Plastic Waste
Prior to 2019, most Parties of the Basel Convention never considered plastic waste 
to be “hazardous” or regarded as “other” waste and thus subject to Basel controls. If 
a Party had ever considered that plastics, in fact, might be hazardous by virtue of its 
Annex I and Annex III materials and characteristics (e.g., due to its containing haz￾ardous additives), this could have been declared but, in practice, was not.
Greenpeace, in the mid 1990s, pressed for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) scrap to be 
considered hazardous waste due to it being listed on Annex I as Y45 (organohalogen 
compounds) and possessing certain hazardous characteristics such as H13 (e.g., 
when burned to create dioxins or by off-gassing vinyl chloride after landflling). 
However, in response to this proposal, the plastics industry entered the Convention 
meetings in force and lobbied Parties heavily against the listing proposal. The 
resulting impasse led the Convention, which was at the time formulating the A 
(Annex VIII) and B (Annex IX) lists corresponding to hazardous and nonhazardous 
wastes, respectively, to punt on the decision by placing PVC as the sole entry on a 
new “C” list which was characterized as an “undecided, pending further investiga￾tion” list. This C list, which only had PVC on it for a short time, has been long for￾gotten today.
Annex II wastes, while including “wastes collected from households” (Y46), 
might have been used to control plastic waste with the argument that signifcant 
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes76
amounts of plastics are collected from households as wastes, but to our knowledge, 
this listing has never been used to control plastic waste. Likewise, the enigmatic 
listing Y13, “wastes from the production, formulation, and use of resins, latex, plas￾ticizers, glues, and adhesives,” might describe plastic wastes, however indirectly, 
but it too was, to the best of our knowledge, never used in controlling  trade in 
plastic waste.
The Basel Plastic Waste Amendments: Impetus
This plastics gap within the Convention’s implementation all changed at the 14th 
Conference of the Parties held in Geneva in May of 2019. In advance of this meet￾ing, Norway foated a proposal for three new listings for plastic wastes. One of 
which, for the frst time, would place a large set of commonly generated plastic 
waste types under the Basel control procedure whether hazardous or not. This 
became the now-famous new “other” waste listing  on Annex II  – Y48  which 
describes most of the traded plastic wastes today. Norway found great support for 
these amendments for two reasons.
First, there was a growing concern over plastic pollution in the marine environ￾ment (Fig. 3). By now, most of us have heard of the plastic gyres in the oceans and 
have imagined our oceans becoming host to massive swirling foating swamps of 
Fig. 3 Greenpeace together with the Break Free From Plastic coalition conducted a beach cleanup 
activity and plastics brand audit on Freedom Island, Philippines, in 2017. (© Daniel Müller/
Greenpeace)
J. Puckett77
plastic debris. How many of us have not bemoaned plastic wastes that we see wash￾ing up in our favorite local or holiday beach destinations? How many of us have not 
heard the statistic that by 2050 there will be more plastic than fsh in the sea? Plastic 
waste is currently estimated to make up 80% of all marine pollution, with about 
8–10  million metric tons of plastic fnding their way to our oceans each year 
(Wearden, 2016).
The second driver for the new amendments arose from the increasingly common, 
yet ugly images of imported plastic wastes piled high and too often burning in 
Southeast Asian or Turkish felds outside of hastily erected recycling factories 
(Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives [GAIA], 2019). Up to this point, the 
developed world had largely been fnding refuge for most of its plastic refuse aris￾ings in China – the destination for mixed  wastes derived either from  municipal 
waste processing facilities known as MRFs (materials recycling facilities) or busi￾ness waste arisings such as packaging waste, manufacturing off-spec production 
wastes or factory cut-aways. For decades China had accepted most of the industrial￾ized world’s plastic wastes in massive amounts. It is estimated that prior to the 
Chinese ban, about 429 large-size shipping containers arrived each day in China 
from the United States alone (Rapoza, 2020). Even more containers, each day, 
arrived also from Europe, Canada, Australia, Japan, and New Zealand.
The recycling that occurred in the many plastic waste villages in China was rudi￾mentary and partial – with operations that resulted in severe pollution and public 
health impacts. Such concerns were documented for the frst time in the indepen￾dent Chinse flm “Plastic China” (Zhao, 2017; Fig. 4). Shortly after the Chinese 
airing of the flm, it was banned and erased from the Internet. Then, very shortly 
thereafter, China suddenly decided to ban all imports of plastic waste/scrap unless 
the shipments achieved levels of 99.5% purity – considered tantamount to a full ban 
in commercial terms. In March 2018, this new policy under the name of “National 
Sword at the Gate” or more commonly “National Sword” was adopted (Watson, 
2018). And importantly, prior to implementing the National Sword policy, China 
Fig. 4 Promotional still from the flm “Plastic China,” offcial website of Plastic China. Link: 
https://www.cnex.tw/plasticchina
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes78
had created a veritable army of customs agents to enforce it, making the decree far 
more than a typical paper tiger. China customs has a total of 580 customs houses or 
offces and nearly 4000 customs clearance control stations and total agents number￾ing 50,000 persons (GACC, n.d.). The sudden regulatory wall erected by China, 
unlike the weak e-waste bans initiated in earlier years, was “a solid one” and worked 
to create a massive disruption in the global waste market, which in effect resulted in 
a tidal wave of plastic waste “bouncing” off this wall, rebounding in new fnal rest￾ing places.
The new global dumping grounds for the developed world’s waste following the 
Chinese rejection were hard to hide and soon became visible and well-known. As 
the Chinese brokers and businessmen got shut down by governmental edict, they 
simply picked up their  plastic waste recycling businesses and shifted them to 
Thailand, Vietnam, Malaysia, and Indonesia. Chinese operators cut deals with local 
governments in South and Southeast Asian to buy, lease and permit land for the 
recycling of plastics, electronic wastes, or both. Small factories with large enclo￾sures began springing up all over rural, agrarian areas of these countries or in so￾called free-trade zones. The new facilities were largely a replication of the old ones 
in China, fraught with the same problems of pollution from the dumping, burning, 
and melting of plastics (GAIA, 2019). Many of these were not properly permitted 
by the national government and fell under the radar of national authorities (Wong, 
2021). Meanwhile a similar phenomenon occurred in Eastern Europe and Turkey 
for European plastic wastes.
Media reports of the new plastic waste destinations following National Sword 
created a new wave of controversy and shame and led to numerous media stories, 
with on-again, off-again crackdowns in Malaysia, Thailand, Turkey, and Poland. 
Images of European, North American, and Australian labels on plastic packaging 
waste hastily and impartially sorted, dumped, and burned in these new dumping 
grounds projected an image of an out-of-control plastic waste market and grabbed 
the attention of governments and citizens around the world. It was this reporting, 
combined with the tragedy of plastics in the marine environment, that helped create 
the desire to do something globally signifcant and as a matter of urgency on the 
plastic waste crisis.
Serious discussions soon got underway in numerous international fora, in par￾ticular at the United Nations Environmental Assembly (UNEA), where a call for a 
global treaty on plastic waste began to emerge. By the UNEA 4 meeting in March 
of 2019, there was considerable momentum, but that meeting failed to fnd a critical 
mass of countries willing to seize the opportunity to address plastic pollution with a 
new legally binding instrument (Break Free From Plastic, 2019).
Norway, among other countries, realized that while a global treaty would be a 
good idea, it would, in any case take a long time and until then, a lot could be done 
with existing instruments – especially via the Basel Convention, the world’s only 
global treaty specifcally addressing wastes, their trade, and management. In Basel, 
the global community of nations had a treaty already in force, with excellent global 
coverage (191 Parties as of this writing) and with the possibility of rapid adoption 
J. Puckett79
of amendments to annexes (where the waste listings are found) achievable by a tacit 
consent and not a full-fedged, time-consuming textual ratifcation process.
Norway seized the opportunity. In consultation and support from key Parties 
such as the EU, China, Japan, and many developing countries, they proposed a new 
package of three amendments to the Basel Convention waste lists in Annexes II, 
VIII, and IX  respectively. At Basel’s 14th Conference of the Parties (COP14, 
September 2019), while the shrill minority of Argentina and the United States, 
thought to be doing the political bidding of large industrial lobbies, complained 
vociferously, the amendments, after just some slight weakening of the original pro￾posals, were adopted by consensus in decision BC/14/12.
The Basel Plastic Waste Amendments Explained
The amendments’ success, refected by their rapid adoption, was made possible by 
a clever tactic on the part of Norway, which allowed the Parties to avoid much of the 
debate as to whether and which plastic wastes should be determined to be hazard￾ous or not.
Under the Convention, most of the controlled wastes are classifed as hazardous 
wastes, and these are defned by Annexes I and III and elaborated more fully in 
Annex VIII. These are controlled with the default procedure of prior informed con￾sent (PIC) or are sometimes subject to a ban. However, there is a lesser known group 
of wastes, the “other wastes,” found in a stand-alone Annex II. The title of Annex II 
is “Categories of Wastes Requiring Special Consideration,” and these are also sub￾ject to the PIC procedure under the Convention. Historically, the Annex was created 
because the United States, during the original treaty negotiations, could not abide by 
the hazardous waste designation supported by the rest of the delegations, for certain 
waste streams that were not so defned under US national law. They all agreed, nev￾ertheless, that they could or should be controlled under the PIC procedure as long as 
they were not referred to as hazardous. Thus, Annex II was created and originally 
only contained two listings: Y46 (wastes collected from households) and Y47 (resi￾dues arising from the incineration of household wastes).
The crux of the Basel plastic amendments lies in the creation of a third Annex II 
listing – now listed as Y48. This listing is far more complicated than the usual waste 
listings and could not be refected in just one line of text as is the norm in the 
Convention (e.g., Y46 and Y47), but rather, Y48 takes two pages to defne in the 
newly published edition of the Convention.
The placement of the new plastic waste defnition in Annex II means that the 
plastic waste in this category will normally be subject to the same controls as haz￾ardous waste under the Convention (prior informed consent) with the exception that 
it will not normally be controlled under the Basel Ban Amendment (new Article 4a), 
which bans the export of hazardous wastes (Annex VIII) from moving from Basel 
Annex VII countries to non-Annex VII countries – that is, unless countries decide to 
include Annex II in their implementation of the Basel Ban Amendment as has been 
done by the European Union.
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes80
So, by avoiding a fractious debate experienced years ago over PVC as to whether 
plastics were hazardous or not, Norway was able to fnd support to achieve mostly 
equivalent levels of control as those for hazardous wastes for a large category of 
problematic plastic wastes under the new Annex II listing Y48 – “wastes requiring 
special consideration.”
Completing the package of the three amendments, which together are meant to 
encompass all plastic wastes, are the listings for hazardous plastic waste (A3210) 
and nonhazardous plastic waste (B3011). Below we expound on how in fact the 
three categories fail to cover all plastic wastes.
A3210: Hazardous Plastic Waste
A3210 reads as follows:
Plastic waste, including mixtures of such waste, containing, or contaminated with Annex I 
constituents, to an extent that exhibits an Annex III characteristic (note the related entries 
Y48 in Annex II and on list B B3011).
Such wastes were actually already covered by the terms of the original Convention, 
before the Amendments, as the above wording is simply a restating of the blanket 
(Article 1, 1, a) – global defnition of hazardous wastes found in the Convention:
[a] Wastes that belong to any category contained in Annex I, unless they do not possess any 
of the characteristics contained in Annex III.
However, despite the fact that the concept of control of hazardous plastic waste 
has been in the Convention since its inception, this did not mean that Basel Parties 
had ever controlled it, nor clearly defned which plastic waste streams fell under 
A3210. Many questions still arise as to whether hazardous additives which are rou￾tinely added to polymers will qualify plastic wastes as A3210. That is, while we 
know the additives are in plastics, the Convention has not provided guidance on 
when they exhibit hazardous characteristics. 
Perhaps the greater question is, in the absence of actual knowledge of what the 
chemical composition is of a given shipment of collected plastic waste, which is 
almost always the case, should it not always be considered as presumptively hazard￾ous? After all, the wording of the Convention found in Article 1, 1, a establishes a 
rebuttable presumption that the waste will be hazardous “unless they do not pos￾sess….” Meaning that wastes are presumed hazardous if they appear on Annex I, 
and can only be considered nonhazardous by being shown to not possess one or 
more of the hazardous characteristics listed in Annex III. Thus, parties should pre￾sume untested or unverifed plastic wastes are hazardous. Application of Article 1, 
1, a should mean, then, that loads of mixed plastics derived, as they usually are, 
from a variety of products and sources, all with differing additive ingredients, must 
be presumed hazardous until proven otherwise. Today, this interpretation is not
being applied, and mixed plastics are assumed to not be hazardous even when we do 
not know that to be the case, turning the rebuttable presumption obligation of the 
Convention on its head.
J. Puckett81
So far, the little work that has been done to defne which traded plastic wastes are 
A3210 can be found in the newly adopted Basel Plastic Waste Guidelines (United 
Nations Environment Programme [UNEP], 2023) and in the European Union 
Correspondent’s Guidelines #12 (European Commission, 2021). But while these 
(shown below) are a good start, they fail to indicate a practical way to assess the 
hazardous content of shipments of traded plastic wastes.
From EU Correspondent’s Guidelines #12:
15. It is noted that additives, such as fllers, plasticisers, stabilizers, colorants and fame 
retardants, are usually part of plastics. The presence of certain additives in plastic waste, 
such as brominated fame retardants that are persistent organic pollutants or lead or cad￾mium in PVC, may lead to a classifcation of the plastic waste in question as hazardous 
waste and covered by entries A3210 or AC300.
The phrase here “may lead to” is unhelpful. This head-in-the-sand approach is 
not only found within the province of the EU.
In the Basel Plastic Waste Technical Guidelines, we fnd the following text:
28. The addition of hazardous additives or processing aids has the potential to render plastic 
waste hazardous, diffcult to recycle or not suitable for recycling. A recent analysis of the 
global governance of plastics indicates that 128 chemicals of concern used in the plastics 
life cycle are currently regulated by existing multilateral environment agreements, such as 
additives, processing aids and monomers and non-intentionally-added substances. (BRS, 
2023; UNEP, 2023)
Again, the phrase “has the potential to” is lacking in real guidance. With only 
weak suggestive remarks such as these to embolden them, all Basel Parties remain 
blissfully, perhaps, but illegally ignorant, to the fact that plastic wastes, even those 
shipped as a sorted single polymer, are likely to trigger the defnition of hazardous 
waste and shipped as A3210. But the norm is that these plastic wastes are not ana￾lyzed or otherwise assessed for the presence of hazardous substances, and thus the 
presumption of hazardousness is not rebutted, and yet are allowed to be shipped as 
Y48 or even B3011.
B3011 Nonhazardous Plastic Waste
The second category of the Basel plastic amendments triad is the nonhazardous and 
non-Annex II plastic wastes. These B3011 plastic wastes are those that the Basel 
Convention will not control and can be generally, but not absolutely, characterized 
as nonhazardous, unmixed, uncontaminated, single polymers, cured resins, or con￾densation products, and are nonhalogenated excluding a fnite list of fuoropoly￾mers, all of which must be destined for recycling and not for fnal disposal or 
waste-to-energy destinations.
The listing has been drawn in part from the older plastic waste listing (B3010) 
created in 1998 with some additional refnement. With one exception, the plastic 
waste must be single nonhalogenated polymers, cured resins, or condensation 
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes82
products and cannot be mixed. The one mixture allowed as an exception in order 
to streamline the trade in polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles which are typi￾cally closed with a polypropylene (PP) cap and wrapped with a polyethylene (PE) 
label. Thus, the combination of PP, PE, and PET can be considered as an exception 
to the single compound rule, as long as these three polymers are recycled separately 
at their fnal destination. All other mixed plastic types other than a mix of PP, PE, 
and PET will be considered either A3210 or Y48. Likewise, all contaminated (see 
below) plastics will also be either A3210 or Y48.
B3011, somewhat illogically, also continues to list some fuorinated polymers 
from the old listing (while halogenated polymers are pointedly excluded in B3011). 
But the listing does require that all B3011 plastic waste be recycled via an Annex IV 
R3 destination (recycling only but not via waste-to-energy), and it must be done so 
in an environmentally sound manner.
The primary problem with the actual implementation of the B3011 listing, as 
noted above, is that most shipments of  plastics are collected from a variety of 
sources and without comprehensive chemical analysis. Thus, it is usually not the 
case that there is knowledge to ensure that the additives and other contaminants in 
the load of supposed B3011 plastic wastes are nonhazardous or nonhalogenated 
(e.g., with brominated fame-retardant additives). And such analysis is usually cost￾prohibitive. The Basel Convention is meant to be based on the notion of “rebuttable 
presumption,” with wastes presumed to be hazardous if they are listed on Annex I 
unless you can rebut that presumption by showing that they do not possess a hazard￾ous characteristic on Annex III. But if you cannot rebut due to a lack of information, 
then the default conclusion should be that the waste in question is presumed to be 
hazardous. As this situation is far from theoretical, due to the wide range of hazard￾ous additives in use and the lack of transparency as to what these might be in any 
given shipment, a strong case should be made that most plastic waste shipments 
should now be considered hazardous. But this is not the case in practice. Exporters 
rather simply claim that the export is B3011 or Y48 with no supporting documen￾tary proof.
Y48: Halogenated, Mixed, Incinerated, or Contaminated Plastics
Notwithstanding the “hidden and forgotten plastics” noted in the fnal section of this 
chapter, Y48 can be considered the catchall of the three listings as it includes all 
plastic waste that is neither designated as hazardous (A3210) nor as nonhazardous 
(B3011). Due to the lack of implementation and enforcement of hazardous plastics 
(A3210) currently and the fact that historically nonhazardous plastics have been 
given carte blanche (no controls) despite the lack of proof of nonhazardousness, the 
most signifcant new regulatory development embodied by the amendments today is 
the new classifcation of Y45. Y48 can be broadly characterized as those plastics 
that, while they may not be hazardous per se, are likely to be poorly recycled or not 
recycled safely and effciently and, therefore, are likely to cause harm after trans￾boundary movement. The primary outlined characteristics of Y48 are as follows:
J. Puckett83
1. Contaminated Plastic Wastes: The Convention did not provide a concentration 
limit for allowable contamination but has used strong language: “almost free from 
contamination and other types of wastes,”  and “almost exclusively consisting 
of.” Parties around the world have since interpreted this language (BAN, 2023b) at 
a national level. Most signifcant in this regard is the European Union’s level of 
allowable contamination at 2% or less by weight for exports out of the EU and 6% 
within (European Commission, 2021).
The contamination levels applied by the EU and others are important because 
most of the plastic waste currently traded is likely to be contaminated at concentra￾tion levels greater even than 6%. In 2016, California conducted a bale study of 
plastic wastes collected from households and small businesses and separated at 
materials recovery facilities (MRFs) (CalRecycle, 2016). The study showed con￾tamination levels for PET bottles at 14.1% and colored HDPE bottles at 11.1%.
Another large source of plastic waste is agricultural flm. An EU study recently 
found that the average level of contamination in agricultural flm is 30–40% (Hann 
et al., 2021).
Sources of plastics from postconsumer appliances, electronics, and automobiles 
which are often shredded prior to attempts at sorting and recycling (such as car 
shredding and electronic waste shredding operations) are also rife with contamina￾tion. This contamination is not only from other plastics which, as noted below, cre￾ate polymer mixtures but also at times metals, paper, wood and other materials.
2. Mixed Plastic Polymer, Cured Resins, or Condensation Product Wastes 
(With One Exception): If plastic types are mixed, the shipment qualifes as Y48 
with the one exception being the mixture of PET, PE, and PP which is exempt from 
control if each of these polymers is separated and recycled upon arrival in the 
importing country. There is reason for concern about whether the required separa￾tion and subsequent recycling of all three polymers are currently taking place as the 
market for PP and PE recyclate is limited and enforcement of the new Basel 
Amendments is weak in most parts of the world.
But PET bottles aside, wastes collected from households and small businesses in 
municipalities around the world are mixed at source, primarily from the many types 
of packaging employed today. While MRFs are designed to try to separate the types 
of plastic, such separation is far too diffcult to accomplish completely for all poly￾mers entering the waste stream.
Further, there are many end-of-life consumer products that generate large vol￾umes of mixed plastic wastes. These include wastes from end-of-life automobiles 
and electronic appliances and information technology. Taking the case of consumer 
electronics, about 40% is plastic by weight but utilizing many different types of 
polymers in the same products. Yet, the e-cycling industry has never been required 
to separate the heterogenous mixtures of the many different plastics used in elec￾tronic equipment. These plastics commonly include high-impact polystyrenes 
(HIPs) 14%, ABS 17%, polypropylene (PP) 12%, ABS-polycarbonate (PC) blend 
or PC 12%, plastics with BFRs 9%, ABS with BFRs 3%, polyethylene (PE) 1%, 
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes84
Fig. 5 What is in WEEE (e-waste) plastics
other polymers 17%, and elastomers 5% as noted in Fig. 5 (European Electronics 
Recyclers Association [EERA], 2022).
The methods for separating these plastics that might be shredded or removed 
from the electronics by hand,  typically involve foat-sink technologies utilizing 
immersion in tanks of saline solutions of differing densities. While these systems if 
used back-to-back and combined at times with electrostatic separators, theoretically 
can separate all the polymers found in e-waste, such operations are messy, diffcult, 
and expensive and can only be justifed if there is a lucrative market for each of the 
separations (which currently there are not). This means that much of the e-waste 
plastic  that has been run through multiple foat-sink tanks will remain mixed or 
contaminated and remain classifed as Y48. The inability to turn electronic waste 
plastics into single polymers has created a serious economic market disruption in 
the United States, where there are few viable plastics separating and recycling 
industries and the export of Y48 is illegal due to the Party to non-Party (USA) ban 
in the Basel Convention (discussed previously).
3. Halogenated Polymers (Not already  Listed in B3011): Both the Y48 and 
B3011 (nonhazardous) listings stipulate that plastic polymers must be separated, 
free from contamination, and nonhalogenated if they are to escape Basel controls as 
B3011. The exception to this is a specifc list of fuorinated polymers consisting of 
perfuoroethylene/propylene (FEP), perfuoroalkoxy alkanes, tetrafuoroethylene/
perfuoroalkyl vinyl ether (PFA), tetrafuoroethylene/perfuoro methyl vinyl ether 
(MFA), polyvinyl fuoride (PVF), and polyvinylidene fuoride (PVDF).
J. Puckett85
Halogenated polymers refer to polymers containing halogen elements such as 
fuorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine. These elements are often introduced into 
polymer molecules through substitution or addition reactions. The main purpose of 
halogenation is to change the properties of a chemical to change and defne its per￾formance as a material. And yet they typically introduce toxicological impacts both 
acute and chronic, due to the few possibilities in nature of forming halogenated 
hydrocarbons and thus allowing natural species to develop immunities to the com￾pounds. For use in polymers, a well-known example of halogenation by design is 
the feature of fame retardancy such as in brominated fame retardants (BFRs) that 
are often added to plastics (BOC Sciences, n.d.).
Other common halogenated polymer wastes also include waste PVC, as well as 
PFTE or poly-fuorinated tetra-ethylene wastes. PFTE is the chemical behind 
Tefon, the once popular nonstick product used in cookware that is causing concern 
globally today as being ever-present and everlasting in the environment. Halogenated 
plastic polymers are also widely used in making paints, semiconductors, and medi￾cal devices and products.
PVC waste is widely traded, often in violation of the newly established controls. 
And PVC waste trade is more easily tracked than many plastic wastes as it carries 
its own Harmonized Tariff Schedule (HS) code: HS39153. BAN observes many 
illegal exports of PVC wastes through scrutiny of Comtrade data or from subscriber￾based trade data services (e.g., Panjiva or Datamyne). Examples of these are shown 
in Figs. 6, 7, and 8 and include shipments of PVC from the United States to Asian 
countries or to Mexico which should be subject to the prohibition between trade 
between Parties and non-Parties. BAN has also seen PVC waste exports from the 
EU which are also illegal as Y48 exports to non-OECD countries are illegal by vir￾tue of Europe’s export ban placed in their Waste Shipment Regulation.
Fig. 6 Exports of Y48 PVC wastes from the United States to Basel Parties all of which are illegal 
unless destined for Canada. (Source: BAN analysis of shipping data from Datamyne via Material 
Research L3C)
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes86
Fig. 7 Exports from EU countries to non-OECD countries of Y48 PVC, all of which are illegal. 
BAN analysis of shipping data from Datamyne via Material Research L3C
Fig. 8 Exports by truck from the United States to Mexico of Y48 PVC, all of which are illegal. 
BAN analysis of shipping data from Datamyne via Material Research L3C
4. Moving to a Non-R3 (Annex IV) Destination: Y48 cannot include any wastes 
defned by the B3011 listing (nonhazardous plastic waste), and B3011 must only be 
bound for Annex IV R3 destinations. Thus, one of the reasons that wastes might 
be considered Y48 is if they are destined for fnal disposal (e.g., landflling (D1) or 
incineration (D10)) or another form of recovery such as waste-to-energy (R1).
J. Puckett87
While most plastic waste that is traded is ostensibly moving for mechanical recy￾cling, it is very important to refect that in actual practice, considerable fractions of 
what moves to mechanical recycling is sorted away from the actual recycling pro￾cesses for reasons of contamination or inability to economically process certain 
polymers. These residues and left-overs end up being dumped or burned. In this 
way, even otherwise nonhazardous B3011 waste must be considered Y48 if any part 
of the loads meets a fnal fate of landflling, incineration, or open burning. And yet 
this factor is seldom weighed in the prior informed consent (PIC) process for alleged 
B3011 waste shipments.
Basel Article 11: Uses and Abuses
As noted earlier there can be exceptions to the Party to non-Party ban, defned in the 
Basel Convention’s Article 11. Article 11 states that notwithstanding Basel Article 
4, 5, trade between Parties and non-Parties can take place under bilateral or multi￾lateral accords outside of the Basel Convention “provided that such agreements or 
arrangements do not derogate from the environmentally sound management of haz￾ardous wastes and other wastes as required by this Convention. These agreements or 
arrangements shall stipulate provisions that are not less environmentally sound than 
those provided for by this Convention in particular taking into account the interests 
of developing countries.”
The OECD Council Decision
Perhaps the most well-known and widely used Article 11 agreement now in place is 
the OECD Council Decision on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Wastes 
Destined for Recovery Operations which has been in force since 1992 and applies 
to the 38 member states of the OECD (1992).
One clear effect and purpose of the OECD Decision is to enable other OECD 
members that are Basel Parties to continue trading in hazardous and other wastes 
with non-Parties for the purposes of recycling. Today, the United States is the only 
OECD member state that is a non-Party to the Basel Convention. In addition to 
allowing trade with the United States, the OECD members also wished to stream￾line the implementation of the Basel PIC procedure. The OECD streamlining 
includes allowing pre-consented facilities and imposing tacit (assumed) consent for 
shipments where no consent is forthcoming within a given length of time.
In 2001, the OECD adopted major revisions to their Council Decision to align 
itself more closely with the Basel Convention concerning the lists of wastes to be 
controlled (CIEL, 2009). Today, the OECD Council Decision and its lists of wastes – 
the controlled (amber listed) and not controlled (green listed) wastes – continue to 
largely replicate the Basel Convention’s listings of wastes controlled (hazardous 
and other wastes found in Annex VIII and II) and those that are not controlled 
(Annex IX).
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes88
Under the terms of the OECD Council Decision, the default procedure is to auto￾matically accept new Basel classifcations into the corresponding list (e.g., amber or 
green). However, if a member objects to the automatic incorporation of new Basel 
listings, it is subject to a formal procedural debate and a fnal decision. This proce￾dure is important for our discussion on plastic waste trade because this is precisely 
what happened on July 3, 2019, when the United States objected to the new Basel 
plastic waste listings being adopted in the OECD Council Decision and proposed 
that the status quo be maintained (CIEL, 2020) – that is, that a free trade in all plas￾tic wastes destined for recovery purposes within the OECD be retained with the 
exception of hazardous plastic waste (A3210). The new global  listings Y48 and 
B3011 would be ignored  for trade in plastic waste for recycling within the 
OECD bloc. 
While the United States argued at the OECD against adopting the new controls 
on plastic waste, it failed to persuade any other OECD member states to accept this 
interpretation. The US proposal would have served as largely a denial of the new 
Basel Amendments but was rebuffed by the rest of the OECD.
As all OECD member states are Basel Parties (other than the US), they knew 
their Basel obligations could not be legally ignored as an Article 11 agreement (see 
language above) does not allow for such a major derogation of simply not control￾ling a new Basel-controlled waste. So in the absence of a consensus to accept the 
Basel Amendments (as the United States disagreed), the OECD Decision currently 
does not include the new listings B3011 (nonhazardous plastic waste) nor Y48 
(plastic waste for special consideration).
This leaves only “hazardous” plastic waste (A3210) as a legally traded plastic 
wastes between OECD countries using the OECD Article 11 agreement. All OECD 
countries must otherwise control such waste (Y48 and B3011) “according to their 
domestic and international laws,” meaning that OECD members other than the 
US must apply Basel and national controls to the transboundary movement of plas￾tic wastes Y48, and nobody can trade in Y48 at all with the United States other than 
A3210. In sum, all Basel Parties are prohibited from trading any Y48 plastic wastes 
with the United States except for Canada which, signed a legally dubious arrange￾ment with the United States (see Canadian Plastic Waste Arrangement below).
Sadly, trade data deposited in the Comtrade datasystem demonstrate that many 
Basel Parties both OECD and non-OECD are currently accepting Y48 plastic wastes 
from the United States (see charts). Such trade is defned as illegal traffc under the 
Convention and a criminal act.
Article 11 Abused to Perpetuate Free Trade in Plastic Waste
Following the adoption of the new plastic amendments, certain OECD member 
Basel Parties, even after publicly supporting the amendments during the COP14 
negotiations in Geneva, moved thereafter to undermine these new controls on 
J. Puckett89
plastic wastes. The avenue they believed was available to them to do this was 
Article 11. BAN (2023a) published a report on the misuse of Article 11, in which 
we revealed three cases of illegal Article 11 application. The report’s fndings are 
summarized as follows:
While Article 11 was always meant to condone side agreements that were 
roughly equivalent to Basel controls to ensure that trade with non-Parties could take 
place, particularly in the years prior to widescale ratifcation, it was never meant to 
institutionalize agreements weaker than the Basel Convention. This is very clear 
from the text of the Article. And yet in the three cases outlined, this requirement has 
been ignored.
Three cases identifed by BAN either provide no control or far less control over 
the new plastic wastes that is meant to occur under Basel, or they operate as if the 
OECD accord was in force for all plastic waste trade, when it is not.
The European Union and EEA Double Standard The EU has failed to properly 
implement the new amendments for that trade between Basel Parties within the 
European Economic Area (EEA). This is currently the case, and the newly proposed 
revised waste shipment regulation now readied for adoption following the trilogue 
procedure, also fails to provide equivalent level of control and continues to allow 
certain Y48 plastics controlled by the new Basel plastic amendments to be freely 
traded between the EU-European Free Trade Association (EFTA) member states 
making up the EEA. Unfortunately, the fnal text retained the illegal use of Article 
11 and allowed the EEA to derogate from the Basel Convention allowing the 
European states from fully adopting what was agreed at Basel with respect to plastic 
waste controls. 
Canadian Plastic Waste “Arrangement” with the United States Shortly before 
the entry-into-force of the Basel plastic amendments in late 2020, the United 
States and Canada declared a “nonlegally binding arrangement” as an Article 11 
agreement, which according to the two countries allows Canada to freely trade 
with a non-Party (United States) those newly controlled plastic wastes under the 
Convention. This “arrangement” completely ignores the 2019 Basel plastic waste 
amendments and the most basic Article 11 requirements for equivalent levels of 
control. If it is allowed to stand, Canada will be able to continue to completely 
ignore the new plastic amendments in their plastic waste trade  with the 
United States.
Mexico Invokes the OECD Council Decision to Trade Plastic Waste with the 
Non-Party United States Mexico has recently declared in letters to BAN that they 
consider that  their concurrent membership in the OECD with the United States 
allows them to trade Basel-controlled plastic wastes (Y48) with the Unites States 
without following Basel control procedures. However, as noted above, while there 
is an OECD Decision in place that normally could serve as a valid Article 11 agree￾Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes90
ment for those wastes that are covered by both the Basel Convention and OECD 
Council Decision, the OECD Council has not adopted two of the three new plastic 
waste listings (Y48 and B3011) following the US objection to the new listings being 
incorporated into the OECD Decision. The OECD Decision can therefore not be 
considered a valid Article 11 agreement for plastic waste listed under Y48, and trade 
of such plastic waste between Mexico (a Party to the Basel Convention) and the 
United States (non-Party to the Basel Convention) violates the legal requirements of 
the Convention. If this illegal interpretation is allowed to stand, plastic wastes will 
continue to fow, as they do today, illegally across the US/Mexico border.
In sum, despite the contradiction with the terms of the Basel Convention’s Article 
11, paragraph 1, Basel Parties (the EU member states, Iceland, Liechtenstein, 
Norway, as well as Mexico and Canada) continue to assert a claim to legitimate use 
of Article 11 to ignore, all or in part, the plastic waste amendments. Unfortunately, 
the Basel Convention does not have a governing body capable of examining the 
validity of Article 11 agreements and their implementation, nor capacity to prose￾cute  invalid ones, and thus  to hold Parties accountable for the above  mentioned 
violations.
All Parties and stakeholders should condemn such invalid interpretations of 
Article 11 and, as appropriate, self-correct all such revealed noncompliance. Failing 
to do so creates a dangerous precedent that weakens the Basel Convention and inter￾national governance generally. To allow any grouping of two or more countries to 
self-declare an Article 11 agreement that contradicts Article 11 itself is to allow for 
illegal reservations (forbidden by Basel’s Article 26), by another name, and in time, 
a complete unraveling of the Convention.
Regional and National Waste Trade Instruments
The European Union Waste Shipment Regulation
The European Union (and formerly the European Community) has long held a lead￾ership role in global governance on waste trade and has maintained legislation on 
waste trade as early as 1984 (EC/84/631). Historically, it was with the support of 
Europe, led by Denmark, that added to the call of the G77 developing countries and 
ensured the passage of the Basel Ban in 1994 and the subsequent decision for a 
Basel Ban Amendment in 1995. The EU was an early adopter of the Ban Amendment, 
placing it into EU legislation in 1997, years prior to its global entry-into-force in 
2019. Furthermore, they did so by including Basel Annex II wastes in addition to 
hazardous wastes within the ban’s scope.
The current version of the waste shipment regulation (Regulation (EC) No. 
1013/2006) is now in the fnal stages of being recast (see COM/2021/709 fnal), 
with the fnal trilogue negotiations fnished. During the negotiations the issue of 
plastic waste control was central. Igniting the controversy were two issues. First, as 
noted above, the EU shocked many observers by electing to assert a dubious use of 
J. Puckett91
Article 11 and ignore many of the obligations for controlling plastic wastes inferred 
by the new Basel plastic amendments for trade among EU and EFTA states. Second, 
there had been a clarion call among civil society groups for the EU to pass an out￾right ban on the export of all forms of plastic wastes from the EU/EFTA group. This 
became a tough battle between NGOs and some in industry. In the end, following 
the fnal trilogue negotiation, while a total ban was not achieved for all plastic waste 
exports, substantial further restrictions on plastic waste trade was achieved to add to 
the improvements made following the Basel plastics amendments passage in 2019. 
The new Waste Shipment Regulation will ban all plastic wastes including B3011 
to non-OECD countries by 2026. Five years after that ban has been in force, a very 
small exception will be allowed for those countries which can prove to the 
Commission against a slate of very strict criteria, that they can manage such wastes 
in an environmentally sound manner and in a way that does not harm their own 
waste management infrastructure. With respect to exports to OECD countries such 
as Turkey, all plastic wastes will be subject to the prior-informed-consent procedure 
and will not be allowed to be shipped at all should they be found to be contaminated 
beyond 2% by weight, After two years of this new OECD rule being operational, the 
Commission will study these OECD exports to determine whether a full ban should 
be imposed.
In sum, the EU will be managing plastic waste trade far more strictly than any 
other waste stream, aiming to control its trade regardless as to whether it is hazard￾ous or not. With respect to exports of plastic wastes to non-OECD countries, a de￾facto ban is now in place ending more than 30 years of plastic waste export and 
dumping in countries such as China, Malaysia, Vietnam, Thailand and 
Indonesia.  Additionally the new Regulation contains serious improvements and 
new teeth for enforcing the trade rules achieved. Now the emphasis must lie with 
implementation by EU Member States.
Africa’s Bamako Convention
The Bamako Convention on the ban on the Import into Africa and the Control of 
Transboundary Movement and Management of Hazardous Wastes within Africa, 
adopted on January 29, 1991, in Bamako, Mali, prohibits the import into Africa of 
any hazardous, including radioactive, wastes, as well as hazardous substances, 
including products, which have been banned, cancelled, or withdrawn from regis￾tration for environmental or health reasons. The Convention entered into force on 
April 22, 1998, and now, as of COP3, has 29 Parties (UNEP, 2020).
The Bamako Convention defnes hazardous wastes differently than the Basel 
Convention in that it explicitly includes radioactive wastes, and it allows for either 
a hazardous constituent (Annex I) or a hazardous characteristic (Annex II) to defne 
a waste as hazardous (controlled). The Basel Convention bases its defnition of haz￾ardous wastes controlled by it being listed on Annex I unless it does not possess a 
hazardous characteristic  listed on Annex III.  Further, the older Basel Annex II 
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes92
listings are found in Bamako’s Annex I as Y18 wastes collected from households, 
including sewage and sewage sludges, and Y47 residues arising from the incinera￾tion of household wastes.
Bamako’s Y18 should include many plastic wastes (e.g., municipal derived plas￾tic fractions), and likewise Y45 (organohalogen compounds other than substances 
referred to in this Annex) would include all fuorinated polymers as well as PVC 
and many other chlorinated and brominated compounds. This means that presently 
Bamako Parties should control waste PVC, fuorinated polymers, and plastics with 
brominated fame retardants. All of the plastic wastes then which might be included 
in Y18 and Y45, should be forbidden entry into the continent of Africa by the 29 
Bamako Parties today.
The special defnition for additional hazardous wastes that includes “hazardous 
substances which have been banned, cancelled or refused registration by govern￾ment regulatory action, or voluntarily withdrawn from registration in the country of 
manufacture, for human health or environmental reasons” (Article 2, 1, d) is par￾ticularly interesting as this could very well include plastic products that have been 
banned from the marketplace in some country in the world, due to for example their 
being single-use plastics. The debate could arise as to whether a single-use plastic 
bag or soda straw would be considered a “hazardous substance” or not, but a case 
can certainly be made that due to the ubiquitous presence of hazardous additives 
they could meet the defnition of hazardous substances that have been banned. 
Further, now that Basel has added new Annex II listings, it is likely that Bamako 
Parties will add the new listings of Y48 (halogenated, mixed, and contaminated 
plastics; see above) and Y49 (nonhazardous electronic waste adopted at COP16). If 
these are added, Bamako Parties will be obliged to ban their import into the conti￾nent of Africa.
The last Bamako Conference of Parties (COP3) was held in Brazzaville, Congo, 
in February 12–14, 2020. A decision on plastic waste (CB-3/8) (see Bamako Text) 
was adopted there that called inter alia for the following:
Urges, Parties and other African states that have not already done so, to enhance or supple￾ment existing legislation to prevent illegal and unwanted traffc in plastic waste from enter￾ing their territory and the African Continent;
Further Urges, the Parties to take steps to add all forms of plastic wastes to Annex I of 
the Bamako Convention at the earliest opportunity, bearing in mind the procedures to be 
followed under Article 18, to ensure that traders do not make the African continent a target 
for foreign plastic waste.
Certainly, if the Bamako Convention were amended as described in the second 
operative paragraph above, then a full ban on plastic waste trade into the continent 
of Africa would become the law and norm of the continent.
The South Pacifc’s Waigani Convention
The Convention to Ban the Importation into Forum Island Countries of Hazardous 
and Radioactive Wastes and to Control the Transboundary Movement and 
Management of Hazardous Wastes within the South Pacifc Region, commonly 
J. Puckett93
known as the Waigani Convention, was adopted on September 16, 1995, in Waigani, 
Papua New Guinea, by the South Pacifc Forum states. The treaty prohibits each 
Pacifc Island developing Party from importing all hazardous and radioactive wastes 
from outside of the Convention area. Australia and New Zealand are prohibited 
from exporting hazardous or radioactive wastes to all other South Pacifc Forum 
Island countries. The Convention is now in force with 13 of the 15 South Pacifc 
Forum states having ratifed.
Unlike the Bamako Convention, the Waigani Convention defnes hazardous 
waste as the Basel Convention does but with the exception that Basel Annex II 
wastes are included on Annex I, and thus, these Annex I listed wastes will be haz￾ardous unless they are shown not to exhibit a hazardous characteristic. If they do 
exhibit a hazardous characteristic they will be considered as “hazardous” waste, 
forbidden entry into the region if destined to a developing country. Australia and 
New Zealand are likewise forbidden from exporting such Basel Annex II such as 
hazardous Y46 plastic waste to a developing country in the region. The defnition of 
Y46 has been altered slightly from Basel’s version to read:
Y46 Wastes collected from households, including sewage and sewage sludges with the 
exception of clean sorted recyclable wastes which do not possess any of the hazardous 
characteristics defned in Annex II.
Due to the uncertainty of classifying plastic waste in the Waigani Convention and 
its caveat that Basel Annex II entries are only included if they possess a hazardous 
characteristic (which is weaker than Basel) as it is currently drafted, it would per￾haps be best if the treaty were amended to include a third annex of Basel Annex II 
wastes that will be considered hazardous without needing to possess a hazardous 
characteristic. Indeed, inclusion of the new Basel listings is Recommendation 14 of 
a recent report prepared by the Secretariat of the Pacifc Regional Environment 
Program (SPREP), entitled Evaluation of the Waigani Convention (2021).
The Mediterranean’s Izmir Protocol
The Parties to the Convention for the Protection of the Mediterranean Sea against 
Pollution (Barcelona Convention) adopted the Protocol on the Prevention of 
Pollution of the Mediterranean Sea by Transboundary Movements of Hazardous 
Wastes and Their Disposal (Izmir Protocol) on October 1, 1996, in Izmir, Turkey. 
Turkey led the push for the adoption of this instrument and thus was able to confer 
the title of the famous Turkish port city in naming the protocol. Ironically, Turkey 
now is seen as a Party that completely ignores the treaty and its implementation, not 
only for plastic waste but for obsolete ships as well.
The Izmir Protocol prohibits the export of hazardous and radioactive wastes to 
non-OECD countries and the import of hazardous and radioactive wastes to those 
Parties that are not members of the European Community. For the purposes of this 
protocol, Monaco is considered to be part of the OECD and the European 
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes94
Community. The Protocol is in force, and Turkey is a Party, as are Albania, Malta, 
Montenegro, Morocco, Syria, and Tunisia.
The Izmir Protocol defnes its scope similarly as has the Bamako Convention in 
that it considers waste to be hazardous by being either on the list of hazardous sub￾stances (Annex I) or possessing a hazardous characteristic (Annex II). Further, 
“hazardous substances which have been banned, cancelled or refused registration 
by government regulatory action, or voluntarily withdrawn from registration in the 
country of manufacture, for human health or environmental reasons,” as noted 
above, could be useful in designating plastic bans found around the world as a trig￾ger for the material as a hazardous substance. Additionally, Basel’s Y46 and Y47 
found in Basel Annex II are listed as part of Annex I in Izmir. This has the effect of 
including these in the Izmir import ban. This is especially important with respect to 
plastic wastes due to Y46 including household waste plastic. 
Sadly, there has been a history of noncompliance with the Izmir protocol as 
Turkey, in particular, has ignored it for hazardous ships entering the shipbreaking 
yards at Aliaga, very near Izmir, the site of the signing of the protocol. Also, Turkey 
has had a terrible track record of allowing all manner of plastic wastes into their 
territory, many of which should be controlled due to their toxic additives, or due to 
their being wastes collected from households (e.g., municipal wastes from Europe) 
as stipulated by the scope of the Izmir Protocol. We look forward to the day when 
the Turkish government decides to embrace the obligations of the Izmir Protocol or 
is otherwise held accountable for the agreement it was so proud to espouse and host 
a few decades ago.
National Import Bans
China
As noted earlier, China has banned the import of all manner of scrap, including 
plastic scrap under their National Sword policy and legislation. Pellets and fakes 
that have been recycled already are seen as a commodity are not included. This 
prohibition was frst put into place in March of 2018 with a cutoff limit of purity of 
no more than 0.5% contamination. Today, that limit has been removed, and 100% 
purity of plastic polymer is required to allow trade into China. This took place in an 
amendment to the national solid waste law and went into force the same day as the 
Basel plastic waste amendments – January 1, 2021 (Editorial Team, 2020). While 
laudable from the standpoint of protecting China’s environment and implementing 
national self-suffciency in waste management called for by the Basel Convention, 
the Chinese National Sword policy has created a tidal wave of exportation to neigh￾bouring Asian countries, while China has done little to prevent or mitigate the harm 
caused by the redirection.
J. Puckett95
Fig. 9 Thailand’s plastic waste imports from 2012 to 2020. (Source: Thailand Customs Data 
(Igini, 2023))
Thailand
Following the National Sword policy  closing China to plastic waste imports in 
2018, Southeast Asian countries were besieged with plastic scrap imports as Chinese 
businessmen set up their recycling operations across the rural areas of the region 
and in free trade zones (Fig. 9) creating a massive import surge that same year in 
Thailand. Thus, Thailand has announced a plastic waste import ban which is slated 
to go into force in 2025. [Source: https://earth.org/thailand-ban-plastic-imports/]. 
Closing the Remaining Plastic Waste Trade 
Pathways / Recommendations
While the Basel Convention and the regional treaties and national legislation it has 
encouraged has been a vital driver in minimizing transboundary movements of plas￾tic wastes, the efforts to date are not comprehensive in scope and are sorely lacking 
in proper implementation and enforcement. The latter concern is corroborated by 
the global data (BAN Data) found in the chapter entitled “Major Six-Year Trends in 
Global Plastic Waste Trade”.
A scan of the 6-year trends of global trade from 2017 to date shows signifcant 
overall decline in global shipments of OECD waste, but only modest evidence of 
reductions between 2020 and 2021, before and after the new Basel Amendments 
went into force. It is true that were many factors impacting global trade in plastic 
waste from 2020 to 2023 that could have scrambled data trends. These include the 
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes96
very welcome decision by shipping line CMA CGM to ban the movement of plastic 
waste on their ships beginning on June 1, 2022 (CMA CGM, 2021). And they 
include the indirect effect of the global COVID-19 pandemic, which caused ship￾ping line disruptions due to supply chain upheavals. The price of oil from which 
plastic is made, has had a major infuence on plastics demand and therefore the 
amount of plastic waste as well. However, despite the inability to comprehensively 
assess the impacts of these varying factors, the major dip one might have expected 
after a major slice of global plastic waste trade was suddenly controlled for the frst 
time, was not observed. And, as of this writing, we are seeing alarming plateaus and 
even some increases in plastic waste trade following the previous steady decline 
witnessed in the 6-year period from the OECD group.
While the United States has decreased exports to Asia in the last few years, their 
exports to Latin America, including Mexico, have increased. The EU has sadly seen 
a steady increase in exports from the EU to Asia and Turkey in comparison with the 
average levels seen in 2020 before entry-into-force of the Basel Amendments. Japan 
continues to show the highest levels of export to non-OECD countries in the world, 
and this trade has not diminished post entry-into-force (January 1, 2021).
Implementation and Enforcement of Basel’s Plastic 
Amendments Must Improve
Perhaps the biggest concern with regard to the scant evidence of the new laws mak￾ing a serious impact in trade volumes, is the concurrent data we receive from sub￾scription sources (e.g., Panjiva or Datamyne) that noncompliance currently appears 
to be widespread. This is best revealed by a steady fow of plastic waste from the 
non-Party, the United States, and the apparent willingness of importing countries 
such as Malaysia, Vietnam, Indonesia, Thailand, and Mexico to receive it despite 
such imports being illegal due to the Basel Party to non-Party ban.
Searches in the bill of lading databases for the general HS Code 3915 (plastic 
scrap) show high volumes of exports from the United States to Basel Parties other 
than Canada. Remember trade between the US with the exception of Canada are 
supposed to be forbidden unless they are B3011 plastic waste which are uncontami￾nated and sorted by polymer. As such purity in shipments of most plastic waste is 
unlikely, it is feared that many of these shipments are illegal exports.
BAN has in the past contacted governments including India, Vietnam, Malaysia, 
Thailand, and Indonesia with information about shipments en route to their coun￾tries, alerting them to the fact that the shipments contained mixed plastic waste and 
were likely to be contraband. Only two of the countries said they would search the 
containers, and none of them subsequently informed BAN of actions taken.
BAN has direct knowledge that mixed plastics bales (Y48) are still fowing from 
the US electronics recycling industry to certain recyclers in Malaysia in contraven￾tion of the Party to non-Party ban in the Convention. It is unclear how this is possi￾ble given Malaysia’s Basel obligations to prevent such illegal traffc from entering 
the country.
J. Puckett97
Another  area where the noncompliance becomes indisputable and obvious is 
found in the exports of PVC from the EU to non-OECD countries or from the United 
States to any Basel Party other than Canada. PVC is an obvious halogenated poly￾mer and is thus defned as Y48. Two examples of this very clear noncompliance are 
found in Figs. 10 and 11.
Fig. 10 Four hundred sixty-one records of PVC exports from the United States to Mexico from 
January 1, 2023, to June 30, 2023, making up $1,210,000 in customs value have moved to Mexico, 
a Basel Party that cannot legally accept PVC waste (Y48) from the United States. BAN analysis of 
shipping data from Datamyne via Material Research L3C
Fig. 11 These exports from the European Union and the United Kingdom are illegal due to Y48 
being included in the Basel Ban Amendment implementation of the EU and the United Kingdom. 
The exports from the United States are also illegal due to a ban on the trade of Y48 between Parties 
and non-Parties without a valid Article 11 agreement. BAN analysis of shipping data from 
Datamyne via Material Research L3C
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes98
Basel Must Finally Begin to Address the Hazardous Additives 
in Plastic Waste 
As noted above, the Basel Convention has kept its head frmly in the sand when it 
comes to addressing the hazardous nature of plastic waste. Every use of plastic has 
chemical additives in addition to the compounds that make up the resin, or polymer 
that serves as the basic matrix. Many of these additives are hazardous. And yet the 
presence of these is not assessed in determining whether a plastic waste is hazardous, 
a waste for special consideration or a non-hazardous waste.  The construct of the 
Basel Convention is that the presence of a hazardous additive triggers the rebuttable 
presumption that the waste listed on Annex I is hazardous, and it is only by the dem￾onstration with some evidence that the Annex I waste does not present a hazardous 
characteristic can it be presumed to not be hazardous. As such a demonstration or 
presentation of evidence is not in the offng for plastics containing hazardous addi￾tives, most shipments subject to transboundary movement must be defned as hazard￾ous. Thus, the application of A3210 (hazardous plastic waste) should be far more 
common than it is today. B3011 (non-hazardous plastic) should only be reserved for 
scraps where it is known precisely what additives are being used and that in fact they 
do not present hazardous characteristics. Today that burden of proof of non-hazard￾ousness has been turned on its head. This must be corrected at the earliset opportunity.
Basel Must Ensure Coverage of Hidden 
and Forgotten Plastic Wastes
While the original intent of the Basel plastic amendments was to ensure that all 
plastic waste would be covered by at least one of the three new listings (A3210 – 
hazardous, B3011 – nonhazardous, or Y48 – special consideration), in fact there are 
many types of plastic wastes that remain in a gray area of uncertainty due to their 
being covered in part by other previously existing Basel Annex IX listings for non￾hazardous wastes, or sometimes were not listed at all and remain uncertain. A read￾ing of the decisions taken at COP14 on plastics says nothing regarding the older 
listings taking precedence where overlapping defnitions are in existence. Logically 
one would think the more recent decisions would trump the older ones but this has 
in fact not been the case in practice.
These hidden or forgotten plastic wastes to which the new amendments do not 
appear to apply include the following:
• Synthetic textile wastes
• Rubber wastes
• Plastics making up part of electronic waste
• Plastic making up part of waste motor vehicles
• Waste plastic mixed in bales of paper waste
• Refuse derived fuel which contains high levels of plastic waste
• Waste tyres
J. Puckett99
As an example of the problem, we can examine two issues which have been 
highlighted in a recent presentation  given at the Basel Conference of Parties 
(COP16)  – textile waste and waste plastics mixed into bales of paper (BAN/
IPEN, 2023).
Globally, the trade in textile waste is massive with container loads of used cloth￾ing, carpets, etc., moving daily from the Global North to the Global South. About 
60% of our clothing today is synthetic, using polymers such as nylon, polyester, and 
acrylic. By the fundamental defnitions of the new Basel listings, these plastic wastes 
are almost certainly to be considered Y48, because the plastic is “contaminated” 
with natural fbers and other materials and will almost certainly be mixed polymers. 
However, these are not being considered as Y48 plastics due to the existence of the 
older listings B3030 (textile wastes) and B3035 (waste textile foor coverings, car￾pets) which are being used instead, and these listings of course are outside of the 
ambit of control, being listed on Annex IX (non-hazardous).
The previous listings should have been adjusted to accommodate the new intent 
of the plastic amendments. Likewise, using the HS code 3915 (waste parings and 
scrap of plastic) to serve as the metric for plastic waste trade is highly misleading as 
so much of the plastic waste trade is also being exported under other HS codes. This 
results in a global underreporting by about half of actual plastic waste trade in most 
studies that make exclusive use of HS3915 (chapter “Toxic Contamination Caused 
by Plastic Waste in Countries of the Global South”).
Another example that has received recent attention is the mountain of plastic 
which go along for the ride of with the massive waste paper trade which moves 
across the world from Japan, Europe, Australia, and North America to countries like 
Indonesia and India (BAN/IPEN, 2023). As much as 30% of the bales shipped to the 
massive paper recycling mills in these countries are made up of plastic. These plas￾tics pile up alongside the pulp mills as they must be removed to allow proper recy￾cling of paper. These rejected plastics are often set ablaze or given to local business 
as fuel to produce tofu or sugar. The burning of mixed plastics in this way creates 
emissions of some of the deadliest compounds known, including dioxins and poly￾cyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and thus this “paper” waste trade is some of 
the deadliest so far reported in terms of impact. And yet this form of plastic waste 
export is not being controlled under Basel due to the previous Annex IX listing of 
B3020 (paper, paperboard, and paper product waste) (Fig. 12).
Sadly, Parties are interpreting the ambiguity in a way which is least protective of 
the environment. Already the EU has gone so far as to formalize this exemption to 
Basel controls in their EU Correspondent’s Guidelines #12 (European 
Commission, 2021):
16. A waste that, among other materials, contains plastic but can be classifed under a spe￾cifc entry in the Annexes III, IIIB and IV of the WSR (e.g., waste metal cables coated or 
insulated with plastics (see entries A1190 and B1115), waste electrical and electronic 
equipment (see, e.g., entries A1180, B1110 and GC020) or waste vehicles (see entry 
B1250)), cannot be classifed under one of the entries on plastic waste, but is to be classifed 
under the relevant specifc entry.
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes100
Fig. 12 If plastics in textiles and paper bales are included, the numbers for plastic waste trade are 
1.6–2.4 times higher than if we only look at HS3915. And this still does not account for all plastics 
hidden in other HS codes. (Source: Karlsson et al. (2023))
The greater issue of the forgotten plastics falling through the regulatory cracks is 
in serious need of attention by the Basel Parties. It is scientifcally illogical and 
legally incongruent for the package of three amendments, meant to cover all plastic 
waste together, made after older listings containing plastic wastes, to not supersede 
the older listings. However, the work to correct this ambiguity and incoherence has 
not been foreseen and scheduled. It is estimated that these forgotten plastics consti￾tute as much of that which is supposedly now controlled today. Thus, we have only 
accomplished half of the regulatory work anticipated at the outset of the Basel effort 
to better control plastic wastes (BAN/IPEN, 2023).
Conclusion
While the adoption of the plastic amendments in 2019 at COP16 of the Basel 
Convention has been correctly hailed as a major accomplishment in the arena of 
global environmental governance and environmental justice, it is too early to 
applaud ourselves until we implement and enforce the new rules we have made and 
extend them to encompass all the plastic wastes we originally intended to control. 
J. Puckett101
Our work, to  1) Better enforce that which has been agreed; 2) Implement the 
Convention for the hazarduos chemical additives found in plastic wastes; and 3) 
provide proper implementation for the hidden and forgotten plastic waste streams 
that often retain their status as unregulated due to non-listings or old non-hazardous 
waste listings; must continue. Until this is done, celebration is premature.
References
Basel Action Network. (2023a). Misuse of the Basel Convention Article 11 to avoid compli￾ance with new plastic waste controls. http://wiki.ban.org/images/a/a1/Misuse_of_the_Basel_
Convention_Article_11_to_Avoid_Compliance_with_New_Plastic_Waste_Controls.pdf
Basel Action Network. (2023b). Plastic waste contamination table. http://wiki.ban.org/
images/8/85/Contamination_Table.pdf
Basel Action Network & International Pollutants Elimination Network. (2019). The entry into 
force of the Basel ban amendment: A guide to implementation and next steps. http://wiki.ban.
org/images/4/4e/BAN_IPEN_Basel_Ban_Amend_Guide_Nov2019.pdf
Basel Action Network & International Pollutants Elimination Network. (2023, May 8). Tackling 
the hidden Basel plastic wastes [Side event]. Basel Convention 16th Conference of the Parties, 
Basel, Switzerland. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wse2ld0zUHA
BOC Sciences. (n.d.). Halogenated polymers. https://polymer.bocsci.com/products/halogenated￾polymers-4183.html
Break Free From Plastic. (2019, March 4). Progress on plastics update issue 10: UNEA4. https://
www.ciel.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Progress-on-Plastics-Update-Issue-10-UNEA4-
Mar-2019-1.pdf
CalRecycle. (2016). Bale rate study [PowerPoint slides]. https://www2.calrecycle.ca.gov/
PublicNotices/Documents/6678
Center for International Environmental Law [CIEL]. (2020). Legal analysis of the implications of 
the Basel Convention’s decision on plastic waste trade for OECD countries. https://www.ciel.
org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Analysis-Basel-Plastic-Waste-Trade-OECD-Countries.pdf
CMA CGM. (2021, June 1). The CMA CGM Group decides it will no longer carry plastic waste 
on its ships. https://www.cmacgm-group.com/en/news-media/one-ocean-Summit-the-CMA￾CGM-Group-decides-it-will-no-longer-carry-plastic-waste-on-its-ships
Editorial Team. (2020, December 2). China completely bans import of solid waste from 1st Jan 
2021. Safety4Sea. https://safety4sea.com/china-completely-bans-import-of-solid-waste-from￾1st-jan-2021/
European Commission. (2021). Correspondents’ Guidelines No 12 on the classifcation of 
plastic waste under Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 on shipments of waste. https://environ￾ment.ec.europa.eu/system/fles/2021-12/Correspondents'%20guidelines%20No%2012%20
fnal%20Nov%202021%20corr1.pdf
European Electronics Recyclers Association. (2022, June). EERA position on plastics. 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/6273d6aab17e87401893aefc/t/62c5453d0004622
d56e7605c/1657095490188/EERA+Position+on+Plastics+-++June+2022.pdf
GACC. (n.d.). Overview of China Customs. General Administration of Customs, People’s Republic 
of China. http://english.customs.gov.cn/topic/customs17/info189290.htm
Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives. (2019). Discarded: Communities on the frontlines 
of the global plastic crisis. https://www.no-burn.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/Report￾July-12-2019-Spreads-no-marks-1.pdf
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic Wastes102
Hann, S., Fletcher, E., Molteno, S., Sherrington, C., Elliott, L., Kong, M., Koite, A., Sastre, 
S., & Martinez, V. (2021). Relevance of conventional and biodegradable plastics in agri￾culture. European Commission. https://environment.ec.europa.eu/system/fles/2021-09/
Agricultural%20Plastics%20Final%20Report.pdf
Igini, M. (2023, February 22). Thailand announces ban on plastic waste imports by 2025. Earth.
org. https://earth.org/thailand-ban-plastic-imports/
InforMEA. (1991, January 30). Bamako Convention on the ban of the import into Africa and 
the control of transboundary movement and management of hazardous wastes within Africa. 
https://www.informea.org/en/treaties/bamako-convention/text
InforMEA. (1995, September 16). Waigani Convention to ban the importation into Forum island 
countries of hazardous and radioactive wastes and to control the transboundary movement and 
management of hazardous wastes within the South Pacifc Region. https://www.informea.org/
en/treaties/waigani-convention/text
Karlsson, T., et  al. (2023, March 7). Plastic waste trade: The hidden numbers. An IPEN 
report. https://ipen.org/sites/default/fles/documents/ipen_plastic_waste_trade_report￾fnal-3digital.pdf
Müller, S. M. (2023). The toxic ship: The voyage of the Khian Sea and the global waste trade. 
University of Washington Press.
OECD. (1992, March 29). Decision of the council on the control of transboundary movements 
of wastes destined for recovery operations. https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/
OECD-LEGAL-0266
Puckett, J. (1989, March). Eyewitness account by the author, who attended the fnal negotiations 
in March in Basel, Switzerland.
Puckett, J., & Fogel, C. (1994). A victory for environment and justice: The Basel ban 
and how it happened. Greenpeace International. http://wiki.ban.org/A_Victory_for_
Environment_and_Justice:_The_Basel_Ban_and_How_it_Happened
Rapoza, K. (2020, November 29). China doesn’t want the world’s trash anymore. Including “recy￾clable” goods. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/kenrapoza/2020/11/29/china-doesnt￾want-the-worlds-trash-anymore-including-recyclable-goods/?sh=7ba0cdf87290
Secretariat of the Pacifc Regional Environmental Programme. (2021). An evaluation of the Waigani 
Convention. https://www.sprep.org/sites/default/fles/30-SPREP-Meeting/Waigani%20
Convention/WC-6.1_Att.1-Final-Review-report-Waigani-Conv_July%202021.pdf
UNEP/MAP. (1996, October 1). Protocol on the prevention of pollution of the mediterranean 
sea by transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal. Izmir. https://
www.unep.org/unepmap/who-we-are/contracting-parties/hazardous-wastes-protocol?_
ga=2.57168106.1771559891.1691290212-963292404.1691290212
United Nations Environment Programme. (1989, March 22). Basel Convention on the control 
of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal. https://www.basel.int/
TheConvention/Overview/TextoftheConvention/tabid/1275/Default.aspx
United Nations Environment Programme. (2020). Report of the conference of the parties to the 
Bamako Convention on the ban of the import into Africa and the control of transboundary 
movement and management of hazardous wastes within Africa on the work of its third meeting. 
https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/32131/BamakoCOP3Report.pdf
United Nations Environment Programme. (2023). Technical guidelines on the environmentally 
sound management of plastic wastes (UNEP/CHW.16/6/Add.3/Rev.1). https://www.basel.int/
TheConvention/ConferenceoftheParties/Meetings/COP16/tabid/9311/Default.aspx
Watson, S.  K. (2018, June 28). China has refused to recycle the west’s plastics. What now? 
NPR. https://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2018/06/28/623972937/china-has￾refused-to-recycle-the-wests-plastics-what-now
Wearden, G. (2016, January 19). More plastic than fsh in the sea by 2050, says Ellen MacArthur. 
The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/more-plastic-than-fsh￾in-the-sea-by-2050-warns-ellen-macarthur
J. Puckett103
Wong, P. Y. (2021). Malaysia is not a “garbage dump”: Citizens against corruption, complacency, 
and climate crisis. Center to Combat Corruption and Cronyism. http://wiki.ban.org/images/d/
dd/2021_c4_center_special_report_malaysia_is_not_a_garbage_dump.pdf
Zhao, K. (2017, April 28). China’s environmental woes, in flms that go viral, then van￾ish. The New  York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/28/world/asia/chinas￾environmental-woes-in-films-that-go-viral-then-vanish.html#:~:text=Wang's%2C%20
%E2%80%9CPlastic%20China%2C%E2%80%9D,deleted%20the%20items%20or%20why
Global and National Instruments to Stop the Export and Dumping of Plastic WastesPart II
The Illicit Activities in the Plastic Waste 
Trade and Its Toxic Effects© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 107
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_5
Plastic Waste and Criminality
Virginia Comolli
Introduction
Waste management is not only a standard expectation of modern society, but it is 
also a big transnational business. As a society, we produce an ever growing amount 
of rubbish, including the ubiquitous plastic, and managing its collection and dis￾posal is a crucial responsibility of local authorities. Yet, whereas the issue of waste 
may seem a local one, its supply or, rather, disposal chain usually crosses multiple 
borders and connects the largest waste producers in Europe and North America 
(Parker, 2020) to the less developed countries and regions that tend to be the main 
recipients. As a result, Amazon packaging from the United States ends up in illegal 
dumping sites in India (Mok, 2022), and carrier bags from British supermarkets are 
illegally burned in Turkey (Greenpeace, 2021).
Understanding the nature and actors behind these illegal activities is the aim of 
this chapter. To achieve that, it is frst important to establish what constitutes illegal￾ity. A “throw away” culture, coupled with minimal domestic recycling facilities in 
the West, has made the export of waste a necessity for the past several decades 
(WMW, 2021). Waste trade is not in itself illegal. It needs however to be conducted 
in accordance to international conventions and national level legislation that regu￾late imports and exports.
V. Comolli (*) 
Pacifc Programme, The Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime, 
Geneva, Switzerland
e-mail: Virginia.comolli@globalinitiative.net108
Legal Framework
The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous 
Wastes and their Disposal (1989) is the most prominent of these legal tools and 
counts 187 countries and the European Union (EU) among its parties. Given its 
large membership – which however does not include the United States – most plas￾tic waste shipments around the world are regulated by the Basel Convention and its 
amendments (USEPA, 2023). In brief, countries that are members of the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the EU, and Liechtenstein 
are forbidden from shipping hazardous waste to developing countries (BAN and 
IPEN, 2020). In addition, the European Commission has banned its member states 
from sending anything other than “clean” plastic waste (i.e., plastic that is not mixed 
with other waste and is not considered hard to recycle) to non-OECD countries 
(EC, 2020).
Furthermore, individual countries, especially in Asia (the main destination 
region), have introduced import bans. Most notable is China’s 2018 National Sword 
policy which resulted in a virtually overnight domino effect in redirecting waste 
fows from China – the hitherto largest waste recipient in the world – to a number of 
Southeast Asian countries such as Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and others 
(WTO, 2017). Countries in Africa, Latin America, and Eastern Europe as well as 
Turkey have also developed a more prominent role in the waste disposal business.
It is crucial to underscore the fact that the main driver behind these regulations is 
the desire to stop the fows of hazardous waste from reaching countries that do not 
have suffciently sophisticated facilities to appropriately process and dispose of 
such harmful waste. In the absence of such facilities, waste is dumped, buried, or 
burned – all practices that pollute the soil, water, and atmosphere with nefarious 
environmental and health repercussions (INTERPOL, 2020).
Yet, despite the existing regulations and the serious negative effects that breaking 
them have on societies and ecosystems, there are fnancial incentives for businesses 
(and criminal actors) to ignore these restrictions and try to get a slice of the global 
market in recycled plastics which is forecasted to reach US$53 billion by 2029 
(MMR, 2023).
Illegality in the Plastic Waste Supply Chain: Legitimate Actors
Multiple actors are involved along the supply chain of plastic waste breaking rules 
and legislations. Evidence suggests that most illegal activities are carried out by 
legitimate business operators who engage in so-called white-collar crimes. The 
most common include fraud, mis-invoicing, money laundering, tax evasion, and 
corruption. In addition, these actors engage in a whole host of activities that contra￾vene the Basel Convention and national import and export bans (as well as faking 
their adherence to those rules). These fall under three categories. First is 
V. Comolli109
misdeclaration which can pertain to the content, origin, and destination of waste but 
also to the operating capacity of recycling companies, i.e., claiming companies have 
greater capacity than they actually have. Second is the concealment of hazardous 
waste among other goods. It is in fact common for plastics to be mixed with e-waste 
and paper as these are waste products that are subject to a lower level of scrutiny. 
Third is the illicit disposal that could take the form of incineration or illegal dump￾ing, for instance, in the sea or remote rural areas or even in forests (Comolli, 2021).
Brokers, waste management and recycling companies, shipping lines, corrupt 
customs and border control, and non-waste companies (e.g., paper and cement man￾ufacturers) are among those involved in such illicit practices, which enable mixed 
hazardous plastic waste from Europe and North America to arrive, usually after a 
number of intermediate stops, to the likes of Turkey, Romania, Ghana, Ecuador, 
Indonesia, and more.
Brokers deserve particular attention. As already indicated, only a fraction of 
Western-produced waste is processed or recycled domestically. Most of it is sold to 
brokers whose job is to then facilitate the export on to countries and companies that 
would process the plastic waste and, in theory, recycle it into plastic pellets that are 
then sold as raw material. This is the appeal for receiving countries to accept foreign 
waste shipments as a way to generate revenues. Brokers are able to exploit their 
pivotal role along the supply chain to facilitate the shipment of banned waste to non￾OECD countries. They are therefore the ones often responsible for misdeclaration 
of content as well as of intended origin and destination of a given cargo 
(INTERPOL, 2020).
Criminals
Albeit to a lesser extent than commercial operators, criminal actors are also involved 
in the illicit trade in plastic waste. This is hardly surprising. Criminal groups have 
long been attracted to the waste management industry. A notable example is the one 
of the Italian mafas which, by the 1980s, had already consolidated their involve￾ment in this sector (Post, 2013) eager, as ever, to take advantage of lucrative oppor￾tunities. It has to be noted however that less information is available compared to 
what is known about business operators. Therefore, the extent of criminal involve￾ment in the plastic waste business might actually be greater than suspected.
Turkey and Eastern Europe are where the involvement of criminals in the illicit 
disposal of European waste is most apparent. Similarly to the business operators 
described above, fnancial crimes such as fraud, forgery, money laundering, tax eva￾sion, and manipulation of legal records (alongside the corruption of offcials) are the 
most common offences carried out by criminals that infltrate the waste sector. This 
is usually done through legitimate companies that are used as a façade for illegal 
activities.
Instances of convergence with other forms of crime are hard to corroborate, but 
it is possible that drugs and other illicit goods are traffcked alongside European 
Plastic Waste and Criminality110
waste via Turkey, on to further destinations in the Middle East and beyond 
(Comolli, 2021).
Additionally, there are documented cases suggesting a convergence between 
human traffcking and the waste industry. These usually involve vulnerable indi￾viduals that are lured by traffckers with the promise of good employment only to 
then be forced in modern slavery conditions and living in substandard accommoda￾tion – such as in the case of Polish victims who ended up working for one of the 
UK’s largest waste companies, Biffa (Gentleman, 2021).
On the other side of the Atlantic, Latin American countries have seen an increase 
in illicit shipments of plastic waste from the United States following the introduc￾tion of China’s National Sword (Rueada, 2022). At the same time, there appears to 
be growing evidence that the Mara Salvatrucha gang (also known as MS13) controls 
dumping sites in Honduras which are run as businesses. Locals, including children, 
sort through mountains of rubbish to collect valuable waste such as plastic, copper, 
and nylon that is then sold by the kilo to MS13. Then, through a broker, the gang 
sells the material to recycling companies within Honduras as well as, allegedly, to 
regional recycling company Invema, according to an investigation by InsightCrime 
(Martínez D’aubuisson, 2022).
Conclusions
The preceding pages have given a favor of the methods and networks of illegality 
that are built around the plastic waste trade. Despite the serious human and environ￾mental harms resulting from the illicit trade and disposal of plastics and other waste, 
tackling this issue often remains a low priority. This is the result of a number of 
factors. Among others is the continued desire in many less affuent receiving coun￾tries to accept shipments in order to generate revenues, as well as some exporting 
countries’ limited interest in these matters and just wanting to get rid of the waste 
without looking too closely at the routes and methods involved.
Therefore, resources available to environmental agencies and dedicated law 
enforcement units are limited. With this in mind, collaboration and information 
sharing across agencies, sectors, and jurisdictions becomes paramount in order to 
identify offences and pursue offenders. Together with this, capitalizing on technol￾ogy to digitalize waste management, trace shipments, and monitor potentially suspi￾cious brokers (who regularly advertise online) and other actors is certainly a 
necessity.
Across collaborative efforts and the use of technology, civil society actors such 
as NGOs, activists, and investigative journalists around the world have been playing 
an important role, especially by conducting investigations and exposing malpractice 
and illegality. Through their efforts, nongovernment actors are able to raise public 
awareness on plastic waste and related issues through different channels, from tra￾ditional to social media, thereby reaching different demographics. Albeit not always 
successful or long-lasting (Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021; Laville, 2021), some of 
V. Comolli111
these campaigns have the power to increase policy prioritization and infuence pol￾icy change which, in turn, can translate into the allocation of greater resources to 
combating waste crimes.
References
BAN, & IPEN. (2020). The entry into force of the Basel Ban Amendment: A guide to implications 
and next steps. https://ipen.org/sites/default/fles/documents/ban-basel-fact-sheet-v2_1-en.pdf. 
Accessed on 10 July 2023.
Comolli, V. (2021). Plastic for proft. Tracing illicit plastic waste fows, supply chains and actors. 
GI-TOC. https://globalinitiative.net/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/GITOC-Plastic-for-Proft.
pdf. Accessed on 10 July 2023.
European Commission. (2020, December 22). Plastic waste shipments: New EU rules on 
importing and exporting plastic waste. https://environment.ec.europa.eu/news/plastic-waste￾shipments-new-eu-rules-importing-and-exporting-plastic-waste-2020-12-22_en. Accessed on 
10 July 2023.
Gentleman, A. (2021, January 14). Three victims of traffcking and modern slavery to sue Biffa. 
The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/law/2021/jan/14/three-victims-of-traffcking￾and-modern-slavery-to-sue-biffa. Accessed on 10 July 2023.
Greenpeace. (2021). Trashed. How the UK is still dumping Plastic waste on the rest of the world. 
https://www.greenpeace.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Trashed-Greenpeace-plastics￾report-final.pdf?_ga=2.123036232.2120234364.1689006528-344669026.1689006528. 
Accessed on 10 July 2023.
Gündoğdu, S., & Walker, T. R. (2021). Why Turkey should not import plastic waste pollution from 
developed countries? Marine Pollution Bulletin, 171, 112772.
INTERPOL. (2020). Emerging criminal trends in the global plastic waste market since January 
2018. https://www.interpol.int/content/download/15587/fle/INTERPOL%20Report%20_
criminal%20trendsplastic%20waste.pdf. Accessed on 10 July 2023.
Laville, S. (2021, May 19). Turkey to ban plastic waste imports. The Guardian. https://www.
theguardian.com/world/2021/may/19/turkey-to-ban-plastic-waste-imports. Accessed on 10 
July 2023.
Martínez D’aubuisson, J. J. (2022, January 19). How the MS13 became Lords of the Trash Dump in 
Honduras. InsightCrime. https://insightcrime.org/investigations/honduras-how-ms13-became￾lords-trash-dump/. Accessed on 10 July 2023.
MMR. (2023, March 14). Recycled plastics market to grow at a CAGR of 8.9 percent reach￾ing USD 53.01 Bn by 2029 says maximize market research. Global Newswire. https://www.
globenewswire.com/en/news-release/2023/03/14/2626748/0/en/Recycled-Plastics-Market-to￾grow-at-a-CAGR-of-8-9-percent-reaching-USD-53-01-Bn-by-2029-Says-Maximize-Market￾Research.html. Accessed on 10 July 2023.
Mok, A. (2022, December 27). Amazon’s plastic packaging was reportedly found thousands of 
miles away at illegal dump sites in India. Business Insider. https://www.businessinsider.com/
amazon-delivery-packaging-found-in-illegal-dump-sites-in-india-2022-12?international=true
&r=US&IR=T. Accessed on 10 July 2023.
Parker, L. (2020, October 30). U.S. generates more plastic trash than any other nation, report 
fnds. National Geographic. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/article/us￾plasticpollution. Accessed on 10 July 2023.
Post, E. (2013). “Trash is gold”: Documenting the ecomafa and Campania’s waste cri￾sis. Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and Environment, 20(3), 597–621. https://doi.
org/10.1093/isle/ist075
Plastic Waste and Criminality112
Rueada, A. (2022, November 6). Latin America, the US’s new plastic dumping ground. Servindi. 
https://www.pressenza.com/2022/11/latin-america-the-uss-new-plastic-dumping-ground/. 
Accessed on 10 July 2023. Ramos, R., & Fernanda, M. (2022, October 12). From “Backyard” 
to “Dumpster”: This is how the US is using Latin America as its dumping ground. Latin 
American Post. https://latinamericanpost.com/42329-from-backyard-to-dumpster-this-is-how￾the-us-is-using-latin-america-as-its-dumping-ground. Accessed on 10 July 2023.
USEPA. (2023, last updated). New international requirements for the export and import of plastic 
recyclables and waste. https://www.epa.gov/hwgenerators/new-international-requirements￾export-and-import-plastic-recyclables-and-waste#:~:text=As%20a%20result%20of%20
these%20changes%2C%20transboundary%20movements%20of%20most,effect%20on%20
January%201%2C%202021. Accessed on 10 July 2023.
WMW. (2021, March 19). EuCertPlast Report: European industry generated sales of three bil￾lion euros in 2020. Waste Management World. https://waste-management-world.com/artikel/
eucertplast-report-european-industry-generated-sales-of-three-billion-euros-in/. Accessed on 
10 July 2023.
WTO. (2017, July 18). Notifcation by the Ministry of Environmental Protection of the 
People’s Republic of China to the WTO. https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/SS/directdoc.
aspx?flename=q:/G/TBTN17/CHN1211.pdf&Open=True. Accessed on 10 July 2023.
V. Comolli© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 113
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_6
Toxic Contamination Caused by Plastic 
Waste in Countries of the Global South
Jindrich Petrlik, Bjorn Beeler, Yuyun Ismawati, and Lee Bell
Introduction
The enormous amounts of plastic waste transferred from developed to developing 
countries are an environmental problem because the transferred waste is diffcult to 
handle. Plastics contain various chemical additives which make these wastes hard to 
easily destroy or recycle (Marine Litter Topic Group, 2019). We must also consider 
plastics from used electronics, in addition to waste from plastic packaging and gen￾eral consumer products. Plastics used in electronics contain high levels of fame 
retardants, including ones which are banned or listed under the Stockholm 
Convention on persistent organic pollutants (POPs), such as polybrominated diphe￾nyl ethers (PBDEs), hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD), or dechlorane plus (DP). 
The same applies to wrecked cars also often ending on scrap yards in developing 
countries as they contain many plastics with high concentrations of hazardous fame 
retardants and other chemical additives.
However, there are many chemicals in plastics which are not followed with same 
level of concern as the additives in electronics or cars. A recent study identifed 
“more than 10,000 relevant substances” in plastics and categorized them “based on 
substance types, use patterns, and hazard classifcations wherever possible” 
(Wiesinger et al., 2021). Over 2400 substances were identifed as “substances of 
J. Petrlik 
Arnika – Toxics and Waste Programme, Prague 3, Czech Republic 
International Pollutants Elimination Network (IPEN), Göteborg, Sweden 
B. Beeler · L. Bell 
International Pollutants Elimination Network (IPEN), Göteborg, Sweden 
Y. Ismawati (*) 
Nexus3 Foundation, Bali, Indonesia
e-mail: yuyun@nexus3foundation.org114
potential concern as they meet one or more of the persistence, bioaccumulation, and 
toxicity criteria in the European Union.” The study also found that many of these 
substances (1327) “are not adequately regulated in many parts of the world” or are 
even “approved for use in food-contact plastics in some jurisdictions (901 sub￾stances)” (Wiesinger et al., 2021). Looking at pictures from plastic waste yards in 
Indonesia (see Photos 3, 4, and 5), Malaysia, or Turkey, we can identify plastic 
packaging in which a large number of these unregulated chemicals can be found.
A report published by UNEP identifed even higher number of chemicals in rela￾tion to plastics: “More than 13,000 chemicals are associated with plastics and plas￾tic production across a wide range of applications, of which over 3,200 monomers, 
additives, processing aids and non-intentionally added substances are of potential 
concern due to their hazardous properties. These properties include carcinogenicity, 
mutagenicity, reproductive toxicity, specifc target organ toxicity, endocrine disrup￾tion, ecotoxicity, bioaccumulation potential, environmental persistence and mobil￾ity, including potential for long-range environmental transport to remote locations” 
(Weber et al., 2023).
Plastic waste is transferred to the Global South, including all the toxic additives 
in it. As most developing countries do not have appropriate disposal technologies, 
plastic waste, including automotive and electronic waste, ends at large scrap yards 
or dumpsites where it is often destroyed by open burning to get metals from it or 
simply to reclaim more space for new loads of plastic wastes (Gündoğdu, 2022; 
Petrlik et al., 2020a; Velis & Cook, 2021). This practice leads to the creation of even 
larger numbers of toxic chemicals released in the environment and affecting the 
health of communities in developing countries. One of the highest burdens is caused 
by burning plastics from electronic or automotive waste as the presence of metals in 
this process increases the creation of very toxic dioxins1
 (PCDD/Fs). This activity is 
also listed as one of major sources of unintentionally produced POPs (UPOPs) 
under the name “smoldering copper cables” (see Fig. 2) in Annex C to the Stockholm 
Convention (SC, 2009; Stockholm Convention, 2008).
Flows of various toxic chemicals in plastics may vary. Figure 1 illustrates such 
global fows for PBDEs and transfer of their emissions from developed to develop￾ing countries that was published in a recent study on unequal ecological exchange 
(Tong et al., 2022).
The International Pollutants Elimination Network (IPEN) and its member orga￾nizations carried out several studies mapping food chain contamination with toxic 
chemical releases, most likely from dumped plastic wastes or their burning, at a 
number of sites affected by these disposal practices mostly in developing or transi￾tion countries. These studies focused mainly on POP levels in free-range chicken 
eggs. They were summarized in a global report showing signifcant levels of POPs 
at 25 sites affected by plastic waste disposal in 14 countries around the globe (Petrlik 
1Dioxins are a large group of unintentionally produced POPs of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins 
and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs). They are listed under Stockholm Convention in Annex C. This 
term also includes often another group of dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls (dl PCBs). We will 
use the acronym PCDD/Fs in our text.
J. Petrlik et al.115
Fig. 1 Illustration of the fows of the trade embodied emissions of PBDEs between the world 
regions. (Source: Tong et al. (2022))
Photo 1 Typical example of smoldering copper cables at an e-waste scrap yard in Agbogbloshie, 
Ghana. (Photo: Martin Holzknecht (Arnika))
et al., 2021). A wide range of POPs was observed in free-range eggs from sites 
affected by disposal of plastic waste in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and Europe 
(Photo 1).
Free-range chicken eggs are sensitive indicators of POP contamination in soils/
dust and represent an important human exposure pathway (Piskorska-Pliszczynska 
et al., 2014; Van Eijkeren et al., 2006). As “active samplers,” they can be used to 
reveal POP contamination, particularly in areas impacted by PCDD/Fs and PCBs 
Toxic Contamination Caused by Plastic Waste in Countries of the Global South116
(Arkenbout & Bouman, 2021; Aslan et al., 2010; DiGangi & Petrlik, 2005), as well 
as by brominated fame retardants (BFRs) (Petrlik et al., 2017; Polder et al., 2016) 
or brominated dioxins (PBDD/Fs) (Teebthaisong et al., 2021; Weber et al., 2015).
It is well established that toxic chemicals are released into the environment not 
only during the production and the use of plastics (Karlsson et al., 2021; Møller 
et al., 2020) but also during their disposal (BC & SC Secretariat, 2019; Hahladakis 
et al., 2018), in particular when burning or incineration is involved (Blankenship 
et al., 1994; Stockholm Convention, 2008).
It is not only dumping and open burning (Velis & Cook, 2021) of imported plas￾tic waste that affects communities in Global South. In several places, local people 
found plastic waste to be a good fuel replacing the use of wood, but burning plastic 
as fuel produces a much wider range of toxic pollutants such as polychlorinated or 
polybrominated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs and PBDD/Fs) as 
well as dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls (dl PCBs) or polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs). For example, in Tropodo, Indonesia (see Photo 2), imported 
plastic waste was used as fuel in tofu production facilities (Ismawati Drwiega et al., 
2019). In Karawang, Indonesia, plastic waste is used as fuel in kilns for chalk pro￾duction. At both places, high levels of dioxins were measured in free-range chicken 
eggs (Petrlik et al., 2022b, d).
Off-gases from facilities like tofu factories or chalk kilns are not the only sources 
of contamination as ashes produced by burning of plastics also contain dioxins and 
furans. The ashes contained up to 1.2 and 0.5 ng TEQ/g of PCDD/Fs in Tropodo and 
Karawang, respectively, yet they were not considered as being hazardous due to a 
loophole in international legislation which defnes dioxin POP waste as hazardous 
only above a level of 15 ng TEQ/g PCDD/Fs. The ashes are widely repurposed for 
Photo 2 Tofu factories burning plastic waste as fuel in Tropodo, Indonesia, as documented in 
November 2019. (Photo: Jindrich Petrlik (Arnika))
J. Petrlik et al.117
Photo 3 Plastic waste yard in Bangun, Indonesia, in 2019. (Photo: Fully Syaf (Ecoton))
Photos 4 and 5 Evidence of the origin of plastic packaging waste imported to Bangun, Indonesia, 
from the United Kingdom; November 2019. (Photo: Jindrich Petrlik (Arnika/IPEN))
construction of roads and public pathways or for embankments in these localities. 
Free-range hens can access these areas and become contaminated with PCDD/Fs or 
other POPs contained in ashes (Katima et al., 2018; Petrlik et al., 2020a). The ash 
from waste incineration is suggested by authorities to be used as soil amendment in 
Toxic Contamination Caused by Plastic Waste in Countries of the Global South118
Fig. 2 Highest levels of PCDD/Fs measured globally in chicken eggs until 2020. Red bars show 
samples from sites affected by plastic waste disposal included in IPEN’s report. (Source: Petrlik 
et al. (2021))
some developing countries (Dzonteu, 2020; Mochungong et al., 2012; Wang et al., 
2008). This suggestion does not consider the high levels of PCDD/Fs and other 
POPs in waste incineration residues as consequence of burning plastics and how 
they will lead to soil and food chain contamination.
It was estimated that 53.6 million metric tons (Mt) of e-waste from consumer 
products alone were generated in 2019, and it is predicted to exceed 74 Mt by 2030 
(Forti et al., 2020). An estimated 70–80% of e-waste was shipped from developed 
to low-income countries and was improperly recycled (Ádám et  al., 2021; Forti 
et al., 2020). This also includes plastic casings and other plastic parts of e-waste, 
mostly treated with fame retardants including brominated or chlorinated com￾pounds currently banned and listed under the Stockholm Convention (Stockholm 
Convention, 2009a, b, 2013, 2017, 2023), although they are contained in used elec￾tronic products produced in the years when the ban of some BFRs was still pending. 
Electronic waste was spotted at some sites included in IPEN’s global study, like 
J. Petrlik et al.119
Indonesia or Uruguay, and the report included one of the largest e-waste and auto￾motive waste scrap yard in Agbogbloshie, Ghana, where high levels of PBDEs were 
measured in soils (Akortia et al., 2017). The highest ever measured levels of 661 and 
300 pg TEQ/g fat of chlorinated and brominated dioxins (PCDD/Fs and PBDD/Fs), 
respectively, in free-range chicken eggs globally were found in samples from this 
scrap yard (Hogarh et al., 2019). High levels of PCDD/Fs, dl PCBs, and PBDD/Fs 
were also observed in free-range chicken eggs from the vicinity of other e-waste 
sites located in developing countries (Petrlik et al., 2022b; Zeng et al., 2018).
An adult eating just 1 egg from a free-range chicken foraging in Agbogbloshie 
area would exceed the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) tolerable daily 
intake (TDI) at level of 0.25  pg WHO-TEQ/kg of body weight/day for dioxins 
(EFSA CONTAM, 2018a) by 220-fold. Indicator PCBs in these eggs were four-fold 
higher than the EU standard, and dioxins and dioxin-like PCBs were 171-fold 
higher than the standard (European Commission, 2016).
High levels of POPs, dioxins, and PBDEs in particular were also measured in 
samples of soil, dust, and hair from Guiyu, an e-waste site in China (Luksemburg 
et al., 2002; Xu et al., 2017). Also, rice hulls from the vicinity of another e-waste 
site in China contained relative high levels of PCDD/Fs, PCBs, and PBDEs (Fu 
et al., 2012).
Figure 2 shows that among the highest levels of PCDD/Fs measured globally in 
chicken eggs are more samples from the sites with plastic and/or electronic waste 
disposal, including Tropodo (Indonesia), Samut Sakhon (Thailand), and others.
A wide range of analyses was conducted at fve dumping sites in Adana prov￾ince, Turkey, where plastic waste imported mainly from the European Union and 
the United Kingdom was illegally dumped and burned (Gündoğdu, 2022). In com￾parison with the control samples, the concentrations of PCDD/Fs determined in the 
survey areas were found to be “approximately 400,000 times higher in Yüreğir/
İncirlik feld and 8000 times in Seyhan/Yenidam feld. … The concentration of 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) determined in the soil samples collected 
from Yenidam was up to 35 times higher than the concentration of PAHs reported in 
previous studies of other regions in Turkey” (Gündoğdu, 2022). PAHs are common 
pollutants occurring at sites of open burning of plastics (Velis & Cook, 2021), and 
plastic waste itself can contain them (Conesa et al., 2021) because plastic is mainly 
produced from oil.
Chinese scientists focused on heavy metal contamination at a typical plastic 
recycling site in North China and found that “the surface soils and sediments have 
suffered from moderate to high metal pollution and in particular, high Cd and Hg 
pollution” and “that there is considerable to high potential ecological risks in more 
than half of the soils and high potential ecological risk in almost all sediments” 
(Tang et al., 2015). Source assessment suggested that heavy metals in soils and sedi￾ments were mainly derived from inputs from poorly controlled plastic waste recy￾cling in this area. High levels of heavy metals were observed also at the previously 
mentioned fve sites in Adana province, Turkey (Gündoğdu, 2022).
Toxic Contamination Caused by Plastic Waste in Countries of the Global South120
It must be noticed that plastic recycling in areas in Southeast Asia is mostly 
turned to large plastic waste scrap yards like the one in Bangun, Indonesia (see 
Photo 3).
Intentionally produced POPs used as additives in plastics were measured in high 
levels in free-range chicken eggs from the sites affected by plastic waste disposal 
along with dioxins. The level of 27,159 ng/g fat of PBDEs in free-range eggs from 
Tropodo was the second highest level ever measured in eggs right after the level of 
46,000 ng/g fat in eggs from e-waste site in Guiyu, China. High levels were mea￾sured also in other samples from the vicinity of the sites affected by plastic waste 
disposal, including Bangun, Indonesia, with a large plastic waste scrap yard or 
Taizhou (Labunska et al., 2013), another e-waste site in China (see graph at Fig. 3).
The egg samples from the Bangun waste yard, known for large quantities of 
imported plastic waste (Ismawati et al., 2019), have also shown levels of per- and 
polyfuorinated compounds (PFASs) comparable to the sites affected by industry 
from Western Europe (Petrlik et al., 2020a). An adult eating half an egg per day 
from a free-range chicken foraging in the vicinity of the Bangun dumpsite would 
exceed the proposed tolerable daily intake (TDI) of PFOS (EFSA CONTAM, 
2018b) up to almost 16-fold (Petrlik et al., 2020a).
PFASs are known to contaminate drinking water source near industrial and mili￾tary sites (Hu et al., 2016; Post et al., 2012). A study conducted in the vicinity of 
waste disposal sites, including plastic wastes in Thailand, demonstrated “that waste 
disposal site leachates represent a likely major PFAS source in groundwater in 
Thailand” (Hongkachok et al., 2023). Thailand became one the key destinations of 
electronic and plastic waste exports in Southeast Asia, after China closed its doors 
to mixed plastic waste imports in 2017 (Petrlik et  al., 2022c; Roberts-Davis & 
Saetang, 2019).
The occurrence of short and medium chain chlorinated paraffns (SCCPs and 
MCCPs) and dechloranes, also additives to plastics, was confrmed in free-range 
chicken eggs and soil collected near waste disposal sites in Tanzania in a recent 
study (Haarr et al., 2023), which confrmed results for SCCPs in eggs from previous 
research by IPEN (Petrlik et al., 2020b). The study concluded, “risk assessment of 
CPs shows that consumption of eggs from free-range chickens could represent a 
health concern regarding exposure to SCCPs” (Haarr et al., 2023) (Photos 4 and 5).
POPs analyzed in soil, eggs, rice, and other locally grown food from the sites 
affected by imported plastic waste, including plastic in electronic and automotive 
waste, have serious impacts on human health. BFRs such as PBDEs are known 
endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) and adversely impact the development of 
the nervous system and of children’s intelligence (POP RC, 2006, 2007, 2014).
Per- and polyfuoroalkyl substances (PFASs) are a large class of more than 4500 
(OECD, 2018) very persistent fuorinated chemicals (including PFOS) that have 
been widely used in packaging, textiles, and other plastics. Scientists are concerned 
with their widespread presence in the environment, and the Madrid Statement said 
that they “call on the international community to cooperate in limiting the produc￾tion and use of PFASs and in developing safer nonfuorinated alternatives” (Blum 
et al., 2015). In animal studies, some long-chain PFASs have been found to cause 
J. Petrlik et al.121
Fig. 3 The highest levels of PBDEs measured globally in chicken eggs until 2020. Red bars show 
samples from sites affected by plastic waste disposal included in IPEN’s report. (Source: Petrlik 
et al. (2021))
liver toxicity, disruption of lipid metabolism and of the immune and endocrine sys￾tems, adverse neurobehavioral effects, neonatal toxicity and death, and tumors in 
multiple organ systems (Lau et al., 2007; Post et al., 2012). More health effects of 
this very large group of chemicals are summarized in the Madrid and Zurich state￾ments as well as in the toxicological profles of PFASs (ATSDR, 2018; Blum et al., 
2015; Fenton, 2019; Ritscher et al., 2018).
Chlorinated dioxins (PCDD/Fs) are known to be extremely toxic. Numerous epi￾demiologic studies have revealed a variety of human health effects linked to dioxin 
Toxic Contamination Caused by Plastic Waste in Countries of the Global South122
exposure including cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cancer, porphyria, endometrio￾sis, early menopause, alteration of testosterone and thyroid hormones, and altered 
immune system response among others (Schecter, 2012; White & Birnbaum, 2009). 
Laboratory animals given dioxins suffered a variety of effects, including an increase 
in birth defects and stillbirths. Food (particularly from animals) is the major source 
of dioxin exposure for humans (BRS, 2017).
PBDD/Fs have been found to exhibit similar toxicity and health effects as their 
chlorinated analogs (PCDD/Fs) (Behnisch et  al., 2003). They can, for example, 
affect brain development, damage the immune system and fetus, or induce carcino￾genesis (Kannan et al., 2012).
Exposure to chemicals contained in consumer products such as toys, hair acces￾sories, and/or kitchen utensils (Kuang et al., 2018; Møller et al., 2021; Samsonek & 
Puype, 2013; Strakova & Petrlik, 2017) made of recycled plastic from used elec￾tronics and cars is additional burden to human health globally, including developing 
countries. A recent study has shown widespread occurrence of products contami￾nated with BFRs obtained at markets from African and Arabic countries (Petrlik 
et al., 2022a), and a similar situation was previously found in products from a wide 
range of other developing countries (DiGangi & Strakova, 2016).
POPs and heavy metals represent the groups of chemicals brought in imported 
plastics from the Global North to the Global South. UPOPs are created by insuff￾cient plastic waste management as a result of the widely ignored fact that develop￾ing countries lack proper technologies for disposal of plastic waste while 
acknowledging that for wide range of plastics, such technologies do not exist any￾where at this time.
We have not discussed the other toxic chemical effects of plastics or contamina￾tion with other additives such as phthalates or bisphenol A in this chapter yet. The 
levels of phthalates found increased in the vicinity of some dumpsites in South 
Africa (Adeniyi et al., 2008). Another study based on research in six Asian develop￾ing countries suggested that microplastics “could be potential sources of the phthal￾ates and brominated retardants” in soils at dumpsites (Tun et al., 2022). These toxic 
chemicals’ effects were demonstrated in numerous studies (Fantke et  al., 2021; 
Groh, 2019; Marine Litter Topic Group, 2019; Verma et al., 2016).
Plastic waste management remains challenging mainly from the point of view of 
potentially toxic substances in plastics. It was well documented on PBDEs: “Since 
the largest proportion of interregional PBDE emission transfer arises from the waste 
disposal stage, global efforts aiming to address the issue of the ecological unequal 
exchange and reduce the health and environmental impacts of PBDEs should focus 
on tackling the problem of e-waste trade. Since countries in the developed regions 
often have higher labor costs and more stringent environmental regulations, a large 
proportion of their wastes are exported to other, often less developed countries” 
(Tong et al., 2022).
Minimization of use of plastics remains the primary solution to this problem 
alongside phasing out of toxic additives in plastics and phasing out of the most prob￾lematic plastics such as PVC in relation to UPOPs generated during their disposal. 
It is also necessary to set more strict limits to control POPs (Weber et al., 2019) and 
J. Petrlik et al.123
heavy metal content in the wastes in order to halt their free movement across 
borders. The Stockholm Convention could apply material substitution2
 much more 
rigorously to avoid UPOP releases.
The plastic waste crisis including the spread of toxic chemicals related to the 
production, use, and disposal of plastics is accelerating and requires immediate 
action. Unfortunately, the most severe consequences will be felt in developing coun￾tries as more recent studies demonstrate. One study suggests that “the strategies that 
are appropriate for OECD nations are not always appropriate for developing econo￾mies” (Browning et al., 2021). Locally focused approaches like “Locally Managed 
Decentralized Circular Economy (LMDCE) provide the best option for addressing 
the problem of mismanaged and unmanaged plastic waste in infrastructure limited 
countries and has the potential to be transformative for both women and men” 
(Browning et al., 2021).
Increasing volumes of plastic waste and toxic chemical releases globally led to 
the conclusion “that humanity is currently operating outside the planetary bound￾ary” (Persson et al., 2022). “The increasing rate of production and releases of larger 
volumes and higher numbers of novel entities with diverse risk potentials exceed 
societies’ ability to conduct safety related assessments and monitoring,” stated sci￾entists in the global assessment in 2022 (Persson et al., 2022). The new global treaty 
on plastic waste must therefore also address toxic pollution caused by plastic over￾use and overproduction. Developing countries should not serve as dumping grounds 
for plastic waste collected worldwide.
References
Ádám, B., Göen, T., Scheepers, P. T. J., Adliene, D., Batinic, B., Budnik, L. T., Duca, R.-C., Ghosh, 
M., Giurgiu, D. I., Godderis, L., Goksel, O., Hansen, K. K., Kassomenos, P., Milic, N., Orru, 
H., Paschalidou, A., Petrovic, M., Puiso, J., Radonic, J., et  al. (2021). From inequitable to 
sustainable e-waste processing for reduction of impact on human health and the environment. 
Environmental Research, 194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.110728
Adeniyi, A., Dayomi, M., Siebe, P., & Okedeyi, O. (2008). An assessment of the levels of phthalate 
esters and metals in the Muledane open dump, Thohoyandou, Limpopo Province, South Africa. 
Chemistry Central Journal, 2, 9. https://doi.org/10.1186/1752-153X-2-9
Akortia, E., Olukunle, O. I., Daso, A. P., & Okonkwo, J. O. (2017). Soil concentrations of poly￾brominated diphenyl ethers and trace metals from an electronic waste dump site in the Greater 
Accra Region, Ghana: Implications for human exposure. Ecotoxicology and Environmental 
Safety, 137, 247–255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2016.12.008
Arkenbout, A., & Bouman, K. (2021). The true toxic toll  – Biomonitoring research 
results  – Czech Republic, Lithuania, Spain. https://zerowasteeurope.eu/library/
the-true-toxic-toll-biomonitoring-of-incineration-emissions/
2Part V, Annex C, of the Stockholm Convention names the following measure among the general 
prevention measures relating to both best available techniques and best environmental practices: 
“Replacement of feed materials which are persistent organic pollutants or where there is a direct 
link between the materials and releases of persistent organic pollutants from the source.”
Toxic Contamination Caused by Plastic Waste in Countries of the Global South124
Aslan, S., Kemal Korucu, M., Karademir, A., & Durmusoglu, E. (2010). Levels of PCDD/Fs in local 
and non-local food samples collected from a highly polluted area in Turkey. Chemosphere, 
80(10), 1213–1219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2010.06.008
ATSDR. (2018). Toxicological profle for perfuoroalkyls. Draft for public comment.
BC & SC Secretariat. (2019). Report on the activities of the Basel and Stockholm conventions 
regional centres; Addendum: Plastic and toxic additives, and the circular economy: The role of 
the Basel and Stockholm Conventions. UNEP/CHW.14/INF/29/Add.1 – UNEP/POPS/COP.9/
INF/28/Add.1. Basel Convention Secretariat, Stockholm Convention Secretariat.
Behnisch, P. A., Hosoe, K., & Sakai, S.-I. (2003). Brominated dioxin-like compounds: In vitro 
assessment in comparison to classical dioxin-like compounds and other polyaromatic com￾pounds. Environment International, 29(6), 861–877. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/B6V7X-48YT5WD-2/2/8e1c507cf4be6f401341f3befddb4fc8
Blankenship, A., Chang, D., Jones, A., Kelly, P., Kennedy, I., Matsumura, F., Pasek, R., 
& Yang, G. (1994). Toxic combustion by-products from the incineration of chlori￾nated hydrocarbons and plastics. Chemosphere, 28(1), 183–196. http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Retrieve&dopt=AbstractPlus&l
ist_uids=NIOSH/00219630DOCNO-NIOSH/00219630
Blum, A., Balan, S.  A., Scheringer, M., Trier, X., Goldenman, G., Cousins, I.  T., Diamond, 
M., Fletcher, T., Higgins, C., Lindeman, A.  E., Peaslee, G., Voogt, P.  D., Wang, Z., & 
Weber, R. (2015). The Madrid statement on poly- and perfuoroalkyl substances (PFASs). 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 123(5), A107–A111. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1509934
Browning, S., Beymer-Farris, B., & Seay, J. R. (2021). Addressing the challenges associated with 
plastic waste disposal and management in developing countries. Current Opinion in Chemical 
Engineering, 32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coche.2021.100682
BRS. (2017). All POPs listed in the Stockholm Convention. Retrieved 7 Mar 2019 from http://
www.pops.int/TheConvention/ThePOPs/AllPOPs/tabid/2509/Default.aspx
Conesa, J. A., Nuñez, S. S., Ortuño, N., & Moltó, J. (2021). PAH and POP presence in plastic 
waste and recyclates: State of the art. Energies, 14(12). https://doi.org/10.3390/en14123451
DiGangi, J., & Petrlik, J. (2005). The Egg Report – Contamination of chicken eggs from 17 coun￾tries by dioxins, PCBs and hexachlorobenzene. IPEN Report, 52 p.
DiGangi, J., & Strakova, J. (2016). Recycling of plastics containing brominated fame retardants 
leads to contamination of plastic childrens toys. Organohalogen Compounds, 78(2016), 9–11.
Dzonteu, D.-C. (2020, February 2). Gabon: GES s’invite dans la destruction par incinération 
aux normes internationales. Retrieved 13 Apr 2023 from https://www.gabonreview.com/
gabon-ges-sinvite-dans-la-destruction-par-incineration-aux-normes-internationales/
EFSA CONTAM. (2018a). Risk for animal and human health related to the presence of dioxins 
and dioxin-like PCBs in feed and food. EFSA Journal, 16(11), 331. https://doi.org/10.2903/j.
efsa.2018.5333
EFSA CONTAM. (2018b). Risk to human health related to the presence of perfuorooctane sulfonic 
acid and perfuorooctanoic acid in food. EFSA Journal, 16(12), 284. https://doi.org/10.2903/j.
efsa.2018.5194
European Commission. (2016). Commission Regulation (EC) No 1881/2006 of 19 December 
2006 setting maximum levels for certain contaminants in foodstuffs (Text with EEA relevance) 
(OJ L 364, 20.12.2006, p. 5). Offcial Journal.
Fantke, P., Chiu, W. A., Aylward, L., Judson, R., Huang, L., Jang, S., Gouin, T., Rhomberg, L., 
Aurisano, N., McKone, T., & Jolliet, O. (2021). Exposure and toxicity characterization of 
chemical emissions and chemicals in products: Global recommendations and implementa￾tion in USEtox. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11367-021-01889-y
Fenton, S. E. (2019, 2020 February 22). PFAS collection. Retrieved 21 June 2020 from https://ehp.
niehs.nih.gov/curated-collections/pfas
Forti, V., Balde, C. P., Kuehr, R., & Bel, G. (2020). The Global E-waste Monitor 2020: Quantities, 
fows and the circular economy potential. 120 p.
J. Petrlik et al.125
Fu, J., Wang, T., Wang, P., Qu, G., Wang, Y., Zhang, Q., Zhang, A., & Jiang, G. (2012). Temporal 
trends (2005–2009) of PCDD/Fs, PCBs, PBDEs in rice hulls from an e-waste dismantling 
area after stricter environmental regulations. Chemosphere, 88(3), 330–335. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2012.03.006
Groh, K.  J. (2019, August 23). Benchmarking in  vitro toxicity of plastics. Food Packaging 
Forum. Retrieved 19 Sept 2019 from https://www.foodpackagingforum.org/news/
benchmarking-in-vitro-toxicity-of-plastics
Gündoğdu, S. (2022). Game of waste: Irreversible impact. Greenpeace Mediterranean, 34 p. 
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.21342.72005
Haarr, A., Nipen, M., Mwakalapa, E.  B., Borgen, A.  R., Mmochi, A.  J., & Borga, K. (2023). 
Chlorinated paraffns and dechloranes in free-range chicken eggs and soil around waste dis￾posal sites in Tanzania. Chemosphere. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2023.138646
Hahladakis, J. N., Velis, C. A., Weber, R., Iacovidou, E., & Purnell, P. (2018). An overview of 
chemical additives present in plastics: Migration, release, fate and environmental impact during 
their use, disposal and recycling. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 344, 179–199. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2017.10.014
Hogarh, J.  N., Petrlik, J., Adu-Kumi, S., Akortia, E., Kuepouo, G., Behnisch, P.  A., Bell, L., 
DiGangi, J., Rosmus, J., & Fišar, P. (2019). Persistent organic pollutants in free-range chicken 
eggs in Ghana. Organohalogen Compounds, 81(2019), 507–510.
Hongkachok, C., Boontanon, S. K., Boontanon, N., Sukeesan, S., Polprasert, C., & Fujii, S. (2023). 
Per- and polyfuoroalkyl substances in groundwater in Thailand: Occurrence, source identifca￾tion and spatial distribution. International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13762-023-04894-w
Hu, X. C., Andrews, D. Q., Lindstrom, A. B., Bruton, T. A., Schaider, L. A., Grandjean, P., Lohmann, 
R., Carignan, C.  C., Blum, A., Balan, S.  A., Higgins, C.  P., & Sunderland, E.  M. (2016). 
Detection of poly- and perfuoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in U.S. drinking water linked to 
industrial sites, military fre training areas, and wastewater treatment plants. Environmental 
Science & Technology Letters. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.estlett.6b00260
Ismawati, Y., Septiono, M. A., Arisandi, P., & Bell, L. (2019). Plastic waste trade in Indonesia. 
Country update report. Nexus3 Foundation, 66 p.
Kannan, K., Liao, C., & Moon, H.-B. (2012). Polybrominated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofu￾rans. In A. Schecter (Ed.), Dioxins and health including other persistent organic pollutants and 
endocrine disruptors (3rd ed., pp. 255–302). Wiley.
Karlsson, T., Brosché, S., Alidoust, M., & Takada, H. (2021). Plastic pellets found on 
beaches all over the world contain toxic chemicals. International Pellet Watch, IPEN, 
26 p. Available form: https://ipen.org/documents/plastic-pellets-foundbeaches￾all-over-world-contain-toxic-chemicals
Katima, J. H. Y., Bell, L., Petrlik, J., Behnisch, P. A., & Wangkiat, A. (2018). High levels of PCDD/
Fs around sites with waste containing POPs demonstrate the need to review current standards. 
Organohalogen Compounds, 80, 700–704.
Kuang, J., Abdallah, M.  A.-E., & Harrad, S. (2018). Brominated fame retardants in black 
plastic kitchen utensils: Concentrations and human exposure implications. Science of 
the Total Environment, 610–611(Supplement C), 1138–1146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2017.08.173
Labunska, I., Harrad, S., Santillo, D., Johnston, P., & Yun, L. (2013). Domestic duck eggs: An 
important pathway of human exposure to PBDEs around E-waste and scrap metal processing 
areas in Eastern China. Environmental Science & Technology, 47(16), 9258–9266. https://doi.
org/10.1021/es402300m
Lau, C., Anitole, K., Hodes, C., Lai, D., Pfahles-Hutchens, A., & Seed, J. (2007). Perfuoroalkyl 
acids: A review of monitoring and toxicological fndings. Toxicological Sciences, 99(2), 
366–394. https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfm128
Luksemburg, W., Mitzel, R., Peterson, R., Hedin, J., Maier, M., Schuld, M., Zhou, H., & Wong, 
A. (2002). Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDDs/PCDFs) levels in 
environmental and human hair samples around an electronic waste processing site in Guiyu, 
Guangdong Province, China. Organohalogen Compounds, 55, 347–349.
Toxic Contamination Caused by Plastic Waste in Countries of the Global South126
Marine Litter Topic Group. (2019, April 29–May 10). Plastic and toxic additives, and the circular 
economy: The role of the Basel and Stockholm Conventions. UNEP/CHW.14/INF/29/Add.1 – 
UNEP/POPS/COP.9/INF/28/Add.1. Conference of the parties to the basel convention on the 
control of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their, disposal fourteenth meet￾ing; Conference of the parties to the Stockholm Convention on persistent organic pollutants, 
ninth meeting, Geneva.
Mochungong, P. I., Gulis, G., & Sodemann, M. (2012). Clinical waste incinerators in Cameroon--A 
case study. International Journal of Health Care Quality Assurance, 25(1), 6–18. https://doi.
org/10.1108/09526861211192377
Møller, M., Jopkova, M., Kristian, J., Brabcova, K., & Petrlikova, L. (2020). Phthalates in the 
environment of children  – Case studies from the Czech Republic in the period 2007–2016. 
Arnika, 54 p.
Møller, M., Randjelovic, J., Petrlik, J., Gramblicka, T., Pulkrabova, J., Bell, L., & Petrlikova 
Maskova, L. (2021). The ongoing hazards of toxic BFRs in toys, kitchen utensils and 
other consumer products from plastic in Czechia and Serbia. Organohalogen Compounds, 
82(2021), 93–96.
OECD. (2018). Toward a new comprehensive global database of per- and polyfuoroalkyl sub￾stances (PFASs): Summary report on updating the OECD 2007 list of per- and polyfuoroal￾kyl substances (PFASs). Joint meeting of the Chemicals Committee and the Working Party on 
Chemicals, Pesticides and Biotechnology (Series on Risk Management No. 39, Issue). http://
www.oecd.org/offcialdocuments/publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=ENV-JM-MONO(2018)7
&doclanguage=en
Persson, L., Carney Almroth, B. M., Collins, C. D., Cornell, S., de Wit, C. A., Diamond, M. L., 
Fantke, P., Hassellov, M., MacLeod, M., Ryberg, M. W., Sogaard Jorgensen, P., Villarrubia￾Gomez, P., Wang, Z., & Hauschild, M.  Z. (2022). Outside the safe operating space of the 
planetary boundary for novel entities. Environmental Science & Technology, 56(3), 1510–1521. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c04158
Petrlik, J., Kalmykov, D., Bell, L., & Weber, R. (2017). Brominated fame retardants in eggs – Data 
from Kazakhstan and Thailand. Organohalogen Compounds, 79(2017), 167–170. http://diox￾in20xx.org/wp-content/uploads/pdfs/2017/9773.pdf
Petrlik, J., Ismawati, Y., Arisandi, P., Bell, L., Beeler, B., Grechko, V., & Ozanova, S. (2020a). Toxic 
hot spots in Java and persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in eggs. IPEN, Arnika – Toxics and 
Waste Programme, Nexus3, Ecoton, 128 p. ISBN: 978-80-87651-78-0.
Petrlik, J., Ochieng Ochola, G., & Mng’anya, S. (2020b). POPs in eggs from Kenya and Tanzania – 
Plastic waste poisons the food chain in Kenya and Tanzania. Arnika, IPEN, 12 p.
Petrlik, J., Bell, L., Beeler, B., Møller, M., Brabcova, K., Carcamo, M., Chávez Arce, S.  C., 
Dizon, T., Ismawati Drwiega, Y., Jopkova, M., Kuepouo, G., Mng’anya, S., Ochieng Ochola, 
G., & Skalsky, M. (2021). Plastic waste disposal leads to contamination of the food chain. 
International Pollutants Elimination Network (IPEN), Arnika – Toxics and Waste Programme, 
118 p. ISBN: 978-1-955400-07-7.
Petrlik, J., Beeler, B., Strakova, J., Møller, M., Allo’o Allo’o, S.  M., Amera, T., Brosché, S., 
Gharbi, S., Hajri, I., Kuepouo, G., Mng’anya, S., Ngakeng, A., Ochieng Ochola, G., Rhalem, 
N., Al-Refai, O., Grechko, V., Walaska, H., & Zulkovska, K. (2022a). Hazardous chemicals in 
plastic products – Brominated fame retardants in consumer products made of recycled plastic 
from eleven Arabic and African countries. Arnika, IPEN, 74 p. ISBN: 978-1-955400-17-6.
Petrlik, J., Bell, L., DiGangi, J., Allo’o Allo’o, S. M., Kuepouo, G., Ochieng Ochola, G., Grechko, 
V., Jelinek, N., Strakova, J., Skalsky, M., Ismawati Drwiega, Y., Hogarh, J. N., Akortia, E., 
Adu-Kumi, S., Teebthaisong, A., Carcamo, M., Beeler, B., Behnisch, P., Baitinger, C., et al. 
(2022b). Monitoring dioxins and PCBs in eggs as sensitive indicators for environmental 
pollution and global contaminated sites and recommendations for reducing and controlling 
releases and exposure. Emerging Contaminants, 8(2022), 254–279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
emcon.2022.05.001
J. Petrlik et al.127
Petrlik, J., Boontongmai, T., Bubphachat, N., Thowsakul, C., Teebthaisong, A., Saetang, P., 
Jelinek, N., Strakova, J., Grechko, V., & Jeungsmarn, P. (2022c). POPs in the surroundings of 
e-waste sites. EARTH, Arnika, IPEN, 41 p.
Petrlik, J., Ismawati, Y., Bell, L., Beeler, B., Grechko, V., Jelinek, N., & Septiono, M. A. (2022d). 
POPs contamination caused by use of plastic waste as fuel at locations in Indonesia. 
Organohalogen Compounds, 83(2022), 117–121.
Piskorska-Pliszczynska, J., Mikolajczyk, S., Warenik-Bany, M., Maszewski, S., & Strucinski, 
P. (2014). Soil as a source of dioxin contamination in eggs from free-range hens on a Polish 
farm. Science of the Total Environment, 466–467(0), 447–454. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2013.07.061
Polder, A., Müller, M. B., Brynildsrud, O. B., de Boer, J., Hamers, T., Kamstra, J. H., Lie, E., 
Mdegela, R. H., Moberg, H., Nonga, H. E., Sandvik, M., Skaare, J. U., & Lyche, J. L. (2016). 
Dioxins, PCBs, chlorinated pesticides and brominated fame retardants in free-range 
chicken eggs from peri-urban areas in Arusha, Tanzania: Levels and implications for human 
health. Science of the Total Environment, 551–552, 656–667. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2016.02.021
POP RC. (2006). Risk profle on commercial pentabromodiphenyl ether, UNEP/POPS/
POPRC.2/17/Add.1.
POP RC. (2007). Risk profle on commercial octabromodiphenyl ether, UNEP/POPS/
POPRC.3/20/Add.6.
POP RC. (2014). Risk profle on decabromodiphenyl ether (commercial mixture, c-decaBDE), 
UNEP/POPS/POPRC.10/10/Add.2.
Post, G. B., Cohn, P. D., & Cooper, K. R. (2012). Perfuorooctanoic acid (PFOA), an emerging 
drinking water contaminant: A critical review of recent literature. Environmental Research, 
116, 93–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2012.03.007
Ritscher, A., Wang, Z., Scheringer, M., Boucher, J. M., Ahrens, L., Berger, U., Bintein, S., Bopp, 
S.  K., Borg, D., Buser, A.  M., Cousins, I., DeWitt, J., Fletcher, T., Green, C., Herzke, D., 
Higgins, C., Huang, J., Hung, H., Knepper, T., et al. (2018). Zurich statement on future actions 
on per- and polyfuoroalkyl substances (PFASs). Environmental Health Perspectives, 126(8), 
084502. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP4158
Roberts-Davis, T. L., & Saetang, P. (2019). Trading away health and the environment: The toxic 
business of waste imports into Thailand. EARTH, Arnika, 61 p.
Samsonek, J., & Puype, F. (2013). Occurrence of brominated fame retardants in black thermo 
cups and selected kitchen utensils purchased on the European market. Food Additives & 
Contaminants: Part A, 30(11), 1976–1986. https://doi.org/10.1080/19440049.2013.829246
SC. (2009). Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic – Pollutants quantities of POPs reported 
in national implementation plan inventories of 88 Parties to the Convention. UNEP/POPS/
COP.4/30.
Schecter, A. (2012). Dioxins and health including other persistent organic pollutants and endo￾crine disruptors (3rd ed.). Wiley, 644 p. ISBN: 9780470605295.
Stockholm Convention. (2008). Guidelines on best available techniques and provisional guid￾ance on best environmental practices relevant to Article 5 and Annex C of the Stockholm 
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants. http://www.pops.int/documents/guidance/
batbep/batbepguide_en.pdf
Stockholm Convention. (2009a). Listing of tetrabromodiphenyl ether and pentabromodiphenyl 
ether. Decision SC 4/18.
Stockholm Convention. (2009b). Listing of hexabromodiphenyl ether and heptabromodiphenyl 
ether. Decision SC 4/14.
Stockholm Convention. (2013). Listing of hexabromocyclododecane. Decision SC-6/13.
Stockholm Convention. (2017). Listing of decabromodiphenyl ether. Decision SC-8/10.
Stockholm Convention. (2023). Decision SC-11/[--]: Listing of Dechlorane Plus.
Strakova, J., & Petrlik, J. (2017). Toy or toxic waste? An analysis of 47 plastic toy and beauty 
products made from toxic recycling. Arnika, 17 p.
Toxic Contamination Caused by Plastic Waste in Countries of the Global South128
Tang, Z., Zhang, L., Huang, Q., Yang, Y., Nie, Z., Cheng, J., Yang, J., Wang, Y., & Chai, M. (2015). 
Contamination and risk of heavy metals in soils and sediments from a typical plastic waste 
recycling area in North China. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 122, 343–351. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2015.08.006
Teebthaisong, A., Saetang, P., Petrlik, J., Bell, L., Beeler, B., Jopkova, M., Ismawati, Y., Kuepouo, 
G., Ochieng Ochola, G., & Akortia, E. (2021). Brominated dioxins (PBDD/Fs) in free range 
chicken eggs from sites affected by plastic waste. In Dioxin 2021, Xi’an, China.
Tong, K., Li, L., Breivik, K., & Wania, F. (2022). Ecological unequal exchange: Quantifying 
emissions of toxic chemicals embodied in the global trade of chemicals, products, and waste. 
Environmental Research Letters, 17(4). https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac5f95
Tun, T. Z., Kunisue, T., Tanabe, S., Prudente, M., Subramanian, A., Sudaryanto, A., Viet, P. H., & 
Nakata, H. (2022). Microplastics in dumping site soils from six Asian countries as a source of 
plastic additives. Science of the Total Environment, 806(Pt 4), 150912. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2021.150912
Van Eijkeren, J., Zeilmaker, M., Kan, C., Traag, W., & Hoogenboom, L. (2006). A toxicokinetic 
model for the carry-over of dioxins and PCBs from feed and soil to eggs. Food Additives & 
Contaminants: Part A, 23(5), 509–517.
Velis, C.  A., & Cook, E. (2021). Mismanagement of plastic waste through open burning with 
emphasis on the Global South: A systematic review of risks to occupational and public 
health. Environmental Science & Technology, 55(11), 7186–7207. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
est.0c08536
Verma, R., Vinoda, K., Papireddy, M., & Gowda, A. (2016). Toxic pollutants from plastic waste-A 
review. Procedia Environmental Sciences, 35, 701–708.
Wang, T., Liu, T., & Sun, C. (2008). Application of MSWI fy ash on acid soil and its effect on the 
environment. Waste Management, 28(10), 1977–1982. Epub 2007 Sept 1918.
Weber, R., Watson, A., Petrlik, J., Winski, A., Schwedler, O., Baitinger, C., & Behnisch, P. (2015). 
High levels of PCDD/F, PBDD/F and PCB in eggs around pollution sources demonstrates the 
need to review standards. Organohalogen Compounds, 77(2015), 615–618.
Weber, R., Bell, L., Watson, A., Petrlik, J., Paun, M. C., & Vijgen, J. (2019). Assessment of POPs 
contaminated sites and the need for stringent soil standards for food safety for the protec￾tion of human health. Environmental Pollution, 249, 703–715. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2019.03.066
Weber, R., Ashta, N. M., Aurisano, N., Wang, Z., Outters, M., Miguel, K., Schlummer, M., Blepp, 
M., Wiesinger, H., Andrade, H., Scheringer, M., & Fantke, P. (2023). Chemicals in plastic: A 
technical report. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.31417.34409
White, S.  S., & Birnbaum, L.  S. (2009). An overview of the effects of dioxins and dioxin￾like compounds on vertebrates, as documented in human and ecological epidemiol￾ogy. Journal of Environmental Science and Health, Part C, 27(4), 197–211. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10590500903310047
Wiesinger, H., Wang, Z., & Hellweg, S. (2021). Deep dive into plastic monomers, additives, 
and processing aids. Environmental Science & Technology, 55(13), 9339–9351. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.est.1c00976
Xu, P., Tao, B., Zhou, Z., Fan, S., Zhang, T., Liu, A., Dong, S., Yuan, J., Li, H., Chen, J., & Huang, 
Y. (2017). Occurrence, composition, source, and regional distribution of halogenated fame 
retardants and polybrominated dibenzo-p-dioxin/dibenzofuran in the soils of Guiyu, China. 
Environmental Pollution, 228, 61–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2017.05.024
Zeng, Y., Huang, C., Luo, X., Liu, Y., Ren, Z., & Mai, B. (2018). Polychlorinated biphenyls and 
chlorinated paraffns in home-produced eggs from an e-waste polluted area in South China: 
Occurrence and human dietary exposure. Environment International, 116, 52–59.
J. Petrlik et al.© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 129
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_7
The Human Rights Impacts of Plastic 
Waste Exports
Krista Shennum
Introduction
I met “Çiçek” and her two younger sisters in Adana, Turkey, while investigating the 
human rights impacts of plastic recycling for Human Rights Watch (Human Rights 
Watch, 2022).1
 While sitting with the three teenage girls on their living room foor, 
Çiçek told me how her family fed the war in Syria nearly overnight, with the girls 
only able to bring a single bag with them as they fed to Turkey as refugees. Shortly 
after arriving in Adana, Çiçek and her sisters began working at a nearby plastic 
recycling facility, where they sorted mixed plastic by color for 12 hours per day, 
6 days per week, in spite of legal provisions preventing any children in Turkey from 
working in such a hazardous workplace. The girls reported sorting imported plastic 
waste, which they were able to identify by foreign language labels. And despite 
laws requiring exported plastic waste to be clean, recyclable, and already sorted, 
Çiçek told me that the imported waste was often dirty and contaminated with things 
like soiled baby diapers.
For decades, high-consuming economies in the Global North, including the 
United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Japan, and European Union member 
states, have exported their plastic waste to countries where it is cheaper to process 
or otherwise get rid of the refuse. Often, recipient countries have weak or unen￾forced environmental regulations, low labor costs, and limited government 
accountability for environmental and labor abuses. For years, most exported plastic 
1Here and throughout this chapter, I am using quotation marks to indicate that a pseudonym is 
being used to protect the identity of the individual over fears of retaliation.
K. Shennum (*) 
Climate Rights International, Los Angeles, CA, USA130
waste was sent to China, with the country importing 45% of global plastic waste 
from 1992 to 2018. But in 2018, the Chinese government implemented its National 
Sword policy, which banned the import of plastic waste due to its immense environ￾ment and human health impacts. Instead of taking this global policy decision as an 
opportunity to build domestic waste management systems or take concrete steps to 
minimalize plastic production or consumption, countries in the Global North began 
shipping their waste to new countries, with Turkey, Malaysia, Indonesia, the 
Philippines, and Mexico rapidly becoming major importers of plastic waste. 
Countries in the Global North continue to externalize the health, environmental, and 
economic costs of their high consumption.
While the entire plastic life cycle can pose serious threats to human rights, plastic 
disposal, recycling, and waste management pose acute risks to the rights to health, 
water, food, access to information, life, and a healthy environment. When plastic 
waste is exported from one country to another, its management – or lack thereof – 
can impact local communities and workers who are exposed to that waste or its 
pollution. This concerning trend of the export of plastic waste by wealthy, high￾consuming countries perpetuates inequality between high- and middle- or low￾income countries. It enables wealthy individuals to continue their high carbon life 
cycles that contribute to climate change, which disproportionately impacts commu￾nities in the Global South that have contributed the least to the climate crisis.
This chapter will discuss the human rights consequences of exported plastic 
waste on receiving communities. First, it will discuss threats to the right to health 
for communities in importing countries, including workers in the informal economy 
and at plastic recycling facilities. Next, this chapter will discuss the role of the plas￾tic waste trade on the human right to clean drinking water. Then, we will dive into 
the various ways that the plastic waste trade threatens the rights to access of infor￾mation by analyzing what types of information are readily available for communi￾ties in importing countries, as well as the role of fast-moving consumer goods 
companies and plastic producers in driving misinformation in high-consuming 
economies about recyclability. Finally, this chapter will end with a discussion of the 
impacts of the plastic waste trade on the right to a healthy environment, including 
its contributions to the climate crisis.
The Right to Health
The enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health is one of the fundamental rights 
of every human being without distinction of race, religion, political belief, economic or 
social condition. (World Health Organization, 1946)
Plastics’ ubiquity is not an indicator that they are safe for humans and the environ￾ment. Plastics are made from fossil fuel feedstocks  – typically oil or gas  – and 
chemical additives. While additives can provide important material characteristics, 
like color and rigidity, many common chemical additives are toxic to human health. 
More than 13,000 chemicals are associated with plastics, yet scientists have found 
K. Shennum131
that roughly 3200 of those substances are of concern due to their hazardous proper￾ties, including endocrine disruption, carcinogenicity, and environmental persistence 
(UNEP et  al., 2023). In addition, there is limited research and oversight on the 
health impacts of chemicals around the globe. Of the 350,000 chemicals marketed 
globally, only 7% have been registered through the European Union’s Registration, 
Evaluation, Authorization, and Restriction of Chemicals regulation, which studies 
the safety of chemicals and can ban chemicals if they are deemed too hazardous 
(European Chemicals Agency, 2023).
Exposure to common chemical additions in plastic, like phthalates, bisphenol A 
(BPA), and per- and polyfuoroalkyl substances (PFAS), can lead to serious illnesses 
and diseases. Phthalates are a group of chemicals used to make plastics more dura￾ble, yet they are also endocrine disrupting chemicals that are linked to early meno￾pause in women, low birth rates, and higher rates of miscarriage (Wang & Qian, 
2021). BPA is used in common plastic products, including food containers and baby 
bottles, but exposure to BPA contributes to increased risk of cancer, cardiovascular 
disease, and liver problems (Jalal et  al., 2018). PFAS are a group of chemicals 
known as “forever chemicals” due to their longevity in our bodies and the environ￾ment. Researchers have found that exposure to PFAS leads to decreased fertility, 
low birth weight, reduced immune system response, and increased risk of cancer 
(US EPA, n.d.).
For people in importing countries at the frontlines of plastic waste management 
(or mismanagement), exposure to toxic chemicals in plastic products threatens their 
right to health because those toxins are released into the air, soil, and water when 
plastic is recycled, burned, incinerated, or dumped.
Under the Basel Convention’s Plastic Amendments, plastic waste exported from 
one country to another must be properly managed, including through recycling or 
for incineration to generate energy. Yet, there have been documented cases in 
importing countries where imported plastic waste has been illegally dumped, land￾flled, or burned. For instance, Greenpeace documented cases in Turkey where plas￾tic food packaging  – which is not typically recyclable  – from Germany and the 
United Kingdom was illegally dumped and set afame (Greenpeace UK, 2021). 
Plastic waste is often incinerated or burned as a waste management solution because 
it provides a low-cost solution to reducing or “eliminating” plastic waste. Plastic 
incineration emits toxic chemicals and particulate matter that harm human health. 
For instance, particulate matter emitted from burning plastic can lead to immediate 
and short-term impacts on respiratory systems. Even in healthy individuals, particu￾late matter can cause irrigation of the airways, coughing, and diffculty breathing 
(US EPA, 2016). For people with preexisting cardiovascular or respiratory issues, 
short-term exposure to particulate matter may aggravate asthma, cause nonfatal 
heart attacks, or lead to premature death.
In addition to the serious health problems posed by plastic burning and incinera￾tion, the process of recycling plastic can also be harmful. Mechanical plastic recy￾cling goes beyond the sorting of plastic from other waste by consumers; it is a 
multistep process that typically takes place in industrial warehouses and involves 
chopping plastic materials into small pieces, washing and drying those plastic 
The Human Rights Impacts of Plastic Waste Exports132
particles to remove contaminants (like food or chemical residue), heating the mate￾rial to extremely high temperatures, and then reforming the plastic into a form that 
can be used to make a new material. When plastic is shredded and melted, it releases 
toxic particles into the environment that can pose threats to human and environmen￾tal health. In some cases, poor recycling practices, like recycling multiple types of 
plastic together, can result in plastic recycling generating even more toxic sub￾stances, including dioxins (Petrlik et al., 2022).
My research with Human Rights Watch found that plastic recycling in small￾scale facilities in Adana and Istanbul, Turkey, threatened the health of workers and 
nearby residents (Human Rights Watch, 2022). Dozens of current and former work￾ers, including children, migrants, and refugees, and local residents described devel￾oping respiratory illnesses, rashes, headaches, and other ailments as a result of 
working or living near plastic recycling centers. For example, a 20-year-old man, 
“Ahmet,” stopped working at a plastic recycling facility due to the health impacts. 
He explained, “There’s a huge cauldron where they’re cooking the material, they 
keep adding water which comes back up as steam. When I inhaled that, it would feel 
like my lungs were squeezed and under pressure … I stopped working there two 
months ago, but I still have a problem with breathing.”
For people like “Ahmet” at the frontlines of plastic waste management, exposure 
to toxins released during plastic recycling can lead to serious, long-lasting health 
impacts. Because plastics are often made of toxic chemicals, the plastic waste trade 
can be thought of as a trade in toxic materials. By shipping toxic plastic materials 
from one country to another, the global plastic waste trade exports health harms to 
communities in receiving countries, threatening the right to health.
Workers’ Rights
The international transfer of dangerous and dirty work, whether extraction of natural 
resources, use of toxic chemicals and pesticides or disposal of hazardous wastes, without 
appropriate measures to protect workers against exposures to toxic substances has left 
workers, their families and their communities at considerable risk of grave impacts on their 
human rights. (Tuncak, 2019)
Countries in the Global North often send their garbage to countries with lower labor 
costs and little government enforcement of labor laws. Once plastic waste is 
imported, workers in the waste management sector, including both formally 
employed and informal workers, are tasked with waste management, exposing them 
to potential occupational health and safety harms.
Waste pickers collect, sort, repurpose, and sell discarded materials and are a part 
of the informal economy. According to the International Alliance of Waste Pickers, 
waste pickers collect 60% of all plastic that is collected for recycling, playing a 
critical role in reducing pollution (International Alliance of Waste Pickers, 2022). 
Globally, waste pickers are often members of marginalized groups and live in 
extreme poverty (Morais et al., 2022). The lack of formal work recognition, limited 
K. Shennum133
access to healthcare and other social services, economic vulnerability, and exposure 
to physical hazards make waste pickers particularly susceptible to rights abuses.
In some cases, waste pickers have alleged that the plastic waste trade has made 
their job more diffcult. Waste pickers in Thailand protested in 2021 over a drop in 
the price of collected recyclables due to a rapid increase in imported plastic waste 
(Duggleby, 2021). In Turkey, waste pickers have described how the infux of plastic 
waste from the United Kingdom and the European Union countries limited their 
ability to sell hand collected Turkish recyclables because imported waste was 
already sorted, thus cheaper for recycling facilities to purchase (Human Rights 
Watch, 2022). The rise in imported plastic waste also resulted in less domestically 
produced plastic waste from being recycled. For low-income people and people liv￾ing in extreme poverty, any drop in income can contribute inability to pay for food, 
clothing, housing, healthcare, and other basic services needed to actualize the right 
to an adequate standard of living.
For workers at plastic recycling facilities, exposure to toxins released during 
recycling threatens their rights. In a report by the former UN Special Rapporteur on 
the implications for human rights of the environmentally sound management and 
disposal of hazardous substances and wastes, Baskut Tuncak, the human rights con￾sequences of toxic exposure for workers are made clear: “Everyone, including 
workers in both formal and informal settings, has the inherent right to life, the right 
to enjoy the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health and the right 
to the physical integrity of their body. Acute poisonings and other cases of extreme 
exposure to toxic substances are unquestionable violations of these rights of work￾ers, subjecting them to violent, cruel, inhuman and degrading forms of treatment. 
However, these rights also extend to longer-term, chronic exposure to toxic sub￾stances, which can also give rise to violent, cruel, inhuman and degrading out￾comes” (Tuncak, 2019).
Studies have found volatile organic compounds and polycyclic aromatic hydro￾carbons, both cancer-causing classes of chemicals, in the air breathed in by workers 
at plastic recycling facilities (Tsai et al., 2009). Workers can also be exposed to 
harmful heavy metals, like arsenic, cadmium, and chromium, through direct skin 
contact with recycled plastic pellets and the inhalation of contaminated dust (Huang 
et al., 2021). To ensure that workers’ rights are fully respected in plastic recycling 
facilities, workers need full access to appropriate personal protective equipment, 
including masks, gloves, and goggles, and proper training on how to use that equip￾ment to protect themselves from potential harms. Employers must also ensure that 
workers understand the health risks they are exposed to in plastic recycling facili￾ties. Yet, research suggests that both workers and plastic recycling facility owners in 
Turkey do not understand the serious risks of exposure to toxins emitted during 
plastic recycling (Human Rights Watch, 2022). Under the United Nations Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human Rights, businesses have a responsibility to 
respect human rights and ensure their practices do not cause human rights abuses; 
thus, plastic recycling facility owners must provide a safe workplace and the equip￾ment and information needed for workers to protect themselves. Under international 
The Human Rights Impacts of Plastic Waste Exports134
human rights law, governments are obligated to implement policies to protect the 
health and safety of workers.
Waste management workers, including waste pickers and recycling facility 
workers, play an incredibly important role in pollution prevention and have the right 
to be safe in their jobs. Oftentimes, the plastic waste trade is promoted as a job cre￾ator in importing countries, yet the rights of workers are sacrifced by this promise 
of economic growth. Importing countries must uphold and respect the rights of 
workers and should take into account the impact of imported plastic waste on infor￾mal and formal waste management workers prior to permitting the import of 
that waste.
Right to Water
Pollution and over-abstraction of water resources through industrial activities or dumping 
are among the most commonly identifed threats to the realization of the human rights to 
water and sanitation. (de Albuquerque, 2014)
When plastic particles contaminate freshwater resources, they threaten the human 
right to safe drinking water. After plastic waste is imported, those plastic products 
and particles of those waste products may enter waterways as dumped material or 
through the process of recycling. Plastic does not biodegrade but instead breaks 
down to smaller particles that infltrate freshwater and ocean water resources, get 
suspended in the air, and make their way into the bodies of humans and wildlife. 
Microplastics, or plastics smaller than 5 mm in length, can be so small they are not 
removed through municipal water fltration systems, which may include coagula￾tion/sedimentation, sand fltration, or UV-based oxidation (Na et al., 2021).
In addition, as plastic is shredded and washed during mechanical recycling, 
small plastic particles, including microplastics, can pollute freshwater systems if 
they are not properly fltered and disposed of. A study of three mechanical plastic 
recycling facilities in Vietnam found that annual microplastic emissions ranged 
from 0.014 to 5.8 tons per year (Suzuki et  al., 2022). While the study does not 
describe the origin of plastic waste recycled in those facilities, Vietnam is one of the 
world’s largest importers of plastic waste, with nearly 300,000 metric tons of plastic 
waste imported in 2021 (United Nations Statistics Division, n.d.). Imported plastic 
waste exacerbates water fltration and sanitation systems in importing countries by 
introducing additional sources of microplastic pollution without providing any tech￾nical or fnancial support to mitigate that pollution.
Currently, the full health consequences of consumption of microplastics in drink￾ing water is not known, but there is reason to believe that precautions should be 
taken to protect water resources. Studies have found that microplastics in freshwater 
can promote the growth of microbes, including human pathogens and antibiotic 
resistant microbes (Eckert et al., 2018). In addition, microplastics ingested through 
drinking water have been found to produce oxidative stress in the body, which is 
linked with chronic infammation and tissue damage (Eerkes-Medrano et al., 2019). 
K. Shennum135
Following the precautionary principle, governments should take measures to protect 
environmental and human rights risks from plastic in drinking water even while 
scientifc uncertainty remains. In practice, this should include removing harmful 
chemicals from plastic products, investing in better waste management systems, 
installing proper flters to remove microplastics from drinking water, and ending the 
import of plastic waste which exacerbates water fltration and sanitation systems in 
importing countries. The human right to clean drinking water is indispensable for 
life and securing other human rights, and the impacts of plastic waste on drinking 
and other freshwater resources must be prioritized in decisions made about the 
import and export of plastic waste.
Right of Access to Information
Access to environmental information enables people to understand how environmental 
harms caused by plastics undermine their human rights …The vast majority of rights hold￾ers do not have access to information relating to the impacts of the various stages of the 
plastics cycle. (Orellana, 2021)
The global plastic waste trade can threaten peoples’ right of access to information 
in importing countries. The right of access to information includes the right and 
freedom to seek, receive, and share information and is a prerequisite for the exercise 
of many other rights. Under international law, the Aarhus Convention guarantees 
the right of access to environmental information for citizens in participating 
European countries, including information about air, soil, and water quality and 
government legislation, policies, or other measures that may impact health and 
well-being. The Escazú Agreement also lays out robust standards for access to 
information in environmental decision-making in Latin America and sets out spe￾cifc measures to ensure that people or groups in vulnerable situations, including 
Indigenous Peoples and ethnic groups, are able to access environmental information.
In the context of the plastic waste trade, access to information is key for com￾munity members, workers, employers, and others to make informed decisions 
regarding what precautions to take to reduce toxic exposure. The United Nations 
Human Rights Council has stated that governments are obligated to, “proactively 
put in the public domain Government information of public interest. States parties 
should make every effort to ensure easy, prompt, effective and practical access to 
such information” (UN Human Rights Committee, 2011). Thus, policymakers and 
governmental decision-makers have the duty to make information about the plastic 
waste trade, including the potential health impacts of exposure to toxins in plastic 
waste products, easily accessible and available to the public.
The lack of accessible information regarding toxic chemical additives in plastics 
is a threat to the rights of people in countries that import plastic waste. When plastic 
is made, producers are not required to disclose what chemical additives are included 
in their products. Therefore, consumers are not able to make informed decisions 
about the chemicals they may be exposed to when choosing a product containing 
The Human Rights Impacts of Plastic Waste Exports136
plastic. Once that plastic is disposed, waste management workers and other people 
who come into contact with that plastic material are likely unknowingly exposed to 
harmful chemicals, as toxins in the original products are typically undisclosed. Yet, 
people encountering plastic materials at each stage of the plastic life cycle have the 
right to know what chemicals they may be exposed to.
Some steps are currently being taken to increase chemical transparency in plastic 
products, yet further action is necessary to protect rights. Under the Global Plastic 
Treaty, which at the time of writing is under negotiation by parties to the United 
Nations Environment Assembly, access to information about chemicals in plastic 
products is becoming a key concern, with international human rights experts calling 
for the treaty to guarantee access to information on chemicals added to plastics 
(OHCHR, 2023).
Beyond issues regarding chemical transparency, the plastic waste trade contrib￾utes to a global disinformation campaign around the true role of recycling. Studies 
have found that only 9% of all plastics created have been recycled, with most plastic 
waste dumped in landflls, incinerated, or accumulated in the environment (Geyer 
et al., 2017). Yet, plastic recycling has been pushed as a key solution by fossil fuel 
and plastic producing companies for decades, while they continued to increase plas￾tic production (Sullivan, 2020). In 2022, the Attorney General of the State of 
California announced an investigation into fossil fuel and petrochemical companies 
for their role in causing the global plastic crisis, claiming, “for more than half a 
century, the plastics industry has engaged in an aggressive campaign to deceive the 
public, perpetuating a myth that recycling can solve the plastics crisis” (State of 
California Department of Justice, 2022). The global waste trade plays into this myth 
of recycling. By exporting their plastic waste, high-consuming countries are able to 
count that refuse toward “zero waste” or national recycling goals, regardless if it is 
actually recycled. Meanwhile, people consuming those plastic products believe they 
are being environmentally responsible by sorting their waste into a recycling bin 
and therefore are not incentivized to reduce plastic consumption or advocate for 
more sustainable alternatives.
The Right to a Healthy Environment
The global crises we currently face, including climate change, the loss of biodiversity, and 
pollution, represent some of the biggest threats to humanity, severely affecting the exercise 
and enjoyment of human rights. (OHCHR et al., 2023)
The right to a clean, healthy, and sustainable environment is not only a recognized 
right in itself, but it is also a precondition for the realization of many other rights, 
including the rights to life, food, and water. While there is not a universal defnition 
for the right to a healthy environment, the right generally includes both substantive 
elements, like a safe climate, clean air and water, healthy ecosystems, and a non￾toxic environment, and procedural elements, including access to information, pub￾lic participation, and access to justice or remedies (OHCHR et al., 2023). More than 
K. Shennum137
100 countries have guaranteed the right to a healthy environment in their national 
constitution, and in 2022, the United Nations General Assembly offcially recog￾nized the right to a clean, healthy, and sustainable environment as an inalienable 
human right.
The global plastic waste trade threatens the right to a clean, healthy, and sustain￾able environment by exporting pollution to importing countries. As described in the 
sections above, pollution stemming from both the mismanagement and recycling of 
imported plastic waste leaches toxins into the air, soil, and water of importing coun￾tries, directly threatening the right to a healthy environment for local communities. 
The plastic waste trade is also demonstrative of resource-intensive, mass consump￾tion, which has become the norm in the Global North and intrinsically threatens the 
right to a healthy environment by prioritizing economic growth and continuous 
development over human and environmental well-being.
In addition to the direct environmental rights harms posed by exported plastic 
waste, the global plastic waste trade is a contributor to the climate crisis, the world’s 
greatest threat to human rights. At each stage of the plastic life cycle, plastics emit 
greenhouse gases, thus driving climate change. And global plastic production is 
expected to continue increasing. At the current rate of growth, plastic and other 
petrochemical production is projected to increase dramatically in the next few 
decades, driving roughly half of the growth in oil demand by 2050 (International 
Energy Agency, 2018). With emissions from the plastics industry alone projected to 
reach between 10% and 13% of the global carbon budget by 2050, it will be diff￾cult – if not impossible – to reach Paris Agreement climate targets (Orellana, 2021). 
By enabling wealthy countries in the Global North to export their waste, the plastic 
waste trade is a global threat to the right to a clean, healthy, and sustainable environ￾ment by polluting ecosystems, harming human health and wildlife, contaminating 
food chains and water systems with toxic pollutants, and threatening the climate.
Conclusion
The global plastic waste trade is a human rights issue. As plastic production and 
consumption have grown over the past few decades, the human impacts of plastic 
have become more acute and more recognized. Unfortunately, plastic waste is pro￾jected to triple by 2060 as production and consumption continues to increase, put￾ting people at even greater risk of plastic-related human rights harms (OECD, 
2022). The global plastic waste trade does little, if anything, to actually address the 
growing issue of how to deal with plastic waste, as it simply shifts the burden to 
communities who are not responsible for the problem. Plastic can take centuries to 
break down, so plastic waste dumped today will cause harms for generations. The 
global plastic waste trade is a result of an extractive, capitalist economy, where 
products are used for a limited amount of time before being discarded, and it is a 
modern act of colonialism. By exporting their plastic waste, high-consuming econo￾mies are perpetuating a system of ever-increasing fossil fuel, petrochemical, and 
The Human Rights Impacts of Plastic Waste Exports138
plastic production that damages the climate, harms the natural environment, and 
threatens the rights of people in importing countries.
Yet, the human rights harms posed by plastic waste and the global plastic waste 
trade are not inevitable. Major exporting nations have a responsibility to end the 
practice of exporting their plastic waste and must be accountable for their high rates 
of consumption. Countries should enact policies to protect people and the environ￾ment from the harms posed by plastics, including by banning the use of toxic chemi￾cals in plastics and investing in waste management infrastructure. Critically, steps 
must be taken to cap the production of new plastic products and ban the production 
of harmful and unnecessary plastics, like single-use plastic products. If the global 
plastic waste trade continues, communities in importing countries will continue to 
disproportionately bear the human cost of the plastic crisis.
References
de Albuquerque, C. (2014). Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drink￾ing water and sanitation, Catarina de Albuquerque: Common violations of the human rights 
to water and sanitation. A/HRC/27/55. United Nations General Assembly. https://undocs.org/
Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=A%2FHRC%2F27%2F55&Language=E&DeviceType=Desktop
&LangRequested=False. Accessed 29 Sept 2023.
Duggleby, L. (2021). Thai trash collectors threatened by continued waste imports. China Dialogue. 
https://chinadialogue.net/en/cities/thai-saleng-trash-collectors-livelihoods-threatened-by￾waste-imports/. Accessed 15 May 2023.
Eckert, E. M., Cesare, A. D., Kettner, M. T., et al. (2018). Microplastics increase impact of treated 
wastewater on freshwater microbial community. Environmental Pollution, 234. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2017.11.070
Eerkes-Medrano, D., Leslie, H. A., & Quinn, B. (2019). Microplastics in drinking water: A review 
and assessment. Current Opinion in Environmental Health and Science, 7, 69–75. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.coesh.2018.12.001
European Chemicals Agency. (2023). REACH Registration Statistics. https://echa.europa.eu/docu￾ments/10162/2741157/registration_statistics_en.pdf/58c2d7bd-2173-4cb9-eb3b-a6bc14a675
4b?t=1649160655122. Accessed 26 Mar 2023.
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J. R., & Law, K. L. (2017). Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever. 
Science Advances, 3(7). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700782
Greenpeace UK. (2021). Trashed: How the UK is still dumping plastic waste on the rest of the 
world. https://www.greenpeace.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Trashed-Greenpeace￾plastics-report-fnal.pdf. Accessed 15 Sept 2021.
Huang, G., Xie, J., Li, T., & Zhang, P. (2021). Worker health risk of heavy metals in pellets of recy￾cled plastic: A skin exposure model. International Archives of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, 94(7), 1581–1589. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00420-021-01727-6
Human Rights Watch. (2022). It’s as if they’re poisoning us”: The health impacts of plastic recy￾cling in Turkey. https://www.hrw.org/report/2022/09/21/its-if-theyre-poisoning-us/health￾impacts-plastic-recycling-turkey. Accessed 21 Sept 2022.
International Alliance of Waste Pickers. (2022). GlobalRec seeks meaningful participation of waste 
pickers in the frst negotiations of Plastics Treaty in Uruguay. https://globalrec.org/2022/07/15/
globalrec-participation-waste-pickers-plastics-treaty-uruguay/. Accessed 2 May 2023.
International Energy Agency. (2018). The future of petrochemicals. https://www.iea.org/reports/
the-future-of-petrochemica.ls. Accessed 12 Oct 2022.
K. Shennum139
Jalal, N., Surendranath, A. R., Pathak, J. L., et al. (2018). Bisphenol A (BPA) the mighty and the 
mutagenic. Toxicology Reports, 5, 76–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.toxrep.2017.12.013
Morais, J., Corder, G., Golev, A., et al. (2022). Global review of human waste-picking and its con￾tribution to poverty alleviation and a circular economy. Environmental Research Letters, 17. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac6b49
Na, S. H., Kim, M. J., Kim, J. T., et al. (2021). Microplastic removal in conventional drinking water 
treatment processes: Performance, mechanism, and potential risk. Water Research, 202. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2021.117417
OECD. (2022). Global plastic waste set to almost triple by 2060, says OECD. https://www.
oecd.org/environment/global-plastic-waste-set-to-almost-triple-by-2060.htm. Accessed 22 
May 2023.
Orellana, M. (2021). Report of the Special Rapporteur on the implications for human rights of the 
environmentally sound management and disposal of hazardous substances and wastes, Marcos 
Orellana: The stages of the plastics cycle and their impacts on human rights. A/76/207. United 
Nations General Assembly. https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/3936771?ln=en. Accessed 15 
Oct 2021.
Petrlik, J., Beeler, B., & Strakova, J. (2022). Hazardous chemicals in plastic products. International 
POPs Elimination Network. https://ipen.org/sites/default/fles/documents/ipen-toxic-plastic￾products-africa-v2_3w-en.pdf. Accessed 15 Mar 2023.
State of California Department of Justice. (2022). Attorney General Bonta announces investigation 
into fossil fuel and petrochemical industries for role in causing global plastics pollution crisis. 
https://oag.ca.gov/news/press-releases/attorney-general-bonta-announces-investigation-fossil￾fuel-and-petrochemical. Accessed 19 Feb 2023.
Sullivan, L. (2020). How big oil misled the public into believing plastic would be recycled. 
NPR. https://www.npr.org/2020/09/11/897692090/how-big-oil-misled-the-public-into￾believing-plastic-would-be-recycled. Accessed 22 Mar 2023.
Suzuki, G., Uchida, N., Tuyen, L. E., et al. (2022). Mechanical recycling of plastic waste as a 
point source of microplastic pollution. Environmental Pollution, 303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2022.119114
Tsai, C. J., Chen, M. L., Chang, K. F., et al. (2009). The pollution characteristics of odor, vol￾atile organochlorinated compounds and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons emitted from 
plastic waste recycling plants. Chemosphere, 74(8), 1104–1110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2008.10.041
Tuncak, B. (2019). Principles on human rights and the protection of workers from exposure to 
toxic substances. A/HRC/42/41. UN Human Rights Council. https://ap.ohchr.org/documents/
dpage_e.aspx?si=A/HRC/42/41. Accessed 15 Feb 2023.
UN Human Rights Committee. (2011). International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; 
General comment No. 34; Article 19: Freedoms of opinion and expression. CCPR/C/GC/34, 
para. 19. https://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrc/docs/gc34.pdf. Accessed 2 May 2023.
UN OHCHR. (2023). UN human rights experts urge treaty to address ‘plastic tide.’ https://www.
ohchr.org/en/press-releases/2022/02/un-human-rights-experts-urge-treaty-address-plastic￾tide. Accessed 24 Apr 2023.
UN OHCHR, UNEP, & UNDP. (2023). What is the right to a healthy environment. https://www.
undp.org/sites/g/fles/zskgke326/fles/2023-01/UNDP-UNEP-UNHCHR-What-is-the-Right￾to-a-Healthy-Environment.pdf. Accessed 10 May 2023.
UN Statistics Division. (n.d.). UN Comtrade Database. Trade Statistics Branch. https://comtrade.
un.org/data/. Accessed 18 Apr 2023.
UNEP and Secretariat of the Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions. (2023). Chemicals 
in plastics: A technical report. https://www.unep.org/resources/report/chemicals-plastics￾technical-report. Accessed 5 May 2023.
US EPA. (2016). Health and environmental effects of particulate matter (PM) [Overviews and 
Factsheets]. https://www.epa.gov/pm-pollution/health-and-environmental-effects-particulate￾matter-pm. Accessed 28 Apr 2023.
The Human Rights Impacts of Plastic Waste Exports140
US EPA. (n.d.). Our current understanding of the human health and environmental risks of 
PFAS. https://www.epa.gov/pfas/our-current-understanding-human-health-and-environmental￾risks-pfas. Accessed 16 May 2023.
Wang, Y., & Qian, H. (2021). Phthalates and their impacts on human health. Healthcare, 9(5), 603. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare9050603
World Health Organization. (1946). Constitution of the World Health Organization. https://www.
who.int/about/governance/constitution. Accessed 15 Feb 2023.
K. Shennum© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 141
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_8
The Darker Side of Dutch Colonialism: 
Exporting Plastic Waste Is Plastic Pollution 
Traffcking
Helena Danton and Tony R. Walker
Introduction
Unsustainable plastic production and overconsumption has resulted in a global plas￾tic waste and plastic pollution crisis (Walker, 2018; Lau et  al., 2020; Walker & 
McGuinty, 2020; Walker & Fequet, 2023). Geyer et al. (2017) estimated that more 
than 75% of all plastics ever produced now exists as waste in landflls or as plastic 
pollution in the environment. Based on data from 2016, Borrelle et al. (2020) esti￾mated that 19–23 million metric tons of plastic pollution enters aquatic and marine 
environments annually. In the Netherlands, with a population of almost 18 million 
people, this plastic waste and plastic pollution crisis is no different than anywhere 
else, although arguably maybe contributing more than its fair share beyond its 
national borders (CBS Statistics Netherlands, 2019).
Single-use plastics are the major contributors to this plastic waste and pollution 
crisis as they are produced and discarded after a single use and are notoriously dif￾fcult to recycle (Navarre et al., 2022) or have limited end of life recyclable market 
value (Diggle & Walker, 2020, 2022; Diggle et al., 2023). Yet, despite their limited 
recyclability or end of life value, single-use plastics are widely used in food packag￾ing (Walker et  al., 2021; Kitz et  al., 2022), in plastic grocery bags (Xanthos & 
Walker, 2017; Schnurr et al., 2018; Adam et al., 2020), and in plastic containers or 
utensils for takeout food (Molloy et al., 2022).
One of the major issues with this unsustainable plastic use and increasing waste 
generation is that most countries can not properly manage their domestic waste. 
This has resulted in a global plastic waste trade that lacks adequate transparency or 
accurate monitoring of plastic waste trade fows (March et al., 2022). This lack of 
transparency is further exacerbated as mismanaged or lost volumes are often not 
H. Danton · T. R. Walker (*) 
School for Resource and Environmental Studies, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
e-mail: trwalker@dal.ca142
accounted for, which falsely increases recycling performance rates of high-income 
countries, such as the Netherlands, which export their waste to low-income coun￾tries for so-called recycling (Lau et al., 2020; Walker, 2023a, b). Another major 
problem of this global plastic waste trade is that it is often contaminated with food 
scraps, comingled with other plastic polymers, or is simply of too poor quality that 
it is impossible to “recycle” (Navarre et al., 2022). Thus, much of this traded plastic 
waste is landflled, incinerated, burned in open pits or is released into the environ￾ment as plastic pollution (Lau et  al., 2020; Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021; Walker, 
2023a, b).
Southeast Asian countries have been adversely impacted by plastic pollution 
from domestic and transboundary sources as well plastic imports from high-income 
countries (Jambeck et al., 2015; Brooks et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2021; Navarre 
et  al., 2022). In 2015, it was reported that fve Asia Pacifc countries (including 
China, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Thailand) were collectively responsible for 
~60% of ocean plastic pollution (Jambeck et al., 2015), giving rise to the commonly 
held misperception that Southeast Asian countries are the biggest sources of global 
plastic pollution (Walker et al., 2021). However, recent research on sources of this 
plastic pollution suggests otherwise, as a lot of this plastic waste often does not 
originate from these importing countries (Navarre et  al., 2022). In other words, 
plastic waste and plastic pollution from high-income countries are exacerbating the 
plastic pollution problem in low-income countries with inadequate waste manage￾ment infrastructure (Walker, 2023a, b). This practice has now recently been referred 
to as plastic pollution colonialism by several plastic pollution researchers (Liboiron, 
2021; Fuller et al., 2022).
Since 1993, global annual imports and exports of plastic waste, as part of the 
global plastic waste trade, increased rapidly to 723% and 817% in 2016, respec￾tively (Brooks et al., 2018). High-income countries, including the Netherlands, have 
overwhelmingly been the primary exporters of plastic waste to low-income coun￾tries since the 1980s, which has been valued at $71B USD (Liu et al., 2021). Prior 
to 2018, most of the global plastic waste trade from high-income countries was 
exported to China. In 2012, imports to China from high-income countries accounted 
for over 50% of the global plastic waste trade, which was used by Chinese plastic 
waste recycling industries for feedstock materials for use in the massive manufac￾turing sector in China (Liu et al., 2021). However, in January 2018, China enacted 
the “National Sword” policy, which banned the import of most plastics and other 
materials (Liu et al., 2018; Walker, 2018).
After China closed its doors to plastic waste imports in 2018, high-income coun￾tries began exporting plastic waste to other low-income countries (Liu et al., 2018; 
Walker, 2018; Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021). However, many of these importing 
countries lack adequate waste management facilities, which has led to excessive 
open dumping or burning of plastic waste, including waste-to-energy incineration 
(Walker, 2023a, b). Burning plastic waste for energy releases greenhouse gases, 
contributes to accelerating climate change, and produces toxic atmospheric pollut￾ants and toxic ash residues impacting local communities and surrounding ecosys￾tems, including locally produced food (DeWeerdt, 2022; Walker, 2023b; 
H. Danton and T. R. Walker143
Teebthaisong et  al., 2021). Even when recycling infrastructure exists, they have 
been found to be major contributors of microplastic pollution to aquatic receiving 
environments (Brown et al., 2023).
International Plastic Waste Trade
The global plastic waste trade is managed by multiple levels of government (inter￾national, national, and municipal levels) and by a myriad of private sector compa￾nies making the international trade in plastic waste a complex web of regulations 
and middlemen lacking transparency (Liu, 2021; March et  al., 2022). If plastic 
waste is not recycled domestically, it can be exported but must be issued with a 
specifc trade code (Plastic Soup Foundation, 2022). Although plastic waste should 
be traded in compliance with international agreements, such as the Basel Convention, 
stringent enforcement is often lacking (Yang, 2020; van Der Marel, 2022). Traded 
plastic waste can be transported to various intermediate countries via waste brokers 
before arriving at the destination country (Plastic Soup Foundation, 2022). Waste 
brokers can proft from each of these intermediate transactions, and the plastic waste 
trade can be even more lucrative when selling plastic waste to recycling plants at the 
fnal destination. Government regulations and fnancial subsidies can make it attrac￾tive for plastic waste to be processed in other countries (Plastic Soup Foundation, 
2022). This has created a highly complex and competitive international market for 
plastic waste in which huge quantities of plastic waste are transported globally, but 
at every step there is a lack of transparency making it increasingly diffcult to over￾see the trade (Liu, 2021; March et al., 2022).
Eurostat and the European Environment Agency are the overarching agencies 
that monitor waste of European countries (Ministerie Van Infrastructuur en 
Waterstaat, 2021a). Monitoring of general waste streams in the Netherlands is cov￾ered by Rijkswaterstaat (Ministerie Van Infrastructuur en Waterstaat, 2021a). 
Prezero (previously known as Suez) is the biggest company for the collection and 
separation of plastic household waste in the Netherlands, and they monitor these 
processes to keep track of their recycling rates, which is now known to be falsely 
infated by many high-income countries participating in plastic pollution traffcking 
(Lau et al., 2020). However, monitoring of plastic waste generated from individual 
trading or recycling companies is virtually nonexistent since there is a lack of man￾agement oversight (Snijder & Nusselder, 2019). Liang et al. (2021) documented the 
conditions which Asian countries established for incoming waste. For example, 
monitoring of what goes into the containers for export to Asia is inconsistently 
reported. Low-quality plastic waste continues to end up in Asia. This may be due to 
lax interpretations of the Basel Convention: “Non-hazardous plastic wastes listed in 
Annex IX can be moved among Parties without any specifc control under the 
Convention” (Yang, 2020; van Der Marel, 2022).
Exporting plastic waste for high-income countries that produce and consume 
huge quantities of plastic is one way to get rid of (“manage” or “recycle”) excess 
The Darker Side of Dutch Colonialism: Exporting Plastic Waste Is Plastic Pollution…144
plastic waste, much of which is hard to recycle (CBS Statistics Netherlands, 2019). 
For a long time, China was the primary importer until, in the face of large-scale pol￾lution, it closed its borders for almost all imports of plastic waste in 2018 (Liu et al., 
2018; Walker, 2018; Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021; Plastic Soup Foundation, 2022). In 
2018, over three-quarters of plastic waste were destined for a country within Europe. 
Germany was one of the most important destinations and recorded the strongest 
increase compared to 2010. Plastic waste exports to Asian countries (other than 
China) such as Indonesia and Vietnam rose during the period (CBS Statistics 
Netherlands, 2019; Plastic Soup Foundation, 2022).
Plastic Waste Management Internationally
The Basel Convention governs plastic waste exports. It is an international treaty that 
is legally binding for 186 countries (Yang, 2020; van Der Marel, 2022). The focus, 
however, lies more on hazardous waste. The most important rules governing the 
international trade in waste products are laid down in the Basel Convention (1989). 
This agreement was passed to regulate the international transport and processing of 
hazardous waste. In May 2019, several amendments were introduced to the Basel 
Convention to make the trade in plastic waste more transparent and enforceable. 
These amendments took effect on January 1, 2021. One important amendment was 
the introduction of a “prior informed consent” (PIC) for mixed plastic waste, which 
means that it is easier to monitor the export of plastic waste and that countries may 
reject shipments (Plastic Soup Foundation, 2022). However, for plastic waste that is 
separated according to polymer type (e.g., polyethylene (PE), polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC), or polyethylene terephthalate (PET)) and is labelled “almost free from con￾tamination,” no permission is required. Unfortunately, the Convention does not 
defne what falls under this description so that there is plenty of room for misinter￾pretation resulting in the export of huge quantities of contaminated plastic waste 
which inevitably ends up as plastic pollution at the fnal destination.
The Basel Convention specifes separate trade codes for various plastic waste 
streams that must be used by relevant parties and which should make it clear whether 
the PIC is needed. This is a different coding system than that used for the UN 
COMTRADE database. All the codes in the Basel Convention fall under the 
umbrella of UN COMTRADE trade code 3915. As of 2021, countries that have rati￾fed the Convention may only export contaminated or mixed plastic waste (unsepa￾rated) to another country if that country has signed the Convention and in doing so 
has given permission. Countries that have not ratifed the Convention, such as the 
United States, may make separate agreements with the receiving convention about 
the import and export of plastic and other waste, resulting in a patch work of regula￾tion, mismanagement, and lack of transparency or harmonization (Plastic Soup 
Foundation, 2022).
H. Danton and T. R. Walker145
Plastic Waste Management in the European Union 
and in the Netherlands
In addition to the Basel Convention, the European Union (EU) has implemented its 
own legislation and regulations for packaging material. The transport of waste must 
meet the terms of the “Directive on shipments of waste” (1013/2006) (EU, 2006). 
This Directive also covers the trade in plastic waste. The export of waste that will 
end up in landfll in countries outside the EU is banned. Permission must be obtained 
from the relevant authority in the receiving country for some, not polluted, specifed 
waste streams. For the export to countries outside the EU, 2% of the waste may be 
contaminated, and for export to countries within the EU, 6% may be contaminated 
(Plastic Soup Foundation, 2022). In this case, “contaminated” means irregular plas￾tic waste or plastic waste that is of low quality and cannot be recycled. These EU 
rules follow from the European Green Deal, the Waste Framework Directive, and 
the Circular Economy Action Plan (European Commission, 2008, 2020, 2022). The 
objective is for “keeping the value of products, materials and natural resources in 
the economy as long as possible and, at the same time, minimising waste, the transi￾tion to a circular economy can make an important contribution to the creation of a 
low-carbon, resource-effcient, competitive economy” (Ministerie Van Infrastructuur 
en Waterstaat, 2019, p. 1). These plans also make shipment possible between mem￾ber states (EU, 2006). Additionally, “waste must be classifed as a good” (Ministerie 
Van Infrastructuur en Waterstaat, 2019, p. 72). This means that extra monitoring on 
the quality of the “waste” is not always required and can be overlooked, which can 
lead to the transportation of mismanaged plastic waste (Ministerie Van Infrastructuur 
en Waterstaat, 2019). The EU is currently modifying this legislation. The proposed 
new regulations on the transport of waste, including plastic, will be more stringent 
(Plastic Soup Foundation, 2022). However, they should ensure that the EU no lon￾ger exports waste that is too diffcult or expensive to recycle domestically. The EU 
should address the illegal export of waste more effectively. The EU should only 
export waste that receiving countries can guarantee will be processed responsibly 
and transparently. Despite the call of environmental organizations, up to now the 
proposed regulations do not impose a general ban of the export of plastic waste to 
countries outside the EU (Plastic Soup Foundation, 2022).
Apart from legal waste streams, such as those included in the UN COMTRADE 
database, there is also a sizeable illegal trade in plastic waste. In a 2020 report, 
Interpol noted a strong rise in criminality connected to the trade in plastic waste. In 
recent years, under the name of “recycling,” ever more plastic has been dumped 
(INTERPOL, 2020). Criminals take advantage of the highly complicated legisla￾tion, irregular control in the export countries, and the lack of control in countries 
that receive illegal container freight. One of the ways in which plastic waste is ille￾gally traded is by hiding it behind bales of old paper for export (Plastic Soup 
Foundation, 2022). Although the Netherlands has an extensive management plan for 
waste management called Landelijk Afvalbeheer Plan (LAP3) or National Waste 
Management Plan, which became effective on March 2, 2021 (Bergsma et  al., 
The Darker Side of Dutch Colonialism: Exporting Plastic Waste Is Plastic Pollution…146
2014), the government relies heavily on individual companies and institutions for 
proper management of their waste (Ministerie Van Infrastructuur en 
Waterstaat, 2021c).
Plastic Waste Management in Municipalities
Typically, collection of household waste is the responsibility of municipalities (i.e., 
local governments) (Walker & Xanthos, 2018). In the Netherlands, there are two 
ways in which plastic waste is collected: separately in Plastic packaging material, 
Metal/Cans and Drinks cartons (PMD) bins for source separation or mixed with 
other material. These two options depend on individual municipalities (Ministerie 
Van Infrastructuur en Waterstaat, 2021b). Prezero (the largest plastic recycling com￾pany using source separation in the Netherlands) handles 80,000 tons/year 
(Çevikarslan et al., 2022; Prezero, 2022). Although material in PMD bins is intended 
for recycling, a substantial portion of the plastic waste ends up in waste-to-energy 
facilities which produce greenhouse gas emissions and contribute to climate change 
(Government of the Netherlands, 2018). After collection, the plastic waste is sepa￾rated into homogeneous streams used to make plastic fakes of which new plastic 
materials are made. However, not all plastic waste is suitable for recycling (e.g., 
mixed and/or colored plastics are diffcult for detection machinery to recognize and 
separate). Thus, these are not appropriate for producing fakes and directed to mixed 
waste stream (Prezero, 2022). Mixed streams are sent to companies that attempt to 
retrieve useful materials out of the waste stream or make new products from the 
mixed plastics, but this can be extremely diffcult, even when infrastructure exists 
(Vollmer et al., 2020). However, because of their low quality, these mixed plastic 
waste streams have extremely low or even negative value and when exported to Asia 
have little chance of ever being recycled.
Management of Waste Exports
The exportation of recyclable plastic waste is allowed within the EU (EU, 2006; 
Ministerie Van Infrastructuur en Waterstaat, 2019). The Netherlands does this, 
claiming that the country is too small and greater recycling capacity exists else￾where. The exporting country must make sure that the material exported is indeed 
“recyclable” and the importing country can have conditions on what type of waste 
they accept (Faraca & Astrup, 2019; Liang et al., 2021). After the import ban on 
plastic waste from China, most Asian countries updated their conditions for accept￾ing specifc recyclable materials (e.g., clean, no composites, certain polymers) 
(Liang et al., 2021). However, according to Navarre et al. (2022), the quality of 
exported waste from the Netherlands does not meet the specifc criteria required by 
importing countries. Since these countries do not want to accept low-quality plastic 
H. Danton and T. R. Walker147
waste for recycling, there are no management strategies to address this pressing 
issue. Therefore, the opportunity for proper recycling in these countries is not pos￾sible and combined with a lack of monitoring results in widespread leakage of 
Dutch plastics into the environment.
The European Environment Agency states that “The objective is a shift towards 
a circular economy, handling natural resources as effciently as possible and ensur￾ing the lowest possible environmental impact” (European Environment Agency, 
2021, p. 5). To reach this objective, the following action plans have been proposed 
next to the LAP3.
The Transition Agenda Circular Economy focuses on moving toward a circular 
economy which means relying less on raw materials and concentrating on the reuse 
of materials. The goal is that plastics are fully circular by 2050. To achieve this, the 
emphasis will lie on prevention, supply of renewable plastics, quality, and strategic 
chain operation (Government of the Netherlands, 2018). This report mentions the 
intended result, action holders, the budget required, and the timeline. It can there￾fore be considered as a solid plan. Afvalpreventie programma (the waste prevention 
program) focuses on the prevention of creating waste, the negative consequences of 
waste products for the environment, and lowering the number of dangerous sub￾stances in materials (Rijksoverheid, 2021). Circulair Materialen Plan (Circular 
Material Plan) has a stronger legal basis. It also supports the treatment of materials 
from companies and, with that, offers incentive for innovation (Ministerie Van 
Infrastructuur en Waterstaat, 2022). This plan has been written as an extension of 
the LAP3.
Within the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 
the EU, as a trading block comprising of 27 member states, was the largest exporter 
of plastic waste in the world to non-OECD countries in 2021. The net weight of 
exported plastic from the EU to non-OECD countries in 2021 was 887 million kg. 
After the EU, the following individual countries were the top 5 exporters of plastic 
waste to non-OECD countries in 2021: Japan (462 million kg), the United States 
(250 million kg), the Netherlands (211 million kg), Germany (95 million kg), and 
Australia (84 million kg), respectively (Plastic Soup Foundation, 2022).
Following China’s import ban in 2018, the export of plastic waste from the 
Netherlands to non-OECD countries decreased but increased dramatically in 2020 
and 2021, despite stricter rules in the Basel Convention taking effect in 2021. 
Indonesia, Vietnam, and Malaysia were the main destinations for plastic waste 
export from the Netherlands in 2021, with Indonesia being the main export destina￾tion country. Further, the Netherlands is the largest exporter of plastic waste to 
Indonesia during the 5 years prior to 2021 (Plastic Soup Foundation, 2022). This is 
in stark contrast to the sharp decrease in exports to OECD countries from the 
Netherlands. In 2021, the Netherlands was the world’s largest exporter of plastic 
waste to Indonesia, totaling 70 million kg, and exported almost 64 million kg to 
Vietnam (Plastic Soup Foundation, 2022).
The Darker Side of Dutch Colonialism: Exporting Plastic Waste Is Plastic Pollution…148
Is the Netherlands Wish Cycling?
Up until the import ban on plastic waste, the Netherlands had been exporting much 
of its waste to China, with the intention that it would be recycled into feedstock 
materials for the Chinese manufacturing industries (Brooks et al., 2018). However, 
the quality of the plastic that was exported by the Netherlands was too low for the 
creation of raw materials, and there was also a lack of technology for recycling of 
this material in China and other importing countries (Liang et al., 2021). With the 
overfow of low-quality plastics to Asian countries following the import ban by 
China, it is now continuing to leak into marine and terrestrial environments causing 
harm to wildlife and local communities.
This chapter provides insights on the plastic waste trade of the Netherlands. 
According to Brooks et al. (2018), the Netherlands is the seventh biggest exporter 
of plastic waste in the world. The Dutch Afvalfonds voor Verpakkingen (Waste 
Fund for Packaging) claims that 50% of plastic packaging is recycled; however, this 
claim is misleading as this does not include mixed plastics since these are already 
considered nonrecyclable materials (Snijder & Nusselder, 2019).
Limitations, Recommendations, and Future Considerations
Companies are not required to separate plastics from their waste (Ministerie Van 
Infrastructuur en Waterstaat, 2021b). This means that the waste is mostly going to 
incineration and the recycling rates for this sector are low (Snijder & Nusselder, 
2019). To obligate companies to cooperate with plastic recycling, a law should be 
implemented that requires companies to take part in recycling. Proper monitoring is 
required with random spot checks at recycling companies.
The Netherlands has a strict policy on landfll of household waste but when recy￾cling is not possible, incineration is used (Snijder & Nusselder, 2019; Çevikarslan 
et al., 2022). The tax on landfll reduced the use of landflls discernably. Therefore, 
it can be assumed that a tax on recyclable plastic waste, which is being shipped 
abroad or incinerated, will make a positive impact on this problem. The money 
obtained can be used for improving recycling rates (Government of the Netherlands, 
2018, p. 31).
There is a wide variety in materials used for plastic packaging. This makes recy￾cling extremely diffcult. Producers should not mix or color plastics to help decrease 
the mixed waste stream and increase the recycling rate in the Netherlands to help 
prevent useless exportation. To push this transition, the government should help by 
providing rewards for companies that improve their products and fne companies 
that neglect innovation.
For customers, it is extremely diffcult to select products with less packaging 
material. Supermarkets should help the customer in this. There is already one exam￾ple of a supermarket chain that moved away from useless packaging material: 
H. Danton and T. R. Walker149
Ekoplaza (2022). Other supermarkets should follow their example. The Netherlands 
is not the only country exporting plastic waste, but this is no excuse for its actions. 
Other countries that have reduced their export of plastic waste should be looked at 
to learn from their successes and failures. This can help the transition away from the 
exportation of plastic waste faster for the Netherlands. The United Kingdom and 
Norway are great examples for management, monitoring, and mitigation strategies 
in Europe (Plastics Europe, 2022).
Current plastic production use and disposal may continue to undermine imple￾mentation of many of the UN SDGs by 2030 without reductions in global consump￾tion of fossil fuel-based plastics (Walker, 2021). Although solutions required to 
reduce plastic waste and plastic pollution are diverse and cannot be adequately 
addressed in this chapter, some solutions include extended producer responsibility 
programs (Diggle & Walker, 2020, 2022; Diggle et al., 2023), prevention initiatives 
to reduce single-use plastic use (Xanthos & Walker, 2017; Schnurr et  al., 2018; 
Adam et al., 2020; Bezerra et al., 2021; Clayton et al., 2021), and the Plastics Treaty 
which will consider the entire plastic life cycle including curbing production, circu￾lar economy and environmental reporting standards, increased consumer aware￾ness, and improved performance measures (Ammendolia & Walker, 2022; Bergmann 
et al., 2022; Dey et al., 2022). For example, plastic packaging and plastic waste 
comprise complex mixtures consisting of over 13,000 chemical substances such as 
additives, processing aids, and non-intentionally added substances, and many of 
them are known to be hazardous to human health and the environment (Wiesinger 
et  al., 2021; Dey et  al., 2022). Thus, toxic chemicals used in plastic production 
hamper recycling efforts.
Conclusions
Despite its small size and population compared to other EU countries, the 
Netherlands remains a large player in the international trade in plastic waste, and 
this is also despite the modifcations to the Basel Convention. The Netherlands 
exports most of its plastic waste to Indonesia, Malaysia, and Vietnam. This suggests 
that greater transparency is required in the Basel Convention, which would allow 
the public to gain access to data of the trade streams originating from the Netherlands. 
Current updates to the European Waste Shipment Directive also offers opportunities 
to improve transparency about plastic waste exports from the Netherlands to non￾OECD countries. However, a ban on the export of plastic waste to countries outside 
the EU would be the most effective mitigation to curb this plastic pollution traffck￾ing, yet it is not included in the proposed changes. A ban would lead to pollution 
being tackled as close to the source as possible and make the illegal trade in plastic 
waste much more diffcult. The current legislation and regulations are too compli￾cated and leaves too much space for transporting contaminated plastic waste.
The Darker Side of Dutch Colonialism: Exporting Plastic Waste Is Plastic Pollution…150
References
Adam, I., Walker, T. R., Bezerra, J. C., & Clayton, A. (2020). Policies to reduce single-use plastic 
marine pollution in West Africa. Marine Policy, 116, 103928.
Ammendolia, J., & Walker, T. R. (2022). Global plastics treaty must be strict and binding. Nature, 
611(7935), 236.
Basel Convention (1989). Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of 
Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, Mar. 22, 1989, 1673 UNTS 126.
Bergmann, M., Almroth, B. C., Brander, S. M., Dey, T., Green, D. S., Gundogdu, S., Krieger, A., 
Wagner, M., & Walker, T. R. (2022). A global plastic treaty must cap production. Science, 
376(6592), 469–470.
Bergsma, G.  C., Vroonhof, J., Blom, M.  J., & Odegard, I.  Y. R. (2014). Evaluatie Landelijk 
Afvalbeheerplan (LAP) 1 en 2. https://ce.nl/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/CE_Delft_2C95_
Evaluatie_landelijk_Afvalbeheerplan_LAP_1_en_2.pdf
Bezerra, J. C., Walker, T. R., Clayton, C. A., & Adam, I. (2021). Single-use plastic bag policies in 
the Southern African development community. Environmental Challenges, 3, 100029.
Borrelle, S. B., Ringma, J., Law, K. L., Monnahan, C. C., Lebreton, L., McGivern, A., Murphy, 
E., Jambeck, J., Leonard, G. H., Hilleary, M. A., Eriksen, M., Possingham, H. P., De Frond, 
H., Gerber, L. R., Po, B., & Rochman, C. M. (2020). Predicted growth in plastic waste exceeds 
efforts to mitigate plastic pollution. Science, 369(6510), 1515–1518. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.aba3656
Brooks, A. L., Wang, S., & Jambeck, J. R. (2018). The Chinese import ban and its impact on global 
plastic waste trade. Science Advances, 4(6), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat0131
Brown, E., MacDonald, A., Allen, S., & Allen, D. (2023). The potential for a plastic recycling 
facility to release microplastic pollution and possible fltration remediation effectiveness. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials Advances, 10, 100309.
CBS Statistics Netherlands. (2019). Less recyclable plastic waste sent to China. https://www.cbs.
nl/en-gb/news/2019/11/less-recyclable-plastic-waste-sent-to-china
Çevikarslan, S., Gelhard, C., & Henseler, J. (2022). Improving the material and fnancial circular￾ity of the plastic packaging value chain in The Netherlands: Challenges, opportunities, and 
implications. Sustainability, 14(12), 7404. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14127404
Clayton, C. A., Walker, T. R., Bezerra, J. C., & Adam, I. (2021). Policy responses to reduce single￾use plastic marine pollution in the Caribbean. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 162, 111833.
DeWeerdt, S. (2022). How to make plastic less of an environmental burden. Nature, 611(7936), 2–5.
Dey, T., Trasande, L., Altman, R., Wang, Z., Krieger, A., Bergmann, M., Allen, D., Allen, S., 
Walker, T. R., Wagner, M., & Syberg, K. (2022). Global plastic treaty should address chemi￾cals. Science, 378(6622), 841–842.
Diggle, A., & Walker, T.  R. (2020). Implementation of harmonized Extended Producer 
Responsibility strategies to incentivize recovery of single-use plastic packaging waste in 
Canada. Waste Management, 110, 20–23.
Diggle, A., & Walker, T. R. (2022). Environmental and economic impacts of mismanaged plastics 
and measures for mitigation. Environments, 9(2), 15.
Diggle, A., Walker, T. R., & Adams, M. (2023). Examining potential business impacts from the 
implementation of an extended producer responsibility program for printed paper and packag￾ing waste in Nova Scotia, Canada. Circular Economy, 2(2), 100039.
Ekoplaza (2022). Sparen voor zomerse bio producten. https://www.ekoplaza.nl/nl/campagnes/
verwenpakket
EU. (2006). Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and the Council of 14 
June 2006 on shipments of waste. Offcial Journal of the European Union, L190, 1–98. https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32006R1013&from=EN
European Commission. (2008). Waste framework directive. https://environment.ec.europa.eu/
topics/waste-and-recycling/waste-framework-directive_en
H. Danton and T. R. Walker151
European Commission. (2020). A European green deal. https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/
priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en#Highlights
European Commission. (2022). Circular economy action plan. https://environment.ec.europa.eu/
strategy/circular-economy-actionplan_en
European Environment Agency. (2021). Overview of national waste prevention programmes in 
Europe The Netherlands. https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2021/02/
Faraca, G., & Astrup, T. (2019). Plastic waste from recycling centres: Characterisation and evalu￾ation of plastic recyclability. Waste Management, 95, 388–398. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
WASMAN.2019.06.038
Fuller, S., Ngata, T., Borrelle, S., & Farrelly, T. (2022). Plastics pollution as waste colonialism in 
Te Moananui. Journal of Political Ecology, 29(1), 534–560.
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J. R., & Law, K. L. (2017). Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. 
Science Advances, 3(7), 3–8. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700782
Government of the Netherlands. (2018). Transition agenda circular economy  – Circular 
construction economy. https://hollandcircularhotspot.nl/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/
TRANSITION-AGENDA-PLASTICS_EN.pdf
Gündoğdu, S., & Walker, T. R. (2021). Why Turkey should not import plastic waste pollution from 
developed countries? Marine Pollution Bulletin, 171, 112772.
INTERPOL. (2020). INTERPOL report alerts to sharp rise in plas￾tic waste crime. https://www.interpol.int/News-and-Events/News/2020/
INTERPOL-report-alerts-to-sharp-rise-in-plastic-waste-crime
Jambeck, J., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T. R., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., Narayan, R., & 
Law, K. L. (2015). Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. Science, 347(6223), 768–771.
Kitz, R., Walker, T., Charlebois, S., & Music, J. (2022). Food packaging during the COVID-19 
pandemic: Consumer perceptions. International Journal of Consumer Studies, 46(2), 434–448.
Lau, W. W., Shiran, Y., Bailey, R. M., Cook, E., Stuchtey, M. R., Koskella, J., Velis, C. A., Godfrey, 
L., Boucher, J., Murphy, M. B., & Thompson, R. C. (2020). Evaluating scenarios toward zero 
plastic pollution. Science, 369(6510), 1455–1461.
Liang, Y., Tan, Q., Song, Q., & Li, J. (2021). An analysis of the plastic waste trade and management 
in Asia. Waste Management, 119, 242–253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2020.09.049
Liboiron, M. (2021). Pollution is colonialism. Duke University Press.
Liu, Z. (2021). Regulate waste recycling internationally. Nature, 594(7863), 333–333.
Liu, Z., Adams, M., & Walker, T. R. (2018). Are exports of recyclables from developed to devel￾oping countries waste pollution transfer or part of the global circular economy? Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling, 136, 22–23.
Liu, Z., Liu, W., Walker, T. R., Adams, M., & Zhao, J. (2021). How does the global plastic waste 
trade contribute to environmental benefts: Implication for reductions of greenhouse gas emis￾sions? Journal of Environmental Management, 287, 112283.
March, A., Roberts, K. P., & Fletcher, S. (2022). A new treaty process offers hope to end plastic 
pollution. Nature Reviews Earth & Environment, 3(11), 726–727.
Ministerie Van Infrastructuur en Waterstaat. (2019). LAP3 A.6 International. https://lap3.nl/
service/english/
Ministerie Van Infrastructuur en Waterstaat. (2021a). LAP3 A.7 Monitoring van het afvalbeheer. 
https://lap3.nl/beleidskader/deel-aalgemeen/a7-monitoring/
Ministerie Van Infrastructuur en Waterstaat. (2021b). LAP3 B.3 Gescheiden houden van afvalstof￾fen. https://lap3.nl/beleidskader/deel-bafvalbeheer/b3-afvalscheiding/
Ministerie Van Infrastructuur en Waterstaat. (2021c). LAP3 D.7 Handhaving. https://lap3.nl/
beleidskader/deel-dvergunning/d7-handhaving/
Ministerie Van Infrastructuur en Waterstaat. (2022). Circulair Materialenplan 1. https://www.plat￾formparticipatie.nl/CMP1/default.aspx
Molloy, S., Varkey, P., & Walker, T. R. (2022). Opportunities for single-use plastic reduction in 
the food service sector during COVID-19. Sustainable Production and Consumption, 30, 
1082–1094.
The Darker Side of Dutch Colonialism: Exporting Plastic Waste Is Plastic Pollution…152
Navarre, N., Mogollón, J. M., Tukker, A., & Barbarossa, V. (2022). Recycled plastic packaging 
from the Dutch food sector pollutes Asian oceans. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 
185, 106508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2022.106508
Plastic Soup Foundation. (2022). A neocolonial plastic scandal: The Netherlands plays a leading role 
in the international trade in plastic waste. https://www.plasticsoupfoundation.org/en/2022/09/
netherlands-pivotal-in-global-export-of-plastic-waste-to-non-western-countries-report-fnds/
Plastics Europe. (2022). The circular economy for plastics. https://plasticseurope.org/wp-content/
uploads/2022/06/PlasticsEurope-CircularityReport-2022_2804-Light.pdf
Prezero. (2022). Prezero. https://prezero.nl/
Rijksoverheid. (2021). Afvalpreventieprogramma Nederland Inhoud Inleiding. https://
open.overheid.nl/repository/ronl-a5b3b35c-d786-4f10-8ca6-b04bc8a913ce/1/pdf/
afvalpreventieprogramma-nederland.pdf
Schnurr, R. E., Alboiu, V., Chaudhary, M., Corbett, R. A., Quanz, M. E., Sankar, K., Srain, H. S., 
Thavarajah, V., Xanthos, D., & Walker, T. R. (2018). Reducing marine pollution from single￾use plastics (SUPs): A review. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 137, 157–171.
Snijder, L., & Nusselder, S. (2019). Plasticgebruik en verwerking van plastic afval in Nederland. 
https://ce.nl/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/CE_Delft_2T13_Plasticgebruik_en_plastic_afval_
verwerking_NL_DEF.pdf
Teebthaisong, A., Saetang, P., Petrlik, J., Bell, L., Beeler, B., Jopkova, M., Ismawati, Y., Kuepouo, 
G., Ochieng Ochola, G., & Akortia, E. (2021). Brominated dioxins (PBDD/Fs) in free range 
chicken eggs from sites affected by plastic waste. Organohalogen Compounds, 82, 199–202.
van Der Marel, E. R. (2022). Trading plastic waste in a global economy: Soundly regulated by the 
Basel Convention? Journal of Environmental Law, 34(3), 477–497.
Vollmer, I., Jenks, M. J. F., Roelands, M. C. P., White, R. J., van Harmelen, T., de Wild, P., van der 
Laan, G. P., Meirer, F., Keurentjes, J. T. F., & Weckhuysen, B. M. (2020). Beyond mechani￾cal recycling: Giving new life to plastic waste. Angewandte Chemie – International Edition, 
59(36), 15402–15423. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201915651
Walker, T. R. (2018). China’s ban on imported plastic waste could be a game changer. Nature, 
553(7686), 405–406.
Walker, T. R. (2021). (Micro) plastics and the UN sustainable development goals. Current Opinion 
in Green and Sustainable Chemistry, 30, 100497.
Walker, T.  R. (2023a). The tropics should not become the world’s plastic pollution problem. 
Journal of Tropical Futures, 27538931231165273. https://doi.org/10.1177/275389312311652
Walker, T. R. (2023b). The Maldives should not become the world’s garbage dump by importing 
plastic waste. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 189(4), 114749.
Walker, T. R., & Fequet, L. (2023). Current trends of unsustainable plastic production and micro 
(nano) plastic pollution. TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 160(3), 116984.
Walker, T. R., & McGuinty, E. (2020). Plastics (pp. 1–12). Springer International Publishing.
Walker, T. R., & Xanthos, D. (2018). A call for Canada to move toward zero plastic waste by reduc￾ing and recycling single-use plastics. Resources Conservation and Recycling, 133, 99–100.
Walker, T.  R., McGuinty, E., Charlebois, S., & Music, J. (2021). Single-use plastic packaging 
in the Canadian food industry: Consumer behavior and perceptions. Humanities and Social 
Sciences Communications, 8, 80.
Wiesinger, H., Wang, Z., & Hellweg, S. (2021). Deep dive into plastic monomers, additives, and 
processing aids. Environmental Science & Technology, 55(13), 9339–9351.
Xanthos, D., & Walker, T.  R. (2017). International policies to reduce plastic marine pollution 
from single-use plastics (plastic bags and microbeads): A review. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 
118(1–2), 17–26.
Yang, S. (2020). Trade for the environment: Transboundary hazardous waste movements after the 
Basel Convention. Review of Policy Research, 37(5), 713–738.
H. Danton and T. R. WalkerPart III
The Receiving Country’s Perspectives155
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia 
and Country’s Response to Waste Trade 
Challenges
Yuyun Ismawati, Mochamad Adi Septiono, Nindhita Proboretno, 
and Krishna Zaki
Introduction
The term “waste colonialism” was frst introduced by Puckett and Smith in their 
2002 report titled “The digital dump: exporting high-tech re-use and abuse to 
Africa” (Puckett et al., 2002). They used the term to describe the practice of export￾ing hazardous electronic waste from developed countries to developing countries, 
particularly in Asia and Africa. Since then, the term has been widely adopted in 
academic and activist circles to describe the broader environmental and social 
impacts of waste disposal practices on marginalized communities. According to 
Liboiron (2021) the term “waste colonialism” highlights how pollution is not only 
a symptom of capitalism but a violent enactment of colonial land relations that 
claim access to indigenous land of local land (Liboiron, 2021).
The idea of “waste colonialism” draws on the historical and ongoing legacies of 
colonialism, which saw colonial powers exploiting the resources and labor of colo￾nized countries for their own beneft. Waste colonialism refects similar patterns of 
domination and exploitation, where developed countries continue to dump their 
waste in developing countries, often for little or no fnancial beneft to the receiving 
countries. In the last 30 years, waste colonialism has become a term widely adopted 
by scholars, activists, and policy-makers to describe the unequal and exploitative 
distribution of waste in the global context, where wealthy countries in the developed 
world send their waste materials, particularly plastic waste, to developing countries 
in Asia, Africa, and South America (Brooks et al., 2018; EEA, 2019; Foundation, 
2023; Fuller et al., 2022; Michaelson, 2021; Pratt, 2011; Sridhar & Kumar, 2019). 
In many cases, these developing countries have weak or nonexistent regulatory 
Y. Ismawati (*) · M. A. Septiono · N. Proboretno · K. Zaki 
Nexus3 Foundation, Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia
e-mail: yuyun@nexus3foundation.org
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_9156
oversight and waste management infrastructure and resources to properly dispose of 
this waste, leading to environmental pollution and public health risks.
Plastic waste colonialism occurs because recycling or disposing of plastic waste 
can be expensive, and some developed countries have found it more cost-effective 
to export their waste than to handle it domestically. Often, the waste is not ade￾quately sorted or cleaned before it is shipped, leading to contamination and health 
risks for those managing it (OECD, 2018). Moreover, the lack of data and reporting 
makes identifying how many traded commodities were recycled diffcult. In some 
cases, more than 40% of the content of items in the containers ended up in illegal 
dumping sites, being burned, and the chemicals in plastics contaminating the food 
chains (Karlsson et al., 2023; Petrlik et al., 2019, 2021).
The recipients of this waste are often countries that are already struggling with 
poverty and injustice, and they become the dumping ground for the waste of others. 
This type of colonialism perpetuates the power dynamic between developed and 
developing countries, with wealthy nations taking advantage of the resources and 
vulnerabilities of less-powerful nations (Marrs et al., 2019).
Waste colonialism has received greater attention in recent years with the imple￾mentation of waste import bans by countries such as China, Malaysia, the 
Philippines, and Thailand (Chen et  al., 2021; Liang et  al., 2020; Sasaki, 2020; 
Sembiring, 2019; Wang et al., 2019). These countries no longer accept plastic waste 
from developed countries, which has led to increased scrutiny of waste management 
practices and calls for greater responsibility from those who generate the waste.
Materials and Methods
We used data for plastic production, trade, and recycling taken from UN statistics 
(UN Comtrade Database) 2018–2022, state environmental bureaus or statistical 
bureaus, and reports published by several networks.
Of all the plastic products (code 39) in the HS (International Convention for 
Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, Harmonized System), 
code 3915 refers to plastic waste, parings, and scrap. Here plastic waste relates to 
the products belonging to code 3915 and other plastic products to commodities 
belonging to code 39 (3915: includes the value and quantity of plastic trade in 
this study).
We also obtained qualitative data and information from interviews with experts, 
relevant government offcials, and focus group discussions with the Indonesian 
plastics and papers industry associations.
Y. Ismawati et al.157
Results
Waste Trade Actors and Stakeholders
The actors involved in the plastic waste trade vary depending on the specifc context 
but generally include the following:
• Exporters: These companies or individuals generate plastic waste and seek to 
dispose of it or sell it abroad. Exporters can include waste management compa￾nies, manufacturers, and retailers. Statistics and trade databases identify export￾ers based on countries where the companies are registered. Some importers have 
internal trade within the same group or between sister companies.
• Importers and plastic recyclers: These companies or individuals purchase plastic 
waste from exporters to process it into raw materials or for recycling purposes. 
Importers typically operate recycling facilities and may also export processed 
plastic waste. Plastic recyclers reprocess post-consumers’ plastics and plastic 
wastes where it is washed, shredded, and sorted further. The plastic is then melted 
and extruded into new recycled plastic pellets to make new products.
• Brokers and traders: These intermediaries facilitate the buying and selling plastic 
waste between exporters and importers. Brokers and traders may be located in 
the same country as the exporter or the importer or may be based in a third coun￾try. Waste brokers and shipping lines also play a signifcant role in waste colo￾nialism, particularly in the context of plastic waste trades. Waste brokers act as 
intermediaries between waste generators and waste processors or recyclers. They 
often operate in countries with weak regulatory systems and are known to engage 
in fraudulent activities, such as mislabeling waste shipments as recyclable mate￾rials. Waste brokers proft from the trade of plastic waste by charging fees for 
their services.
• Shipping and logistics companies: These companies provide transportation and 
logistics services to move plastic waste traded between exporting and importing 
countries. Shipping lines transport commodities from one country to another. 
They have been known to transport plastic waste under pretenses, such as label￾ing plastic waste shipments as “scrap plastic” or “recyclable materials.” This 
mislabeling allows shipping lines to bypass regulations on the export of plastic 
waste and avoid paying higher fees for transporting hazardous waste. Shipping 
lines also made profts from the trade of plastic waste by charging fees for their 
services. In February 2021, 52 environmental and social organizations (BAN, 
2021a) called on the major shipping lines to prove their sustainability commit￾ments by pledging not to transport plastic waste to developing countries. The 
organizations wrote letters to the nine most prominent global shipping lines: 
Hapag- Lloyd (Germany), Maersk (Denmark), CMA CGM (France), MSC 
(Switzerland), Hamburg SUD (Germany), Hyundai Merchant Marine (Korea), 
Evergreen (Taiwan), COSCO (China), and Orient Shipping (Jordan) (BAN, 
2022). They urged them to establish policies to prevent the export of plastic 
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges158
wastes of all kinds moving from OECD to non-OECD countries or the OECD 
countries such as Turkey and Mexico.
• Governments and regulatory agencies: These entities oversee the trade of plastic 
waste and enforce regulations related to waste disposal and recycling. Agencies 
overseeing plastic waste trade in Indonesia within the Coordinating Ministry of 
Economy and Industry are the Customs and Excise of the Ministry of Finance 
(MoF), Ministry of Trade (MoT), Ministry of Industry (MoI), Ministry of 
Environment and Forestry (MoEF), and to some degree, the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MoFA). However, although Customs and Excise units are on the front￾line, their decision to intercept and confscate containers will be based on the 
technical recommendations from the Ministry of Trade and the Ministry of 
Environment and Forestry.
• Consumers: These individuals purchase products made from recycled plastic, 
promoting demand for recycled plastics and encouraging recycling efforts.
• Both waste brokers and shipping lines have been implicated in the illegal plastic 
waste trade. In 2019, for example, Malaysia returned 150 shipping containers of 
plastic waste to their countries of origin, including the United States, Canada, 
and the United Kingdom. Authorities found these containers to contain contami￾nated and nonrecyclable plastic waste, which violated Malaysia’s import regula￾tions (Chen et al., 2021).
New Global Rules
As of January 1, 2021, the new plastic waste entries clarify the scope of control 
under the Basel Convention for other types of plastic waste and mixtures and the 
specifc conditions under which plastic waste is subject to the Prior Informed 
Consent (PIC) procedure.
As explained on the Basel Convention guidance document, all plastic waste and 
mixtures of plastic wastes, except waste covered by entry B3011, will be subject to 
the PIC procedure (Secretariat, 2021). The categories include:
• Plastic waste classifed as hazardous waste: new entry A3210 reads, “Plastic 
waste, including mixtures of such waste, containing or contaminated with Annex 
I constituents, to the extent that it exhibits an Annex III characteristic (note the 
related entries Y48 in Annex II and on list B B3011).” Examples of hazardous 
constituents that may be found in plastic waste due to their use as additives in 
various applications are lead compounds (used as heat or light stabilizers) and 
organohalogen compounds (e.g., halogenated organic compounds used as fame 
retardants).
• Plastic waste requiring special consideration: new entry Y48 covers plastic 
waste, including mixtures of such wastes, except for those falling under entries 
A3210 or B3011.
Y. Ismawati et al.159
As specifed in entry B3011, the following plastic waste will not be subject to the 
PIC procedure, provided it is destined for recycling in an environmentally sound 
manner and almost free from contamination and other types of waste:
• Plastic waste almost exclusively consists of one non-halogenated polymer. Such 
polymers include commonly used ones like polyethene (PE), polypropylene 
(PP), and polyethene terephthalate (PET).
• Plastic waste almost exclusively consists of one cured resin or condensation 
product. Such resins include urea-formaldehyde resins and epoxy resins.
• Plastic waste almost exclusively consists of one of the following fuorinated 
polymers:
– Perfuoroethylene/propylene (FEP)
– Perfuoroalkoxy alkanes:
Tetrafuoroethylene/perfuoroalkyl vinyl ether (PFA)
Tetrafuoroethylene/perfuoro methyl vinyl ether (MFA)
– Polyvinyl fuoride (PVF)
– Polyvinylidene fuoride (PVDF)
As of 2022, as a Party to Basel Convention, the Indonesian government has not 
specifcally issued new regulations to adopt the Basel Amendment on plastic waste 
and no PIC list has been communicated to importers.
Indonesia’s Responses to Waste Trade Dynamic
Waste Defnition, Ports of Entry, and Registered Exporters
Importation of waste is prohibited in Indonesia, as stipulated in the Indonesian 
Waste Management Law No. 18/2008. Violation of such an Act is equivalent to 
committing a criminal act. The context for the Article within the Act is subject to the 
term “trash” instead of “waste.” Further, waste importation is regulated under the 
jurisdiction of the Ministry of Trade, considering there are recyclable materials that 
are benefcial as raw materials in manufacturing processes. Certain commodities 
such as types of metal, rubber, plastic, and paper are included in the Ministry of 
Trade Regulation that has been developed to regulate the importation of nonhazard￾ous waste. In the last 4 years, there have been several changes to the regulation that 
oversees nonhazardous waste imports.
The most recent policy regulating plastic waste importation, including paper 
waste, is the Minister of Trade Regulation No. 20/2021 jo. 25/2022 (MoT Reg. 
20/2021 jo. 25/2022) on Import Control and Policy, which replaces the MoT Reg. 
No. 84/2019 concerning “The Importation of Non-Hazardous Waste as Industry 
Secondary Raw Materials.” MoT Reg. No. 84/2019 has redefned nonhazardous 
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges160
Fig. 1 Locations of plastic industry and recycling industries in Indonesia. (Source: Association of 
Plastic Recycler Industry/ADUPI, 2021)
waste for importation, as distinct from garbage that has no economic value, or 
“trash,” as stipulated in the Waste Management Act, including:
• The waste should not be sourced from landflls (clean and not mixed with soil 
or dirt).
• The waste should not be sourced from household waste.
• The waste should not be contaminated with hazardous materials or waste.
• The waste should be homogenic.
The policy also short-listed the port of entry for these inward shipments, only 
certain entry portal was available (see Fig. 1):
1. Tanjung Priok Port, DKI Jakarta Province
2. Tanjung Emas Port, Central Java Province
3. Tanjung Perak Port, Eastern Java Province
4. Soekarno Hatta Port, Southeast Sulawesi Province
5. Belawan Port, North Sumatra Province
6. Batu Ampar Port, Riau Islands Province
7. Teluk Lamong Port, Eastern Java Province
8. Merak Port, Banten Province
9. Weda Port, North Maluku Province (addition from MoT Reg. 92/2019)
10. Cigading Port, Banten Province (addition from MoT Reg. 92/2019)
11. Bahodopi Port, Central Sulawesi Province (addition from MoT Reg. 92/2019)
12. Bitung Port, North Sulawesi Province (addition from MoT Reg. 92/2019)
13. Pekanbaru Port, Riau Province (addition from MoT Reg. 83/2020)
14. Sekupang Port, Riau Islands Province (addition from MoT Reg. 20/2021)
15. Panjang Port, Lampung Province (addition from MoT Reg. 25/2022)
The frst amendment of MoT Reg. 84/2019 issued in MoT Reg. 92/2019 further 
detailed the means of shipment. It prohibits transfer shipments in other ports not 
Y. Ismawati et al.161
indicated in the shipment documents unless the shipment is kept sealed and intact. 
It also added the requirement to include the exporters’ company profles and track 
records validated by relevant authorities. They must obtain registration certifcates 
at the Indonesian Embassies or Consulates in the exporting countries (T.  KBRI, 
2021; W. KBRI, 2021).
Up to August 2021, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has issued 355 Certifcates of 
Registered Exporters (Bukti Eksportir Terdaftar/BET) in 28 countries. Forty-one 
Indonesian Embassies and Consulates issued these exporters’ registration certif￾cates. Most registered exporters are in the United States (62 exporters), Australia 
(38 exporters), Japan (53 exporters), the United Kingdom (24 exporters), and 
Singapore (48 exporters) (see Table 1) (Kemenlu, 2021).
While the second and third amendment in MoT Reg. 58/2020 and MoT Reg. 
83/2020 is mainly amendments to administrative and permit details, the rest of the 
amendment is to merge the nonhazardous waste import regulation list with all the 
other regulated commodities into one regulation paper, with the additional ports 
of entry.
Waste Contaminants and National Recycling Capacity
Several relevant authorities, namely, the MoT, MoEF, MoI, and the National Police, 
issued a joint decree in May 2020 to set a 2% maximum contamination for imported 
plastic and paper scraps. These allowable contaminants include the taping to tie the 
bales, the bale separator within the container shipments, the pallet or the base 
beneath the shipment bales, and the wrapping. These contaminants, however, should 
Table 1 Number of registered exporters (August 2021)
Country # of registered exporters Country # of registered exporters
United States 62 Norway 3
Japan 53 Belgium 3
Singapore 48 France 3
Australia 38 Portugal 3
United Kingdom 24 Greece 3
South Korea 18 Poland 2
Netherland 17 Bahrain 2
New Zealand 15 Philippines 1
Italy 10 Denmark 1
Canada 9 Papua New Guinea 1
Malaysia 9 Austria 1
Germany 9 Vietnam 1
Spain 7 Brunei Darussalam 1
Brazil 6 Jordan 1
Chile 4 -- --
Source: Kemenlu, Min. of Foreign Affairs (2021)
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges162
not be mixed or contain hazardous materials and waste (e.g., medical waste, elec￾tronic waste, and radioactive materials), containers of hazardous materials and 
waste, drugs packaging, liquid leakage other than water, household waste (e.g., 
apparel waste, diapers, sanitary pad, food waste, toys, etc.), nonrecyclable single￾use plastic, wood scraps, and dirt. These contaminants are the importer’s responsi￾bility to treat and manage or cooperate with other industries to treat, as it is also 
included in the checklist before MoEF issue recommendation for import permit 
application (Nexus3, 2021). As part of the checklist for importers, the MoEF 
includes a point in the integrity pact to be signed by the importer, a statement “7. 
The quantity of the non-hazardous waste that will be imported is no more than 50% 
of the production’s capacity.” However, this integrity pack statement is no longer 
available online. The form has been replaced with a new form (see Fig. 2) that looks 
likely edited from the recommendation lists for importers of hazardous wastes 
(Limbah Bahan Berbahaya Beracun or LB3) (KLHK, 2020).
The joint regulation also mandated the government to develop a baseline study to 
establish a roadmap for nonhazardous waste management for industrial purposes 
(Sugasri et al., 2021). Further, the roadmap would set out incremental restrictions 
and import quotas depending on the availability of materials for plastic and paper 
recycling over time. This applies to the Basel Convention update since specifc 
requirements from countries are allowed under the amendment.
During incoming shipment processes, customs authorities would receive import 
notifcation and the necessary documents, including the import approval and sur￾veyor report. In addition, the Indonesia National Single Window (INSW) – a syn￾chronizing platform for permitting, customs clearance, and release  – and the 
customs risk management system alert mandatory and random inspection for 
incoming shipments (Cukai, 2020).
Indonesia has yet to determine its national recycling capacity to handle plastic 
waste, even domestically. The Ministry of Environment and Forestry Regulation 
No. 97/2017 already planned and stipulated a national program-based strategy. 
However, they have yet to include performance-based indicators. For instance, the 
plan to enact incentives or disincentives in 11 cities/regencies to go beyond compli￾ance in recycling has no percentage or volume targets. This creates big unknowns 
for recyclers to scout or collect recyclable waste.
The national annual plastic production is 6.8  million tons, but the recycling 
industry is only equipped to accommodate two million tons of recycling capacity. 
The Centre of Green Industry (Pusat Industri Hijau), under the MoI, emphasized 
that the lack of capability in waste sorting, collection, and transportation was the 
main reason the Indonesian industry still needs to import plastic waste from abroad 
(Sanderson, 2021) (see also Fig. 3). The national recycling capacity and the plan to 
incrementally reduce import quotas will be addressed in the Roadmap of Non￾Hazardous Waste Management as Secondary Raw Material for Industries.
Y. Ismawati et al.163
Fig. 2 Template of agreement letter from the MoEF for Indonesia importers. (Source: Kementerian 
Lingkungan Hidup dan Kehutanan, 2020)
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges164
RAW MATERIALS FOR PLASTIC WASTE INDUSTRY
4%
32%
13%
Imported recyclates
Locally sourced recyclates
Imported virgin plastics
Locally sourced virgin plastics
51%
Fig. 3 Raw materials for plastic industry in Indonesia. (Source: Ministry of Industry)
Plastics and Paper Wastes Imported by Indonesia
Plastic Waste Imports
After 2018, the infow of plastic waste trade to Indonesia increased from the United 
States, Australia, the United Kingdom, and Spain. Meanwhile, Malaysia imported 
signifcant shipments of plastic waste from the United States, the United Kingdom, 
and Spain (The International Criminal Police Organization, 2020). At the peak of 
Indonesia’s import of plastic waste in 2018, imports of plastic waste to Indonesia 
rose from different regions of the world, either from North America (fourfold), 
Europe (eightfold), as well as Australia and Oceania (34%).
The plastic waste trade volume decreased overall after the restriction and 
reviewed regulations in Indonesia in 2019. Shipments from Australia and Oceania 
dropped by almost half to 43,000 tons, and from North America by 30% to 37,000 
tons, dominated by the Marshall Islands and the United States, respectively. 
However, shipments from Western European countries rose to 107,000 tons, making 
the region the most signifcant source of plastic waste imported by Indonesia until 
today. The latest data from 2020 showed that shipments from West Europe accounted 
for 57% of total imported plastic waste to Indonesia (see Fig. 4). Despite the fuc￾tuation in the total trade value, which is also dependent on the shipment quantity, the 
average tonnage price for imports and export shows an increasing trend (see Fig. 5).
Indonesia’s import partner of plastic waste was dominated by trade partners from 
North America, mainly from the United States, until 2016. In the same year, emerg￾ing shipments came from the Marshall Islands with no export reports from their end 
(Ismawati & Septiono, 2019). The following year, imports from the United States 
sharply decreased by 70%, reaching 11,000 tons. At the same time, Indonesia 
reported shipments from the Marshall Islands tripled to 68,000 tons, making 
Y. Ismawati et al.165
Fig. 4 Indonesia’s import of plastic waste (HS Code 3915) by region (in tons). (Source: Indonesia 
Bureau of Statistics)
Fig. 5 Fluctuations in annual average tonnage import and export price of plastic scraps (HS3915). 
(Source: Indonesia Bureau of Statistics *Data in 2022 is only available for January–March)
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges166
shipments from the Marshall Islands the most signifcant volume of imports in 2017 
(Septiono & Ismawati, 2022).
The reviewed nonhazardous waste import regulation resulted in the short-listed 
port of entry through which plastic and paper waste shipments were allowed to enter 
Indonesia. However, there was a minor shipment to Sekupang Port and several air￾ports, which was not included in the MoT 92/2019 list, probably due to the reviewed 
date in October 2019.
In 2019 and 2020, the port of entry shifted from predominantly Tanjung Priok in 
Jakarta Province (Ismawati & Septiono, 2019) to Batu Ampar Port in Batam City, 
Riau Islands Province (52% and 75% in 2019 and 2020, respectively). Tanjung 
Priok Port is still the second-highest entry port for plastic waste (42% and 12% in 
2019 and 2020, respectively), followed by Belawan Port. A small quantity of paper 
waste imports is still observed in four airports of Semarang, Tangerang, Pontianak, 
and Surabaya cities.
Paper Waste Imports
The investigations of paper waste imports in the plastic waste trade arose due to 
multiple news coverage of plastic waste contamination in paper waste shipments 
(The International Criminal Police Organization, 2020). Indonesia’s paper mills and 
paper recycling companies demanded 320,000 tons for their processes (Kurniawan, 
2019). The import of paper waste peaked in 2019, reaching more than 3,180,000 
tons, tenfold higher than the demand from paper recycling companies. In 2020, the 
import volumes slightly decreased to 3 million tons.
Plastic wastes often become paper scrap contaminants. In addition, Indonesian 
paper mills are not equipped with treatment capacity for certain types of plastics 
that are hard to recycle. This unwanted plastic was thrown out or “donated” by the 
importing paper companies to local communities to further “illegally” sort and sent 
to middlemen for recycling or downcycling (Ismawati & Septiono, 2019; Septiono 
& Ismawati, 2022).
Paper scrap imports predominantly consisted of paper waste under HS code 
4707.10, non-bleached corrugated paper, or cardboard. The import shipment pro￾portion of mixed paper (HS code 4707.90) was higher before signifcantly decreas￾ing to 0.53% of the total paper waste shipments in 2020.
Indonesia receives paper waste shipments dominantly from Western European 
countries (see Fig. 6). Shipments from West Europe almost doubled in 2018 from 
the previous year to 1,158,307 tons. In 2018 and 2019, there was also a temporary 
increase in paper waste imports from North American Region, with a little more 
than 2 million tons in total for both years, before dropping back to 403,000 tons 
in 2020.
Shipments from the North Americas are mainly sourced from the United States, 
while Western European countries varied, including from the United Kingdom, 
Y. Ismawati et al.167
Fig. 6 Indonesia’s import of paper waste (HS Code 4707), by region, in thousand tons. (Source: 
Indonesia Bureau of Statistics)
Netherlands, Italy, France, Greece, and others. Paper waste imported from Asia pre￾dominantly originated from Japan and Singapore. In 2020, the three highest import 
volumes came from Italy, the United States, and Australia (Septiono & 
Ismawati, 2022).
About 67% of the paper scrap shipment’s port of entry was Tanjung Priok in 
2019 and 2020. Figs. 7 and 8 show plastic contaminant landfll and piles belong to 
paper industries near Jakarta. The second highest port of entry receiving paper 
waste was Tanjung Perak in East Java, followed by Tanjung Emas in Central Java. 
The entry port for paper waste is dominated across Java Island and Riau Islands 
Province, where most paper industries are located (APKI, 2022; Asosiasi Industri 
Pulp and Kertas Indonesia, 2021; Septiono & Ismawati, 2022). The import entry 
points of Batu Ampar, Tanjung Priok, Tanjung Perak, and Tanjung Emas ports were 
according to the revised MoT Reg No. 84/2019. A small quantity of paper waste 
imports is still observed in three airports in Bali, Tangerang, and Surabaya.
In East Java and West Java, unwanted plastic waste dumped by paper mills that 
imported paper scraps as their production materials were delivered by factory driv￾ers every day to the nearby villages. Communities took the opportunity to make 
money from these leftover scraps and sell it for fuel to tofu factories or lime furnace 
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges168
Fig. 8 Plastic waste contaminants from one paper mills in Karawang, Indonesia, to be transferred 
to lime burning plants near the factory. (Photo credit: Tio Septiono)
Fig. 7 A mountain of plastic waste contaminants in a private landfll belongs to one of the largest 
paper mills in Indonesia, PT Indah Kiat in Serang. (Photo credit: Yuyun Ismawati)
owners (Ismawati & Septiono, 2019) (see Figs. 9 and 10). Plastic burning as fuel 
without proper tools and equipment releases black smoke and toxic emissions to the 
surroundings. Studies conducted in 2019 (Petrlik et  al., 2019) and 2022 (Petrlik 
et al., 2022) showed high levels of dioxins and toxic chemicals released into the 
environment, entering the food chains.
Y. Ismawati et al.169
Fig. 9 Tropodo village in East Java is a tofu-making village that uses plastic scrap as fuel, pur￾chased from paper factories. (Photo credit: Yuyun Ismawati)
Fig. 10 (Left) Dried shredded plastic waste from paper mill company prepared to be used as fuel 
in a tofu factory. (Photo credit: Yuyun Ismawati). (Right) Discarded plastic waste from paper com￾panies, sponges, and tires used as fuel to burn lime in Karawang. (Photo credit: Yuyun Ismawati)
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges170
Like plastic scraps, the recycled imported nonhazardous paper waste would be 
distributed to the paper production companies. Paper scraps are needed to produce 
various paper products, gypsum boards, asbestos boards, and recovered pulps. The 
distribution of paper production companies in Indonesia mainly concentrated in 
Java and Sumatera Island. Fifty-two companies have a total production capacity of 
12.6 million tons, although they only produced 7.6 million tons of products in 2020 
(APKI, 2021). In 2020, total demand for paper scraps was 6.6 million tons with an 
import volume of 3 million, covering 50% of the total demand. The market for paper 
scraps is projected to increase to over 8 million tons in 2024 (Asosiasi Industri Pulp 
and Kertas Indonesia, 2021).
Indonesia’s Waste Trade Partner
OECD Countries
Since 2016, global export from OECD countries has declined from a little over 
7 million tons that year to almost 3 million tons in 2020, due to China’s restriction 
policy. However, the market for plastic waste exports for OECD countries still exists 
in some European countries, like Turkey, and Asian countries, including 
Southeast Asia.
Regarding their trade with Indonesia, OECD countries’ export to Indonesia 
spiked in 2018 when China enacted their waste import inspection program, the Blue 
Sky Policy, a continuation from the National Sword Policy in 2017. Among the 
OECD country members, the three largest countries that exported their plastic waste 
to Indonesia were the Netherlands (58,326.8 tons), Germany (42,421.28 tons), and 
Japan (26,718.63 tons). OECD countries also received plastic waste scraps from 
Indonesia, increasing from 2016 (6479.43 tons) to 2020 (23,725.00 tons). In 2020, 
the three largest countries that imported plastic waste from Indonesia were the 
United States (13,140.64 tons), Belgium (4713.70 tons), and Ireland (3945.58 tons) 
(Septiono & Ismawati, 2022). However, after 2021, the EU was the major exporter 
of plastic waste to Indonesia which mainly came from the Netherlands (see Figs. 11
and 12). Plastic waste imports from OECD countries accounted for 62.17% of 
Indonesia’s total import of plastic waste in 2020 alone, dominated by the Netherlands, 
Germany, Japan, the United States, and Slovenia.
United States
One of Indonesia’s largest import partners of plastic waste is the United States. 
Being a nonparty to Basel Convention, the dynamics of waste trade between 
Indonesia and the United States raise concerns about the legality under the Basel 
Convention (Basel Action Network, 2021a, b). The United States exported over 
21,000 tons of plastic waste in 2020, declining 37% from their 2016 export to 
Y. Ismawati et al.171
Fig. 11 Plastic waste exports (HS 3915) from the EU, the United States, Japan, and the United 
Kingdom to Indonesia 2020–2023. (Graph credit: Basel Action Network, 2021a, b)
Fig. 12 Plastic waste exports (HS 3915) from the EU to Indonesia 2020–2023. (Graph credit: 
Basel Action Network, 2021a, b)
Indonesia (34,521 tons). Their import from Indonesia, however, shows an increas￾ing trend from 2016 to 2020. Compared to 2016 imports from Indonesia (1245.19 
tons), their import volume rocketed by 955% to 13,140 tons in 2020. Between 2020 
and 2023, the major type of plastic waste exported by the United States to Indonesia 
was HDPE and LDPE (see Fig. 13).
Indonesia is one of the countries of interest of the United States in international 
waste trade. The US Census Bureau data shows that over 25,900 tons of plastic 
waste were still exported to Indonesia in 2021. There has been a strong lobby from 
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges172
2020..
Jan-21
Feb-21
Mar-21
Apr-21
May-21
Jun-21
Jul-21
Aug-21
Sep-21
Oct-21
Nov-21
Dec-21
Jan-22
Feb-22
Mar-22
Apr-22
May-22
Jun-22
Jul-22
Aug-22
Sep-22
Oct-22
Nov-22
Dec-22
Jan-23
Feb-23
Mar-23
Apr-23
May-23
Styrene #6
Other Plastic #5 & 7
HDPE #2 & LPDE #4
PVC #3
2020-23 U.S. Plastic Waste Exports to Indonesia (HS 3915)
Plastic Waste (kg/month)30,00,000
25,00,000
20,00,000
15,00,000
10,00,000
5,00,000
0
PET #1
Fig. 13 Plastic waste exports (HS 3915) from the United States to Indonesia 2020–2023. (Graph 
credit: Basel Action Network, 2021a, b)
American plastic and paper industry associations during the discussion about the 
contaminant standard process (Ismawati & Septiono, 2019). In addition, the waste 
trade agreement between Canada and the United States also increases the unknowns 
about plastic waste that originated between these two countries.
Australia
Indonesia imported 11,464 tons of plastic waste from Australia in 2020, which 
decreased by approximately 33% from the previous year. The plastic waste imported 
from Australia fuctuated, with a peak in 2019, reaching 17,277 tons. Between 2020 
and 2022, the main plastic waste exported from Australia to Indonesia was ethylene 
type of plastics (HDPE and LDPE) and other types of plastic, which are potentially 
contaminants, including PET (see Fig. 14).
Indonesia has re-exported several containers to Australia due to the contamina￾tion level that violated the MoT Regulation standards and misdeclarations 
(Boediwardhana, 2019; Septiari, 2020). One observed impact of these shipment 
violations on the ground was the infamous use of foreign plastic waste as fuel in 
tofu-making processes, mainly slipped in together with imported paper waste 
(Ismawati & Septiono, 2019; Petrlik et al., 2019). Indeed, Australia’s most exported 
waste-derived products to Indonesia is paper waste. In March 2020, the Council of 
the Australian Government responded to the complaints and protests from CSOs, 
and public pressure, by prohibiting the export of waste commodities within a certain 
date (Pickin & Donovan, 2020).
With the prohibition of waste products, Australia was to only export properly 
processed waste to prevent potential dumping or contamination of such shipments 
outside of the Australian border (Australian Department of Agriculture, 2021).
At least two signifcant known material recovery and recycling companies in 
Australia, RecycleCo Group and Cleanaway, have been shifting to produce process￾engineered fuel (PEF) products, and some also aim to export them to Southeast 
Y. Ismawati et al.173
2020-23 Australia Plastic Waste Exports to Indonesia (HS 3915)
Plastic 
Waste (kg/month)
Jan-21
Feb-21
Mar-21
Apr-21
May-21
Jun-21
Jul-21
Aug-21
Sep-21
Oct-21
Nov-21
Dec-21
Jan-22
Feb-22
Mar-22
Apr-22
May-22
Jun-22
Jul-22
Aug-22
Sep-22
Oct-22
Nov-22
Dec-22
Jan-23
Feb-23
Mar-23
Apr-23
2020 Monthly...
30,00,000
25,00,000
20,00,000
15,00,000
10,00,000
5,00,000
Other - including
PET
PVC
Stytrene
Ethylenes
Fig. 14 Plastic waste exports (HS 3915) from Australia to Indonesia 2020–2023. (Graph credit: 
Basel Action Network, 2021a, b)
Asian region (Australian Clean Energy Finance Corporation, 2020; Metso, 2019; 
Resource Recycling, 2020; ResourceCo, 2019). This development raises concerns 
about potential loopholes in the MoT Regulation.
Considering PEFs are yet to be defned explicitly in the HS Code, these waste￾derived products needed to be added to the Indonesian government’s watchlist. In 
addition, a report from a company in the Philippines has identifed commodity code 
ATHN’s 38,251,000 (Holcim Philippines, 2019), which could also apply in 
Indonesia. If such commodities are being pushed and imported, the trade of PEFs or 
refused-derived fuels (RDFs) will undermine the Indonesian government’s current 
measures to increase solid waste treatment capacity and domestic recycling rate. 
However, since the Basel Convention amendments have not provided clear guid￾ance about the identifed HS codes for PEF, RDF, or solid-recovered fuel (SRF), the 
mislabeling of plastic fuels as mixed waste meant for recycling could lead to new 
problems in the importing countries.
ASEAN Member Countries
Among country members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), 
only Indonesia, Singapore, and Malaysia have ratifed the Basel Convention, which 
at least provides added environmental protection within the global environmental 
law framework. Indonesia has trade relations with ASEAN country members. As an 
exporter of plastic scraps, Indonesia’s export spiked in 2018 (13,153.10 tons) to 
Malaysia (40.53%), Vietnam (28.3%), and Thailand (17.11%) (see Fig. 15). Among 
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges174
Fig. 15 Indonesia plastic waste exports (HS 3915) to ASEAN countries 2016–2020. (Source: 
Indonesia Bureau of Statistics)
the ASEAN countries, Indonesia exported to Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, 
Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam.
Aside from export, Indonesia imported plastic waste from Malaysia, the 
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. Further, the import volumes from 
ASEAN countries show an increasing trend until 2020 (14,272.64 tons), mainly 
from Singapore and Malaysia (see Fig. 16). The high import volume from Singapore 
may also occur because Singapore is a trade hub of Southeast Asian countries 
(Capri, 2021; Singapore Economic Development Board, 2021).
Data Discrepancies
We found discrepancies in plastic waste trade data in both export and import. We 
compared databases from Indonesia Statistics and UN Comtrade for plastic waste 
import and export. Tables 2 and 3 show three data types: Indonesia Statistics, 
Indonesia reports in the UN Comtrade, and country partner reports in the UN 
Comtrade.
Y. Ismawati et al.175
Fig. 16 Indonesia plastic waste imports (HS 3915) from ASEAN countries 2016–2020. (Source: 
Indonesia Bureau of Statistics, 2021)
In this mirroring data analysis of import data, positive discrepancy values indi￾cate that the country reported more quantity than Indonesia received. For import, 
the highest discrepancy was found in the import data from the Marshall Islands in 
2016, 2017, and 2018. However, no report of plastic waste export from the Marshall 
Islands was recorded (Ismawati & Septiono, 2019). The latest data in 2020 showed 
a difference of more than 32,000 tons, meaning the country partner recorded higher 
volumes of exported plastic waste than Indonesia’s import record.
For export, negative values in the discrepancies show that the country partners 
recorded more plastic waste imported compared to what Indonesia exported. In 
2020, for instance, there was a negative 11,000 ton discrepancy between the data 
from Indonesia Statistics and country partner reports in the UN Comtrade data.
Discrepancies between import and export data from both countries may occur 
due to the differences in recording and documentation systems in each country. For 
instance, Indonesia keeps import records by country of origin and does not docu￾ment transit consignment of goods in third countries before they arrive at the desti￾nations (see Table 4) (Septiono & Ismawati, 2022).
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges176
Table 2 Indonesia’s import of plastic waste report (HS Code 3915) period of 2015–2020
Year
Indonesia statistics
UN Comtrade
Indonesia report Country partner report
Indonesia report data Data discrepancy
Country partner report 
data Data discrepancy
Netweight 
(Ton)
Trade value 
(Mil USD)
Netweight 
(Ton)
Trade value 
(Mil USD)
Netweight 
(Ton) (4)–(2)
Trade value 
(Mil USD) 
(5)–(3)
Netweight 
(Ton)
Trade value 
(Mil USD)
Netweight 
(Ton) (8)–(2)
Trade value 
(Mil USD) 
(9)–(3)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
2015 88,240.19 $39.20 97,146.23 $42.74 8906.04 $3.54 115,095.70 $47.87 26,855.51 $8.66
2016 112,366.42 $39.58 120,978.86 $42.48 8612.44 $2.90 104,055.12 $31.20 −8311.31 -$8.39
2017 117,383.43 $42.91 128,951.34 $45.87 11,567.91 $2.95 121,567.81 $33.54 4184.37 -$9.38
2018 283,152.25 $91.02 320,451.81 $102.37 37,299.56 $11.35 320,259.04 $79.43 37,106.79 -$11.59
2019 249,618.37 $83.22 249,618.39 $83.22 0.02 $0.00 231,639.45 $66.75 −17,978.92 -$16.47
2020 181,718.75 $63.04 213,923.61 $67.12 32,204.86 $4.09
Source: Indonesia Bureau of Statistics and UN Comtrade (2021)
Y. Ismawati et al.177
Table 3 Indonesia’s export of plastic waste (HS Code 3915) 2015–2020
Year
Indonesia statistics
UN Comtrade
Indonesia report Country partner report
Indonesia report data Data discrepancy Country partner report data Data discrepancy
Netweight 
(Ton)
Trade value 
(Mil USD)
Netweight 
(Ton)
Trade value 
(Mil USD)
Netweight 
(Ton) (4)–(2)
Trade value 
(Mil USD) 
(5)–(3)
Netweight 
(Ton)
Trade value 
(Mil USD)
Netweight 
(Ton) (8)–(2)
Trade value 
(Mil USD) 
(9)–(3)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
2015 148,734.61 $82.95 148,734.61 $82.95 −0.00 $0.00 142,102.99 $88.35 −6631.61 $5.40
2016 203,586.22 $93.28 203,586.22 $93.28 −0.00 $0.00 213,009.76 $113.97 9423.54 $20.68
2017 192,891.17 $92.13 193,544.82 $92.28 653.65 $0.15 229,312.25 $141.24 36,421.08 $49.11
2018 98,450.21 $44.34 98,516.36 $44.34 66.15 -$0.00 36,031.87 $24.40 −62,418.34 -$19.94
2019 73,275.20 $47.67 73,277.24 $47.67 2.04 $0.00 33,509.40 $25.75 −39,765.80 -$21.92
2020 43,724.72 $27.94 32,349.88 $23.61 −11,374.84 -$4.32
Source: Indonesia Bureau of Statistics and UN Comtrade (2021)
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges178
Table 4 Trading partners acknowledgement in Indonesia
Trade Partner countries Indonesia
Import Country of origin + country of consignment Country of origin
Export Country of last-known destination + country of 
consignment
Country of last-known 
destination
Source: Direktorat Jendral Bea dan Cukai, Kementerian Keuangan (Cukai, 2015)
Illicit Waste Trade Cases
Between 2019 and 2022, several cases of illicit waste trade attracted signifcant 
attention from offcials and the public. Some of these cases were triggered by civil 
society reports or community complaints.
The investigations in 2019 were prompted by several reports from Ecological 
Observation and Wetlands Conservation (Ecoton) and Nexus for Health, 
Environment, and Development Foundation (Nexus3 Foundation) about illegal 
dumping and burning of plastic waste properly in West Java, Banten, and East Java 
Provinces, which were then covered by several national and international media. 
The importing company rejected several plastic types from the declared plastic (HS 
3915) and paper waste (HS 4707) due to the lack of technical and economic feasi￾bility of recycling. These unwanted materials were then “donated,” sold, or dumped 
on the communities around the factories, violating MoT Reg. No. 31/2016 (Ismawati 
et al., 2019, 2022; Petrlik et al., 2019, 2022; Septiono et al., 2021).
In June 2019, 65 container shipments inspected by Customs in Batu Ampar Port, 
Batam, from four different importing companies: PT. Royal Citra Bersama, PT. Arya 
Wiraraja Plastikindo, PT. Tanindo Sukses, and PT. Hongtay. The imported plastic 
scraps were suspected to be contaminated with hazardous waste, violating the MOT 
Decree 31/2016 at the time (Helmi, 2019).
Despite the government claiming to repatriate the violated shipments, some of 
the re-exported waste did not end up back in the country of origin. In June 2019, 58 
containers were meant to be returned to the United States. However, only 12 con￾tainers docked in the United States. The remaining were re-routed to India, Thailand, 
Vietnam, South Korea, Mexico, Netherlands, and Canada (BAN & Foundation, 
2019). In response to the report that the shipments had ended up in India, Indonesian 
MoEF and Customs representatives refused to acknowledge that the containers 
were re-exported to other countries instead of the country of origin. They stated that 
the shipments were still on the way to their destinations. The Indonesian offcials 
also indicated that re-exportation is a law mandate and “if importers do not re￾export properly, they would be subject to administrative sanctions by revocation of 
import permits, and companies could also be subject to criminal sanctions to pro￾vide a deterrent effect” (Arumningtyas & Maulidin, 2019).
Article 39 of Law No. 18/2008 states that “anyone who unlawfully imports and/
or imports household waste and/or household waste-like waste into the territory of 
the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is punishable by imprisonment for a 
minimum of 3 (three) years and a maximum of 9 (nine) years and a fne of at least 
Y. Ismawati et al.179
Rp 100,000,000.00 (one hundred million rupiah) and a maximum of Rp 
3,000,000,000.00 (three billion rupiah)” (Wahyudi et al., 2020). Synergy between 
Customs, the Ministry of Environment and Forestry, and other state agencies is 
needed to enforce the law. However, although PT MSE and PT SM found violating 
the law, they have never been sanctioned and are still running their operations until 
now. A trusted source stated that the two companies were “sacrifced” because they 
are not members of the pulp and paper industry association.
Indonesian Customs and the MoEF seized another 102 incoming plastic waste 
shipments in September 2019, imported by PT. New Harvestindo International (PT 
NHI). The 23 containers were contaminated with hazardous waste, while 79 passed 
the clearance and continued to be released. Further, the contaminated waste contain￾ers were re-exported to Australia (13 containers), the United States (7 containers), 
New Zealand (2 containers), and the United Kingdom (one container). In addition, 
the Tangerang Region Customs also seized 138 container shipments of mixed plas￾tic waste imported by PT. New Harvestindo International. The shipments were par￾tially cleared (29 containers), while the remaining 109 containers were reexported 
back to Australia (80 containers), the United States (4 containers), New Zealand (3 
containers), and the United Kingdom (22 containers) (Astuti, 2019; Direktorat 
Jenderal Bea dan Cukai, 2021).
In addition to PT NHI case, another 24 containers found lacked of proper permit￾ting documents among import shipments by PT. Advanced Recycle Technology (PT 
ART). Ten containers were contaminated and were traced back and re-exported to 
Hong Kong (three containers) and Australia (seven containers) (Astuti, 2019). 
Customs cleared the remaining 14 containers after inspections.
Due to the high infux of imported nonhazardous waste and the risk to human 
health and the environment, the Secretary of Cabinet arranged a meeting in August 
2019 to discuss the matter. The meeting established general decisions to maximize 
domestic sources of waste, improve waste management, and implement stricter 
enforcement (Sekretariat Kabinet Republik Indonesia, 2019; Watubun, 2019).
In October 2019, the Indonesian authorities identifed two Singaporeans, with an 
alias LSW and KWL, involved in smuggling the imported contaminated plastic 
scrap. The imported shipments were contaminated by used remote controls, batter￾ies, printed circuit boards, and wires, despite the lack of necessary import docu￾ments (Septiari, 2021). LSW was subjected to Articles 105 and 106 of the 
Environmental Management and Protection Act (Law No. 32/2009), with a poten￾tial maximum sentence of 15 years and a fne of Rp 15 billion (USD 1 million) 
(Syahni, 2019). However, their court paperwork was never followed up.
Until early 2020, more than 1000 containers had already been seized for inspec￾tion at Tanjung Priok Port (Jakarta). Such a condition prompted the MoEF, 
Commission IV of the House of Representatives, Ministry of Maritime and 
Investments, Ministry of Trade, and Customs and Excise to conduct the unexpected 
inspection, specifcally to check the KSO SCISI (KSO SCISI is a collaboration 
between two Indonesian state-owned enterprises in the feld of testing, inspections, 
and certifcations) offce in Tanjung Priok port.
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges180
The team sampled several containers and observed multiple MoT Regulation No. 
84/2019 violations. The visit (Kementerian Lingkungan Hidup dan Kehutanan, 
2020) concluded that:
• Customs and Excise would organize for re-exportation, with the Basel Convention 
focal point when found relevant.
• The House of Representatives agreed that contaminated imported waste was not 
eligible for plastic processing and recycling raw materials.
• Sanction for KSO-CSISI, the surveyor company, and possible replacement of 
surveyor companies that violated the rules supported by evidence.
• Review of KSO-SCISI’s performance in validating nonhazardous waste import 
shipments is needed.
A series of meetings, with multiple ministries and parliament committee mem￾bers involved, was held over the matter (Risalah Rapat Dengar Pendapat Komisi IV 
DPR RI dengan Kementerian Luar Negeri, Kementerian Lingkungan Hidup dan 
Kehutanan RI, Kementerian Perdagangan Ri, Kementerian Perindustrian RI, dan 
Kementerian Keuangan RI (Bidang Pertanian, Lingkungan Hidup dan Kehutanan, 
dan Kelautan, 2020). In May 2020, a limited ministry coordination meeting estab￾lished decisions to re-export the confscated containers. Based on Cabinet Secretariat 
Letter No. B.164/Seskab/Ekon/05/2020, they decided to develop a scheme for 
exterminating the unclaimed containers which were unable to be re-exported. The 
letter informed of several decisions to (Direktorat Jenderal Bea dan Cukai, 2021):
• Start the re-exportation process for the total 63 containers of PT. ART by that 
time, which did not have a proper surveyor report and import permit document, 
with the lead from the MoEF.
• Continue the re-exportation process for 107 containers of PT. NHI, which once 
requested to be exterminated because the Indonesian government had already 
sent the notifcation to do so to the country of origin.
• Reinspect 20 containers of PT. AWP in Batam Customs.
• Reinspect 114 containers of PT. NHI (which was later confrmed by the MoEF 
letter No. S.241/PSLB3/VPLB3/PLB.3/06/2020 on June 2020 (mediaindonesia.
com, 2020)).
• Exterminate 901 containers belonging to PT. NHI, which had no proper import 
permit document, with the lead from the MoEF. PT NHI should bear the cost of 
extermination (which was confrmed by the MoEF letter No. S478/VPLB3/
PLB.3/06/2020 on June 2020 (mediaindonesia.com, 2020)).
Further, due to the continuous and large quantity of incoming fagged shipments, 
several multistakeholder meetings of national agencies’ task forces continued for 
coordination. As of August 2020, the Indonesian Customs and the MoEF inspected 
1146 containers declared as nonhazardous waste with the remaining 1078 unin￾spected at the time, making a total of 2224 containers under their watch. Later, the 
task force cleared 562 containers and declared another 584 containers contaminated 
with other types of waste commodities, such as household waste and hazardous 
waste (Direktorat Jenderal Bea dan Cukai, 2021; Septiono & Ismawati, 2022).
Y. Ismawati et al.181
Fig. 17 Seized containers suspected contaminated with hazardous wastes. (Photo credit: Liputan 
6. (Nurdin, 2019))
In 2020, in total, 450 containers had been re-exported to the countries of origin. 
The identifable “contaminated” containers came from multiple countries, and the 
highest volumes of shipment came from Australia, followed by Germany, the United 
States, the Netherlands, and others. Most of these containers were intercepted and 
inspected by Banten and Batam Customs Offces (Direktorat Jenderal Bea dan 
Cukai, 2021) (see Fig. 17).
Thereafter, the second amendment of the MoT Regulation No. 84/2019 was 
enacted, along with the previously established Task Force for the Import of Waste 
(Huda, 2019), had issued a joint-decree setting the maximum contaminant of 2%, 
and developed the technical guideline for import verifcation within the MoFA.
In July 2021, the Indonesian Customs and the MoEF started the extermination 
process of the unresolved investigation and repatriation containers. The Indonesian 
Customs fnally transferred the authorization of the enforcement process to the 
Directorate of Hazardous Waste Verifcation (MoEF) that month, following the 
extermination plan that had been approved by the Task Force for Non-Hazardous 
Waste Import (mediaindonesia.com, 2020; Ocean Week, 2021).
However, the serious case of PT NHI has never been processed and followed up 
in court, nor has the company been ordered to pay penalties for the violations in the 
past. Although the breach of waste importation laws by PT NHI is considered a 
criminal act, the only punishment given by the Indonesian government for PT NHI 
was to cancel their import permit. On the contrary, on 30 July 2021, the UK Court 
fned a waste management company, Biffa Waste Services Ltd., £1.5 million for 
exporting mixed household wastes to Indonesia and India. This fne is the highest 
penalty ever ordered by the court for a waste crime case (UK Environment 
Agency, 2021).
On the 24th of September 2020, local media, citraindonesia.com, covered the 
frst event of PT NHI exterminating nine plastic waste containers in their 
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges182
Fig. 18 Old bales of plastics waste at PT NHI’s premises confscated in 2019 covered by wild 
plants. (Photo credit: Yuyun Ismawati)
mini-incinerator. It took 3 days to burn them all. However, when the Nexus3 team 
tried to access the news for this study, the original link of this online information 
was no longer available and could not be displayed. Fortunately, the source is avail￾able to obtain using the archive search engine (Darling, 2020). Figure 18 taken in 
March 2022 shows the old bales of mixed plastic waste in PT NHI’s premises 
already covered by wild plants.
Updates from a trusted source stated that the mini-incinerator was broken several 
times and can only burn the plastic waste for a couple of hours in a day. Until March 
2023, when the Nexus3 team found out that PT NHI was still working to extermi￾nate the remaining confscated plastic wastes, the team spotted new fresh bales of 
uniform PET bottles in PT NHI’s premises. However, when they try to investigate 
further, the database of PT NHI could not be found anymore in the company regis￾tration system.
Since October 2019, Indonesia Maritime, Transportation and Logistics Watch 
(IMLOW) expressed their concern for the hazard of the lengthy holding time for 
these containers, posing risks of self-combustion due its material properties, per 
Indonesian Shipping Act (Law No. 17/2008). The lengthy process also affected the 
scarce in container availability for exports on the transfer depo (Asosiasi Pengusaha 
Tempat Penimbunan Sementara Indonesia, 2020; Azka, 2020). Until June 2021, 
there were still hundreds on containers held in the Tanjung Priok port waiting for 
extermination (Yati, 2021). Safety practices should be uphold strictly, considering 
that these containers were loaded with contaminated waste. Importers and shipping 
companies complained about the accumulated charges of demurrage costs at the 
ports and demanded authorities review the regulations faster (Pelindo, 2020; 
Wahyudi et al., 2020).
Y. Ismawati et al.183
In February 2021, Basel Action Network and NGOs in Malaysia, Indonesia, and 
India fagged shipments from the United States (not a party to the Basel Convention) 
to those countries (parties to the Basel Convention), from a company Newport CH 
International. In total, fve containers received by their Indonesian counterpart on 
Belawan Port, North Sumatera. Despite the fact that the company declared the ship￾ment as HS Code 3915.10 (plastic waste, parings, and scrap of polyethylene), the 
shipment should have been considered illegal due to the provisions of Basel 
Convention, as the United States is yet to be the party of the international agreement 
(BAN, 2021b).
Conclusions and Recommendations
The issue of nonhazardous waste has been partially addressed in the revision of The 
Minister of Trade Regulation, which addressed lessons learned from past violation 
cases of waste importation in Indonesia, and delivered state’s liability to protect 
human health and the environment (Sonia & Sunyowati, 2020).
The government have established several measures to address waste trade chal￾lenges and opportunities, such as by setting a new standard of maximum 2% con￾taminants in waste import shipments, as well as additional procedures, including 
mandating exporter registration at the Indonesian Embassy in the country of origin, 
requesting for a master list of importing companies to the Ministry of Industry, hav￾ing multiple parameter checklists from the Ministry of Environment and Forestry 
for importer’s recommendation letter, and strengthening inspection procedure of the 
Customs from the regulator’s perspective. However, sanctions and punishment for 
companies violating the rules should be increased and publicly announced.
More needs to be done to minimize the impacts of waste colonialism on 
Indonesia. The Government of Indonesia is not on track to establish the roadmap for 
plastic and paper recycling industries. The roadmap should be designed to incre￾mentally reduce the import of nonhazardous waste by setting import quotas, to 
allow domestically sourced nonhazardous waste or post-consumers plastics and 
paper to become a main source of secondary materials for the local recycling indus￾tries. The roadmap must be developed by relevant ministries and agencies at the 
national level in consultations with industries and civil society representatives. In 
parallel, waste management system and infrastructures in the country need to be 
improved to increase the rate of recycling and recyclability of post-consumer prod￾ucts to feed the recycling industries.
As a Party to Basel, the Government of Indonesia should strengthen Basel 
Convention enforcement and compliance, especially the repatriation of contami￾nated waste shipments or return-to-senders. Indonesian authorities should adopt and 
revise the existing regulations to accommodate the Basel Convention Plastic Waste 
Amendments that had entered into force on January 1, 2022.
The Ministry of Trade and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should notify the 
Indonesian Embassy and Consulates and other relevant stakeholders in exporting 
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges184
countries about the decision on maximum contaminants. Information on the maxi￾mum contaminant limit should not be considered a barrier-to-trade, because the 
defnition and provisions of import of nonhazardous waste is aiming for the ease of 
the recycling sector. This rule aligns with the Basel Convention amendments on 
plastic waste trade, where provisions such as being “almost free from contamina￾tion” may be supplemented with a specifc national point of reference 
(Secretariat, 2021).
The Ministry of Environment and Forestry should prohibit the imports of nonre￾cyclable plastic, hard-to-recycle plastics, and waste-derived products (PEFs or 
RDFs). Mixed plastic and several types of plastic are technically recyclable, but 
they have higher costs and the risk of releasing toxic chemicals.
Considering Indonesia does not have a protective regulatory framework from the 
emission standards for multiple persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and emerging 
and carcinogenic chemicals – such as methylmercury, PBDEs, PCBs, PFAS, and 
UV-328, and several others – the precautionary principle should be implemented. 
Mixed plastic poses health risks due to the chemicals, with contamination through 
plastic components used in electronic products. Chlorinated-based plastic, such as 
PVC, also releases dioxins and furans during thermal melting and shaping, poten￾tially harming recycling workers.
In addition, Indonesia has already enacted MoEF Reg. 75/2019, which will pro￾hibit the use of some plastics on products by 2030, such as polystyrene and PVC 
plastics. The use of such plastic types and their demand in the recycling sector will 
drop due to the regulating policy for the industry. Such policy implications should 
be considered while developing the Indonesian Roadmap of Non-Hazardous Waste 
as Secondary Raw Materials for Industries.
The Ministry of Environment and Forestry should increase laboratory capacity to 
improve the safeguarding of public health and the environment. Indonesia is still 
unable to analyze several POPs, organic metalloids, and other emerging chemicals. 
Increasing the capacity of commercial and educational laboratories in Indonesia 
would also lower the cost of laboratory instrumentation and analysis.
The Ministry of Environment and Forestry and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
should maximize the newly established exporter registry for waste repatriation/
return-to-sender. Violation in waste shipment harms domestic recycling industries 
and the public. Ultimately, trade violations in the past increased the burden of envi￾ronmental and health costs of the public. The Government of Indonesia should 
apply the lessons learned from past experiences to develop plans for prevention and 
curative actions to pursue waste repatriation to the country of origin.
Overall, there is a growing recognition among exporting countries that authori￾ties should address illegal waste exports through regulations and enforcement 
efforts. However, challenges remain, particularly in developing countries with lim￾ited enforcement capacity.
Holding waste brokers and shipping lines accountable for their actions is essen￾tial. This can be done by implementing stricter regulations on the export and import 
of plastic waste, increasing penalties for the violation of these regulations, and 
enforcing these regulations through monitoring and inspections.
Y. Ismawati et al.185
It is important to note that not all actors involved in the plastic waste trade are 
necessarily engaged in illegal activities. However, waste crime and illegal waste 
trade remain major concerns in the global waste management sector, and effective 
regulation and enforcement are vital to promoting responsible and sustainable waste 
management practices.
Finally, efforts to combat waste colonialism and illegal waste trade involve a 
combination of government regulation and oversight, improved waste management 
practices, greater social and environmental awareness, and activism.
Acknowledgments The work covered in this paper was produced with the support of Plastic 
Solution Funds, International Pollutants Elimination Network, and Basel Action Network.
References
APKI. (2021). Kebutuhan Bahan Baku Kertas Daur Ulang (KDU) [Presentation]. Paper presented 
at the FGD Peta Jalan Daur Ulang Kertas dan Plastik di Indonesia, Virual.
APKI. (2022). Berbasis ESG, Industri Pulp dan Kertas Indonesia Bisa Terus Bersaing di Pasar 
Global. Retrieved from https://apki.net/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/Berbasis-ESG-Industri￾Pulp-dan-Kertas-Indonesia-Bisa-Terus-Bersaing-di-Pasar-Global1.pdf
Arumningtyas, L., & Maulidin, M. A. (2019, November 7). Pengembalian Limbah B3 Tak Sampai 
Negara Asal? Importir Terancam Sanksi. Mongabay. Retrieved from https://www.mongabay.
co.id/2019/11/07/pengembalian-limbah-b3-tak-sampai-negara-asal-importir-terancam-sanksi/
Asosiasi Daur Ulang Plastik Indonesia. (2021). ADUPI – Asosiasi Daur Ulang Plastik Indonesia
[Presentation]. Retrieved from Indonesia.
Asosiasi Industri Pulp and Kertas Indonesia. (2021). Kebutuhan Bahan Baku Kertas Daur Ulang 
(KDU) [Presentation]. Retrieved from Indonesia.
Asosiasi Pengusaha Tempat Penimbunan Sementara Indonesia. (2020). Miris, Kontainer Ekspor 
Langka, Namun Ribuan Kontainer Limbah Masih Mangkrak di Priok. Retrieved from https://
aptesindo.com/miris-kontainer-ekspor-langka-namun-ribuan-kontainer-limbah-masih￾mangkrak-di-priok-20201204348
Astuti, I. (2019). Bea Cukai dan KLHK Tindak 3 Importir Limbah. Retrieved from https://mediain￾donesia.com/humaniora/260361/bea-cukai-dan-klhk-tindak-3-importir-limbah
Australian Clean Energy Finance Corporation. (2020). Case study: Turning waste into processed 
engineered fuel. Retrieved from https://www.cefc.com.au/where-we-invest/case-studies/
turning-waste-into-processed-engineered-fuel/
Australian Department of Agriculture, W., and Environment. (2021). Waste exports. Retrieved 
from https://www.awe.gov.au/environment/protection/waste/exports
Azka, R. M. (2020). Apa Kabar Limbah Kontainer di Tanjung Priok? Retrieved from https://eko￾nomi.bisnis.com/read/20201021/98/1307974/apa-kabar-limbah-kontainer-di-tanjung-priok
BAN. (2021a). NGOs signing on to letter to shippers to stop plastic waste exports. Retrieved from 
https://www.ban.org/plastic-waste-transparency-project-hub/shipping-lines-campaign
BAN. (2021b). Three current examples of likely illegal plas￾tic waste exports from US. Retrieved from http://wiki.ban.org/images/a/ae/
Three_Current_Examples_of_Likely_Illegal_US_Plastic_Waste_Exports_from_US.pdf
BAN. (2022). Shipping line CMA CGM to halt global trade of plastic waste. Retrieved from 
https://www.ban.org/plastic-waste-transparency-project-hub/shipping-lines-campaign
BAN, & Foundation, N. (2019). Global shell game: Report on fate of re-exports of seized illegal 
imports of waste from the USA to Indonesia. Retrieved from USA and Indonesia. https://www.
nexus3foundation.org/_fles/ugd/13eb5b_907439e852d14544824343170a823ad4.pdf
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges186
Basel Action Network. (2021a). Indonesian government uncertain as local protests begin, eyes are 
on India. Retrieved from https://www.ban.org/news/2021/3/25/whistle-blown-whistle-heard￾malaysia-declares-reported-shipments-of-us-plastic-wastes-to-asia-are-illegal
Basel Action Network. (2021b). Three current examples of likely illegal plas￾tic waste exports from US. Retrieved from USA http://wiki.ban.org/images/a/ae/
Three_Current_Examples_of_Likely_Illegal_US_Plastic_Waste_Exports_from_US.pdf
Boediwardhana, W. (2019). After plastic, Indonesia now also returns contaminated paper waste 
to Australia. Jakarta Post. Retrieved from https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2019/07/09/
after-plastic-indonesia-now-also-returns-contaminated-paper-waste-to-australia.html?src=mo
stviewed&pg=news/2019/02/08/turkey-building-collapse-death-toll-hits-14.html
Brooks, A. L., Wang, S., & Jambeck, J. R. (2018). The Chinese import ban and its impact on global 
plastic waste trade. Science. Advances, 4(6), eaat0131. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat0131
Capri, A. (2021). Commentary: How Singapore will remain a top trading hub in a post-pandemic 
world. Commentary. Retrieved from https://www.channelnewsasia.com/commentary/
singapore-top-trading-hub-post-coronavirus-covid-19-pandemic-936541
Chen, H. L., Nath, T. K., Chong, S., Foo, V., Gibbins, C., & Lechner, A. M. (2021). The plastic 
waste problem in Malaysia: Management, recycling and disposal of local and global plastic 
waste. SN Applied Sciences, 3(437). https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-021-04234-y
Cukai, D. B. D. (2015). Analisa Diskrepansi Perdagangan Merkuri.
Cukai, D. B. D. (2020). Pengawasan Impor Limbah [Presentation].
Cukai, D. B. D. (2021). Pengawasan Impor Limbah Non-B3 [Presentation].
Darling, M. (2020, September 24). Dimusnahkan 9 Kontainer Limbah Non B3 Plastik Milik 
PT.  NHI.  Citra Indonesia. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20201022205210/
https://citraindonesia.com/dimusnahkan-9-kontainer-limbah-non-b3-plastik-milik-pt-nhi/
Direktorat Jenderal Bea dan Cukai. (2021). Pengawasan Impor Limbah Non-B3 [Presentation]. 
Retrieved from Indonesia.
EEA. (2019). The plastic waste trade in the circular economy. European Environmental Agency.
Foundation, T. O. (2023). Stop waste colonialism: Leveraging extended producer responsibility to 
catalyze a justice-led circular textiles economy. Retrieved from https://stopwastecolonialism.
org/stopwastecolonialism.pdf
Fuller, S., Ngata, T., Borrelle, S. B., & Farrelly, T. A. (2022). Plastics pollution as waste colonial￾ism in Te Moananui. Journal of Political Ecology, 29, 534–560.
Helmi, I. (2019). BC Batam Periksa Puluhan Kontainer Sampah Plastik Impor 
di Pelabuhan Batuampar. Retrieved from https://probatam.co/2019/06/15/
bc-batam-periksa-puluhan-kontainer-sampah-plastik-impor-di-pelabuhan-batuampar/
Holcim Philippines. (2019). Holcim Philippines statement on alterna￾tive fuels held at other ports. Retrieved from https://www.holcim.ph/
holcim-philippines-statement-alternative-fuels-held-other-ports
Huda, L. (2019). Pemerintah Bentuk Satgas Penanganan Impor Limbah. Retrieved from https://
bisnis.tempo.co/read/1271435/pemerintah-bentuk-satgas-penanganan-impor-limbah/
full&view=ok
Ismawati, Y., & Septiono, M. A. (2019). Plastic waste trade in Indonesia country update report 
2019. Nexus3 Foundation. 
Ismawati, Y., Septiono, M. A., Arisandi, P., & Bell, L. (2019). Plastic waste trade in Indonesia. 
Retrieved from Denpasar, Indonesia https://bit.ly/35H6EUm
Ismawati, Y., Proboretno, N., & Septiono, M. A. (2022). Plastic waste management and burden in 
Indonesia. Retrieved from Jakarta https://bit.ly/PlasticBurden2022
Karlsson, T., Dell, J., Gündoğdu, S., & Carney Almroth, B. (2023). Plastic waste 
trade: The hidden numbers. Retrieved from Gothenburg https://ipen.org/documents/
plastic-waste-trade-hidden-numbers
KBRI, T. (2021). Impor Limbah Non B3. Retrieved from https://kemlu.go.id/tokyo/en/pages/
impor_limbah_non_b3/4351/etc-menu
KBRI, W. (2021). Procedure for authentifcation NZ exporter of non-hazardous and non￾toxic waste. Retrieved from https://kemlu.go.id/wellington/en/pages/prosedur_oten￾Y. Ismawati et al.187
tikasi_untuk_eksportir_limba%20h_tidak_berbahaya_dan_tidak_beracun/3920/
etc-menu
Kemenlu, Min. of Foreign Affairs. (2021). Penandasahan Eksportir Terdaftar oleh Perwakilan RI
[Presentation]. Paper presented at the FGD Plastic and Paper Waste Trade Virtual.
Kementerian Lingkungan Hidup dan Kehutanan. (2020). Sidak KLHK bersama Komisi IV DPR ke 
PT. KSO Sucofndo, terkait impor sampah dalam konteiner. Retrieved from http://pslb3.men￾lhk.go.id/read/sidak-klhk-bersama-komisi-iv-dpr-ke-pt-kso-sucofndo-terkait-impor-sampah￾dalam-kontainer
KLHK. (2020). Formulir Permohonan Rekomendasi Impor Limbah Non Bahan Berbahaya Dan 
Beracun. Retrieved from http://pelayananterpadu.menlhk.go.id/images/dokumen/nonperiz￾inan/PERSYARATAN-REKOM-IMPOR-LB3.pdf
Kurniawan, G. (2019). Pasok Bahan Baku Manufaktur, Industri Daur Ulang Plastik 
Dipacu. Retrieved from https://ekonomi.bisnis.com/read/20190823/257/1140332/
pasok-bahan-baku-manufaktur-industri-daur-ulang-plastik-dipacu
Liang, Y., Tan, Q., Song, Q., & Li, J. (2020). An analysis of the plastic waste trade and management in 
Asia. Waste Management, 119, 242–253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2020.09.049
Liboiron, Max. (2021). Pollution is colonialism. Duke University Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.
ctv1jhvnk1
Marrs, D. G., Ručevska, I., & Villarrubia-Gómez, P. (2019). Controlling transboundary trade in 
plastic waste. Policy Brief. Retrieved from https://www.grida.no/publications/443
mediaindonesia.com. (2020). KLHK Susun Peta Kelola Limbah Non-B3 sebagai 
Bahan Industri. Retrieved from https://mediaindonesia.com/humaniora/327115/
klhk-susunpeta-kelola-limbah-non-b3-sebagaibahan-industri
Metso. (2019). From waste to fuel: Success in PEF production. Retrieved from https://recycling.
metso.com/casestudies/recycling/from-waste-to-fuel/
Michaelson, R. (2021). ‘Waste colonialism’: World grapples with west’s unwanted plastic. The 
Guardian.
Nexus3. (2021). Focus Group Discussion: Pengetatan Impor Limbah Non-B3 Scrap Plastik dan 
Scrap Kertas: Permendag 84/2019 (jo. Permendag 83/2020) dan Basel Convention Plastic 
Waste Amendment. Paper presented at the FGD with Indonesians Paper and Plastic Industries 
Association, Virtual. Retrieved from https://bit.ly/3NZ6iPp
Nurdin, A. (2019). Bea Cukai: 38 Kontainer Bermuatan Limbah Plastik Positif Mengandung 
B3. Liputan 6. Retrieved from https://www.liputan6.com/bisnis/read/4003388/
bea-cukai-38-kontainer-bermuatan-limbah-plastik-positif-mengandung-b3
Ocean Week. (2021). Kontainer Limbah di Priok Akan Dimusnahkan. Retrieved from https://
oceanweek.co.id/kontainer-limbah-di-priok-akan-dimusnahkan/
OECD. (2018). Improving plastics management: Trends, policy responses, and the role of inter￾national co-operation and trade. Background report. Retrieved from https://www.oecd.org/
environment/waste/policy-highlights-improving-plastics-management.pdf
Pelindo, T. P. (2020). Tarif konteiner petikemas. Retrieved from https://ipctpk.co.id/tarif/
Petrlik, J., Ismawati, Y., DiGangi, J., Arisandi, P., Bell, L., & Beeler, B. (2019). Plastic waste food￾ing Indonesia leads to toxic chemical contamination of the food chain. Retrieved from Jakarta, 
Surabaya, Prague, San Francisco. https://bit.ly/2N7a3Wk
Petrlik, J., Bell, L., Beeler, B., Møller, M., Jopkova, M., & Brabcova, K. (2021). Plastic waste 
poisoning food and threatening communities in Africa, Asia, Central & Eastern Europe and 
Latin America. Arnika–IPEN.  Retrieved from https://ipen.org/sites/default/fles/documents/
ipen-plastic-waste-contaminates-food-chain-en.pdf
Petrlik, J., Ismawati, Y., Bell, L., Beeler, B., Grechko, V., Jelinek, N., & Septiono, M. A. (2022). 
POPs contamination caused by use of plastic waste as fuel at locations in Indonesia. Paper 
presented at the Symposium on Halogenated Persistent Organic Pollutants, New Orleans, 
October 9–14.
Pickin, J., & Donovan, S. (2020). Exports of Australian waste-derived products and wastes in 
2019-20. Retrieved from https://www.dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/fles/documents/data￾exports-australian-wastes-2019-20.pdf
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges188
Pratt, L. (2011). Decreasing dirty dumping? A reevaluation of toxic waste colonialism and the 
global management of transboundary hazardous waste. William and Mary Environmental 
Law and Policy Review, 35(2010–2011)(2), 581–622. Retrieved from https://scholarship.law.
wm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1519&context=wmelpr
Puckett, J., Westervelt, S., Gutierrez, R., & Takamiya, Y. (2002). The digital dump: Exporting 
re-use and abuse to Africa. Retrieved from Seattle, WA https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/558f1c27e4b0927589e0edad/t/55d79038e4b069c9055c8720/1440190520196/
BANsDigitalDump-2005.pdf
Resource Recycling. (2020). From green fence to red alert: A China timeline. Retrieved from 
https://resource-recycling.com/recycling/2018/02/13/green-fence-red-alert-china-timeline/
ResourceCo. (2019). A world away from waste. Retrieved from https://resourceco.com.
au/a-world-away-from-waste/
Risalah Rapat Dengar Pendapat Komisi IV DPR RI dengan Kementerian Luar Negeri, Kementerian 
Lingkungan Hidup dan Kehutanan RI, Kementerian Perdagangan Ri, Kementerian Perindustrian 
RI, dan Kementerian Keuangan RI (Bidang Pertanian, Lingkungan Hidup dan Kehutanan, dan 
Kelautan), Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Republik Indonesia. 56 (2020).
Sanderson, P. (2021). Indonesia imports recyclate because it lacks collection infra￾structure says Industry Ministry. Retrieved from https://www.rebnews.com/
indonesia-imports-recyclate-because-it-lacks-collection-infrastructure-says-industry-ministry/
Sasaki, S. (2020). The effects on Thailand of China’s import restrictions on waste: measures 
and challenges related to the international recycling of waste plastic and e-waste. Journal of 
Material Cycles and Waste Management, 23, 77. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10163-020-01113-3
Secretariat, B. (2021). BC-14/12: Amendments to Annexes II, VIII and IX to the Basel Convention. 
Retrieved from https://www.basel.int/Implementation/Plasticwaste/PlasticWasteAmendments/
FAQs/tabid/8427/Default.aspx
Sekretariat Kabinet Republik Indonesia. (2019). Berpotensi Rusak Lingkungan, Presiden Jokowi Minta 
Impor Sampah dan Limbah Dikendalikan [Press release]. Retrieved from https://setkab.go.id/
berpotensi-rusak-lingkungan-presiden-jokowi-minta-impor-sampah-dan-limbah-dikendalikan/
Sembiring, M. (2019). Global waste trade chaos: Rising environmentalism or cost-beneft analy￾sis. NTS Insight, IN19-02. Retrieved from https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/resrep26804.pdf
Septiari, D. (2020). Indonesia to send back hazardous materials to Australia, NZ, UK, US. Retrieved 
from https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2020/12/25/indonesia-to-send-back-hazardous￾materials-to-australia-nz-uk-us.html
Septiari, D. (2021). Two Singaporeans named suspects in toxic waste import case. Retrieved from 
https://www.thejakartapost.com/seasia/2019/10/04/two-singaporeans-named-suspects-in￾toxic-waste-import-case.html
Septiono, T., & Ismawati, Y. (2022). Indonesia waste trade updates: Focusing on plastic and paper 
waste in Indonesia. Retrieved from Denpasar https://www.nexus3foundation.org/2022/11/03/
indonesia-waste-trade-updatesfocusing-on-plastic-andpaper-waste-in-indonesia/
Septiono, M. A., Ismawati, Y., & Arisandi, P. (2021). Indonesia waste trade update: Focusing on 
plastic and paper waste trade. Retrieved from www.nexus3foundation.org/reports.
Singapore Economic Development Board. (2021). We connect you to the world. Global connectiv￾ity. Retrieved from https://www.edb.gov.sg/en/why-singapore/global-connectivity.html
Sonia, V., & Sunyowati, D. (2020). The state liability of plastic waste dumping in Indonesia. 
Utopía y Praxis Latinoamericana, 25(1). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3784901
Sridhar, L., & Kumar, P. (2019). The new face of waste colonialism: A review of legal regulations 
governing the import waste into India. Socio-Legal Review, 15(2), 101–130. Retrieved from 
https://repository.nls.ac.in/slr/vol15/iss2/1
Sugasri, A., Permanasari, T., Suryana, A., Herlina, L., & Apriella, N. (2021). Kajian Daur 
Ulang Plastik dan Kertas Dalam Negeri. Retrieved from Jakarta https://www.scribd.com/
document/501879526/Kajian-Daur-Ulang-Plastik-dan-Kertas-Dalam-Negeriiii
Syahni, D. (2019). Kala Dua Pengusaha Singapura Terjerat Kasus Impor Sampah 
Plastik Ilegal di Tangerang. Retrieved from https://www.mongabay.co.id/2019/10/14/
kala-dua-pengusaha-singapura-terjerat-kasus-impor-sampah-plastik-ilegal-di-tangerang/
Y. Ismawati et al.189
The International Criminal Police Organization. (2020). Strategic analysis report: Emerging crim￾inal trends in the global plastic waste market since January 2018. Interpol.
UK Environment Agency. (2021). Biffa caught exporting banned waste again. Climate change 
impact in developing countries. Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/government/news/
biffa-caught-exporting-banned-waste-again
UN Comtrade. (2021). https://comtradeplus.un.org/TradeFlow
Wahyudi, I. T., Anggara, W., & Zein, M. R. (2020). Tinjauan Kebijakan Importasi Limbah Di 
Indonesia. JURNAL PERSPEKTIF BEA DAN CUKAI, 4(1). https://doi.org/10.31092/jpbc.
v4i1.739
Wang, W., Themelis, N. J., Sun, K., Bourtsalas, A. C., Huang, Q., Zhang, Y., & Wu, Z. (2019). 
Current infuence of China’s ban on plastic waste import. Waste Disposal & Sustainable 
Energy, 1, 67–78. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42768-019-00005-z
Watubun, K. (2019). ‘Zero Tolerance’ Impor Sampah & Limbah B3. Retrieved from http://staging￾point.com/read/2019/08/29/142522/.Zero.Tolerance.Impor.Sampah.Limbah.B3
Yati, R. (2021). Kontainer Limbah Mangkrak di Priok, Pengusaha TPS Rugi Ratusan 
Miliar. Retrieved from https://ekonomi.bisnis.com/read/20210622/98/1408475/
kontainer-limbah-mangkrak-di-priok-pengusaha-tps-rugi-ratusan-miliar.
Plastic Waste Trade in Indonesia and Country’s Response to Waste Trade Challenges191
Plastic Waste Trade Issues 
and Environmental Contamination 
in Romania
Florin-Constantin Mihai and Simona Roxana Ulman
Introduction
Waste management activities imply the import-export of waste fows between coun￾tries for recycling and recovering purposes. Besides other international regulations, 
the prohibition of the export of hazardous substances and toxic wastes from well￾developed countries to emerging economies of Asia and Africa under the Basel 
Convention must be achieved (Mihai et al., 2022a).
Even in such context, illegal trade activities in the waste sector are still wide￾spread, posing further risks to public health and environment, particularly in coun￾tries where there are gaps in domestic waste management activities. E-waste is 
commonly exported in Africa where the largest e-waste dump is formed on the 
outskirts of Accra (Ghana) such as Agbogbloshie (Dodd et al., 2023), and textile 
wastes end up in dumpsites owing to the fast-fashion consumption model in high￾income economies and second-hand exportation (Niinimäki et al., 2020). Since the 
China ban on plastic imports, other South Asian countries are facing challenges 
with the surplus of imported plastic waste, while domestic waste management also 
has its own defciencies (Wang et al., 2020).
A similar context appears in Eastern Europe, where low landfll fees combined 
with law enforcement gaps are attractive for waste brokers to trade plastic waste and 
other waste fows through illicit procedures (BAN, 2021). Romania proved to be a 
key destination for illegal waste trade in the last years (Europol, 2022), while waste 
management performances are still low compared with other EU countries (Rios & 
Picazo-Tadeo, 2021). Therefore, imported waste fows put additional pressure on 
the current waste management systems. Plastic waste management has signifcant 
shortcomings related to poor performances of source-separation collection schemes 
F.-C. Mihai (*) · S. R. Ulman 
CERNESIM Center, Department of Exact Sciences and Natural Sciences, Institute of 
Interdisciplinary Research, “Alexandru Ioan Cuza” University of Iasi, Iasi, Romania
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_10192
despite a developed recycling infrastructure and investments made by the business 
sector (Ganea, 2021). Moreover, civil society is concerned about Romania’s expo￾sure to illegal waste trade (Euroactiv, 2020). This country, like other new EU mem￾bers, struggles to comply with EU targets in terms of recycling and recovery of the 
municipal waste stream (Bunding-Venter et al., 2022). On this background, the cur￾rent work aims to examine the role of formal and illegal plastic waste trade in 
Romania and its effects on domestic plastic waste management practices and envi￾ronmental contamination risks (freshwater-land-air pollution) through illegal dump￾ing, burying, open burning, or co-incineration in cement factories (see Fig. 1).
Moreover, it intends to analyze the main mitigation strategies in the case of ille￾gal plastic trade and environmental contamination, with a focus on the legislative 
framework at the EU and national levels, on law enforcement and monitoring, and, 
also, on improvements in terms of plastic waste management through circular solu￾tions in this particular context.
Plastic Waste Management in Romania Under 
Linear Economy
Romania is a landfll-based country despite the aspirations toward a circular econ￾omy transition in line with 2030 EU targets. Plastic waste is a common waste frac￾tion in the municipal waste stream and packaging waste fows. In addition, e-waste, 
end-of-life vehicles (ELVs), or textile waste contain plastic items are additional 
plastic pollution sources for the natural environment, even to a greater extent if they 
are not properly managed. Previous studies showed that Romania is facing waste 
management challenges in municipal waste management systems (Dobre-Baron 
et al., 2022), packaging waste (Teodor et al., 2020; Mihai & Ulman, 2022), e-waste 
(Modoi & Mihai, 2022), end-of-life vehicles (Rovinaru et al., 2019), textile waste 
(Tripa & Indrie, 2021), or construction and demolition waste (Mihai, 2019). As it is 
Fig. 1 Plastic waste trade issues and environmental contamination in Romania: a general overview
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman193
well-known, plastic items can be easily, unfortunately, released into the environment 
via illegal dumpsites or littering behavior. Therefore, the mismanagement of plastic 
waste that feeds plastic pollution of natural environment has multiple generation 
sources at national and regional levels besides the municipal waste stream. In detail, 
the key problems related to plastic waste management in Romania identifed by the 
Circular Economy Strategy are low recycling levels (31%), reduced content of recy￾cled materials in new products, or low consumer awareness (Ministry of 
Environment, 2022). As found in the literature, these main national vulnerabilities 
might have some current responses, at least from the theoretical point of view 
(Fig. 2). Accordingly, (i) plastic in the municipal waste stream could be better man￾aged through more effcient separated collection systems and through more numer￾ous and correlated actions made for increasing the pro-environmental general 
awareness, with a focus on this specifc concern (Mihai et al., 2022b). (ii) Some 
alternatives for replacing the plastic in packaging waste fows might be found, i.e., 
plant-based and compostable packaging materials; glass, when it is reused and recy￾cled; or cardboard mono-material (McNeish & Neufeldt, 2023; Mihai et al., 2024). 
(iii) The concern for plastic in textile waste might be attenuated if it is, no less than 
partially, replaced to natural fbers and, also, if this industry starts to follow the 
principles of circular economy, closing the loop (Tripa & Indrie, 2021). (iv) Plastic 
in e-waste might be reduced through different actions like reducing the use of elec￾tronics and selecting more eco-friendly options that have the same output; putting 
Fig. 2 Main plastic waste management challenges and potential solutions to them in Romania
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania194
more frequently into practice other specifc strategic circular principles like reuse, 
repair, return, recycle, recover, and remanufacture; and choosing energy-effcient 
electronics that, at least, are more environmentally safe (Mihai et al., 2022b; Mihai 
& Ulman, 2023). (v) Plastic in end-of-life vehicles might be a problem potentially 
improved through a higher level of implemented green mobility and more circular 
approaches in the automotive industry (Bănică et  al., 2019; Andrei et  al., 2022; 
Mihai & Ulman, 2023) (see Fig. 2).
Post-consumer packaging waste such as PET bottles is the most visible pollution 
item on freshwater bodies particularly after the food events when these plastic 
items are accumulating behind the dam lakes or are trapped in the riparian vegeta￾tion (Mihai, 2018). This fact suggests gaps in the current plastic waste management 
system in the context in which PET bottles are one of the most recycled plastic 
items with high demand in the plastic recycling market. GreenTech is one of the 
largest plastic recycling companies from Southeast Europe, providing “bottle to 
bottle” mechanisms while closing the PET bottle loop (rPET). However, the low 
effciency of source-separated schemes in the last decade in Romania led to the 
importation of PET bottles from abroad to feed the operational demands of recy￾cling facilities, while undocumented domestic plastic waste fows were exported to 
the Asian market (Cojocariu, 2013). For instance, the offcial data shows that plastic 
waste exported in China was 810 t in 2016–2017, but equal to zero in 2018–2019 
after China’s ban on importing plastic waste (Romanian Court of Accounts, 2022).
On the other side, imported PET bottles seem to be more qualitative than domes￾tic plastic fow according to recycling actors. GreenTech imports almost 60% of 
PET bottles mainly from the business sector (Ganea, 2021). This fact suggests that 
the domestic collection system is ineffcient despite the available recycling capacity 
and technology in Romania. The source-separated waste collection systems such as 
the dual system (dry versus humid fraction) or the collection in four to fve waste 
fractions (plastic/metal, paper/cardboard, glass, organic/residual) imply contamina￾tion risks in the absence of a strong environmental awareness of the community and 
a better law enforcement (Modoi et al., 2022; Jigani et al., (2020). The bins for 
plastics could receive various plastics types (packaging or nonpackaging plus met￾als or aluminum cans) that need to be further sorted, treated, cleaned, and prepared 
for recycling/recovery operations. In this regard, the deposit-refund system appears 
to be a better alternative to providing clean PET bottles for producing rPET. However, 
besides PET and HDPE packaging materials where the business sector seems to be 
better developed, the other plastic packaging materials and plastic parts (e.g., 
e-waste, automotive industries) must be attentively integrated into higher circular 
mechanisms (Modoi & Mihai, 2022).
In the case of municipalities, the transition from a dual system toward fve frac￾tions combined with a strong involvement of local authorities and more numerous 
awareness events might be able to determine radical changes in plastic waste cap￾ture in a relatively short period of time, an example in this regard being offered by 
Salacea, a rural community of Bihor County (Zero Waste Europe, 2019). This is 
important because a signifcant share of the population still lives in rural areas in 
Romania where plastic waste is more exposed to illegal or open burning practices 
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman195
(Mihai & Grozavu, 2019), adding concern on the low-quality plastics imported 
through formal and/or illicit channels or derived from raw dismantling activities of 
e-waste and end-of-life vehicles. On the other side, better plastic waste capture rates 
in both quantity and quality from residents will decrease the current importation of 
plastics from abroad necessary for feeding the plastic recycling facilities located in 
this national context.
Plastic Waste Flow in Romania from International Trade
Formal Waste Trade Activities
Analyzing the evolution of annual exports and imports of plastic waste in Romania 
in relation to intra-EU countries and also to non-EU countries between 2004 and 
2021, some fgures could be overseen (Fig. 3a, b) (considering Eurostat Databases, 
2004–2021). Accordingly, regarding the relation to intra-EU countries, the annual 
imports appear to have an ascendant trend in the analyzed period, especially between 
2009 and 2019. This last year represents the peak point, with a value equal to 83,460 
tons and with an increase from 2413 tons which is the value registered in 2009. This 
represents a huge quantity of plastic offcially introduced in Romania, while the 
exported quantity appears to be signifcantly lower. Still, the annual exports of plas￾tic waste also seem to have an ascendant but a much slower trend in the indicated 
context. Another aspect to be observed is the fact that, while in 2004, the annual 
imported and exported quantities of plastic waste appear to be quite similar (14 tons 
of annual imports versus 2652 tons of annual exports), in 2019, the differences 
become huge (83,460 tons of annual imports versus 19,063 tons of annual exports). 
In 2021, the differences are still very high, but not as high as in 2019 (58,354 tons 
of annual imports versus 22,573 tons of annual exports).
If comparing the annual exports to EU member states and the ones to non-EU 
countries, the difference is equal to 12,228 tons in favor of the frst ones. In addition, 
when analyzing the annual imports of plastic waste in Romania, the difference 
between these two groups of countries is much higher, being equal to 50,141 tons. 
Moreover, while the quantity of plastic exported in non-EU countries is higher than 
the imported one in 2021, the fgures are quite the opposite when the relation of 
Romania to the other EU countries is analyzed in this regard, as we have already 
mentioned above.
Synthetizing, as a general overview, the amount of plastics that circulate between 
Romania and the EU space is signifcantly higher than the one between Romania 
and other countries outside of it. The most visible difference is in regard to the 
imported quantity from the other EU countries with not so obvious distinction when 
it comes to observing the prices implied. Consequently, the situation appears to be 
not very good for Romania which seems to import much plastic waste at low prices. 
The offcial fgures seem to be also confrmed by the remarks and conclusions of the 
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania196
90000.00
80000.00
70000.00
60000.00
50000.00
40000.00
30000.00
20000.00
10000.00
0.00
90000.00
80000.00
70000.00
60000.00
50000.00
40000.00
30000.00
20000.00
10000.00
0.00
200420052006200720082009201020112012201320142015201620172018201920202021
200420052006200720082009201020112012201320142015201620172018201920202021
Annual imports - tonne Annual imports - tonne
Annual exports - thousand euro Annual exports - thousand euro
Annual imports - tonne Annual imports - tonne
Annual exports - thousand euro Annual exports - thousand euro
a
b
Fig. 3 (a) (upper panel). Evolution of annual imports and exports of plastic waste in Romania in 
relation to intra-EU countries between 2004 and 2021. (Source: Eurostat [ENV_WASTRDMP]); 
(b) (lower panel). Evolution of annual imports and exports of plastic waste in Romania in relation 
to non-EU countries between 2004 and 2021. (Source: Eurostat [ENV_WASTRDMP])
offcial institutions’ reports and found in the Romanian press, as it will be 
emphasized in the next part of this section that stresses the improper situation of this 
country in regard to plastic waste trade and management.
Still, if comparing this country with the other EU member states, although the 
situation is expected to be different and more severe in terms of plastic waste imports 
from the intra-EU area, especially when considering the above observations, the 
fgures show that Romania has almost similar problems to other EU countries, for 
example, Bulgaria, Greece, Slovakia, Croatia, etc. in 2021. Moreover, similar 
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman197
circumstances appear to be met in their majority, the exception being made by 
Austria, Czechia, Luxembourg, Poland, Germany, Belgium, and the Netherlands. 
The fgures seem to be even more complicated when analyzing plastic waste imports 
of EU member states from non-EU countries for the same year, with countries like 
Spain, Italy, Austria, Poland, Germany, Sweden, and the Netherlands as the greatest 
importers (see Fig. 4) (considering Eurostat Databases, 2021).
On the other hand, the EU countries that mostly export to non-EU space appear 
to be Spain, Belgium, Germany, and the Netherlands, differently from Romania 
which seems to be situated among the states with the lowest levels of exported plas￾tic waste outside the EU area. Completing the perspective, France, Luxembourg, 
Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, nearby Italy, Austria, Poland, and Sweden are 
the largest exporters of plastic waste to other countries of the EU.
Illegal Trade and Criminal Networks
Moving from the analysis of formal waste trade activities to the observation of some 
situations regarding illegal trade and criminal networks, it has to be mentioned that 
the informal waste business sector appears to be proftable as investigated by the 
Romanian mass-media. At the same time, the country struggles to divert waste from 
landflls under EU regulations on recycling and recovery operations. According to 
Romanian Border Police, the international illegal traffc of waste decreased from 
14,286 tons in 2021 to 3994 tons in 2022 (Romanian Border Police, 2023). However, 
there is no data before 2021, and this fact suggests that the illegal waste trade started 
to gain more attention from authorities in the last years. There is an inter-institutional 
Fig. 4 The perspective of imports and exports of plastic waste in EU member states in 2021. 
(Source: Eurostat [ENV_WASTRDMP])
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania198
cooperation regarding waste shipments between the National Environmental Guard 
and the Border Police (terrestrial routes), or the Coast Guard in Constanta Port 
(maritime routes). In 2022, the most shipments were registered in the following 
border regions: Giurgiu (826), Oradea (272), Sighetu Marmației (169), Iași (41), 
and Timișoara (31), while the Coast Guard has requested environmental commis￾sioners to inspect 215 shipments of waste (Ecologic, 2022).
Ferrous and copper waste are highly demanded in the informal recycling econ￾omy using both domestic and imported e-waste or end-of-life vehicle waste streams. 
This informal scrap network developed in the last years involves huge quantities of 
recyclable waste (ferrous and non-ferrous items in particular) that are outside the 
offcial records. This activity leads to the development of entire communities 
involved in waste recovering operations from ELVs or e-waste items. In such com￾munities, the process of ELVs treatment is poorly performed on streets and in front 
of households using open burning and manual dismantling practices (Digi24, 2017).
The revenues obtained by organizations skip the offcial taxes and do not comply 
with environmental obligations. Through tax avoidance, the proftability of such 
activities increases, being also fed by the cheap labor from marginalized communi￾ties. On this background, some criminal organizations are born and proliferate on 
the backs of individuals under the poverty line and socially excluded (Digi24, 2021).
The Environmental Guard and the National Police have investigated several 
environmental crimes and revealed complex networks of criminal organizations 
(practicing tax avoidance, fake recycling and waste collectors, exploitation of indi￾viduals or children, etc.). Hotspots of environmental pollution associated with infor￾mal activities of waste recovery operations were detected in the proximity of 
Bucharest (the Romanian capital city) such as Sintesti village. In addition, the South 
of Romania is predisposed to a huge informal network of scrap metals dealing with 
ELV treatment in poor conditions in terms of safety and environmental conditions 
such as Sarulesti village (Calarasi County). Here, over 800 people are involved in 
the dismantling activities of ELVs in such defcient circumstances (Digi24, 2017). 
Used car parts are sold unregulated on the open market, car bodies reach Turkey, 
while copper and aluminum recovered from this source are further sold to the smelt￾ers in Slatina or Galați, where small factories specialized in the production of semi￾conductors function (Burla, 2021). Therefore, practices characterized by complex 
mechanisms of dark urban mining are established for both ELVs and e-waste fows 
in Romania which underpins the efforts for sustainable waste management transi￾tion in line with circular economy principles. After dismantling activities and sort￾ing of recyclable items, the rest of the ELVs components with less economic value 
on the recycling market (e.g., seats, plastic items, and tires) are uncontrollably dis￾posed of through open burning, burying, or illegal dumping in the natural environ￾ment (e.g., foodplains, water bodies, forest areas, wild dumps) as shown in Fig. 5a, b.
According to a report of INTERPOL (2019), illegal plastic waste was most prev￾alent in Europe in comparison to the other regions of the world. It is generally 
accepted that the most economically developed countries use to represent the net 
exporters of plastic waste (FundacióENT, 2021; Environmental Investigation 
Agency, 2021). Based on feld checks performed by national authorities, some 
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman199
Fig. 5 (a) (left panel). Plastic waste disposed from ELVs dismantling activities on Bistrita river 
foodplain with open burning activities (Roznov city, Neamt County Sept 2022) (Photo: FCM); (b) 
(right panel). Plastic waste disposed from ELVs dismantling activities on Bahlui river foodplain 
(Holboca commune, March 2021, Iasi County). (Photo: FCM)
examples of illegal plastics trade are revealed, as shown in Table  1. As also 
frequently noticed within the mass media, different crime structures put pressure on 
customs points from Romania for introducing more waste into the country. This 
happens in the context in which the storage costs from here are much lower if com￾pared to the ones from other European countries (Pavalasc, 2021). Moreover, giving 
birth to an entire business, the number of illegal cases is constantly increasing. The 
most recent assessment of Europol (2022) in regard to this subject also validates the 
general ideas formed in the press about the EU criminal networks, that “are increas￾ingly targeting Central and Eastern Europe to traffc illicit waste produced in 
Western Europe,” with Romania included in the list of “key destinations” 
(EUROPOL, 2022). For instance, 7000 cubic meters of plastic waste imported from 
Italy is stored at Pata Rat (Cluj Napoca) landfll site to be burned into the pyrolysis 
station despite the fact that this facility is intended only for local waste (Niculescu, 
2020). In addition, based on feld checks performed by national authorities, other 
examples of illegal plastics trade are presented in the Table 1.
Nearby this high pressure from abroad, the general image in regard to national 
waste management is not more favorable in the context in which the separate collec￾tion proves to be ineffective, with a lack of solutions for sorting and treating waste. 
As it is constantly mentioned in public sources, there is a system-based problem, 
caused especially by the political leaders but also by businessmen and other differ￾ent actors taking part even in European criminal networks (i.e., the one from Italy) 
and, consequently, in corruption.
Europol (2022) offers a clear explanation in regard to the manner in which these 
kinds of networks are involved in the global traffcking of plastic waste using legal 
businesses as cover, remembering “a common modus operandi,” i.e., the reintroduc￾tion of contaminated plastics, but declared as clean, that arrive to be used plastics 
into the recovery processes. This manner of action hinders the detection of illegal 
actions on waste. Complicating more the context, public institutions engaged to 
resolve these situations are not able to cooperate, blocking and blaming each other. 
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania200
Table 1 Examples of illegal plastic trade from Romanian borders according to the National 
Environment Guard, Coast Guard, and Border Police
Import 
route
Border 
passing
Plastic 
waste 
(t) Period/date Observations
Bulgaria Giurgiu 31 t March 30, 
2021–May 
30, 2021
Special campaign to monitor the illegal waste 
trade – PET bottles (93 transportations 
stopped) with destination at a recycling 
center from Buzau, nearby other 21 
transportations stopped with plastic foils with 
destination at Afumati commune (Ilfov 
county)
Bulgaria Giurgiu 18.26 t September 
21, 2021
Noncompliant documents with Regulation 
(EC) no. 1013/2006 on waste transfers
Bulgaria 
(Novi 
Iskar)
Chiscau 
(Calarasi)
14.4 t May 04, 
2022
PET bottles bailed and contaminated with 
paper, dust, oils
Germany Bors II 
(Bihor 
County)
4.29 t May 05, 
2023
No legal documents
Greece Giurgiu 11.5 t June 28, 
2021
Plastic waste with destination at Galati, 
noncompliant documents with Regulation 
(EC) no. 1013/2006 on waste transfers
Greece Giurgiu 37 t August 18, 
2021
Noncompliant documents with Regulation 
(EC) no. 1013/2006 on waste transfers
Indonesia Constanta 
Port
15.5 t January, 
2023
Synthetic textile waste of poor quality for 
recovering operations
Israel Constanta 
Port
33 t August 30, 
2022
Polystyrene waste, noncompliant documents 
with Regulation (EC) no. 1013/2006 on 
waste transfers
Italy Nadlac II 
(Arad 
county)
24 t November 
01, 2021
Plastic waste and used tires, noncompliant 
documents with Regulation (EC) no. 
1013/2006 on waste transfers
Italy, 
Germany
Nadlac II 
(Arad 
county)
22.9 t October 29, 
2022
Plastic waste and used tires, noncompliant 
documents with Regulation (EC) no. 
1013/2006 on waste transfers
Poland Bors II 
(Bihor 
County)
24 t October 18, 
2022
No legal documents
United 
Kingdom
Constanta 
port
38 t January 07, 
2023
Two containers checked, noncompliant 
documents with Regulation (EC) no. 
1013/2006 on waste transfers
Compilation by authors
For a more complete perspective in terms of total lack of public environmental 
awareness, there were reported cases in which even public institutions were practic￾ing such illegal dumping or in which besides environmental campaigns offcially 
launched, no pro-environmental activity was done (see Digi24, 2023).
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman201
Environmental Contamination Risks Related to Plastic Waste 
from Abroad
Plastic Leakage into the Natural Environment (Water and Land)
Plastic Pollution of Freshwater Bodies
Romania has a developed hydrographic network of rivers, lakes, and streams mainly 
fed by the Carpathian Mountains and with the Danube as the main fuvial collector 
system that develops a delta region before spilling into the Black Sea. Mountain 
rivers are prone to illegal dumping of plastic waste due to domestic waste manage￾ment gaps in these regions and geographical restrictions of built-up environments. 
These lead to the direct dumping of waste in the watercourses in the proximity of 
households or behind the courtyards. Floodplains and riverbanks are often regarded 
as waste disposal sites in various geographical landscapes (mountain, hilly, low￾land) as seen in the “Let’s Do It Clean-up” events from past years or “Clean-up 
Romania” event organized in 2022 by the Ministry of Environment (Mihai & 
Ulman, 2022). This fact points out that environmental awareness and law enforce￾ment must be improved in the following years. In detail, Romania is facing massive 
plastic pollution of freshwater bodies (rivers, streams, lakes) associated with inef￾fcient source-separated waste collection schemes. Furthermore, wastewater fows 
are additional plastic and organic pollution sources without proper connection of 
urban and rural municipalities to sound sanitation and wastewater treatment facili￾ties (Mihai et al., 2023).
On this background, the import of low-quality plastic materials that were refused 
by recycling companies will further feed the plastic leakage to freshwater bodies. 
Illegal dismantling activities of e-waste and end-of-life vehicles were observed on 
Bahlui and Bistrita foodplains as well (see Fig. 5a, b) where plastic materials were 
disposed of nearby river courses. The informal urban mining practices represent a 
lucrative sector as investigated by journalists (Pirca, 2022), but copper and ferrous 
materials are recovered to be sold on the recycling market. The plastic parts of these 
waste fows are undesirable items and they are either burned in backyards or dis￾posed of on illegal dumping sites.
Land Pollution
Landflls and illegal dumping sites are the main waste disposal practices that con￾taminate the soil with plastics. Noncompliant landflls represent the norm in the last 
decades in Romania in the condition in which plastic waste tends to infltrate into 
the soil and further into aquifers or reach nearby lands via wind (Pop et al., 2022; 
Ioana-Alina & Anca, 2019). Old rural dumpsites were closed by 2010, but feld 
observations and clean-up events reveal that the illegal dumping of waste is a sig￾nifcant environmental problem in rural Romania. In such a context, PET bottles 
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania202
should represent a particular environmental concern among postconsumer plastic 
materials despite the high recycling market demand. The uncollected plastic waste 
from rural regions related to low waste collection coverages has polluted the sur￾rounding land in the last decades. Land pollution with illegal dumpsites is more 
visible in extra-Carpathian regions where areas are more densely populated com￾pared to mountain regions (Mihai & Grozavu, 2019). Besides the inadequate waste 
disposal sites, plastic litter is another key pollution source for streets, roadsides, 
forest areas, or trekking routes. Agricultural practices such as plastic mulching or 
greenhouses and improper plastic packaging associated with pesticides could be 
other ways of soil contamination with plastics. These sources of plastic pollution 
are related to domestic activities, but the context is important when we examine the 
role of plastic waste importation from abroad as additional pressure on current plas￾tic waste management systems in Romania.
If poor-quality mixed plastics are imported and, consequently, could not be fur￾ther processed in sorting and recycling facilities, their disposal is likely to occur 
through landflls, cement factories, or illegal dumpsites. On the other hand, recy￾cling companies such as GreenTech capture only 40% of PET bottles generated in 
Romania, the rest of 60% being imported (Ganea, 2021) due to low performances 
of separate collection schemes from urban and rural municipalities, while terrestrial 
and aquatic environments are polluted, as it has already been pointed out.
Plastic Waste Burned in Cement Factories and Air Pollution
Energy recovery based on combustible waste materials is seen as a better alternative 
to municipal/industrial landflls in the waste management hierarchy framework, as 
outlined by the cement business sector of Romania (CIROM, n.d.). The use of waste 
materials to reduce the demand for fossil fuels (e.g., coal, coke) is part of the co￾incineration process in cement kilns. Used tires and nonrecyclable plastic materials 
are common waste materials prone to energy recovery processes. The mixed plas￾tics refused by sorting stations and recycling companies are co-incinerated in 
cement factories. However, the co-incineration process poses further environmental 
risks that need to be properly monitored. Mixed unsorted plastics, contaminated 
plastic packaging with organic materials, or other chemical substances are either 
destined for landflls or co-incineration plants under the formal sector. The illegal 
trade of plastics with Romania as the fnal destination is also prone to unsound prac￾tices such as burying, burning, or open dumping practices, as revealed in section 
“Illegal trade and criminal networks”. An investigation fnalized with a video docu￾mentary entitled “Cement’s Dirty Business” reveals the impact of waste combustion 
in cement industries, including plastics. The case involved international criminal 
networks (Italy-Germany-Romania), politicians, waste brokers, businesses, and 
authorities combined with legislative and environmental gaps (e.g., dioxins, furans) 
in the monitoring procedures while highlighting the high level of pollution gener￾ated in Chiscadaga village, where a cement factory is operating (RiseProject, 2019). 
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman203
On the other hand, the cement business advocates for the co-incineration of 
nonrecyclable waste (including plastics and used tires) claiming that emissions such 
as dioxins and furans are negligible and below legal limits, while there are no resid￾ual materials since the ash is used as substitutive material for clinker production 
(CIROM, n.d.).
Therefore, independent monitoring (e.g., environmental authorities) of various 
emissions and dust from cement factories and surroundings should be mandatory 
and transparent by law, while improvement of combustible waste fows traceability 
is required on both domestic and imported sources. Besides the legislative frame￾work, independent logistics (state of art monitoring equipment and laboratories) 
and human resources (specialized personnel of the Environmental Guard) are criti￾cal to reducing the environmental threats associated with plastic waste trade, illegal 
traffc, and combustion in cement factories.
However, the cement business sector claimed that the scale of imported waste 
was reduced in previous years (around 2% of total waste) and, in 2021, all co￾processed waste in cement factories was generated in Romania (CIROM, n.d.). Still, 
the poor quality of domestic source-separated plastic waste stream leads to large 
amounts of plastics collected that are not proper for recycling activities feeding less 
circular activities (co-incineration) or even to their disposal in landflls, following 
the traditional linear pathway.
Mitigation Strategies of Illegal Plastic Trade 
and Environmental Contamination
Legislative Framework at EU and National Levels
One of the most important pillars of mitigating illegal plastic trade and environmen￾tal contamination is represented by the global, international, national, and/or 
regional legislative framework, supposed to function based on systemic thinking.
At the international level, the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs), through Goal 14: Life below water, specifcally address the problem of 
plastic use, emphasizing that “usage and wrong disposal of plastic is a major cause 
of marine pollution,” while organizing cleanup projects for rivers and oceans with 
the involvement of the whole local community is a clear and direct recommendation 
in this regard. In addition, contributing to Goal 12 and Goal 13 achievements might 
aid the curbing of plastic waste generation, besides additional improvements to 
other SDGs. Other important global initiatives with great soundness around the 
world were the ones of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), i.e., 
the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous 
Wastes and their Disposal (adopted in 1989 and coming into force in 1992, with 
nearly universal membership, and amended in 2019 to support more the manage￾ment of plastic waste, with changes becoming effective from 2021) or the Global 
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania204
Partnership on Marine Litter (launched during the UN Conference on Sustainable 
Development, June 2012), bringing together the actors implied in marine litter and 
plastic pollution prevention and reduction. Other examples could be the Stockholm 
Convention, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the G20 Action 
Plan on Marine Litter, or the UNEP Global Plan of Action for the Protection of the 
Marine Environment from Land-Based Activities. All these initiatives include direc￾tions for reducing plastic use through the improvement of waste management while 
promoting sustainable production and consumption.
Aware of the fact that “voluntary initiatives alone will not be enough” (UNEP, 
2022), an entire list of complementary efforts is present or is planned to be added in 
the endeavor of fghting against massive plastic accumulation and environmental 
contamination. The most important one is announced to be a global agreement on 
plastic pollution under Ellen MacArthur Foundation/UNEP Global Commitments 
for Plastics. It aims to address the full life cycle of plastics and protect human health 
and nature while focusing especially on countries most in need (Smit et al., 2021). 
Besides this large initiative, others came to support and complement the national 
reporting that, in some cases, seems to be at a very low level, including the National 
Guidance for Plastic Pollution Hotspotting and Shaping Action (IUCN, UNEP, and 
the Life Cycle Initiative); the Minderoo Foundation Plastic Waste Makers Index; 
Guidelines for the Monitoring and Assessment of Plastic Litter in the Ocean (devel￾oped by Group of Experts on the Scientifc Aspects of Marine Environmental 
Protection); the Back to Blue Plastics Management Index (Economist Impact and 
Nippon Foundation); or UNEP’s Global Tourism Plastics Initiative (GTPI) 
(UNEP, 2022).
Proceeding to the European Union (EU) level, closely linked to the international 
movements in regard to plastic reduction, several regulations addressing it could be 
observed. Among them, the EU plastics strategy (2018), the Directive on single-use 
plastics (2019), New Circular Economy Action Plan (2020), the Proposal for a revi￾sion of EU legislation on Packaging and Packaging Waste (2022b), or Waste 
Framework Directive revision (expected in 2023) (EC, 2022a, b) seem to be the 
most important current initiatives of mitigating illegal plastic trade and/or environ￾mental contamination while establishing the main steps in regard to future direc￾tions for reducing the plastic quantity arrived in the nature be it legally or not, but 
also for diminishing the whole quantity of plastic produced and used. Observing the 
approach of policies and rules coordination in the EU, as mentioned by the European 
Commission (2022a, b), the administrative details in terms of requirements are 
managed by the member states, and only preventions of market distortions or obsta￾cles to free movement are taken into account and regulated at the EU level. For 
instance, aiming at removing the barriers in the case of different partnerships across 
EU states, the harmonized rules in regard to extended producer responsibility, pack￾aging collection, deposit and return schemes, or reuse systems are seen as necessary 
establishments both for the achievement of environmental targets and for offering 
the same conditions for businesses from these specifc markets (EC, 2022a, b).
Being promoted as “the best place to lead the transition to the plastics of the 
future” (EC, 2018), the foundations of a new plastics economy established in 2018 
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman205
as an ambitious set of EU measures are continuously completed (EC, 2018). One 
flling in this regard appears to be the Directive of single-use plastics, entering into 
force in 2019 and establishing that single-use plastic (SUP) products cannot be 
placed on the market in the context in which different alternatives do exist, or taking 
measures for reducing the consumption of certain SUPs for which there is no alter￾native. The objective of informing consumers and encouraging responsible con￾sumer behavior in order to reduce litter from different specifc products while 
increasing the level of awareness among them in regard to, for example, reusable 
alternative products is also pointed out here. In the same way, considering the per￾spectives of the European Green Deal (EC, 2019) and the Circular Economy Action 
Plan (EC, 2020) in regard to products, the entire life cycle of packaging, reducing 
plastic litter, and improving recycling are targeted, complementing the European 
Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy (EC, 2018).
Adding up to this legal perspective, the protection of the environment through 
criminal law should not be neglected. In this sense, in the context in which environ￾mental crime is found to be the fourth largest criminal activity in the world (accord￾ing to Interpol and UNEP), with a rapid annual growth rate, the real need to 
strengthen the legal framework appears to be clear. It determined a reaction within 
the European Commission that proposed a new Directive on environmental crime in 
2021. This aims to better defne criminal offenses related to the environment like 
illegal traffcking in waste, pollution crimes, or illegal trading with hazardous sub￾stances considered to be among the most serious ones (EC, 2021). In addition, it 
focuses on new sanctions besides the classical ones (prison sentences and fnes) like 
withdrawal of permits, disqualifcations, and exclusion from access to public fund￾ing, potentially more effective than the frst ones (EC, 2021).
As in all EU countries, in Romania, the legislative framework for plastic waste is 
primarily based on EU regulations and directives. Being transposed into national 
legislation, some of the key regulations and directives addressing plastic waste in 
this country were already mentioned when the EU framework was discussed. For 
instance, the Single Use Plastics (SUP) Directive, transposed into Romanian law in 
2021 and setting out measures to reduce the environmental pressure of single-use 
plastic products, imposes bans on certain products, such as plastic cutlery and 
plates, straws, and stirrers, nearby specifc requirements to reduce the consumption 
of others (EEA, 2022). In the same way, the Waste Framework Directive and the 
Packaging Waste Directive were transposed into national law that establishes the 
legal framework for waste management in Romania, while also including provi￾sions for the management of plastic waste. Completing the legal framework, differ￾ent decisions are taken from time to time in order to improve the manner in which 
the environment is protected in regard to waste. For instance, at the end of 2020, 
considering the fact that the quantities of imported waste have to be correlated with 
the recycling capacity of the existing companies, Romania has limited the number 
of border crossing points through which recyclable waste comes into the country 
while also adopting a decision to combat the illegal import of waste, as shown in 
Table 2.
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania206
Table 2 Legal provisions adopted in the waste area in Romania in the period between 2021 
and 2022
New legal provisions 
(2021–2022) Issuer Main legal issues
ORDER no. 1647 
from June 10, 2022
Ministry of Environment, Water 
and Forests
Methodological norms regarding the 
controls of waste transfers
ORDER no. 1736 
from June 28, 2022
Ministry of Environment, Water 
and Forests
Registration, reporting, and declaration 
procedure for economic operators that 
bring waste into the country with aim 
of reutilization/ recovering
ORDER no. 831/49 
from April 29, 2022
Ministry of Environment, Water 
and Forests, no. 831 from April 
8, 2022/Ministry of Internal 
Affairs, no. 49, April 19 from 
2022
Establishing the single cross-border 
points of waste shipment or second￾hand goods
Government 
Decision no. 1265 
from December 17, 
2021
Romanian Government Supervision and control of waste 
transfers while taking into account the 
need to conserve, protect, and improve 
the quality of the environment and 
human health
Government 
Emergency 
Ordinance no. 92 
from August 19, 
2021
Romanian Government Aligning the national legislation with 
European objectives in waste regime in 
order to contribute to the transition to a 
circular economy
Law no. 268 from 
November 9, 2021
Romanian Parliament Establishing the Romanian Customs 
Authority, as a specialized body of the 
central public administration in the 
customs feld
In this national endeavor of strengthening the legal framework for improving 
waste management across the country, including concerns like waste transfers 
within Romania, but also cross-border ones, new legal provisions were adopted (see 
Table 2). In addition, others are proposed and/or in the course of being adopted. For 
instance, Government Emergency Order no. 125 from September 16, 2022, with its 
main aim of modifying and completing the old Government Emergency no. 196 
from December 30, 2005, regarding the Environmental Fund, is following at the 
moment the necessary steps for its adoption and, accordingly, it is still under discus￾sion. All of these provisions imply certain repercussions that the policymakers 
should carefully analyze and consider when opting for law changes. In regard to this 
new proposal, there is an entire debate within the press (see, e.g., Economica.net, 
2023) regarding its potential impact if it arrives to be adopted in the actual proposed 
form. Among its potential effects, negative consequences on fnal consumers like 
higher prices for products on the shelf because of the artifcially increased costs for 
managing packaging waste are also emphasized.
In addition, a national circular economy strategy has been published, establish￾ing ambitious targets such as recycling 55% of total municipal waste by 2025 and 
60% by 2023 and recycling 50% of waste generated through plastic packaging by 
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman207
2025 and 55% by 2030  in line with EU regulations (Romanian Ministry of 
Environment, Water and Forests, 2022). In this document, reference is made to the 
EU Directive 2019/904 regarding the imposed utilization of recycled materials in 
plastic packaging, being necessary to regulate the right of frst refusal on the sec￾ondary recycled materials of the companies that comply with the Extended Producer 
Responsibility (REP). Outside the scope of the European Plastic Waste Directive, in 
this national document, the introduction of some bans on the sale of certain plastic 
materials and, accordingly, the usage increasing in terms of more sustainable alter￾natives, extending or introducing mandatory BPA criteria for plastic products, are 
pointed out (Romanian Ministry of Environment, Water and Forests, 2022).
In addition, the deposit-refund system (DRS) in the case of nonreusable primary 
packaging has been introduced in the Romanian context, with the legal framework 
for its implementation in the entire country being established in 2022 (Romanian 
Government, 2022).
Law Enforcement and Monitoring
Despite the entire effort made in the last years, as also shown in the precedent sec￾tions, the statistics reveal that, unfortunately, plastic pollution is continuously 
increasing (OECD, 2022). Proper enforcement should be one step forward in mak￾ing regulations more effective.
The enforcement and monitoring of plastic laws in the EU are primarily the 
responsibility of the member states, who are required to transpose EU directives and 
regulations into national law and ensure their effective implementation. The 
European Commission checks the transposition of EU Directives into national law, 
assists member states in correctly implementing them, monitors their implementa￾tion, and legally takes action against member states that fail to comply. Such penal￾ties in regard to the manner in which the national measures are implemented for 
accomplishing the requirements of the Waste Framework Directive should follow 
the desideratum of effectiveness and proportionality while embracing the role of a 
kind of benefcial barrier, deterring the misconduct. For offering an example in this 
respect, the attention is drawn to the EU notifcation C (2021)/2137 about the lack 
of fulflment of the obligation to communicate the transposition measures into the 
national legislation of the Directive (EU) 2018/851 while emphasizing on the fnan￾cial sanctions that might be imposed to Romania. This warning led to the publica￾tion of Government Emergency Ordinance no. 92/2021 regarding the waste regime 
for aligning the national legislation with European objectives in this area and, con￾sequently, for contributing to the transition to a circular economy.
Considering that the design and application of penalties represent a matter for 
member states, governments detain the specifc role of strengthening regulations 
and enforcing mechanisms to deter and penalize illegal plastic trade and environ￾mental contamination, increasing fnes, imposing prison sentences, and/or confs￾cating illegal plastic shipments. For instance, in Romania, environmental crimes 
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania208
such as burying and burning waste are punishable by 3–5 years in prison; in the 
same way, the penalties for dumping waste were increased (EEA, 2022). Working 
for observing the way of complying with plastic laws and regulations in the case of 
organizations and citizens, several key actors are engaged, such as regulatory bod￾ies, law enforcement agencies, and environmental organizations. In general, mem￾ber state bodies act as regulatory authorities in relation to matters covered by EU 
law. The same role is played by the EU bodies but in relation to various centralized 
EU environmental regimes (Coxall & Souter, 2021).
Given the fact that the manner in which plastic laws are enforced and monitored 
is mainly the responsibility of the member states. According to Guillot (2022), the 
chances of success are highly dependent on the EU countries’ willingness to coop￾erate. Although agencies like Europol, Eurojust, and the EU Anti-Fraud Offce 
(OLAF) are able to play a signifcant role in this regard, their involvement is possi￾ble only in the situation in which a country reports a crime and asks for assistance 
Guillot (2022).
One infuential instrument for law enforcement and monitoring should be accu￾rate data on environmental crime. However, since the member states do not have a 
single body with the function of central coordinating all data on environmental ille￾galities, a lack of comprehensive and comparable statistical data in this regard has 
been identifed and emphasized as an obstacle in combating environmental crime in 
the EU (Smit et al., 2021). For instance, in an EU report analyzing the assessment 
of statistical data collection for environmental crime, Romania is given as a negative 
example of a country in which no statistics in this respect are collected by the 
National statistical institute (Smit et al., 2021).
Another essential tool for enforcing the international and national legal frame￾work should be environmental awareness campaigns and education. In regard to 
appropriate education regarding environment and sustainable development, includ￾ing circular economy and plastic pollution, the United Nations Economic 
Commission for Europe (2021), in their country report dedicated to Romania and to 
its national environmental performance, mentioned that the formal education sys￾tem integrates them somehow mainly through the optional curriculum, civic educa￾tion, and extracurricular activities, as well as in several subjects of the compulsory 
curriculum. Besides other issues like global warming, human rights, or renewable 
energies, including at the initiative of individual teachers and responding to rising 
interest among students, plastic pollution is also pointed out (Gherhes et al., 2022). 
Still, it is clearly emphasized that a systematic approach to developing, promoting, 
and implementing environmental education in the national education system is 
lacking.
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman209
Improvement of Domestic Plastic Waste Management by 
Circular Economy
Romania is still a landfll-based country (Mihai, 2021) and, potentially interlinking, 
registers vulnerability in regard to the openness of its citizens to circular initiatives 
such as product repair, plastic material, and single-use packaging avoidance or sep￾arate collection of waste (Romanian Ministry of Environment, Water and Forests, 
2022). Along with these facts denoting the citizens’ and local authorities’ behav￾ioral patterns and awareness, other signifcant barriers in the Romanian context are 
regarding institutional challenge to develop a policy for a complex cross-sectoral 
issue; market barriers for recycled products; companies’ ability to grasp opportuni￾ties; and good indicators and targets (EEA, 2022). As a clear effect, besides other 
contextual causes, Romania is among the EU countries registering the lowest per￾formances in regard to waste management, especially in the matter of waste genera￾tion related to economic activity (GDP), waste treatment, and use of recycled 
materials in the economy (Romanian Ministry of Environment, Water and 
Forests, 2022).
Taking into account the peculiarities of this national context, some specifc ways 
for improving the capture of domestic plastic waste through integrating and follow￾ing a circular economy approach have to be considered. In the proposed Action Plan 
for Implementing Circular Economy in Romania (Romanian Ministry of 
Environment, Water and Forests, 2023), certain ways are indicated. They focus 
especially on increasing the rates of separate collection and waste recycling through 
the enforcement of pay-as-you-throw system and through the development of an 
adequate infrastructure for waste collection (i.e., adequate collection systems, sort￾ing and processing facilities, and markets for recycled materials). Other directions 
of action mentioned in this strategic document are the ones in regard to pro￾environmental education among Romanian citizens through awareness campaigns 
in terms of circular economy with a focus, especially on separate collection, waste 
reduction, or illegal dumping. Innovation and collaboration are also put into discus￾sion, and aspects like available data basis and waste management systems need to 
be improved through research and development in the area of the circular economy.
In addition, strengthening the domestic plastic waste capture might be assured 
through other ways such as extended producer responsibility, designing products for 
better reutilization, refurbishment, recycling, and implementing take-back pro￾grams as a responsible approach for the entire life cycle of their products. Likewise, 
deposit return schemes and waste banks might be among the alternatives fostering 
improvements in waste management from the level of households. In addition, 
development projects like the ones supported by the Recovery and resilience plan 
for Romania (Ministry of European Investments and Projects, 2021) could be of real 
help. For instance, a recent call is for projects aiming at fnancing digital ecological 
islands that could represent a means for the improvement of domestic plastic waste 
capture.
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania210
Among them, as mentioned in one previous section, the deposit-refund system 
(DRS) in the case of nonreusable primary packaging has been introduced in the 
Romanian context (Romanian Government, 2022). Being closely linked to the 
extended producer responsibility (EPR) principle in waste management, DRS seems 
to represent a potentially promising way to solve the problem of SUP (Walls, 2011). 
Collecting the plastic bottles that have to be brought back to the shop or collection 
point (instead of the amount of money paid in the moment of buying and included 
in the fnal price of that product bought) appears to be a more realistic manner of 
action, especially in regard to consumer behavior patterns, frequently considered 
across the literature as a barrier in this process of pro-environmental change. At the 
same time, through the higher possibility of increasing the recycling rates and offer￾ing more qualitative recycled material, it might be an effcient way to facilitate the 
activity of companies using in their production such recycled plastic while reducing 
imports of such material (see, e.g., the case of Green Tech, one of the most impor￾tant plastic recyclers in Europe, a top producer of PET fakes, R-PET, and PET strap 
and the company which paved the way of the recycling market in Romania). Besides 
these benefts, other economic and environmental ones could be pointed out such as 
cost reduction for collection systems and landfll operations or more employment 
than other waste management options (Millette et  al., 2022; Hogg et  al., 2011). 
Accordingly, it is expected that, once it begins to be effectively implemented in 
Romania, just like it happened in other cases, the deposit-refund system (DRS) to 
enforce the entire range of (both international and national) initiatives for improving 
the plastic waste management in these national countries.
Conclusions
The poor-quality plastic surplus from abroad (EU and non-EU countries) destined 
for recycling plants or cement factories increase the environmental contamination 
risks of the natural environment in Romania. This country is a key destination and 
transition route for legal and illegal plastic waste trade (e.g., packaging materials, 
textile waste, used tires, plastics contaminated with other municipal solid waste 
fractions, or e-waste plastics). The main point of access is Constanta port followed 
by terrestrial routes particularly from the West (border with Hungary) and the South 
(border with Bulgaria) parts of the country. Recovering scrap metal from ELVs or 
e-waste is a prosperous activity in Romania that engages both the formal and infor￾mal sectors including waste importation from aboard. The informal sector relies on 
recovering scrap metals (ferrous items, copper) resulting from unsound dismantling 
activities that are further sold to recycling companies. The plastic components of 
ELVs and e-waste streams have no recycling value on current markets, and these are 
uncontrollably disposed to natural environments polluting water-air-land nexus via 
illegal activities (open dumping, burying, open burning) or end up in landflls under 
formal channels. Some legal incentives are implemented to better check and moni￾F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman211
tor the transboundary movement of waste, but Romania is still exposed to 
illegal traffc of plastic waste from the EU and overseas.
In such a context, an intensive plastic waste trade in Romania was shown to be 
linked especially to the European Union space. Moreover, the offcial statistics 
revealed a high level of imported plastic waste. One explanation could be the fact 
that this country fails in offering the necessary quantity of plastic used in its current 
recycling activities. This is why a more effcient domestic collection system, along 
with a stronger general environmental awareness among citizens and a better law 
enforcement, is a need in the national context. Complicating it more and moving the 
discussion to illegal waste trade and criminal networks, frequent cases reveal that 
the pressure on the customs points for introducing more waste, including plastics, 
does exist, being also amplifed by the lower storage costs.
Bringing this entire image to attention, besides the various complex measures 
implemented across the European Union area in regard to plastic waste, the failure 
of offering a proper/fair trade context might be overseen. The presence and fre￾quency of illegal waste trade and criminal networks denote systemic problems like 
lack of legality, transparency, equality, and, as a whole, integrity at the national, but 
also EU levels.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by a grant of the Ministry of Research, Innovation 
and Digitization, CNCS  – UEFISCDI, project number PN-III-P1-1.1-TE-2021-0075, within 
PNCDI III.
References
Andrei, L., Negulescu, M. H., & Luca, O. (2022). Premises for the future deployment of automated 
and connected transport in Romania considering citizens’ perceptions and attitudes towards 
automated vehicles. Energies, 15(5), 1698.
BAN. (2021). After China ban, Romania hit by illegal waste imports. Available at https://www.
ban.org/news/2021/4/28/after-china-ban-romania-hit-by-illegal-waste-imports. Accessed on 3 
Nov 2021.
Bănică, A., Eva, M., & Iațu, C. (2019). Perceptions of green and smart urban transport issues in 
Romanian cities: A preliminary exploratory analysis. Territorial Identity and Development, 
4(2), 58–75.
Bunding-Venter, C., Silimela, Y. T., & Oe, N. (2022). Solid waste management deep dive: Bulgaria, 
Croatia, Poland and Romania-sustainable cities implementation framework. https://policy￾commons.net/artifacts/2363856/solid-waste-management-deep-dive/3384827/
Burla, V. (2021). Dezmembrările de mașini, o afacere prosperă care poluează enorm.
https://Romania.europalibera.org/a/poluarea-dindezmembrareamasinilor/31553536.
html?fbclid=IwAR2K2kx_QVY-TQm2w6V9Zqe6DbUl52E6Kw754xVMXkUFjE_
X9gvIEZx8IMA. Accessed on 6 Mar 2023.
CIROM. (n.d.). Co-processing waste in cement industry. Available at https://cirom.ro/
industria-cimentului-deseurile-care-nu-pot-fi-reciclate-prin-procesele-de-reciclare￾existente-devin-o-resursa-alternativa-in-productia-de-ciment-si-salveaza-mii-de-tone-de￾combustibil-fosil-si-resurs
Cojocaru, B. (2013). Why Romania is covered by PET bottles and Romania is still importing 
plastic waste. Available at https://www.zfcorporate.ro/energie/de-ce-este-romania-acoperita￾Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania212
de-pet-uri-si-totusi-am-ajuns-sa-importam-deseuri-din-plastic-10874974. Accessed on 17 
Mar 2023.
Coxall, M., & Souter, K. (2021). Environmental law and practice in the European Union: Overview. 
Thomson Reuters Practical Law. Available at https://uk.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/w￾027-3735?transitionType=Default&contextData=(sc.Default)
DIGI24. (2017). Săruleşti, the “country” of scrap metal sellers. Available at https://www.digi24.
ro/stiri/actualitate/social/sarulesti-tara-vanzatorilor-de-fier-vechi-unde-doarjandarmiii-se￾incumeta-sa-intre-808524. Accessed on 23 Feb 2023.
Digi24. (2021). The terrible scheme of burning in Sintești. Chief of the Environmental Guard: 
People are enslaved on dumpsites, there are thousands of children (27.03.2021). Available at 
https://www.digi24.ro/stiri/actualitate/teribila-schema-a-arderilor-de-la-sintesti-seful-garzii￾de-mediu-oamenii-sunt-sclavi-pe-plantatii-de-deseuri-sunt-mii-de-copii-1475281. Accessed 
on 17 Mar 2023.
Digi24. (2023). Gunoaiele Europei la porțile României. Aproape 3.800 de tone au fost oprite 
la frontier. Available at https://www.digi24.ro/stiri/actualitate/gunoaiele-europei-la-portile￾romaniei-aproape-3-800-de-tone-au-fost-oprite-la-frontiere-2201561?fbclid=IwAR3Jo
Tvj_vORZYxCSkavuscNOajwwPOOseTvEEFzQ4CZTrz_BZSENbEH8J8. Accessed on 01 
Jan 2023.
Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council. (2019, June 5). Offcial 
Journal of the European Union. Available at https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2019/904/oj
Dobre-Baron, O., Nițescu, A., Niță, D., & Mitran, C. (2022). Romania’s perspectives on the transi￾tion to the circular economy in an EU context. Sustainability, 14, 5324. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su14095324
Dodd, M., Amponsah, L. O., Grundy, S., & Darko, G. (2023). Human health risk associated with 
metal exposure at Agbogbloshie e-waste site and the surrounding neighbourhood in Accra, 
Ghana. Environmental Geochemistry and Health, 1–17.
EC. (2018). A European strategy for plastics in a circular economy. Brussels, 16.1.2018, 
COM(2018) 28 fnal. Available at https://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/
plastics-strategy.pdf
EC. (2019). The European Green Deal. Brussels, 11.12.2019, COM(2019) 640 fnal.
[pdf]. Available at https://eur-lex.europa.eu/resource.html?uri=cellar:b828d165-1c22-1
1ea-8c1f-01aa75ed71a1.0002.02/DOC_1&format=PDF
EC. (2020). A new circular economy action plan for a cleaner and more competitive Europe. 
Available at https://environment.ec.europa.eu/strategy/circular-economy-action-plan_en
EC. (2021). Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protec￾tion of the environment through criminal law and replacing Directive 2008/99/EC. Brussels, 
15.12.2021, COM(2021) 851 fnal, 2021/0422 (COD). Available at https://commission.europa.
eu/system/fles/2021-12/1_1_179760_prop_dir_env_en.pdf
EC. (2022a). Environmental impact of waste management  – Revision of EU waste framework. 
Available at https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/13225-
Environmental-impact-of-waste-management-revision-of-EU-waste-framework_en
EC. (2022b). Proposal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE 
COUNCIL on packaging and packaging waste, amending Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 and 
Directive (EU) 2019/904, and repealing Directive 94/62/EC.
Ecologic. (2022). The number of illegal waste shipments is reduced more reduced in 2022. 
Available at https://ecologic.rec.ro/in-2022-s-a-redus-numarul-transporturilor-ilegale-de￾deseuri/. Accessed on 20 Apr 2023.
Economica.net. (2023). Exportul de ambalaje folosite devine un posibil motiv de scumpiri general￾izate la raft. Asociația OIREP AMBALAJE: O decizie a deputaților aruncă în aer întreaga piață a 
deșeurilor de ambalaje. Available at https://www.economica.net/exportul-de-ambalaje-folosite￾devine-un-posibil-motiv-de-scumpiri-generalizate-la-raft-asociatia-oirep-ambalaje-o-decizie￾a-deputatilor-arunca-in-aer-intreaga-piata-a-deseurilor-de-ambalaje666896_666896.html?fbcl
id=IwAR0LR3KIQCPwRXULAd0Rn5LKmiGe4rrkylvrlFa1sfbzFE9nZRru_EVJgfk
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman213
EEA. (2022). Circular economy country profle – Romania. ETC CE Report 2022/5 – Romania. 
Available at https://www.eionet.europa.eu/etcs/etc-ce/products/etc-ce-products/etc-ce￾report-5-2022-country-profles-on-circular-economy/romania-ce-country-profle-2022_for￾publication.pdf
Environmental Investigation Agency. (2021). The truth behind trash. The scale and impact of the 
international trade in plastic waste. Environmental Investigation Agency. Available at https://
eia-international.org/wp-content/uploads/EIA-The-Truth-Behind-Trash-FINAL.pdf
EU. (2018). Directive (EU) 2018/851 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 
2018 Amending Directive 2008/98/EC on waste. Offcial Journal, L150, 109–114. Available at 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32018L0851
Euroactiv. (2020). Activists concerned over increase in waste smuggling in Romania. 
Available at https://www.euractiv.com/section/energy-environment/news/
activists-concerned-over-increase-in-waste-smuggling-in-romania/
EUROPOL. (2022). ENVIRONMENTAL CRIME threat assessment 2022  in the age of climate 
change. Available at https://www.europol.europa.eu/cms/sites/default/fles/documents/
Environmental%20Crime%20in%20the%20Age%20of%20Climate%20Change%20-%20
Public%20report_5.pdf
Eurostat Databases. (2004-2021). Trade in waste by type of material and partner. Available at 
https://rethinkplasticalliance.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/RPa-ZWE-Illegal-plastic￾shipments-Spain-report-1-1.pdf
FundacióENT. (2021). Understanding illegal plastic waste shipments: A focus on Spain. 
Report of Rethink Plastic alliance. Available at https://rethinkplasticalliance.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2021/11/RPa-ZWE-Illegal-plastic-shipments-Spain-report-1-1.pdf
Ganea, M. (2021). Waste recycling in Romania by Green Group. Available at https://zin.
ro/20/04/2021/mediu/romania-reciclare-deseuri-green-group-green-tech-green-fber-green￾management-constantin-damov/ Accessed on 6 Apr 2023.
Gherheş, V., Fărcaşiu, M. A., & Para, I. (2022). Environmental problems: An analysis of students’ 
perceptions towards selective waste collection. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 6346.
Guillot, L. (2022). Europe’s dirty problem: Environmental crime. Politico Pro. Available at 
Europe’s dirty problem: Environmental crime – POLITICO.
Hogg, D., Fletcher, D., Eye, M., Mulcahy, K., & Elliott, T. (2011). From waste to work: The poten￾tial for a deposit refund system to create jobs in the UK. Eunomia Research & Consulting Ltd.
INTERPOL. (2019). INTERPOL KEY FINDINGS REPORT: OPERATION 30 DAYS AT 
SEA 2.0 (2019). Note by the General Secretariat of the International Criminal Police 
Organization-INTERPOL.
Ioana-Alina, C., & Anca, M. (2019, September). Closure solutions for a non-compliant landfll: 
Case study from Parța non-compliant landfll, Timiș County, Romania. IOP Conference Series: 
Materials Science and Engineering, 603(4), 042009. IOP Publishing.
Jigani, A. I., Delcea, C., & Ioanăș, C. (2020). Consumers’ behavior in selective waste collection: A 
case study regarding the determinants from Romania. Sustainability, 12(16), 6527.
McNeish, J. E., & Neufeldt, J. (2023). Can Nestlé transform from a corporation that ‘talks about 
doing good’ to ‘doing good’ for the environment? In Dealing with socially responsible con￾sumers: Studies in marketing (pp. 429–456). Springer Nature Singapore.
Mihai, F.-C. (2018). Rural plastic emissions into the largest mountain lake of the Eastern 
Carpathians. Royal Society Open Science, 5(5), 172396. Available at https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsos.172396
Mihai, F.-C. (2019). Construction and demolition waste in Romania: The route from illegal dump￾ing to building materials. Sustainability, 119(11), 3179. Available at https://doi.org/10.3390/
su11113179.
Mihai, F.-C. (2021, November). Waste management challenges in Romania during the COVID-19 
pandemic. In Waste-to-resources 2021: 9th international symposium circular economy, MBT, 
MRF and recycling (p. 335). Cuvillier Verlag.
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania214
Mihai, F.-C., & Grozavu, A. (2019). Role of waste collection effciency in providing a cleaner rural 
environment. Sustainability, 11(23), 6855. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11236855
Mihai, F.-C., & Ulman, S.-R. (2022). Post-consumer plastic waste pollution under linear econ￾omy mechanisms in Romania. In 9th SWS international scientifc conferences on SOCIAL 
SCIENCES-ISCSS 2022. Available at https://doi.org/10.35603/sws.iscss.2022/s15.129
Mihai, F.-C., & Ulman, S.-R. (2023). Circular economy in Green Deal strategies. In Sustainable 
and circular management of resources and waste towards a Green Deal (pp. 49–63) Elsevier. 
Available at https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-323-95278-1.00029-2
Mihai, F.-C., Gnoni, M. G., Meidiana, C., Schneider, P., Ezeah, C., & Elia, V. (2022a). A global 
outlook on the implementation of the Basel Convention and the Transboundary Movement 
of E-waste. In Paradigm shift in E-waste management (pp. 49–75). CRC Press. Available at 
https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003095972-4
Mihai, F.-C., Gündoğdu, S., Markley, L. A., Olivelli, A., Khan, F. R., Gwinnett, C., Gutberlet, J., 
Reyna-Bensusan, N., Llanquileo-Melgarejo, P., Meidiana, C., Elagroudy, S., Ishchenko, V., 
Penney, S., Lenkiewicz, Z., & Molinos-Senante, M. (2022b). Plastic pollution, waste manage￾ment issues, and circular economy opportunities in rural communities. Sustainability, 14, 20. 
Available at https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010020
Mihai, F.-C., Minea, I., & Ulman, S.-R. (2023). Water resources preservation through circu￾lar economy. The case of Romania. In Water management and circular economy. 143–176, 
Elsevier, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-95280-4.00002-3
Mihai, F.-C., Meidiana, C., Elagroudy, S., Ulman, S.-R., Gutberlet, J., & Carvalho, C. (2024). 
Plastic waste management for zero waste to landflls: potential, challenges, and opportuni￾ties. In Bhat, R. A., Dar, G. H., & Hajam, Y. A. (Eds), Zero waste management technologies: 
Advanced transformations for resource development and environmental protection, Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG. (in press)
Millette, S., et al. (2022). Global deposit book. An overview of deposit return Systems for single-use 
beverage containers. Reloop – Resources remain resources. Available at https://www.reloop￾platform.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/RELOOP_Global_Deposit_Book_11I2022_P1.pdf
Ministry of Environment. (2022). Circular economy strategy. available at http://www.mme￾diu.ro/app/webroot/uploads/files/Strategia%20Nationala%20privind%20Economia%20
Circulara%20-%20var%20fnala.pdf
Ministry of Environment, Water and Forests. (2022a). ORDER no. 1647 from June 10, 2022. 
Available at https://legislatie.just.ro/Public/DetaliiDocument/256826
Ministry of Environment, Water and Forests. (2022b). ORDER no. 1736 from June 28, 2022. 
Available at https://legislatie.just.ro/Public/DetaliiDocumentAfs/256828
Ministry of Environment, Water and Forests. (2022c). ORDER no. 831/49 from April 29, 2022. 
Available at https://lege5.ro/gratuit/geytcmzygqydm/ordinul-nr-831-49-2022-privind￾stabilirea-punctelor-de-trecere-a-frontierei-de-stat-pentru-transferurile-de-deseuri-si-marfuri￾bunuri-secondhand
Ministry of European Investments and Projects. (2021). National recovery and resilience plan.
Available at https://mfe.gov.ro/pnrr/
Ministry of the Environment, Japan. (2021). G20 report on actions against marine plastic litter. 
Third information sharing based on the G20 implementation framework. Available at https://
g20mpl.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/G20MPL-report-2021_fnal-edition1119.pdf
Modoi, O.-C., & Mihai, F.-C. (2022). E-waste and end-of-life vehicles management and circu￾lar economy initiatives in Romania. Energies, 15, 1120. Available at https://doi.org/10.3390/
en15031120
Modoi, C., Dascăl, D., Roba, C., & Bălc, R. (2022). On the importance of public views regard￾ing the environmental impact of plastic pollution in Cluj County, Romania. International 
Multidisciplinary Scientifc GeoConference: SGEM, 22(4.2), 83–91.
Niculescu, P. (2020). Tons of waste illegally brought from Italy illegally burned (?) At 
Pata Rât. Available at https://www.monitorulcj.ro/actualitate/78340-tone-intregi-de￾deseuri-aduse-din-italia-se-ard-la-pata-rat
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman215
Niinimäki, K., Peters, G., Dahlbo, H., Perry, P., Rissanen, T., & Gwilt, A. (2020). The 
environmental price of fast fashion. Nature Reviews Earth and Environment, 1(4), 189–200.
OECD. (2022). Global plastics outlook: Economic drivers, environmental impacts 
and policy options. Available at https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/
global-plastics-outlook_de747aef-en
Pavalasc, M. (2021). How Romania turned into an illegal dumping ground for EU waste. Availabe 
at https://www.rferl.org/a/romania-garbage-asia-european-union/31429822.html
Pirca, R. (2022). Informal waste industry in Romania. Available at https://www.wall-street.ro/
articol/Social/285142/industria-la-negru-a-deseurilor-in-romania-cat-se-castiga-din-arderile￾de-masini-si-gropile-ilegale-de-gunoi.html#gref
Pop, M., Bucur, I., Zoldan, D., Imre, K., Nichita, I., Cristina, G., et al. (2022). Chemical and micro￾biological air quality in a municipal solid waste landfll and its surroundings, in South-Eastern 
Romania. Sustainability, 14(1), 156.
Rios, A. M., & Picazo-Tadeo, A. J. (2021). Measuring environmental performance in the treat￾ment of municipal solid waste: The case of the European Union-28. Ecological Indicators, 
123, 107328.
RiseProject. (2019). Cement’s dirty business. Available at https://www.riseproject.ro/articol/video￾secrete-de-ciment/ Accessed on 6 Apr 2023.
Romanian Border Police. (2023). Activity report for 2022 year. Available at https://www.politiade￾frontiera.ro/ro/giurgiu/i-analiza-activitatii-politiei-de-frontiera-romane-pe-anul-2022-32548.
html. Accessed on 20 Apr 2023.
Romanian Court of Accounts. (2022). Sinteza raportului de audit al performanței. Evaluarea 
modului de gestionare a nivelului de generare a deșeurilor de plastic/Summary of perfor￾mance audit report. Evaluation of the management mode of the level of plastic waste genera￾tion. Department IX, Directorate 2 (In Romanian). Available at https://www.curteadeconturi.
ro/uploads/a611a0a4/9c39be71/46669cee/6ffecf53/1ce27039/1bcd2971/6f4df098/cbc94ec4/
Raport.pdf
Romanian Government. (2021a). Government Decision no. 1265 from December 17, 2021. 
Available at https://www.lege-online.ro/lr-HOT%C4%82R%C3%82RE-1265%20-
2021-(249714)-(2).html
Romanian Government. (2021b). Government Emergency Ordinance no. 92/2021 
regarding the waste regime. Available at https://lege5.ro/Gratuit/ha3tsnbtgi4a/
ordonanta-de-urgenta-nr-92-2021-privind-regimul-deseurilor
Romanian Government. (2022). The Decision no. 1214/2022 for the amendment and supplementing 
of Government Decision no. 1074/2021 on the establishment of the Guarantee-return System 
for the not reusable primary packaging. Available at https://lege5.ro/gratuit/gezdonjtge2ds/
sistemul-de-garantie-returnare-hotarare-1214
Romanian Ministry of Environment, Water and Forests. (2022). Strategia națională privind eco￾nomia circulară/National strategy regarding circular economy. Monitorul Ofcial al României, 
Partea I, Nr. 943 bis/27.IX.2022, Romania.
Romanian Ministry of Environment, Water and Forests. (2023). Action plan for implementing 
circular economy in Romania.
Romanian Parliament. (2021). Law no. 268 from November 9, 2021. Available at https://legislatie.
just.ro/Public/DetaliiDocumentAfs/248350
Rovinaru, F. I., Rovinaru, M. D., & Rus, A. V. (2019). The economic and ecological impacts of 
dismantling end-of-life vehicles in Romania. Sustainability, 11(22), 6446.
Smit, P., Jandl, M., Carausu, F., & McGuinn, J. (2021). Assessment on statistical data collection 
for environmental crime. Final report JUST/2020/JACC/FW/CRIM/0122. Gopa Luxembourg 
and Milieu Consulting SRL.
Teodor, C., Tricã, C. L., Ignat, R., & Drăcea, R. M. (2020). Good practices of effcient packaging 
waste management. Amfteatru Economic, 22(55), 937–953.
Plastic Waste Trade Issues and Environmental Contamination in Romania216
Tripa, S., & Indrie, L. (2021). Households textile waste management in the context of a 
circular economy in Romania. Environmental Engineering & Management Journal (EEMJ), 
20(1), 81–87.
UNEP/EA.5/Res.14. (2022). Resolution adopted by the United Nations Environment Assembly 
on 2 March 2022. Information on reports and updates by the Technology and Economic 
Assessment Panel (unep.org).
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. (2021). Romania environmental performance 
reviews. Third review (Environmental performance reviews series no. 53). Available at https://
unece.org/sites/default/fles/2021-12/ECE_CEP_189.pdf
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). (1989). Basel Convention on the Control 
of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal. Available at http://
disasterlaw.sssup.it/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/BASEL-CONVENTION-ON-THE￾CONTROL-OF-TRANSBOUNDARY-MOVEMENTS-OF-HAZARDOUS-WASTES-AND￾THEIR-DISPOSAL-1989.pdf
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). (2012). The global partnership on 
marine litter. Available at https://www.unep.org/explore-topics/oceans-seas/what-we-do/
addressing-land-based-pollution/global-partnership-plastic
Walls, M. (2011). Deposit-refund systems in practice and theory. Resources for the future
(Discussion Paper, RFF DP, 11–47). Available at https://media.rff.org/documents/RFF￾DP-11-47.pdf
Wang, C., Zhao, L., Lim, M. K., Chen, W. Q., & Sutherland, J. W. (2020). Structure of the global 
plastic waste trade network and the impact of China’s import ban. Resources, Conservation and 
Recycling, 153, 104591.
Zero Waste Europe. (2019). The story of Salacea (Romania). Available at https://zerowastecities.
eu/bestpractice/the-story-of-salacea/
F.-C. Mihai and S. R. Ulman217
An Imported Problem?
Plastic Waste Effects on Türkiye’s Environment 
with Specifc Emphasis on Relevant Multilateral 
Environmental Agreements
Ezgi Ediboğlu Sakowsky and Sedat Gündoğdu
Introduction
Since the beginning of trade records in the late 1980s, over 250 million tons of plas￾tic waste have been relocated globally (EIA, 2021). The increasing awareness about 
the environmental harm posed by waste has created pressure on industry and gov￾ernments and has brought attention to the plastic waste trade in industrialized coun￾tries throughout the 1970s and 1980s (Kummer, 1995, UN Secretary–General, 
1989). Subsequently, in 1989, the creation of the Basel Convention on the Control 
of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes sought to reduce harm to human 
health and the environment, particularly in countries of the Global South. Since 
then, the trade of much of the waste stream partly falls under the remit of the Basel 
Convention. This Convention is the international instrument that, among other 
objectives, regulates the requirements outlining what is permissible concerning the 
transboundary movement of hazardous wastes or wastes requiring special consider￾ation (1989, Articles 4, 4A and 6–10).
Plastic waste trade from wealthy to poorer countries emerged as a solution for 
domestic waste management issues in high waste-generating industrialized coun￾tries (Kummer, 1995). Plastic consumption is still linked to the gross domestic 
product (OECD, 2022a). Hazardous waste exports of higher income per capita 
countries created a pollution haven effect in lower-income per capita countries. The 
plastic waste trade is directly related to increased plastic production, unsustainable 
consumption patterns, and the high cost of proper disposal of hazardous wastes. The 
practice, also referred as the colonial transfer of plastic waste pollution, caused 
E. E. Sakowsky 
Max Planck Institute for Innovation and Competition, Munich, Germany 
S. Gündoğdu (*) 
Faculty of Fisheries, Department of Basic Sciences, Çukurova University, Adana, Türkiye
e-mail: sgundogdu@cu.edu.tr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_11218
issues in recipient countries with inadequate waste management systems. The trans￾boundary movement and the excessive waste load led to plastic leakage, burning 
plastic, and unlicensed operations causing severe environmental damage (OECD, 
2022a). These problems mainly occur in the Global South and Türkiye, which is one 
of the primary destinations of Global North’s waste (OECD, 2022a).
Before the Chinese ban on plastic waste imports in 2018, China was the primary 
destination for Global North’s plastic waste exports. The Chinese decision disrupted 
the global plastic waste trade industry and changed the direction of Global North’s 
plastic waste to countries such as Türkiye, Malaysia, Tunisia, etc. (Gündoğdu & 
Walker, 2021).
With 32 million tons of municipal waste (MSW) produced annually, Türkiye is 
among the top four European MSW-producing countries (TÜİK, 2021; Gündoğdu 
& Walker, 2021). It is calculated that the global average proportion of plastic in 
MSW varies between 8.3 and 13.2% (Lebreton & Andrady, 2019). Applying this 
rate to Türkiye’s total MSW, it corresponds to approximately 3.9 million metric tons 
of plastic waste. It is estimated that the percentage of the plastic waste collection 
rate in Türkiye is 10–20% (Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021). Even if this value is 
assumed to be 20% with the most optimistic estimation, this amount is almost equal 
to the amount of plastic waste imported by Türkiye in 2020 (Gündoğdu & 
Walker, 2021).
Türkiye is one of the major plastic pollution sources in the Mediterranean and the 
Black Sea, due to its inadequacy of plastic waste management, the high amount of 
plastic production and consumption, illegal dumping of plastic waste, and wastewa￾ter treatment plants (WWTP) (Çevik et al., 2021). In fact, inadequate waste man￾agement infrastructure makes Turkish rivers the primary source of plastic pollution 
for the Mediterranean Sea (Gonzalez-Fernandez et al., 2021). Considering Türkiye’s 
inability to manage its own plastic waste, importing plastic waste from high-income 
countries very likely worsens the issue considerably. Since China banned plastic 
waste imports in 2018, many developed countries are scrambling to fnd new plastic 
waste destinations (Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021; Zhao et al., 2022). After this histori￾cal shift, Türkiye became one of the top destinations for the Global North’s plastic 
waste (Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021). Before the Chinese ban, Türkiye imported 
261,864 t of plastic waste annually, mainly from the UK, EU27, and the USA 
(TÜİK, 2021). By the end of 2020, this has rapidly increased to 772,831 t (Gündoğdu 
& Walker, 2021; Fig. 1). In 2021, Türkiye generated a total of 3.9 million tons of 
plastic waste domestically and imported 669,535 tons of plastic waste. Therefore, 
the total plastic waste treated domestically was 4.6 million tons, resulting in a total 
recycling rate, including net imports, of 18.4% (EIA, 2021). Türkiye’s plastic waste 
import is the equivalent of 16.94% of domestically generated plastic waste in 2020. 
Hence, if Türkiye did not import plastic waste, its recycling rate would increase to 
21.50% (Table 1).
In this chapter, we aim to analyze the impact of plastic waste on the land, the 
seas, and air quality in Türkiye and assess Türkiye’s practice of managing plastic 
waste in relation to international standards set by multilateral environmental agree￾ments. Even though we acknowledge the unity of world ecosystems and the 
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu219
Fig. 1 The monthly plastic waste export to Türkiye in the period of 2020 to July 2022. (Source: 
https://www.ban.org/plastic-waste-project-hub/trade-data/Türkiye-import-data)
Table 1 Snapshot of main waste exporters and Türkiye’s municipal solid waste and plastic waste 
and recycling in 2021
Metric (million tons) Türkiye Belgium France Germany Netherlands
The 
UK
The municipal solid waste 
generated
32.93 8.79 38.01 53.75 9.04 27.10a
Plastic waste generated 
domestically
3.95 0.693 2.99 6.96 1.28 3.67
Plastic waste imported 0.682 0.238 0.341 0.444 0.807 no data
Plastic waste exported 0.012 0.348 0.150 0.721 0.597 0.47
Source (TÜİK 2021; EIA 2021) a
For 2020
diffculty of drawing a line on the environmental harm caused by plastic waste on 
the land, the seas, and air, below, we analyze each element separately for the sake of 
clarity. Although negotiations for a plastic treaty are currently in place for the land/
sea ecosystem (UNEA, 2022; Bergmann et al., 2022), the Basel Convention (1989) 
is currently the only international treaty in force directly regulating waste manage￾ment and trade. It covers the standards for plastic waste management and trade and 
gives relatively clear obligations on its Parties for this purpose. Section “Plastic 
Waste Impacts on the Land: In Light of the Basel Convention” presents a deeper 
analysis of plastic waste’s environmental impact on the land and assesses whether 
Türkiye complies with the Basel Convention obligations relevant for plastic waste.
As for the sea ecosystem, Turkish seas are governed by two regional sea regimes. 
The Convention on the Protection of the Black Sea Against Pollution (Bucharest 
Convention, 1992) is the main agreement for the Black Sea regime, and the 
Barcelona Convention for the Protection of the Mediterranean Sea Against Pollution 
An Imported Problem?220
(Barcelona Convention, 1976) is the main agreement for the Mediterranean Sea 
regime. Unlike the Basel Convention, these agreements and most relevant protocols 
do not directly address plastic waste (For Barcelona Convention amendments and 
other legal documents, Barcelona Convention Website, 2022; For Basel Convention 
amendments, Basel Convention Website, 2022; For Bucharest Convention amend￾ments and other legal documents, Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea 
Website, 2022). Therefore, it is methodologically not possible to assess the compli￾ance of Türkiye with these agreements by only looking at plastic waste management 
practices. We therefore take the overall aim and broad obligations of these agree￾ments on waste management into account and analyze whether the state of the envi￾ronment in the regional seas and the practice of Türkiye demonstrate a suffcient 
level of prevention of environmental harm from plastic wastes. Section “Imported 
and Domestic Plastic Waste Impact on the Seas: With Respect to Regional Sea 
Regimes” undertakes such an assessment and delves into the effects of plastic waste 
on the Turkish seas.
In terms of air quality, it is estimated that the plastic life cycle accounts for 15% 
of allowed greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2050, threatening the aim of the 
United Nations (UN) climate change regime on limiting global warming at a safe 
level for all ecosystems (UNEP, 2021). However, since Türkiye does not incur direct 
obligations about plastic waste under the climate change regime, this chapter pro￾vides a bird’s eye analysis on Türkiye’s practice in relation to plastic waste manage￾ment and climate change rather than a systemic analysis. Section “Plastic Waste 
Impacts on the Air” provides such an analysis after discussing the impact of plastic 
waste management of Türkiye on air quality and climate change.
Needless to say, there are relevant international principles, customary interna￾tional law, decisions of agreement bodies and regional organizations (especially 
decisions of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, OECD), 
and nonbinding but infuential soft law documents (especially sustainable develop￾ment goals and declarations from global summits about the environment) (Kummer 
et al., 2016; see also, Kummer, 1995) to plastic waste (for all instruments, UNEP, 
2016). We, however, aim to analyze the effects of plastic waste on Türkiye’s “imme￾diate environment” and only consider Türkiye’s obligations under treaties (hard law 
documents) concerning plastic waste. For such an analysis, we selected the treaties 
in Table 2 and their subsequent protocols since they broadly cover core treaty obli￾gations and commitments of Türkiye under treaties to prevent environmental dam￾age from waste, including plastic waste effects on the land, the seas, and air. As 
mentioned above, the obligations or commitments of Türkiye from the selected 
legal instruments do not always relate to plastic waste specifcally. Nevertheless, 
plastic waste constitutes a portion of sea pollution and GHG emissions, which are 
discussed under the broader waste management issue. In this light, Table 2 lists 
legal instruments that are considered for the analysis.
This chapter provides signifcant evidence that Türkiye exhibits poor manage￾ment of both its domestic and imported plastic wastes. Plastic imports make it 
nearly impossible for the country to manage the issue with its current practice. Our 
analysis demonstrates that the Basel Convention standards and obligations are 
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu221
Table 2 Full list of selected multilateral legal instruments taken into account for the analysis in 
this study
Selected multilateral treaties, 
amendments, and protocols to 
those treaties
Opened 
for 
signature
Entry 
into 
force
Signature 
by Türkiye
Entry into 
force for 
Türkiye
Relevance to 
plastic waste
1. On the land
1.1. Basel Convention on the 
Control of Transboundary 
Movements of Hazardous 
Wastes
March 22, 
1989
May 5, 
1992
March 22, 
1989
Sept. 20, 
1994
Direct reference 
to plastics after 
amendments
Amended, renamed as the Basel 
Convention on the Control of 
Transboundary Movements of 
Hazardous Wastes and their 
Disposal
Sept. 22, 
1995
Dec. 
05, 
2019
Aug. 27, 
2003
Dec. 05, 
2019
Amended, Amendments to 
Annexes II, VIII and IX to the 
Basel Convention
– Jan. 1, 
2021
– Feb. 10, 
2022
2. On the seas
2.1. Bucharest Convention on 
the Protection of the Black Sea 
Against Pollution
April 21, 
1992
Jan. 
15, 
1994
April 21, 
1992
March 
29, 1994
Reference to the 
broader issue of 
waste
2.1.a. Protocol on the Protection 
of the Black Sea Marine 
Environment against Pollution 
by Dumping
April 21, 
1992
Jan. 
15, 
1994
April 21, 
1992
March 
29, 1994
Reference to the 
broader issue of 
waste
2.1.b. Protocol on the Protection 
of the Black Sea Marine 
Environment against Pollution 
from Land–Based Sources
April 21, 
1992
Jan. 
15, 
1994
April 21, 
1992
March 
29, 1994
Reference to the 
broader issue of 
waste
Amended, renamed as the 
Protocol on the Protection of the 
Marine Environment of the 
Black Sea from Land–Based 
Sources and Activities
April 7, 
2009
Not yet 
in 
force
April 7, 
2009
Not yet in 
force
2.2. Barcelona Convention for 
the Protection of the 
Mediterranean Sea Against 
Pollution
Feb. 16, 
1976
Feb. 
12, 
1978
Feb. 16, 
1976
May 6, 
1981
Reference to the 
broader issue of 
waste
Amended, renamed as the 
Convention for the Protection of 
the Marine Environment and the 
Coastal Region of the 
Mediterranean
June 10, 
1995
July 9, 
2004
Sept. 18, 
2002
July 9, 
2004
(continued)
An Imported Problem?222
Table 2 (continued)
Selected multilateral treaties, 
amendments, and protocols to 
those treaties
Opened 
for 
signature
Entry 
into 
force
Signature 
by Türkiye
Entry into 
force for 
Türkiye
Relevance to 
plastic waste
2.2.a. Protocol for the 
Prevention of Pollution of the 
Mediterranean Sea by Dumping 
from Ships and Aircraft
Feb. 16, 
1976
Feb. 
12, 
1978
Feb. 16, 
1976
May 6, 
1981
Reference to the 
broader issue of 
waste
Amended, renamed as Protocol 
for the Prevention and 
Elimination of Pollution of the 
Mediterranean Sea by Dumping 
from Ships and Aircraft or 
Incineration at Sea
June 10, 
1995
Not yet 
in 
force
Sept. 18, 
2002
Not yet in 
force
2.2.b. Protocol for the 
Protection of the Mediterranean 
Sea Against Pollution from 
Land–Based Sources
May 17, 
1980
June 
17, 
1983
Feb. 21, 
1983
June 17, 
1983
Reference to the 
broader issue of 
waste
Amended March 7, 
1996
May 
11, 
2008
Sept. 18, 
2002
May 11, 
2008
2.2.c. Protocol on the 
Prevention of Pollution of the 
Mediterranean Sea by 
Transboundary Movements of 
Hazardous Wastes and their 
Disposal
Oct. 1, 
1996
Jan. 
18, 
2008
Oct. 01, 
1996
Jan. 18, 
2008
Direct reference 
to plastics
3. On air quality
3.1. United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change
May 9, 
1992
March 
21, 
1994
Feb. 24, 
2004
May 24, 
2004
Reference to the 
broader issue of 
waste
3.1.a. Kyoto Protocol Dec. 11, 
1997
Feb. 
16, 
2005
May 28, 
2009
Aug. 26, 
2009
Reference to the 
broader issue of 
waste
3.1.b. Paris Agreement Dec. 12, 
2015
Nov. 4, 
2016
April 22, 
2016
Oct. 11, 
2021
Indirect 
reference
technically mostly respected and can be found in Turkish legal documents. Looking 
at the application of procedures and the execution of relevant laws, however, we 
encounter severe implementation issues and identify enormous environmental 
damage. The adoption of domestic laws does not necessarily translate to environ￾mental protection in practice when it concerns plastic waste management in Türkiye. 
In terms of the regional seas and climate change regimes, Türkiye demonstrates a 
very poor record of environmental protection. This could also indicate that the 
country does not substantially commit to improving plastic waste pollution in the 
seas and limiting emissions from plastic waste. We raise concerns over the country’s 
future actions, especially its position in ongoing Plastics Treaty negotiations. We 
propose that Türkiye should decrease its reliance on a plastic-based economy and 
discontinue plastic waste imports, which exacerbates the problem.
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu223
Plastic Waste Impacts on the Land: In Light 
of the Basel Convention
Overall Environmental Impact of Plastics on the Land
Plastic waste undergoes degradation due to physical, chemical, and biological fac￾tors. Plastics larger than 5 mm, called macroplastics, turn into particles smaller than 
5 mm, called microplastics, due to various factors (GESAMP, 2015). Microplastics 
can also be released directly into the environment by producing micro-sized parti￾cles designed for various purposes (resin pellets, etc.) (Gündoğdu et  al., 2022). 
Further degradation of microplastics by various factors causes particles with dimen￾sions smaller than 1 μm, called nanoplastics (GESAMP, 2015). Microplastics are 
pollutants that can be found in soil, water, and the air (Duis & Coors, 2016; Dehghani 
et al., 2017; Gündoğdu & Çevik, 2017; Gündoğdu, 2018; Lusher et al., 2018).
Plastics have several toxic additives such as phthalates, poly-fuorinated chemi￾cals, bisphenols (BPA–BPS, etc.), and brominated fame retardants, which can 
reach the environment and adversely affect environmental and public health 
(GESAMP, 2015). From production to disposal of plastic, plastics and additives can 
pollute terrestrial environments in many ways. This pollution is commonly caused 
by the direct littering of plastics and by landflling MSW. Landflls and dumping 
sites constitute almost 90% of Türkiye’s MSW disposal and recovery methods 
(TÜİK, 2021). It is known that dumping plastics in the soil or landflls can cause 
plastic additives (stabilizers, harmful colorants, plasticizers, and heavy metals) to 
eventually leach into various compartments of the environment, thereby creating 
soil and water pollution (UNEP, 2016). The leachate of landflls can be a potential 
source of microplastics for groundwater, even if adequately managed. The risks of 
microplastic leaching from informal landflls are naturally high; they are not con￾structed, do not operate in accordance to applicable standards, and are characterized 
by unsophisticated construction and a lack of environmental protection measures 
(Wan et al., 2022). Previous research also demonstrated that the presence of micro￾plastics can be high in formal landflls as well (Su et al., 2019; Praagh et al., 2018; 
Sun et al., 2021).
Mixed plastic waste can contain numerous hazardous chemicals incorporated in 
the plastic during manufacture. For this reason, the circulation of national and inter￾national plastic waste is controlled by regulations, and a new treaty, the Plastic 
Treaty, specifcally on plastic waste is in preparation, discussed further below. In 
practice, however, several studies and reports indicate that hazardous plastics with 
transboundary movement could be the subject of illegal dumping and open burning 
practices (Greenpeace, 2022; Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021). A couple of previous 
reports in several countries where mixed plastic waste had been disposed of, and in 
some cases burned, highlighted a broad range of hazardous chemical contaminants 
within plastic wastes and in post-burning residues, as well as in the local environ￾ment (Greenpeace, 2018; Petrlik et al., 2021; Greenpeace, 2021).
An Imported Problem?224
All these environmental risks are already apparent for Türkiye. According to a 
study conducted in the Turkish city of Adana, a wide range of toxic chemicals, 
many known to be produced while burning plastics, was identifed in ash and soil 
samples (Greenpeace, 2022). The amount of some of the chemicals (PCDD/F, 
PBDD/F, PBDE, HBCD) reported by Greenpeace (2022) was found to be at the 
highest level globally. These chemical pollutants include highly persistent toxic 
compounds (resistant to environmental degradation), which can, in many cases, 
bioaccumulate if they enter the food chain.
The Basel Convention
Efforts to globally manage the transboundary movement of hazardous waste, as put 
into perspective by Kummer (1992, 1995, see also, UN Secretary–General, 1989), 
have been ongoing for nearly 50  years. In the 1970s, local environmental laws 
regulating hazardous waste disposal began to emerge in some countries, and with 
the support of Principles 21 and 22 of the 1972 Stockholm Declaration, the issue of 
toxic waste colonialism gained international attention, leading to discussions in the 
1980s. After soft law documents and ad hoc negotiations on environmental issues 
raised awareness about toxic waste colonialism, the most signifcant milestone in 
addressing this issue came with the Basel Convention in 1989. The Basel Convention, 
which entered into force in 1992, is widely regarded as the primary international 
agreement for regulating the transboundary movement of hazardous waste, includ￾ing plastics (1989, Preamble and Article 4). The Basel Convention played a crucial 
role in globally recognizing the issue of hazardous waste and even prompted discus￾sions on including plastics in its texts. However, the Basel Convention may not be 
the only effective and fnal international agreement in this feld in the near future. 
The Plastic Treaty, negotiated by the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), can be 
seen as an extension of the path paved by the Basel Convention. Both the Basel 
Convention, to which Türkiye is a party, and the Plastic Treaty will shape the current 
and future state of global management of hazardous waste that encompasses plastic 
pollution.
The Basel Convention plays a heightened role in regulating plastic waste inter￾nationally, as it is as of yet the only convention in force specifcally targeting waste. 
The obligations of the Basel Convention vary, but they mainly concern the disposal, 
exports, imports, and the aim of waste minimization (Basel Convention, 1989, 
Preamble, Articles 4, 4A, 6–10 and 13–14). We focus on the general obligations on 
parties for our analysis as they encapsulate the overall expectations from parties for 
their waste management, including plastic waste. The core obligations most rele￾vant to this study are the minimization of waste (Article 4(2)(a)), providing ade￾quate waste disposal facilities (Article 4(2)(b)), ensuring the people involved in all 
waste management processes take necessary steps to prevent pollution due to haz￾ardous wastes (Article 4(2)(c)), the minimization of the transportation of hazardous 
waste (Article 4(2)(d)), the prevention of “the import of hazardous wastes and other 
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu225
wastes if it has reason to believe that the wastes in question will not be managed in 
an environmentally sound manner” (Article 4(2)(g)), creating “legal, administrative 
and other measures” for implementing the obligations of the Basel Convention 
(Article 4(4)), and creating procedural means to authorize people for the transporta￾tion and disposal of hazardous waste, which should be undertaken via standards of 
packaging, labeling, and transportation accompanied with information about their 
transport (Article 4(7)).
In 2019, the parties to the Basel Convention adopted the decision amending lists 
II, VIII, and IX, and plastic waste was incorporated into those lists (Conference of 
the Parties to the Basel Convention, 2019, Decision BC–14/12). The amendments 
have been in effect since January 1, 2021. Annex II concerns waste requiring special 
consideration and created the new entry Y48 to incorporate plastic waste. A new 
entry was also added to Annex VIII as A3210 for plastic waste. Plastic waste falling 
under this category is accepted as hazardous, and their transboundary movement 
requires prior informed consent from the importer state (Basel Convention, 1989, 
Articles 1, 6 and Annex VIII, A3210; see also, Rotterdam Convention on the Prior 
Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in 
International Trade, 1998). The transboundary movement of such waste also 
requires states to establish domestic systems to authorize stakeholders involved in 
the process and have some level of packaging, labeling, and transporting standards 
(Basel Convention, 1989, Article 4(7)). Furthermore, hazardous waste transport 
from the industrialized states to other states is prohibited by the Ban Amendment to 
the Basel Convention in order to prevent the Global South from carrying the burden 
of the production and consumption practices of the Global North (Conference of 
Parties to the Basel Convention, 1995, Decision III/1; Basel Convention, 1989, 
Article 4A, Annex VII; IPCC, 2022). The last amendment in the Basel Convention 
about plastic waste was made in Annex IX, which replaces the waste stream B3010 
with B3011. It identifes the types of plastic waste that are not hazardous and hence 
not subjected to both the requirement of prior informed consent from states and 
stricter waste management standards.
Discussions on Domestic Regulations of Türkiye 
on Plastic Waste
Since Türkiye is a party to the Basel Convention, Turkish domestic laws on waste 
management should be in line with its Basel obligations. Turkish laws on plastic 
waste and their implementation are investigated in this regard in the following.
Plastic waste is not always governed by a regulation directly and is often regu￾lated under the broader issue of waste, or in subject specifc by-laws such as packag￾ing regulations. Waste is governed by multiple legal instruments (see Table 3). The 
Turkish Constitution grants Turkish citizens the right to a clean environment by 
Article 56: “Everyone has the right to live in a healthy and balanced environment. It 
An Imported Problem?226
Table 3 List of domestic legal instruments that are most relevant to plastic waste management at 
the land in Türkiye
Selected domestic legal instruments of Türkiye
Adoption 
date
No. of the 
legislation
The Constitution of the Republic of Türkiye 1982 2709
Laws
Law on Environment 1983 2872
Metropolitan Municipalities Law 2004 5216
Municipality Law 2005 5393
By–Laws and a Communiqué
By–Law on the Incineration of Wastes 2010 27721
By–Law on Organized Landfll of Wastes 2010 27533
By–Law on Waste Management 2015 29314
By–Law on Zero Waste 2019 30829
By–Law on Control of Packaging Wastes 2021 31523
Communiqué on Procedures and Principles Regarding the 
Establishment and Operation of Waste Collection Centers and Zero 
Waste Practices
2021 –
is the duty of the State and citizens to improve the natural environment, to protect 
the environmental health and to prevent environmental pollution (…).” The article 
covers the aim of the Basel Convention by incorporating its main elements of pro￾tecting human health and the environment and preventing environmental pollution 
by environmentally sound waste management. Even though it is beyond the scope 
of this study to analyze whether Türkiye suffciently fulfls its positive obligation to 
provide its citizens with a clean environment, it is worth noting that the term waste 
is used specifcally in the Constitution.
A list of regulations that are most relevant for plastic waste management at land 
as of June 2023 is given in Table 3. It is important to note that Türkiye amends its 
laws relatively often and further changes are expected.
The Law on Environment is especially relevant as it provides domestic waste￾related defnitions, domestic waste management obligations for stakeholders 
involved in the process, and administrative fnes and judicial punishment for bad 
waste management practices (Articles 2, 8, 10–13, 20, 26). The scope of the Law on 
Environment was expanded to cover more types of waste by amendments, espe￾cially with the amendments entered into force in 2006, 2018, 2020, and 2022. Some 
recent amendments directly refer to minimizing plastic bags, single-use plastics, 
and packaging (Articles 2, 3(h), and 20). Minimizing plastic waste is a valuable step 
for protecting the land ecosystem and complying with the obligation covered by 
Basel Convention Article 4(2)(a). The Law on Environment also regulates that 
incentives will be available for those establishing zero waste management systems, 
such as municipalities and other actors (Article 29). Incentives for municipalities 
are an especially crucial step as municipalities manage MSW (Metropolitan 
Municipalities Law No. 5216, 2004; Municipality Law No.  5393, 2005). 
Incentivizing municipalities to implement better waste management could be 
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu227
interpreted as a step by Türkiye to fulfl its obligations under Articles 4(2)(b)–(c). 
Municipalities adopting better waste management systems are also increasing 
(TMEU, 2020).
On the other hand, municipalities are far from being well-equipped in practice. 
A study calculating climate change-related expenditures of metropolitan munici￾palities in Türkiye in 2022 found that, on average, they allocate 20–40% of their 
climate change-related budgets to waste management (Public Expenditures 
Monitoring Platform, 2022). This budget, however, includes the wastewater man￾agement expenditures of water and sewage administrations. Recycling and waste 
effectiveness constitute approximately 14% of municipal waste budgets (Public 
Expenditures Monitoring Platform, 2022). It should be added that, except for the 
Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality, none of the climate change budgets of munici￾palities amount to 20% of their total budget, and many are below 10% (Public 
Expenditures Monitoring Platform, 2022). This translates into less than 2% of the 
total budgets of many municipalities spent on recycling and waste effectiveness, and 
this is lower than the world average both for high- and low-income countries (Kaza 
et  al., 2018). Considering that the main responsibility for waste management in 
Türkiye falls on municipalities, the low budgets allocated to municipal waste man￾agement are causing the Turkish waste management infrastructure to become 
insuffcient.
The import of plastic waste exacerbates the issue and further diminishes the abil￾ity of municipalities to cope. Companies with licenses for waste recycling tend to 
import more plastic waste because it is proftable, which is also a limiting factor for 
developing an effective waste management system. This also has led to Türkiye 
being ranked the lowest MSW recovery member country of the OECD (OECD, 
2020). As reported by Interpol (2020) and Comolli (2021), importing plastic waste, 
which is particularly diffcult to recycle, into Türkiye via mislabeling is also a factor 
that puts strain on the waste management infrastructure. Plastic wastes that are mis￾labeled or have a high percentage of hard-to-recycle materials are either illegally 
dumped into the environment by importers or sent to landflls with municipal waste 
(Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021). Therefore, increasing amounts of MSW, including 
plastic waste, are dumped mainly in more than 2000 open landflls in Türkiye 
(Berkun et al., 2011). This number is almost double that of licensed waste manage￾ment facilities (1128 licensed recycling and 731 collection and separation sites) in 
Türkiye (TMEU, 2020; see also, Karasik, 2022). These implementation issues bring 
about the questions of whether the Basel obligations of providing adequate waste 
disposal facilities (Article 4(2)(b)) and ensuring that the people involved in all waste 
management processes take necessary steps to prevent pollution due to hazardous 
wastes (Article 4(2)(c)) are actually fulflled, further discussed below.
The By-Law on Waste Management sets the rules for waste management, respon￾sibilities of relevant authorities and other stakeholders, and waste imports (2015). It 
is therefore very relevant to the plastic waste management and also plastic waste 
import issues in the country. It directly refers to the Basel Convention in Article 3 
and explains that it is prepared accordingly. It does not classify plastic as hazardous, 
unless contaminated, since it was adopted before the Basel Convention amendments 
An Imported Problem?228
labeling certain plastics as hazardous. On the other hand, the classifcation is per￾haps a conscious choice because Turkish laws are subjected to changes often, and 
the country has dealt with large amounts of untreated, mislabeled, and illegally 
treated plastic waste since 2018 (OECD, 2022a). In fact, since 2010, the country has 
adopted many by-laws relevant for waste management (see Table 3) and amended 
the Law on Environment multiple times. Looking at the practice also shows that the 
country is aware of the issues in practice. For instance, workers in plastic waste 
management facilities report that they deal with all kinds of waste, including poten￾tially hazardous ones labeled as nonhazardous plastic wastes by Turkish authorities 
at the borders (HRW, 2022). This also means that quite a few of the aforementioned 
plastic waste imports could be procedurally legal under Turkish by-laws related to 
waste management (TMEU, 2020; TMEUCC 2022), even though they signifcantly 
harm the environment. Prima facie this situation could mean that the obligation of 
the prevention of “the import of hazardous wastes and other wastes if it has reason 
to believe that the wastes in question will not be managed in an environmentally 
sound manner” is not respected (Basel Convention, 1989, Article 4(2)(g)). This also 
means that actors of the Global North also mislabel their plastic wastes as nonhaz￾ardous for waste export (Interpol, 2020; HRW, 2022).
It is questionable why Türkiye would knowingly allow such practices causing a 
severe level of environmental damage. One reason could be the issue of the diff￾culty of the implementation of domestic laws on waste management. Türkiye admits 
that there are issues in its waste management by stating the following in a commu￾nication with the Basel Convention Secretariat about preparing national inventories: 
“we need a transition period” (Basel Convention Website, Country Profles: Türkiye, 
Submission heading, Others section, 2022a). In its national reports to the Basel 
Convention (due to Article 13(3)), the Turkish government indicates diverse imple￾mentation problems regarding managing waste transportation (e.g., Basel 
Convention Website, Basel Convention National Reports  – Year 2020, Türkiye, 
2020, Response to Question 4). This is rather unsurprising as a 2022 Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report acknowledges the commonality of imple￾mentation problems of waste-related regulations amongst countries (IPCC, 2022). 
However, for the Turkish case, we claim that the problem is not only the implemen￾tation such as weak border controls but probably also the intention of the stakehold￾ers involved in this issue, including the Turkish government. In fact, after the 
aforementioned Chinese ban on most of its waste imports in 2018 and with the Ban 
Amendment to the Basel Convention, Türkiye became a plastic waste hotspot for 
highly industrialized nations (Basel Action Network Website, 2022; OECD, 2022a, 
b, c). Regardless of its environmental deprivation, Türkiye was one of the few coun￾tries that sent a notifcation of nonacceptance, which it withdrew later, for the Plastic 
Waste Amendments aimed at better controlling the transboundary movements of 
such wastes (Basel Convention Website, Plastic Waste Amendment, Status of 
Ratifcation, 2022b). In another case, Türkiye adopted a domestic regulation ban￾ning ethylene polymer waste imports in May 2021 by including it in the prohibited 
list for imports (Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Trade, 18 May 2021b, Number: 
31485; see also, Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Trade, 31 December 2020, 
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu229
Number: 31351). Due to intense industry pressure, the ban was withdrawn after a 
week when it came into force in July 2021, and imports were rereleased (Republic 
of Türkiye Ministry of Trade, 10 July 2021a, Number: 31537; see the latest regula￾tion, Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Trade, 31 December 2022, Number: 32060). 
As seen in Fig. 1, this regulation caused a dramatic decrease in plastic waste imports, 
with a signifcant increase shortly thereafter. The last example illustrates that the 
plastic waste trade is an infuential business with some degree of lobbying power. 
Waste imports created an industry worth 14 billion USD in 2021 in Türkiye (Ünker, 
2022). Perhaps this is another reason that the country is less than eager to improve 
its implementation issues on waste management, especially for the proftable plastic 
waste imports.
Considerations and Türkiye’s Compliance with Basel 
Convention Obligations
At frst glance, domestic regulations in the country cover the waste management 
practices in detail, and it is hard to claim that the country lacks regulations for plas￾tic waste management. It is noticeable that the vast majority of the regulations are 
dated after the adoption of the Basel Convention and the plastic amendments are 
mainly incorporated after 2015. In fact, since 2015, the country also announced 
further policies and programs. For instance, the National Waste Management and 
Action Plan for 2016–2023 has been in effect since 2017, and the Ministry of 
Environment, Urbanisation, and Climate Change initiated a nationwide Zero Waste 
Project (2017). Regulations and waste policies, as shown in Table 3, can give the 
impression that the abovementioned procedural requirements of the Basel 
Convention by Article 4(4) and Article 4(7) may be fulflled.
When the implementation of domestic laws and the compliance with the substan￾tial obligations of the Basel Convention are investigated, the picture changes drasti￾cally. In practice, Türkiye bypasses the aim of the Basel Convention by following 
the procedural standards without actually protecting the environment. In fact, 
regardless of the Zero Waste Project in the country, plastic waste imports are very 
high and the minimization of waste obligation of the Basel Convention is far from 
being met (Article 4(2)(a)).
Looking at the practice regarding the Basel Convention obligation on providing 
adequate waste disposal facilities (Article 4(2)(b)), as discussed above, the country 
heavily lacks proper facilities to fulfl such an obligation. The minimization of the 
transportation of hazardous waste (Article 4(2)(d)) and the prevention of “the import 
of hazardous wastes and other wastes if it has reason to believe that the wastes in 
question will not be managed in an environmentally sound manner” (Article 4(2)
(g)) obligations can be also judged by the practice. As explained, most waste enters 
the country either by mislabeling the waste’s content as nonhazardous to ease its 
transportation or by illegal means. Nevertheless, even if all plastics imported would 
An Imported Problem?230
fall under Annex IX without hazardous components, the Turkish environment would 
still be contaminated due to the lack of recycling facility standards (HRW, 2022). 
HRW (2022) shows that workers at the plastic recycling facility in Adana/Türkiye, 
and those living near these facilities, may be exposed to harmful chemicals when 
they breathe in the toxic dust and fumes emitted during the recycling process, 
threatening their right to lead a healthy life. Exposure to air pollution puts employ￾ees and residents of recycling facilities at risk of developing major life-long health 
problems, including cancer and reproductive system disorders. Similarly, in a report 
published by Greenpeace (2021), it has been reported that a wide variety of hazard￾ous chemicals are in the soils where imported plastic wastes are dumped and burned 
and that the concentration of some of these chemicals is much higher than the 
threshold levels. Both studies reveal that there is no safe plastic import level for the 
environment considering Turkish plastic waste management practices. In this 
regard, Türkiye does not only fail to comply with its obligations under Articles 4(2)
(d) and 4(2)(g) but also with Article 4(2)(c) as the practice demonstrates that it falls 
short on ensuring the actors involved in the waste management process take neces￾sary steps to prevent pollution due to hazardous wastes.
The analysis above demonstrates that Türkiye is struggling with establishing a 
reliable system for plastic waste management especially after the increase in its 
plastic imports. However, the responsibility belongs to Türkiye to regulate its sys￾tem (Basel Convention, 1989, Article 4 in general). Therefore, instead of allowing 
plastic waste to cause signifcant harm to the environment, it could ban the import 
of plastic waste based on Article 4(1) until it establishes reliable facilities and 
implementation means. In fact, the Basel Convention Preamble clearly recognizes 
that “any State has the sovereign right to ban the entry or disposal of foreign hazard￾ous wastes and other wastes in its territory” (See also, Rio Declaration, 1992, 
Principle 2; Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, 1996). In this light, 
we argue that Türkiye needs substantial changes in its plastic waste management 
practices and should ban imports until it adopts environmentally sound plastic waste 
management practices.
Imported and Domestic Plastic Waste Impact on the Seas: 
With Respect to Regional Sea Regimes
The Overall State of the Environment and the Contribution 
of Türkiye to Plastic Pollution at the Black Sea 
and the Mediterranean Sea
Two regional seas surround Türkiye, the Black Sea and the Mediterranean. Marine 
pollution in both seas is one of the most concerning environmental challenges of the 
country. To illustrate the severity of the issue, pollution in the Black Sea reached a 
level that leads to scholars warning against the death of the Black Sea ecosystem at 
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu231
some point in the 1990s (Pokazeev et al., 2021). Today, plastic waste at sea presents 
the majority of this issue, as it constitutes “95 to 100% of marine foating waste and 
50% of litter on sea beds” in the Mediterranean (UNEP, 2020a). Numerous studies 
have been conducted to reveal the direct and indirect harmful effects of plastic pol￾lution on coastal and marine biota, estuaries, and freshwater environments (Galloway 
& Lewis, 2017; Lusher et al., 2017; Güven et al., 2017; Bergmann et al., 2022; 
Blettler et al., 2018; Çevik et al., 2021). Most plastic litter arriving in aquatic eco￾systems is of terrestrial origin (Jambeck et al., 2015; Nizzetto et al., 2016; Lebreton 
et al., 2017). The most important of these sources are agricultural activities, urban 
activities, and poor wastewater treatment (Gündoğdu et al., 2018, 2022). In addi￾tion, illegal waste dumping related to plastic waste imports, inappropriate wastewa￾ter discharge from recycling facilities, and both traffc-related microplastics from 
roads and plastic particles escaping during transportation are also important sources 
(Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021; Çevik et al., 2021).
The Mediterranean and the Black Sea are semi-enclosed basins mostly isolated 
from the World Ocean and can be considered traps for plastic pollution. González￾Fernández et al. (2021) predicted an annual input of 98 million foating macro-litter 
items to the Black Sea, where Türkiye is one of the most signifcant contributors. 
Plastic is the most common type of litter on the Turkish coast of the Black Sea, 
comprising >80% of the macro-sized debris found in the seabed, sea surface, and 
beaches (Aytan et al., 2022). Landflling and illegal dumping activities are signif￾cant sources of plastic pollution (e.g., Commission on the Protection of the Black 
Sea Against Pollution, 2002; UNEP, 2020a; UfM, 2020). Moreover, the contribution 
of intensive fshing activities, shipping, and coastal cities also substantially contrib￾utes to the Black Sea’s plastic pollution. Previous studies showed that 70% of the 
debris item collected via trawling were plastics, constituting 84% of the total waste 
weight in the Black Sea (Aydın, 2021). According to Stoica et al. (2020), plastic is 
the most represented item of anthropogenic litter in all the evaluated Black Sea 
river-infuenced beaches. Similarly, according to the Marine Litter Watch (MLW) 
database (Kideys & Aydın, 2020), which provides data from European beaches, 
including seas, rivers, and lakes, the Black Sea appears as the most littered beach 
(652 items/100 m) among the four EU regional seas. The percentage share of plas￾tics on beaches is 79–88%, and the rate of single-use plastics (SUP), with a share of 
66.1%, is the highest in the Black Sea. Moreover, Aytan et al. (2020) found that the 
surface microplastic concentration ranged between 1.783 and 40.03 items/m3
.
The Sea of Marmara connects the Mediterranean and the Black Sea via the 
Dardanelles and Bosphorus Straits. This connectivity makes the Marmara Sea one 
of the hotlines for vessel traffc. According to Şirin et al. (2022), between 41.103 
and 43.999 vessels passed through the Bosphorus and Dardanelles Straits in 2018. 
Moreover, approximately 26 million people live in cities, including the megacity 
Istanbul, around the sea. This makes the Marmara Sea a hotspot for plastic pollu￾tion. Şirin et al. (2022) reported the mean litter abundance for the seafoor as 136.7 
items/km2
, Gedik et al. (2022) reported the mean abundance of microplastic in wild￾caught mussels as 2.06 items/individual, Sari Erkan et al. (2021) reported the micro￾plastics abundance range as 276.1857–3497.02 particle/km2
, and Artüz et al. (2021) 
An Imported Problem?232
reported the mean number of marine litter as 66.2/m2
 in the beaches around the 
Marmara Sea.
Türkiye is one of the major plastic pollution sources in the Mediterranean and the 
Black Sea (Liubartseva et  al., 2018; Çevik et  al., 2021; Strokal et  al., 2022). 
Inadequate waste management infrastructure makes the Turkish rivers the main 
source of plastic pollution for the Mediterranean Sea. According to Gonzalez–
Fernandez et al. (2021), Türkiye had the highest share (16.8%) of the total foating 
macro-litter loading to the marine environment (the Mediterranean and the Black 
Sea). In another study, it was estimated that areas with the highest concentrations of 
plastics (>20 g km−2
) are represented in the Cilician Sea (NE Mediterranean coasts 
of Türkiye) (Liubartseva et al., 2018). In the same study, it is estimated that three of 
the top fve major sources of plastic pollution in the Mediterranean Sea are Turkish 
rivers: the Ceyhan (5.1%), Seyhan (3.5%), and Buyuk Menderes Rivers (2.4%). The 
Seyhan and Ceyhan rivers receive a high amount of wastewater from the recycling 
industry. More than 170 licensed mechanical recycling facilities (most of them have 
plastic waste import licenses) are located around the Seyhan River, and most do not 
have proper wastewater treatment systems inside the facilities (HRW, 2022). 
According to Suzuki et  al. (2022), the annual microplastic emissions from such 
facilities can range from 0.014 to 5.8  t/year. With a rough calculation based on 
Suzuki et al. (2022), it is possible to say that around 2.38–986 tons/year of micro￾plastic leak into the wastewater from the area where these facilities are located. This 
amount can be quite variable depending on the facilities’ plastic waste processing 
capacity and the processing machines’ success. The microplastic removal rate of the 
nearest WWTP (Seyhan WWTP) is around 70% under normal conditions (Gündoğdu 
et al., 2018). However, considering these microplastics possibly clogging the sys￾tem and rendering the WWTP inoperable, this rate may decrease further. The effu￾ent of Seyhan WWTP fows into the Seyhan River. Therefore, as stated by 
Liubartseva et al. (2018), this is an important factor that makes the Seyhan River the 
river that carries the most plastic waste to the Mediterranean Sea.
Regional Sea Regimes on the Black Sea 
and the Mediterranean Sea
The Bucharest Convention on the Black Sea and the Barcelona Convention on the 
Mediterranean Sea have common objectives (preserving the marine environment 
and preventing pollution), and both target pollution at the source. As a large portion 
of the pollution at the seas, plastic waste falls under the scope of these regimes. We 
consider the standards and objectives of these regimes in relation to plastic waste 
management. Nevertheless, as mentioned above, these conventions and most rele￾vant protocols do not directly address plastic waste. We, therefore, take the overall 
aim and broad obligations of these agreements on waste management into account 
and analyze whether the state of the environment in the regional seas and the 
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu233
practice of Türkiye demonstrate a suffcient level of prevention of environmental 
harm from plastic wastes. This analysis incorporates protocols to these conventions 
on pollution from land-based sources and dumping. These two sources are in fact 
the main sources of plastic waste in the marine ecosystem as explained in section 
“The Overall State of the Environment and the Contribution of Türkiye to Plastic 
Pollution at the Black Sea and the Mediterranean Sea”. Together, they cover, among 
others, inadequate waste management and wastewater treatment, illegal dumping of 
plastic waste, urban activities, transportation, and tourism. The Barcelona 
Convention also contains a protocol on the transboundary movements of hazardous 
wastes and their disposal, which specifcally targets some types of plastic waste. 
This protocol is also analyzed due to its direct reference to plastic waste. We lastly 
consider action plans, strategies, subsidiary bodies, mechanisms, or means to pro￾mote the implementation of these conventions only where it is necessary to assess 
Türkiye’s practice in relation to plastic waste.
To combat marine pollution, the UNEP has established the regional seas program 
in 1974 (UNEP, 2022; Alexander, 1977). The Barcelona Convention was adopted 
within this program in 1976 (UNTS, 1978a), and it was further amended and 
renamed in 1995 (UNEP, 2022; Barcelona Convention and Protocols). It aims “to 
prevent, abate, combat and to the fullest possible extent eliminate pollution of the 
Mediterranean Sea Area (…)” (Barcelona Convention, 1976, Article 4(1); see also, 
Preamble). The Barcelona Convention targets pollution from different sources: 
from dumping from ships and aircraft or incineration at sea (Article 5), ships (Article 
6), exploration and exploitation of the continental shelf and the seabed and its sub￾soil (Article 7), land-based sources (Article 8), and transboundary movements of 
hazardous wastes and their disposal (Article 11). Plastic waste can be found in most 
of these sources, especially in land-based sources (Commission on the Protection of 
the Black Sea Against Pollution, 2002; UfM, 2020).
To reach its aims above, the Barcelona Convention requires its parties “to take 
appropriate measures” for implementation (see Article 4 in general). The Barcelona 
Convention has seven protocols giving relatively detailed obligations on its parties; 
Türkiye is a party to fve of these protocols (UNEP, 2022). Below, this analysis 
considers three protocols to the Barcelona Convention relevant to plastic waste as 
explained above.
More than 15 years after the adoption of the Barcelona Convention, and soon 
after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Bucharest Convention was adopted in 
1992 by riparian states of the Black Sea (UNTS, 1978b). Its overall objective is not 
very different from the objective of the Barcelona Convention: the prevention of 
pollution and preserving the marine environment of the Black Sea (Article V(2); see 
also, Preamble and Article XIII). It also aims at combating pollution at its source 
through Articles VI–VIII, X–XII, and XIV.  Unlike the Barcelona Convention, 
Article XII to the Bucharest Convention specifcally targets pollution from or 
through the atmosphere. There are four protocols to the Bucharest Convention, 
Türkiye is a party to all of them (Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea 
Website). Below, this analysis considers two protocols to the Bucharest Convention 
relevant to plastic waste as explained above.
An Imported Problem?234
Analysis of the Turkish Practice in Light of the Regional 
Sea Regimes
Both the Bucharest Convention and the Barcelona Convention require adoption of 
necessary measures for the elimination of marine pollution while they are very 
broad in scope. Protocols targeting pollution from dumping and land-based sources 
provide a better guideline for judging the Turkish practice (For Barcelona Convention 
amendments and other legal documents, Barcelona Convention Website, 2022; For 
Basel Convention amendments, Basel Convention Website, 2022; For Bucharest 
Convention amendments and other legal documents, Commission on the Protection 
of the Black Sea Website, 2022).
The dumping protocols in effect for both conventions use a similar method to the 
one found under the Basel Convention. Dumping hazardous materials is prohibited 
(Dumping Protocol to the Bucharest Convention, 1992, Article 2; Dumping Protocol 
to the Barcelona Convention, 1976, Article 4). Some plastic wastes fall under this 
category, e.g., the list of hazardous materials in Annex I to the dumping protocol to 
the Bucharest Convention includes persistent synthetic materials. Dumping of other 
wastes requires either a special permit (Dumping Protocol to the Bucharest 
Convention, 1992, Article 3; Dumping Protocol to the Barcelona Convention, 1976, 
Article 5) or a prior general permit from the competent national authorities 
(Dumping Protocol to the Bucharest Convention, 1992, Article 4; Dumping Protocol 
to the Barcelona Convention, 1976, Article 6). Some plastic types also fall under 
these categories. However, the amendment to the Dumping Protocol of the Barcelona 
Convention in 1995 takes a different approach. Its Article 4 bans all dumping (with 
some exceptions); most plastic dumping is therefore prohibited under this amended 
version. The amendments are not yet in force and therefore many plastics can be 
subjected to dumping with the required permissions.
In order to evaluate the Turkish practice on the dumping of plastic waste, we 
need reliable data from monitoring systems. Although there is currently a national 
program for monitoring marine pollution, there has been no offcial monitoring pro￾gram for the seas until 2014 (Aydın, 2021). Prior to this date, the available marine 
litter information is based on several scientifc studies and studies at pilot sites. In 
addition, the presence of plastic litter on the beaches was included in the monitoring 
program in 2017. However, the national monitoring program has a very limited 
number of stations. Therefore, the geographical context of the monitoring program 
is narrow, and there is still no comprehensive and continuous information on the 
current status of marine litter. There is very limited information about the pathways 
and sources of plastic pollution. Overall, what we know is that plastic pollution in 
Turkish seas and freshwater environments is increasing (Çevik et al., 2021). The 
common point of all studies is that plastic pollution is alarming (Aydın, 2021). 
Studies further point out that illegal dumping is still a serious issue at the seas (e.g., 
for the Black Sea, Ozturk & Pogozheva, 2019). Adding that amendments to the 
Dumping Protocol to the Barcelona Convention have never come into force since 
their adoption in 1995, we consider that there is a need of a further focus on plastic 
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu235
pollution from dumping by parties to the regional sea regimes. Even though it is not 
possible to reach a clear conclusion without the information from a reliable moni￾toring system, it is determined that the measures taken are not suffcient for the 
prevention of dumping of plastics, especially considering illegal dumping.
The land-based pollution protocols that are in effect also have similar mandates. 
They both aim at the elimination of pollution from land-based sources and activities 
(Land-Based Pollution Protocol to the Bucharest Convention, 1992, Article 2 (see 
also Article 4(1)); Land-Based Pollution Protocol to the Barcelona Convention, 
1996, Article 1). They cover a signifcant portion of marine plastic pollution sources 
that are mentioned above such as agriculture, the recycling industry, incineration of 
waste and management of its residues, waste and wastewater (municipal and indus￾trial) management, tourism, and transportation (Land-Based Pollution Protocol to 
the Bucharest Convention, 1992, Annex–I; Land-Based Pollution Protocol to the 
Barcelona Convention, 1996, Annex–I). The Land-Based Pollution Protocol to the 
Barcelona Convention Article 5 requires its parties to develop national programs 
and plans, and the Land-Based Pollution Protocol to the Bucharest Convention 
Article 1 requires “all necessary measures” to be taken for the prevention, reduc￾tion, and control of land-based pollution. Monitoring is also given as an obligation 
under these protocols (Land-Based Pollution Protocol to the Bucharest Convention, 
1992, Article 6, see also Article XV to the Bucharest Convention; Land–Based 
Pollution Protocol to the Barcelona Convention, 1996, Article 8, see also Article 12 
to the Barcelona Convention).
For the monitoring obligations under the land-based pollution protocols, a plastic 
pollution monitoring program for freshwater ecosystems focusing explicitly on riv￾ers was initiated in 2021, with a very limited geographical coverage. There is still 
no published information about the results of the program. However, it has long 
been established that land-based sources constitute a major source of marine pollu￾tion (for the Black Sea Krutov, 2019a, for the Mediterranean, UNEP, 2020a). 
Türkiye is refraining from taking major implementation steps in practice. For 
instance, studies show that Türkiye’s discharge of municipal waste into the Black 
Sea is increasing (Krutov, 2019b). In order to combat implementation problems, the 
Strategic Action Plan for the Environmental Protection and Rehabilitation of the 
Black Sea was adopted under the Bucharest Convention regime (1996, renewed 
2009). Several studies, as well as the Black Sea regime commission itself, point to 
the lack of progress in the actions of the riparian states for this action plan 
(Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea Against Pollution, 2002; Sofa 
Deklaration, 2009; Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea Against Pollution 
& Others, 2007; Oral, 2013; Ediboğlu, 2020). Similar to our observation about the 
Basel Convention, in practice, Türkiye fails to prevent the environmental hazard 
resulting from land-based pollution, although studies undertaken by the OECD and 
the UNEP conclude that the country technically has the legal instruments to address 
its marine environmental issues (OECD, 2008; UNEP, 2020a; see also, TMEU, 
2020). Those same studies emphasize the need for a better implementation of regu￾lations and point out many areas of improvement. For instance, the UNEP study 
(2020a) provides an analysis on the prospects of countries to reach the UN 
An Imported Problem?236
Sustainable Development Goals, including Goal 12 relevant to waste issues. Türkiye 
is categorized under the category “signifcant challenges remain” for the achieve￾ment of Goal 12. Notably, for all 17 goals, Türkiye was categorized as either “sig￾nifcant challenges remain” or “major challenges remain.” Even though this study 
does not cover Turkish regulations on the seas in relation to plastic waste, it is worth 
noting that there seems to be a pattern in the country. International standards are 
adopted as domestic regulations, but as in the Basel Convention example, and as the 
UNEP and the OECD studies mention, these regulations face serious implementa￾tion problems. Further research is needed to uncover the reasons for the problem 
and to suggest suitable improvements or implementation methods.
Lastly, there is a protocol to the Barcelona Convention on the transboundary 
movement of hazardous wastes (1996). This protocol recognizes the Basel 
Convention in its preamble. It however does not ban the transboundary movement 
of hazardous waste but regulates the standards for such wastes and calls for minimi￾zation and elimination if possible. Annex I of the protocol classifes “wastes result￾ing from surface treatment of metals and plastics” and “wastes from production, 
formulation and use of resins, latex, plasticizers, glues/adhesives” as hazardous. 
Even though the movement of these plastics was not banned, it is a considerable 
step, especially for 1996. The lack of data in practice for the implementation of this 
protocol is identifed by the UNEP’s analysis on the Barcelona Convention regime 
(2020a). Nevertheless, regarding the unprecedented plastic waste pollution and the 
environmental damage in the Turkish regional seas as demonstrated above 
(Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021), there is room for improvement at the implementation 
level of the protocol.
The lack of a good monitoring system makes it very hard to point to the exact 
issues regarding the Turkish practice on marine plastic pollution. We however know, 
as explained in section “The Overall State of the Environment and the Contribution 
of Türkiye to Plastic Pollution at the Black Sea and the Mediterranean Sea”, that the 
plastic pollution at both regional seas is increasing and that this situation harms the 
marine ecosystem signifcantly. The state of the environment signals that the coun￾try is not suffciently acting toward the achievement of the objectives of the regional 
sea regimes at the Black Sea and the Mediterranean. We therefore repeat our recom￾mendation that Türkiye has to stop its plastic waste imports. The country needs to 
focus on managing its municipal waste, which also represents a major marine plas￾tic source (e.g., Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea Against Pollution, 
2002; UNEP, 2020a; UfM, 2020). We lastly emphasize that Türkiye needs to 
strongly prioritize its implementation means for its domestic waste laws, even 
though they may be designed according to international standards.
Plastic Waste Impacts on the Air
The GHG contribution from the whole lifecycle of plastic is around 3.4% of global 
GHG emissions (OECD 2022a, b, c). The plastic life cycle could take up to 15% of 
the global GHG emission budget for keeping the global temperature increase at 
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu237
1.5 °C by 2050 (UNEP, 2021). This makes the plastic industry directly relevant to 
the efforts to combat climate change, which is mainly caused by the high concentra￾tion of GHGs (for the full list of GHG, see IPCC, 2007b; for the GHG-climate 
change relationship, IPCC, 2015; IPCC, 1990). For instance, methane, a GHG gas 
that contributes signifcantly to global warming, is released during the microbial 
biodegradation of plastics (IPCC, 2007a). The waste management aspect of plastic 
waste is a contributor to its emission rate. In fact, the share of plastic waste in the 
MSW can be up to %20 (Lebreton & Andrady, 2019; Çevik et al., 2021).
The UN climate change regime treaties (UNFCCC, 1992; Kyoto Protocol, 1997; 
Paris Agreement, 2015) aim at limiting the GHG concentration in the atmosphere. 
More specifcally, the Paris Agreement (2015) Article 2(1)(a) targets to keep the 
temperature increase below 2 °C in comparison to pre-industrial levels. In order to 
achieve these aims, the mitigation of GHGs and a global peak of GHG emissions by 
the second half of the century is necessary (Paris Agreement, 2015, Article 4(1); see 
also, UNFCCC, 1992, Article 2). The UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change and the subsequent Kyoto Protocol acknowledge waste management as a 
source of GHG emissions (UNFCCC, 1992, Article 4(1)(c); Kyoto Protocol, 1997, 
Article 2(1)(a)(viii) and Article 10(b)(i)). The Kyoto Protocol specifcally lists 
“waste” in its Annex A as a category of a sector/source for GHGs. Even though the 
latest agreement to the regime, the Paris Agreement, does not make a reference to 
waste, waste management and plastic waste are increasingly important topics in the 
discussions of the parties to the Paris Agreement. For instance, there was a side 
event at the latest Conference of Parties in 2022 about plastic waste (UNODC, 
2022). Below, the effects of plastic waste on the air are explained, and a brief analy￾sis is conducted regarding the GHG mitigation rate of Turkish plastic waste man￾agement practices and overall climate change commitments.
Burning plastic with or without MSW is a potential non-point source of emis￾sion, which causes serious concerns, especially in the Global South and Türkiye. 
There are two main effects of plastic waste on air quality. One is related to the 
chemicals added during the production or released during the burning of plastics, 
and the second are micro- and nanoplastics. The burning of plastic can release major 
pollutants (dioxin, furans, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs) particulate matter, benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene and 
1-hexene) and GHG (Petrlik et al., 2021). Moreover, burning chlorinated plastics 
such as polyvinyl chloride liberates hazardous halogens and pollutes the air (Petrlik 
et al., 2021). The released noxious substances are posing a threat to human and 
environmental health. Burning plastics, a common disposal practice of imported 
plastic waste in the Global South and Türkiye, may hence alter air quality. Therefore, 
this can result in risks of heart disease, aggravating respiratory ailments such as 
asthma and emphysema and causing rashes, nausea or headaches, and damage to the 
nervous system (Halden, 2010; Faroon & Ruiz, 2016; Greenpeace, 2022).
Türkiye’s import of plastic waste has led to illegal disposal methods that pose 
even more serious problems. Indeed, much of the open waste burning occurs in 
dumpsites that have been flled far beyond their maximum capacity. Dumpsite waste 
fres are either started intentionally to reduce the waste volume or occur 
An Imported Problem?238
spontaneously. As stated in Interpol (2020), there is a sharp increase in intentional 
waste fres in plastic recycling facilities related to waste trade globally. Since 2016, 
there have been more than 250 open waste fres at plastic recycling facilities (PRFs) 
in Türkiye, with 121 incidents recorded in 2021. In the media, numerous claims 
have been stated attributing the cause of the fres to deliberate actions taken by PRF 
operators to destroy low-value and hard-to-recycle post-consumer plastics, whether 
they were collected domestically in Türkiye or exported from Western countries. 
However, the lack of thorough investigation by the Turkish authorities means that 
these suspicions have yet to be substantiated with conclusive evidence. According 
to another report from Greenpeace in the UK, Germany, and Türkiye, soil samples 
taken from areas where waste was illegally dumped or burned contained an alarm￾ing level of persistent organic chemicals (Greenpeace, 2021). These hazardous sub￾stances can also be released into the air. The report revealed the presence of 16 
different carcinogenic PAHs, 18 types of PCBs that exhibit dioxin-like toxicity, 17 
types of polychlorinated dibenzo-dioxins/furans (PCDD/F) commonly known as 
dioxins/furans, and 18 different heavy metals and metalloids. All fve locations 
showed a variety of toxic chemicals, many of which are known to be produced dur￾ing the burning of plastics. Turkish plastic waste management practice has serious 
adverse effects for the country’s air quality.
Statistics show that Turkish waste management practices also have an effect on 
the country’s emissions. The emissions from the waste industry have been less than 
5% of total emissions in the country since the 1990s (TÜİK, 2023). However, within 
the same timeframe, GHG emissions in the country increased in all sectors and 
waste emissions have grown more than 30%. Even though we acknowledge that 
plastic waste emissions are not constituting a signifcant portion of Türkiye’s GHG 
emissions, they are still considerable and signifcantly pollute the environment as 
discussed above.
Looking at the climate change plans and policies of the country, Türkiye’s 
intended nationally determined contribution in 2015 was considered critically insuf￾fcient (Climate Action Tracker, 2022a; Republic of Turkey, 2015). In 2021, Türkiye 
announced its net zero targets for 2053, which was considered poor (Climate Action 
Tracker, 2022b). Türkiye updated its nationally determined contribution in 2023 
and again was considered critically insuffcient (Climate Action Tracker, 2023; 
Republic of Türkiye, 2023). The updated contribution identifed the county’s emis￾sion peak year as 2038. Emissions are therefore expected to increase until 2038. 
This means an approximately 30% increase in GHG emissions from the 2020 levels 
in the country, which could be an indicator of the emission rate of the plastic waste 
industry in the near future. In fact, considering the abovementioned illegal waste 
imports and illegal burning, it is unlikely that Türkiye can reach an emission peak 
from waste management in the short term.
When Türkiye’s national communications with the climate change regime 
(TMEU, 2016) and its climate change action plan (TMEU, 2012) are investigated, 
it is noticeable that the word “plastic waste” is absent. In contrast, the word “waste” 
is excessively used. Concerning the recent developments under the UN regarding 
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu239
the adoption of a plastic treaty (UNEA, 2022; Bergmann et  al., 2022), Türkiye 
needs to make plans to specifcally target plastic waste.
The country is often criticized about its climate change plans and policies (e.g., 
Climate Action Tracker, 2023; Ediboglu Sakowsky, 2023). We also underline that 
plastic waste management practices of Türkiye negatively contribute to its efforts on 
combating climate change and harm its environment. The country should work on 
managing its issue of illegal burning of plastic waste, which translates into the adop￾tion of better waste management systems and not overburdening the system with 
plastic imports.
Prospects and Recommendations
Türkiye ranks second after Germany in Europe and seventh in the world for plastic 
production (PAGEV, 2021). Yet, current domestic waste management and recycling 
schemes are insuffcient to handle domestic plastic waste generation and do not suf￾fciently prevent plastic pollution (Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021). This chapter ana￾lyzed the impact of imported plastic waste on the environment in Türkiye and 
concluded that Türkiye’s waste import threatens its waste management infrastruc￾ture and environment. Furthermore, we conclude that Türkiye fails to comply with 
the substantive obligations under the Basel Convention relevant to plastic waste and 
falls short of adopting the necessary standards demanded by the regional seas and 
climate change regimes in order to protect its environment from the adverse effects 
of plastic waste.
In terms of prospects, Türkiye’s stance toward multilateral agreements has 
undergone a shift in the last 5 years (Oğuzlu, 2019; Aral, 2022). The country adopted 
a more unilateral approach. We argue that this approach is likely to extend to the UN 
Plastic Treaty. The Turkish delegation’s poor and superfcial preparation, as evi￾denced by their low-level participation in the frst UN Plastic Treaty negotiation 
meeting held in Uruguay in December 2022, suggests this trend. The delegation’s 
speech centered on the national zero waste action plan, bag fee, and cleaning cam￾paigns. Türkiye’s approach to the Plastic Treaty is characterized by two priorities: 
the intention to gain fnancial support from the agreement’s funding and the desire 
to lead a regional initiative for the plastic agreement. While these objectives are 
commendable, the current investments on petrochemistry, waste import, and growth 
in plastic production render Türkiye’s current position questionable. Despite 
Türkiye’s expressed support for the Plastics Treaty, the country’s signifcant invest￾ments in petrochemicals and plans for long-term growth in plastic production ren￾der this position ineffective. Moreover, Türkiye’s coastal areas, particularly on the 
Mediterranean coast, suffer from high pollution levels, and the country has yet to 
take signifcant measures to address this issue, making it less likely for Türkiye to 
serve as a regional leader in the fght against plastic pollution.
In light of the above, Türkiye should ban the import of plastic waste, which is the 
subject of numerous illegal activities, while it is not yet suffciently capable of 
An Imported Problem?240
managing its own waste. In addition, it should adopt a domestic waste management 
strategy by ending its investment support for the industry, which is dependent on the 
import. Türkiye should strongly prioritize its implementation means to comply with 
its obligations under the Basel Convention concerning plastic waste management 
and environmental protection. Even though most of the procedural obligations of 
the Convention were adopted by Türkiye, their implementation is fragile, at a level 
where they can be seen as absent. Implementation focus is a must for Türkiye.
References
Alexander, L. M. (1977). Regional arrangements in the oceans. American Journal of International 
Law, 71(1), 84–109.
Aral, B., 2022. Turkey’s voting preferences in the UN General Assembly during the AK Party Era 
as a counterchallenge to its ‘new’ foreign policy. Journal of Balkan and Near Eastern Studies 
doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/19448953.2022.2143852. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Artüz, M. L., Artüz, O. B., & Artüz, S. D. (2021). First report of quantifcation and classifcation 
of buried litter on the public beaches around the Sea of Marmara, Turkey. Marine Pollution 
Bulletin, 165, 112–117.
Aydın, M. (2021). Evaluation of the European Union and Turkish Legislation and practice in the 
context of marine litter problem. Middle East Technical University.
Aytan, U., Sahin, F. B. E., & Karacan, F. (2020). Beach Litter on Sarayköy Beach (SE Black Sea): 
Density, composition, possible sources and associated organisms. Turkish Journal of Fisheries 
and Aquatic Sciences, 20(2), 137–145.
Aytan, U., Esensoy, F. B., & Senturk, Y. (2022). Microplastic ingestion and egestion by copepods 
in the Black Sea. Science of the Total Environment, 806, 150921.
Barcelona Convention for the Protection of the Mediterranean Sea Against Pollution. Adopted Feb. 
16, 1976, entered into force Feb. 12, 1978. 1102 U.N.T.S. 44.
Basel Action Network Website. (2022). Turkey import data. https://www.ban.org/plastic-waste￾project-hub/trade-data/turkey-import-data. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their 
Disposal. Adopted March 22, 1989, entered into force May 5, 1992. 1673 U.N.T.S. 57.
Basel Convention Website. (2020). Basel convention national reports – Year 2020. Türkiye. http://
www.basel.int/Countries/NationalReporting/NationalReports/BC2020Reports/tabid/8989/
Default.aspx. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Basel Convention Website. (2022a). Country profles: Türkiye. http://www.basel.int/Countries/
CountryProfles/tabid/4498/Default.aspx#. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Basel Convention Website. (2022b). Plastic Waste Amendment, Status of Ratifcation. http://www.
basel.int/Countries/StatusofRatifcations/PlasticWasteamendments/tabid/8377/Default.aspx. 
Access date: 01.07.2023.
Bergmann, M., Almroth, B. C., Brander, S. M., et al. (2022). A global plastic treaty must cap 
production. Science, 376(6592), 469–470.
Berkun, M., Aras, E., & Anılan, T. (2011). Solid waste management practices in Turkey. Journal 
of Material Cycles and Waste Management, 13(4), 305–313.
Blettler, M. C. M., Abrial, E., Khan, F. R., Sivri, N., & Espinola, L. A. (2018). Freshwater plastic 
pollution: Recognizing research biases and identifying knowledge gaps. Water Research, 143, 
416–424.
Bucharest Convention Convention on the Protection of the Black Sea Against Pollution. Adopted 
April 21, 1992, entered into force Jan. 15, 1994. 1764 U.N.T.S. 3.
By–Law on Control of Packaging Wastes. (2021). No: 31523.
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu241
By–Law on Organized Landfll of Wastes. (2010). No: 27533.
By–Law on the Incineration of Wastes. (2010). No: 27721.
By–Law on Waste Management. (2015). No: 29314.
By–Law on Zero Waste. (2019). No: 30829.
Çevik, C., Kıdeyş, A. E., Tavşanoğlu, Ü. N., Kankılıç, G. B., & Gündoğdu, S. (2021). A review 
of plastic pollution in aquatic ecosystems of Turkey. Environmental Science and Pollution 
Research, 1, 1–20.
Climate Action Tracker. (2022a). Türkiye: Country summary. https://climateactiontracker.org/
countries/turkey/. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Climate Action Tracker. (2022b). Türkiye: Net zero targets. https://climateactiontracker.org/coun￾tries/turkey/net-zero-targets/. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Climate Action Tracker. (2023). Türkiye: Country summary. https://climateactiontracker.org/coun￾tries/turkey/. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea Against Pollution. (2002). State of the Environment 
of the Black Sea: Pressures and trends 1996–2000. http://www.blacksea-commission.org/_
publ-SOE2002-eng.asp. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea Against Pollution, BSERP, GEF, UNDP, 
& UNOPS. (2007). Black Sea transboundary diagnostic analysis. https://iwlearn.net/
resolveuid/027884cd-d97e-4ec5-ac6b-60f4db3f277f. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea Website. Offcial Documents. http://www.blacksea￾commission.org/Offcial%20Documents/. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Communiqué on Procedures and Principles Regarding the Establishment and Operation of Waste 
Collection Centers and Zero Waste Practices Waste Collection Centres. (2021). https://cygm.
csb.gov.tr/genelgeler-i-442. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Comolli, V. (2021). Plastic for proft: Tracing illicit plastic waste fows, supply chains and actors. 
Global Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime. Geneva, Switzerland. https://globa￾linitiative.net/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/GITOC-Plastic-for-Proft.pd.
Conference of Parties to the Basel Convention. (1995). Decision III/1.
Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention. (2019). Decision BC–14/12.
Constitution of the Republic of Türkiye. (1982). No: 2709.
Dehghani, S., Moore, F., & Akhbarizadeh, R. (2017). Microplastic pollution in deposited urban 
dust, Tehran metropolis, Iran. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 24(25), 
20360–20371.
Duis, K., & Coors, A. (2016). Microplastics in the aquatic and terrestrial environment: sources 
(with a specifc focus on personal care products), fate and effects. Environmental Sciences 
Europe, 28(1), 1–25.
Ediboğlu, E. (2020). Karadeniz’deki Ekolojik Krizin Hukuki Analizi ile Türkiye ve Rusya’nın 
Duruma Etkileri (The legal analysis of the ecological crisis in the Black Sea and the effects of 
Turkey and Russia on the issue). In E. H. Kılıçbeyli (Ed.), Yılında Türkiye Rusya İlişkileri: Çok 
Tarafı Gelişmeler, Karşılıklı Etkileşimler (Vol. 100, pp. 55–91). NİKA Yayınevi.
Ediboğlu Sakowsky, E. (2023). Türkiye: A climate fnancing opportunist? In M.  Kaeding, 
J. Pollak, & P. Schmidt (Eds.), Climate change and the future of Europe (pp. 163–166). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-23328-9_37 Springer.
EIA. (2021). The Truth Behind Trash: The scale and impact of the international trade in plastic 
waste. https://eia-international.org/report/the-truth-behind-trash-the-scale-and-impact-of-the￾international-trade-in-plastic-waste/. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Faroon, O., & Ruiz, P. (2016). Polychlorinated biphenyls: New evidence from the last decade. 
Toxicology and Industrial Health, 32(11), 1825–1847.
For Barcelona Convention amendments and other legal documents, Barcelona Convention 
Website. (2022). Barcelona convention and protocols. https://www.unep.org/unepmap/who￾we-are/barcelona-convention-and-protocols. Access date: 01.07.2023.
For Basel Convention amendments, Basel Convention Website. (2022). Amendments. http://www.
basel.int/TheConvention/Amendments/Overview/tabid/2759/. Access date: 01.07.2023.
An Imported Problem?242
For Bucharest Convention amendments and other legal documents, Commission on the Protection 
of the Black Sea Website. (2022). Table of Main Legal Documents. http://www.blacksea￾commission.org/Offcial%20Documents/Table%20of%20Legal%20Documents/. Access date: 
01.07.2023.
Galloway, T., & Lewis, C. (2017). Marine microplastics. Current Biology, 27(11), R445–R446.
Gedik, K., Eryaşar, A.  R., & Gözler, A.  M. (2022). The microplastic pattern of wild–caught 
Mediterranean mussels from the Marmara Sea. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 175, 113331.
GESAMP. (2015). Sources, fate and effects of microplastics in the marine environment: A global 
assessment. http://www.gesamp.org/publications/reports-and-studies-no-90. Access date: 
01.07.2023.
González-Fernández, D., Cózar, A., Hanke, G., et  al. (2021). Floating macrolitter leaked from 
Europe into the ocean. Nature Sustainability, 4(6), 474–483.
Greenpeace Malaysia. (2018). The toxic after–Effects of the imported plastic waste in Malaysia. 
https://www.greenpeace.org/southeastasia/publication/4058/the-recycling-myth-2-0-the￾toxic-after-effects-of-imported-plastic-waste-in-malaysia/. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Greenpeace UK. (2021). Trashed: How the uk is still dumping plastic waste on the rest of the 
world. https://www.greenpeace.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Trashed-Greenpeace￾plastics-report-fnal.pdf. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Greenpeace UK. (2022). Game of waste. https://www.greenpeace.org.uk/resources/game-of￾waste-report/. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Gündoğdu, S. (2018). Contamination of table salts from Turkey with microplastics. Food Additives 
and Contaminants  – Part A Chemistry, Analysis, Control, Exposure and Risk Assessment, 
35(5), 1006–1014.
Gündoğdu, S., & Çevik, C. (2017). Micro– and mesoplastics in Northeast Levantine coast of 
Turkey: The preliminary results from surface samples. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 118(1–2), 
341–347.
Gündoğdu, S., & Walker, T. R. (2021). Why Turkey should not import plastic waste pollution from 
developed countries? Marine Pollution Bulletin, 171, 112772.
Gündoğdu, S., Çevik, C., Güzel, E., & Kilercioğlu, S. (2018). Microplastics in municipal wastewa￾ter treatment plants in Turkey: A comparison of the infuent and secondary effuent concentra￾tions. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 190(626), 1–10.
Gündoğdu, S., Ayat, B., Aydoğan, B., Çevik, C., & Karaca, S. (2022). Hydrometeorological assess￾ments of the transport of microplastic pellets in the Eastern Mediterranean. Science of the Total 
Environment, 823, 153676.
Güven, O., Gökdağ, K., Jovanović, B., & Kıdeyş, A. E. (2017). Microplastic litter composition of 
the Turkish territorial waters of the Mediterranean Sea, and its occurrence in the gastrointesti￾nal tract of fsh. Environmental Pollution, 223, 286–294.
Halden, R. U. (2010). Plastics and health risks. Annual Review of Public Health, 31(1), 179–194.
HRW. (2022). It’s as if they’re poisoning us – The health impacts of plastic recycling in Turkey. 
https://www.hrw.org/report/2022/09/21/its-if-theyre-poisoning-us/health-impacts-plastic￾recycling-turkey. Access date: 01.07.2023.
International Court of Justice. Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons. (1996). ICJ 
reports 1996, Advisory Opinion.
INTERPOL. (2020). Emerging criminal trends in the global plastic waste market since January 
2018 – Strategic analysis report.
IPCC. (1990). Climate change: The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Impacts 
Assessment. Australian Government Publishing Service.
IPCC. (2007a). Climate change 2007: Mitigation. Cambridge University Press.
IPCC. (2007b). Climate change 2007: The physical science basis. Cambridge University Press.
IPCC. (2015). Climate change 2014: Synthesis report. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/. Access 
date: 01.07.2023.
IPCC. (2022). Climate change 2022: Mitigation of climate change. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/
ar6/wg3/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGIII_FullReport.pdf. Access date: 01.07.2023.
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu243
Jambeck, J. R., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., et al. (2015). Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. 
Science, 347(6223), 768–771.
Karasik, R. (2022). Plastic pollution policy country profle: Turkey. Ni Pb, December 2021. 
https://nicholasinstitute.duke.edu/sites/default/fles/projects/Plastic-Pollution-Policy-Country￾Profle-Turkey.pdf. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Kaza, S., Yao, L.C., Bhada-Tata, P., & Van Woerden, F. (2018). What a waste 2.0: A global snap￾shot of solid waste management to 2050. World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
entities/publication/d3f9d45e-115f-559b-b14f-28552410e90a. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Kideys, A. E., & Aydın, M. (2020). Marine Litter Watch (MLW) European Beach Litter Assessment 
2013–2019 (ETC/ICM Technical Report 2/2020) (p. 26). European Topic Centre on Inland, 
Coastal and Marine Waters.
Krutov, A. (2019a). Land Base Sources. In A. Krutov (Ed.), State of the Environment of the Black 
Sea (2009–2014/5) (pp.  46–61). Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea Against 
Pollution.
Krutov, A. (2019b). Executive summary. In A. Krutov (Ed.), State of the environment of the Black 
Sea (2009–2014/5) (pp. 1–7). Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea Against Pollution.
Kummer, K. (1992). The international regulation of transboundary traffc in hazardous wastes: The 
1989 Basel Convention. The International and Comparative Law Quarterly, 41(3), 530–562.
Kummer, K. (1995). International management of hazardous wastes. Oxford University Press.
Kummer, P. K., Ziegler, A. R., & Baumgartner, J. (Eds.). (2016). Waste management and the green 
economy: Law and policy. Edward Elgar.
Kyoto Protocol. Adopted Dec. 1, 1997, entered into force Feb. 16, 2005. 2303 U.N.T.S. 148.
Law on Environment. (1983). No: 2872.
Lebreton, L., & Andrady, A. (2019). Future scenarios of global plastic waste generation and dis￾posal. Palgrave Communications, 5(1), 6.
Lebreton, L. C. M., Van Der Zwet, J., Damsteeg, J. W., Slat, B., Andrady, A., & Reisser, J. (2017). 
River plastic emissions to the world’s oceans. Nature Communications, 8(1), 1–10.
Liubartseva, S., Coppini, G., Lecci, R., & Clementi, E. (2018). Tracking plastics in the 
Mediterranean: 2D Lagrangian model. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 129(February), 151–162.
Lusher, A., Hollman, P., & Mendozal, J. (2017). Microplastics in fsheries and aquaculture: Status 
of knowledge on their occurrence and implications for aquatic organisms and food safety (FAO 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper 615).
Lusher, A. L., Hernandez-Milian, G., Berrow, S., Rogan, E., & O’Connor, I. (2018). Incidence of 
marine debris in cetaceans stranded and bycaught in Ireland: Recent fndings and a review of 
historical knowledge. Environmental Pollution, 232, 467–476.
Metropolitan Municipalities Law. (2004). No: 5216.
Municipality Law. (2005). No: 5393
Nizzetto, L., Futter, M., & Langaas, S. (2016). Are agricultural soils dumps for microplastics of 
urban origin? Environmental Science & Technology, 50(20), 10777–10779.
OECD. (2008). Environmental performance reviews: Turkey. https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/envi￾ronment/oecd-environmental-performance-reviews-turkey-2008_9789264049161-en. Access 
date: 01.07.2023.
OECD. (2020). Municipal waste, generation and treatment. https://stats.oecd.org/Index.
aspx?DataSetCode=MUNW. Access date: 01.07.2023.
OECD. (2022a). Global plastics outlook: Economic drivers, environmental impacts and policy 
options. OECD Publishing.
OECD. (2022b). Plastic leakage and greenhouse gas emissions are increasing. https://www.
oecd.org/environment/plastics/increased-plastic-leakage-and-greenhouse-gas-emissions.htm. 
Access date: 01.07.2023.
OECD. (2022c). Greenhouse gas emissions from plastics lifecycle – Projections for all scenarios. 
https://stats.oecd.org/viewhtml.aspx?datasetcode=PLASTIC_GHG_V2_1&lang=en. Access 
date: 01.07.2023.
Oğuzlu, T. (2019). Turkey and the West: Geopolitical shifts in the AK Party era. Turkey’s Pivot to 
Eurasia, 15–30. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429023064-2. Access date: 01.07.2023.
An Imported Problem?244
Oral, N. (2013). Regional co–operation and protection of the marine environment under interna￾tional law: The Black Sea. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.
Ozturk, B., & Pogozheva, M. (2019). Marine litter. In A. Krutov (Ed.), State of the environment of 
the Black Sea (2009–2014/5) (pp. 212–222). Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea 
Against Pollution.
PAGEV. (2021). Türkiye plastik sektör izleme raporu 2021. https://pagev.org/upload/fles/
Plastik%20%20Sekt%C3%B6r%20Raporu%202021%20%28Ocak%20-Aral%C4%B1k%29.
pdf. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Paris Agreement. Adopted Dec. 12, 2015, entered into force Nov. 4, 2016. FCCC/CP/2015/10/
Add.1, Annex.
Petrlik, J., Bell, L., Beeler, B., Møller, M., Jopkova, M., & Brabcova, K. (2021). Plastic waste 
poisoning food and threatening communities in Africa, Asia, Central & Eastern Europe and 
Latin America.
Pokazeev, K., Sovga, E., & Chaplina, T. (2021). Pollution in the Black Sea: Observations about 
the Ocean’s pollution. Springer.
Praagh, M., Hartman, C., & Brandmyr, E. (2018). Microplastics in landfll leachates in the Nordic 
countries. Nordic Council of Ministers. https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1277395/
FULLTEXT01.pdf. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Public Expenditures Monitoring Platform. Paris Anlaşması Öncesi ve Sonrası İklim Değişikliğine 
Yönelik Bütçeler: 14 Büyükşehir Belediyesinin Çevre Koruma ve İklim Değişikliği (ÇKİD) 
ile ilgili Performans Hedeferinin Karşılaştırılması: 2021–2022 İzleme Sonuçları (Budgets for 
Climate Change Before and After Paris Agreement: Comparison of Performance Targets of 
14 Metropolitan Municipalities on Environmental Protection and Climate Change (EPCC): 
2021–2022 Monitoring Results). (2022). https://www.kahip.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/
CKID-301022sonsite.pdf. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Republic of Turkey. (2015). Intended nationally determined contribution. https://unfccc.int/
sites/default/fles/NDC/2022-06/The_INDC_of_TURKEY_v.15.19.30.pdf. Access date: 
01.07.2023.
Republic of Türkiye. (2023). Updated frst nationally determined contribution. https://unfccc.int/
sites/default/fles/NDC/2023-04/T%C3%9CRK%C4%B0YE_UPDATED%201st%20NDC_
EN.pdf. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Trade. (2020, December 31). Çevrenin Korunması Yönünden 
Kontrol Altında Tutulan Atıkların İthalat Denetimi Tebliği (Ürün Güvenliği ve Denetimi: 
2021/3). Number: 31351 (4. Mükerrer).
Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Trade. (2021a, July 10). Çevrenin Korunması Yönünden Kontrol 
Altında Tutulan Atıkların İthalat Denetimi Tebliği (Ürün Güvenliği ve Denetimi: 2021/3)’nde 
Değişiklik Yapılmasına Dair Tebliğ (Ürün Güvenliği ve Denetimi: 2021/36). Number: 31537.
Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Trade. (2021b, May 18). Çevrenin Korunması Yönünden Kontrol 
Altında Tutulan Atıkların İthalat Denetimi Tebliği (Ürün Güvenliği ve Denetimi: 2021/3)’nde 
Değişiklik Yapılmasına Dair Tebliğ (Ürün Güvenliği ve Denetimi: 2021/33). Number: 31485.
Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Trade. (2022, December 31). Çevrenin Korunması Yönünden 
Kontrol Altında Tutulan Atıkların İthalat Denetimi Tebliği (Ürün Güvenliği ve Denetimi: 
2023/3). Number: 32060 (4. Mükerrer).
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development. (1992). 31 I.L.M. 874.
Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals 
and Pesticides in International Trade. Adopted, Sept. 10, 1998, entered into force Feb. 24, 2004. 
2244 U.N.T.S. 337.
Sıfır Atık (Zero Waste). (2017). https://sifratik.gov.tr/. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Silva, A. L. P., Prata, J. C., Duarte, A. C., Soares, A. M. V. M., Barceló, D., & Rocha-Santos, 
T. (2021). Microplastics in landfll leachates: The need for reconnaissance studies and reme￾diation technologies. Case Studies in Chemical and Environmental Engineering, 3, 100072. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CSCEE.2020.100072. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Şirin, M., Daban, İ. B., İşmen, A., & Arslan İhsanoğlu, M. (2022). Benthic marine litter in the 
Marmara Sea, Turkey. Ege Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 39(2), 111–119.
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu245
Sofa Decleration. (2009). http://www.blacksea-commission.org/Offcial%20
Documents/#RegionalCommittment-Sofa2009. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Stoica, E., Atabay, H., Bat, L., & Ciuca, A. (2020). Marine litter occurrence in the river–infuenced 
Black Sea coast Marine litter occurrence in the river–infuenced Black Sea coast. In Ü. Aytan, 
M. Pogojeva, & A. Simeonova (Eds.). Marine litter in the Black Sea. https://scholar.google.
com.tr/scholar?hl=tr&as_sdt=0%2C5&q=Marine+litter+occurrence+in+the+river-infuenced
+Black+Sea+coast&btnG=. Access date: 01.07.2023
Strokal, V., Kuiper, E. J., Bak, M. P., et al. (2022). Future microplastics in the Black Sea: River 
exports and reduction options for zero pollution. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 178, 113633.
Su, Y., Zhang, Z., Wu, D., Zhan, L., Shi, H., Xie, B. (2019). Occurrence of microplastics in land￾fll systems and their fate with landfll age. Water Research. 164, 114968. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.114968. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Sun, J., Zhu, Z. R., Li, W. H., Yan, X., Wang, L. K., Zhang, L., Jin, J., Dai, X., & Ni, B. J. (2021). 
Revisiting microplastics in landfll leachate: Unnoticed tiny microplastics and their fate in 
treatment works. Water Research, 190, 116784. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2020.116784. 
Access date: 01.07.2023.
Suzuki, G., Uchida, N., Tuyen, L. H., et al. (2022). Mechanical recycling of plastic waste as a point 
source of microplastic pollution. Environmental Pollution, 303, 119114.
TMEU. (2012). Republic of Turkey Climate Change Action Plan 2011–2023. https://webdosya.
csb.gov.tr/db/iklim/editordosya/iklim_degisikligi_eylem_plani_EN_2014.pdf. Access date: 
01.07.2023.
TMEU. (2016). Sixth National Communication of Turkey under the UNFCCC. https://unfccc.int/
fles/national_reports/non-annex_i_natcom/application/pdf/6_bildirim_eng_11_reducedfle￾size.pdf. Access date: 01.07.2023.
TMEU. (2017). Ulusal Atık Yönetimi ve Eylem Planı 2023 (National Waste Management and 
Action Plan 2023). https://webdosya.csb.gov.tr/db/cygm/haberler/ulusal_at-k_yonet￾m%2D%2Deylem_plan%2D%2D20180328154824.pdf. Access date: 01.07.2023.
TMEU. (2020). 6th State of Environment Report for Republic of Turkey. https://webdosya.csb.gov.
tr/db/ced/icerikler/tc-dr_2020_-ng-l-zce-20210430143751.pdf. Access date: 01.07.2023.
TMEUCC. (2022). Turkish Ministry of Environment, Urbanisation and Climate Change, 
Yönetmelikler (By-Laws). https://cygm.csb.gov.tr/yonetmelikler-i-440. Access date: 
01.07.2023.
TÜİK. (2021). Atık İstatistikleri, 2020. https://data.tuik.gov.tr/Bulten/Index?p=Atik-Istatistikleri￾2020-37198. Access date: 01.07.2023.
TÜİK. (2022). Sera Gazı Emisyon İstatistikleri 1990-2020 (Greenhouse gas emission statistics). 
https://data.tuik.gov.tr/Bulten/Index?p=Sera-Gazi-Emisyon-Istatistikleri-1990-2020-45862. 
Access date: 01.07.2023.
TÜİK. (2023). Sera Gazı Emisyon İstatistikleri 1990–2021 (Greenhouse gas emission statistics). 
https://data.tuik.gov.tr/Bulten/Index?p=Sera-Gazi-Emisyon-Istatistikleri-1990-2021-49672. 
Access date: 01.07.2023.
UfM. (2020). Reaching the 2020 Horizon: 14 years of Mediterranean cooperation on Environment. 
https://www.h2020.net/resources/fnal-h2020-report/send/342-fnal-h2020-report/3400-fnal￾h2020-report. Access date: 01.07.2023.
UNEA. (2022). Resolution adopted by the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United 
Nations Environment Programme: 5/14: End plastic pollution: Towards an internaional legally 
binding instrument. UNEP/EA.5/Res.14.
UNEP. (2016). Marine plastic debris and microplastics – Global lessons and research to inspire 
action and guide policy change. https://wedocs.unep.org/handle/20.500.11822/7720. Access 
date: 01.07.2023.
UNEP. (2020a). State of the Environment and Development in the Mediterranean. https://wedocs.
unep.org/handle/20.500.11822/38057. Access date: 01.07.2023.
UNEP. (2020b). Mediterranean Action Plan (MAP). https://www.unep.org/unepmap/. Access 
date: 01.07.2023.
An Imported Problem?246
UNEP. (2021). From Pollution to Solution: A global assessment of marine litter and plastic pollu￾tion. https://www.unep.org/resources/pollution-solution-global-assessment-marine-litter-and￾plastic-pollution. Access date: 01.07.2023.
UNEP. (2022). Mediterranean Action Plan Website. Türkiye. https://www.unep.org/unepmap/
who-we-are/contracting-parties/turkey. Access date: 01.07.2023.
UNFCCC. (1992). The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Adopted May 
9, 1992, entered into force March 21, 1994. 1771 U.N.T.S. 107.
Ünker, P. (2022). 14 milyar dolarlık atık nasıl zehirliyor? DW. https://www.dw.com/tr/
at%C4%B1%C4%9Fa-14-milyar-dolar-veren-t%C3%BCrkiyede-denetimler-yeterli-mi/
a-62605786. Access date: 01.07.2023.
UNODC. (2022). COP27 Side Event: Unmanaged Waste – A hidden cause of climate change. 
https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/environment-climate/cop27-unmanaged-waste.html. Access 
date: 01.07.2023.
UNSG. (1989). Report of the Secretary-General on Illegal Traffc in Toxic and Dangerous Products 
and Wastes, U.N. Doc. A/44/362 and Corr. 1.
UNTS. (1978a). Convention for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution. .. https://
treaties.un.org/pages/showDetails.aspx?objid=08000002800f6a1c. Access date: 01.07.2023.
UNTS. (1978b). Convention on the protection of the Black Sea against pollution. Barcelona. 
https://treaties.un.org/Pages/showDetails.aspx?objid=08000002800b25b8&clang=_en. Access 
date: 01.07.2023.
Wan, Y., Chen, X., Liu, Q., Hu, H., Wu, C., & Xue, Q. (2022). Informal landfll contributes to 
the pollution of microplastics in the surrounding environment. Environmental Pollution, 293, 
118586. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.118586. Access date: 01.07.2023.
Zhao, C., Qi, X., Wang, J., Du, F., & Shi, X. (2022). Predicting possible new links to future global 
plastic waste trade networks. Sustainability (Switzerland), 14(8), 4692.
E. E. Sakowsky and S. Gündoğdu247
The Waste Trade as a Tool of Colonialism 
in Our Age: A Sociolegal Analysis 
for Türkiye
Sezai Çağlayan and Firdevs Yüzbaşi Tobaz
Introduction
Humans consume a great deal of products in this modern era, and their remnants 
cannot be recycled at a similar rate. The preferred method to eliminate the waste 
produced is to export it to another country, usually to a less developed one (Wen 
et al., 2021, pp. 1–9). The global circulation of waste raises questions about whether 
this is a tool of colonialism.
Türkiye has become one of the leading waste importers since China banned 
waste imports in 2018 (Gundogdu, 2022, p. 16). This has contributed to economic 
development in Türkiye but has also had a corresponding negative effect on the 
well-being of those living in the country (Human Rights Watch, 2022). The sudden 
increase in waste imports, their uncontrolled processing, and their disposal in public 
areas in a way that threatens human health are critical problems (Gundogdu, 2022). 
One may ask whether Türkiye has already set up a legal framework to prevent the 
unwanted consequences of the waste trade. The answer is, technically, yes. Legal 
apparatuses exist and can be counted as pillars of the waste trade regime in the 
country. Yet, the question remains whether the waste trade regime works in practice.
The purpose of this chapter is to question whether the waste trade in which 
Türkiye is involved as an importer is a tool for colonialism. It is not possible to 
determine this using the classical defnition of colonialism. Instead, it is more 
appropriate to evaluate Türkiye’s waste imports through the lens of neocolonialism. 
Türkiye has managed to build up the legal framework of her domestic waste regime 
S. Çağlayan (*) 
Law Faculty, Department of International Law, Ondokuz Mayis University, Samsun, Türkiye
e-mail: sezai.caglayan@omu.edu.tr
F. Yüzbaşi Tobaz 
Law Faculty, Department of Constitutional Law, Ondokuz Mayis University, 
Samsun, Türkiye
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_12248
to a certain level. However, the regime is not effcient in resolving judicial disputes. 
The difference between theory and practice is the main defciency in this context.
This chapter mainly consists of two sections, excluding the introduction and con￾clusion. The frst section considers the defnition and disappearance of classic colo￾nialism and the evolution of new colonial practices in our age. The second section 
discusses Türkiye’s waste trade in terms of colonialism. Under this section, Türkiye’s 
share in the international waste trade; the theory and practice of the domestic legal 
framework of waste trade; and whether Türkiye’s waste trade can be called “colo￾nial” will be discussed.
Colonialism Through the Waste Trade
Colonialism as dominance of one group over another in the most general terms 
(Butt, 2013, pp. 1–2) was a global reality until the last century. The elimination of 
colonialism was not on the international community’s agenda until the UN system 
was established after the Second World War in 1945, whereupon it began to disap￾pear. The UN Charter, which is regarded as the international community’s constitu￾tion, is built on the principle of equality of states and, thereby, their nationals. People 
who can exercise the right to self-determination can establish a state and technically 
take part in the international sphere under the sovereignty of that state.
Over the last 30 years, technically there has been no colonial state or any state 
existing under the supervision of the UN (see Shaw, 2017, p. 931). However, this 
does not mean that colonialism has disappeared. Some societies continue to be sub￾jected to implicit colonial practices through different means. Globalization is a key 
term to express the current situation of colonialism in this modern era. Globalization 
and colonialism are alike and related, as pointed out by Bernard (2020). Both are 
about the domination of one group by another (Bernard, 2020). In the era of global￾ization, a new understanding of colonialism has emerged based on the unequal rela￾tions between superpowers and their former colonies. Although big claims about the 
importance of freedom are expressed, colonial practices continue to exist 
(Watts, 2020).
Neocolonialism can manifest in many different ways, in diverse areas such as 
economics, politics, culture, and even education (Haag, 2012). The environment is 
another salient area. Those countries that wish to keep their habitats clean have 
contributed to neocolonialism by transporting their waste to countries with weak 
resistance. The environmental justice movement, which asks for the fair distribution 
of environmental burdens and benefts among people (Caglayan, 2015, p. 84), is one 
of the responses of waste-based new colonial practices. As far back as the 1970s, 
Blacks in the American South protested the deliberate use of their local environment 
as dumping sites (Caglayan, 2015, p. 84). The concept then became popular among 
scholars, thanks to the academic works of Robert Bullard (2018). It has been 
observed that environmental injustice continues as a neocolonial practice based on 
racial and socioeconomic parameters (Mohai et al., 2009, p. 406; Reed, 2009, p. 25). 
S. Çağlayan and F. Yüzbaşi Tobaz249
While it is true that there have been colonial practices based on various factors, each 
case must be analyzed through specifc and quantitative feld research (Martinez￾Alier et al., 2016, p. 734; Morales Jr. et al., 2012, p. 2).
Environmental injustice was originally an inegalitarian practice by one group 
within a state toward another. Environmental injustice-like situations caused by 
waste-related activities gained an interstate dimension, thanks to globalization 
(Achankeng, 2003). It has been noted that environmental burdens shift from the 
center to the periphery (Morales Jr. et al., 2012, p. 1). African states, viewed as the 
periphery, claim they are seen as dumping sites for developed countries (Fuller 
et al., 2022, p. 539). What is also determinative is the nature of the waste. Dumping 
sites are, one way or another, built in some regions for domestic waste. However, 
there may be more dangerous cases, for example, nuclear waste, which is a danger￾ous waste type that may be stored or buried. Some have even described nuclear￾based waste activities as “nuclear colonialism” (Runyan, 2018, p.  25). The 
combination of insuffcient infrastructure and waste facilities may lead to tragic 
consequences for the country concerned (Pratt, 2010, p. 152). Pratt has labeled this 
practice in the Cote d’Ivoire as “toxic colonialism” (2010, pp. 149–151). Globally 
sized waste-based colonial practices have gone beyond racial and economic expla￾nations and led to different concepts, such as “global climate justice” (Mohai et al., 
2009, p. 405).
The idea that waste can have a colonial purpose in international trade was 
acknowledged in the preparatory work of the Basel Convention, one of the essential 
international regulations on the subject. The Basel working group was the frst to 
express the notion of “waste colonialism” (Fuller et  al., 2022, p.  539; Manglou 
et al., 2022, p. 4). Both these act as evidence that the waste trade is an important part 
of modern colonialism (Mohai et al., 2009, p. 419). Although the Basel Convention 
may be deemed a positive international initiative to prevent the waste trade from 
becoming a form of colonialism, the fact that international agreements depend on 
states’ discretion prevents the formation of a binding international waste trade 
regime for all, which may therefore result in the creation of colonial practices and 
render the Convention inadequate.
Does Türkiye’s Waste Imports Represent a New 
Colonial Practice?
Türkiye’s Share in the International Waste Trade
A World Bank report of 2018 stated that a person’s average waste generation equals 
0.74 kg per day and is expected to increase to 1.25 kg by 2050 (Kaza et al., 2018, 
p. 3). Accordingly, solid waste management is becoming more challenging, particu￾larly for some countries, and consequently they will hope to export their waste abroad.
In recent years, the international waste trade has been experiencing great change. 
In 2018, China, the biggest waste importer for Europe for a generation, imposed a 
The Waste Trade as a Tool of Colonialism in Our Age: A Sociolegal Analysis for Türkiye250
ban on imports of plastic waste (Varkkey, 2019). This paved the way for Türkiye to 
fll this gap in the sector (Gundogdu, 2022, p. 16). In 2019, Türkiye became the 
number one plastic waste importer (Gundogdu, 2022, p. 16). Türkiye was able to 
increase its market share in this way through bans and restrictions on plastic waste 
imposed by other importer countries such as Vietnam, Malaysia, and Thailand 
(Gundogdu, 2022, p. 16).
Other than economic, there is no specifc reason why Türkiye became interested 
in waste import. Government incentives for plastic recycling facilities in the name 
of economic growth and employment have accelerated the establishment of new 
facilities since 2017 (Ministry of Industry and Technology, n.d.). An increase in 
proft has contributed to the growth of the recycling sector, employing many more 
people and increasing tax revenue accordingly. There is also insuffcient domestic 
waste for recycling. The Turkish Statistical Institute’s (TUIK) data proves this. 
According to 2021 data, 104.8 million tons of waste were collected in Türkiye in 
2020. 16.99% of the waste was sent to municipal dumps and 69.43% to landfll, 
while the rate of those going to recycling facilities was only 12.83% (TUIK, 2021). 
Third, the lack of waste management infrastructure and the collection of unsepa￾rated waste has increased waste imports (Beyazlı & Aydemir, 2008, p. 93).
Policies are being developed to encourage people to collect household waste 
separately. People’s willingness to comply with such policies has been admirable. 
For instance, there was a noticeable decrease in the use of plastic bags immediately 
after the introduction of a regulation that allows the sale of bags in supermarkets for 
a fee (Onay et al., 2021, p. 38). Furthermore, locally developed practices are also 
notable. Some municipalities have started the separate collection of waste and 
developed practices aimed at instilling “zero waste” awareness in children (Onay 
et al., 2021, p. 8).
Domestic Waste Trade Regime in Theory and Practice
The regulation of the international waste trade requires a multinational effort. 
Multilateral international agreements are of great importance and can contribute to 
this. Türkiye is a party to most of these agreements (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
2022). However, one is particularly important: The Basel Convention (1989), which 
was opened for signature in 1989 and entered into force in 1992, as it plays a vital 
role in the codifcation of the waste trade regime. Türkiye has been a party to this 
Convention since 1994 (Basel Convention, 1989).
The Basel Convention is updated in line with changes in the sector. The relevant 
amendments are made at the Conference of the Parties (COP), the Convention’s 
governing body consisting of government representatives of state parties, as articu￾lated in Article 15 of the Convention (Basel Convention, 1989). The COPs, the last 
of which was held in June 2022, are held periodically every few years (Basel 
Convention, 1989). The Ban Amendment adopted at the 3rd COP in 1995 and 
entered into force in 2019 was the frst update to the Convention (Ban Amendment, 
S. Çağlayan and F. Yüzbaşi Tobaz251
1995). This sets out that hazardous waste trade among the parties, namely, 
Liechtenstein, EU, and OECD countries, is prohibited (Ban Amendment, 1995). 
Another amendment that updates the Convention is the Plastic Waste Amendment, 
which restricts the plastic waste trade (Plastic Waste Amendments, 2019). This 
amendment agreed upon at the 14th COP was adopted on May 10, 2019 (Plastic 
Waste Amendments, 2019). Its aim is to keep plastic waste at a minimum level and 
to be compatible with the environment (Plastic Waste Amendments, 2019). The 
amendment is binding for all parties that do not give notice of nonacceptance within 
the frst 6-month period entered into force on January 1, 2021 (Plastic Waste 
Amendments, 2019). Another development regarding the Convention is the Basel 
Protocol on Liability and Compensation opened for signature in 1999. The purpose 
of the protocol is to prevent damages that may occur during illegal trade and estab￾lish an effective legal regime to provide the necessary compensation. The protocol, 
which was planned to enter into force with a number of 20 parties, has 12 parties as 
of April 1, 2023. Therefore, it has yet to enter into force.
It became a party to the Convention at an early stage. Nevertheless, it has dis￾played different attitudes toward the Convention. First, it adopted the frst update to 
the Convention by approving the Ban Amendment in 2003 (Ban Amendment, 1995). 
Following the fulflment of the 3/4 party ratifcation requirement on December 5, 
2019, the Amendment became binding for Türkiye (Ban Amendment, 1995). 
Second, it did not remain silent on the Plastic Waste Amendment, which was agreed 
would become effective on January 1, 2021, for parties that do not submit a notifca￾tion of non-acceptance. At frst, it gave the notifcation to the Depository of the 
Convention (Plastic Waste Amendments, 2019). During this time, it was recorded as 
the only OECD member ratifying the Convention but not adopting the Amendment 
(Gündoğdu & Walker, 2021; Karasik, 2022, p. 5). On February 10, 2022, it became 
bound by the Amendment by withdrawing the previous notifcation (Plastic Waste 
Amendments, 2019). Third, the Liability Protocol is the latest development deter￾mining Türkiye’s position on the Convention. It is not yet a party to the Protocol 
(Liability Protocol, 1999); it has neither commenced the signature nor ratifcation 
processes to implement the Protocol.
Türkiye respects international law and tries to fulfl its international obligations. 
The Basel provisions to which it is bound are among these obligations. Article 90 of 
the Turkish Constitution is fundamental in incorporating the Basel provisions into 
the domestic legal order (1982, art. 90). Domestic legal regulations are then made 
accordingly.
There is no constitutional norm regulating waste import in the Turkish legal sys￾tem. However, there are provisions in the constitution regarding the prevention of 
environmental pollution caused by waste import. Article 56 of the Constitution 
defnes the protection of the environment under the title of “health services and 
protection of the environment” in Chapter III, which regulates the Social and 
Economic Rights and Duties (1982, art. 56). In the relevant literature, discussion on 
this article mainly centers on whether it recognizes the right to the environment in 
the context of collective rights (Ustun, 2021, pp.  2550–2588). The article thus 
The Waste Trade as a Tool of Colonialism in Our Age: A Sociolegal Analysis for Türkiye252
imposes duties on the state and citizens to prevent environmental pollution that may 
derive from uncontrolled waste import.
Moreover, the Turkish legal system includes laws and regulations that have been 
updated and revised during Türkiye’s European Union accession process on the 
subject. Environmental Law No. 2872 is the most crucial one on preventing envi￾ronmental pollution (The Environmental Law, 1983). This law as a legal framework 
prohibits the import of hazardous waste (Art. 13). In Article 11, it is explained that 
waste shall be recycled, and nonrecyclable waste shall be disposed of with the 
appropriate methods determined in the relevant sub-norms. It is imperative in Article 
11 that those who establish and operate recycling and disposal facilities shall have 
a license from the Ministry of Environment, Urbanisation and Climate Change. In 
Article 15, it is stated that facilities operating without a license shall be suspended 
indefnitely. As a result of the inspections made based on this article, the activities 
of 26 businesses in Adana, a major city in southern Türkiye, that operated without a 
license and cause environmental pollution have been suspended indefnitely 
(Boztepe, 2021). The principle adopted by the Law in Article 3/g on liability is the 
“Polluter Pays” as determined by the OECD. This principle is based on the under￾standing that the party responsible for environmental pollution bears the cost of its 
behavior and itself pays for the pollution it has created (Sezer & Dokmen, 2018). In 
Article 12, the law primarily entitles the Ministry to inspect. However, it states that 
the Ministry can share its authority with the Turkish Environment Agency, the 
General Directorate of Security, the Gendarmerie General Command, and the Coast 
Guard Command (The Environmental Law, 1983, Art. 12). It should be noted that 
these provisions regarding the importation and recycling of waste in the 
Environmental Law have been widely criticized, mainly because it favors corporate 
proft by following the “Polluter Pays” logic (Beyazit & Yarim, 2020, p. 87).
The Environmental Law’s comprehensive content plays a role in framing the 
waste trade. However, waste import principles, management, and procedures are 
specifed by lower legal norms, including regulations that ensure laws and presiden￾tial decrees and others such as circulars and communiqués.
The most important is the Regulation on the Regular Storage of Waste 2010, 
which covers issues such as technical principles regarding landflls, acceptance of 
waste for storage, and determining precautions, audits, and responsibilities. The 
Regulation sets a target of 60% proft from recycling by 2035. This is particularly 
signifcant in terms of making a long-term program (Turkish Courts of Accounts, 
2022, p. 14).
The second most important is the Zero Waste Regulation entered into force on 
July 12, 2019. Reducing or preventing waste generation and recycling waste is the 
focus of the Regulation. It also ensures the reduction of recycling costs to maintain 
the sustainability of waste management (Ministry of Environment Urbanization and 
Climate Change, 2022).
Another is the Regulation on Packaging Waste Control 2021. It was updated on 
June 26, 2021, and includes provisions for reuse, recycling, and use of waste in 
energy generation. According to the Regulation, manufacturers are required to pro￾duce in a way that produces the least amount of waste. The Regulation also 
S. Çağlayan and F. Yüzbaşi Tobaz253
introduces the practice of charging for bags to prevent environmental pollution 
caused by plastic bags.
There is also the Waste Import Implementation Circular published by the 
Ministry in 2022. The Circular tried to reduce the plastic waste import quota to 
80%, increase the amount of domestic waste collection, and prevent environmental 
pollution (Vardar, 2021). Within a short period, the waste import quota of 80% was 
not deemed suffcient, and with pressure from non-governmental organizations, the 
quota was reduced by 30–50% (Turapoğlu, 2020). The Circular was amended by the 
Ministry and entered into force on December 30, 2022. Unlike in the previous one, 
setting a fxed quota has been abandoned in the new Circular (Waste Import 
Implementation Circular, 2021, Art 10). Instead, the quota calculation shall be 
based on the Temporary Activity Certifcate and/or the Capacity Report based on 
the Environmental Permit and License Certifcate. According to Art 10 of the 
Circular, the quota calculation does not consider collecting, separating, pressing, 
and breaking operations. The material waste import quota rate shall be calculated 
over the annual consumption capacity specifed in the Capacity Report, over the rate 
stated in Annex-4/A, which is determined every year by the Ministry to increase the 
domestic collection rates.
It should be noted that the amount to be imported is determined as 50% of the 
capacity in Annex 4/A. According to the article, this quota allocated is to be used in 
equal amounts in quarterly periods, and the quota account is to be re-evaluated in 
the following years, considering the domestic waste collection rates. Put differently, 
the Ministry has tried to create a system that can take shape according to the criti￾cisms from the sector by adopting a variable approach rather than establishing a 
settled regime in waste imports.
Finally, there is the Communiqué on Import Inspection of Wastes under Control 
for Environmental Protection 2021, which delineates the rules for the importation of 
various products that are dangerous and need to be kept under control. More impor￾tantly, the Communiqué prohibited the import of waste in the ethylene polymer 
group that has a wide range of uses in daily life and takes up a considerable share of 
the plastic waste trade (Vardar, 2021). While this legislative change was accepted as 
a positive development by environmental organizations (Bianet, 2021), sector rep￾resentatives developed a strong opposition to the change and claimed that the ban on 
imports of polyethene scrap put the plastics industry in jeopardy and it was there￾fore necessary to remove the ban (Cumhuriyet, 2021). Thereupon, the ban was lifted 
with an amendment, and it was decided to impose strict controls on companies in 
the sector (Euronews, 2021).
The norms explained above are supposed to help all relevant actors implement 
waste import in a proper way. However, the situation in practice is not straightfor￾ward. Failure to enforce the rules on waste trade has brought disputes to court. The 
courts of frst instance, the administrative courts, are places where legal proceedings 
begin. The place of appeal for cases that cannot be resolved in these courts is the 
Council of State.
The Council of State’s decisions help to understand how waste trade-related 
cases are decided. This court deals with waste trade-related complaints in the 
The Waste Trade as a Tool of Colonialism in Our Age: A Sociolegal Analysis for Türkiye254
context of the environment rather than developing unique case law regarding the 
waste trade. Formerly, the Council of State adopted a broad interpretation that 
would allow many actors to fle lawsuits regarding environmental pollution (Ustun, 
2021, pp. 2587–2588). To this end, applications of bars, chambers, residents of vil￾lages, and inhabitants of cities encouraged everyone to become more sensitive 
toward such issues (Ustun, 2021, pp. 2587–2588). Recently, this broad interpreta￾tion has been abandoned, and decisions have been made to narrow the concept of 
interest, which is one of the parameters for fling administrative lawsuits (Dinc, 
2008, p. 36).
Is There Evidence of Colonialism?
It is diffcult to say that waste trade from developed countries to developing ones is 
evidence of colonialism. States that import waste consent to conduct this trade. 
Türkiye, which is subject to modern international law that prohibits colonialism, 
also imports waste in this manner. However, there are some signs that the waste 
trade has neocolonial features. First and most obviously, not all waste exported from 
developed countries to Türkiye is recyclable. In other words, waste exporting coun￾tries see Türkiye as their backyard, where they throw unusable garbage. Some quan￾titative research also proves this. The Chamber of Environmental Engineers of the 
Union of Chambers of Turkish Engineers and Architects (TMMOB) stated in the 
World Environment Day Türkiye Report published in June 2019 that not all of the 
waste imported from the European Union to Türkiye could be recycled; nearly 50% 
of the waste was unusable garbage.
It is also known by exporting countries that nonrecyclable waste is sent to 
Türkiye to be disposed of inappropriately. The OECD’s determination in the 
“Environment at a Glance 2020” report (p. 48) shows that Türkiye’s recycling rate 
(10%) remains at a low level compared to other OECD countries. This is so remark￾able that Türkiye’s waste recycling capacity has been the subject of press interest. 
British journalists investigating where the waste of a supermarket in England goes 
tried to determine the fnal destination of the waste by placing GPS tags in three 
plastic garbage bags left in containers in London (Chellel & Moskwa, 2022). The 
journalists identifed the fnal destination of the bags as an industrial zone in Adana 
(Chellel & Moskwa, 2022). The journalists found no recycling facility near the 
industrial zone as well as tons of European garbage piled up outside the specifc 
warehouse.
In another investigation conducted by Greenpeace Mediterranean in 2021, the 
researchers collected soil, ash, water, and sediment samples from fve different loca￾tions in Adana where plastic waste was mainly imported from England and European 
Union countries (Gundogdu, 2022, p. 7). Samples were examined in both Greenpeace 
Research Laboratories and independent laboratories (Gundogdu, 2022, p. 7). It was 
determined that toxic chemicals were produced while burning plastics that could 
S. Çağlayan and F. Yüzbaşi Tobaz255
trigger tumors and affect hormones and immune systems (Gundogdu, 2022, 
pp. 8–9).
Exporting countries are not the only responsible parties for the neocolonial fea￾tures of Türkiye’s waste trade. Türkiye also contributed to this. Waste sent to the 
solid waste warehouses is improperly segregated in unlicensed facilities, and some 
are even incinerated in open areas, as articulated by Ozturk (2020). This situation 
causes many problems in practice, primarily adverse effects on human health.
Those who work in the waste disposal sector constitute the frst group exposed to 
the side effects of uncontrolled waste disposal and destruction (Human Rights 
Watch, 2022, p. 42). Shopkeepers around the waste facilities and even neighboring 
residents who need to open the windows on warm summer days are negatively 
affected by the burned plastic smell (Human Rights Watch, 2022, p. 48). They are 
all directly exposed to pollution, resulting in respiratory distress. The offcials do 
not make public the records or statistics of those who receive medical care for 
pollution-induced respiratory illnesses such as asthma and chronic obstructive pul￾monary disease (Human Rights Watch, 2022, pp. 71–6). The survey conducted by 
Human Rights Watch reveals that governmental pressures on the healthcare sector, 
including hospitals and Turkish medical associations, prevent such statistics from 
being made public. Moreover, stations measuring air quality in Adana are far from 
the waste disposal facilities, thus preventing the amount of damage to the local 
people from being revealed, which is among the fndings obtained from the study.
It is important to note that people residing near the waste disposal areas do not 
generally constitute the socioeconomically wealthy segment of society. The low 
awareness in these areas thus prevents this group from using any judicial remedy 
effectively. Third parties can of course legally support people who cannot defend 
their own rights. NGOs are the frst to come to mind in this context. However, the 
narrow interpretation of the concept of “interest” by the administrative courts pre￾vents complaints from being brought to the judiciary (Dinc, 2008, p. 36). This nar￾row interpretation by the courts results in the applications of third parties being 
rejected, that is, those who are not directly affected by the waste, on the grounds that 
their interests are not affected.
Likewise, the uncontrolled disposal of waste in public areas has external effects. 
Microplastics penetrate foods like sea salt (Gundogdu, 2018, pp.  1006–1014). 
People in neighboring countries are also affected by these undesirable practices. 
Studies have proven that Türkiye has severe plastic pollution, so much so that she 
was recorded as the country that disposed of the most plastic into the Mediterranean 
after Egypt and Italy (Onay et al., 2021, pp. 7–12). In other studies, it was concluded 
that the situation in other seas is no different. There is more plastic pollution on the 
Black Sea, Marmara, and Aegean coasts compared to the coasts of other countries 
(Onay et  al., 2021, pp.  18–20). People’s quality of life decreases, as does their 
health, and even deaths may occur. It may also be possible for people to be affected 
psychologically, with increasing concerns about food safety causing mental 
disorders.
The Waste Trade as a Tool of Colonialism in Our Age: A Sociolegal Analysis for Türkiye256
Conclusion
This chapter considered whether Türkiye’s import-based waste trade amounts to a 
practice of neocolonialism and whether the domestic waste trade regime effectively 
impacts on this practice. It can be concluded that the economic benefts of waste 
import are given greater weight than the welfare of people in the country. That the 
legal apparatus, both legal norms and their judicial review, establishing the domestic 
waste trade regime have been shaped in a way that helps to boost economic proft 
rather than ensuring social good has caused this result. These actions of Türkiye 
have been effective in making the waste trade take the form of a new colonial prac￾tice. However, Türkiye is not the only country responsible for this situation. States 
that export waste to Türkiye have contributed equally to creating this. Records of 
international organizations like the OECD, research conducted by NGOs like 
Greenpeace Mediterranean, and investigations by independent media organizations 
show that Türkiye has defciencies in waste recycling. Despite this, exporting states 
do not refrain from sending their garbage, including that which cannot be recycled, 
to Türkiye.
References
Achankeng, E. (2003, October). Globalization, urbanization and municipal solid waste manage￾ment in Africa. In Proceedings of the African Studies Association of Australasia and the Pacifc 
26th annual conference (pp. 1–22).
Ban Amendment. (1995). Retrieved December 27, 2022, from http://www.basel.int/
Implementation/LegalMatters/BanAmendment/Overview/tabid/1484/Default.aspx
Barnard, M. (2020). Globalization and colonialism. In Fashion theory (pp. 743–756). Routledge.
Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their 
Disposal. (1989). http://www.basel.int/TheConvention/Overview/TextoftheConvention/
tabid/1275/Default.aspx
Basel Protocol on Liability and Compensation. (1999). Retrieved December 27, 2022, from http://
www.basel.int/TheConvention/Overview/LiabilityProtocol/tabid/2399/Default.aspx
Beyazıt, E., & Yarım, S. (2020). Kırılgan Dünyanın Küresel Sorunu Çöp (1st ed.). Gece Kitaplığı.
Beyazli, D., & Aydemir, Ş. (2008). Landflling with mixed wastes: Environmental effects of wastes 
and their management in the eastern Black Sea region of Turkey. Indoor and Built Environment, 
17(2), 92–102.
Bianet. (2021, May 19). Plastik Atıkların Yüzde 74’ünün İthalatı Yasaklandı. Bianet. https://www.
bianet.org/bianet/cevre/244301-plastik-atiklarin-yuzde-74-unun-ithalati-yasaklandi
Boztepe, S.  A. (2021, May 2). Adana’da çevreyi Kirleten Geri Dönüşüm 
Tesislerine Rekor Ceza. Anadolu Agency. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/turkiye/
adanada-cevreyi-kirleten-geri-donusum-tesislerine-rekor-ceza/2227274
Bullard, R. D. (2018). Dumping in Dixie: Race, class, and environmental quality. Routledge.
Butt, D. (2013). Colonialism and postcolonialism. In H. LaFollette (Ed.), The international encyclo￾pedia of ethics. Wiley-Blackwell. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781444367072.
wbiee763/full
Caglayan, S. (2015). A review of the case law of the European court of human rights in the context 
of environmental justice. Hacettepe Hukuk Fakültesi Dergisi, 5, 81–100.
S. Çağlayan and F. Yüzbaşi Tobaz257
Chellel, K., & Moskwa, W. (2022, March 29). A plastic bag’s 2,000-mile journey shows 
the messy truth about recycling. Bloomberg.Com. https://www.bloomberg.com/
graphics/2022-tesco-recycle-plastic-waste-pledge-falls-short/
Communiqué on Import Inspection of Wastes under Control for Environmental 
Protection, RG 31.12.2021/31706. (2021). https://www.resmigazete.gov.tr/
eskiler/2021/12/20211231M4-2.htm
Cumhuriyet. (2021, July 9). Yasak İki Ay Dayanabildi: Plastik Atık İthalatı
Yeniden Başlıyor. Cumhuriyet. https://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/haber/
yasak-iki-ay-dayanabildi-plastik-atik-ithalati-yeniden-basliyor-1851053
Dinç, G. (2008). Avrupa İnsan Hakları Sözleşmesine Göre Çevre ve İnsan. Türkiye Barolar Birliği 
Yayınları.
Fuller, S., Ngata, T., Borrelle, S. B., & Farrelly, T. (2022). Plastics pollution as waste colonialism 
in Te Moananui. Journal of Political Ecology, 29(1), 534–560.
Gundogdu, S. (2018). Contamination of table salts from Turkey with microplastics. Food Additives 
& Contaminants: Part A, 35(5), 1006–1014.
Gundogdu, S. (2022). Game of wastes: Irreversable impact. Greenpeace Mediterranean.
Gundogdu, S., & Walker, T. R. (2021). Why Turkey should not import plastic waste pollution from 
developed countries? Marine Pollution Bulletin, 171, 112772–112775.
Haag, D. (2012). Mechanisms of neo-colonialism: Current French and British infuence in 
Cameroon and Ghana (Working Paper, (2011/6)). International Catalan Institute for Peace.
Human Rights Watch. (2022). “It’s as if they’re poisoning us” The health impacts of plastic recy￾cling in Turkey. Human Rights Watch. https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/fles/media_2022/09/
turkey0922web_0.pdf
Karasik, R. (2022, February). Plastic pollution policy country profle: Turkey (pp.  1–8). Duke 
University Nicholas Institute for Environmental Policy Solutions.
Kaza, S., Yao, L. C., Bhada-Tata, P., & Van Woerden, F. (2018). What a waste 2.0: A global snap￾shot of solid waste management to 2050. World Bank.
Manglou, M., Rocher, L., & Bahers, J.-B. (2022). Waste colonialism and metabolic fows in island 
territories. Journal of Political Ecology, 29(1), 1–19.
Martinez-Alier, J., Temper, L., Del Bene, D., & Scheidel, A. (2016). Is there a global environmen￾tal justice movement? The Journal of Peasant Studies, 43(3), 731–755.
Ministry of Industry and Technology (n.d.). Retrieved December 20, 2023, from https://www.
sanayi.gov.tr/destek-ve-tesvikler/yatirim-tesvik-sistemleri 
Ministry of Environment Urbanization and Climate Change. (2022). Sıfır Atık Yönetimi Sistemi 
Uygulama Kılavuzu. https://sifratik.gov.tr/content/fles/uploads/24/MAVİ.pdf
Mohai, P., Pellow, D., & Roberts, J. T. (2009). Environmental justice. Annual Review of Environment 
and Resources, 34, 405–430.
Morales, O., Jr., Grineski, S. E., & Collins, T. W. (2012). Structural violence and environmental 
injustice: The case of a US–Mexico border chemical plant. Local Environment, 17(1), 1–21.
OECD. (2020). Environment at a Glance 2020. https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/4ea7d35f￾en.pdf?expires=1672127461&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=B4AEDF6B73CD90CE29
0E6A58AF9E36B2
Onay, T. T., Küçüker, M. A., Vardar, S., & Yücel, T. (2021). Türkiye’de Plastik Atık Sorunu ve 
Politika Önerileri. WWF Türkiye – Boğaziçi Üniversitesi Çevre Bilimleri Enstitüsü. https://
www.wwf.org.tr/?11580/Turkiyede-Plastik-Atik-Sorunu-ve-Politika-Onerileri
Ozturk, M. (2020, July 4). İngiltere’den Adana’ya Kirli ve Karışık Plastik Atık İthali. 
Independent Türkçe. https://www.indyturk.com/node/206221/t%C3%BCrkiyeden-sesler/
ingiltere%E2%80%99den-adana%E2%80%99ya-kirli-ve-kar%C4%B1%C5%9F%C4%B1k￾plastik-at%C4%B1k-ithali
Plastic Waste Amendments. (2019). Retrieved December 27, 2022, from http://www.basel.int/
Implementation/Plasticwaste/Amendments/Overview/tabid/8426/Default.aspx
Pratt, L. A. (2010). Decreasing dirty dumping – A reevaluation of toxic waste colonialism and 
the global management of transboundary hazardous waste. Texas Environmental Law Journal, 
41, 147.
The Waste Trade as a Tool of Colonialism in Our Age: A Sociolegal Analysis for Türkiye258
Reed, T. (2009). Toxic colonialism, environmental justice, and native resistance in Silko’s “alma￾nac of the dead”. Melus, 34(2), 25–42.
Regulation on Packaging Waste Control, RG 26.06.2021/31523. (2021). https://www.resmigazete.
gov.tr/eskiler/2021/06/20210626-18.htm
Regulation on the Regular Storage of Waste, RG 26.03.2010/27533. (2010). https://www.res￾migazete.gov.tr/eskiler/2010/03/20100326-13.htm
Runyan, A. S. (2018). Disposable waste, lands and bodies under Canada’s gendered nuclear colo￾nialism. International Feminist Journal of Politics, 20(1), 24–38.
Sezer, Ö., & Dökmen, G. (2018). Kirleten Öder İlkesi Çerçevesinde Türkiye’de Çevre Vergileri 
ve Negatif Dışsallık Sorunu. Dumlupınar Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, 57, Article 57.
Shaw, M. N. (2017). International law. Cambridge University Press.
The Environmental Law, Number 2872. (1983). https://www.mevzuat.gov.tr/mevzuat?MevzuatN
o=2872&MevzuatTur=1&MevzuatTertip=5
TMMOB Chamber of Environmental Engineers. (2019). Dünya Çevre Günü Türkiye Raporu. 
https://www.cmo.org.tr/resimler/ekler/10504079d7e9ced_ek.pdf?tipi=72&turu=X&sube=0
TUIK. (2021, December 23). Atık İstatistikleri 2020. https://data.tuik.gov.tr/Bulten/
Index?p=Atik-Istatistikleri-2020-37198
Turapoğlu, A. Z. (2020, September 4). Atık İthalatı Kotası Yüzde 50’ye İndirildi. Anadolu Agency. 
https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/ekonomi/atik-ithalati-kotasi-yuzde-50ye-indirildi/1962949
Turkish Constitution. (1982). https://www5.tbmm.gov.tr/yayinlar/2021/TC_Anayasasi_ve_
TBMM_Ic_Tuzugu_Ingilizce.pdf
Turkish Courts of Accounts. (2022). Plastik Atık Yönetimi Sayıştay Raporu. https://sayistay.gov.tr/
reports/download/3961-plastik-atik-yonetimi
Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs. (2022). Ülkemizin Taraf Olduğu Başlıca Çevre Anlaşmaları. 
Retrieved December 27, 2022, from https://www.mfa.gov.tr/data/DISPOLITIKA/
Anlasmalar.pdf
Türkiye’de Plastik/Polietilen İthalatına Getirilen Yasak Kaldırıldı. (2021, July 10). Euronews. https://
tr.euronews.com/2021/07/10/turkiye-de-plastik-polietilen-ithalat-na-getirilen-yasak-kald-r-ld
Ustun, K.  T. (2021). Anayasa Mahkemesinin Bireysel Başvuru Kararlarında Çevre Hakkına 
Yaklaşımı. Selçuk Üniversitesi Hukuk Fakültesi Dergisi, 29(3), Article 3.
Vardar, N. (2021). Plastik Atık İthalatında Büyük Zafer. Greenpeace Akdeniz Türkiye. 
Retrieved December 28, 2022, from https://www.greenpeace.org/turkey/basin-bultenleri/
plastik-atik-ithalatinda-buyuk-zafer
Varkkey, H. (2019, July 29). By exporting trash, rich countries put their waste out of sight and out 
of mind. CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2019/07/29/opinions/by-exporting-trash-rich-countries￾put-their-waste-out-of-sight-and-out-of-mind-varkkey/index.html
Waste Import Implementation Circular, Number 18330076/010.06/2599483. (2021). https://web￾dosya.csb.gov.tr/db/ced/icerikler/2021-25-sayili-genelge-20220103145138.pdf
Watts, M. J. (2020). Neocolonialism. In Encyclopedia of human geography (2nd ed.). Elsevier Ltd.
Wen, Z., Xie, Y., Chen, M., & Dinga, C. D. (2021). China’s plastic import ban increases pros￾pects of environmental impact mitigation of plastic waste trade fow worldwide. Nature 
Communications, 12(425), 1–9.
Zero Waste Regulation, RG 12.07.2019/30829. (2019). https://www.resmigazete.gov.tr/
eskiler/2019/07/20190712-9.htm
S. Çağlayan and F. Yüzbaşi Tobaz259
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health
The True Costs of Plastic Waste Exports 
to Malaysia
Pui Yi Wong
Introduction: Plastic Waste Trade in Malaysia
Walking along a jetty with a plastic recycler one afternoon, we spotted the ubiqui￾tous polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles littering the river shoreline. We were 
in Selangor, the most industrialized state in the federation of Malaysia, where infra￾structure development is more advance than anywhere else in the country. The recy￾cler shook his head, gave an exasperated laughed, and said, “We need those bottles 
as our raw materials, but people keep throwing them away.” PET, used to make soda 
and water bottles, is the easiest and most common plastics to recycle due to its low 
melting temperature and single-layer, mono-material composition. Yet, throughout 
Malaysia, PET bottles frequently top the list of trash collected in cleanups.
Mobilik, Ling, Mohd Lokman, and Ruhana Hassan (2014) found that clear and 
colored plastic bottles represented 46.15% of the total common source debris, col￾lected from both marine and terrestrial environments, at four public beaches in the 
state of Sarawak. 90.7% of the total objects collected was plastic. In 2022, Reef 
Check Malaysia, a local marine conservation organization that holds annual nation￾wide beach cleanups, found that out of 300,183 items (24,301 kg) collected across 
394km of coastlines, the most common items found were cigarette butts at 55,100 
pieces, followed by plastic bottles at 44,706 bottles.1
In Malaysia, the Solid Waste and Public Cleansing Management Act 2007 man￾dates waste separation at source. Failure to comply can lead to a fne not exceeding 
1Reef Check Malaysia. (2022, October 11). Malayians picked up 24,301kg of trash from our beaches. 
https://www.reefcheck.org.my/press/malaysians-picked-up-24301kg-of-trash-from-our-beaches
P. Yi Wong (*) 
Independent Researcher, Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_13260
1000 Malaysian ringgit (approximately 220 US dollars). This Act was established 
to standardize solid waste management (household, commercial, construction, 
industry, etc.) and public cleansing across all local authorities regardless of revenue 
levels. The government announced the implementation of waste separation at source 
in 2015 under this Act,2
 but until today, there is still no enforcement of this practice 
(Razali et al., 2020).
This Act also does not cover all 13 states in Malaysia. Some state governments, 
including in Selangor, have opted not to surrender their power over waste manage￾ment to the federal government. This have hindered efforts to institute nationwide 
reforms for waste management.
Aside from enacting legal reforms, the Malaysian government has consis￾tently  run public campaigns on recycling. Decades of being subjected to songs 
about recycling on public service announcements and in schools have not convinced 
the general Malaysian public to practice waste reduction, separation, and recycling. 
In addition, many rural areas and islands do not even have waste collection services.
Amid these domestic waste management and public apathy challenges, Malaysia 
became the world’s top destination for plastic waste exports in 2018, receiving more 
than 800,000 tons of plastic waste that year, including unrecyclable municipal 
waste. The country which, together with its Asian neighbors, had been blamed by 
Western scholars and media for plastic leakage into the ocean (Jambeck et  al., 
2015), became the largest garbage dump of the developed world.
In 2018, China’s National Sword Policy came into effect with a ban on 24 types 
of solid waste imports to the country, including plastic waste, unsorted waste paper, 
waste textiles, and waste from the manufacture of iron or steel. This disrupted global 
networks for recyclable material and redirected plastic waste to new markets in 
Southeast Asia and other developing countries with weaker regulatory frameworks 
and less technical capacity to deal with the massive amounts of waste. The infux of 
waste to Malaysia led to a sharp rise in illegal recycling facilities as well as illegal 
dumpsites, causing land, water, and air pollution that affected communities’ health, 
food systems, and natural environments nationwide.
This chapter highlights how the plastic waste trade impacted the lives of 
Malaysians, with a focus on the time period from 2018 to 2021. This study aims to 
unpack the concept of “waste colonialism” by examining the externalities where 
plastic waste supply chains touch the ground in a waste recipient country, with an 
emphasis on social, cultural, and political implications. The study explores three 
key questions: What were the impacts of plastic waste imports on people and their 
environments? How did the people respond? How did waste colonialism cause harm 
socially, culturally, and politically?
In-depth interviews were conducted with 40 stakeholders, including politicians, 
government offcials, businesspeople in the private sector, civil society activists, and 
community group representatives, who were affected by the importing, processing, 
2New Straits Times. (2015, September 1). Separation of solid waste from source launched. https://
www.nst.com.my/news/2015/09/separation-solid-waste-source-launched
P. Yi. Wong261
smuggling, burning, and dumping of foreign plastic waste. The interviews were 
conducted across feld visits to Sungai Petani and Alor Setar (in the state of Kedah), 
Bukit Mertajam and Georgetown (in the state of Penang), Putrajaya (a federal terri￾tory), and Klang and Kuala Langat (in the state of Selangor). Primary data collected 
was supplemented by secondary data from news articles or other research reports.3
Plastic Waste Trade and Colonialism
Waste trade is the international buying and selling of waste or scrap materials, or the 
offering of waste management, as commodities or service between countries for 
treatment, disposal, or recycling. The wastes include plastics, papers, textiles, tires, 
electronics, metals, chemicals, and many more. On the surface, the trade appears to 
be just another economic transaction where there are willing buyers and willing 
sellers and profts to be made. However, the export of wastes occurs mostly from 
economically developed, wealthy, industrialized countries in the Global North to 
less wealthy and less industrialized countries in the Global South, and takes place to 
exploit weaker economies through cost externalization. This occurs as the “com￾modities” are undeniably waste materials and often contain hazardous or diffcult￾to-recycle compounds. They may end up being dumped or burned, resulting in 
harmful emissions in the recipient country. The wastes are also often mixed with 
no-value residual waste that the exporter would have had to dispose of in the coun￾try of origin otherwise.
This characteristic of this trade, where waste importers, processers, and workers 
might welcome the materials and the processing activity despite the risks involved 
and negative impacts on human and environmental health, indicates some level of 
control and dependency in the relationships, and has evoked the term “toxic or 
waste colonialism.” It is reminiscent of the colonial area where lands and natural 
resources were exploited for the proft of colonial masters. In this case, the clean air, 
water, land, labor, and health of recipient countries are “conquered” and used to 
process waste from the “colonial masters,” a form of “territorial expansion” by more 
powerful actors, so that wealthier societies can continue to enjoy a certain type of 
lifestyle, one of wasteful production and consumption, while exporting the true 
costs of those lifestyles to other territories.
The pollution haven hypothesis predicts a trend of developed countries exporting 
polluting industries to less developed countries to avoid the costs of stringent envi￾ronmental regulations (Davis et al., 2019; Puckett & Smith, 2002). While most stud￾ies had been focused on electronic waste or e-waste, plastic waste has also been 
shown to fow from high-income to low-income countries. In the past, cargo vessels 
had carried China-made consumer goods to developed countries, and instead of 
returning empty, the liners offered favorable shipping rates to transport low-value 
3No interviews were secured with parties involved in illegal plastic recycling.
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health262
products, including plastic waste and used paper, back to China using (backhaul) 
empty containers (Tran et al., 2021).4
 Coupled with low labor costs, low environ￾mental standards, and high demand for recycling materials, China was subjected to 
waste colonization by the more industrialized economies (including the USA, UK, 
Germany, and Japan) for decades.
China has since grown into an industrialized economic powerhouse, and it simi￾larly became a “colonial master,” outsourcing the pollution to weaker economies. 
The “fying geese” paradigm of economic development had been used to explain the 
sequential catching-up process of industrialization of latecomer economies, seen as 
“geese” fying in the wake of a “lead goose” and benefting from its updraft. 
However, instead of developing better technologies to deal with waste once it has 
accumulated more resources, the “lead goose” tends to export waste and pollution 
to the fock of “geese” following it, while continuing to enjoy the benefts of indus￾trial expansion.
China started regulating solid waste imports through Operation Green Fence 
(OGF) in 2013, with stricter inspections to stop the illegal trade of hazardous waste 
and improve the quality of imported waste.5
 In July 2017, China announced the 
National Sword Policy and implemented a 0.5% contamination limit (down from 
1.5% for OGF) for all solid waste imports, in attempts to halt the continued con￾tamination of the country by soiled imported waste which were overwhelming facil￾ities. This was followed by a new waste import inspection program aimed at 
eradicating trading rings and smuggling channels called Blue Sky 2018. Then, in 
April 2020, China approved a further revision to its pollution importation crack￾down policies, increasing the import ban to cover a total of 32 types of solid waste, 
with a zero contamination limit imposed (Tran et al., 2021).
The Chinese government had faced diffculties monitoring waste imports, facing 
smuggling or illegal trading of foreign waste, improper handling of trash, and seri￾ous pollution of air, land, and water.6
 In a formal notifcation to the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade dated July 18, 
2017, regarding the ban of 24 types of waste materials (under the National Sword 
Policy), the Chinese government provided the following objective and rationale for 
the urgent measures:
According to the Special Actions of Strengthening the Supervision and Strictly 
Striking of Illegal “Foreign Garbage” by the General Administration of Customs 
of China, Ministry of Environmental Protection of China, Ministry of Public 
4Penang Port authorities, interview, Butterworth, November 12, 2019.
5 Investigations by PTASKL around Klang revealed that recycling facilities set up by Chinese busi￾nessmen had been in the area since 2013, an indication that the facilities were set up after China’s 
OGF led Chinese waste-related businesses to move to Southeast Asia.
6Yen Nee Lee. (2018, April 16). The world is scrambling now that China is refusing to be a trash 
dumping ground. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2018/04/16/climate-change-china-bans-import￾of-foreign-waste-to-stop-pollution.html#:~:text=It%20grew%20a%20whole%20
waste,country%20into%20a%20major%20polluter.&text=China’s%20ban%2C%20they%20
said%2C%20would,better%20manage%20their%20own%20trash
P. Yi. Wong263
Security of China and General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection 
and Quarantine of China, as well as the Special Actions of Striking of the Illegal 
Actions of Imported Solid Waste Processing and Utilizing Sectors by Ministry of 
Environmental Protection of China, we found that large amounts of dirty wastes 
or even hazardous wastes are mixed in the solid waste that can be used as raw 
materials. This polluted China’s environment seriously [emphasis added]. To 
protect China’s environmental interests and people’s health, we urgently adjust 
the imported solid wastes list, and forbid the import of solid wastes that are 
highly polluted.7
China’s National Sword ban exposed Western “recycling” programs as being 
highly suspect and dependent on exports to Asia for partial, and often polluting, 
recycling. Brooks, Wang, and Jambeck (2018) found that a cumulation of 45% of all 
plastic waste was imported by China since 1992, and they estimated that 111 mil￾lion tons of plastic waste will be displaced by the ban by 2030. Even before the ban, 
only 9% of total discarded plastics globally were recycled. 12% were burned while 
79% were sent to landflls or illegally dumped (Geyer et al., 2017).
The National Sword ban had the effect of redirecting plastic waste to Southeast 
Asia and other developing countries which have even lower capacity to process the 
massive amounts of plastic waste coupled with lax regulatory frameworks to protect 
the environment (Wang et al., 2020). In 2015, a study examined countries’ annual 
tons of mismanaged plastic waste and the total amount which ended up in the ocean. 
Researchers found that, out of the top eight countries globally, fve were in Southeast 
Asia – Indonesia (2nd), the Philippines (3rd), Vietnam (4th), Thailand (7th), and 
Malaysia (8th) (Jambeck et al., 2015). Yet, these are the very same countries bearing 
the burden of processing foreign plastic and other wastes following China’s refusal 
to continue that role. After the China ban, Chinese recyclers moved their operations 
to other countries to receive wastes largely from the West, process the proftable 
fractions, dump or burn the rest, and then send the recyclables back to China to be 
fed into their manufacturing processes. These developing economies, like China in 
the past, are hungry for economic opportunities, regardless of the negative externali￾ties that come with them.8
7WTO. Catalogue of Solid Wastes Forbidden to Import into China by the End of 2017 (4 Classes, 
24 Kinds). Notifcation No. G/TBT/N/CHN/1211. 2017. Retrieved from http://tbtims.wto.org/en/
RegularNotifcations/View/137356, archived at https://perma.cc/3CUT-LEM9. The 24 types of 
materials were listed at https://members.wto.org/crnattachments/2017/TBT/CHN/17_3218_00_x.
pdf, archived at https://perma.cc/35G9-FGNL
8Fuller, Ngata, Borrelle, and Farrelly (2022) argued that waste colonialism is not only inherent in 
the trade of plastic waste but also in the plastic pollution problem, as a form of ecological imperial￾ism rooted in Western industrial capitalist modes of production and consumption.
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health264
Plastic Waste Exports to Malaysia
As a result of the tsunami of Western wastes redirected from China, communities in 
Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, and the Philippines have been found living close to 
mountains of plastic waste or open burning grounds, subjected to toxic fumes and 
contaminated groundwater.9
 Between January and November 2018, Malaysia 
received 15.7% of the total plastic waste exports from the top exporting countries: 
the USA, Japan, Germany, UK, and Belgium.10 Malaysia has relatively good ports, 
roads, and industrial infrastructure and a Mandarin-speaking business community 
ready to form partnerships with businesses from China.
The import of plastic scrap into Malaysia continued to increase in 2020. While 
most major export markets for scrap plastic saw moderate to signifcant declines for 
the frst half of 2020 compared to 2019, Malaysia nearly tripled its imports despite 
enacting stringent scrap plastic import rules.11 Greenpeace’s Unearthed analysis 
released in October 2020 showed that Malaysia was the second largest market for 
plastic waste from the UK, with exports increasing 81% from January to July 2020 
compared to the same period in 2019.12 Overall, in 2020, UK plastic waste exports 
to Malaysia increased by 63% from 40,007 tons to 65,316 tons, but the volume 
remained lower than in 2016, 2017, and 2018.13
As a whole, more than 1.206 million tons of HS 3915 plastic scrap were imported 
by Malaysia in 2018 and 2019 (according to UN COMTRADE data), while data 
from Malaysia’s Department of Solid Waste Management (JPSPN) showed that 
2020 saw imports of 478,092 tons, an increase of 43% compared to the year before. 
This sum only accounts for legal transactions (see Fig. 1). Data on the amount of 
plastic scrap that has been recycled into resins, for domestic use or export, as well 
as the amount of unrecyclable or contaminated waste stranded in Malaysia, has not 
been made available.
9See Petrlik, Ismawati, Arisandi, and Bell (2019), Bueta (2020), Global Alliance for Incinerator 
Alternatives (2019), Akenji et al. (2019), and Sembiring (2019) for country case studies.
10Greenpeace. (2019, April 23). Data from the global plastics waste trade 2016-2018 and the off￾shore impact of China’s foreign waste import ban, An analysis of import-export data from the top 
21 exporters and 21 importers. https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-eastasia￾stateless/2020/06/9858a41c-gpea-plastic-waste-trade-research-briefng-v2.pdf
11Staub, C. (2020, August 12). Plastic exports drop 18% in frst half of 2020. Resource Recycling. 
publication. https://resource-recycling.com/plastics/2020/08/12/
plastic-exports-drop-18-in-frst-half-of-2020/
12Clarke, J.  S. (2020, October 9). UK still shipping plastic waste to poorer countries despite 
Conservative pledge. Greenpeace. https://unearthed.greenpeace.org/2020/10/09/
plastic-waste-uk-boris-johnson-malaysia/
13Moore, D. (2021, February 17). ‘Enormous’ increase in UK plastic waste exports to Turkey and 
Malaysia  – Greenpeace. Circular. https://www.circularonline.co.uk/news/enormous-increase-in￾uk-plastic-waste-exports-to-turkey-and-malaysia-greenpeace/. For a response by Malaysian plas￾tic industry players, see Free Malaysia Today. (2021, February 25). Claims on plastic waste 
imports rubbished. https://www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/nation/2021/02/25/
claims-on-plastic-waste-imports-rubbished/
P. Yi. Wong265
Fig. 1 Import of HS Code 3915 plastic waste to Malaysia, 1997–2020. The quantity of imports in 
net weight for 2020 was provided by JPSPN.  The trade value was not available. (Source: UN 
COMTRADE data (1997–2019) and Department of Solid Waste Management (JPSPN), 2020)
Exporting the Plastic Waste Burden
Forced into Activism to Protect Their Homes
The export of plastic waste brings with it a host of problems. Since 2017, illegal 
plastic waste processing facilities had mushroomed in Malaysia’s most industrial￾ized state of Selangor, due to its easy access from the largest port in the country, Port 
Klang. The facilities are considered illegal if they were operating with no prior 
approval from the federal, state, and local authorities. In addition, to process 
imported plastic waste categorized as HS Code 3915 plastic scrap, companies are 
required to hold import licenses called Approved Permits (AP) issued by the then 
Ministry of Housing and Local Government (KPKT, now known as the Ministry of 
Local Government Development).
Various terms including “clean, homogenous plastic,” “plastic scrap,” and “plas￾tic waste” have been used to describe what is allowable under the HS Code 3915. 
The import of nonrecyclable household waste, municipal waste, or mixed waste is 
completely banned in Malaysia. Despite the Customs prohibitions, at one point, 
more than 17,000 tons or 17 million kilograms of unrecyclable plastic trash entered 
Malaysia and were dumped openly in Jenjarom, a small town in the municipality of 
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health266
Kuala Langat in the state of Selangor.14 Greenpeace Malaysia (2018) documented 
discarded plastic packaging from 106 different brands of consumer household prod￾ucts from at least 19 countries found in four different locations: Pulau Indah (Klang), 
Telok Panglima Garang (Kuala Langat), Jenjarom (Kuala Langat), and Tasek (Ipoh, 
in another state of Perak).
In early 2018, a group of residents-turned-volunteer activists from the Sungai 
Jarom New Village’s Village Development and Security Committee (JKKK KBSJ) 
began mounting an opposition to the increasing levels of pollution surrounding their 
homes. Plagued by the toxic fumes of burning plastic, community members had 
been falling ill. Urged on by a chemical engineer, Lay Peng Pua, who has knowl￾edge of toxic compounds and their health impacts, JKKK KBSJ began their own 
investigations, documenting the locations of illegal factories and GPS coordinates, 
as the illegal facilities had no signboards nor addresses. They submitted letter after 
letter, complaining to the local authority, but they were met with lackluster response. 
Offcers from the local authority berated them for being “too free” and having 
“nothing better to do.”15
The group soon found mountains of foreign municipal waste hidden within oil 
palm estates around their homes. They set up the Kuala Langat Environmental 
Action Association (PTASKL) to consolidate efforts in opposing the illegal plastic 
waste factories. In the nearby town of Klang, illegal factories were also in operation, 
but the facilities were more dispersed and less conspicuous. Residents similarly set 
up the Klang Environmental Action Association (PTASK), and like PTASKL, they 
traced factories which had stockpiled jumbo bags full of plastic waste, had no sign￾boards, and were emitting noxious fumes. The residents in Klang similarly noted 
down GPS coordinates and addresses, and took photographs. They lamented that 
the local authority or local council would not commence investigations unless they 
furnished suffcient evidence.16
Anecdotes in media articles presented hints on how these illegal factories came 
about. The Los Angeles Times reported a consultant for the plastic recycling indus￾try saying, “The previous government was very supportive of China, so some com￾panies found their way in outside the proper channels.” 17 Operations were spread 
out across various small facilities; one facility purchases, dismantles, and crushes 
large plastic debris into tiny shards, to be packed and trucked to another facility, 
processed into pellets, and exported to China.
14Tan, Y. (2019, February 13). Plastic pollution: One town smothered by 17,000 tonnes of rubbish. 
BBC News. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-46518747
15PTASKL member, several interviews, 2020.
16The terms local council, local government, or local authority tend to be used interchangeably, but 
for this chapter, the term local council (comprising politically appointed local councilors) is used 
to refer to the policymaking arm of the local government, while local authority is used to refer to 
the bureaucratic arm.
17B.Shashank. (2018, December 29). How heaps of U.S. plastic waste landed in Malaysia, broken 
down by workers earning $10 a day. Los Angeles Times. https://www.latimes.com/world/asia/la￾fg-malaysia-plastic-2018-story.html
P. Yi. Wong267
The government remained unresponsive in the frst half of 2018. That same year, 
Malaysia experienced a watershed moment in its political history. For the frst time 
since the formation of the country in 1963, a new political coalition Pakatan Harapan 
(PH) was voted into federal power on May 9, 2018, during the 14th General Election 
(GE14). PH took over from the Barisan Nasional (BN) coalition which had gov￾erned the country since independence.
After GE14, complaints by the groups in Jenjarom and Klang fnally received 
attention from the federal government and the newly appointed environment minis￾ter Bee Yin Yeo.18 Local news daily Kosmo! broke an award-winning exposé on the 
illegal factories in Kuala Langat,19 supported by environmental groups Malaysian 
Natural Heritage Protectors Society (PEKA) and Greenpeace Malaysia. International 
media soon took notice. The PH administration sprung into action in July 2018, 
sealing illegal factories and stopping containers at ports. As the authorities began 
cracking down on operators in Kuala Langat and Klang, plastic recycling spread to 
other areas in Selangor. Illegal factories were soon discovered in almost every state 
in Peninsular Malaysia, and containers of waste were found at the ports in 
Butterworth, Penang, and in East Malaysia in Kuching, Sarawak.20
Up north, when the Penang government began clamping down on these opera￾tions in early 2019, factories then appeared in Sungai Petani, Kulim, and Gurun in 
the neighboring state of Kedah, all of which were relatively close to the Butterworth 
port.21 What PTASKL experienced in 2018 began to affect the residents in Sungai 
Petani in 2019. Air pollution in Sungai Petani intensifed, and this caught the atten￾tion of former political representative Lydia Ong, medical doctor Sunny Tneoh, and 
other affected residents, who subsequently established the Sungai Petani 
Environmental Action Association (PTASSP).
PTASSP organized protests, signed petitions, and made police reports. They 
banded together and patrolled the factory areas to fnd evidence of illegal burning 
and conducted tests on soil samples for pollutants. They plotted GPS coordinates of 
illegal facilities and submitted memorandums to the Kedah chief minister, the mem￾ber of parliament for Sungai Petani, and the prime minister. Association members 
were residents living in affected areas, sacrifcing their time in a fght to protect their 
homes and their health.
18The lack of response from the bureaucracy to public complaints between January to July 2018, 
and the failure of regulatory oversight which allowed the infux of foreign waste have yet to be 
addressed.
19Bernama. (2019, April 27). Two Kosmo! journalists bag prestigious Kajai award. Malay Mail. 
https://www.malaymail.com/news/malaysia/2019/04/27/two-kosmo-journalists-bag￾prestigious-kajai-award/1747448
20Chan, D. (2019, February 24). Illegal plastic recycling plants  – ‘Operators shifted to other 
states’. New Straits Times. https://www.nst.com.my/news/nation/2019/02/463130/illegal-plastic￾recycling-plants-operators-shifted-other-states; and information provided by the DOE in July 2020.
21Chern, L. T. (2019, July 29). It’s just about moving here to there. The Star. https://www.thestar.
com.my/news/nation/2019/06/12/its-just-about-moving-here-to-thereplastic-waste-factories￾relocated-from-penang-to-kedah
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health268
Deteriorating Environmental and Human Health
A large portion of pollution stem from illegality surrounding the waste trade. Illicit 
businesses shipped recyclable plastic, contaminated mixed plastics, and dirty house￾hold waste into Malaysia, most notably in 2018. Clean plastic would be processed 
into pellets or resins, while plastic scrap that was unsuitable for recycling was stock￾piled around factories in the open, or illegally dumped and burned in oil palm plan￾tations or former sandmining pits, releasing toxic chemicals into the air, water, and 
soil. In Klang, secluded industrial parks were laden with abandoned bales and 
jumbo bags of plastic waste, now overgrown with weeds. Journalists from a Danish 
television station found municipal waste from Denmark at these sites in September 
2019, although their country ostensibly sends its waste to Germany for 
processing.22
Across Peninsular Malaysia, the incineration of plastic waste mostly happened at 
night to conceal the thick, dark smoke. Residents in the affected areas complained 
about the smell and reported increasing health issues such as coughing, breathing 
diffculties, nose bleeds, eye irritation, and skin itchiness. Investigations by PTASKL 
around Klang revealed that recycling facilities set up by Chinese businessmen had 
been established indiscriminately in the area since 2013. This ties in with China’s 
OGF which began in 2013.23 The community in Sungai Jarom New Village, 
Jenjarom, reportedly noticed a spike in cancer cases among their neighbors since 
the illegal recycling facilities had been set up.
In Sungai Petani, Kedah, PTASSP noted an increase of up to 30% in reports of 
respiratory diseases in Sungai Petani from 2018 to 2019.24 The community resorted 
to purchasing handheld Air Pollutant Index (API) monitors to get readings on the air 
pollution.25 When questioned, a government offcer responded that the data given by 
the community was not valid, as they had not made offcial reports to the district 
health offce.26 Dangerous levels of air pollution indicated in their personal API 
monitors were also dismissed as the offcial DOE API reading from a station in 
Sungai Petani did not capture similar data about air pollution.
22Herschend, S. S. (2019, September 29). TV 2 fnder dansk plastaffald på dumpingsite i Malaysia. 
https://nyheder.tv2.dk/samfund/2019-09-29-tv-2-finder-dansk-plastaffald-paa-dumpingsite￾i-malaysia
23Early, C. (2017, July 31). China renews clampdown on waste imports. China Dialogue. https://
chinadialogue.net/en/pollution/9954-china-renews-clampdown-on-waste-imports/.
24PTASSP member, interview, Sungai Petani, January 29, 2020.
25Nambiar, P. (2019, July 1). Sungai Petani residents lodge 10 police reports over air pollution. 
Free Malaysia Today. https://www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/nation/2019/07/01/sungai￾petani-residents-lodge-10-police-reports-over-air-pollution/
26Air pollution and its direct consequences on public health has been well documented (Mazrura 
Sahani et al., 2016; National Research Council, 2000; Wong et al., 2008), but the intangible nature 
of air pollution and changing wind directions also cause air pollution to be extremely diffcult 
to prove.
P. Yi. Wong269
Table 1 Fires at plastic recycling factories, 2019–2021
No. Date Factory
1 April 18, 2019 Plastic recycling factory of Green Mark Technology Sungai Petani, 
Kedah
2 May 14, 2019 Plastic manufacturing factory in Setapak, Selangor
3 July 5, 2019 Three factories in Pulau Indah Industrial Zone, Selangor
4 July 28, 2019 Recycling factory in Jalan Ayer Hitam, close to Batu 24, Kulai, Johor
5 October 25, 
2019
Plastic processing factory in Kampung Permatang Berangan, Sungai 
Petani, Kedah
6 January 21, 
2020
Factory in Bakar Arang Light Industrial Area, Sungai Petani, Kedah
7 March 1, 2020 Recycling factories in Pasir Gudang, Johor
8 March 26, 2020 Two plastic processing factories in Kundang, Selangor
9 April 3, 2020 Plastic processing factory in Ijok, Selangor
10 June 5, 2020 Plastic recycling factory in Taman Ria Jaya, Sungai Petani, Kedah
11 October 31, 
2020
Plastic processing factory in Jalan Kampung Orang Asli Kuang 
contaminated Sungai Kuang in Rawang, Selangor
12 November 21, 
2020
Plastic recycling factory in Taman Ria Jaya, Sungai Petani, Kedah
13 February 26, 
2021
Paper and plastic recycling factory in a light industrial area in Kampung 
Jawa, Selangor
Source: Author compilation from media and social media reports
Fires at plastic waste processing facilities became a common occurrence with 
several fres occurring in plastic factories, as reported in the media throughout 2019 
and 2020 (see Table  1 and Fig.  2). According to the Selangor Fire and Rescue 
Department, there were 14 fres at plastic recycling plants in Selangor alone from 
March to June 2020.27
Plastic is easily combustible. Material recovery facilities, recycling operations, 
and dumpsites can end up in massive fres, releasing toxic fumes and greenhouse 
gasses (Hamilton et al., 2019). While the fre department noted that the main causes 
of fres were due to wiring and equipment failures, arson could not be ruled out – 
particularly when much of the imported waste was too contaminated to be properly 
recycled. Within their communities, PTASKL and PTASSP reported insider allega￾tions of trade wars and unscrupulous factory owners trying to dispose waste stock￾piles (Fig. 3).
This list in Table 1 does not include the multiple illegal dumpsites that had been 
set on fre throughout the country, which may have contained foreign plastic waste. 
Local communities in Sungai Petani and Jenjarom alleged that shredded e-waste 
was also being dumped and burned, similar to the piles shown in Fig. 4. While it is 
diffcult to ascertain the exact compounds in the shredded material and whether it 
27Ayamany.K. (2020, June 19). Incidence of fre at recycling plants spikes during MCO, causing 
health hazards from toxic fumes. theSundaily. https://www.thesundaily.my/local/incidence-of￾fre-at-recycling-plants-spikes-during-mco-causing-health-hazards-from-toxic-fumes-AY2607057
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health270
Fig. 2 Plastic waste facility on fre  – Sungai Rambai, Jenjarom, Selangor, January 12, 2019. 
(Photo credit: Lay Peng Pua)
contained electronic wastes, tests conducted by Greenpeace on samples of similar 
shredded material from a dumpsite in Seri Cheeding, Kuala Langat, Selangor, 
revealed relatively high concentrations of metals and metalloids such as copper, 
lead, zinc, and cadmium, as well as other persistent organic compounds such as 
brominated fame retardants and phthalates or plasticizers, which could impact the 
health of fora and fauna negatively or cause secondary pollution to nearby water 
sources (Greenpeace Malaysia, 2020, p. 12).28
Investigators from Greenpeace Italy also found high levels of dangerous chemi￾cals including heavy metals such as cadmium and lead and benzo(a)pyrene, a car￾cinogen to humans, in plastic, water, and soil samples from various other dumping 
sites in Malaysia. A prawn farm owner close to Port Klang claimed that his prawns 
started dying when plastic waste recycling facilities had been set up nearby.29
However, there has been no offcial acknowledgment of the toxic pollution caused 
by plastic waste the authorities. Continuous contestations over data related to air, 
water, and land pollution have caused much dismay to residents in Kedah, Penang, 
and Selangor.
Illegal dumpsites expanded in size quickly once large volumes of foreign waste 
began entering the country. Three major dumpsites were found in Kedah – Pinang 
Tunggal with hundreds of tons of plastic waste, Kampung Kemumbung with a 
6-acre dumpsite on the banks of the Muda River, and Kampung Belida with a 3-acre 
mining pool full of waste, meters away from the Muda River and surrounded by 
28More information on toxic additives leached from plastics and the impacts on human health can 
be found at Azoulay et al. (2019) and Petrlik et al. (2019).
29Prawn farm owner, Jenjarom, May 3, 2022.
P. Yi. Wong271
Fig. 3 Upper left: plastic waste facility on fre – Telok Panglima Garang, Selangor, October 17, 
2019. Upper right: plastic waste facility on fre  – Sungai Petani, Kedah, November 21, 2020. 
Lower: shredded waste dumped and set on fre – Sungai Petani, Kedah, January 31, 2020. (Photo 
credit: Lay Peng Pua, Sunny Tneoh, Pui Yi Wong/C4 Center)
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health272
Fig. 4 (a and b) Illegal dumpsite in a former sand-mining site – Kampung Belida, Kedah, beside 
the Muda River, January 31, 2020. (c and d) Illegally dumped shredded waste – Telok Panglima 
Garang, Selangor, January 12, 2020 and Seri Cheeding, Selangor, September 5, 2020. (e) “Cleared” 
illegal dumpsite still emitting toxic fumes under the sun  – Kampung Seri Cheeding, Banting, 
Selangor, September 5, 2020. (Photo credit: Pui Yi Wong/C4 Center)
P. Yi. Wong273
agricultural land and a village (see Fig. 4(a, b)).30 The Muda River supplies drinking 
water to millions in the states of Kedah and Penang. By 2022, the open dumps 
in Pinang Tunggal and Kampung Kemumbung have been partly cleared and partly 
buried, while the one at Kampung Belida had been left uncleared, with weeds 
reclaiming the space.
Research into marine plastic pollution has shown that plastic can leach toxic 
substances into the environment and impair the growth of microorganisms.31
Another study found increasing evidence that black plastics in consumer products 
contain recycled plastic housings of waste electronic and electrical equipment. 
These have the potential to contaminate household or food-related items with haz￾ardous substances such as brominated fame retardants and heavy metals (Turner, 
2018). Other research has indicated that workers in the plastics industry suffer 
higher rates of respiratory and cardiovascular disease and cancers, while plastic 
waste treatment facilities (collection, sorting, processing, recycling, incineration, 
and landfll) also lead to negative health outcomes (Alabi et al., 2019; Dematteo 
et al., 2013).
In addition, research showed that the most common plastics, including polyeth￾ylene used in shopping bags, produce greenhouse gases such as methane and ethyl￾ene when exposed to sunlight (Royer et al., 2018). This is precisely the condition in 
which much plastic waste was and is kept in Malaysia, exposed to solar radiation 
within factory grounds, at illegal dumpsites, or in landflls (see Fig. 4(c, d, e)).
Governance Loopholes and Allegations of Graft
When queried about the dumpsites beside the Muda River, a government offcers in 
Kedah denied that the dumpsites were toxic, claiming that most of the wastes were 
construction waste and that the Department of Environment’s (DOE) Water Quality 
Monitoring Stations show that the Muda River was not polluted.32 The same govern￾ment offcers also challenged the toxicity of plastic waste, as plastic is seen as a 
stable and recyclable substance. While scraps of plastic packaging with foreign 
labels were sighted in visits to the dumpsites, the offcers responded that “they could 
have been blown over from elsewhere.” They also repeated industry narratives that 
30Nambiar, P. (2019, May 10). Now, world’s rubbish fouling up Sungai Petani. Free Malaysia 
Today. https://www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/nation/2019/05/10/now-worlds-rubbish￾fouling-up-sungai-petani/; Nambiar, P. (2019, July 28). Kedah govt seals off huge illegal dumpsite 
along Sungai Muda. Free Malaysia Today.
31Studies have been conducted on the impact of plastics on photosynthetic bacteria at the bottom 
of the marine food web, crustaceans, barnacle larvae, and mussel embryos, among others. See 
Bejgarn et al. (2015), Lithner et al. (2011), Silva et al. (2016), and Tetu et al. (2019).
32Government offcers, interview, Alor Setar, February 11, 2020, and information retrieved from 
Chern, L. T., & Sekaran, R. (2019, July 31). Water in Sg Muda declared safe. The Star. https://
www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2019/07/31/water-in-sg-muda-declared-safe.
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health274
“every piece of plastic can be recycled.” Since the government crackdown on 
imported waste, operators have taken to shredding waste before dumping them, 
complicating the identifcation of the type and origin of the waste.
There were serious allegations of graft by the communities and businesses in 
relation to illegal recycling before the federal government clamped down on the 
operations. The key potential areas for graft and illegality are at the ports, where 
smuggling and the false declaration of containers can take place; during the trans￾portation of smuggled goods should the trucks be stopped by law enforcement off￾cers; at the site of the factories, where lax enforcement enables illicit activity in the 
absence of permits; and at illegal waste dumping sites. On more than one occasion, 
business owners contacted PTASKL and PTASK after complaints were made in 
confdence by whistleblowers to the authorities regarding the polluting factories, 
indicating that the identities of the whistleblowers had been leaked.
Greenpeace Malaysia reported “illicit fows of money to people in key positions 
and diffculties to get necessary AP without paying higher prices,” citing an anony￾mous and disgruntled solid waste sales manager (Greenpeace Malaysia, 2018, 
p. 20). In reality, there are no charges for the applications for APs according to a 
KPKT offcer in Putrajaya, unless brokers were hired to prepare the relevant docu￾mentation and to submit hard copies to KPKT for approval.33
Implicating another politician and furnishing photographic evidence, PTASSP 
alleged that the CEO of a major plastic recycling company is the corporate advisor 
of the then Sungai Petani Member of Parliament (MP). This company also provided 
in-kind donations such as school bags for the MP’s community outreach program. 
When queried about his relationship with the CEO, the then MP said that he accepts 
advice and in-kind donations from all parties, declaring that “if anyone has evidence 
of me being involved in corruption, they can take me to court.”34
The CEO and the company have had their fair share of controversy. PTASSP 
alleged that this company is part of a syndicate of plastic recyclers with ties to busi￾nessmen from China. In 2017, the CEO was charged for harboring undocumented 
migrant workers.35 In 2019, a  Canadian journalist from CBC Marketplace went 
undercover in Sungai Petani as plastic waste exporters with a fake company.36 Their 
footage captured workers processing plastic with no protective equipment. The said 
CEO offered to buy dirty plastics from the undercover journalists, encouraging 
them to lie on shipping labels. He admitted to receiving kickbacks for helping other 
companies to import the materials, as his company held an AP. No action has been 
taken against him thus far.
33KPKT offcer, interview, Putrajaya, July 1, 2020.
34Then MP for Sungai Petani, interview, Sungai Petani, February 17, 2020.
35Ahmad, M. R. (2017, October 25). Recycling company manager fned RM70,000 for harbouring 
14 illegal immigrants. New Straits Times. https://www.nst.com.my/news/nation/2017/10/294989/
recycling-company-manager-fned-rm70000-harbouring-14-illegal-immigrants
36Szeto,E., Pedersen,K., Common,D. & Denne,L. (2019, September 27) ‘Canadians would be 
highly shocked’: Marketplace poses as fake company to expose illegal overseas recyclers. CBC 
News. https://www.cbc.ca/news/world/plastics-recycling-waste-overseas-marketplace-1.5292512
P. Yi. Wong275
The issues faced by the residents amid the food of plastic waste imports are 
common grouses of petty corruption against local governments and law enforce￾ment agencies. Petty or administrative corruption refers to everyday corruption or 
the abuse of power by public offcials when interacting with citizens, such as brib￾ery linked to law enforcement.37 A state assembly representative shared that small 
businesses often opt not to legalize their operations due to high costs, simply 
because it was cheaper to pay off enforcement offcers whenever they conducted 
inspections.38
While PTASKL accused local authorities of malfeasance and abuse of power, 
particularly in licensing and enforcement, PTASSP offered examples of graft 
whereby runners from factories would collect payments for various law enforce￾ment agencies. Law enforcement agencies and political representatives have 
strongly denounced corruption among their ranks, but institutionalized corruption 
of this sort is not uncommon in Malaysia. Past investigations had revealed the prev￾alence of corruption within different government agencies, including the Kedah 
police station.39
In addition, PTASSP shared that several raids by authorities found factories 
devoid of activity, indicating that the operators could have been tipped off in 
advance. In February 2020, a raid was conducted on an illegal recycling plant deep 
inside an oil palm plantation in Bedong, a town close to Sungai Petani. Authorities 
had been gathering evidence on this factory since 2019. However, the place was 
found empty, with only some laundry that was hung out to dry.40 Another similar 
37U4 Anti-Corruption Resource Centre. (n.d.). What is corruption? https://www.u4.no/topics/anti￾corruption-basics/basics
38State Assembly representative, interview, Bukit Mertajam, 11 February 2020.
39The practice of businesses, legal or illegal, paying “fees” to enforcement offcers has been 
reported by the local press. Malaysiakini had ran reports on Road Transport Department offcers 
soliciting bribes from transport companies (see Lu Wei Hoong. (2020, February 13). Institutionalized 
corruption in RTD grips logistics industry, turns clean frms dirty. Malaysiakini. https://www.
malaysiakini.com/news/510634). In August 2020, a whistleblower complained about police and 
local council protection for illegal online gambling dens, leading to arrests of enforcement offcers 
(see Anis, M. N. (2020, August 14). MACC arrests MBSA director over alleged bribery. The Star. 
https://www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2020/08/14/macc-arrests-mbsa-director-over-alleged￾bribery). Prior to that, The Star exposed corruption among border offcers and policemen involved 
in wildlife smuggling (see Yee, E., Shah, A., & Koonlachoti, C. (2019, September 25). EXCLUSIVE: 
R.AGE undercover investigations expose international smuggling ring for endangered pangolins. 
The Star. https://www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2019/09/25/corruption-at-the-border). In addi￾tion, they revealed that since 2012, three Malaysian policemen have been arrested for smuggling 
pangolins across the Malaysia-Thailand border including one offcer who was arrested twice. 
Incidentally, all three policemen arrested had worked, or are still working, at the same police sta￾tion, the Kedah state police headquarters, where illegal plastic recycling operations have taken root 
(see Traffcked to Extinction. (n.d.). https://globalstory.pangolinreports.com/#malaysia-thai￾border).
40Sin Chew Daily. (2020, July 2). Cang you zong yuan nei an zhong cao zuo, fei fa yang la ji chang 
bei cha feng [Secret operations in oil palm estate, illegal foreign waste factory closed down]. 
https://www.sinchew.com.my/?p=3010734
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health276
case was reported in Klang in 2019.41 In another incident, a member of PTASKL 
alleged that foreign workers believed to be working in the plastic recycling factories 
were found playing basketball in her village on the day of a joint operation by the 
government. The workers said that they were told not to go to work.
A local news daily, Malay Mail, cited industry sources who alleged that illegal 
plant operators had bribed Malaysian offcials at all levels of government (Malay 
Mail, 26 July 2018).42 The then Minister of Water, Land and Natural Resources also 
admitted to the possibility of corruption by the previous administration which led to 
lax enforcement. He said that he had ordered an investigation. A former local coun￾cilor shared that it is common for businesses to offer money in exchange for favors 
from the local councilors or the local government.43
There have been few publicly reported investigations by the Malaysian Anti￾Corruption Commission into how unlicensed operators set up their recycling facili￾ties with ease.44 The only tell-tale sign that may indicate the government’s awareness 
of petty corruption was the change of DOE directors at state and local branches 
across the country in 2019.45
Thus far, no government offcer or business owner has been held accountable for 
the devastating pollution and irreparable damage to environmental and human 
health caused by the high volume of imported plastics into the country. Corruption, 
with the exchange of money, is extremely diffcult to prove without the assistance of 
informants or whistleblowers, and in this section, we have only compiled allega￾tions and anecdotal evidence. There remains an urgent need for legal reforms to 
effectuate whistleblower protection in Malaysia, if institutionalized corruption is to 
be seriously addressed. This must be a priority of the current federal government, 
voted into power in November 2022.
41Chan, D. (2019, June 3). MPK, DoE shut down illegal plastic waste plant in Teluk Gong [NSTTV]. 
New Straits Times. https://www.nst.com.my/news/nation/2019/06/493628/mpk-doe-shut-down￾illegal-plastic-waste-plant-teluk-gong-nsttv
42Syed Jaymal Zahiid And Ruban Anbalagan. (2018, July 26). Graft behind Chinese frms dumping 
plastic waste here?. Malay Mail. https://www.malaymail.com/amp/news/malaysia/2018/07/26/
graft-behind-chinese-frms-dumping-plastic-waste-here/1656056
43Former local councilor in Selangor, interview, Kuala Langat, 2 July 2020.
44A report was lodged in 2018 on the alleged illegal operation of a plastic recycling plant at 
Jenjarom, Kuala Langat, but the Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission (MACC) found no ele￾ments of corruption. Another man was arrested for receiving bribes related to the establishment of 
a recycling plant, but the outcome of the investigation is unknown. (Bernama. (2019, June 9). 
Customs to crack down on illegal plastic waste entry at ports (https://www.malaysiakini.com/
news/478956). Both PTASSP and PTASKL shared that they attempted to lodge reports with 
MACC. PTASKL was rejected by the MACC offcers, saying they had no case, while PTASSP 
went through an NGO and did not hear from them.
45This information was revealed when attempts were made to secure interviews with DOE offcers 
at state and local branches and also shared by local communities.
P. Yi. Wong277
Criminality and Intimidation of Activists
In Selangor, the community activists faced intimidation from gangsters. After the 
secretary of PTASKL brought journalists to investigate a factory which was believed 
to be processing imported plastic waste without an AP, she received death threats 
and had red paint splashed on her home. The perpetrators were identifed as gang 
members and were arrested and charged in court,46 but the person who hired the 
gangsters was never revealed.
PTASK also faced gangster intimidation in Klang.47 When driving around the 
factories, their members were harassed by men on motorcycles. When bringing 
journalists around Klang, the residents-turned-activists reported that workers at a 
recycling facility snatched their car keys while the boss warned and threatened them 
not to return. The same person later resorted to offering bribes so that investigations 
would cease (Greenpeace Malaysia, 2019, p.19).48
As with in  Selangor, gangsterism appears rife among recycling operators up 
north in Sungai Petani. The plastic recycling company CEO from Sungai Petani 
who was captured in CBC Marketplace’s footage was implicated in a massive fre 
which occurred at its factory in early 2019. In another tussle between local com￾munities, plastic recycling operators, and law enforcement offcers, individuals 
linked to PTASSP were arrested late one night over charges of arson.49 PTASSP 
maintained that the individuals arrested were innocent and that the arrests made that 
night were forms of intimidation against the vocal group.
In another case, a factory owner in Sungai Petani was beaten up by illegal recy￾cling plant operators after he flmed them continuing their operations after their 
factory was sealed by the local authorities. The same people also threatened the then 
president of PTASSP to stop opposing the factories.50 Even government offcers 
46Chan, D. (2019, December 5). Undeterred by threat, Pua calls for continued action to protect the 
environment. New Straits Times. https://www.nst.com.my/news/nation/2019/12/544970/
undeterred-threat-pua-calls-continued-action-protect-environment
47PTASK member, interview, Kuala Lumpur, 2 January 2020.
48See also Channel News Asia (30 December 2019), (Mahmud, A. H. (2021, February 4). Malaysia 
moves to reap the benefts of processing global plastic waste. CNA News. https://www.channel￾newsasia.com/news/asia/malaysia-world-plastic-waste-recycling-china-11048810)
49Tan, G. (2019, November 28). Activist nabbed over alleged arson. The Star. https://www.thestar.
com.my/news/nation/2019/05/12/activist-nabbed-over-alleged-arson
50A factory manager and driver pleaded guilty and were fned RM1,500 by the magistrate court for 
causing injury to the victim. They were also ordered to pay RM1,000 each as compensation to the 
victim (The Sun Daily. (n.d.). Factory manager, driver fned RM1,500 for causing injury to plant 
owner. https://www.thesundaily.my/local/factory-manager-driver-fned-rm1-500-for-causing￾injury-to-plant-owner-JC1105193). A third person, a security guard, was subsequently arrested 
(Bernama. (2019, July 16). Another suspect detained in factory manager assault case. New Straits 
Times. https://www.nst.com.my/news/crime-courts/2019/07/504710/another-suspect-detained￾factory-manager-assault-case). Gangsterism and the threat of violence surrounding the plastic 
recycling operations were recurring problems which informants from both Selangor and Kedah 
experienced.
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health278
were not spared, as revealed by SWCorp, the statutory body set up under the solid 
waste management department to execute policies. Enforcement offcers were often 
threatened when patrolling illegal dumpsites as the site operators are believed to be 
linked to gangsters and secret societies.51
The problems enumerated above are not new – smuggling, illegal factories, insti￾tutionalized corruption, gangsterism, political-business nexus, and a lack of public 
access to information. In this case of the waste trade, petty corruption, malfeasance, 
and illegality have direct consequences on human and environmental health.
The whole experience from 2018 to 2020 deepened the trust defcit between the 
affected communities and the government. While the communities were quick to 
accuse the government of self-gratifcation and collusion with businessmen and 
gangsters at the expense of the environment, health, and public interest, the govern￾ment chastised the community groups as minority voices with political motives, 
accusing them of over-exaggeration and wrongful blaming of the government. 
Meanwhile, the government, members of the public, landowners, legitimate plastic 
recycling businesses, etc., had to go to great lengths and incur high costs in efforts 
to stem the harm caused by the massive infux of plastic waste to such a small 
country.
The Important Role of the Government
Malaysia is a party to the 1992 Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary 
Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal (Basel Convention). The DOE 
under the federal ministry for environment is the competent authority of the Basel 
Convention. However, monitoring and regulating plastic waste imports is very com￾plex in Malaysia, not only because of the issues outlined above. Enforcement efforts 
cut across several government agencies under different ministries and across vari￾ous levels of government, each with varying degrees of concern for the environment 
and international law.
The executive arm of the Government of Malaysia is made up of three levels: 
federal government, state government, and local government. The important role 
played by the local government in protecting the right to a healthy environment was 
brought to the forefront in the plastic waste importation crisis. All complaints made 
by the communities to the Chief Minister’s Offce at the state level, or to JPSPN or 
the DOE at the federal level, were often referred back to the local government. 
However, while the local government deals with issues on the ground, both the local 
and state governments are subject to policies made by the federal government.
The government has indeed taken action to solve the problems caused by 
imported plastic waste. Table 2 presents major announcements made by the federal 
51The Star Online. (2020, June 23). SWCorp in battle against secret societies and gangsters. 
https://www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2020/06/23/swcorp-in-battle-against-secret￾societies-and-gangsters
P. Yi. Wong279
Table 2 Key policy decisions taken by the federal government
Date Government action
July 23, 
2018
KPKT (ministry for local government) revoked APs on the import of HS Code 
3915 plastic waste for 114 factories for 3 months
JPSPN (solid waste management department) would form a task force to review 
the procedures on the import of items under this code, chaired by the Director 
General and consisting the DOE, Customs, Malaysian Industrial Development 
Authority, and SWCorp
August 16, 
2018
KPKT agreed to lift the suspension of APs for HS Code 3915 plastic waste 
(homogenous, clean waste) for facilities at free trade zones (FTZ) and licensed 
manufacturing warehouse (LMW)-status plants, with immediate effect, after 
appeals from importing companies
September 
25, 2018
KPKT minister chaired a coordination meeting at Kuala Langat District Council 
on the issue of illegal factories
AP holders were discovered to have rented out their import licenses to other 
parties including illegal factories that processing plastic waste without proper 
equipment, which was admitted by the businessmen to the government
The government will impose a levy of MYR15 per ton on the import of plastic 
waste by local industry players beginning next month
There were 54 plastic waste factories in Kuala Langat. Thirteen factories were 
legalized by the state government and given licenses. Seventeen were ordered to 
close. Among future plans was to relocate plastic waste processing factories to 
heavy industrial zones
October 16, 
2018
Establishment of a Joint Ministerial Committee to tackle the issue – KPKT 
(chair), natural resources ministry (KATS), international trade ministry (MITI) 
and environment ministry (MESTECC)
KPKT froze the import of plastic waste with HS Code 3915
MESTECC froze license issuance for plastic recycling factories. The import of 
all nonrecyclable mixed solid waste will be banned
The government closed more than 30 factories in Kuala Langat
Confscated plastic waste from illegal factories to be auctioned to legal players. 
Contaminated and nonrecyclable wastes to be landflled
October 26, 
2018
KPKT announced a permanent stop on the issuance of APs for contaminated 
plastic waste after a Joint Ministerial Committee meeting, where the Malaysian 
Plastic Manufacturers Association shared their views
APs would still be approved for the import of clean, quality plastic under strict 
conditions. Only eight companies comply with the current eight criteria
The local plastic industry was encouraged to stop dependency on materials from 
abroad. The country would phase out the import of all types of plastic including 
“clean” plastic within 3 years
October 17, 
2018
MESTECC launched the Roadmap Towards Zero Single-Use Plastics 2018–2030. 
The Malaysia Plastic Pact was proposed, as an industry-driven multistakeholder 
initiative toward a circular plastic economy
November 1, 
2018
KPKT proposed that APs for the import of plastic waste be resumed for 
companies that fulfl certain AP conditions, which will be increased and made 
more stringent
(continued)
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health280
Table 2 (continued)
Date Government action
November 
15, 2018
KPKT told Parliament that a committee had been set up within the ministry to 
check all 114 plastic recycling factories with approval to conduct plastic waste 
imports
KPKT sent a circular to all local authorities to shut down illegal factories
Applications by factories for business licenses to process plastic waste will 
require a consent letter from KPKT, which will only be approved once the 
applicants meet the new 18 conditions stipulated
January 5, 
2019
KPKT had yet to approve any APs since July 2018
114 companies held APs for plastic waste but only 54 were active. Eight 
complied with previous conditions stipulated. All must reapply for the AP 
according to the new procedures. Nineteen companies have applied
January 15, 
2019
Town hall session on plastic waste with Malaysian Plastics Manufacturers 
Association (MPMA) and PTASKL, among others. KPKT will train customs 
offcers to identify clean plastic from mixed plastic waste
19 out of 114 plastic waste AP holders passed the requirements to import plastic 
scrap into the country
June 8, 2019 62 Malaysian companies thus far held APs to import and process plastic waste
These companies are continuously monitored to ensure that the regulations are 
followed
A company based in Johor which imported contaminated plastic waste and made 
a false declaration in import documentation to evade checks by the authorities 
had its permit suspended. JPSPN warned that subsequent offences could lead to 
revocation of the permit
January 4, 
2020
MESTECC had shut down the operations of 170 plastic recycling factories for 
violating the Environmental Quality Act 1974
Source: Author compilation from media reports and Department of Environment (DOE), July 2020
government to deal with the infux of plastic waste, however, with the changing 
stance on APs observed between October and November 2018. Table 3 summarizes 
the roles of various institutions, legislation, and mechanisms adopted by the govern￾ment to address the plastic waste issue across federal, state, and local levels., while 
Table 4 shows the number of returned containers of plastic waste to the countries of 
origin. The full report by C4 Center (2021) presented an in-depth discussion about 
the various enforcement efforts by the different government agencies.
Despite implementing one of the best efforts in the region to tackle the imported 
plastic waste crisis, loopholes still exist. Then KPKT minister informed Parliament 
in November 2018 that “the plastic that come are the homogenous and pellet types. 
We are controlling this (plastic waste import) very thoroughly, to ensure the plastic 
waste that comes is of good quality, and processed to be used by consumers.”52 In 
January 2019, she reiterated at a town hall that the government had never approved 
52Chow, M. D. (2018, November 15). Plastic waste a RM30 billion industry, Dewan Rakyat told. 
https://www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/nation/2018/11/15/plastic-waste-a-rm30-billion￾industry-dewan-rakyat-told/
P. Yi. Wong281
Table 3 Interagency cooperation to solve the plastic waste crisis
Government action Mechanism
Ministerial-level taskforce Joint ministerial committee:
KPKT (chair), natural resources ministry (KATS), international 
trade ministry (MITI), and environment ministry (MESTECC)
Inter-ministry coordination 
(ports)
JPSPN, KPKT (local government ministry):
Grant or reject Approved Permits for HS Code 3915 plastics
Customs, Ministry of Finance:
Allow or stop foreign cargo from entering the country
DOE, MESTECC (environment ministry):
Ensure compliance with the Basel Convention. Organize 
government-to-government arrangements to repatriate dirty 
municipal plastic waste
Inter-ministry and 
federal-state-local 
governmental regulation of 
licensing for premises and 
businesses (factories)
MIDA, MITI (international trade ministry):
Standards-setting and policymaking for the whole country
DOE, MESTECC (environment ministry):
Ensure compliance with environmental laws and environmental 
impact assessments (EIA) before giving approval for the factory
Monitoring of compliance with environmental laws
State Executive Councils:
Policymaking for the state. Decisions on freezing or allowing the 
approval of licenses to plastic recycling facilities
Local Government Committee:
The executive committee for local government (made up of 
elected state representatives) meets with the mayor or presidents 
of local councils in the state several times a year to enhance policy 
implementation and coordination
Local Authority (bureaucracy):
Approval of licensing for premises and businesses. Enforcement 
against unlicensed operators
Federal-state-local 
governmental committee to 
continuously monitor the 
issue
District Development Action Committee:
The district offcer meets monthly with members of parliament, 
state assembly representatives, state exco, the police, and offcers 
from local branches of federal agencies. This is the main 
problem-solving body at the district level, coordinated by the 
National Development Action Council as part of the national 
policy implementation coordination mechanism
Meeting of Environment Ministers and State Executive Councilors 
Responsible for the Environment (MEXCOE):
The environment minister meets with the excos for environment 
from all states to heighten and facilitate enforcement activities 
against environmental pollution
Source: Author compilation from media reports and interviews
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health282
Table 4 Return of containers with contaminated plastic waste as of June 2020
No. Port Origin No. of containers Weight (kg)
1 Port Klang, Selangor UK 1 22,000
Bangladesh 1 20,710
Spain 10 237,220
Australia 3 68,440
Singapore 1 22,000
Japan 5 390,770
USA 1 28,000
Belgium 7 152,820
Germany 2 45,360
Taiwan 1 21,050
Poland 1 18,900
South Korea 2 30,790
Hong Kong 14 290,788
China 3 58,000
Sri Lanka 1 21,284
2 Senari Port, Kuching, Sarawak USA 31 429,760
France 48 991,373
Singapore 3 71,886
3 Penang Port USA 17 334,103
Vietnam 2 38,195
Portugal 3 73,647
Canada 11 189,201
Lithuania 1 20,300
Saudi Arabia 1 22,300
UK 46 981,278
Hong Kong 9 147,000
Total 225 4,727,175
Source: Department of Environment (DOE), July 2020
the import of plastic rubbish, just clean plastic scrap.53 However, in 2019, Australian 
journalists easily intercepted a container full of mixed waste, as shown in Fig. 5. 
When queried, the factory owner receiving the container revealed that he could eas￾ily access supplies of mixed plastic waste from smugglers.
Aside from smuggling at the ports, illegal plastic recycling facilities also pose a 
problem. In February 2020, MESTECC launched a “National Action Plan on 
Enforcement on the Import of Plastic Waste” and targeted a total of 30,000 enforce￾ment actions in 2020, compared to 18,314 enforcement actions in 2019 and 7194 in 
53Bedi, R. S. (2019, July 29). Zuraida: Imports of clean, recyclable plastic allowed, never plastic 
‘rubbish’. The Star. https://www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2019/01/15/zuraida-imports￾of-clean-recyclable-plastic-allowed-never-plastic-rubbish
P. Yi. Wong283
Fig. 5 Australian journalists intercepting a mixed waste container – Pulau Indah, Selangor, March 
15, 2019. (Photo credit: Lay Peng Pua)
2018.54 From January 1 to September 20, 2020, a total of 17,445 inspections on vari￾ous premises had been conducted under the EQA.55 These enforcement efforts are 
time-consuming and labor-intensive. Joint enforcement operations were organized 
across various states, involving federal agencies, state governments, and local 
authorities, along with much coordination among multiple agencies.
Table 5 shows enforcement action as compiled by the DOE since 2019. In 
mid-2019, two plastic recycling factories in Selangor were charged in court and 
fned a total of MYR120,000 for processing plastic waste without DOE approval, 
failure to install air pollution control systems, and failure to install systems to man￾age industrial effuents.56 This was a slap on the wrist as processing waste without 
DOE approval is punishable by a maximum of MYR500,000 fne, or a maximum 
fve-year jail term, or both, under the environmental law.
At the state level, in Selangor, a special task force with monthly meetings was 
formed to solve the plastic waste problem, co-chaired by the Environment, Green 
54Mestecc launches national action plan on enforcement against plastic waste imports. (2020, 
February 10). The Sun Daily. https://www.thesundaily.my/local/mestecc-launches-national￾action-plan-on-enforcement-against-plastic-waste-imports-CA1992073#:~:text=Mestecc%20
launches%20national%20action%20plan%20on%20enforcement%20against%20plastic%20
waste%20imports,-10%20Feb%202020&text=The%20plan%2C%20also%20known%20
as,said%20in%20a%20statement%20today
55Yunus, A., & Hana Naz Harun and Teh Athira Yusof. (2020, November 4). Drop it! 61 premises 
charged over water pollution. New Straits Times. https://www.nst.com.my/news/
nation/2020/11/637913/drop-it-61-premises-charged-over-water-pollution
56Lim, I. (2019, May 17). Court fnes two Selangor factories RM120,000 for illegal plastic recy￾cling. Malay Mail. https://www.malaymail.com/news/malaysia/2019/05/17/court-fnes-two￾selangor-factories-rm120000-for-illegal-plastic-recycling/1754010
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health284
Table 5 DOE operations against illegal factories
Year
No. of 
Operations
Enforcement action
Overall 
actions
Notice 
of 
orders Compounds
Seizure of 
operating 
facilities
Prohibition 
order
Investigation 
papers 
opened
2019 275 119 86 186 11 74 476
2020, 
January 
1 to 
July 17
41 17 66 18 1 7 109
Total 316 136 152 204 12 81 585
Source: Department of Environment (DOE), July 2020
Technology and Consumer Affairs Committee chairman and the Local Government, 
Public Transportation and New Village Development Committee chairman, and 
involving representatives from local councils, the DOE, the District and Land 
Offce, the police force, and the Immigration Department.57 On occasion, Tenaga 
Nasional Berhad (power service provider, with approval from the Energy 
Commission of Malaysia),58 Air Selangor (water service provider), National Water 
Services Commission, and Customs would join the operations where the supply of 
utilities to the factories would be disconnected.
From 2018 to 2020, the state government took action against 113 factories in 
Klang alone, with 37 shut down, and another 34 illegal factories in Jenjarom, Kuala 
Langat, were closed.59 Similar actions were taken in Penang and Kedah, with the 
Kedah state government stopping all issuance of business licenses for plastic recy￾cling in 2019. This left certain businesses who had invested in building new facili￾ties in a quandary.60 Seberang Perai in the state of Penang reportedly had as many as 
404 plastic recycling facilities and factories, with 14 found to be operating without 
license.61
57Chan, D. (2019, February 23). Selangor gets tough on illegal factories [NSTTV]. New Straits Times. 
https://www.nst.com.my/news/nation/2019/02/462869/selangor-gets-tough-illegal-factories-nsttv
58Rajendra, E. (2019, November 28). MPK cuts off electricity supply at illegal plastic waste pro￾cessing plant. The Star. https://www.thestar.com.my/metro/metro-news/2019/06/24/mpk-cuts￾off-electricity-supply-at-illegal-plastic-waste-processing-plant
59Martin Vengadesan & Low Choon Chyuan. (2020, August 20). The Selangor gov’t and scourge 
of plastic waste. https://www.malaysiakini.com/news/539196
60Kedah state offcer, interview, Alor Setar, February 11, 2020.
61Chern, L. T. (2019, July 29). Illegal plastic factories booming. The Star. https://www.thestar.
com.my/news/nation/2019/05/18/illegal-plastic-factories-booming/
P. Yi. Wong285
Conclusion: Counting the True Costs of Plastic Waste
Waste management should not be viewed purely from an economic lens. It is a gov￾ernance, human rights, and environmental justice issue. The nations exporting the 
most plastic waste are also the world’s largest consumers of plastics (the benefcia￾ries of the products). They should manage their own plastic waste with an urgent 
focus on reducing plastic production and consumption, rather than exporting the 
waste, even when they are allegedly exported for recycling.
We have learned that the recycling of plastic waste is partial at best and highly 
hazardous to workers and surrounding communities, polluting their water and air, 
with a large portion dumped or burned. Wastewater from recycling facilities leave a 
legacy of contamination and, as scientists have proven, the effuent of microplastics 
(Go et al., 2022). “Economic progress” as historically defned by the Global North 
has led the planet into an ecological crisis – the type of progress that has existed at 
the expense of other global neighbors – as it necessitates the offshoring of negative 
externalities to others far away in order to offer luxury and convenience to a wealth￾ier minority.
This chapter showed how the plastic waste exported to Malaysia has impacted 
people and their communities not only environmentally, but also socially, culturally, 
and politically – affecting the relationships between people, the government, and 
businesses; worsening the culture of graft and illegality; and sowing distrust in 
political leaders and confict with bureaucrats. The costs of “waste colonialism” go 
beyond the toxicity of plastic pollution. Plastic is certainly not a “cheap material,” 
if one were to consider the true costs of its production, consumption, waste, and 
pollution, especially on peoples and environments far from the minds of the fnance 
executives in business offces.
Today, the Malaysian government remains reluctant to ban the import of plastic 
waste for economic reasons, opting to focus on enhancing enforcement efforts, as 
many major business interests continue to proft from the trade. Yet, there are signs 
that enforcement of the Basel Convention’s newly adopted controls is not being 
realized. Affected communities remain distrustful of the government, which to 
them, appeared to be more concerned with the health of plastic industry players than 
that of the people. The plastic manufacturing industry is well established in Malaysia 
with the association MPMA set up in 1967. In 2018, MPMA had several engage￾ments with the ministers overseeing environment (MESTECC), local government 
(KPKT), and international trade (MITI) (Malaysian Plastics Manufacturers 
Association, 2019, pp. 33–34), while affected communities had to struggle to get a 
meeting with the ministers.
An Advanced Plastic Recycling Industry for Malaysia: A White Paper by MPMA 
and MPRA stated that the plastics recycling industry is worth MYR4.5 billion in 
revenue, and it supports the MYR31 billion local plastics conversion industry 
(Malaysian Plastics Manufacturers Association & Malaysian Plastics Recyclers 
Association, 2019, p. 8). However, before one can assume even the direct economic 
benefts of importing foreign wastes, what needs to be clarifed is how much 
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health286
recycled plastics are benefcial to the midstream plastic conversion industry, and 
how much resins from the imported plastic waste are actually destined to be wholly 
exported to China, therefore providing no value to the domestic plastic industry.
When queried why China banned the import and processing of waste amid 
industry claims that it is lucrative, a government offcial opined that it was because 
China wanted to move up the value chain toward higher-value products.62 This was 
inaccurate, as China clearly imposed the ban to rehabilitate its polluted environ￾ment. The WTO submission by the Chinese government provided strong evidence 
that the concerns of the local communities in Malaysia about the overall impacts of 
plastic waste imports on human and environmental health are valid, despite the 
government and businesses claiming otherwise. Another interviewee further sup￾ported this point by sharing that the Chinese government had sought international 
assistance to curb smuggling in the illegal waste trade.63
In addition to pollution, environmental degradation, and social costs, the admin￾istrative hidden costs incurred by the government in terms of enforcement, monitor￾ing, cleaning up, and rehabilitation of polluted environments must also be considered, 
alongside the burden on public healthcare. Illegal businesses and smuggling activi￾ties that plague the waste trade contribute nothing to the local economy (Sembiring, 
2019) and are extremely diffcult to monitor. When viewed from a true cost, eco￾logical economics perspective, it is logical that Malaysia should follow the example 
of China and ban the trade outright as it creates a net economic defcit for the 
country.
Finally, the ease of securing plastic waste via importation disincentivizes the 
need for local businesses and governments to enhance domestic plastic waste segre￾gation and collection (Environmental Investigation Agency, 2023), particularly for 
commercial and household wastes. This is yet another serious consequence of the 
waste trade, leading to ever more plastic leakage and pollution.
The Malaysian government has gone to great lengths to seek solutions to the 
plastic waste import crisis. But while government offcers in the federal and the 
state governments we interviewed observed that the problem has largely been 
addressed, ongoing complaints by the communities about dumping, open burning, 
and air pollution indicate that the picture remains ugly. The diffculties of monitor￾ing and enforcement remain. In addition, more illegal recycling factories of other 
types of waste materials have emerged.
Meanwhile, Malaysia is worryingly accepting another form of waste colonialism 
from the Global North – allowing the installation of waste-to-energy incineration 
facilities as a “solution” to waste problems. There are serious concerns that these 
incinerator schemes would require more imported wastes as fuel to fll the capacity 
of the burners. This presents a whole new set of environment justice problems, 
including exacerbating the climate crisis by incinerating converted fossil fuels and 
introducing the carbon into the atmosphere, when our planet desperately needs to 
sequester it.
62Government offcer, interview, Shah Alam, September 14, 2020.
63 International offcer, interview, teleconference, June 4, 2020.
P. Yi. Wong287
Acknowledgments Research for this chapter was supported by the Center to Combat Corruption 
and Cronyism (C4 Center) in Malaysia. This chapter draws partially from the full report titled 
Malaysia is not a “garbage dump”: Citizens against corruption, complacency, crime, and climate 
crisis (2021).
References
Akenji, L., Bengtsson, M., Kato, M., Hengesbaugh, M., Hotta, Y., Aoki-Suzuki, C., et al. (2019). 
Circular economy and plastics: A gap-analysis in ASEAN member states. Mission of the 
European Union to ASEAN and Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Alabi, O. A., Ologbonjaye, K. I., Awosolu, O. A., & Olufropo, E. (2019). Public and environ￾mental health effects of plastic wastes disposal: A review. Journal of Toxicology and Risk 
Assessment, 5(1). https://doi.org/10.23937/2572-4061.1510021
Azoulay, D., Villa, P., Arellano, Y., Gordon, M., Moon, D., Miller, K., & Thompson, K. (2019). 
Plastic and health: The hidden costs of a plastic planet. Retrieved from https://www.ciel.
org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Plastic-and-Health-The-Hidden-Costs-of-a-Plastic-Planet￾February-2019.pdf
Bejgarn, S., MacLeod, M., Bogdal, C., & Breitholtz, M. (2015). Toxicity of leachate from weath￾ering plastics: An exploratory screening study with Nitocra spinipes. Chemosphere, 132, 
114–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.03.010
Brooks, A. L., Wang, S., & Jambeck, J. R. (2018). The Chinese import ban and its impact on global 
plastic waste trade. Science Advances, 4(6). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat0131
Bueta, G. R. P. (2020). Waste trade in the Philippines: How local and global policy instruments 
can stop the tide of foreign waste dumping in the country.. Retrieved from Quezon City: https://
storage.googleapis.com/planet4-philippines-stateless/2020/03/da311344-waste-trade-in-the￾philippines-report-v2.pdf
C4 Center. (2021). Malaysia is not a “Garbage Dump”: Citizens against corruption, compla￾cency, crime, and climate crisis. Center to Combat Corruption and Cronyism (C4 Center).
Davis, J.-M., Akese, G., & Garb, Y. (2019). Beyond the pollution haven hypothesis: Where and why 
do e-waste hubs emerge and what does this mean for policies and interventions? Geoforum, 98, 
36–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2018.09.020
Dematteo, R., Keith, M. M., Brophy, J. T., Anne, W., Watterson, A. E., Beck, M., Rochon, A., et al. 
(2013). Chemical exposures of women workers in the plastics industry with particular refer￾ence to breast cancer and reproductive hazards. New Solutions: A Journal of Environmental 
and Occupational Health Policy, 22(4), 415–417. https://doi.org/10.2190/NS.22.4.d
Environmental Investigation Agency. (2023). Plastic waste power play: The offshoring and recy￾cling displacement involved in trying to recycle EU plastic waste.. Retrieved from https://
eia-international.org/wp-content/uploads/EIA_UK_Plastic_Waste_Trade_Report_0123_
FINAL_SPREADS.pdf
Fuller, S., Ngata, T., Borrelle, S. B., & Farrelly, T. A. (2022). Plastics pollution as waste colonial￾ism in Te Moananui. Journal of Political Ecology, 29(1), 534–560. https://doi.org/10.2458/
jpe.2401
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J. R., & Law, K. L. (2017). Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. 
Science Advances, 3(7). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700782
Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives. (2019). Discarded: Communities on the front￾lines of the global plastic crisis. Retrieved from https://wastetradestories.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/04/Discarded-Report-April-22.pdf
Go, S., Natsuyo, U., Le, H.  T., Kosuke, T., Hidenori, M., Tatsuya, K., Shin, T., Pham, H.  V., 
Hidetoshi, K., & Masahiro, O. (2022). Mechanical recycling of plastic waste as a point 
source of microplastic pollution. Environmental Pollution, 303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2022.119114
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health288
Greenpeace Malaysia. (2018). The recycling myth: Malaysia and the broken global recycling sys￾tem. Greenpeace.
Greenpeace Malaysia. (2020). The recycling myth 2.0: The toxic after-effects of imported plastic 
waste in Malaysia. Greenpeace Malaysia.
Hamilton, L. A., Feit, S., Muffett, C., Kelso, M., Rubright, S. M., Bernhardt, C., … Labbé-Bellas, 
R. (2019). Plastic and climate: The hidden costs of a plastic planet.. Retrieved from https://
www.ciel.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Plastic-and-Climate-FINAL-2019.pdf
Jambeck, J. R., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T. R., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., et al. (2015). 
Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. Science, 347(6223), 768–771. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1260352
Lithner, D., Nordensvan, I., & Dave, G. (2011). Comparative acute toxicity of leachates from 
plastic products made of polypropylene, polyethylene, PVC, acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene, 
and epoxy to Daphnia magna. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 19(August), 
1763–1772. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-011-0663-5
Malaysian Plastics Manufacturers Association, & Malaysian Plastics Recyclers Association. 
(2019). An advanced plastics recycling industry for Malaysia.. Retrieved from http://mpma.
org.my/v4/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/White-Paper-FINALR.pdf
Mazrura Sahani, M., Khan, F., Mahiyuddin, W. R. W., Latif, M. T., Ng, C. F. S., Yussoff, M. F., 
et al. (2016). Air pollution and health in Malaysia. In D.-C. Shin (Ed.), Hazardous air pollut￾ants: Case studies from Asia. CRC Press.
Mobilik, J.-M., Ling, T.-Y., Husain, M. L., & Hassan, R. (2014). Type and abundance of marine 
debris at selected public beaches in Sarawak, East Malaysia, during the northeast monsoon. 
Journal of Sustainability Science and Management, 9(2), 43–51. Accessed at: https://jssm.umt.
edu.my/wp-content/uploads/sites/51/2015/02/4.pdf
National Research Council. (2000). Waste incineration and public health. The National 
Academies Press.
Petrlik, J., Ismawati, Y. D., Joseph, Arisandi, P., & Bell, L. B. Björn (2019). Plastic waste poi￾sons Indonesia’s food chain.. Retrieved from https://ipen.org/sites/default/fles/documents/
indonesia-egg-report-v1_9-web.pdf
Puckett, J., & Smith, T. C. (Eds.). (2002). Exporting harm: The high-tech trashing of Asia. Basel 
Action Network and Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition.
Razali, F., Daud, D., Choong, W.-W., & Jiram, W. R. A. (2020). Waste separation at source behav￾iour among Malaysian households: The Theory of Planned Behaviour with moral norm. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122025
Royer, S.-J., Ferrón, S., Wilson, S. T., & Karl, D. M. (2018). Production of methane and ethylene 
from plastic in the environment. PLoS One, 13(8), e0200574. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0200574
Sembiring, M. (2019). Global waste trade chaos: Rising environmentalism or cost-beneft analy￾sis? (NTS Insight, No. IN19-02). Centre for Non-Traditional Security, S. Rajaratnam School 
of International Studies, Nanyang Technological University.
Silva, P. P. G. E., Nobre, C. R., Resaffe, P., Pereira, C. D. S., & Gusmão, F. (2016). Leachate from 
microplastics impairs larval development in brown mussels. Water Research, 106(December), 
364–370. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.10.016
Tetu, S.  G., Sarker, I.  S., Verena, Pickford, R., Elbourne, L.  D. H., Moore, L.  R., & Paulsen, 
I. T. (2019). Plastic leachates impair growth and oxygen production in Prochlorococcus, the 
ocean’s most abundant photosynthetic bacteria. Communications Biology, 2, 184. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s42003-019-0410-x
Tran, T., Goto, H., & Matasuda, T. (2021). The impact of China’s tightening environmental regu￾lations on international waste trade and logistics. Sustainability, 13(937), 1–14. https://doi.
org/10.3390/su13020987
Turner, A. (2018). Black plastics: Linear and circular economies, hazardous additives and 
marine pollution. Environment International, 117, 308–318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2018.04.036
P. Yi. Wong289
Wang, C., Zhao, L., Lim, M. K., Chen, W.-Q., & Sutherland, J. W. (2020). Structure of the global 
plastic waste trade network and the impact of China’s import ban. Resources, Conservation and 
Recycling, 153(104591). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104591
Wong, C.-M., Vichit-Vadakan, N., Kan, H., Qian, Z., & PAPA Project Teams. (2008). Public health 
and air pollution in Asia (PAPA): A multicity study of short-term effects of air pollution on 
mortality. Environmental Health Perspectives, 116(9), 1195–1202.
Exporting Pollution, Colonizing Health291
On the Plastic Waste Route: Latin America 
Is the New Port of Destination
Ela Zambrano and Magdalena Donoso
Introduction
Trade between peoples, countries, or continents has a long history that shows the 
need to exchange goods and services. Thus, we know of such important routes as 
the Silk Route, the Incense Route, and the New Spain Route, in which ways were 
found to cross complex geographies to obtain what was needed by some in exchange 
for what was surplus to others. However, neither ancient China nor the gold-hungry 
Spanish usurpers could have imagined the route of plastic waste or absurdity. In 
recent years, civilizations have left behind spices, precious metals, and cultural 
exchange for ships with containers full of plastics sailing the seas and looking for a 
port where to leave our waste.
The route of the absurd was unveiled in 2018 after China said “Enough!” to the 
tons of dirty and contaminated plastic imported from the United States arriving in 
its territory with the label of “recyclable.” With the Asian giant’s borders closed and 
its plastic waste up to its neck, the country with the stars and stripes has once again 
become the uncomfortable and abusive neighbor for Latin America: its plastic waste 
is not swept under the carpet; it is literally put in its neighbor’s backyard. The Global 
Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives (GAIA) denounced that by 2020, it had distrib￾uted 44,173 tons of plastic waste to 15 South America countries. “That meant the 
shipment of approximately 35 plastic waste containers daily to the region.” 
(“La-basura-plástica-llegó-a-América-Latina.pdf”, 2021, 2).
GAIA indicates that what the United States used to export to China is now 
shipped to countries like Ecuador, Mexico, Argentina, and Chile and constitutes 
E. Zambrano (*) 
Independent Researcher, Quito, Ecuador 
M. Donoso 
Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives, Concepción, Chile
e-mail: magdalena@no-burn.org
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_14292
waste impossible to recover for the circular economy. It is distributed abusively 
under the label of “recycling,” and it is not possible to establish with certainty the 
conditions under which it reaches customs in order for it to be effectively recover￾able for any industry.
Between 2014 and 2020, plastic waste shipments came from 37 countries from 
three continents: America, Europe, and Asia; 36% of the total coming from the 
United States, making it the world’s leading supplier of this plastic waste (Íbid, 10). 
The connections in the new route of the absurd have counted on the complicity and 
suffcient opacity of the Latin American governments that – as always – “keep a 
silence quite similar to stupidity.”1
 On the contrary, the different organizations that 
makeup GAIA in Latin America and the Caribbean declared their rejection by an 
international public statement and awakened a state of alert before this threat “that 
turns our region into an emerging destination of the world’s plastic waste” 
(Elevation, 2021).
Such a new type of trade has raised several questions: In what state is this plastic 
waste entering? Where exactly is it coming from? Under what headings or subhead￾ings is it entering? What supervision is there from the ministries of the environ￾ment? What industries are being fed with imported dirty plastic? Furthermore, the 
most disturbing of all questions: Do Ecuador or Mexico really have a greater recy￾cling capacity than the United States?
The Audacity of the United States
Regarding multilateral environmental conventions, it is common knowledge that the 
United States remains the world’s most noncommittal power. It has not acceded to 
the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous 
Wastes and their Disposal, nor the amendments on plastics, and for a few years, it 
stayed distant from the Paris Agreement (2019–2021), the international tool that 
aims to limit greenhouse gas emissions. National Geographic points to it as the 
world’s second-largest emitter of greenhouse gasses and reports from Greenpeace 
and GAIA place it as the world’s largest exporter of plastic waste.
In addition, the United States has become incapable of processing all the plastic 
waste it produces, which should entail changes in population consumption and the 
extended responsibility of the companies that produce plastics. According to the 
Greenpeace report Circular Claims Fall Flat Again, in 2021, the country barely 
managed to recycle the 4.7% (2.4 million tons) of 51 million tons of plastic waste 
generated by households, which makes it desperate to search for a way to get 
rid of it.
1 “We have kept a silence quite similar to stupidity,” proclaimed insurrection of the Junta Tuitiva de 
los derechos del rey y del pueblo, in La Paz, on July 16, 1809. Quoted by Eduardo Galeano in The 
Open Veins of Latin America.
E. Zambrano and M. Donoso293
According to the Greenpeace report, “the recycling rate in the United States is 
estimated to have declined to 5.6%, previously at 9.5% in 2014 and 8.7% in 2018.” 
To improve their fgures a bit, “the export of millions of tons of plastic waste to 
China was registered as recycled,” even though the fnal destination of those plastics 
is unclear, as they may well have ended up incinerated or dumped as waste (“Circular 
Claims Fall Flat Again”, 2022, p. 3). The conclusion Greenpeace states, and is obvi￾ous, is that the US recycling capacity continues to decline.
To the lack of a good Integrated Solid Waste Management (ISWM) system, not 
only in the United States but also in Latin America, it is added that “hundreds of 
different types of synthetic plastic materials produced are fundamentally non￾recyclable.” Besides, as Greenpeace explains, a large plastic industry in the world 
has generated a scenario in which plastic is one of the easiest wastes to collect and 
put back into circulation.
In recent history, the COVID-19 pandemic and social restrictions led to lax con￾trols at bureaucratic levels, allowing the United States to get rid of its waste. While 
the whole world’s attention was on COVID-19’s victims and overwhelmed hospi￾tals, “in August 2020, the U.S. registered an export record to four countries, includ￾ing Ecuador, which received 1100 tons of this type of waste. That meant the 
shipment of seven containers per day” (Soliz et al., 2021, p. 20). A year later, Latin 
America became the frst-choice destination for plastic waste, even though, at the 
same time, the Basel Convention’s Plastics Amendment came into force.
Among the information that environmental organizations in Latin America were 
able to gather, the state of California is the largest exporter of plastic waste to 
Ecuador and Malaysia. Thus, Greenpeace mentions: “While other countries now 
restrict imports of plastic waste to countries that do not belong to the Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the fow of U.S. plastic 
waste to countries with high rates of waste mismanagement continues at a scandal￾ous level. In March 2021 alone, California exported 7.4 million kg of plastic waste 
to non-OECD countries, including 3.8 million kg to Malaysia (equivalent to 24 
TEU shipping containers daily)” (“Acceptance of Unrecyclable Plastic Products 
and California’s Continued Exports of Plastic Waste Exports to Non-OECD 
Countries”, 2021).
The “the more trade, the more economic growth” maxim falls out and rolls off 
the foor on this plastic trash route: “More than any other state, California’s recy￾cling facilities continue to accept plastic waste that is exported to developing coun￾tries that have weak labor regulations in terms of wages, age, and limited 
environmental protections” (Ibid) (Fig. 1).
“Plastics export is always a false solution because they are so pervasive that they 
are extremely tough to collect, virtually impossible to sort, harmful to the environ￾ment, expensive to reprocess, and they often contain toxic materials,” mentions The 
Guardian in October 2022, the same newspaper which, in its digital version, unveiled 
what many would have preferred to keep silent (Lakhani, 2022).
On the Plastic Waste Route: Latin America Is the New Port of Destination294
Fig. 1 US states’ recycling facilities continue to accept plastic waste that is exported to develop￾ing countries that have weak labor regulations in terms of wages, age, and limited environmental 
protections. (Source: https://www.ban.org/plastic-waste-project-hub/trade-data/usa-export-data)
Latin America: The “Greenwashing” Servant
It was 2019 when the article “Where does your plastic go? Global investigation 
reveals America’s dirty secret,” published in The Guardian digital version, raised 
the alarms of environmental organizations regarding the route of plastics from the 
United States to developing countries like Turkey, Senegal, Bangladesh, Thailand, 
Vietnam, Indonesia, Cambodia, Hong Kong, Malaysia, and Ecuador. All of them 
have problems managing their waste.
E. Zambrano and M. Donoso295
Ecuador
Why would Ecuador, one of the largest importers of plastic waste, have a better 
technical capacity to recycle than California if, according to fgures from the 
National Institute of Statistics and Census (INEC), the Andean country barely man￾ages to recover 4% of its waste? In addition, this is mainly due to grassroots recy￾clers’ work.
The research “La Partida 3915, Importación de desechos plásticos en Ecuador,” 
conducted by the Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar, GAIA, Alianza Basura Cero, 
and VLIR-UOS, reveals that the plastics Ecuador bought and which were men￾tioned in the investigation by The Guardian were “plastic hoses that used in irriga￾tion and that (…) arrive full of soil. A recipe for biological invasions” (Soliz et al., 
2021, p. 9).
Within the framework of the discussion of amendments to the Basel Convention, 
The Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries has reportedly warned that this new 
approach of asking importing countries for their consent “will create an adminis￾trative burden that will make it more diffcult for countries without recycling 
capacity to export plastics to countries with available infrastructure” (“Más de 180 
países acuerdan restricciones para la exportación de desechos plásticos”, 
2019, p. 1).
As it turns out, in the eyes of the United States, Ecuador has “available infra￾structure” willing to wash its waste. In fact, the previously mentioned investigation 
exposes companies such as Productos Paraíso,2
 a polyethylene and mattresses busi￾ness that “can process 40 tons per day of recycling. Between 2016 and 2020, it 
acquired 17,783 tons of plastic waste from US agricultural companies from which 
they buy plastic pipe waste used for irrigation.” The absurdity is self-explanatory. 
Quito, the capital of Ecuador, generates a thousand tons of waste per day (without 
considering organic waste), and its sanitary landfll is on the verge of being declared 
in a state of emergency, once again, by the newly elected local authorities.
Productos Paraíso, a well-known business in the Andean market for its mat￾tresses, now has a product line called “Greenbag,” providing “eco-friendly fexible 
packaging,” and in an institutional video, it announces that it has the largest post￾consumer recycling plant in the country.
Another source, Datasur, also states that between 2019 and November 2020, a 
total of 14,988 tons arrived in Ecuador. That means the shipment of 2820 containers 
for maritime transport in that period, of which 1552 arrived in 2020, a higher vol￾ume than that recorded in 2019 (Basura plástica, 2021, p. 9).
Ecuador is a demonstration of the ups and downs of plastic waste, with no cus￾toms controls or strong ministries to exercise control. According to data from the 
Central Bank of Ecuador, in 2022, Ecuador imported 3255.2 tons of ethylene poly￾mers from the United States. That same year, it exported 501.4 tons of poly(ethylene 
terephthalate) bottles to the United States.
2 https://www.paraiso.com.ec/empaques-fexibles/linea-industrial/
On the Plastic Waste Route: Latin America Is the New Port of Destination296
In Ecuador, it is established that the Ministry of the Environment must authorize 
the importation of “hazardous, special, or non-hazardous” waste. However, the gov￾ernment institution has reports that do not account for what enters through customs. 
According to customs records, the Andean country has received mostly “plastic 
waste,” a classifcation that is too broad and “does not allow to know what type of 
plastics or their condition they bring through customs” (Íbid, 9).
Alianza Basura Cero and environmental defense organizations, with the support 
of academia, have put the cat out of the bag and conducted an in-depth investigation, 
“La Partida 3915 Importación de desechos plásticos en Ecuador,” in which they 
contrast information from the Ministry of Environment, Water and Ecological 
Transition (Maate), the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the National Customs 
Service of Ecuador (Senae), among other institutions.
The conclusions report, “Besides the inconsistencies between the fgures, at least 
10,000 tons of plastic waste enter Ecuador annually. This number equals the total 
plastic waste production from 40 cities, with an average population of 266,688” 
(Soliz et al., 2021, p. 151).
One of the most revealing details of the investigation is that despite being a sig￾natory to the Basel Convention and the Plastics Amendment, in Ecuador, the cor￾responding authority, the Ministry of Environment and Water (Maate), is in the dark 
about whether or not the waste arrives contaminated or if it is hazardous. Their 
supervisory role was entrusted to customs offcials, who obviously do not fulfll it.
Mexico
After The Guardian’s article, obtaining information was one of the major diffculties 
for environmental organizations, civil society, and academia. Despite all the diff￾culties facing the state mechanisms that cover up the commercial and toxic absur￾dity of the twenty-frst century, there is no way to hide that much waste.
Through their website, the collective Malditos Plásticos provides “A radiography 
of Plastic Waste Colonialism in Mexico, a tool for consultation and information dis￾semination on the pollution and the problems caused by the export of plastic waste 
to Mexico, and its use as fuel in incineration, pyrolysis, co-processing, and other 
forms of energy or thermal use in the country.”
This enterprise provides information on the colonialism of waste, the origin of 
plastic waste, the case of the United States, where the waste, where the waste goes, 
case studies, and recommendations. Organizations such as GAIA, Acción Ecológica, 
Fronteras Comunes, Asociación Ecológica Santo Tomás, GeoComunes, Fondo 
Acción Solidaria, A.C., Geografía Septentrional, and Break Free From Plastic 
joined the communicational effort.
Among the most relevant data that Malditos Plásticos succeeds in exposing is 
that according to Mexico’s Tariff Information System (Siavi), from 2015 to 2021, 
the country would have received 662,518 tons of plastic waste, with 94% coming 
from the United States and 3% from Italy, Germany, Netherlands, and China. The 
E. Zambrano and M. Donoso297
remaining percentage is from other countries. The highest volume of incoming plas￾tic waste is evident between 2020 (38,528.965 tons) and 2021 (67,863.037 tons).
Mexico registers 200 authorized recycling plants and companies, of which 
México Tóxiico could map and visualize 165. However, nine companies control – 
or, more accurately, contaminate  – the plastic waste import market: “Geocycle 
Mexico (993 thousand 700 tons, 14%); Johnson Controls Enterprises Mexico (590 
thousand 085 tons, 8.3%); Lim del Puerto, Logística, Ingeniería y Mantenimiento 
del Puerto (500 thousand tons, 7.1%); and Sociedad Ecológica Mexicana del Norte 
(356 thousand 500 tons, 5%).”
Based on data from Malditos Plásticos, cement companies such as Cemex have 
set the ambitious goal of incinerating 19 million tons of plastic waste by 2030. 
Across the sea, in 2018, the European Union stopped subsidizing incinerator con￾struction and issued a warning to Germany for preferring incineration since it is a 
false solution: it is not recycling; it is not a circular economy; and it does not reduce 
the demand for plastic usage. The editorial by José Luis Gallego, published in La 
Vanguardia’s digital version, refers to Directive 2018/852 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on packaging and waste, sets a com￾mon target for recycling 65% of packaging waste by 2025 and 70% by 2030 (“La 
UE critica la incineración de residuos en países que se dicen avanzados como 
Alemania”, 2019).
Argentina
Even the great trade routes, despite their implications for the usurpation of resources, 
allowed the exchange of products for human use or consumption. In the case of 
Argentina, we should question the purpose of the entry of sewage sludge, a problem 
detected in 1988.
The country’s resistance started before Mexico and Ecuador, and its prompt 
action succeeded in limiting the entry of hospital waste, deceitfully labeled as “sani￾tary aid, humanitarian aid, or raw material for the manufacture of fertilizers” (Basura 
plástica, p. 3).
The Basel Convention, which aims to regulate transboundary movements of haz￾ardous wastes and their disposal, served as the foundation for Argentina’s 1992 
enactment of National Hazardous Waste Law No. 24,051. This law allowed the 
country to refuse any “sanitary assistance” or batches of plastic waste without a port.
The plastic waste import issue is so pathetic that the same agencies representing 
the heart of imperialism, such as Interpol, have submitted reports on the “Emergence 
of criminal trends in the plastic waste market since January 2018.”
“The international organization reported that in Argentina and Mexico, there are 
growing investments to install recycling plants, which would mean a new destina￾tion for plastic waste from the United States,” according to GAIA’s report, Plastic 
Waste Has Arrived in Latin America.
On the Plastic Waste Route: Latin America Is the New Port of Destination298
The southern cone country once implemented severe restrictions in Decree 
181/92, which prohibited “the transportation, introduction and defnitive or tempo￾rary import into the Territory, the Special Customs Area, and Free Trade Areas 
Created or to be created, of residue, waste or scrap from other countries.” However, 
they were modifed in 2019 by Mauricio Macri’s government (Decree N. 591/2019), 
1 month before the end of his term, arguing that “waste is resources and the need for 
a solution for the industries that require them.”
The Argentine Federation of Cardboard and Recyclers (FACyR) and environ￾mental organizations quickly rejected the decree for “putting at risk their work” 
since they are the leading suppliers of recycled materials for the Argentine indus￾try (FACyR, 2019). “But the change lasted only six months because the government 
of Alberto Fernández reinstated Decree 181/92” (Basura-plástica, p.12).
The threats to Argentina’s sovereignty are still in force, prompting environmental 
organizations to demand permanent monitoring as there remains a possibility that 
someone may intend to open the borders and transform the country into a “waste 
dump of the world,” terms with which the FACyR questioned Macri and his then 
Minister of the Environment, Sergio Bergman.
The Myth of Recycling and Plastic
While developing countries in Latin America have been making modest improve￾ments in their recycling capacities, industrialized countries, such as China and the 
United States, have taken advantage of this progress to justify exporting plastic 
waste to these nations. However, these very industrialized countries are also estab￾lishing recycling plants in developing countries.
Camila Aguilera, GAIA’s Communications Coordinator in Latin America, who 
has been close to citizen actions, does not speak of a “recycling myth” as Greenpeace 
refers. However, she does question “abuse” based on the positive connotations of 
the term “recycling,” a label under which the waste that enters through customs is 
being camoufaged.
“If Customs tells you that a container arrives for recycling, the word recycling 
has such a positive connotation that no one will question the quality of the plastic 
that enters. There is no strong legislation nor suffcient coordination between the 
Ministries of Environment and Customs to catalog or question what type of recy￾cling these plastics are going for. Recycling of what?” observed Aguilera in a per￾sonal interview.
For its part, Greenpeace questions plastic recycling:
Will we allow companies to continue promoting the failed myth of recycling toxic plastics, 
or will we demand a pivotal opportunity that drastically reduces the production of single￾use plastics? Instead of continuing down this false path, companies in the U.S. and world￾wide must urgently eliminate single-use plastics by replacing their packaging with reuse 
and refll systems and offering packaging-free products. (“Circular Claims Fall Flat Again”, 
2022, 7)
E. Zambrano and M. Donoso299
The Greenpeace report cites fve reasons why plastic is falsely a recyclable product: 
“(1) it is extremely diffcult to collect, (2) virtually impossible to sort for recycling, 
(3) its co-processing is dangerous for the environment, (4) it is often made of or 
contaminated by toxic materials, (5) its recycling is not economical” (“Circular 
Claims Fall Flat Again”, 2022, 6).
The Basel Convention is a legally binding instrument created as a global response 
to the alarming increase in international trade in toxic wastes. It seeks “to protect, 
through strict control, human health and the environment against the adverse effects 
that may result from the generation and management of hazardous and other 
wastes.” In addition, the Plastics Amendment aims to address the high pollution 
generated by this type of waste on a global scale. However, trade continues to spiral 
out of control and escalate, and the generation of plastics continues to increase. For 
this reason, we urgently need a legally binding International Plastics Treaty that 
covers the entire life cycle of plastic, addressing its impact on both terrestrial and 
marine environments, as well as the local populations of the poorest countries 
affected by the shipment of this waste.
A Bit of History
The waste route history is not recent. In 1992, the Basel Convention on the Control 
of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal was hosted 
in Switzerland and subsequently approved there. Eight years later, 175 countries 
adhered to this international instrument; by 2021, the fgure will have risen to 187 
countries, except for the United States, which still needs to ratify it. This is sum￾marized in the Executive Summary Plastic Waste (Basura-plástica, p. 2).
The Basel Convention aims “to protect human health and the environment 
against the adverse effects of hazardous wastes,” according to the document. In 
addition, “The provisions of the Convention center around the following principal 
aims: the reduction of hazardous waste generation and the promotion of environ￾mentally sound management of hazardous wastes, the restriction of transboundary 
movements of hazardous wastes, and the implementation of a regulatory system for 
the permissible movements of hazardous wastes” (Basel Convention, 2023).
One year later, on January 1, 2021, the Plastics Wastes Amendment came into 
force. It obliges countries that “wish to export contaminated or mixed plastics, or 
that do not have environmentally sound recycling as their main destination, to 
request prior consent from the receiving country; however, a substantial decrease in 
the fow of plastic waste has not yet been observed, which is an alarming sign 
regarding the compliance of each country with its international commitments.” The 
purpose of the amendment is to “improve the control of transboundary movements 
of plastic waste and to prevent, among other things, industrialized countries from 
fooding poor countries with their waste” (Basura-plástica, p. 4).
The amendment was welcomed in Latin America: by 2020, three Latin American 
countries reported the entry of plastic waste through their customs: 32,650 tons in 
On the Plastic Waste Route: Latin America Is the New Port of Destination300
Mexico; 4054 tons in El Salvador; and 3665 tons in Ecuador, according to data 
compiled by The Last Beach Cleanup (LBC).3
Deal with Your Waste
The Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives (GAIA) in Latin America and the 
Caribbean rejected the threat that makes the region an emerging destination for the 
world’s plastic waste. They cite several factors, but above all, they emphasize “that 
trade in plastic waste is carried out through broad and ambiguous tariff headings, 
subheadings and fractions, which do not allow these materials to be tracked until 
their fnal use. From the experiences of Asian countries, there is ample evidence that 
this waste arrives contaminated or is diffcult to recycle, which has an environmen￾tal impact on the receiving countries.”
This impact is evident not only in the contamination of nature but also in “the 
violation of communities’ rights to live in an environment that is safe for their health 
and that of their territories,” the press release mentions, without delving into the 
health effects caused by microplastics.
“The transboundary trade of plastic waste is perhaps one of the most nefarious 
expressions of the mercantilization of common goods and the colonial occupation 
of the territories of the geopolitical south to turn them into sacrifce zones. Latin 
America and the Caribbean are not the backyards of the United States, we are sov￾ereign territories, and we demand the fulfllment of the rights of nature and our 
peoples,” Fernanda Soliz, director of the health area of the Simon Bolivar University, 
Ecuador.
Because of the unknown state in which thousands of tons of plastic waste, mainly 
from the United States, enter through ports and borders, environmental organiza￾tions in Mexico demanded that the waste “must be treated in places close to where 
they are generated,” rejecting its imports “as a fnal or transit destination” (Basura 
plástica, p. 5).
Greenpeace urges to stop the greenwashing of nonrecyclable plastic products 
and the export of plastic waste, which is demonstrated to cause plastic pollution in 
the ocean and cause severe social and environmental damage in the receiving coun￾tries (Acceptance of Unrecyclable Plastic Products and California’s Continued 
Exports of Plastic Waste Exports to Non-OECD Countries, 2021).
3An independent US initiative that seeks to reduce plastic pollution; its source is the US Trade 
Online records.
E. Zambrano and M. Donoso301
Conclusions
Ships entering and leaving the borders, crossing from one continent to another with 
plastic waste, expose an obvious need for control and regulation, which is clearly 
insuffcient nowadays.
We warn that we are facing an imminent danger of contamination of nature and 
the violation of communities’ rights to live in an environment that is safe for their 
health and that of their territories. Representatives of different organizations have 
expressed their support and concern, stating that we are “facing a waste crisis that 
reveals that to achieve success we must prioritize reduction policies, and then ensure 
the reuse and recyclability of packaging, ensuring recycling is carried out in places 
nearby where they are generated. We categorically repudiate the fact that high recy￾cling fgures shown by rich countries are being at the cost of turning our continent 
into a waste dump” (Elevation, 2021).
If Latin America accepts to become the destination of the world’s plastic waste, 
it would be granting the consumerist waste of countries like the United States, but, 
above all, it would be mistaking the disease for the cure when it comes to the treat￾ment of plastic waste.
We have mentioned some trade routes whose impact on the spreading of life￾styles was positive, but history also records routes of shame, one of them being the 
Slave Route. In the twenty-frst century, will Latin America assume the conse￾quences of this absurd route for its territories and communities?
References
“Acceptance of Unrecyclable Plastic Products and California’s Continued Exports of Plastic Waste 
Exports to Non-OECD Countries”. (2021). Greenpeace USA. Accedido julio 9. https://www.
greenpeace.org/usa/research/letter-to-ca-recycling-commission/
“Cartoneros y recicladores argentinos rechazan el nuevo decreto que permitirá la “importación 
indiscriminada” de residuos”. (2019). Residuos Profesional. Septiembre 5. https://www.residu￾osprofesional.com/argentina-decreto-importacion-residuos/
“Circular Claims Fall Flat Again”. (2022). Greenpeace USA. Accedido julio 3. https://www.green￾peace.org/usa/reports/circular-claims-fall-fat-again/
“Convenio de Basilea sobre el Control de los Movimientos Transfronterizos 
de los Deshechos Peligrosos y su Eliminación | Observatorio del Principio 
10”. (2023). Accedido junio 19. https://observatoriop10.cepal.org/es/tratado/
convenio-basilea-control-movimientos-transfronterizos-deshechos-peligrosos-su-eliminacion
Elevation, Development. 2021. “Declaración Pública: América Latina No Es Un 
Basurero. Rechazamos El Comercio Transfronterizo de Desechos Plásticos 
En Nuestro Territorio  – GAIA”. GAIA  – octubre 6. https://www.no-burn.org/
declaracion-publica-rechazamos-comercio-transfronterizo-de-desechos-plasticos/
“Estados Unidos abandona ofcialmente el Acuerdo de París. ¿Qué signifca?”. (2020). National 
Geographic. Noviembre 6. https://www.nationalgeographic.es/medio-ambiente/2020/11/
estados-unidos-abandona-ofcialmente-acuerdo-de-paris
Greenpeace. 2021. Acceptance of Unrecyclable Plastic Products and Califorminia's Continued 
Exports of Plastic Waste Exports to Non-OECD Countries.
On the Plastic Waste Route: Latin America Is the New Port of Destination302
“La UE critica la incineración de residuos en países que se dicen avanzados como Alemania”. 
(2019). La Vanguardia. febrero 20. https://www.lavanguardia.com/natural/ecogal￾lego/20190220/46585655213/union-europea-critica-incineracion-residuos-reciclaje￾alternativa-economia-circular.html
“La-basura-plástica-llegó-a-América-Latina.pdf”. (2021). Accedido junio 18. https://www.no-burn.
org/wp-content/uploads/La-basura-pla%CC%81stica-llego%CC%81-a-Ame%CC%81rica￾Latina.pdf
Lakhani, N. (2022). “Only 5% of plastic waste generated by US last year was recycled, report 
says”. The Guardian, octubre 24, sec. US news. https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2022/
oct/23/us-plastic-waste-recycled-2021-greenpeace
“Más de 180 países acuerdan restricciones para la exportación de desechos plásticos”. 
(2019). National Geographic. mayo 13. https://www.nationalgeographicla.com/planeta￾o-plastico/2019/05/mas-de-180-paises-acuerdan-restricciones-para-la-exportacion-de￾desechos-plasticos
Soliz, M.  F., Morán, S.; Alianza Basura Cero, y UASB Área Salud. (2021). La Partida 3915: 
importación de desechos plásticos en Ecuador (1. ed.). Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar, 
Sede Ecuador: GAIA: Alianza Basura Cero Ecuador: VLIR-UOS.
“Where does your plastic go. Global investigation reveals América’s dirty secret”. (2019). 
The Guardian. 17 de junio. https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2019/jun/17/
recycled-plastic-america-global-crisis
E. Zambrano and M. Donoso303
A Story of Waste Colonialism: 
An Italian-Tunisian Case
Semia Gharbi and Nidal Attia
Introduction
The Italian waste affair took on two dimensions, Tunisian legal dimension which 
deals with corruption and Tunisian-Italian that falls within the framework of the 
Basel International Convention. The Collective of experts Réseau Tunisie Verte and 
civil society organizations based in Tunisia were mobilized against waste colonial￾ism because of 282 containers of waste from Italy, carrying tons of mixed and inap￾propriate wastes. The trade of mixture waste entered under code Y46 and includes 
hospital waste, which does not comply with national and international laws. The 
representative of the Ministry of Environment of Tunisia indicated that the contain￾ers did not include recyclable material but only “urban and mixed waste, impossible 
to differentiate” and therefore were destined for disposal in landflls or incineration.
The collective strongly denounces the illegal importation by a Tunisian company 
of mixed waste from Italy and is indignant at the lack of frm enforcement of inter￾national laws on the transport of waste from Italy to Tunisia. It is well known to all 
party members of international conventions in relation to the protection of the envi￾ronment and the health of citizens and their right to live in a healthy environment as 
provided by the Tunisian Constitution of 2020, to ensure that exceedances of laws 
are not observed.
Taking into account the chaotic waste management in the Mediterranean region 
and facing this new ecological crime, our Collective:
S. Gharbi (*) 
Association de l’éducation environnementale pour les futures générations et Réseau Tunisie 
Verte, Tunis, Tunisie 
Réseau Tunisie Verte, Tunis, Tunisie 
N. Attia 
Réseau Tunisie Verte, Tunis, Tunisie
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9_15304
1. Calls on the Tunisian authorities to return the containers to their country of ori￾gin, to identify the culprits, to strictly apply the law, and to stop any future 
attempt to import waste into our country in accordance with the Tunisian consti￾tution and legislation and international conventions ratifed by Tunisia. Indeed, 
marketing waste under the pretext of recycling is actually a common practice in 
several developed countries to avoid the disastrous costs and environmental 
impacts of their local treatment.
2. This act confrms the violation of a long list of international conventions ratifed 
by Italy and Tunisia and the regional conventions to which Tunisia is a signatory. 
We mainly quote:
The Basel Convention and the Ban “Ban Amendment” which blocks any export of hazard￾ous waste from an EU, OECD country to a developing or transition country. In this act, 
article 9 of the Basel Convention should be applied, which considers this transboundary 
movement of wastes to be “illegal traffc.”
The MARPOL Convention prohibits the shipment of hazardous wastes.
The Barcelona Convention on pollution resulting from the transboundary move￾ments of hazardous wastes and their disposal: the Contracting Parties shall take all 
appropriate measures to prevent, abate, and to the fullest possible extent eliminate 
pollution of the environment which can be caused by transboundary movements and 
disposal of hazardous wastes and to reduce to a minimum, and if possible eliminate, 
such transboundary movements. Article 3 (a) and (b) relates to medical waste Y1, 
Y2, and Y3 and household waste Y46 waste collected, including sewage and sewage 
sludge as in the Annex I of the Convention.
The BAMAKO Convention was ratifed by Tunisia in 1992 and entered into 
force in 1998: on the ban on importing hazardous wastes into Africa and on the 
control of transboundary movements and the management of hazardous wastes pro￾duced in Africa.
Bilateral Agreements with Italy and the Association Agreement between the 
European Union and its member states including Italy and Tunisia establish the 
rules of cooperation between the parties which aims to prevent the degradation of 
environment and improvement of its quality, protection of human health, and the 
rational use of natural resources with a view to ensuring sustainable development.
Waste Colonialism
The Tunisian authorities received 70 containers of the waste at the Port of Sousse 
and an extra 200 containers including thousands of tons of waste. In total, there are 
283 of containers of illegal waste. The Tunisian company at the origin of this import 
had concluded an agreement with an Italian company for the import of 120,000 tons 
of waste per year, at a cost of 48 euros per ton. The total amount of the contract is 
around 18 million dinars per year. The affair was discovered by the customs services 
in July 2020, but it was only after its media coverage that the government decided 
to take it up.
S. Gharbi and N. Attia305
Fig. 1 The chronology and facts during the Italian-Tunisian case
The Ministry of Environment reiterated that it did not issue a license for the 
import of waste from abroad and announced the opening of an investigation into the 
issue. The Ministry notifed the Italian authority of illegal trade activities and ship￾ping the containers back.
According to environmental organizations, this export action violates European 
Union law, Tunisian law, as well as international treaties on the trade of waste – the 
Basel Convention, the Bamako Convention, and the Izmir Protocol of the Barcelona 
Convention.
This group of organizations has shown, in a brief report, how weaknesses in EU 
regulations have contributed to the export of this waste for disposal under the guise 
of recycling.
Réseau Tunisie Verte militated for the return of the waste to support Tunisian 
government. It was almost 2 years of nonstop work (Fig. 1).
Tunisian Law on Waste
The import of waste is not authorized by the Tunisian law. The Tunisian law clearly 
regulates the feld of waste disposal, under the constitution, international agree￾ments ratifed by Tunisia, and the legislative and regulatory texts enacted for this 
purpose, in particular the framework law No. 1996-41 of June 10, 1996, relating to 
the waste and monitoring of its elimination and removal.
Therefore, it is strictly prohibited to import hazardous waste into Tunisia.
The import of nonhazardous waste is also ruled by laws and regulations, mainly 
Law No. 41 of 1996 of June 10, 1996, on waste and disposal control.
This law represents a general framework which defnes the methods and condi￾tions for the disposal of all waste in Tunisia.
A Story of Waste Colonialism: An Italian-Tunisian Case306
Under Article 45 of Law No. 96-41 of June 10, 1996, relating to waste and the 
control of its management and disposal, “if the waste has been imported or exported 
against the provisions of this law or of the special regulations referred to in the pre￾ceding article, relevant authorities shall order their keeper, their carrier or their pro￾ducer to return them to the country of origin within a timeframe it determines.”
Law No. 95-63 of July 10, 1995, authorized the accession of the Republic of 
Tunisia to the Basel Convention on the control of transboundary movements of 
hazardous waste and their disposal.
If the offender does not comply, relevant authorities may take all necessary mea￾sures to ensure the return of this waste at the expense of the participants in the 
operation.
Moreover, Tunisia has a list of laws to regulate the waste, but the management is 
very weak.
The Agreement Violations
• The shipment is registered under code Y46 which is not allowed if we consider 
Basel Convention.
• The PIC documents contained inaccurate info; therefore, the Tunisian authorities 
can credibly argue they were misled.
• R3 code is from Basel and the EU. It is for recycling and reclamation of organic 
materials other than solvents. It is distinguished from metal recycling, incinera￾tion, or waste to energy but should not be confned to composting.
• Italy’s shipments of municipal waste to Tunisia in 2020 shine a spotlight on per￾sisting abuses in the global trade in plastic and other wastes. In particular, this 
scandal highlights the role of problematic EU waste code 19 12 12 in these ille￾gal shipments. The waste was classifed as “19 12 12,” which corresponds in the 
European waste catalogue to “wastes (including mixtures of materials) from 
mechanical treatment of wastes.” 19.12.12 is typically exported for “recovery” – 
as RDF in co-incineration. The fact that 19.12.12 exports are legal in Italy/
Europe does not mean that they are unproblematic. These waste shipments may 
have breached Tunisian law. Code 19 in the EU refers to “special” waste, which 
apart from other industrial wastes, also includes waste from waste treatment sites.
• The use of code 19 12 12 appears to have introduced ambiguity about whether 
the waste exported was truly household or municipal waste. However, this EU 
waste code should not have been used for a waste shipment outside the EU: only 
the internationally agreed code for these wastes, listing Y46 under Annex II of 
the Basel Convention (household waste), should have been used. Because the EU 
has banned the export of all Basel Convention Annex II wastes, including house￾hold waste (Y46) to non-OECD countries, that ban should have been clearly 
imposed in this case (Puckett, 2021).
• The laboratory analysis is different from what was announced in the agreement 
and contains toxic elements
S. Gharbi and N. Attia307
Flagrant Violation of International Agreements
Tunisia is part of the Basel Convention, Bamako Convention, MARPOL Convention, 
and Izmir Protocols.
The Basel Convention
As stressed in the article 6 of Basel convention, the state of export shall notify or 
shall require the generator or exporter to notify, in writing, through the channel of 
the competent authority of the state of export, the competent authority of the States 
concerned of any proposed transboundary movement of hazardous wastes or 
other wastes.
Tunisia notifed the secretariat of Basel Convention on October 23, 2020. Even 
in cases where they are not going to pursue criminal charges, Article 8 applies when 
things are not done according to the contract. In that case it is 90 days from the time 
the importing state informed of the case to the exporting country and the secretariat 
of the Convention. Therefore, they have 90 days to send it back to the state of export 
or agree on an alternate arrangement (Article 8 Duty to Re-import). The Basel 
Convention is considered as a loophole because the industry is taking advantages of 
the vagueness of the convention in terms of the unclear meanings of the text such as 
for the amendement on the exported plastic waste which must be “exclusively pure” 
and the words exclusively can has different interpretation meanings (Merelle, 2021).
The Bamako Convention and Izmir Protocols
The competent authority of Italy should have known that they had an import ban in 
place for these Y46 wastes (or Bamako, Izmir listing for same) that the export is 
illegal traffc and is illegal on the part of the exporter.
In such cases Italy needs to take the waste back within 30 days after they have 
been informed of the problem by Tunisia (or other time that the two countries might 
agree) (Article 9 Illegal Traffc).
The Human Rights
The illegal entry of such waste into Tunisian territory is a violation of constitution￾ally protected rights to health and the environment.
A Story of Waste Colonialism: An Italian-Tunisian Case308
The presence of waste is also a violation of the integrity of Tunisians and of their 
right to live in dignifed and satisfactory sanitary conditions as enshrined in the 
international conventions ratifed by both Italy and Tunisia.
The current situation causes great fear to the inhabitants of the affected region 
(namely, the neighbors of the port of the city of Sousse) who are beginning to feel 
the impact of such a threatening presence on their health and that of their children.
Particularly fragile people fear the presence of waste, and we know that environ￾mental problems threaten the rights of the most fragile population in particular, 
namely, sick people, people in precarious situations, and in particular port workers 
who are close to thousands of tons of waste.
The Tunisians are invaded by thousands of tons of waste illegally entered the 
Tunisian territory; it is they who are confronted with the dangers and risks caused 
by such a scourge.
Reactions of National and International Civil Society
Réseau Tunisie Vert consider the Italy case as a criminal act. Illegal shipments due 
to the fault of the exporter, as in the case of the Italian waste exported to Tunisia, 
must be taken back by the exporting state within 30 days from the moment when the 
Exporting State has been notifed of the illegal shipment, or otherwise disposed of 
in an environmentally sound manner under the direction of the Exporting State. 
Unfortunately, it has took almost 2  years to reship 212 containers. Through our 
NGO Réseau Tunisie Verte, we contacted the special rapporteur of human rights 
which reacted very well to our request and we provided to his secretariat with the 
necessary details about the illegal shipment. The special rapporteur visited Italy in 
their mandate and reported the issue of the waste with recommendations as men￾tioned in the document (UNDOC, 2022):
Italy was informed of the illegal shipment by the Tunisian government on December 9, 
2020. They are therefore almost two months late to act in accordance with the law. This is 
unacceptable. We call on the European Commission to take the necessary measures to 
ensure compliance. (Jim Puckett of the Basel Action Network (BAN), quoted by the same 
source) (Puckett, 2021).
Italy should take responsibility for preventing and managing its own municipal waste, 
rather than exporting its problems to Tunisia. Each additional day of delayed repatriation 
adds to this injustice. (Sirine Rached of the Global Alliance for Alternative Incinerators 
(GAIA)) (Rached et al., 2021).
This type of trade is immoral and destructive to the environment; it is not acceptable to 
import waste from Italy to Tunisia for landfll. Landflling waste can generate toxic leaching 
and contribute to the degradation of human health and the environment. (Mohammed 
Tazrout, campaigner for Greenpeace Middle East and North Africa) (Mohamed, 2021).
Pierre Condamine, Head of Waste Policy at Zero Waste Europe (ZWE, 2021) went 
so far as to say that:
This is another stark example of a weakness in EU law and enforcement causing ethical and 
environmental harm to others.
S. Gharbi and N. Attia309
Media Reactivities to the Italy Case
Réseau Tunisie Vert didn’t stop making press releases supported by many journal￾ists and specifcally the National Agency of Press. Radio and TV channels national 
and private have shown their willingness to battle Italy waste. Additional to national 
mass media, the international journalism reacted making the Italy case as a scandal 
(Chabane, 2015; Common, 2021; Orsi et al., 2021; Bongarra, 2022; Gorman, 2022).
Arguments of the Health Impacts of Landflls in Tunisia
Tunisia is facing a huge problem to manage its own wastes and doesn’t have the 
appropriate management to treat hazard wastes. Although there is a big lack of stud￾ies to relate the landflls that causes many diseases such cancers, an investigation 
was done on the subject and related the realities (Chabane, 2015).
Updates
After all the series of activities implemented by both Tunisian government and 
Réseau Tunisie Vert and all its related international and regional contacts, Tunisia 
succeed to reship 212 containers on February 18, 2022. Unfortunately, 70 contain￾ers were affected when a fre broke out in December 2021  in the warehouse of 
Tunisian company Soreplast where the Italian waste subject to customs control was 
stored. An investigation is initiated to determine the circumstances of the fre. 
Lesson learned from this case which highlighted the growth of the global waste 
trade despite the strict regulations at the international and EU level which aimed at 
preventing rich countries from dumping their hazardous wastes in poor countries.
Recommendations
The Italian-Tunisian municipal waste scandal has already had far-reaching conse￾quences in Tunisia, with an ongoing court case against whom facilitated the illegal 
entrance of waste. Nevertheless, countries have to comply with their obligations 
under the Basel Convention on wastes. Meanwhile, this scandal has revealed the 
problematic effect of European Waste Catalogue code 19 12 12 in creating confu￾sion about the nature of wastes being traded and facilitating breaches of EU and 
international law. Other recommendations were made to EU countries as: provide 
reparations for any harm to the environment or human health or other damages 
resulting from the wastes and take administrative/legislative actions to ensure that 
A Story of Waste Colonialism: An Italian-Tunisian Case310
waste exports to countries where such imports are banned are never considered or 
undertaken again (Puckett, 2021).
The dramatic case of illegal transboundary movement of waste can continue 
because they are other breaches which can facilitate the export. We list one of the 
main important points that increase the waste colonialism as the customs codes. 
This latter isn’t transparent regarding the waste and the nature of waste; we need 
urgently the international organization of customs to review deeply their codes and 
delete totally those harming the countries particularly the developing countries 
which don’t have the capacities to manage their proper waste.
References
Bongarra, F. (2022). Italy to take back tons of waste sent illegally to Tunisia. https://arab.news/
vd7ka. Last access: 3 Aug 2023.
Chabane, N. E. H. (2015). Investigation into the landfll at Borj Chakir: Causes and effects of poor 
waste management. https://nawaat.org/2015/05/17/the-landfll-at-borj-chakir-a-serious-threat￾to-a-decent-life-and-clean-environment/. Last access: 3 Aug 2023.
Common, P. (2021). Italian waste traffc in Tunisia, containers are still in Sousse. https://www.
enicbcmed.eu/common-project-italian-waste-traffc-tunisia-containers-are-still-sousse. Last 
access: 3 Aug 2023.
Gorman, S. (2022). Tunisian NGOs triumph in David-vs-Goliath toxic waste battle with Italy. 
https://www.france24.com/en/africa/20220221-tunisian-ngos-triumph-in-david-vs-goliath￾toxic-waste-battle-with-italy. Last access: 3 Aug 2023.
Merelle, L. (2021). https://euranetplus-inside.eu/eu-waste-exports-go-to-waste-part-i/
Mohamed, L. B. (2021). https://thesubmarine.it/2021/03/03/traffco-illecito-rifuti-italia-tunisia/
Orsi, G., Forti, C., Farina, A., & Martinelli, F. (2021). https://www.rai.it/programmi/report/inchi￾este/Terra-felix-f4a19e8d-70f1-4fa7-b515-4a7796a5cf1a.html
Puckett, J. (2021). https://www.no-burn.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/2021-03-02-Italy￾Tunisia-short-report.pdf
Rached, S. (GAIA), Gharbi, S. (Réseau Tunisie Verte), Favoino, E. (Zero Waste Europe), & 
Puckett, J. (Basel Action Network). (2021). Illegal shipments of Italian municipal waste to 
Tunisia. Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives 1958 University Avenue, Berkeley, CA 
94704, USA.
UNDOC. (2022). https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G22/405/46/PDF/
G2240546.pdf?OpenElement
ZWE. (2021). Italian company caught illegally dumping plastic and other municipal waste in 
Tunisia. https://zerowasteeurope.eu/press-release/italian-company-caught-illegally-dumping￾plastic-and-other-municipal-waste-in-tunisia/. Last access: 3 Aug 2023.
S. Gharbi and N. Attia311
A
Adana, 119, 129, 132, 224, 230, 252, 254, 255
Argentina, 79, 291, 297–298
B
Basel Convention, 3, 10, 11, 19, 70–76, 78, 
79, 81, 82, 84, 87, 89–91, 93, 94, 100, 
108, 131, 143–145, 147, 149, 158, 159, 
162, 170, 173, 180, 183, 184, 191, 203, 
217, 219–221, 223–230, 234–236, 239, 
240, 249, 250, 278, 281, 285, 293, 
295–297, 299, 304–307, 309
Brominated fame retardants (BFRs), 81, 83, 
85, 92, 116, 118, 120, 122, 223, 
270, 273
C
Chile, 161, 291
Chlorinated and brominated dioxins (PCDD/
Fs; PBDD/Fs), 114–119, 121, 122, 
224, 238
Colonialism, 4–6, 9, 22, 36, 137, 142, 155, 
156, 247–256, 296
D
Data, 18, 27, 30, 31, 34, 36, 55, 85, 86, 88, 
95–97, 141, 149, 156, 164, 165, 171, 
174–178, 194, 197, 208, 209, 219, 231, 
234, 236, 250, 261, 264, 265, 268, 270, 
295–297, 300
E
Ecuador, 60, 109, 291, 293–297, 300
Environmental justice, 3, 4, 36, 70, 72, 100, 
248, 285
Environmental problem, 113, 201, 308
E-waste, 21, 22, 32, 33, 39, 40, 78, 84, 109, 
115, 118–120, 122, 191–195, 198, 201, 
210, 261, 269
Export, 3, 17, 55, 67, 107, 120, 130, 142, 156, 
191, 217, 247, 260, 291, 304
F
False solution, 293, 297
G
Global plastic waste trade, 8, 10, 55–64, 96, 
132, 135, 137, 138, 141–143, 218
Governance, 4, 6, 11, 12, 17–38, 40, 41, 43, 
74, 81, 90, 100, 273–276, 285
H
Human rights, 11, 33, 129–138, 208, 
285, 307–308
I
Illegal dumping, 107, 109, 156, 178, 192, 198, 
200, 201, 209, 218, 223, 231, 233–235
Illegal waste trade, 10, 37, 185, 191, 192, 197, 
200, 211, 286
Index
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to 
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
S. Gündoğdu (ed.), Plastic Waste Trade, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51358-9312
Illicit trade, 10–12, 109, 110
Import, 4, 19, 59, 71, 107, 120, 130, 142, 156, 
191, 218, 247, 260, 293, 304
International conventions, 107, 303, 304, 308
Italy, 161, 167, 197, 199, 200, 255, 270, 296, 
303, 304, 306–309
L
Latin America, 10, 69, 96, 108, 115, 
135, 291–301
M
Malaysia, 8, 61, 64, 78, 96, 108, 114, 130, 
147, 149, 156, 158, 161, 164, 173, 174, 
183, 218, 250, 259–261, 263–265, 267, 
268, 270, 273, 275, 276, 278, 279, 285, 
286, 293, 294
Mexico, 60, 85, 86, 89, 90, 96, 97, 130, 158, 
178, 291, 292, 296–297, 300
Multilateral environmental 
agreements, 35, 218
N
New colonialism, 247–256
P
Paper waste trade, 159
Persistent organic pollutants (POPs), 6, 35, 81, 
113, 123, 184
Plastic, 3, 21, 55, 72, 107, 113, 129, 141, 156, 
191, 217, 250, 259, 306
Plastic exports, 7
Plastic imports, 142, 191, 220, 230, 239, 264
Plastic pollution, 5, 8, 9, 11, 64, 76, 78, 
141–144, 149, 192, 193, 201, 202, 204, 
207, 208, 218, 224, 230–232, 234–236, 
239, 255, 273, 285, 300
Plastic treaty, 136, 219, 223, 224, 239
Plastic waste, 4, 22, 55, 108, 113, 129, 141, 
155, 191, 217, 250, 260, 291
Plastic waste colonialism, 3–12, 156, 296
Plastic waste import, 8, 59, 61, 95, 120, 142, 
170, 174, 175, 196, 197, 218, 222, 
227–229, 231, 232, 236, 253, 260, 264, 
275, 278, 280, 283, 286, 297
Plastic waste trade, 7, 10, 11, 55, 56, 64, 88, 
89, 92, 95–100, 110, 130, 132–137, 
141, 143, 148, 157, 158, 164, 166, 174, 
184, 185, 192, 196, 203, 210, 211, 217, 
229, 251, 253, 260
Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), 
113–115, 119–122, 184
R
Romania, 109, 191–203, 205–211
S
Sociolegal analysis, 247–256
T
Trade regulation, 158
Transboundary movement, 6, 40, 70, 72–74, 
88, 95, 211, 217, 218, 223–225, 228, 
233, 236, 297, 299, 304, 306, 307, 310
Tunisia, 94, 218, 303–309
Türkiye, 218–233, 235–240, 247–256
W
Waste colonialism, 3–7, 12, 155–157, 183, 185, 
224, 249, 260, 261, 285, 286, 303, 310
Waste crime, 111, 181, 185
Waste regime, 18, 22, 206, 207, 247
Waste trade, 4, 11, 17–22, 26–28, 30–36, 
38–41, 68–70, 72, 74, 85, 90, 107, 136, 
155–185, 195–197, 238, 247–256, 261, 
268, 278, 286
Index
