POLITICAL PLASTICITY
Political plasticity refers to limitations on how fast, how much, and in 
what ways political behavior does (or does not) change. In a number 
of important areas of behavior, such as leader–follower relations, 
ethnicity, religion, and the rich–poor divide, there has been long-term 
continuity of human behavior. These continuities are little impacted by 
factors assumed to bring about change such as electronic technologies, 
major wars, globalization, and revolutions. In addition to such areas of 
low political plasticity, areas of high political plasticity are considered. 
For example, women in education is discussed to illustrate how rapid 
societal change can be achieved. This book explains the psychological 
and social mechanisms that limit political plasticity and shape the 
possibility of changes in both democratic and dictatorial countries. 
Students, teachers, and anyone interested in political behavior and 
social psychology will benefit from this volume.
Fathali M. Moghaddam  is Professor of Psychology at 
Georgetown University, USA, where he served as Director of the 
Interdisciplinary Program in Cognitive Science (2016–2021). He was 
Editor-in-Chief of the American Psychological Association journal 
Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology (2014–2021). His most 
recent book is How Psychologists Failed: We Neglected the Poor and 
Minorities, Favored the Rich and Privileged and Got Science Wrong
(Cambridge, 2023). He has won a number of prestigious academic 
awards.
Published online by Cambridge University PressThe Progressive Psychology Book Series
This book is part of the Cambridge University Press book series Progressive 
Psychology, edited by Fathali M. Moghaddam. As the science of human behav￾ior, psychology is uniquely positioned and equipped to try to help us make more 
progress toward peaceful, fair, and constructive human relationships. However, 
the enormous resources of psychology have not been adequately or effectively 
harnessed for this task. The goal of this book series is to engage psychological sci￾ence in the service of achieving more democratic societies, toward providing equal 
opportunities for all. The volumes in the series contribute in new and unique 
ways to highlight how psychological science can contribute to making justice a 
more central theme in health care, education, the legal system, and business, com￾batting the psychological consequences of poverty, ending discrimination and 
prejudice, better understanding the failure of revolutions and limits on political 
plasticity, and moving societies to more openness. Of course, these topics have 
been discussed before in scattered and ad hoc ways by psychologists, but now they 
are addressed as part of a systematic and cohesive series on Progressive Psychology.
Published online by Cambridge University PressPOLITICAL PLASTICITY
The Future of Democracy and Dictatorship
FATHALI M. MOGHADDAM
Georgetown University
Published online by Cambridge University PressShaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, 
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment, 
a department of the University of Cambridge.
We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of 
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781009277112
DOI: 10.1017/9781009277129
© Fathali M. Moghaddam 2023
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions 
of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take 
place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
First published 2023
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-009-27711-2 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-009-27716-7 Paperback
Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for the persistence 
or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this 
publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will 
remain, accurate or appropriate.
Published online by Cambridge University PressThis book is dedicated to 
Richard A. Shweder
Published online by Cambridge University PressPublished online by Cambridge University Pressvii
List of Figures page ix
Preface xi
Acknowledgments xii
1 Political Plasticity, the Key to Understanding the Future of 
Democracy and Dictatorship 1
2 Hardwiring inside and outside People 12
Part I Political Plasticity and Behavioral 
Continuity
3 Why Do Leaders Still Exist? Leadership and Followership 25
4 Rich and Poor – Still Just as Different 37
5 Ethnicity Is Forever 48
6 Religion, Eternally Present but with a Thousand Faces 61
7 The Built Environment and Behavioral Continuity 72
Part II Change Agents, in Theory 
and Practice
8 Revolutions and Political Plasticity 87
9 War as Transformative 101
10 Technology Forces Change 115
11 Globalization and Deglobalization 128
Contents
Published online by Cambridge University Pressviii Contents
Part III Looking Ahead
12 The Eternal Dictator and Political Plasticity 143
Afterword. Lessons Learned: The Example of Women in Education 154
Notes 162
References 181
Index 211
Published online by Cambridge University Pressix
Figures
2.1 The continuum of behaviors, from completely 
hardwired to completely softwired, with almost all behaviors 
located somewhere between these two extremes page 13
5.1 Varieties of strategies for ethnic cleansing 59
7.1 The continuum of blank slate to strong hardwiring, 
with major schools of psychology located on the continuum 73
Published online by Cambridge University PressPublished online by Cambridge University Pressxi
Preface
This book is about continuity in political behavior, which makes it an 
anomaly because almost all of our focus in the twenty-first century is on 
change – such as change in political behavior associated with the Internet 
and social media, gender roles, aging, globalization, and deglobalization.1
Whereas received wisdom points to the importance of rapid changes in 
short time periods, I am highlighting ‘surprising’ continuity over long 
time periods. For example, I ask ‘Why do leaders still exist?’ and point to 
the continuing role of centralized leadership, most often older males, in 
different societies over many thousands of years.
I lead the reader to a reassessment of how we traditionally think about 
change in political behavior. This reassessment requires a differentiation 
between surface and deep changes. For example, the ‘great’ American and 
French revolutions of the eighteenth century, and the more recent revolu￾tions in Russia, Cuba, Iran, and the Arab Spring countries, have brought 
about some changes but only at the surface level. I argue that at the deeper 
level, even the ‘great’ revolutions brought little change in key aspects of 
political behavior; their hallmark has been continuity. But in other areas, 
I point to high political plasticity and the wider ramifications of rapid 
changes in key domains such as women in education. By identifying con￾tinuity and change in political plasticity over long time periods, we reach a 
far more accurate picture of human societies and individuals, one that also 
better prepares us to plan for the future.
This book is written for readers interested in politics and political 
behavior. In the university context, teachers and students in political sci￾ence, social psychology, and political psychology will find this book of 
particular interest.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.001 Published online by Cambridge University Pressxii
Acknowledgments
I am indebted to a number of people for helping me to develop ideas 
explored in this book. My history master, Mr. Henry Chambers, at Eltham 
College, London, was the first to make me aware of the theme of historical 
continuity. More recently, I am indebted to the late Rom Harré for the 
lively and joyful discussions we had on the many ways in which certain 
patterns of human life persist over time. I am also deeply indebted to 
David Repetto of Cambridge University Press for his enthusiastic support 
of this book and for helping to launch the entire Progressive Psychology 
book series.
Published online by Cambridge University Press1
chapter 1
Political Plasticity, the Key to Understanding 
the Future of Democracy and Dictatorship
The newly built house I was visiting was designed by a Florentine architect 
and filled with the most elegant and fashionable futuristic Italian furni￾ture. Exquisitely manicured and coiffured, the host and hostess were also 
dressed in the height of fashion, according to the latest tastes in Rome 
and Milan. We were served cool Italian ices and lemon cake from Amalfi, 
in dazzling glass dishes crafted in Torcello. It was 1977 and I was visit￾ing a young Italian-educated Iranian couple in Tehran, during a summer 
away from my student life in England. The Iranian economy was boom￾ing, thanks to the 1973 oil price hikes that instantly brought Iran and other 
oil-producing nations enormous additional wealth. Many Iranians were 
using their suddenly increased incomes to transform themselves and to 
emulate Western societies in their homes, self-presentations, and lifestyles. 
The explosive pace of change and burgeoning opulence were breathtaking.
I was flying back to England the following day to resume my studies. 
My next immediate duty was to visit my great-grandfather to say goodbye 
to him and some other members of my extended family who, accord￾ing to tradition, gathered at his home once a week. His home was in the 
old part of Tehran, close to the Grand Bazaar. A taxi took me to a street 
near my destination, and from there I walked through narrow, winding, 
dusty lanes too narrow for automobiles but sheltered from the blazing 
sun by high crumbling walls and soaring wind-towers. The old house was 
built around two sheltered courtyards, the larger one exclusive to family 
members. I stepped through an ancient wooden door and removed my 
shoes before entering the main reception room, which was spacious and 
covered in ancient Persian carpets. There was no Western furniture in the 
room, and very little sign of Western influence. Like other family mem￾bers who were visiting, I sat on the floor and was served local watermelon. 
This seemed like a different world from the Westernized part of Tehran, 
including the futuristic ‘Italian’ home I had visited in the morning. Some 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press2
Political Plasticity as the Key parts of Iran seemed to have changed dramatically, so they now bore little 
resemblance to traditional Iranian society.
However, as is often the case, surface changes hide much deeper conti￾nuities. The furniture, clothing, and some other features of life had changed 
for many Iranians, but central aspects of social relations between people 
continued as before. For example, in both the chic Italian-style house and 
in my great-grandfather’s traditional-style home, the use of space and some 
other aspects of behavior remained the same. In both cases, the reception 
rooms had a top (ballaa), away from the entrance and toward the center, 
and a bottom (paa-een), at or close to the entrance. The higher the status 
of individuals, the closer they sit to the top. Irrespective of whether one 
sits on the floor in a traditional home or on chairs in a home with Western 
furniture, all rise when a high-status person enters the room. When seated, 
the soles of the feet are never shown, particularly to higher-status others. In 
both contexts, social relations and the use of space are determined in the 
same way by relative status and social ranking.
Leader–follower relations represent an even more significant example of 
how surface changes can camouflage deeper behavioral continuities. Before 
the 1979 revolution, Iran was led by a shah (Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, 
1919–1980) and his family, who dressed in the finest Western clothes, spoke 
multiple Western languages, engaged in skiing and other Western leisure 
activities, and were in many respects ‘modern.’ After the 1979 revolution, 
Iran was led by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini (1902–1989), who together 
with his family dressed in traditional Eastern clothing, with women in 
his family conforming to strict Islamic hejab. While the shah encouraged 
Iranians to emulate Western values and lifestyles, Ayatollah Khomeini 
encouraged Iranians to return to (so-called) Islamic ways, particularly in 
areas such as dress, gender roles and social relations. On the surface, it 
appears that the two leaders could not have been more different. The shah 
wanted to make Iran the Switzerland of the Middle East; Khomeini wanted 
Iran to return to an imagined ideal Islamic society of the past.
But at a deeper level, the shah and ayatollah represent an important conti￾nuity in leadership style before and after the 1979 Iranian Revolution: absolute 
power in the hands of a single male dictator. First, whatever the shah/ ayatol￾lah uttered immediately gained the status of sacred, as not just ‘truth’ but as 
something never to be questioned by any Iranian. Second, there was no limit 
to the range of subjects on which the shah/ayatollah could or would express 
their sacred opinions.1
 Third, anyone who dared to question the authority of 
the shah/ ayatollah was immediately attacked, resulting in their banishment, 
or imprisonment, or death. This absolute obedience to a single male dictator 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.002 Published online by Cambridge University PressContinuity and Change in Political Behavior 3
has continued into the twenty-first century in Iran – even though a charade 
of ‘democratic elections’ is now put on every few years so that the people can 
elect the president (that the supreme leader has chosen for them).
On further reflection, it becomes evident that continuity in political 
behavior is not exclusive to Iran. Consider the coming to power in the 
twenty-first century of Donald Trump and other authoritarian strongmen 
through populist support in countries as varied as the United States, Brazil, 
India, the Philippines, Hungary, South Africa, Poland, Turkey, Venezuela, 
among others. Trump’s antidemocratic orientation is made clear by his 
refusal to accept the results of the 2020 presidential elections and his direct 
attempts (notably on January 6, 2021) at disrupting the peaceful transition 
of power.2
 The rise of Trump and other similar antidemocracy leaders in 
the twenty-first century, in the United States and elsewhere, represents an 
important continuity in leader–follower relations going back thousands of 
years, involving leadership by a charismatic, authoritarian older male, who 
(at least for a time) enjoys popular support and attempts (often success￾fully) to concentrate all the levers of power in his own hands.3
Continuity and Change in Political Behavior 
and the Central Role of Political Plasticity
In our discussions and explanations of political behavior in societies 
labeled as democracies and dictatorships, we often miss the significance 
of deep and influential continuities. This neglect takes place irrespective 
of whether democracy and dictatorship are being discussed in academic 
research, in the media, or in everyday life among laypersons. As I argue in 
this book, continuities in behavior engulf us, but they often remain cam￾ouflaged. Also, we tend to ignore the connections between different trends 
that are part of larger continuities. What seem to be different unrelated 
events can be part of a larger, deeper pattern of behavioral continuity. 
Consider the following three apparently unrelated events. Each of them is 
extremely important and each has had a profound impact on our twenty￾first-century world.
First, a century after women won the vote in the United States (in 1920), 
no woman has become US president. Even though women now outper￾form men in most areas of education in the United States and many other 
societies,4
 they are still unrepresented at the highest levels of business and 
politics, where the real power lies. In places where it matters the most – the 
boardrooms of the wealthiest businesses, the Congress, the White House – 
women are still grossly underrepresented. Why is this?
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press4
Political Plasticity as the Key Second, consider the continued widespread racism and injustices suffered 
by African Americans in the United States. Although slavery was abolished 
in the United States in 1865, African Americans continue to face harsh eco￾nomic inequalities and unjust treatment.5
 What explains the continued 
plight of African Americans in the United States? Why did Reconstruction 
after the American Civil War (1861–1865), and all the other programs that 
followed in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, including the radical 
movements of the 1960s, not solve the injustices faced by African Americans?
The third puzzle we must consider concerns major political revolutions. 
Why is it that even the greatest revolutions bring so little lasting change, 
particularly in styles of political leadership? King Louis XVI is guillotined 
(1793) and the French Revolution leads to dictator Emperor Napoleon; 
Tzar Nicholas II is murdered (1918) and the dictatorship of Lenin, Stalin, 
and the new Tzars begins, until we get to Tzar Putin (in power since 
2000). The Cuban Revolution, the Arab Spring, they all lead to the rise 
of new dictators and new forms of dictatorship. I returned to Iran imme￾diately after the revolution in 1979, only to live through the dictator shah 
being replaced by the dictator ayatollah.
Of course, Americans will object that their revolution is different: The 
British king was replaced by an elected president. But how new was the 
political system that came into effect after the American Revolution? 
Actually, in some important respects it was not new at all. Over 2,500 years 
ago in Athenian democracy, free men had the right to vote – but women 
and slaves did not. Well over 2,200 years later, the American Revolution 
gave free men, not women and not slaves, the right to vote. Women and 
ethnic minorities had to wait until the twentieth century to gain this right, 
and in the twenty-first century voter suppression in various forms ensures 
that even in the most important elections barely half of all US citizens get 
to cast votes. Participants in American politics are white, old, rich, and 
this trend is continued through voter suppression targeting minorities and 
poor people.6 Why do even major revolutions bring so little change, par￾ticularly in political power and leadership?
I argue that these three puzzles – the lack of clout among women in busi￾ness and politics, the continued unjust treatment of African Americans, 
and the failure of revolutions to bring deep change in leadership and power 
relations – are all explained by political plasticity. I use this term to refer to 
limitations on how fast, how much, and in what ways political behavior 
does (or does not) change. Brain plasticity is already widely known;7
 politi￾cal plasticity, a new concept I introduce,8
 is just as important because so 
much political and social progress depend on it.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.002 Published online by Cambridge University PressContinuity and Change in Political Behavior 5
What is the significance of limitations on political plasticity? Why does 
political plasticity matter? The answers to these questions are given in 
this book. This topic is important and timely, because increased politi￾cal plasticity is the path to fuller democracy and justice for poor whites, 
for women, for blacks and other ethnic minorities, and for all of us in 
the larger society. This book explains the psychological and social mecha￾nisms that limit political plasticity; a limitation that shapes the possibility 
of change toward more open, democratic societies.
All major societies began as dictatorships, with leaders enjoying titles 
such as chief, emperor, and king. But different forms of more open societ￾ies began to emerge in the West from about 2,500 years ago,9
 in the shape 
of Athenian democracy and then the Roman Republic. From the collapse 
of the Roman Republic around 2,000 years ago until the great American 
and French revolutions of the eighteenth century, there were a number 
of other smaller movements toward openness in society, such as in the 
Florentine Republic of the fifteenth century that was brought to an end 
through the power monopoly achieved by the Medici.10 Progress toward 
democracy accelerated in the twentieth century, but the road to democ￾racy has not been smooth and there have been many setbacks, including 
the failure of numerous antidictatorship revolutions, which have typically 
resulted in one dictatorship being replaced by another.11 The world has 
experienced a decline of democracy and openness in the twenty-first cen￾tury.12 At this juncture in history, an ideal held by many (but not all13) 
people is to move societies to greater openness and fuller democracy, 
toward achieving actualized democracy, “full, informed, equal participa￾tion in wide aspects of political, economic, and cultural decision making 
independent of financial investment and resources.”14
This book explains how the road to actualized democracy is shaped and 
limited by political plasticity. Part of the explanation for why political 
plasticity is so rigid is to be found in the persistent relationship between 
children and their adult caretakers. The characteristics of the family vary 
in some respects across cultures and across time, with same-sex families, 
single-parent families, and other variations increasing especially in Western 
societies in recent decades. However, a universal feature of human child–
parent relations is that children are born completely helpless and are for 
many years entirely dependent on adult support for survival. The utter 
helplessness of human newborns means that for many years adults have 
more power than children and adults control the key resources. This rela￾tionship has remained stable across evolution and is the source of impor￾tant behavioral continuities, particularly through the communications of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press6
Political Plasticity as the Key language, religion, traditions, values, and culture broadly. Of course, some 
youth do rebel against the traditions handed down to them, but the gen￾eral trend of continuity is maintained through the superior power and 
resources of adults and older people, who pass on ways of doing things as 
part of a larger continuity.
From one perspective, the discussions in this book will seem pessimistic, 
because I often examine political plasticity in the context of change over 
very long time periods, spanning thousands of years. Most people want 
to see progress toward democracy take place much faster. Revolutionaries 
sometimes topple dictatorships in a matter of months, weeks, or even days, 
and they want to see the transition from dictatorship to democracy also 
happen in a matter of months, weeks, or days. My focus on change over 
longer time periods, sometimes over thousands of years, and the role of 
political plasticity in limiting political change does not match the enthusi￾asm of prodemocracy advocates demanding swift change.
Psychologists are another group who might be surprised and even 
bewildered by my focus on very-long-term changes. The majority of psy￾chologists are trained to conduct one-hour studies, usually in a labora￾tory – that is also how I was trained. What psychologists usually mean 
by ‘long-term’ studies typically involve tracking changes in personality 
or some other psychological characteristic over the course of a few years, 
decades, or at most a human lifespan.15 Psychologists very seldom con￾sider behavioral changes over time periods longer than the human lifes￾pan, but we must consider much longer time periods in order to better 
understand political plasticity.
My argument that political plasticity has to be considered in the context 
of long-term changes, sometimes thousands of years, seems to be contra￾dicted by a view of our twenty-first-century world as rapidly and con￾stantly changing. But a closer examination reveals that the ‘fast change’ 
people have in mind is in technological and scientific domains, which does 
not necessarily change behaviors such as leader–follower relations in the 
political domain, particularly for authoritarian strongmen. For example, 
the topic of ‘digital governance’ in the context of fast-changing technolo￾gies has important implications for leadership in organizations,16 but as 
Donald Trump showed (particularly in the run-up to the 2016 US presi￾dential elections) with his use of Twitter and other ‘advanced’ communi￾cations technologies, the tools available in the digital age can be used to 
bolster long-standing ‘primitive’ authoritarian leadership styles. Trump’s 
antidemocratic sentiments are no secret, yet he has used the latest com￾munications technologies to advance his authoritarian political agenda.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.002 Published online by Cambridge University PressPlan of the Book 7
Technological and scientific innovations help to bring about changes in 
human behavior,17 but this behavioral change is not necessarily in support 
of movement toward actualized democracy. Indeed, dictatorships such as 
China, Russia, and Iran have been quick to adopt new technologies to sup￾press opposition groups. As Xu points out, “Although social scientists, pol￾icy makers, and human rights advocates celebrated the dawn of the Internet 
era in the hopes that better communication technology would become a 
powerful tool to ensure and encourage freedom and democracy …, we have 
not observed widespread authoritarian collapse in the two decades since the 
advent of this era.”18 On the contrary, authoritarianism has become stron￾ger and democracies have weakened during this ‘digital’ age.19 Research in 
China,20 the largest dictatorship, and Venezuela,21 a relatively minor dicta￾torship, shows that authorities in dictatorships use the latest technologies to 
more accurately identify, monitor, and persecute political activists.
My goal in identifying the impact of political plasticity on changes in 
political behavior is to help sharpen the focus and improve the strategies 
of prodemocracy forces. The rise of the superpower dictatorship China, 
the failure to escape dictatorship after revolutions such as in Iran in 1979 
and the Arab Spring countries in the twenty-first century, and the com￾ing to power of authoritarian strongmen through elections in the United 
States, India, Brazil, Turkey, and some other countries, have taken the 
wind out of the sails of prodemocracy forces and encouraged the prodicta￾torship side. This trend has given rise to the suspicion that dictatorship is 
the more natural order for human societies, that people naturally want to 
escape from freedom and do not do well in democracies.22 The concept of 
political plasticity reinvigorates prodemocracy forces, by helping to clearly 
identify the factors that act as roadblocks to political change and through 
this identification to enable better planning to bring about changes toward 
actualized democracy. Most importantly, the analysis of political plasticity 
enables us to make a more realistic assessment of what features of political 
behavior can be changed, to what extent, and at what speed. My conclu￾sion, in the ‘Afterword,’ is that women are the most important key to 
progress toward expanding political plasticity and moving closer to actual￾ized democracy.
Plan of the Book
Political plasticity helps us unravel the puzzle of continuity and change, 
summed up in the expression “The more things change, the more they stay 
the same” (“plus ça change, plus c’est la même chose”). This puzzle comes 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press8
Political Plasticity as the Key to prominence particularly after major revolutions. I was confronted by 
this puzzle in Iran after the 1979 revolution, when at the surface level 
everything seemed to radically change and take on an Islamic façade but 
at a deeper level central and highly important aspects of political behav￾ior remained the same. The dress code, everyday expressions and com￾munications, slogans, music and entertainment, a lot of behavior between 
women and men, and much more, all changed to become Islamic. But we 
still had to be completely obedient to a single male dictator, the political 
power of an elite who circled around the male dictator continued and even 
increased, freedom of speech and basic human rights remained absent, and 
in many other important ways things remained as they had been before 
the revolution. This book examines and explains this puzzle of behavioral 
continuity through the concept of political plasticity.
Different aspects of hardwiring, both inside and outside of people, are 
examined in Chapter 2. Research on hardwiring in the brain is extensive 
and growing,23 but there has been almost no psychological research on 
the role of hardwiring outside of people in shaping continuity in behavior 
across time. Turning to hardwiring outside people, I describe and examine 
the role of cultural carriers, means through which values, ideals, identi￾ties, and other aspects of culture are propagated across generations and 
groups.24 Fairy tales, classic literature (including poetry and songs), tra￾ditional holidays and ceremonies, stereotypes, and daily expressions are 
among many examples of cultural carriers that tend to continue across 
generations, and often across revolutions. Cultural carriers are ‘hardwired’ 
in the sense that they are deeply imbedded within the fabric of everyday 
life and social relationships; they cannot be changed or eliminated without 
transforming everyday relationships – an extraordinarily difficult feat some 
revolutionaries have attempted, but for the most part failed, to achieve.25
The eleven chapters that follow the introduction section (Chapters 1 
and 2) are organized in three parts. The five chapters in Part I explore 
different mechanisms through which political plasticity has remained lim￾ited, sustaining continuity in political behavior.
Why do major societies continue to have single (predominantly older 
male) leaders who enjoy extensive power and influence? This is the ques￾tion taken up in Chapter 3. We now have the technological capability to 
far more extensively include ordinary people and more diverse groups in 
decision-making. Why do we not use this capability to include a more 
varied array of people in making key decisions? Why is it that even in 
countries labeled as democratic (including those in North America and 
Western Europe) decision-making continues to be highly concentrated in 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.002 Published online by Cambridge University PressPlan of the Book 9
the hands of individual leaders and a small elite group around them? For 
example, in the United States the president can decide to launch inva￾sions of other countries, as George W. Bush did in 2001 and 2003, with 
the disastrous invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq. Why is it that so much 
power is concentrated in the hands of one man? I argue that the cen￾tral role of a single national leader in major societies, a continuity across 
human history, is upheld by strong cultural carriers and collective patterns 
of behavior. ‘Democratic elections’ have not fundamentally changed this 
concentration of power in a single leader.
Chapter 4 examines the relationship between the rich and poor through a 
cyclical conceptualization of historical change, which highlights continuity 
in elite/non-elite relations. Through an examination of societal experiments 
with collective ownership, such as in the Soviet Union, China, Cuba, and 
other (so-called) communist societies,26 I explore limits to political plastic￾ity in property ownership and in relationships between the rich and poor. 
Psychological research on our tendency to interpret the world as just, and to 
use legitimizing ideologies to justify inequalities, is central to this chapter.
Modernization theories and research led to the expectation that ethnic￾ity (discussed in Chapter 5) and religion (discussed in Chapter 6) would 
gradually lose influence and become far less important in contemporary 
societies.27 However, both ethnicity and religion continue to play central 
roles in twenty-first-century societies, acting as forms of strong resistance to 
change. Psychological theories of identity are used to frame discussions in 
these chapters, arguing that continuities in political behavior are in impor￾tant ways shaped by ethnic and religious personal and group identities.
The final chapter in Part I examines the role of the built environment 
in shaping continuity in political behavior (Chapter 7). Revolutionaries 
in the French (1789), Russian (1917), and other major revolutions have 
recognized the key role of the built environment and the design of 
physical space in shaping and supporting behavioral continuities. For 
this reason, revolutionaries have often attempted to rename, redesign, 
and reshape the built environment, organizing the use of space in new 
ways. However, the built environment is often the product of many 
years, sometimes many centuries and even thousands of years of col￾lective effort. Despite radical plans and enormous efforts by revolution￾ary groups, even those who gain absolute control of a society, there are 
severe limits to how fast and how much the built environment can be 
reconstructed. Consequently, the built environment often shapes behav￾ior in the same ways across many generations and supports continuities 
in social relationships, even after radical revolutions.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press10
Political Plasticity as the Key The four chapters in Part II of this book examine the role of impor￾tant change agents: revolution (Chapter 8), war (Chapter 9), technology 
(Chapter 10), and globalization (Chapter 11). Chapter 8 argues that the role 
of revolution as change agent is complex, generally misunderstood, and also 
exaggerated. Revolutions tend to bring about Type 1 change, involving only 
within-system transformations, associated with surface-level changes. They 
rarely bring about Type 2 change, involving between-system changes and 
transformations in political behavior at a deeper level. Examples of conti￾nuities in domains such as leader–follower relations, class-based inequali￾ties, wealth concentration, and power distribution support my argument. 
Next, in Chapter 9 major wars are examined as significant contributors to 
change, with discussions of changes in political behavior brought about by 
the two world wars (1914–1918 and 1939–1945). In Chapter 10 technology is 
discussed as a potentially important agent of change in political behavior, 
but this potential is often not realized because of power inequalities in the 
ownership and control of technologies. For example, the potential of elec￾tronic technologies has yet to be realized in expanding the participation of 
ordinary people in political decision-making.
Chapter 11 examines deglobalization and the backlash against globaliza￾tion and the global village. Globalization and the mass migration of hun￾dreds of millions of people across regions and national boundaries have 
been associated with threats to identities, particularly national identities. 
In order to improve intergroup relations and the tolerance of dissimilar 
others, we must do a great deal more to nurture democratic citizens who 
can effectively participate in and support actualized democracy.28 Also, we 
must consider possible limits to changes in political behavior. For exam￾ple, we must consider limitations on how fast and how many dissimilar 
others can be successfully integrated into a host society.
The two chapters in Part III of the book look ahead to future changes in 
political behavior. Chapter 12 explores the dictator’s mind, in the context 
of the deadly competition taking place between democracies and dictator￾ships in the twenty-first century. Particular individuals with the person￾ality characteristics of dictators are always present in all societies. These 
potential dictators are ready to spring to power, as soon as the springboard 
to dictatorship becomes available. Consequently, the danger from poten￾tial dictators is ever-present, as is the danger of democracies sliding back 
into dictatorships. This is another limitation of political plasticity.
In ‘Afterword,’ ‘lessons learned’ are considered. I argue that women have 
played a key role in bringing about political change and are probably the 
most important element in future (collective and individual) behavioral 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.002 Published online by Cambridge University PressPlan of the Book 11
changes. The advancement of women over the last century, particularly 
in areas such as education, has been impressive and even spectacular. 
Whereas until fairly recently women were not even allowed to enter many 
elite universities, they now make up the majority of students and many of 
the faculty – most in some academic departments. In all major societies 
where women have gained the right to vote and stand for political office 
on equal footing with men, as the number of women in higher political 
offices have increased, progressive changes in political policies and political 
behaviors have followed.29 In addition, as the role of women in society has 
changed, the characteristics of the family have also changed, and this has in 
important ways expanded and liberated the role of males, as well as gender 
relations within the family.
Of course, the key role played by women in shaping political behavior 
is intuitively recognized by many, including reactionary forces that resist 
progressive changes. Consequently, in societies led by authoritarian males, 
strenuous efforts are being made to keep women in their traditional roles 
and exclude them from political power. This is most obvious in Islamic 
societies, where women continue to be treated as third-class citizens and 
prevented from contributing to cultural, economic, political, scientific, 
and other domains. The consequence is that not a single Islamic society is 
in the ranks of the advanced countries of the world.
In summary, this book uses the lens of political plasticity to explore and 
highlight the role of continuities in political behavior and the social and psy￾chological mechanisms that sustain this continuity across time. By exam￾ining the mechanisms through which continuity in political behavior is 
maintained, light is shed on limitations to political change. In essence, this 
book explains the gap between our utopian political ideals, as reflected in 
communist and capitalist ideologies and societies, and our actual practices, 
both as they exist today and how they are probably limited in future devel￾opment. Through this analysis, I identify a realistic and progressive path 
for prodemocracy forces to follow toward achieving actualized democracy.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press12
chapter 2
Hardwiring inside and outside People
My focus in this chapter is on the role of hardwiring inside and outside 
individuals that serve to uphold continuity in human behavior. This dis￾cussion provides the framework for the more detailed examinations of 
continuity in behavior, such as in leader–follower relations, discussed in 
the five chapters of Part I of this book. An essential element of this frame￾work is the fuller clarification of what ‘hardwiring’ means. At the same 
time that the use of the term hardwiring has steadily increased since the 
1970s,1
 some critics have argued that this term is too imprecise and more 
effective terminology needs to be adopted by researchers.2
 After all, if hard￾wiring refers to a behavior that is dependent on brain wiring, then it must 
include all behavior, and if it refers only to behavior that is not modifiable, 
then it refers to very little since all behaviors can be modified under certain 
conditions.
My approach is to conceptualize hardwiring at one extreme end of a 
continuum, with softwiring at the other extreme.3
 There are very few – 
perhaps no – behaviors that are at the extreme ends of the ‘completely 
hardwired’ to ‘completely softwired’ continuum (Figure 2.1). The vast 
majority of behaviors are located somewhere on this continuum between 
the two extremes. That is, almost all behaviors can be modified in certain 
circumstances, but there is variation in the extent of modification possible 
and the characteristics of the conditions necessary to bring about change.
Grossi and a number of other researchers have made available detailed 
examinations of the meaning of ‘hardwired,’ but only in relation to the 
brain and processes inside individuals.4
 I argue that in addition to the 
attention to the ‘hardwired–softwired’ continuum concerning processes 
within individuals, we must attend to the same continuum concerning 
processes in the larger society outside individuals. I adopt a societies to cells
approach, by giving priority to hardwiring outside individuals. But I also 
acknowledge that, as reflected in epigenetic research,5
 there is no strict 
division between hardwiring inside and outside individuals. For example, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressContinuity in Behavior and Psychological Science 13
the question is not whether an individual ‘possesses’ or ‘does not possess’ 
certain genes but which genes are turned on or off by environmental trig￾gers. The implication is that characteristics that are to some degree hard￾wired within individuals or within environments can be triggered (or not) 
by factors within environments and/or individuals.
Continuity in Behavior and Psychological Science
How has continuity in behavioral style been studied in psychological sci￾ence? The answer is that for the most part continuity has been neglected, and 
when it has received research attention it has been studied by psychologists 
within individuals across the lifespan and within families across generations.
Studies of individuals across the lifespan have focused on continuity 
in a diverse set of behaviors, including anxiety disorders,6 personality,7
and intelligence.8
 While the theme of continuity is strong in much of this 
research, the central role of contextual factors means that changes take 
place in relation to changing circumstances. For example, while there is 
some continuity in mental health across the lifespan, there is evidence from 
Western societies that subjective well-being and mental health improve 
with age.9
 However, there is also evidence demonstrating that the relation￾ship between mental health and age differs across cultures; for example, 
older Russians are reported to experience more negative and less positive 
mental health, whereas older Germans are reported to experience more 
positive and less negative mental health.10
Research on behavioral continuity within families across generations is 
summed up by the main title of a paper on this topic: “Parenting begets 
parenting.”11 In line with predictions from a range of theoretical perspec￾tives, including behaviorism and psychoanalysis, the early experiences of 
children in important ways influence their cognitive, emotional, and social 
behavior as adult parents, thus influencing how they treat their own chil￾dren. Research shows the role of mothers to be particularly important in 
the continuity of abuse across generations: Mothers who were abused as 
children tend to have children who become abused.12 From an epigenetic 
perspective, the contextual characteristics created by particular types of 
Completely Hardwired __________________Completely Softwired
Figure 2.1 The continuum of behaviors, from completely hardwired to completely 
softwired, with almost all behaviors located somewhere between these two extremes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press14 Hardwiring inside and outside People
parenting will tend to trigger or silence particular genes in the child and in 
this way influence future behavior (including parenting).13
The social identity research tradition has also resulted in some research 
on the continuity of collective identities;14 this research has highly impor￾tant implications for societal processes. When people feel their group iden￾tity is under serious threat, they tend to be more supportive of aggressive, 
authoritarian strongmen as leaders, less supportive of human rights and 
democracy, and more biased against outsiders of various kinds, including 
immigrants and ethnic minorities.15 This threat to ingroup identity has 
been heightened by globalization and the vast movement across national 
borders of people (usually dissimilar others) and cultural products, which 
are seen by some nationalists as ‘invading our country,’ attacking the foun￾dations of ‘who we are,’ weakening our collective identity, and changing 
the kinds of people we have become through our shared history.
Iona Opie and Peter Opie are among the researchers who have exam￾ined continuity in the behavior patterns and the narratives of children, 
which are passed on from one generation of children to another, to some 
degree independent of adults.16 This includes all the rhymes, stories, rid￾dles, and so on that children learn at certain ages, then teach the next 
group of younger children, before forgetting much of what they knew in 
that world of childhood.
In identifying continuities in behavior across historical periods, we 
must take care not to be misled by surface-level changes so that we 
neglect deeper continuities that can take place in disguised form (as I 
discuss next).
Continuity in Disguise
[D]espite a vehement campaign to discredit and destroy all forms of 
religion, the Stalin faction reinscribed certain elements of popular 
religiosity into official political culture. The cult of Lenin was the 
most obvious example. During his lifetime Lenin had been adulated 
but had not been the object of a cult of personality. Following his 
death, however, the Stalin group quite consciously sought to establish 
its legitimacy by sanctifying the dead leader. During the civil war 
the Bolsheviks had waged a campaign to expose the popular belief 
that saints’ bodies did not decompose, yet Lenin’s body was now 
embalmed like that of some latter-day pharaoh and placed in a mau￾soleum that instantly became a shrine.
Stephen Smith17
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressContinuity in Disguise 15
After the 30 August 1918 assassination attempt on Lenin by Fania 
Kaplan, the first but still exceptional religious associations tried to 
explain Lenin’s survival. Since September 1918, Lenin’s qualities of a 
saint, an apostle, a prophet, a martyr, a man with Christ-like qualities 
and a ‘leader by the grace of God’” were venerated.
Klaus-Georg Riegel18
Religion represents an extremely useful domain of behavior through 
which to better understand hardwiring outside individuals, as well as 
the persistence and continuity of certain behavioral patterns across long 
time periods. The continuity of religious behavior across major revolu￾tions and radical societal transformations affords particularly good learn￾ing opportunities for us, because left-leaning revolutions, and particularly 
those inspired and guided by communist ideology, ostensibly make great 
efforts to eradicate religion and delegitimize the church. In a secret 1922 
letter to the Politburo, Lenin urged his communist comrades to use the 
opportunity created by the widescale famine Soviet society was suffering 
at that time to attack the church: “[T]he greater the number of represen￾tatives of the reactionary clergy and reactionary bourgeoisie we succeed in 
executing … the better. We must teach these people a lesson right now, 
so they will not dare even to think of any resistance for several decades.”19
It is certainly ironic that Lenin, who attacked religion and the church 
so vehemently, was transformed by Stalin and others into a religious icon, 
with his mausoleum becoming a religious shrine. But not much effort was 
needed to achieve this transfer of Lenin into a religious icon, because con￾tinuity in religious behavior was strongly supported by hardwiring outside 
individuals. There is also some evidence that religious behavior is influ￾enced by hardwiring within individuals,20 but it is probably the hardwiring 
outside individuals that is most important in this case.
Cultural carriers of various kinds supported the continuity of behavior pat￾terns before and after the 1917 revolution in Russia. That is, the tendencies 
in cognitive style that reflect hardwiring within individuals and that served 
to continue patterns of religious thinking were very strongly supported by 
the wider, societal patterns of culture. An example of such larger patterns 
of culture is the shared and mutually upheld cognitive style among Russian 
peasants, which influenced the cult of Lenin. As Nina Tumarkin argues,
The success of the Lenin cult as a stabilizing and legitimizing force in Soviet 
political life is due in some measure to the extent to which its contours were 
shaped by traditional peasant culture. But the power of the cult owes even 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press16 Hardwiring inside and outside People
more to its religious form and content … Lenin’s body, displayed as a holy 
relic, has been … the most evocative symbol of Lenin’s immortality … 
From the moment of Lenin’s death, the assertions of his immortality 
became the central emotional focus of his cult.21
Thus, Lenin, an antireligion symbol during his life, was turned into a legit￾imization of religious experiences after his death.
Hardwiring outside Individuals
In explaining continuity in human behavior over historic time periods, 
I first look to the role of what I call hardwiring outside individuals. By 
this I mean the hardwiring reflected in the total way of life of human 
beings, including the built environment, societal organization, and for￾mal institutions, as well as the informal culture, narratives and all forms 
of communications, leader–follower relations, and cultural carriers. This 
external hardwiring is already present when individuals are born, and it 
continues (sometimes with little fundamental change) after they die. Each 
generation of humans tends to see themselves as innovative and novel in 
their behaviors, but in many important respects we are following the same 
behavioral patterns that have been in place over very long time periods.
Commonality and continuity in hardwiring outside of individuals can 
best be explained through an evolutionary lens. Certain behaviors, which 
I have termed primitive social relations,
22 improve the survival chances of 
groups. Effective leadership is an example of these primitive social rela￾tions. Effective leadership was a powerful factor in helping some groups 
to better survive, and there developed within those groups behavioral and 
organizational practices, including formal laws and informal shared beliefs 
and values, that supported and kept in place effective leadership. This is 
reflected in the constitutions of twenty-first-century societies, which uni￾formly endorse the important role of the national leader (such as the presi￾dent and the prime minister).
The central role of leadership is common to all major societies, irrespec￾tive of how democratic or dictatorial they actually are or position themselves 
as being. In both more and less democratic countries, the most important 
decisions in many political, economic, and other domains are ultimately 
made by leaders. Of course, in more democratic countries the slogan ‘the 
people decide’ is routinely brandished, but in practice even in such coun￾tries the central and pivotal role of the national leader in making decisions is 
undeniable. For example, despite the role of ‘the people’ in making national 
decisions in the United States, it was ultimately President George E. Bush 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressHardwiring outside Individuals 17
who made the (disastrous!) decisions to launch the invasions of Afghanistan 
(2001) and Iraq (2003). The right of leaders to make such decisions is sup￾ported by national constitutions and legal systems. Of course, competing 
groups (e.g., the US Congress) attempt to exert their influence as well, but 
in practice power remains concentrated in the hands of the national leader 
through formal and informal hardwiring outside individuals.
Formal Hardwiring outside Individuals
Constitutions and legal systems are examples of what I refer to as for￾mal hardwiring outside individuals (among the many other examples are 
organizational charts and regulations of institutions and the formal rules 
and regulations of labor unions and professional associations). In many 
cases, national constitutions are very slow to change. Indeed, the thrust of 
originalist interpretations of constitutions is that continuity rather than 
change should be the priority.23 (“Originalism is the theory of constitu￾tional interpretation that identifies the Constitution’s original meaning 
as its authoritative meaning.”24) Originalism is highly influential in both 
Western and non-Western countries and is reflected in the resurgence of 
Islam and the movement to return to Sharia Law in many Muslim societ￾ies. The constitutions of many Islamic countries have been revised since 
the late twentieth century in an attempt to return to ‘original’ Islam. I was 
in Iran in the post-1979 revolution period when this process was underway 
and the new (so-called)) revolutionary Iranian Constitution was crafted by 
originalists, with an emphasis on ‘return to authentic Islam.’
But there are also progressive interpretations of constitutions, which 
push for changes in legal interpretation in line with changing conditions, 
an example being Erwin Chemerinsky’s progressive interpretation of the US 
Constitution.25 Revolutions also often result in revised or completely rewrit￾ten constitutions,26 and this is a central theme of revolutions, from the ‘great’ 
eighteenth-century American and French revolutions to those in the twenty￾first century. After regime change, revolutionaries use their newly acquired 
power to create a constitution that they believe will move society toward the 
ideals they have in mind; for example, the 1918 Soviet Constitution set out 
a new vision of collective and private property relations in Soviet society.27
We must not be misled into believing that the ideals set up in the new rev￾olutionary constitution actually match what goes on in society. For example, 
the idealist vision of property relations set up in the 1918 Soviet Constitution 
never came to fruition, in the sense that collective farms and collective 
ownership in general were not implemented in a way that resulted in high 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press18 Hardwiring inside and outside People
efficiency and productivity or happy peasants (this matters a great deal, 
because “Russia’s population … was still four-fifth rural and predominantly 
peasant at the time of the Bolsheviks’ October 1917 revolution”28). Indeed, 
most Russian peasants regarded collectivization as a second Serfdom. This is 
a key difference between the actual events on the ground and Soviet propa￾ganda, as Sheila Fitzpatrick argues in Stalin’s Peasants:
Stalin had a picture of the Soviet kolkhoz as a large-scale, modern, mechani￾cal farm that was economically and socially light years ahead of the back￾ward, small-scale farming of the Russian peasant. This was the image 
propagated by Soviet publicists and accepted by many outside observers. 
Reading the Soviet press of the 1930s, it is hard to catch any glimpses of the 
real Russian village behind the Potemkin façade. This is not only because 
of the shameless exaggeration and deception that became a standard feature 
of Soviet writing about agriculture during collectivization, but also because 
a whole new language was invented to describe peasant farming in its col￾lective guise.29
Second, we must not assume that the (so-called) revolutionary con￾stitution is new in foundational ways, even though it uses revolutionary 
language. At a deeper level, the revolutionary language of revolutionary 
constitutions can camouflage stubborn continuities. For example, on the 
surface the new postrevolution constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran 
seems very different from the pre-1979 monarchist constitution. However, 
the ‘revolutionary’ constitution is ‘even more of the same’ in the sense 
that it endorses an absolute dictatorship, giving power to a single male 
leader (this is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 3 of this book). The 
‘revolutionary’ dictator has a new title (supreme leader, instead of shah) 
and a new ideological justification for his right to holding absolute power 
(Khomeini’s interpretation of Shia Islam,30 instead of the shah’s interpre￾tation of the pre-1979 Iranian constitution), but the result is the same: 
absolute power in the hands of a male dictator.
Informal Hardwiring outside Individuals
Informal hardwiring outside individuals refers to all that is integral to 
culture and serves to regulate behavior but is not made explicit through 
formal laws and regulations. This includes all of the normative system, 
comprised of norms, rules, values, attitudes, stereotypes, and in general 
expectations people hold about correct and incorrect behavior in different 
contexts. The normative system is mostly informal, implicit, and tacit, but 
it is nevertheless highly powerful in shaping behavior.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressHardwiring outside Individuals 19
Informal hardwiring outside individuals is already ‘out there’ when an indi￾vidual is born and serves to regulate the integration of the individual into soci￾ety, as well as the entering of societal culture into the individual.31 Becoming a 
person and being able to effectively function as a member of a society require 
that the individual take on how to think and how to act correctly according 
to the local normative system. Although there is variation in human behavior, 
most individuals most of the time behave correctly according to the local nor￾mative system. This regularity enables us to interact with others successfully 
based on the mostly ‘correct’ patterns of behavior we and others follow.
It would be a mistake to assume that because it is informal the norma￾tive system is weak in influence. For example, the norms, rules, and so on 
that guide the behavior of people at a wedding are not written down as 
formal laws, but they nevertheless serve as extremely strong regulators of 
behavior. In many Western and non-Western societies, the bride will wear 
white rather than black, for instance. Women and not men wear dresses at 
weddings. These behaviors are not regulated by formal laws but by infor￾mal norms that are followed by most people most of the time. There are at 
least two characteristics that endorse the power of the normative system: It 
is shared and it is passed on through cultural carriers.
As society enters into individuals through socialization processes, indi￾viduals take on ways of thinking and acting that reflect patterns of expected 
behavior. But this taking on is not a private process involving isolated 
individuals; rather, it is a group process involving collectively shared and 
mutually upheld ways of doing and thinking. The collective nature of the 
informal normative system makes it more powerful than it would be if it 
did involve private processes within isolated individuals; those people who 
go against what is expected behavior face collective pressure to do the right 
thing. But there is variation in behavior, in part because there are some 
differences across groups in conceptions of ‘correct’ behavior.
Cultural carriers serve as a second factor that ensures the great impact 
of the normative system. These carriers are powerful in large part because 
their influence carries across time and across different generations. For 
example, the national flag and the national anthem carry certain values 
(e.g., love and sacrifice for the nation) across many generations. In some 
cases, cultural carriers carry forward values and other features of the nor￾mative system across thousands of years, an example being the Christian 
cross as a cultural carrier. In many cases, cultural carriers regulate patterns 
of behavior across groups as well as individuals; for example, the Islamic 
hejab serves to regulate behavior between men and women, in particular 
restricting the behavior patterns and rights of women.32
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press20 Hardwiring inside and outside People
Hardwiring inside Individuals
Almost all of the research on hardwiring has focused on the brain and 
processes within individuals, with some attention to policy implications.33
Certain domains of behavior, such as sex differences and sexism,34 have been 
postulated as being more hardwired. But a focus on plasticity and continu￾ous rewiring is also reflected in twenty-first-century brain research,35 for 
example, as expressed by Sebastian Rinke and colleagues: “The brain is not 
as hard-wired as traditionally thought … Even in the mature brain, new 
connections between neurons (ie., synapses) are continuously created and 
existing ones are deleted, which can be described as structural plasticity.”36
A highly important factor that remains largely overlooked is the human 
body, whose shape, size, and other characteristics have remained fairly 
stable over long time periods. As Rolf Pfeifer and Josh Bongard and others 
have argued,37 the human body in important ways shapes how we think 
and act, as well as the world we make ‘out there.’ It is not just that the 
body is necessary for thinking to take place but that the characteristics of 
the human body shape the kind of intelligence we have developed. These 
characteristics include, according to Rolf Pfeifer and Josh Bongard,
the shape of the body, the kinds of limbs and where they are attached, the 
kinds of sensors (eyes, ears, nose, skin for touch and temperature, mouth for 
taste) and where on the body they are found … When interacting with the 
real world, the body is stimulated in very particular ways, and this stimula￾tion provides, in a sense, the raw material for the brain to work with.38
This embodied perspective moves away from Cartesian dualism and the 
tradition strengthened by René Descartes (1596–1650) of conceptualizing 
the mind and the body as independent and separate entities. Moreover, 
because the normal human body has had the same characteristics (e.g., 
two legs, two arms, two eyes, two ears, one nose, one mouth, one head, 
etc. located in specific parts of the body) over very long time periods, the 
impact of the body on human thinking has been similar across time and 
across cultures.
Thus, the body has served as an important kind of hardwiring with 
respect to cognition. This continuous role becomes clearer and more spe￾cific when we consider domains of behavior such as audition. The range of 
sound waves audible to adult humans is from about 15–20 hertz (i.e., cycles 
or vibrations per second) to about 15,000 hertz. Our auditory capacities 
are far more limited than many animals. For example, bats use echoloca￾tion to produce sounds and use the echoes of those sounds to locate and 
hunt small insects.39 Just as the limitations of our auditory system shape 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.003 Published online by Cambridge University PressHardwiring inside Individuals 21
our experiences, the characteristics of our visual system (e.g., the common 
distribution of rods and cones) have evolved over very long time periods 
and continue to shape our perception of shapes, motion, and colors as took 
place thousands of years ago.40 In this way, the physiology of our visual sys￾tem serves as hardwiring, maintaining continuity in our hearing and seeing.
There is strong evidence that evolutionary pressures have shaped hard￾wiring within the body in areas such as beauty preferences. Evidence 
shows some such preferences to be inborn, as they appear early in 
infancy,41 and are common to most or perhaps all humans.42 There is also 
evidence of sex differences in brain activity localization in how women 
and men value youth and other physical characteristics, and this also 
points to hardwiring.43 The main criteria used for judging attractive￾ness in others, such as age (youth is more attractive44) and symmetry 
(more symmetrical is more attractive45), are also seen as more hardwired, 
although some researchers highlight the role of plasticity and social 
learning in these domains as well.46
Evidence of hardwired characteristics inside individuals has been inter￾preted through costly signaling theory,47 which postulates that certain 
characteristics of people (and animals generally) serve to communicate 
important information about reproductive fitness to relevant others, and 
the costlier the signal the more reliable it is. More costly signals are more 
reliable because they are harder to fake. A classic example of this is the 
peacock’s tail, which is a highly costly way of signaling reproductive fitness 
to peahens because the longer and heavier the tail, the lower the agility and 
mobility of the peacock (making it more vulnerable to attack by preda￾tors). A long peacock tail signals to the peahen, “Choose me. I carry this 
huge handicap but still succeed in the competition for survival!”
In the human sphere, there is ample evidence that people are concerned 
with manipulating signals to improve the image of their reproductive fit￾ness. For example, people are motivated to be seen as making charitable 
contributions, irrespective of whether the contributions lead to benefits for 
others.48 Perhaps the largest domain of activity where the manipulation of 
signals takes place is cosmetics and plastic surgery. Although people are 
very good at judging the ages of other individuals,49 there is also evidence 
that makeup can reduce the perceived age of others, and the older they are 
the more positive the effect of makeup.50
Thus, on the one hand hardwiring within individuals supports continu￾ity in behavior across historical periods, particularly in areas such as beauty 
preferences: Youth and symmetry are preferred across time and across cul￾tures. On the other hand, throughout the ages, humans have used makeup 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press22 Hardwiring inside and outside People
and various kinds of cosmetic surgery (including tattoos, which have 
become highly fashionable in the twenty-first century) to try to influence 
how others see them. This is also a widely influential continuity in behavior.
Concluding Comment
Hardwiring inside individuals has received extensive attention, because 
it fits the reductionism of mainstream research, heavily influenced as it 
is by the individualism and self-help ideology of American culture.51 Of 
course, hardwiring within individuals does support continuity in human 
behavior, but the role of hardwiring outside individuals is arguably even 
more important. This importance arises in part from the potential we have 
to alter environmental conditions and in this way influence hardwiring 
outside individuals and create new opportunities for social and political 
changes. But we must approach this task with humility, because revolu￾tionaries of different types have in various ways attempted to reach this 
goal. For example, the communists who came into power in Russia after 
the 1917 revolution attempted to use behaviorist psychology as a way to 
reengineer the environment in order to create the new Soviet citizen (this 
is discussed in Chapter 8 of this book). The failure of Soviet collectiviza￾tion programs and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1990 suggest a fail￾ure to achieve this goal and the power of continuity in behavioral styles.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.003 Published online by Cambridge University Presspart I
Political Plasticity and Behavioral Continuity
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.004 Published online by Cambridge University Presshttps://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press25
chapter 3
Why Do Leaders Still Exist? 
Leadership and Followership
‘Leadership in the twenty-first century,’ ‘the new leadership’ – contem￾porary discussions of leadership reflect a strong theme of what is new and 
changing.1
 These discussions look to the future and typically highlight 
some novel aspect of leadership from a different angle.2
 Influenced by this 
research literature, we readily assume that leadership has been undergoing 
changes and is in a state of flux. Leadership seems to be about what is new 
in a fast-changing world.
But I take a very different approach in this chapter, by interpreting lead￾ership as a pivotal and highly influential example of continuity in behavior 
and what remains the same rather than what changes. I look to the evolu￾tionary roots of leadership and how in foundational ways leader–follower 
relations have remained stable over very long time periods. I argue that 
in some important respects leadership has changed very little throughout 
human history. Also, because leadership is so influential, continuity in 
this behavior has supported continuity in some other key types of human 
behavior, such as in the area of inequality.
I begin by discussing the evolutionary origins of leadership and 
inequality, which are linked. Next, I examine the role of leaders in 
contemporary societies, a role that continues to be central and key. 
This is despite there being available avenues for moving toward more 
collective decision-making and relying less on individual leaders being 
the ultimate ‘deciders.’ I accept that institutional and constitutional 
constraints on leadership are greater in democracies,3
 but I also argue 
that in all twenty-first-century societies there continues to be very 
heavy reliance on individual national leaders. Consequently, my argu￾ments about leadership in this chapter apply to all societies, both those 
that are closer to absolute dictatorship and those that are closer to 
actualized democracy.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press26
Why Do Leaders Still Exist? Factors Associated with the Evolution of Leadership
What are the evolutionary origins of decision-making being concentrated 
in an individual leader? How did leadership first emerge, eventually evolv￾ing into the kinds of powerful national leaders (presidents, prime minis￾ters, etc.) that lead twenty-first-century societies, with the United States 
arguably having an imperial presidency?4
 I begin by discussing the evolu￾tion of a surplus, an amount of food and other resources that was beyond 
what was necessary for survival.
The Evolution of a Surplus
There is general agreement that the relatively stable climatic conditions of 
the Holocene (roughly the last 11,700 years5
) were instrumental in enabling 
the development of a surplus through increasingly productive farming and 
animal domestication. In turn, while the evolution of leadership in human 
societies was influenced by a number of different factors,6 the emergence 
of a surplus was probably among the most essential. The availability of a 
surplus could support a part of the labor force to be engaged in activities 
other than food production, and this was a foundation for the develop￾ment of larger, more complex societies involving higher levels of divisions 
of labor and specialization. For example, supported by a surplus, some 
people could dedicate themselves to fighting against competitor groups, 
to defend the surplus from attacks, and to try to expand the territories 
controlled by the ingroup.
Both the presence of a surplus and the increased complexity of society 
enabled by a surplus were contexts in which the role of leadership could 
emerge as more central and important. First, a surplus attracts outgroup 
attackers, and intergroup conflict is a condition in which effective lead￾ership becomes even more valuable.7
 Leaders help to organize defen￾sive forces to protect the interests of the ingroup. Second, a surplus can 
lead to greater conflict within the ingroup, as ingroup factions compete 
for a greater share of surplus resources, and a key role of leadership has 
been identified as resolving internal conflicts; Mark Van Zugt argues, “it 
would benefit group members, especially the weaker ones, to endorse a 
leader to act as peacekeeper in the group.”8
 Third, a surplus allows for the 
growth of larger societies, with greater divisions of labor and more com￾plicated projects that require coordination and monitoring. An essen￾tial role of leadership is to achieve such coordination and monitoring, 
enabling the successful implementation of more complex projects.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University PressExplaining the Evolution of Leadership 27
A surplus could also be used by leaders to direct resources to group 
members in ways that strengthen the leadership position, as well as to 
monopolize resources for themselves. In this way, it serves to increase 
inequalities in society, moving away from the more egalitarian hunter￾gathering existence humans experienced earlier in small groups, typically 
numbering in the hundreds. According to Von Rueden, anthropologists 
have described hunter-gathering societies as egalitarian “because of their 
relative lack of resource inequality, absence of leaders with coercive politi￾cal authority, and intolerance of hoarding, arrogance, or aggrandizing 
behavior.”9
 (Despite being more egalitarian, hunter-gatherers also have 
leadership, as Zachary Garfield and Edward Hagen point out: “[E]ven 
the most egalitarian mobile hunter-gatherers have some forms of leader￾ship.”10) But although the distinction between societies with and without 
a surplus is seen as highly important, some researchers have argued that 
property rights played an even more important role in the evolution of 
human societies and the expansion of the role of leadership.
Private Property
Explanations that center on a surplus through farming and animal 
husbandry as the foundation for more complex societies and central￾ized leadership have been challenged by researchers who argue that the 
coevolution of private property must be considered as equally impor￾tant. In an influential study, Samuel Bowles and Jung-Kyoo Choi point 
out that, at least initially, in many places farmers were not more pro￾ductive than the foragers they gradually replaced.11 If productivity was 
not necessarily higher, those drawn to farming must have had other 
incentives to change their lifestyle.
A factor that has emerged as important in the transition from a hunter￾gathering to an agricultural life is property rights, both in being able to 
claim ownership to property and things and in being able to pass on 
wealth as inheritance to others, usually one’s offspring.12 The emergence of 
property rights was less likely when the ‘property’ in question was perish￾able and not easily stored, such as what was collected by hunter-gatherers, 
including fruits, roots, and fresh meat. However, when the ‘property’ in 
question is cereal grains that can be placed in longer-term storage or a 
natural resource that is more predictable (such as a river or lake location 
with a steady supply of fish), then the defense of such property is more 
manageable.13 Thus, the defensibility of resources is seen as a key factor in 
the development of property rights.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press28
Why Do Leaders Still Exist? Inequality
Alongside the development of systems for storing a surplus in cereal grains, 
there evolved, first, more centralized and formalized leadership and, sec￾ond, larger societies with greater inequalities. The presence of grain stores in 
a community will inevitably attract attention from competitor outgroups, 
who would like to attack and take over the surplus grain. The defense of 
grain stores becomes a central task that can be aided through leadership, as 
Siobhan Mattison and colleagues have pointed out: “Coordination of large 
groups or complex tasks such as warfare present arenas in which leadership 
has been hypothesized to be valuable.”14
The role of leader as coordinator and commander of defense forces 
developed at the same time as greater power concentration in the hands of 
the leader, as well as larger inequalities in society. Irrespective of whether 
leadership arose more through dominance or prestige, the leader inevitably 
enjoyed greater power, as did some other individuals who had more influ￾ence in how the surplus was used. In some societies, a surplus meant that 
some individuals could pay for the labor of others using surplus resources. 
Such ‘hiring’ could be short term or long term and contributes to inequal￾ity, which was first evident about 10,000–12,000 years ago.15
Divisions of Labor
The emergence of a surplus meant that some people could spend their 
time on activities other than food gathering/production. For example, the 
leader could focus on managing projects and directing the strengthening of 
defenses. Some individuals could specialize in the making of stone, wooden, 
and leather articles, which could be used in trade to acquire products made 
by other groups. Another form of specialization involved spiritual or reli￾gious behavior. Research on basic cognitive processes involved in belief,16
as well as on the origins of religion among hunter-gatherers,17 suggests that 
some forms of religious behavior evolved as part of human societies cer￾tainly by the early part of the Holocene. Along with this, some individuals 
specialized in roles, as shaman, for example, supporting religious behavior. 
As these specialized roles developed, although it is not inevitable that a 
surplus result in greater cultural complexity, it is probably the case that as 
divisions of labor increased and more specialized activities developed, there 
was a greater likelihood for cultural complexity to also increase.
Much of the discussion about the origins of specialization have focused 
on sex differences and the question of why in many societies there are major 
differences in the tasks assigned to women and men. Alice Eagly and her 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University PressExplaining the Evolution of Leadership 29
colleagues have made a compelling case for the importance of gender roles,
18
collectively shared and upheld beliefs about the characteristics of women 
and men, in how task specialization takes place for women and men in each 
society. Reviewing evidence on sex roles in foraging societies, Wood and 
Eagly show that “the fundamental determinants of division of labor, wom￾en’s reproductive activities and men’s size and strength, interacted with 
environmental conditions to produce differing divisions of labor across for￾aging societies.”19 Although in most cases the divisions of labor followed 
traditional patterns, environmental conditions influenced some alternatives 
in early human societies, for example, women in some societies hunting 
large animals and men also taking care of children. Along the same lines, 
leadership in these early societies depended on environmental conditions: 
Women made key decisions in some domains, but in areas such as defense 
and intergroup conflict it was male leaders who dominated.
However, research suggests that males have tended to dominate lead￾ership positions even in societies that have not had a tradition of col￾lective violence. Two well-researched examples are the Tiwi of North 
Australia and the Tsimane of Bolivia.20 In traditional Tiwi society, there 
were practices that effectively and quickly resolved conflicts. For exam￾ple, the accused would have to stand in a fixed spot and tolerate being 
the target for spears thrown from a distance by the accuser. But the 
conflict would be declared at an end as soon as even a minor hit was 
achieved. Conflicts would not be allowed to escalate to the intergroup 
level. Among the Tsimane too, traditions of mutual dependency and 
collaboration in farming, hunting, and fishing have been very strong 
and associated with the absence of collective violence. In these societies 
lacking a history of collective violence, elected leaders still tend to be 
physically strong males with greater kin support.
Threats and Crisis Incidents
A substantial body of empirical and theoretical social science literature 
suggests that group members more strongly support centralized leader￾ship when the ingroup is under threat and/or experiencing direct attack.21
The research of Napoleon Chagnon on the Yanomamo in the jungles of 
Brazil/Venezuela,22 as well as classic studies of intergroup conflict involv￾ing groups created by researchers,23 demonstrates how in conflict situa￾tions aggressive leadership takes center stage. Such conditions of increased 
threat arose as human population levels increased and there was greater 
competitive contact between different groups.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press30
Why Do Leaders Still Exist? Contact between groups of hunter-gatherers sometimes involves con￾flicts, but intergroup conflicts became far more serious and complex when 
the groups in interaction were larger and had specialized fighting forces. 
Such military forces were led into battles by leaders, who gained greater 
power and prestige in crisis situations. These leaders of early societies often 
became early versions of what in contemporary terms are known as ‘dicta￾tors.’ Thousands of years later, the role of dictator was formalized in the 
constitution of the Roman Republic, when a single leader (usually the 
emperor) is temporarily given extraordinary powers in order to guide Rome 
out of a serious crisis.24 But the Roman Republic fell and was transformed 
to a long-term dictatorship, in part because once extraordinary powers were 
given to a leader, it proved extremely difficult to get them back.
In the next section I discuss the continuing central role of leadership 
in contemporary societies. This continuity is in part through the role of 
leader as a symbol through which members identify with the ingroup.
Leadership Continues as Highly Influential 
and Central to Decision-Making
Leadership is a central and essential behavioral characteristic that evolved 
as common to all major human societies,25 with universal functions such as 
being a source of valuable knowledge and resolving conflicts in the group.26
Irrespective of their political system and cultural characteristics, major soci￾eties share the feature of having a leader – an individual who leads, and is 
followed by, others and has a dominant role in making decisions for the 
group. We do not need to believe The Great Man (or Woman) theory of his￾tory,
27 the idea that history is shaped by a small number of ‘great’ individu￾als, to accept that leaders have continued to be prominent in major societies 
and have enjoyed influence well above the level of ordinary people.
A review of the leader–follower situation in the two most populous 
countries in the world, China and India (which together have a population 
of about 2.8 billion people, approximately 36 percent of the world’s popula￾tion), reveals that the individual leader continues to sway tremendous power 
and influence, irrespective of whether the path to power for the leader is 
more dictatorial or democratic. In China, Xi Jinping has declared himself 
leader for life and launched what Elizabeth Economy describes as The Third 
Revolution, the key to which is “the dramatic centralization of authority 
under his personal leadership.”28 As The Economist puts it, in contemporary 
China “Mr Xi is to be seen as the undisputed authority on everything.”29
In India, the populist strongman Narendra Modi swept to power through 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University PressCollective Decision-Making 31
elections in 2014 and has governed by centralizing power and galvanizing 
Hindu nationalism – against Muslims and others depicted as enemies. 
Power is concentrated in the person of Modi; as Sanjay Ruparelia notes, 
“Most observers simply refer to ‘Modi sarkar [government],’ underlining its 
personalization of power.”30 This trend of power concentration in the hands 
of a strongman leader is evident in many other countries in the twenty-first 
century (such as Vladimir Putin in Russia and Recep Tayyip Erdogan in 
Turkey31). The enormous power and status enjoyed by individual leaders 
continues a very long tradition, spanning at least thousands of years. But 
it was not inevitable that leadership would become a universal and central 
feature of twenty-first-century human societies.
The question Why do leaders still exist? hints at alternative ways in 
which decision-making could take place in human groups. First, there 
are numerous examples of collective decision-making (rather than 
decision-making by individual leaders), particularly among animals but 
also among humans. Second, human societies now have available to 
them the technological capability to enable many more people to par￾ticipate more frequently in decision-making, but this potential remains 
unrealized.
Collective Decision-Making
[C]ollective decision-making mechanisms across a wide range of ani￾mal group types, from insects to birds (and even among humans in 
certain circumstances) seem to share certain functional characteris￾tics. Furthermore, at a certain level of description, collective deci￾sion-making by organisms shares essential common features with 
mechanisms of decision-making within the brain.
Ian Couzin32
In many circumstances, animals have to rapidly make decisions that deter￾mine their survival and reproductive success, such as where and how fast 
to move next, whether to rest to take advantage of food and water available 
at their present location, and how to avoid a dangerous predator. Often, 
such decisions are made collectively,33 even though individual members 
of the group do not have equal access to information. The differences in 
information, such as the location of water or a predator, available to dif￾ferent group members are often because of their spatial locations. But the 
presence of ‘naïve’ individuals in the group does not necessarily mean that 
a poorer decision is made by the group. On the contrary, research suggests 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press32
Why Do Leaders Still Exist? that the presence of uninformed individuals can limit the influence of 
strongly opiniated minorities and moderate group decisions to become 
more inclusive and democratic.34
Collective decision-making can be interpreted as involving collective 
cognition, in the sense that networks of animals can convey information in 
a way analogous to neural networks in the brain. In this analogy, individ￾ual animals are similar to individual neurons, as Ian Couzin argues: “Ants 
seem to exhibit a very ‘neuron-like’ behavior in which inactive ants exhibit 
a low propensity to become spontaneously active (analogous to spontane￾ous firing of a neuron).”35 The direction of the group can be influenced by 
a small number of ants/neurons who have more information than others.
Experiments with human groups show that a small informed minority 
can influence the rest of the group to make correct decisions (they also 
show that a minority can mislead the group to make incorrect decisions, 
but that is not our focus here36). For example, John Dyer and colleagues 
conducted experiments with fourteen–sixteen-year-old participants,37
organized in forty mixed-sex groups of eight individuals each and asked 
to individually stand on a letter (A–H) in an inner circle, facing a number 
(1–16) spaced equally around the perimeter of an outer circle. In addition, 
individuals were handed slips of paper with a behavioral rule to follow: 
Naïve participants were simply told to ‘stay with the group’ and informed 
individuals were told to ‘go to number X, without leaving the group’ (‘X’ 
representing a number from 1 to 16, found in the outer circle). Participants 
were not allowed to communicate with one another during the experi￾ment. Nevertheless, results showed that a minority of informed individu￾als could influence a group to move to a target, even though most of the 
group members were unaware of what the target was.
Thus, in both animals and humans there are instances where collective deci￾sion-making takes places and results in positive outcomes. This opens the pos￾sibility that collective decision-making, particularly in more open societies,38
can provide a viable alternative to decision-making by an individual leader.
Technology and Public Participation in Decision-Making
There have been very rapid advances in computer technologies and elec￾tronic communications, and these advances have accelerated in the twenty￾first century. These technological developments have helped authorities in 
many countries continue to provide basic remote education in 2020–2021 
despite the COVID-19 pandemic;39 many more children would have 
been deprived of education during this pandemic period if electronic 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University PressCollective Decision-Making 33
communications had not been available. The same technologies have been 
used to enable public participation in urban planning,40 so that a greater 
number of ordinary citizens can have a say in the design of the built envi￾ronment and, for example, how the design of a new road should proceed 
(if at all). These developments have resulted in the growth of so-called 
‘smart cities,’ where (despite shortcomings41) communications between 
the authorities and citizens are far more fluid and decision-making about 
city planning is more participatory.42
In the domain of political decision-making, some progress has been 
made, mostly at the local government level, in using electronic communi￾cations to expand the role of the public.43 But the vitally important deci￾sions that determine the direction of events for an entire country over 
many years, such as whether or not to invade another country or lower 
taxes for the super-rich and corporations, are often made by a single leader, 
influenced by a close group of like-minded advisors. Of course, one could 
argue that national leaders make decisions in light of public opinion (gaged 
through polling), so in one sense the public does participate. But this is a 
minimal and often nonexistent level of public participation, and there are 
numerous twenty-first-century examples of national leaders who ignore 
the wishes and interests of the general public.
In conclusion, although electronic communications provide greater 
opportunities for mass public participation in political decision-making, 
these opportunities are seldom taken up. When they are taken up, it tends 
to be at the local rather than national level. Important decisions that shape 
the direction of nations still continue to be taken by individual national 
leaders. Of course, defenders of the status quo could argue that national 
leaders make decisions through the influence of advisers and public opin￾ion, among others. Consequently, even if it is an individual leader making 
the final decision in a ‘the buck stops here’ style, others do have influence. 
However, the influence that others can have does not negate the domi￾nant and sometimes overpowering role of the individual leader in not only 
making decisions but also setting the tone of behavior for others, particu￾larly in subtle areas such as ethics and morality.44
Having versus Not Having a Leader
Human societies might have evolved to rely far less, or perhaps even not at 
all, on leaders. However, this is not the evolutionary path we took, and now 
I want to briefly consider the implications of the path we did take, which 
leaves us heavily reliant on individual leaders. Irrespective of the sources of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press34
Why Do Leaders Still Exist? power wielded by a leader,45 even in the more democratic societies of North 
America and the European Union, twenty-first-century leaders enjoy tre￾mendous power to influence decision-making. The question I take up is, 
what are the implications of having leaders versus not having leaders?
The most direct and immediate implication of having leaders is that 
power and prestige are centralized in the person of the leader, and also 
in the group of supporters and advisers who surround the leader. This 
concentration of power and prestige results in behaviors that set the leader 
apart from the rest of the group. That the leader becomes psychologically 
different is supported particularly by Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) in his 
theoretical analyses (Freud’s examinations of leadership are among his 
most compelling writings), and also by recent experimental research.
Freud limited his analysis of groups to those with leaders, because he 
believed that only through leadership can groups achieve a high level of 
coordination and organized action. For example, he would argue that 
African Americans became an effective and mobilized group only through 
leadership, such as that provided by Martin Luther King (1929–1968). The 
leader is essential for group formation, which according to Freud takes 
place through identification, arising when individuals perceive that they 
share a common quality. The leader becomes the shared common object 
through which individuals identify with one another, the primary group 
being “a number of individuals who have put one and the same object in 
place of their ego ideal and have subsequently identified themselves with 
one another in their ego.”46
In addition to serving to bind the group together through identifica￾tion, according to Freud the leader also plays a vitally important role in 
displacing aggression onto targets outside the ingroup (Freud was the first 
psychologist to point out that dissimilar others are the prime target of 
displaced aggression). This displacement of aggression is necessary because 
there are within the ingroup libidinal (emotional) ties between group 
members that involve both position and negative feelings.47 For example, 
the members of a basketball team are bound together by positive emotions, 
which results in strong cohesion and cooperation, but they also experience 
jealousies, rivalries, and other behaviors that could potentially fragment 
and harm the ingroup. Similarly, the members of an army or a church 
are bound together by positive affections, but they also experience some 
negative emotions toward one another. The role of the leader is to chan￾nel negative feelings and direct them on to dissimilar outgroup targets, so 
that the illusion is maintained among ingroup members that they are all 
part of a loved group. According to Freud, this illusion is common to all 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University PressCollective Decision-Making 35
groups, even though they are different in many ways. However different 
a church and an army may seem, “the same illusion holds good of there 
being a head – in the Catholic Church Christ, in an army its commander￾in-chief – who loves all the individuals in the group with an equal love.”48
Freud saw the relationship between the leader and followers as being 
rooted in our evolutionary past and the primal horde, and there being two 
different kinds of psychologies for the leader and followers. The leader 
stands apart from the group psychologically:
The members of the group were subject to ties just as we see them today, 
but the father of the primal horde was free … his will needed no reinforce￾ment from others … he loved no one but himself, or other people only in so 
far as they served his needs … Even today the members of a group stand in 
need of the illusion that they are equally and justly loved by their leader; but 
the leader himself need love no one else, he may be of a masterful nature, 
absolutely narcissistic, self-confident and independent.49
The idea that the leader has certain psychological characteristics that dif￾fer from that of followers need not be based on the assumption that leaders 
are born that way and/or that there is something different about the per￾sonalities of leaders that leads them to misuse power. Rather, their different 
circumstances can influence leaders to behave differently. Experimental evi￾dence suggests that when they are placed (even by chance) in extraordinary 
situations, many ordinary people will tend to act in unusual and unexpected 
ways, including harming others and becoming self-centered and corrupt 
when they come to acquire power over others.50 The adage that ‘Power cor￾rupts, absolute power corrupts absolutely’ has proven to be true in experi￾mental studies.51 For example, experimental studies show that power tends 
to lead individuals to not see the constraints that normally inhibit people 
from going outside the rules,52 and these studies include experimental dem￾onstrations of embezzlement and bribery.53 Unfortunately, real life provides 
far too many examples of leaders becoming corrupted by power, from US 
presidents such as Richard Nixon and Bill Clinton misusing their power to 
major corporations such as Volkswagen cheating on emissions tests.54
Thus, the evolutionary path we took involves heavy reliance on leaders 
as the centers of power and decision-making. In more dictatorial coun￾tries, leaders have fewer constraints on their actions; in large dictatorships 
such as China and Russia and smaller dictatorships such as Iran and North 
Korea, the supreme leaders cannot be questioned, criticized, or repri￾manded. This opens the path to enormous corruption, as other individuals 
and groups (including the relatives and close associates of the ‘dear leader’) 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press36
Why Do Leaders Still Exist? also position themselves behind the leader and outside the realm of criti￾cism. In more democratic countries, there are greater constraints on lead￾ership. Indeed, the entire process of democratization can be interpreted as 
an attempt to constrain leadership and make the leader accountable to the 
people. But we see that in practice this is extremely difficult to achieve, 
and even in democracies leaders continue to enjoy enormous power and 
decision-making authority, which they can and do misuse.
Concluding Comment
It is noteworthy – and ironic – that as electronic technologies advance 
and make it possible to achieve decision-making that is far more participa￾tory, in the United States there has developed a more imperial presidency 
and in China and India, the most populous dictatorship and democracy 
respectively, Xi and Modi have also transformed their leadership roles to 
be more centralized and powerful. The continuity of strongman leadership 
is part of a tradition well established in human history, associated with 
group-based inequalities and wealth concentration.
The rise of strongman authoritarian leadership in the twenty-first cen￾tury has coincided with the increased concentration of wealth, a topic I 
turn to in Chapter 4. From their evolutionary roots, leadership and wealth 
inequalities were closely connected, and this association continues in the 
twenty-first century. Increased wealth concentration moves lockstep with 
increased authoritarian leadership, wealth concentration being associated 
with power and decision-making centralization.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press37
chapter 4
Rich and Poor – Still Just as Different
‘Occupy Wall Street,’ ‘the 99% vs. the 1%,’ ‘the COVID pandemic and 
increasing inequality’…on television, in newspapers, in chat rooms, on 
Facebook, and all over the Internet, it seems everywhere we look, in the 
twenty-first century the widening difference between rich and poor people 
is getting a lot of attention. But this is not only in the mass media and the 
Internet. In 2014, the English translation of Thomas Piketty’s 685-page 
research book Capital in the Twenty-First Century became an unexpected 
bestseller.1
 Along with this volume were published a series of other aca￾demic books on inequality,2
 all of which would normally have received 
attention only in specialized research circles but have now become part of 
a much wider debate about the rich and poor (within this debate, there is 
some variation among researchers on the issue of rich–poor differences3
). 
This wider debate created a space in which even ‘popular’ books took up 
the theme of inequality, with titles such as The Triumph of Injustice: How 
the Rich Dodge Taxes and How to Make Them Pay.
4
The wider attention now given to inequality is no doubt in part because 
the gap between the rich and the poor has grown to be so enormous 
and wealth concentration has reached historically high levels. Oxfam 
International reports that the world’s 2,153 billionaires now own more 
wealth than 4.6 billion people,5
 and the 22 richest men in the world have 
more wealth than all the women in Africa. The super-rich now take pri￾vate ‘fun rides’ to outer space in their own spaceships, keep as toys sel￾dom-used yachts that cost hundreds of millions (and sometimes billions!) 
of dollars each,6 and consume extraordinary luxuries in ways that harm 
everybody.7
 Although there has been a decline in global poverty across 
thousands of years of recorded human history,8
 wealth concentration and 
inequality has increased sharply in recent decades.9
 As the subtitle of a 
book on the wealthy declares, in the twenty-first century the billionaires 
have “devoured the world” and acted on self-interest,10 as experimen￾tal research suggests they would.11 The kind of increasing inequality that
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press38 Rich and Poor – Still Just as Different
we now have in major societies tends to result in the poor feeling extreme 
relative deprivation, with detrimental health consequences for the bottom 
group in the population.12
Of course, the categorization of society into two groups, rich and poor, 
can be criticized as too simplistic and misleading, and the same criticism 
can be made of Marx’s use of the two categories capitalist and proletariat 
and Pareto’s use of elite and non-elite. After all, the middle class has grown 
considerably and could serve as a bridge between the top and bottom 
groups. However, in this discussion I use the terms rich and poor, rather 
than categorize society into three or even more groups, because the trend 
of increasing wealth concentration has created an enormous difference 
between the rich and the rest in terms of the choices they have available 
to them. Lukas Arndt has pointed out that the rich can be differentiated 
by levels of income, wealth, and the origin of wealth.13 In this discussion, 
following Piketty,14 I give highest importance to wealth as the main criteria 
for assessing inequality, and I differentiate between the richest and the rest. 
This is in line with empirical research showing that ordinary people also 
differentiate between strata within the rich and see the richest as different 
from the merely ‘rich.’15
But inequality is nothing new. In the first section of this chapter I review 
evidence that shows a wealth gap and group-based inequalities in major 
societies over the past 10,000  years or so. Particularly in the modern era, 
the idea that poverty is detrimental and should be ended has developed. In
the next section, I examine this idea in relation to the ‘war on poverty.’
In the final section, I examine the ideologies that legitimize inequalities 
between the rich and poor. These uphold the continuation of the gap between 
the rich and poor, despite sound arguments suggesting that a large wealth gap 
between the rich and poor is extremely harmful and should be avoided.
Rich and Poor across Historical Time
In order for inequality to come into existence and to grow in a society, 
so that rich and poor groups emerge and the differences between them 
become larger, there first has to be a surplus of resources. That is, there 
must be a growth in resources above what is required for a population to 
simply survive (as discussed in Chapter 3 of this book). The emergence of 
a surplus came about during approximately the same era as the domes￾tication of animals, the growth of farming and human settlements with 
larger populations, and, very importantly, traditions, customs, and/or 
laws that enabled private property to be transmitted as inheritance across 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressRich and Poor across Historical Time 39
generations. Research suggests that these conditions first came about 
approximately 10,000 years ago.
Ten Thousand Years of Inequality is the main title of a collection of research 
discussions on the archeology of inequality in ancient history.16 By examin￾ing evidence from graves, houses, and other buildings, as well as ancient 
settlements of different sizes, archeologists have been able to map out differ￾ences between the rich and poor from at least 10,000 years ago. The archeo￾logical evidence shows that in ancient times whereas some individuals were 
buried with many precious objects, such as thousands of beads, ivory rings, 
and precious ceremonial spears, other individuals were unceremoniously 
placed naked in the earth, with nothing to mark or accompany them in 
their graves. Similarly, some families lived in relatively large homes with sur￾rounding gardens and lands, while others survived in pitiful, tiny shelters.
In the five-volume work A History of Private Lives,
17 we are presented 
with a more intimate picture of the private lives of the rich and poor 
from about 3,000 years ago to the modern era. For example, the historical 
accounts of families during Roman times portray households where the 
majority of inhabitants were servants and slaves, all working to provide a 
luxurious life for a comparatively tiny group, the master and his family. 
By the medieval era, there were not only differences between rich and 
poor, masters and servants, but also between finer layers within the rich 
and poor in society. For example, Philippe Contamine reports on subtle 
differentiations between housing for different levels of medieval peasantry:
[T]here were houses for cotters, living on the verge of poverty; other houses 
for day laborers who owned few tools and fewer animals; and still others 
for well-to-do plowmen who owned several plows and harnesses and who 
would have needed to store quantities of grain and straw and to house a 
number of domestics. Obviously the shape of the peasant house must have 
depended on the wealth of the peasant who occupied it.18
Until the industrial revolution that accelerated from the eighteenth cen￾tury in Western Europe, accounts of private life portray a world in which 
a small elite minority, backed by military power, owned almost all arable 
lands, and the vast majority of people worked lands owned by their lords.19
These accounts provided of the private lives of the rich and poor match 
assessments by economists, indicating that even in the early nineteenth 
century the rich–poor gap was huge and about 80 percent of the world’s 
population was poor, with about 50 percent in Europe living in extreme 
poverty.20 The historical situation is succinctly summed up by Jim Yong 
Kim, a World Bank president: “Before 1800, just about everybody was poor. 
You had royalty, you had these huge landowners, but they were a tiny, tiny 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press40 Rich and Poor – Still Just as Different
minority and just about everyone lived in poverty. And everyone lived very 
much wedded to their land. This was the entire history of humanity.”21
Thus, studies in archeology and social history, as well as assessments 
by economists, show that the private lives of the rich and poor and the 
resources available to them have been very different over the last (at least) 
few thousand years. This rich–poor gap was not exclusive to any particular 
part of the world or to any particular era but was pervasive across major 
societies and across eras. The pharaohs of Egypt, the emperors of Rome, 
the Tsars of Russia, the emperors of China, the kings and feudal lords 
of Europe – the rulers of different societies and the rich elite who sur￾rounded and supported them have enjoyed enormous resource advantages 
for thousands of years. Archeologists have computed estimates of the Gini 
coefficient, a measure of economic inequality (with values from 0, com￾plete equality, to 1, complete inequality), for societies thousands of years 
ago to show the persistence of inequality across history.22 At the same time, 
although computing estimates of the Gini coefficient for earlier societies is 
a useful exercise, there is some uncertainty about the accuracy of such esti￾mates. This is because it is only in the last 200 years or so there have been 
sufficient improvements in the statistical information necessary to arrive at 
accurate measures of inequality.
Studies on global inequality from the early nineteenth century 
show that inequality between individuals in the world has steadily 
increased.23 However, within this general trend there are patterns of 
decreasing and increasing inequality, and these patterns provide hints 
at how extreme inequality can be avoided. The thesis accepted by many 
researchers is that in capitalist societies, there will be a general change 
toward greater inequality unless there is intervention. But experts dis￾agree about the kind and level of intervention needed to ensure that 
capitalist societies avoid extreme inequality. In an influential analy￾sis, Walter Scheidel has identified what he calls the Four Horsemen 
of Leveling: “Four different kinds of violent ruptures have flattened 
inequality: mass mobilization warfare, transformative revolution, state 
failure, and lethal pandemics.”24
The standard argument that capitalist free-market forces inevitably 
result in extreme inequality, and this inequality will be controlled only 
through interventions such as mass mobilization warfare or government￾implemented progressive taxation, seems to be supported by long-term 
trends in wealth distribution. Research presented by Piketty and oth￾ers shows that before the start of World War I (in 1914), unregulated 
markets in Europe resulted in high levels of wealth concentration and 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe War on Poverty 41
inequality – higher than in the United States.25 The shocks of World Wars 
I (1914–1918) and II (1939–1945) resulted in less inequality in both Europe 
and the United States, as faced with catastrophic mass mobilization war￾fare the rich became more willing to make financial sacrifices and to share 
their resources. However, promarket policies since the 1980s have resulted 
in far greater inequality in the United States; this trend is less strong in 
Europe (however, we should note that this standard argument is not sup￾ported by all researchers26).
Despite some differences in how researchers interpret the sources and 
historical patterns of inequality, there is general agreement that at least 
over the last 10,000  years or so there has persistently been a huge gap 
between the rich and poor.
The War on Poverty
The argument that steps should be taken to end poverty made serious prog￾ress from the eighteenth century, including in the works of Adam Smith 
(1723–1790) and Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778). The last part of the 
eighteenth century, influenced particularly by the ideas surrounding the 
French Revolution, was the first time it was proposed that poverty could be 
ended by introducing universal social insurance.27 The idea of a minimum 
standard living as a right (rights being what we are owed28) became more 
widely discussed through the influence of Thomas Paine (1737–1809).29 This 
turn toward the right of people not to live in poverty was new and different 
from previous policies, which attempted to regulate and segregate the poor 
in poorhouses, as reflected, for example, through the so-called Poor Laws
that had developed from earlier centuries in England.30
In 2000, a formal antipoverty position was taken up internationally 
through the United Nations Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 
with the target of halving extreme poverty by 2015. There is some consen￾sus that this initial antipoverty goal was achieved: From 1990 to 2015 the 
number of people living in extreme poverty around the world declined 
from 1.9 billion to 836 million.31 In the same time period, the number of 
people living on more than $4.00 a day tripled and the number of under￾nourished people in poor countries halved. This progress paved the way 
for more ambitious Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) from 2015.32
Of the seventeen SDGs to be achieved by 2030, the top two are ‘end 
poverty’ and ‘end hunger.’33 Although some progress has been made in 
decreasing poverty, the problem of poverty is far from solved, as reported 
by a World Bank president:
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press42 Rich and Poor – Still Just as Different
26% of the world’s population lives on less than $3.20 per day, which cor￾responds to the typical poverty line in lower-middle-income countries; 
46% of the world’s population lives on less than $5.50 per day, the average 
poverty line among upper-middle-income countries. In total, according to 
these measures, an estimated 3.4 billion people – nearly half of the world’s 
population – live in poverty.34
The goal of ending poverty has now been coupled with the slogan war 
on poverty, and in some respects this has been taken up by researchers, 
governments, and institutions such as the United Nations as a global 
campaign. The argument is made that the rich have a duty to help the 
poor climb out of poverty.35 This duty arises in part because rich countries 
have imposed poverty on poor ones, first through colonization and more 
recently through multinational corporations that have active sweatshops, 
mining, pulp and paper, and other activities in poor countries but return 
the vast bulk of their profits to rich countries.36 But the enormous profits 
of multinational corporations, many of them US-based, have not propor￾tionally helped the poor within the giant superpower.
The so-called war on poverty has not ended but transformed poverty in 
the United States. According to the title of an influential book, we now 
have a war against the poor.37 This war against the poor is waged by depict￾ing them as ‘deserving’ to be poor, by attributing their poverty to lack of 
hard work, resilience, intelligence, and other intraindividual weaknesses, by 
depicting them as cheaters and dishonest, by incarcerating larger numbers 
of poor people (who do not have the monetary resources to hire effective 
defense lawyers) for minor offenses, and by interpreting ‘too much welfare 
that prevents initiative’ as the reason most responsible for the continuing 
problem of poverty.38 This individualistic, reductionist interpretation of the 
causes of poverty does not take into consideration the extremely unequal 
opportunities people have in the United States, with the poor having mini￾mal practical opportunities to improve their conditions.39 This situation 
was made much worse by the Trump administration (2016–2020), which 
in some assessments treated the poor with cynicism and contempt.40
Poverty alleviation programs have made some progress in non-Western 
countries, particularly in China, India, and Mexico. Research on poverty 
reduction programs in these three countries show that they are more suc￾cessful when they have the backing of the central authorities and when cen￾tral authorities take steps to ensure that local elites and local power brokers 
play a constructive role in support of these programs.41 Poverty reduction 
in China has made particularly impressive progress and extreme poverty 
has been reduced to probably just a few percentage of the population, but 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressLegitimizing Ideologies in History 43
poverty in rural areas is persistent (about 37 percent live in rural areas in 
China).42 But there are several macrolevel trends that present challenges 
to poverty reduction programs in lower-income countries. Most directly 
and immediately, global warming is accelerating and impacting the poor 
disproportionally, making the challenge of ending poverty far more dif￾ficult.43 Related to this, despite the backlash against globalization, capital 
continues to chase the highest profits and lowest wages across the world, 
and, as Joseph Phiri and Kamal Abdullahi suggest, it is questionable if this 
is the “ideal remedy for ending poverty and enhancing development.”44
Next, I turn to the question of how the superior position of the rich has 
been justified.
Legitimizing Ideologies in History
[I]t may be laid down as a general principle, that the more extended 
the ancestry, the greater the amount of violence and vagabondism; 
for in ancient days those two amusements, combining a wholesome 
excitement with a promising means of repairing shattered fortunes, 
were at once the ennobling pursuit and the healthful recreation of the 
Quality of this land. Consequently, it is a source of inexpressible com￾fort and happiness to find, that in various periods of our history, the 
Chuzzlewits were actively connected with divers slaughterous conspir￾acies and bloody frays. It is further recorded of them, that being clad 
from head to heel in steel of proof, they did on many occasions lead 
their leather-jerkined soldiers to the death with invincible courage, 
and afterwards return home gracefully to their relations and friends.45
This is how Charles Dickens (1812–1870) introduces the Chuzzlewit family 
to us, in his sprawling comic novel Martin Chuzzlewit (1843/44). Dickens 
assures us that like all rich and ancient families, the Chuzzlewits were inti￾mately involved in violence and conspiracies, as a means of becoming and 
staying rich. Given that rich families like the Chuzzlewits have enjoyed 
a luxurious and advantageous life relative to the poor for at least the last 
10,000 years or so, how have they justified their advantageous position? The 
poor have always constituted the vast majority of people, and across history 
there have been numerous rebellions and revolutions against the rich, the 
privileged minority. Despite such disruptions, the gap between the rich and 
poor has continued, even after major revolutions that were enthusiastically 
led by revolutionaries skilled at using proequality rhetoric. For example, 
despite historic revolutions in Russia, China, Iran, Egypt, and many other 
countries ostensibly intended to enhance equality, and even end inequality, 
the gap between the rich and poor has continued in these (and other) 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press44 Rich and Poor – Still Just as Different
countries. Of course, after major revolutions the old rich get replaced by a 
new rich. I was surprised and impressed by how quickly and skillfully the 
new rich, using an ‘Islamic’ front, managed to replace the old rich that sur￾rounded the shah after the 1979 revolution in Iran. Clearly, what continues 
to varying degrees after revolutions is a rich–poor gap and the need for legiti￾mizing ideologies, narratives that justify continuing inequalities in society.
To be effective, legitimizing ideologies have to be widely adopted in soci￾ety, both among the rich and the poor. Also, both those who are born rich 
and those who become rich in their own lifetime typically come to believe 
that their superior status and access to resources are justified.46 Indeed, 
those individuals who rise up the ranks and become rich in their own life￾time become even stronger supporters of the political system.47 After all, 
their rise to the top (supposedly) shows that the system works and the ideol￾ogy justifying inequalities in society must be correct. Of course, as Dickens 
points out, the rich do not have to rely exclusively on ideology to legitimize 
their superior position. After all, the rich control the security forces: They 
can and do use brute force to maintain the status quo. However, brute force 
is costly and not always the most effective means of justifying and continu￾ing their advantageous position and maintaining group-based inequalities. 
A shortcoming of brute force is that it makes it clear that the rulers do 
not have the support of at least a significant portion of the population. A 
less costly and more effective way is for the rich to use their far superior 
resources to propagate, and to have widely adopted in society, an ideol￾ogy that legitimizes the existing power structure and resource distributions. 
Evidence suggests such legitimizing ideologies have been particularly effec￾tive in the United States, where increasing inequality has been associated 
with a shift toward conservativism rather than liberalism and resource redis￾tribution.48 These legitimizing ideologies have been extensively examined 
by Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527), Karl Marx (1818–1993), and Vilfredo 
Pareto (1848–1923), as well as by contemporary psychologists.49
Legitimizing ideologies can best be understood in relation to the concept 
of false consciousness, the lack of awareness among people of the social class 
they objectively belong to and the actual distinct and different interests 
of their own social class vis-à-vis other social classes.50 For example, Jack 
would be described as suffering false consciousness, because of his lack of 
awareness that he meets the objective criteria for being a member of the 
working class and that the interests of his social class are different from, and 
in conflict with, the interests of the capitalist class (consisting of the people 
who own the means of production). According to this view, false conscious￾ness arises because people adopt the ideologies that are dominant in society, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressLegitimizing Ideologies in History 45
and these ideologies are shaped by what Marx termed the capitalist class 
and Pareto termed the elite to be biased and to justify the status quo.
Put simply, the rich shape the dominant narratives that explain how 
society works, including how fair it is and who deserves to get what. The 
rich use their influence to interpret their superior position in society as 
fair and justified and to ensure that this interpretation is widely accepted. 
In this way, the lower classes adopt interpretations of society that work 
against their own personal and class interests. A number of contemporary 
psychological theories have been strongly influenced by the concept of false 
consciousness, a prominent example being system justification theory.51
But what motivates people to believe the dominant narratives in society? 
Given that the dominant narratives justify the superior position of the rich, 
why should ordinary people adopt these narratives, with the result that they 
suffer false consciousness and act against their own interests? Of course, 
these dominant narratives are supported by the vast media outlets, educa￾tion system, and other means available to the rich to propagate their ideas, 
but what is it about the psychological characteristics of people that make 
them receptive to these dominant narratives? Research suggests a powerful 
psychological factor, captured by Mel Lerner’s hypothesis of the Belief in a 
Just World, the conviction that people deserve what they get and get what 
they deserve.52 According to research findings,53 this conviction means that 
in societies with greater inequality, people justify the greater wealth gap by 
reporting a greater merit gap between the rich and poor. Instead of perceiv￾ing a greater wealth gap as unjust, people interpret it as just by exaggerating 
the merits of the rich and minimizing those of the poor.
The just world hypothesis was launched through a pioneering study by Melvin 
Lerner and Carol Simmons.54 The report of this 1966 study is invaluable, 
because the authors make clear how they are concerned with the relationship 
between the larger sociopolitical system and the beliefs of individual citizens, 
focusing on the puzzle of “how societies which produce cruelty and suffering 
maintain even minimal popular support. What must occur is that the people 
come to accept the misery and suffering as well as the norms and laws which 
produce these conditions.”55 The illustrative study reported by the authors set 
up a situation where a victim is (ostensibly) subjected to cruelty and suffering. 
The victim took part in a learning task and (ostensibly) received severe and 
painful electric shocks when she made mistakes. When the study participants 
believed that they would witness the victim suffer again in a second session and 
are powerless to change the victim’s fate, they devalued the victim. In other 
words, they ‘blamed the victim’ for the suffering she experienced.
The ‘blaming the victim’ style of attributing the causes of injustice matches 
well with an individualistic American Dream account of inequalities in society. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press46 Rich and Poor – Still Just as Different
According to this American Dream narrative, society is meritocratic and the 
success or failure of individuals is determined by their own personal character￾istics, particularly how talented, resilient, and hard-working they are. Anyone 
can make it, but only if they have the necessary individual qualifications. If Joe 
and Jane are unemployed or underemployed much of the time, and unable to 
provide adequate food and shelter for their three children, this is because Joe 
and Jane do not have the personal talent, training, and determination required 
to succeed in the free market. Their lack of success is unrelated to them having 
been born into a financially poor African American family; their group mem￾berships are not relevant to their individual success, so it is argued.
Blaming the victim serves a self-protective function, because it preserves 
a picture of the world as a place in which bad things happen to individu￾als who deserve bad outcomes, not a place where randomness and ill luck 
could result in bad outcomes for good people – like us! In this sense, blam￾ing the victim is part of the larger legitimizing ideology of the American 
Dream. Of course, legitimizing ideologies have a far longer history than 
the American Dream. Their origins go back to at least the beginning of the 
rich–poor wealth gap about 10,000 years ago.
A useful distinction can be made between divine and secular legiti￾mizing ideologies. Divine legitimizing ideologies began early in human 
evolution,56 are pervasive across time and across societies, and assume non￾human, divine source(s) as legitimizers. These divine sources are typically 
assumed to be God(s), who choose representatives on earth. As a conse￾quence, the claim is that these representatives, such as a king or a pope or 
a supreme leader, acquire certain divine rights. Perhaps the best articulated 
and most direct representation of the ‘divine right of kings’ was given by 
King James I (1566–1625) of England and Scotland in 1609:
The State of Monarche is the supremest thing upon earth: For Kings are not 
only Gods Lieutenants upon earth, and sit upon Gods throne, but even by 
God himselfe they are called Gods.57
But for much of the last 2,000 years, in Western societies the Pope 
has enjoyed an even greater role as ‘the representative of God on earth’ 
because in this role he has been placed above emperors and kings.58 The 
same role of ‘God’s representative on earth’ is claimed by the supreme 
leader in Iran and put into practice through the insertion of the principle 
of Velayat-e-Faqih in the Iranian Constitution.59 As a general strategy, reli￾gious leaders of different kinds have claimed to represent God on earth 
and to have the divine right of making decisions and judgments on behalf 
of the rest of society, including in the realm of justice, inequality, and 
relations between the rich and poor. In some societies the monarch took a 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.006 Published online by Cambridge University PressConcluding Comment 47
shortcut by declaring himself/herself to be both the head of state and the 
religious leader, a prime example being King Henry VIII (1491–1547).
But the claim by certain individuals to represent divine forces probably 
began well before the advent of agriculture and the emergence of mass 
religions in recorded human history. In a study of religiosity in thirty￾three hunter-gatherer societies,60 79 percent of the sample were found to 
include shamanism, which involves a shaman interacting with a supernatu￾ral world. The shaman serves as an intermediary, often through entering 
a trance state or some form of altered state of consciousness. In this way, 
the shaman can claim to connect ordinary people with the spirit world – a 
practice from at least tens of thousands of years ago that continues in some 
form in the twenty-first century.61 The connection shamans (ostensibly) 
have with the spirit world gives them special status and influence in the 
group, including on matters of justice and resource distribution.
Concluding Comment
The rich–poor divide has been continually with us at least over the last 
10,000 years, since the growth of a surplus. It is this surplus that came to 
be monopolized and used to maintain the rich–poor gap in different soci￾eties. The size of this gap has varied across time and across societies, and 
in recent decades this gap has grown far larger. The scholarship of Thomas 
Piketty and others has put a spotlight on how the super-rich have accumu￾lated an increasing share of global wealth and the bottom group have fallen 
further behind. Remarkably, this concentration of wealth in fewer hands 
is consistent across countries that avowedly have very different political 
systems, such as China, Russia, and the United States.
Despite national and international programs to end poverty and 
repeated rhetoric about a war on poverty, the rich–poor gap continues 
and political plasticity in this domain seems rigid and consistently low. Of 
course, government policies make an enormous difference to the size of 
the rich–poor gap. For example, in the United States since the 1980s suc￾cessive Republican and Democratic administrations have followed poli￾cies that have further enriched the rich and made the rich–poor gap even 
larger.62 My point, then, is not that the size of the rich–poor gap is fixed 
but, first, that this gap has remained large over thousands of years and, 
second, that despite political rhetoric to the contrary, in the twenty-first 
century the size of this gap is increasing in association with the rise of 
strongman authoritarian leadership and weaknesses in democracies.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press48
chapter 5
Ethnicity Is Forever
About 800,000 people were slaughtered in Rwanda in just 100 days in 
1994.1
 Most of the killings were by violent extremist Hutus and most of 
the victims were Tutsis, the Hutu and Tutsi being the two major ethnic 
groups in Rwanda. Eventually, about a million children, women, and men 
were killed in the Hutu–Tutsi conflict that year. This horrendous vio￾lence would lead us to imagine that there are important and difficult to 
change differences between the Hutu and the Tutsi, but this is far from 
the case. Researchers have pointed out that these two ethnic groups are 
highly similar and integrated; as Peter Uvin explains, “they speak the same 
language, believe in the same God, share the same culture and live side by 
side throughout the country.”2
The Hutu and the Tutsi are examples of ethnic groups that, despite 
being very similar on objective criteria, come to develop social construc￾tions of themselves and the other as being in fundamentally important 
ways different and as being deadly enemies.3
 Between 1945 and 1999, fifty￾eight highly violent ethnic civil wars took place in different parts of the 
world.4
 In discussing the prominence of ethnic conflict, Asoka Bandarage 
argues, “The frustration and anger of the world’s poor…provide fer￾tile soil for mobilizing resentment. Today the response to oppression 
does not take the form of class struggle as predicted by Marx but along 
ethno-religious or cultural lines as defined by local and international 
‘ethnic entrepreneurs.’”5
 In line with the structural-functional perspec￾tive, which gives importance to institutional and state factors in shaping 
intergroup relations, ethnic conflict and ethnic minority persecution have 
been enabled by the technological and administrative power of modern 
nations.6 Although social constructions of different ethnic groups can 
change over time and ethnicity in twenty-first century nations is in some 
ways different, ethnicity as a basis for group mobilization and intergroup 
conflict is a persistent factor both in the historical and the contemporary expe￾riences of human societies.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University PressEthnicity Is Forever 49
The title of this chapter includes a quotation from Stephen Worchel,7
who comments on the ‘forever’ nature of ethnicity, an ethnic group con￾sisting of people who share a sense of belonging, often based on (actual or 
assumed) common descent, history, culture, language, religion, or race.8
 On 
the one hand, ethnicity has ancient roots and is part of our primitive heritage 
(as Stuart Kaufman points out, “Ethnic identities have existed throughout 
recorded history. Even in ancient times, ethnic groups such as the Hebrews, 
Babylonians and Egyptians were important political actors”9
), and, on the 
other hand, ethnicity is contemporary and continues to play a foundational 
role in our twenty-first-century societies.10 For example, ethnicity exerts 
influence through political ethnicity, the mobilization of ethnic groups as 
collective political forces,11 in the politics of both Western and non-Western 
societies.12 Ethnicity continues to shape collective and individual behavior 
through ethnic identity, ethnic mobilization, ethnic prejudice and dis￾crimination, ethnicity and economic inequalities, and ethnic conflict. The 
expectation that modernization would melt away the power of ethnicity in 
politics, and social relations more broadly, has not come to fruition. Instead, 
there has been an ethnic revival.13 This continued influence, I argue, means 
that ethnicity has low political plasticity and is highly resistant to change.14
I argue that that the root of ethnicity having low political plasticity is in 
what is ‘out there’ in our socially constructed and collectively upheld collec￾tive life and not in biological factors. The characteristics of what is out there, 
in terms of values, stereotypes, norms, and culture broadly, are shaped by 
our historical experiences, including colonialism and slavery. The rigidity 
of cultural systems as they pertain to ethnicity, for example, in terms of the 
values assigned to different skin colors and stereotypes of different so-called 
racial groups, reflects the low political plasticity of ethnicity.
The terms ‘ethnicity’ and ‘race’ are often used interchangeably, but this 
is misleading. Ethnicity is a social construct based on perceptions among a 
group of people, usually of their own group and/or other groups having 
a common ancestry. Race refers to a group of people who share certain 
characteristics that are heritable and physical (such as skin color). Despite 
repeated exhortations that “Race is not ethnicity,”15 the failure to treat 
these terms as different is common not only in psychological science but 
also in medical science.16 In everyday life and in the mass media, race and 
ethnicity are often used interchangeably, and it is often (wrongly) assumed 
that by looking at the phenotype (the observable physical characteristics of 
a person) one arrives at an accurate idea of the genotype (the genes a per￾son carries). However, research shows that genetic variation within ethnic 
groups is larger than between ethnic groups.17
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press50 Ethnicity Is Forever
Ethnicity has served as a continuously important basis for human 
behavior, particularly in the realm of intergroup competition and con￾flict, even though objectively the differences between ethnic groups in 
conflict (such as the Hutu and the Tutsi) can be minimal. The influence 
of ethnicity continues today as a factor in how we are treated, particu￾larly with respect to access to resources and services. For example, ethnic 
minorities have received less support and been detrimentally impacted 
to a greater extent by the COVID-19 pandemic.18 Ethnicity has a pow￾erful influence in the realm of politics; for example, there is extensive 
evidence that people prefer to vote for candidates of their own ethnic 
group.19 Inequality on the basis of ethnicity, rather than individual-based 
inequality, is more likely to result in collective political mobilization.20
Being the target of ethnic discrimination and aggression also solidifies 
ethnic identity and makes ethnicity a more appealing path for political 
action.21 In more ethnically polarized settings, voting is more likely to be 
influenced by ethnicity.22
The first section of this chapter is focused on theoretical explanations of 
ethnicity. Integral to this is the role of minimal or minor intergroup dif￾ferences. I shall also critically discuss sociobiology and a number of other 
major theories used to try to explain the continued importance of ethnic￾ity in major human societies. In the second major section of this chapter 
I explore the challenge associated with ethnic diversity. A question that 
implicitly underlies ethnic diversity concerns whether ethnically more 
homogeneous societies are at an advantage.
Explanations of Ethnicity
Ethnic group members often maintain, rightly or wrongly, that 
they are descended from a common set of ancestors…Ethnic 
identity, like kinship, is commonly seen as a primordial, ascribed, 
essential status, not easily changed. And ethnic group relations, 
like relations among kin, often seem to involve something more – 
and more primal – than the rational pursuit of individual or class 
interests.
Doug Jones23
Social technologies are manipulatory practices, for example 
a leader asserting kinship ties among his people as a means for 
increasing their cohesion. These practices are invented and passed 
on culturally.
Frank Salter24
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University PressExplanations of Ethnicity 51
Psychologists attempting to explain ethnicity are confronted with an 
enigma: On the one hand, ethnicity is forever. The forever feature of ethnic 
groups has led to numerous interpretations of ethnicity as something pri￾mordial, as somehow biologically based, as rooted in blood and explained 
by essentialism,25 which goes back to the idea of ancient hatreds and is the 
oldest explanatory tradition in ethnic studies.26 On the other hand, the 
changing nature of ethnic identity and manipulations by leadership has 
resulted in more instrumentalist interpretations, meaning that leaders and 
followers manipulate and use ethnicity when they see it as serving their 
own interests.27 For instance, Salter (quoted above) points to the illustra￾tive example of a leader claiming kinship ties between the members of his 
group as a way to increased group cohesion. Such manipulatory practices, 
according to Salter, are invented and become part of the transmissible cul￾ture. As such, the identity and assumed characteristics of ethnic groups can 
change over time. For example, the identity and assumed characteristics of 
African Americans have changed in some respects across the centuries.28
With respect to the forever feature of ethnicity, in many instances it 
does not matter whether there is or is not an objective basis for claims that 
there are actual kinship ties between members of an ethnic group. What 
matters is the belief that there are such ties (even though objective evidence 
argues against a common genetic ancestry29). As long as ethnic identity is 
based on the belief that there are kinship ties between ethnic group mem￾bers, this belief will influence the behavior of ethnic group members (and 
others toward them). This is an important part of the stability and con￾tinuity of ethnicity. Another aspect of this continuity is that one cannot 
exit from an ethnic group one is born into, nor can one join a new ethnic 
group. This is unlike religion and nationality: One can abandon or join a 
religion, and one can change nationality.
Perhaps because of the widely held beliefs about the shared kin, com￾mon-origin, basis of ethnicity (both among the lay public and among 
researchers), sociobiological and evolutionary accounts of ethnicity have 
expanded.30 These accounts interpret the gene, and not the organism, to 
be the unit of replication.31 From this perspective, humans serve as vehicles 
for genes, and nepotism increases the survival chances of particular genes. 
One of the most influential sociobiological researchers is Pierre van den 
Berghe, who interprets ethnicity as an extension of kinship and points 
to the normality and universality of nepotism as evidence of our biased 
behavior in favor of those who share our genes.32
While the commonly held belief that ethnicity is based on common ances￾try and shared genes is a powerful factor in ethnic identity and behavior, this 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press52 Ethnicity Is Forever
belief is not based on fact. Scientific evidence shows that “human DNA is 
99.9% similar, whether we are from Europe, Asia, the Americas, or Africa …
there is more genetic diversity within a single … ethnic group than between 
two or more groups.”33 Genetics provides a simplistic and misleading account 
of ethnicity, with detrimental consequences in areas such as health care.34
Medical treatment cannot use ethnicity as a guide to genetic characteristics, 
because human populations cannot be accurately categorized into genetic 
groups based on ethnicity. Geographical location is a more accurate guide to 
genetic characteristics of people than is ethnicity.35 Of course, the belief in a 
shared ‘homeland’ can have a factual basis and contribute to ethnic identity, 
but in some instances, even more important is the social construction of an 
ethnic identity – irrespective of its factual basis.
The Identity Tradition
From among the different psychological explanations of ethnicity, includ￾ing realistic conflict theory, psychodynamic theories, and justice theories,36
the most compelling is provided by social identity theory and the research 
developments it inspired,37 particularly self-categorization theory.38 From the 
perspective of this identity tradition established by Henri Tajfel (1919–1982) 
and John Turner (1947–2011), the emphasis is on individuals perceiving 
themselves as members of a particular social category (e.g., white American, 
African American, Hispanic American) and using the norms of that category 
as a behavioral guide. Once identification with a social category takes place, 
then ingroup stereotypes also influence the individual. Also, there tends to 
be an exaggeration of differences between the ingroup and outgroups and a 
minimization of differences within the ingroup.39
A combination of cognitive and sociopolitical factors influences which 
particular social categories a person identifies with. A key cognitive factor is 
salience, which is determined by accessibility and fit: “[G]iven two equally 
‘fitting’ categories, the more ‘accessible’ one will become salient and, given 
two equally ‘accessible’ categories, the one that better ‘fits’ the perceptual 
data will become salient.”40 Thus, identification with a social category is 
more likely to take place if that social category comes to mind more easily 
and if the person’s information fits with the characteristics of that social 
category. As to what determines the ease with which social categories come 
to mind and what kinds of information individuals have about social cat￾egories, these arise out of socialization processes and the integration of indi￾viduals in the larger world. Through socialization, individuals enter into 
society and its dominant narratives, just as society enters into individuals.41
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University PressExplanations of Ethnicity 53
When we are born, powerful social and political narratives are already 
in place and active in the collective life surrounding us. Integral to these 
narratives are depictions of ethnic groups, with their associated stereo￾types and norms. For example, there are (often incorrect) narratives about 
biological differences between ethnic groups, including in areas such as 
‘genetic differences and ethnic groups’ and ‘inborn intelligence differences 
and ethnic groups.’ Mainstream psychology along with the stories it has 
generated over time about ethnic groups, some of which have been racist,42
is a central part of these dominant narratives in the larger society.
It is these dominant narratives that in large part explain the forever nature 
of ethnic groups. Changing dominant narratives involves much more than 
changing individual minds, because dominant narratives are out there, in the 
discourse of the larger society, in the education system, in folk tales, in chil￾dren’s stories, in myths, and in culture broadly. Also, dominant narratives 
can be incorrect but continue to have influence. For example, there are only 
minor differences between ethnic groups such as the Hutu and the Tutsi, 
but the dominant narratives in Rwandan society position these two groups 
as being inherently and enormously different. The central role of minor dif￾ferences in intergroup relations and conflict was explored by Sigmund Freud 
(1856–1939), who referred to the narcissism of minor differences.
43
Experimental research also highlights the power of minor intergroup 
differences. Empirical research using the minimal group paradigm has 
demonstrated that social categorization even on a minimal or trivial basis 
can lead to intergroup bias.44 Minimal group paradigm studies usually fol￾low a two-part sequence. In the first part, participants carry out a fairly 
trivial task, such as estimating the number of dots flashed onto a screen. 
In the second part, the participants are divided into two groups, such as 
group X and group Y, ostensibly on the basis of how they carried out the 
trivial task. Next, participants are asked to allocate points to the members 
of groups ‘X’ and ‘Y.’ The points they allocate will not come to them 
personally, nor do they know who is in group ‘X’ and group ‘Y,’ nor will 
they have any interactions with the members of group ‘X’ and group ‘Y.’ 
Despite this, the general tendency has been for participants in Western 
societies to show ingroup favoritism in point allocations.
Of course, it has been argued, with empirical support,45 that in a context 
where there is only one criterion (i.e., the basis for social categorization) to 
guide action, that criterion will become important – even though in other 
contexts this criterion could be trivial. In real-world settings, such as sports 
stadiums, a seemingly trivial criterion, such as team colors or team mem￾bership, can become enormously important (as Bill Shankly, the Liverpool 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press54 Ethnicity Is Forever
Football Club manager said, “Some people think football is a matter of life 
and death. I assure you, it’s much more serious than that.”46). The minor 
differences between the Hutu and the Tutsi became a matter of life and 
death. During the 1994 genocide, each side positioned the other as not only 
different but subhuman and an evil group that must be annihilated.47 It is 
the collective, shared, and diffuse nature of collective narratives that sup￾port the continuation of ethnicity as a powerful force in human societies.
Although ethnicity has the potential to serve as a basis for collective 
mobilization and conflict, certain factors will increase the probability of 
this process coming to fruition:
• Populist leadership and powerful elites who view ethnic mobilization 
and conflict as advantageous to themselves.
• A compelling narrative (often strongly shaped by ingroup 
interpretations of history) that legitimizes ethnic conflict.
• Strong motives (e.g., material gain) for the majority to engage in, or 
at least not resist, ethnic conflict.
• The design of political institutions and traditions that highlight 
and exaggerate ethnic differences and endorse a ‘winner take all’ 
perspective on interethnic competition.48
• An international context that allows or even enables ethnic conflict 
and ethnic minority persecution.
These factors are more likely to become effective in multiethnic, rather 
than ethnically more homogeneous, societies. This implies that ethnic 
diversity is associated with certain serious challenges.
Challenges Raised by Ethnic Diversity
Just as ethnicity is forever, the challenges raised by ethnic diversity are 
forever. Here I discuss the challenges in dealing with inequality, prejudice, 
discrimination, interethnic conflict, and genocide.
Inequality, Prejudice, and Discrimination
Ethnic diversity raises questions about the inevitability of certain prob￾lems associated with interethnic relations. Are ethnically diverse societies 
doomed to experience prejudice and discrimination against ethnic minori￾ties, as well as inequalities and conflict across ethnic groups? Such questions 
arise from a perspective that interprets ethnic diversity as a disadvantage, 
as a subtractive feature that in some ways diminishes societies. From this 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University PressChallenges Raised by Ethnic Diversity 55
perspective, the greater the ethnic diversity, the more extreme the negative 
impact of ethnicity. William Easterly summed up research findings on the 
subtractive economic consequences of ethnic diversity:
More ethnically diverse cities and counties in the United States spend less 
on public goods. States with more religious-ethnic heterogeneity show 
lower public support for higher education and lower high-school gradu￾ation rates. In Kenya, there is less funding for primary schools in more 
ethnically diverse districts. Ethnic diversity also predicts poor quality of 
government services … In U.S. cities, there is a link from ethnic diversity 
to bloated government payrolls. Ethnically polarized nations react more 
adversely to external terms of trade shocks. More foreign aid proceeds are 
diverted into corruption in more ethnically diverse places. Ethnic homo￾geneity raises social capital, or trust, which in turn is associated with faster 
growth and higher output per worker. The finding that ethnic heterogene￾ity lowers trust is confirmed with both U.S. data and cross-country data. In 
the United States, greater ethnic heterogeneity makes participation in social 
clubs less likely, which is consistent with the idea that there is not much 
association across groups.49
But there is also a positive perspective on ethnic diversity, one that 
proposes that societies gain by becoming more ethnically diverse. This 
‘additive’ view argues that an ethnically more diverse society is richer and 
stronger, for example through the excitement and even glamor of having 
ethnic neighborhoods, such as ‘Little Italy’ and ‘Chinatown.’ This additive 
view of ethnicity is attributed as having benefited ancient empires, such as 
the Roman Empire, which were tolerant of diversity.50 But tolerance was 
by necessity, because in ancient empires the central authorities did not 
have the technological weapons available to contemporary governments to 
enforce assimilation and homogeneity.
One of the important changes that have come about is the enormously 
powerful technologies, institutions, and bureaucracies at the disposal of 
twenty-first-century national governments to be used as weapons for 
trying to enforce ethnic assimilation and homogeneity. At least seventy￾five countries are using artificial intelligence (AI) technologies (such as 
facial recognition) for surveillance, and the Chinese company Huawei 
is responsible for supplying AI surveillance technologies to at least fifty 
countries.51 The power of AI is being used to monitor and control ethnic 
groups.52 At the same time, electronic communications are also helping 
ethnic minorities and separatist groups, such as the Basque in Spain, 
the Scots in the United Kingdom, the French Quebecers in Canada, 
and the Kurds in Turkey, Iraq, Syria and Iran, to mobilize as distinct 
collective movements.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press56 Ethnicity Is Forever
The mobilization of ethnic groups in many different regions of the 
world is in part a response to the inequalities and deprivations suffered 
by ethnic minorities in ethnically diverse societies. Thomas Piketty and 
others have highlighted the enormous wealth concentration taking place 
throughout the world,53 and Max Haller has argued that more attention 
should be given to inequality not just between but also within nations.54 A 
central claim made by Haller, which is supported by some other research￾ers,55 is that ethnic diversity is associated with greater inequality, and more 
ethnically homogeneous societies enjoy more equality.
At the heart of ethnic inequality, and discrimination against ethnic minor￾ities,56 is the historical experiences of colonization and slavery. The long arm 
of this history, particularly tragic for the colonized and enslaved, has resulted 
in a colored class structure,57 with whites at the top, blacks at the bottom, and 
other shades in between. Reacting to perceptions of group-based inequality, 
ethnic groups have mobilized and attempted to challenge white supremacy.58
In Western societies, this ethnic mobilization is undoubtedly in large part 
a result of the increasing number of ethnic minorities. For example, in the 
United States by 2044 the white population is predicted to fall below 50 
percent of the total population.59 Increases in ethnic minority numbers 
in Western societies are being seen as a threat by the white population in 
Western countries,60 as well as by the Western security establishment.61
The reaction of the dominant white group to ‘invasions’ of nonwhites 
reflects a behavioral tendency that probably arose out of long-term evolu￾tionary processes. Such behaviors are associated with ingroup reactions to 
external threats, at a primitive level associated with how organisms deal with 
invasive species, life forms that are not native to an area under consideration 
and whose introduction causes harm, death, and even extinction of local life 
forms. The concept of invasive species has been applied to animals and plants 
but is also applicable to humans.62 Just as the introduction of invasive plants 
and animals can threaten, and lead to ‘defense’ reactions from, local 
plants and animals, the invasions of territories by groups of humans can 
result in defensive reactions from locals living in an area being invaded.
The history of Western colonization in Africa, Asia, and the Americas 
provides numerous examples of both failed and relatively successful 
defensive reactions from local populations. The indigenous population of 
Tasmania was wiped out by European invaders, with most of the kill￾ings taking place between 1800 and the 1830s.63 Tens of millions of indig￾enous American Indians were killed as Western expansion took place in 
the United States.64 The population of Africa drastically reduced through 
European invasions, bringing with it the slavery of millions of Africans 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University PressChallenges Raised by Ethnic Diversity 57
and deadly diseases against which local Africans did not have immunity.65
In contrast, Japan successfully isolated itself from the rest of the world, 
in particular keeping out Western religious missionaries, for two centu￾ries between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries.66 Through effective 
defensive tactics, despite suffering defeat and invasion in World War II, 
Japan has emerged in the twenty-first century as an advanced industrial 
nation with a distinct culture.
The experiences of the Tasmanians, who were invaded and annihilated 
by Western colonists, and the Japanese, who for long periods excluded 
outsiders and continue to thrive as an independent nation and culture, 
demonstrate that the outcome of interethnic contact can be very different. 
Similarly, the outcomes of interethnic contact within societies can also be 
different. We can organize to achieve different kinds of outcomes in eth￾nically diverse societies, resulting in high or minimal levels of intergroup 
prejudice, discrimination, and conflict. However, such organization must 
be based on the recognition that the probability of certain behaviors is 
made more likely by our evolutionary past.
An important example of evolutionary-evolved behaviors is ethnic 
ingroup reactions to perceived ethnic outgroup threat. Ethnic groups that 
feel threatened are more likely to support aggressive authoritarian strong￾man leadership, be less tolerant of nonconformity and dissimilar others, 
and show less support for civil liberties.67 These behaviors result in the eth￾nic group becoming more cohesive and unified under strong centralized 
leadership, in readiness to fight off aggressive foes. But becoming a more 
formidable and ‘battle ready’ ethnic group comes at a cost: lower tolerance 
for those who are perceived to be different.
Contemporary transportation and technologies have increased the speed 
with which vast numbers of ethnic outgroups can quickly move from one 
region of the world to another.68 For example, millions of people rapidly 
moved from the Near and Middle East to Europe in the early part of the 
twenty-first century, driven from their homes by the turmoil caused by the 
invasions of Afghanistan (2001) and Iraq (2003), devastating wars (such as 
in Syria), or extreme political repression (such as in Iran). Similarly, mil￾lions of people continue to move from South America to the United States, 
motivated to migrate to escape gang violence, poverty, and instability. In 
response to the sudden appearance of these large numbers of dissimilar out￾group members at their borders, there has been an ethnocentric backlash 
among white nationalists in Europe and the United States. At the extreme 
levels, such antioutgroup movements result in violent interethnic conflict, 
ethnic cleansing, and genocide, topics discussed in the next section.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press58 Ethnicity Is Forever
Ethnic Cleansing, from Ghettoization to Genocide
Ethnic cleansing involves the removal of an ethnic population from a ter￾ritory, in order to homogenize the ethnic makeup of that territory. Erin 
Jenne has said of ethnic cleansing, “Although the concept is relatively 
new, the phenomenon to which it refers is as old as human civilization 
itself.”69 Jenne’s claim is confirmed by historical examinations, which 
reveal that ethnic cleansing took place repeatedly in human history and 
more recent ethnic cleansing is often rooted in historical narratives.70
Examples of ethnic cleansing in the modern era include targets such 
as the indigenous Indians of America and various ethnic minorities in 
Europe.71 Influenced by Hannah Arendt (1906–1975), one line of argu￾ment has been that the technologies and bureaucracies of modern nations 
states and democracies have a banal dark side that ultimately categorizes 
the social world into ‘us’ and ‘them,’ normalizes evil, and paves the way 
for ethnic cleansing.72
Ethnic cleansing has been implemented through a variety of strategies 
across history, ranging from the relatively mild ‘internal transfer and ghet￾toization’ of a population, involving the forced transfer of a group to a 
ghetto inside the country, to the most extreme and horrendous tactic of 
genocide, mass killing and group annihilation (see Figure 5.1).
The strategies listed on the continuum in Figure 5.1 are intended to 
represent important examples, rather than an exhaustive list. I now briefly 
discuss each of the listed strategies.
Internal Transfer and Ghettoization
The mildest form of ethnic cleansing I have listed involves the rounding 
up of an ethnic minority and placing them in isolation. The purpose of 
such isolation can be either to simply keep an ethnic group under control 
and away from the rest of the population or to bring about changes in 
the isolated group. An ongoing example of the latter is the treatment of 
the Uyghur minority in China; several million Uyghur Muslims have 
been undergoing political reeducation in special camps.73 But Western 
democracies have also engaged in this kind of strategy; for example, dur￾ing World War II, both in the United Kingdom and the United States 
certain ethnic groups deemed to be dangerous and potential ‘enemies 
within,’ such as the Japanese in the United States, suffered internment in 
isolated camps.74
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University PressEthnic Cleansing, from Ghettoization to Genocide 59
Expulsion
The expulsion of ethnic minorities from particular territories is so com￾mon that even many large-scale expulsions tend to receive little interna￾tional attention. For example, in 1989 almost 400,000 Turks and Muslims 
were expelled from Bulgaria, a tragedy that is largely forgotten.75 A more 
recent example is the mass expulsion of the Rohingya from Myanmar.76
Whereas ‘internal transfer and ghettoization’ still leaves the targeted eth￾nic minority within the territory of the dominant group, and thus still a 
responsibility of the ruling government, expulsion from a territory osten￾sibly frees the dominant group and ruling government from responsibility. 
For example, the Turks expelled from Bulgaria to Turkey in 1989 now 
became the responsibility of the Turkish government – even though they 
were forced to abandon most of their wealth back in Bulgaria.
Internal and External Ethnic War
Both in the modern era and historically, ethnicity has regularly served as 
the basis of both civil wars and interstate wars, as Lars-Erik Cederman 
points out in Foreign Affairs: “Ethnic nationalism is most likely to lead to 
civil war, but it can also trigger interstate war by encouraging leaders to 
make the sorts of domestic appeals that can increase tensions with foreign 
countries.”77 Some of the most ferocious ethnic conflicts arise out of efforts 
by a numerical majority to overcome the military stranglehold of a numer￾ical minority, an example being attempts by the Sunni majority to over￾throw the murderous Assad regime (which is Shiite, and backed by Shiite 
Iran) in Syria.78 Because many ethnic groups are dispersed across national 
boundaries, in some cases governments see it as necessary to intervene in 
other states in order to protect the interests of ‘their ethnic ingroup.’ For 
example, in 2022 the Russian government has invaded Ukraine, ostensibly 
to protect the interests of Russians and Russian speakers who live in the 
Ukraine79 – the result being conflict with countries of the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization, which includes the United States.
Internal transfer Internal and external
and ghettoization Expulsion ethnic war Genocide
____________________________________________________________________
Most mild strategy Most extreme strategy
Figure 5.1 Varieties of strategies for ethnic cleansing
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press60 Ethnicity Is Forever
Genocide
Genocide, the most extreme form of ethnic cleansing, has a long history 
in human societies.80 However, a number of researchers have convincingly 
argued that the administrative, organizational, and technological weapons 
at the disposal of modern states means that genocide can now be carried 
out far more effectively and efficiently.81 On the other hand, optimistically 
one could argue that globalization and the advancement of technology also 
means that news about genocides in the twenty-first century, such as in 
Darfur, in North Kivu (Democratic Republic of Congo), and the Rohingya 
(Myanmar), spreads rapidly and globally, thus giving opportunities for 
genocide to be opposed and for perpetrators to be punished. Also, optimisti￾cally one could add that there are now international institutions, such as the 
International Court of Justice at the Hague, that can act to implement jus￾tice no matter where in the world a genocide is committed. However, these 
international mechanisms have failed to prevent genocide in the modern era.
Concluding Comment
Ethnicity has low political plasticity and is a continuously important factor 
in the everyday lives of many people in the twenty-first century. Topics 
such as prejudice and discrimination continue to be central in psychol￾ogy,82 because of the high salience and influence of ethnicity in everyday 
life. Ethnicity continues to play an important role in political behavior, 
having an impact on voting patterns and political support for individual 
candidates and political groups. That is why politicians such as Donald 
Trump attempt to appeal to particular ethnic groups and give signals 
of their ethnic biases, such as Trump’s well-publicized speeches against 
Mexican immigrants and his ‘Muslim ban’ against people from Middle 
East countries.83
Modernization has not diluted the power of ethnicity in influencing 
behavior. Far from it, ethnicity has become an even more important theme 
in our twenty-first-century world. From the perspective of left-wing critics, 
powerful elites (who control the mass media, education system, and other 
means of high influence) have manufactured ethnicity as a more dominant 
theme because it distracts from social class and helps to sidetrack movements 
that might otherwise lead to class conflict. But these left-wing criticisms still 
accept that such outcomes are possible only because of the high potential of 
ethnicity for serving as a basis for identity and collective mobilization.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press61
chapter 6
Religion, Eternally Present but 
with a Thousand Faces
Religion, beliefs in divine powers and the implementation of rituals and 
practices directed to such powers,1
 has been expected, according to secu￾larization theory,2
 to be in a state of decline as science and technology 
advance and replace religious explanations. An important aspect of religion 
is spirituality, which involves awareness of a transcendental dimension to 
existence.3
 The advancement and global spread of higher education,4
 as 
well as science,5
 which demands empirical proof and the objective testing 
of hypotheses, would seem to go against religious belief in divine powers, 
which cannot be scientifically known or assessed. The rise in scores on 
intelligence tests in the general population over time and across genera￾tions around the world also suggests that the influence of religion should 
decline,6 since almost a century of research has established that there is 
a negative relationship between religiosity and intelligence.7
 People who 
score higher on intelligence tests have less faith in religion, and as scores on 
intelligence tests increase around the world, one would expect religiosity 
to also decline. From this perspective, then, religion should be becom￾ing weaker in the twenty-first century, and the influence of religion on 
political behavior should also be in decline. But the role and impact of 
religion in societies around the world have proved to be extremely resilient 
to change and complex.8
On the one hand, there is evidence that there has been a global 
decline in religion in the early twenty-first century. Reporting on inter￾national studies on trends in religiosity, Ronald Inglehart claims, “From 
about 2007 to 2019, the overwhelming majority of the countries we 
studied – 43 out of 49 – became less religious. This decline in belief 
was not confined to high-income countries and appeared across most 
of the world.”9 This decline in religiosity has been reported even in the 
United States, a country that once seemed to be impervious to global 
trends in the weakening of religion.10 On the other hand, studies on the 
separation of church and state clearly show that such separation has not
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press62
Religion, Eternally Present taken place as expected in line with a decline in religion, so that reli￾gion continues to have a powerful impact on politics and government 
in most societies.11 Although countries that are more democratic have 
a higher level of separation of church and state, the recent weakening 
of democracies, including in the United States,12 has been accompanied 
by fuzzier lines between church and state even in democracies. In par￾ticular, the power of the religious right in US politics continues.13 Also, 
there are signs that the picture of ‘religion in decline’ is too simplistic 
and is being challenged by some researchers. For example, the Danish 
researcher Hans Ruan Iversen claims, “Ninety percent of the … people 
on this planet are thoroughly religious-minded – and they will probably 
continue to be so.”14 Also, a religious resurgence is taking place in some 
societies.15
My own experience with religious resurgence came through my living 
and researching in Islamic countries. After decades of modernization and 
the rapid expansion of higher education under the shah, Iran experienced 
a major revolution in 1979. The shah was ousted, but instead of a turn 
to democracy, the tragic outcome of the revolution in Iran was a return 
to Islamic dictatorship and repressive rule by mullahs. This was another 
example of how the physical and social networks of religious groups, built 
up over many centuries and sometimes millennia, give them an enormous 
advantage in shaping and undertaking political activities, particularly in 
times of turmoil such as after major revolutions that topple governments. 
I witnessed different manifestations of the resurgence of Islam during my 
research in other Islamic societies, including Turkey, Tunisia, Morocco, 
the Philippines, Malaysia, Egypt, and Indonesia, the most populous 
Islamic country.
In order to better identify the larger communal-societal role of 
religion, it is useful to differentiate between different types of private 
and shared informal spiritual and formal religious experiences among 
individuals and collectives. I have identified four alternative forms of 
religious experience, listed below. By far the most important type of 
experience in the context of this discussion is formal collective religious 
ceremonies (#4).
1. Informal Individual Spiritual Experience
Most people who report being religious have a personal sense of the 
divine, a belief in God or something beyond the material world.16 This 
is often a private feeling, sometimes mystical, experienced by them 
personally as individuals.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.008 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe Evolutionary Roots of Religion 63
2. Informal Collective Spiritual Experience
At times a group of individuals who have gathered informally engage 
in spontaneous activities that result in a shared spiritual experience. 
For example, these individuals might have gathered to remember a 
departed person or past event (such as a tragedy during which many 
people died), narrate stories about the departed, or sing or play musi￾cal instruments, or read, or pray together for comfort. Out of such 
spontaneous activities often emerge spiritual experiences for the group.
3. Formal Individual Religious Ceremony
People often engage in formal religious activities as individuals. In such 
cases, believers interact individually in a formal religious context, such as 
when Catholic believers individually take part in confession or when Jewish 
believers individually say prayers on Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement.
4. Formal Collective Religious Ceremony
By far the most influential religious practice is the formal collective religious 
ceremony. It is in these ceremonies that religious officials (priests, imams, 
rabbis, etc.) exert direct control over people in public settings, lead them in 
prayers, deliver sermons telling people how they should behave, and gen￾erally reinforce conformity and obedience among community members.
But why do people continue to engage in such religious activities? In the rest 
of this chapter, I examine limitations on political plasticity in the domain of 
religion. The main question I address is, why does religion continue to have a 
powerful influence in societies? Why has religion not disappeared, as predicted 
by secularization theory? First, I discuss research on the sources of religion. The 
focus in this first section is mainly on cognition and processes inside individuals. 
Next, I explore those social, cultural, and material characteristics of the world 
‘out there’ outside individuals that sustain and strengthen religion.
The Evolutionary Roots of Religion
In examining the sources of religion, it is useful to distinguish between dif￾ferent types of religious experiences and practices. Research on genetics in 
this domain, popularized by books such as The God Gene,
17 focuses more on 
the sources of spirituality and not directly on the institutions and collective 
practices, ceremonies, and movements organized through formal religions. 
The major formal religions, such as Christianity, Judaism, and Islam, have 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press64
Religion, Eternally Present enormous power as global economic and political organizations; they are 
extremely successful as international businesses (Adam Smith discussed reli￾gions as business enterprises in The Wealth of Nations18). After all, how many 
international businesses can boast of having lasted for thousands of years?
Of course, the argument could be made that it is the individual experi￾ence of spirituality and a sense that there are things (particularly divine 
powers) other than our material world that enable the formation of institu￾tionalized religions. But presumably spirituality could manifest itself in dif￾ferent ways and could lead to different outcomes in the larger society. Even 
if there is a genetic basis for a sense of spirituality, the practical outcome 
need not be the kinds of institutionalized religions, with their particular 
political biases and consequences, that exist today. As Margaret Rappaport 
and Christopher Corbally describe it,19 religion is a nonobligatory trait of 
humankind, even though it has neurocognitive roots. We have the capacity 
for spiritual experiences but we might not put this capacity into practice, 
and the kinds of institutions and practices we build out of such experiences 
could be very different from the mainstream formal religions of today.
There are two main questions that I address with respect to religion. The 
first, discussed in this section, concerns the evolutionary roots of spiritual 
experiences: From a functional perspective why did these behaviors evolve? In 
the next section I discuss the second question, which is about the role of the 
world ‘out there’ in supporting religion: What factors have influenced reli￾gion to grow as an economic, political, and cultural force in major societies?
With respect to the evolutionary roots of religion, one possibility is that 
religion evolved as a mechanism to achieve cooperation between nonkin. 
Relationships among kin can be explained by sociobiologists (as discussed 
in Chapter 5 on the basis of genetic similarity: People are hardwired to 
favor genetically similar others (i.e., their kin), as evolution involves com￾petition between gene pools and humans serve as convenient carriers of 
genes. But cooperation and altruism among nonkin are more difficult to 
explain from a sociobiological, and more broadly an evolutionary, perspec￾tive. This is where religion can play a role. The explanations that evolution￾ary researchers have provided for the development of religion are of two 
types: ‘adaptationist’ and ‘byproduct.’20
The Adaptationist Approach
One group of researchers believe that religion evolved as an adaptation, 
a behavior that confers advantages on an organism or species to become 
more successful in its environment. In particular, the adaptation argument 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.008 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe Evolutionary Roots of Religion 65
focuses on the cohesion, cooperation, and sacrifices that take place among 
nonkin who are members of the same religion. Religious belief is capable of 
binding nonkin individuals together and creating a strong ingroup, whose 
members show high levels of dedication, cooperation, altruism, and even 
self-sacrifice, giving the group an adaptive advantage.
The adaptationist approach would lead us to expect religion to be asso￾ciated with some advantages for believers, and there is evidence to support 
this expectation. First, a number of major reviews of the research litera￾ture have established that religiosity has positive consequences for mental 
health,21 although some reviews identify a weaker impact.22 Jeff Levin has 
summarized this research literature in this way: “[R]eligious involvement, 
broadly defined, exhibits a salutary and primary-preventive function in 
relation to psychological distress and outcomes related to mental health 
and well-being. Findings are consistent, and a protective effect of reli￾giousness seems to be especially salient among older adults.” Second, the 
positive impact of religion on mental health has been identified in fairly 
diverse samples.23 Third, religion helps people cope better with suffering, 
including natural disasters, illness, and the death of a loved one.24 Fourth, 
religion helps people achieve greater self-control, inhibiting behaviors that 
are self-serving (e.g., stealing from neighbors) and promoting behaviors 
that help the community (e.g., helping the needy in the village).25 These 
research findings fit with the interpretation of religion as having evolved as 
an adaptation, to help people cope better with their environments.
The Byproduct Approach
A competing explanation is that religion is a byproduct of human cogni￾tive architecture.26 Researchers in this camp focus on the important role 
that intentional agents play in the lives of humans and how essential it 
is that humans accurately recognize intentional agents in their surround￾ings.27 From a survival perspective, it is argued, humans benefit by being 
hypervigilant in recognizing intentional agents. For example, it is more 
adaptive to imagine that a leopard rather than the wind is moving through 
and stirring the long grass in a nearby field, because the cost is too high 
of mistakenly imagining the wind when it is actually a leopard. This need 
for high attentivity to potential intentional agents in the environment 
has resulted in the development of the cognitive Hyperactive Agency 
Detection Device (HADD). Once an intentional agent is identified in the 
environment, then a cognitive system known as Theory of Mind (ToM) 
produces inferences about the motivational state of the identified agent.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press66
Religion, Eternally Present The hyperactive nature of our cognitive system when it seeks intentional 
agents leads us to literally see ‘faces in the clouds,’28 as Stewart Guthrie 
puts it. Justin Barrett and Jonathan Lanman claim that “having a HADD 
experience with no obvious natural explanation in a location that one has 
been told is the site of frequent divine appearances will make belief in 
those appearances more plausible.”29 This seems more likely to happen 
for some individuals who are more inclined to project images and things 
onto ambiguous objects. I witnessed exactly this kind of projection during 
the time of the revolution in Iran, when followers of Ayatollah Ruhollah 
Khomeini (1900–1989) extatically proclaimed that they miraculously saw 
his face when they gazed up at the moon. But no matter how hard nonbe￾lievers stared at the moon, they could not see Khomeini’s face. This high￾lights individual differences and suggests that prior belief is also influential 
in how we interpret intentional agents in the environment.
In conclusion, then, the adaptationist and byproduct interpretations 
both view religion as an outcome of evolutionary processes. The focus of 
both interpretations is cognition within individuals and how the nature 
of human cognition has given rise to religion. Next, I turn to consider 
an alternative source of religion, giving priority to the collective processes 
‘out there’ in the wider world, rather than cognitive processes within 
individuals.
Explanations of the Continuity of Religion 
That Focus on Collective Processes
The major religions are now global enterprises, with enormous financial 
wealth, as well as considerable political and cultural clout. Rather than 
being replaced by science and technology, religious explanations continue 
side by side with scientific and technological explanations. The coexistence 
of supernatural (e.g., religious) and natural (e.g., scientific) explanations is 
not just a fleeting phase found in children, as assumed in some developmen￾tal research, but also prevalent among adults.30 The same people endorse 
the idea that humans evolved from earlier forms of life, as well as the idea 
that humans were created in their present shape in the last 10,000 years. 
Some university graduates with advanced science degrees from leading uni￾versities in industrialized countries continue to give priority to supernatu￾ral explanations for certain events. A prominent example is Dr. Francis 
Collins, the director of the National Institutes of Health (2009–2021), 
who tried to explain his position as a Christian and a scientist in The 
Language of God: A Scientist Presents Evidence of Belief.
31
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.008 Published online by Cambridge University PressContinuity of Religion and Collective Processes 67
Thus, the secularization thesis that religion would be replaced by scien￾tific explanations is not proved correct by events. Even in Russia, where 
communist authorities attempted to minimize the role of religion when 
Russia was part of the (now collapsed) Soviet Union, religion survived and 
is once again thriving.32 This is largely because religion serves important 
functions in the larger world, rather than just being about beliefs in the 
minds of independent individuals. For example, religion helps to shape 
collective identity and community. Participating in religious practices that 
require gathering in groups helps to build moral communities,33 which 
serve to regulate behavior and also give individuals a sense of belonging.
The evolutionary explanations of religion we considered earlier in this 
chapter, focusing on the adaptationist and byproduct viewpoints, interpret 
continuity in relation to cognitive processes inside individuals. But even if 
we accept the argument that religion has cognitive roots within individuals 
that emerged through evolution, this does not explain the societal character￾istics of major religions and their particular social, economic, and political 
manifestations. Nor does it explain the way religious institutions have taken 
shape and the way they function in the larger world. I now turn to interpre￾tations of the continuity of religion that focus more on collective process.
The Terror Management Role of Religion
Terror Management Theory provides one such interpretation of religion, 
with an eye to the function of religion in the larger society.34 The point of 
departure for this theory is the observation that we humans are aware that we 
will someday die, and this has psychological consequences: “The potential 
for terror this knowledge creates leads us to seek shelter in the form of cul￾tural worldviews that give life meaning and permanence, give us the oppor￾tunity to view ourselves as valuable, and provide some hope of transcending 
death.”35 The worldview that religion provides helps people to believe in 
life everlasting, so that faithful believers expect to experience eternal life in 
heaven after physical death. Faith in everlasting life is reinforced by constant 
participation in collective religious practices and ceremonies, where similar￾minded others endorse one’s religious worldview and the belief that ‘we 
believers in the one and only true religion’ are going to live forever in heaven.
The Terror Management Theory perspective lines up with Karl Marx’s 
(1818–1883) famous description of religion as the opium of the people,36
as a drug that relieves human suffering (and also saps the lower classes of 
political energy and prevents their collective mobilization to overthrow the 
ruling class). In line with the opium of the people interpretation, research 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press68
Religion, Eternally Present shows that as nations develop, achieve higher education and science lev￾els, and become less religious, the suffering of the lower social classes 
increases – presumably because they no longer benefit from the ‘opium of 
the people’ protection provided by religion.37 This suffering is even greater, 
in the shape of poorer health, in countries where wealth inequality is larger 
and the lower classes experience higher relative deprivation.38
But similar to the evolutionary adaptationist and byproduct interpreta￾tions, the Terror Management Theory interpretation could be faulted for 
assuming intrapersonal processes (in this case the feeling of terror that 
arises from the human knowledge of mortality and certain death) to be the 
starting point of religion. An alternative is to look outside to larger collec￾tive processes, to social groups and group-based inequalities, and the role 
of religion in maintaining the social order. From this perspective, continu￾ity in religion and particularly the role of religion in politics are explained 
not by motivations or cognitions within individuals but by what is needed 
in order to sustain the continuation of social orders that are characterized 
by enormous group-based inequalities.
A Materialist View of Religious Continuity
A focus on collective rather than intraindividual processes also requires an 
evolutionary perspective. The development of an increasingly large surplus 
and the emergence of bigger human settlements from around 10,000 years 
ago were associated with the growth of centralized leadership and social strati￾fication (as discussed in Chapter 3 of this book). Through control of the sur￾plus in society, some individuals and groups came to enjoy a great deal more 
power, prestige, and wealth than other individuals and groups. One way to 
protect this superiority was by brute force: The power elite employs an army 
and other security forces to protect its superior position from internal and 
external enemies. But a subtler and even more effective strategy for protecting 
inequalities in the social and political system has been to develop ideologies 
that peacefully persuade people that they live in a just and legitimate society. 
Religion is one such ideology, together with communism and capitalism.
The Italian researcher Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923) has persuasively 
argued that all societies are governed by an elite, who use different ideolo￾gies, including religion, to convince the non-elite that society is legitimate 
and fair.39 The elite survive and enjoy their superior position as long as they 
allow circulation of talent: Talented individuals born to non-elite mem￾bers must be allowed to rise up and join the elite, and individuals lacking 
talent born to the elite must be allowed to drop down to the non-elite. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.008 Published online by Cambridge University PressContinuity of Religion and Collective Processes 69
But all elites eventually close up and refuse to allow circulation of tal￾ent, with the result that talented individuals born to non-elite members 
tire of being trapped in the non-elite and mobilize the non-elite masses 
to overthrow the ruling elite. Pareto described history as “a graveyard of 
aristocracies,”40 with one elite after another falling to counter-elite revolu￾tions (in The Republic, Plato provided a very similar account of the role of 
the circulation of talent in safeguarding society41). But after a counter-elite 
successfully leads the non-elite masses to overthrow an old elite, the coun￾ter-elite simply takes the place of the dethroned elite, maintains group￾based inequalities with itself enjoying superiority at the top, and continues 
to rule as the new elite.
From Pareto’s perspective, the different ideologies used to justify elite 
rule are simply covers, used to camouflage and justify inequalities. The 
various religions, as well as ideologies such as communism and capitalism, 
serve the same legitimization function. In this respect, Pareto’s elite theory 
lines up with Marx’s ‘opium of the people’ interpretation of religion, but 
the two differ in their view on the historical development of societies. 
Whereas Marx sees historical development in stages – feudalism, capital￾ism, socialism – with the classless society as the eventual outcome, Pareto 
sees perpetual elite rule in all societies but under different cover ideologies. 
Pareto’s view of historical development is cyclical, with one elite replacing 
another, one legitimization ideology replacing another, but group-based 
inequalities and elite rule continuing forever.
To those who argue that religion can serve to mobilize the downtrod￾den to overthrow dictators, Pareto responds that such religious revolutions 
simply result in one elite being replaced by another. For example, from 
Pareto’s perspective the revolution in Iran simply resulted in the dictator 
shah and his Westernized entourage being replaced by the dictator ayatol￾lah and his entourage in Eastern camouflage. The surface characteristics of 
the ruling elite changed in Iran, but elite rule continued. The ideological 
camouflage of the regime changed, but dictatorship continued.
A number of characteristics concerned with collective life have 
enabled religion to achieve continuity over thousands of years as the 
most powerful and effective legitimizing ideology, justifying enormous 
group-based inequalities and continued elite rule. The first character￾istic is material and has to do with the nature of the built environ￾ment: Houses of worship (churches, mosques, synagogues, etc.) serve 
to perpetuate and support the continuity of religion. For thousands of 
years, houses of worship have typically been the most imposing, grand, 
and durable buildings in villages, small towns, and large cities. The 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press70
Religion, Eternally Present construction and maintenance of houses of worship have required enor￾mous sacrifices and investments from communities.
Houses of worship serve different historic functions, which support the 
continuity of religion. First, they serve as physically imposing landmarks 
linking the past to the present and future. Robert Brenneman and Brian 
Miller have pointed out that “religious buildings from the past continue 
to exert influence on later social groups. The structures do not just sit 
benignly; they materially affect groups using the buildings and those in 
the neighborhood … the symbolic dimensions of buildings extend well 
beyond the religious sphere.”42 The symbolic dimensions of religious 
building are particularly well served by grand cathedrals, mosques, and 
synagogues, which have long functioned as centers of gathering on reli￾gious pilgrimages – for example, as described in the fourteenth century 
by Geoffrey Chaucer (1340–1400) in The Canterbury Tales.
43 Although the 
social context in which the great Gothic cathedrals were built is very differ￾ent from our twenty-first-century world,44 those cathedrals help to sustain 
the Christian religion, and the tradition of cathedral building continues 
today. For example, according to the tradition that cathedrals should take 
a long time to build, the Washington National Cathedral in the United 
States took almost the entire twentieth century to complete and is in the 
English Gothic style of the fourteenth century.
Because religious buildings tend to be solid and imposing, and to repre￾sent a large resource investment on the part of communities, they tend not 
to be destroyed – even after revolutions that bring antireligious regimes to 
power. For example, after the 1917 revolution that brought communists 
to power in Russia, the most important religious constructions were pre￾served, and these buildings helped to launch a religious revival from the 
1990s, after the collapse of the Soviet Union. Between 1988 and 2016, the 
number of working churches in Russia increased from 7,000 to 34,764.45
After the conquest or reconquest of a region, religious buildings are often 
converted for use rather than be destroyed by the new regime in power. 
For example, as the expulsion of the Moors from Spain took place, Muslim 
mosques were converted to Christian churches.46 But as the Muslim pop￾ulation in Europe increases and religiosity among European Christians 
declines, there are now examples of Christian Churches being converted 
to Muslim Mosques.47
Religious belief systems are dynamic and continually changing, and this 
flexibility also sustains the continuity of religion. The ability of religions to 
adapt to local conditions and belief systems creates greater resilience even 
in the face of hostility.48 For example, the communist society of Vietnam 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.008 Published online by Cambridge University PressConcluding Comment 71
would seem to be a hostile environment for religion, but religion has sur￾vived through adaptation and fusion with local belief systems. In discussing 
religious traditions in Vietnam, Edyta Roszko argues that “the thesis that 
modernization and re-structuring of Asian societies in the name of ‘progress’ 
would lead to their secularization … failed to materialize.”49 Like the sur￾vival of religious buildings, sometimes through adaptation of the building so 
that it comes to serve one religion rather than another, religious belief sys￾tems also tend to adapt as a means to survive, ensuring religious continuity.
Concluding Comment
Religion was supposed to decline as science and education progress, but 
the resilience of religion continues around the world, as does the influence 
of religion on political behavior.50 Those motivated to gain political power 
know that religion presents them with unparalleled opportunities, either 
directly ruling as religious leaders (e.g., in Iran) or using religion to mobi￾lize political support for themselves, particularly through the invocation 
of hot button issues such as abortion (e.g., as in the United States51). The 
resilience and power of religion derive from convictions and faith bolstered 
by solid material religious buildings, some of which have lasted for over a 
thousand years, and also by historic traditions imbedded in our calendars 
and daily routines. As many revolutionaries have discovered, for example 
in communist China, Cuba, Vietnam, and Russia, religion is extremely 
difficult to eradicate. Those attempting to achieve more progressive societ￾ies, where women enjoy equal status and power with men, have also found 
traditional religion difficult to overcome.
The religious systems have infiltrated the everyday lives of people, so 
they are now part of the cultural fabric of societies. There are also almost 
countless characteristics of our twenty-first-century cultures that serve the 
continuity of religion but without us explicitly recognizing this role. For 
example, many events in the calendars we use to plan and regulate our 
twenty-first-century lives are derived from religion (obvious ones being 
Christmas and Easter in Christian societies, Norooz in Near Eastern soci￾eties). As many revolutionaries have learned, changing calendars is far 
easier than changing actual behavior patterns in a population. This conti￾nuity is why the Russian dictator Vladimir Putin found it relatively easy 
to revise the central role of the Russian Orthodox Church in Russia after 
the collapse of the Soviet Union and also why despite running a ruthless 
dictatorship the mullahs in Iran have not been able to eradicate the pre￾Islamic Norooz celebrations.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press72
chapter 7
The Built Environment and Behavioral Continuity
The Tower of London was built under the orders of William the Conqueror 
(1028–1087), after he led the Norman army to victory over the Anglo￾Saxons at the Battle of Hastings (1066) and ruled as the first Norman 
king of England (1066–1087). Over the next thousand years the Tower of 
London was used as a prison, a royal residence, an armory, a public records 
office, a treasury, a home for the Crown Jewels of England and for the 
Royal Mint. The meaning and interpretation of the Tower of London has 
changed in some respects over the centuries, particularly with the advent 
of mass tourism,1
 but throughout this time the Tower has retained a cen￾tral place in English (and later British) national identity. Attesting to its 
widespread influence, the Tower has given its name to an influential psy￾chological test developed in England,2
 and it also had a key role in English 
literature, such as in Shakespeare’s play Richard III (1597–1623) when the 
two little princes (Edward V and Richard Duke of York) are murdered in 
the Tower.
The Tower of London and other heritage architectural buildings repre￾sent one way in which the built environment, the surroundings for human 
activity that have been built or changed by humans, influences how we 
behave.3
 The Tower particularly influences collective memory and national 
identity among the British, as well as how others perceive the British. But 
the Tower has also influenced behavior more directly, intimidating those 
who would challenge the ruling power in the country, particularly in ear￾lier centuries, when the Tower was a dominant military presence overlook￾ing London.
Heritage buildings are one example of how the built environment influ￾ences human behavior in important ways. Since the late twentieth century, 
this impact has been the focus of not only psychologists but also geogra￾phers, architects, and city planners, among other groups of experts.4
 Because 
the built environment is constructed to last, often for very long time periods, 
it has an influence that also continues over the long term. In this chapter I 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressSchools of Psychology and the Built Environment 73
examine the continuity in behavior brought about by the built environment. 
My argument is that political plasticity is necessarily limited through the 
influence of the built environment; this is something that is explicitly rec￾ognized by revolutionaries in their struggles to bring about change through 
and after revolutions (discussed in Chapter 8 of this book).
There are various ways in which the built environment influences human 
behavior and different perspectives on the extent of this influence. In the first 
section of this chapter, I examine the major schools of psychology and their 
different perspectives on the impact of the built environment on behavior. 
Next, I focus particularly on continuity in collective memory and identity 
and discuss the role of national heritage sites in behavioral continuity. As 
part of this discussion, I also consider efforts by revolutionaries and radical 
change programs to transform behavior by reshaping the built environment. 
Finally, I discuss the symbiotic relationship between human behavior and 
the global warming: how we impact global warming and how global warm￾ing is impacting us.
Schools of Psychology and the Impact of the Built Environment
All the major schools of psychology agree that the built environment influ￾ences human behavior in important ways, but the schools differ markedly 
in how much influence they assume the built environment actually exerts. 
Some schools assume that humans are born with little or no hardwiring 
and behavior can be completely shaped by environmental conditions. Other 
schools assume that humans are born already predisposed to experience the 
world and to behave in certain ways because of the extensive hardwiring 
already in place at birth. This hardwiring is assumed to limit the impact of 
the built environment on behavior. We can conceive of a continuum, with 
complete absence of hardwiring, humans born as blank slates (the Lockian 
tabula rasa) and completely shaped by environmental conditions at one 
extreme and at the other extreme humans born with strong hardwiring and 
environmental conditions having far less impact (Figure 7.1).
Radical Social Humanistic Psychoanalysis Evolutionary
behaviorism constructionism psychology psychology
Gestalt Cognitive
psychology psychology
===============================================================
Blank slate Strong hardwiring
Figure 7.1 The continuum of blank slate to strong hardwiring, with major schools of 
psychology located on the continuum
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press74 The Built Environment and Behavioral Continuity
On the blank slate end of the continuum, the most extreme group is 
the radical behaviorists, launched by John Watson (1878–1958) through 
the so-called behaviorist manifesto in 1913 and dominant in psychol￾ogy for the next half century.5
 Integral to this manifesto was the idea 
that in order to be a science, psychology must discard all references to 
consciousness, subjectivity, and free will. All behavior is assumed to be 
shaped by causal stimulus–response associations. Leading behaviorists 
proposed that human societies are at present seriously dysfunctional 
because we refuse to accept that human behavior is causally determined 
by the environment, and we must discard the assumption of free will 
and implement programs to reengineer the environment to correctly 
shape human behavior.6 Consequently, from a behaviorist perspective 
the built environment is enormously important in (re)shaping human 
behavior.
Social constructionist psychology, which gained influence in the 1980s, 
also places considerable importance on the role of the environment in 
shaping human behavior, but in this case the ‘environment’ largely con￾sists of the socially constructed world and the shared narratives that sur￾round us from our birth.7
 According to this perspective, it is narrative 
interpretations and depictions of the built environment, collectively cre￾ated and upheld, that shape human behavior. The same built environment 
might be interpreted differently by different groups, with implications that 
are also different for behavior. For example, the same statue or building 
can be interpreted by group ‘X’ as celebrating a war hero but by group ‘Y’ 
as symbolizing a slave master and a racist system from the colonial past, 
something that must be torn down.
Humanistic psychology and Gestalt psychology accept that the built 
environment impacts behavior, but each assume certain types of inbuilt 
human characteristics. Humanistic psychology, particularly as influenced 
by Abraham Maslow (1908–1970), proposes that humans are born with 
basic human needs and an inclination to grow and self-actualize.8
 The built 
environment could help individuals achieve self-actualization. Gestalt psy￾chologists also conceive of an important role for the built environment 
to enable humans to show initiative and creativity,9
 and they also dem￾onstrate the impact of hardwiring particularly on how humans perceive 
and interact with the built environment. Thus, humanistic psychology and 
Gestalt psychology assume that the inbuilt tendencies of humans can be 
developed through particular environmental designs.
Psychoanalysis and cognitive psychology are similar in that they assume 
even stronger hardwiring than the schools discussed so far, but they differ 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressContinuity through Architectural Heritage 75
markedly in what they propose is hardwired. Freud and his followers 
propose that humans are born with strong inbuilt instincts, particularly 
aggression and self-centeredness. In the process of socialization, clashes 
arise between the morality of society and the inbuilt instincts of individu￾als. In this process, repression and other defense mechanisms help indi￾viduals maneuver and try to balance their basic urges and the demands 
of ‘civilization,’ leading to more and more psychological material that is 
unacceptable to society being pushed into the growing unconscious.10 The 
impact of the built environment on individual behavior is mediated by 
factors in the unconscious, of which individuals are unaware. Similarly, 
cognitive psychology gives importance to implicit processes (which func￾tion outside conscious awareness) that mediate the relationship between 
individuals and the built environment. In the case of cognitive psychology, 
neural networks and cognitive mechanisms are assumed to provide strong 
hardwiring, limiting how much behavior can be (re)shaped by the built 
environment.11
Among the major schools, evolutionary psychology probably assumes 
the strongest hardwiring.12 Human behavior is assumed to be shaped in 
important ways by genetic makeup; for example, altruism and aggression 
are assumed to be largely shaped by genetic similarity and dissimilarity. 
The strong influence of evolutionary factors means that there is less room 
for the built environment to (re)shape behavior.
Thus, there are differences in the extent to which the major schools of 
psychology assume the built environment can influence human behavior. 
Behaviorists assume that all human behavior is environmentally shaped, 
whereas evolutionary psychologists propose that the environment has far 
less influence because of extensive hardwiring.
Some parts of the built environment have a stronger impact on behavior. 
An example of this is buildings, monuments, and other features of heritage 
architecture, discussed next.
Continuity through Architectural Heritage
Historic preservation is inherently concerned with collective 
memory. 
Melinda Milligan13
Significant architectural and historical monuments become an impor￾tant point of reference for the local population, increasing their sense 
of security, and act as an important factor shaping social identity. 
Julia Sowinska-Heim14
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press76 The Built Environment and Behavioral Continuity
National heritage buildings, such as the Tower of London, the White 
House in the United States, the Great Wall of China, the Taj Mahal in 
India, the Pyramids of Egypt, Persepolis in Iran, Machu Picchu in Peru, 
Petra in Jordan, the Colosseum in Rome, among many others, are parts 
of the built environment that play a particularly important role in sustain￾ing continuity in human behavior. They serve as cultural carriers,
15 means 
through which central values, identities, and normative systems broadly 
are propagated and passed on across generations (discussed in Chapter 2 
of this book). Continuity is a central theme in The World Heritage 
Convention,16 adopted by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization in 1972. Articles 4 and 5 of the Convention place 
particular stress on continuity, calling for the identification, protection, 
and transmission to future generations of the valued cultural heritage.
Although twenty-first-century urban landscapes tend to be character￾ized by restlessness and change, there is also a strong theme of continuity, 
even in a relatively young society such as the United States.17 As Elvin 
Wyly points out, US urban centers are continually changing, but “[o]n the 
other hand key features of the urban landscape display remarkable dura￾bility.”18 The theme of continuity is even stronger in societies with longer 
histories. For example, according to Andrew Kipnis social transformation 
in China involves what he calls recombinant urbanization, where the old 
is recycled and reintegrated into the new.19 Essential components of this 
continuity are the historic centers of cities, as well as national heritage 
buildings, including memorials of different types.20
The city and the built environment more broadly are integral to collec￾tive memory.21 Before we are born, there is already in place a built envi￾ronment with historic meanings, represented in collective memory. There 
already exist shared narratives about places and the role of significant 
buildings and other features of the built environment in the shared history 
of ‘our people.’ These shared narratives are carried across time and place 
through stories, poems, pictures of different types, memorials, music and 
songs, and numerous other forms of representations. The representation 
of the built environment in collective memory does not rely on individual 
minds but persists ‘out there’ in the wider, collaboratively constructed and 
collectively upheld cultural world. Collective memory of the built envi￾ronment engulfs the newborn infant and provides a strong structure for 
interpreting and understanding the world.
For example, an infant born in London, England, is already surrounded 
by an enormous variety of collectively shared narratives about the Tower 
of London. Even without having visited the Tower, the young child 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressContinuity through Architectural Heritage 77
growing up in London directly or indirectly learns about the Tower in the 
context of British history and identity, as well as about the historic center 
of the city. For example, by being taught English literature at school in 
London, the young child will learn (e.g., through the works of Shakespeare 
and Charles Dickens, among others) about the different parts and build￾ings of the city (e.g., The Old Curiosity Shop, in the Holborn district of 
London, which features in Dickens’s novel of the same name). Through 
these experiences, the child takes on narratives that are integral to the col￾lective memory of London. This collective memory precedes and enve￾lopes the personal memory developed by the child.
The individual memories of children take shape on the foundation, and 
within the structure, of the collective memories that are already in place 
prior to their arrival. For example, imagine a child born in London who 
visits the Tower of London for the first time at the age of eight. This 
child already has been influenced by the collective memory of her group 
about the Tower. When she now enters the Tower on a visit with her 
school group, she carries with her the numerous shared narratives about 
the Tower that have directly and indirectly reached and enveloped her. 
Before setting out on this school trip, her teacher gave her class a special 
lesson on the Tower, the highlights of its history, and what they should 
look for during their visit. Thus, the child is strongly guided by the collec￾tive memory as she enters the Tower and develops richer personal memo￾ries through her own visit.
Collective memory and the relationship between collective memory and 
personal memory are dynamic and change through both collective experi￾ences of groups and personal experiences of individuals. For example, the 
collective memory of the Tower of London has changed over the last thou￾sand years, so there is some change in what has been passed on to each gen￾eration of children as narratives and representations of the Tower. Also, 
as individuals personally experience the Tower, their individual memories 
change, and this influences their interpretations of collective memories 
about the Tower. For example, the eight-year-old child visiting the Tower 
for the first time might have special experiences, such as being particularly 
fascinated by the Crown Jewels kept in the Tower, and this might change 
her interpretation of the stories passed down to her by her teachers, her 
family, and others about the Tower.
Architectural heritage buildings are not only strongly associated with 
collective memory but also integral to identity, influencing how we con￾ceptualize and act on the kinds of people we believe we are. The built envi￾ronment in general and architectural heritage buildings in particular help 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press78 The Built Environment and Behavioral Continuity
us to retain character. As Thomas Yarrow has argued, buildings and other 
elements of the built environment retain character, including national 
character (such as Scottish character).22 Certain elements in the built envi￾ronment, such as heritage architecture buildings, come to be seen as an 
essential part of ‘our group’s character.’ Debates about heritage conserva￾tion focus on decisions about what parts of a heritage architecture building 
can be changed (restored, revised, added to) without harming the inherent 
character of the building.
The central role of heritage architecture in collective identity becomes 
particularly clear during conflicts, when one group is attempting to defend 
its own heritage architecture against attacks by an enemy group. For exam￾ple, St. Paul’s Cathedral (designed by Sr. Christopher Wren, 1632–1723, 
and completed in 171023) became a symbol of British survival and resis￾tance against intense German aerial bombing during World War II. After 
repeated attacks, Herbert Mason on December 29, 1940, took an iconic 
photograph that became widely known under the title St. Paul’s Survives. 
The ‘miraculous’ survival of St. Paul’s Cathedral became a symbol of 
unshakable British resolve.
Revolutionaries have also recognized and tried to combat the impor￾tant role of heritage architecture, and the built environment broadly, in 
sustaining continuity in behavior (as discussed in Chapter 8 of this book). 
They have adopted a number of strategies to try to transform the role of 
the built environment, from one that sustains continuity to one that stim￾ulates change. At the simplest level, after coming to power revolutionaries 
change the names of cities, heritage buildings, streets, and other features 
of the built environment. Typically, the new names celebrate revolution￾ary dates, events, leaders, and ‘martyrs for the cause of the revolution.’ At 
the second level, revolutionaries change the ways in which the built envi￾ronment is used, such as transforming a ‘grand palace,’ previously owned 
privately and used by an elite family as one of their homes, into a museum 
or a home collectively shared by hundreds of ordinary families. Third, 
revolutionaries attempt to construct new buildings in line with the ideals 
of the revolution, such as by building more affordable public housing for 
ordinary people. But in these endeavors, revolutionaries are hampered by 
traditions in architectural and building design.
After revolutions, new revolutionary regimes inherit a built environ￾ment that sustains behavior as it was before the revolution. The inherited 
built environment includes millions of individual houses, built for tradi￾tional families. As Dick Vestbro and Liisa Horelli explain, “In individ￾ual houses, the conservative patterns of the culture tend to dominate.”24
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressHuman Behavior and Global Warming 79
That is, the traditional family (consisting of a male husband, female wife, 
and their children) is sustained by the design of the traditional single￾family house. Revolutionaries who plan to change the behavior of people 
in the postrevolution society through changing the family are faced with 
the enormous challenge of changing both the vast numbers of individual 
houses already built and the designs and techniques for building houses 
in the future. Both changing existing houses and changing the design of 
future houses in a way that stimulates change in line with the goals of 
the revolution have proved to be insurmountable obstacles, limiting the 
change brought about by revolutions.
Whereas heritage architecture involves the continuing influence of the 
past on human behavior, global warming is an example of how the built 
environment shapes our future, as discussed in the next section.
Human Behavior, the Natural Environment, and Global Warming
Continuity in human behavior is reflected in our historic interactions with 
the natural environment, which is now all part of the built environment 
because we humans have impacted all of the natural world.25 If anyone 
doubts this, think about the temperature changes we have brought about 
(discussed in this section), from which no part of planet earth can remain 
isolated. Through our impact on the oceans, lands, forests, the air, and all 
other features of the natural world, we have influenced human individual 
and collective behavior. Because our impact on the natural world and the 
resulting built environment has taken shape over such long time periods, 
the impact of the built environment on our behavior is also very long term 
and extremely slow to change.
The symbiotic relationship between human behavior and the built envi￾ronment is reflected very clearly in global warming, increases in average 
temperatures resulting from human activities, and climate change, changes 
in climate (e.g., storms, floods, droughts, desertification) resulting from 
global warming. On the one hand scientific evidence clearly shows that 
human behavior is a major factor causing global warming,26 and on the 
other hand climate change (induced by global warming) is detrimentally 
impacting human health and other areas of behavior.27 Clearly, psycho￾logical science can help bring about the changes that must be made in 
human behavior in order to control global warming (e.g., keeping aver￾age temperature increases to no more than 1.5°C–2.0°C) and mitigate the 
detrimental results of climate change.28 But even in this task, on which the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press80 The Built Environment and Behavioral Continuity
survival of humanity depends, it has proven to be extraordinarily challeng￾ing to influence human behavior in the required direction.
Our limitations in understanding and effectively resolving this environ￾mental challenge arise in large part because of the extensive influence of 
the rational choice model of human behavior and the associated reduction￾ism that dominates mainstream economics and has considerable influence 
on behavioral sciences generally.29 Rational choice theory assumes that 
individuals make rational choices intended to maximize rewards for the 
self; Robert Aumann puts it this way: “The rationality hypothesis – that 
people act to promote their interests – underlies most of economic theory 
and indeed economics as a whole.”30 Not only is behavior assumed to be 
rational but it is also assumed that a reductionist focus on individuals best 
explains collective behavior, as John Scott explains: “The methodological 
individualism of rational choice theorists leads them to start out from the 
actions of individuals and to see all other social phenomena as reducible 
to these individual actions.”31 This reductionist interpretation of behavior 
fails to take into account an important lesson from Gestalt psychology, the 
whole is more than the sum of its parts.
Unfortunately, reductionism, a key feature of rational choice theory, is 
also an important characteristic of mainstream psychology in the twenty￾first century.32 The tendency toward reductionism was strong in psychol￾ogy when it was dominated by behaviorism for much of the twentieth 
century, and this tendency has been reinforced through the rise of neuro￾science and cognitive neuroscience. Critics have pointed out that neuro￾science research and interpretations of behavior tend to fall into the trap 
of the mereological fallacy, attributing the properties of wholes to parts.33
Bits of the brain and particular neural networks are identified as being the 
‘causes’ of behaviors that are more appropriately explained by reference to 
whole persons.
Since the late twentieth century a number of research movements have 
developed that have taken mainstream psychology some distance away 
from reductionism and rational choice theory. One such movement that 
gained momentum in the 1990s comes under the title of bounded rational￾ity,34 focusing particularly on how in practice human beings do not make 
rational decisions. This is because, for example, of limitations both in the 
information humans have and in their cognitive capacities (which means 
they are not able to make calculations rapidly and accurately enough to 
maximize self-interest, even if we assume this to be their goal). Research 
under the umbrella of embodied cognition,35 the idea that important fea￾tures of cognition are experienced not just by a part of the brain but by 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressHuman Behavior and Global Warming 81
the whole human body (discussed in Chapter 2 of this book), represents 
another promising research movement that influenced psychologists to 
move beyond reductionism and rational choice theory. For example, when 
Mary’s father passes away, it is not a part of Mary’s brain that feels deeply 
sad but Mary as a whole person.
Another research trend that helped move psychological science away 
from rational choice theory is focused on implicit cognition, thinking 
processes (to do with memory, perception, knowledge, etc.) that remain 
outside conscious awareness. The roots of research on implicit cognition 
go back to the early twentieth century, when animal research pioneered by 
Edward Tolman (1886–1959) provided demonstrations of latent learning, 
learning that takes place without being immediately manifest in behavior.36
Latent learning and implicit cognition point to ways in which human 
cognitive processes lead to decision-making without the decision-makers 
being aware of important bits of information and various factors shaping 
their decisions. In other words, decision-making takes place without per￾fect knowledge and awareness.
Research by Daniel Kahneman, Amos Tversky (1937–1996), and oth￾ers has shown that although decision-making under uncertainty has many 
limitations, the different features of our cognitive system that contribute 
to decision-making have evolved to serve particular survival functions.37
That is, our decision-making is in some respects faulty, but its faults serve 
a useful purpose in survival. Throughout our evolutionary history, there 
have been times when we human beings have had to make rapid deci￾sions on the basis of poor information. For example, imagine being in an 
isolated location, seeing a large stranger from 50 meters away, and quickly 
having to decide if the stranger is trustworthy. Should you keep walking 
toward the stranger or run the other way? To make quick decisions in 
such situations, we use heuristics, mental shortcuts, on the basis of limited 
information, such as the facial characteristics of the stranger. Over our 
evolutionary history we learned to make rapid judgements of the trust￾worthiness of faces and we are still influenced by these heuristic abilities.38
For example, on the basis of split-second exposure to a face, we come to 
conclusions about how much we trust the face – which might well belong 
to a politician we decide to vote for.
What Kahneman termed System 1 thinking, involving split-second 
decision-making, has served us well in our evolutionary history.39 Of 
course, System 1 thinking is generally not as accurate as System 2 thinking, 
which involves more engaged, deeper, knowledge-based cognition. System 
2 thinking is closer to rational choice theory, but it is still very far from 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press82 The Built Environment and Behavioral Continuity
the unbiased ‘cold’ model of the thinker that is at the heart of rational 
choice theory. Indeed, the research in the broad domain of motivated cog￾nition demonstrates that people do not think, reason, and problem-solve 
in a neutral, unbiased manner. Rather, they have a vested interest in the 
outcome, and this vested interest is from the start influencing how they 
think and problem-solve. For example, when people look for information 
and solutions to societal problems, political party affiliation often influ￾ences them to already have preferences for certain types of information 
and solutions.40
Thus, humans do not engage in problem-solving in areas such as global 
warming and climate change as rational, unbiased thinkers. Rather, both 
in creating global warming and in tackling global warming, we are highly 
biased in our thinking and actions. The result is that there is strong conti￾nuity in the slow pace at which we are able (or not) to solve such enormous 
problems as global warming and nuclear disarmament.
Working within Our Limitations
Global warming is perhaps the most important example of how we influ￾ence the built environment, how the built environment in turn transforms 
our behavior, and how these symbiotic processes are extremely slow to 
change. In order to make progress in dealing with global warming and 
other enormously large and complex problems (such as nuclear disar￾mament), we need to acknowledge and work within our psychological 
limitations.
We are not rational creatures, and our behavior is strongly influenced 
by our irrationality (this argument is valid irrespective of whether we con￾ceptualize irrationality more in the cognitive sense of implicit processes 
influencing us or according to the psychodynamic concept of irratio￾nality through repression and the Freudian unconscious). For example, 
collectively we have been unable to recognize the dire danger posed by 
global warming, in part because of a mismatch we experience between the 
everyday experiences we have of temperature changes and the temperature 
changes scientists tell us are involved in global warming. In our everyday 
lives, we can personally experience temperature changes of 10, 20 or even 
30 degrees centigrade over the course of months, weeks, or even days. On 
the other hand, scientists tell us that we must limit average temperature 
change to less than 2 degrees centigrade over the next fifty years. This 
seems like such a small change, relative to the temperature changes we 
experience in our daily lives. At a deep level we find it difficult to accept 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressConcluding Comment 83
that such small changes are catastrophic, when we experience much larger 
changes in our daily lives without problems.
Other limitations are associated with the politicization of global warm￾ing. On the one hand, scientific research is pointing to the detrimental 
impact of global warming on biodiversity generally and human health 
specifically.41 On the other hand, thinking about global warming and con￾ceptualizing this as a ‘dire problem’ that has to be solved immediately 
have become politically interpreted. In line with a general tendency for 
politically right-wing individuals to believe in conspiracy theories,
42 beliefs 
that powerful secret organizations are responsible for events and outcomes, 
interpretations of global warming as ‘fake news’ are more strongly endorsed 
by politically right-wing people.43 (Of course, politically left-leaning indi￾viduals also hold conspiracy theories, but these are different from those 
held by politically right-wing individuals and they tend to be less strongly 
endorsed.44)
Right-wing interpretations depict global warming as part of the natu￾ral cyclical changes that have taken place throughout the history of planet 
Earth, rather than as caused by human activities in recent history. As such, 
the free market is presented as the best solution to deal with the conse￾quences of global warming. Although global warming is disproportionally 
burdening the poor,45 and increases in violence and aggression as a result of 
global warming will leave the poor even more defenseless,46 politically right￾wing individuals reject the argument that there must be more government 
interventions to protect the poor. The continued influence of right-wing 
arguments in politics means that global warming will continue to increase, 
as will its detrimental impact on the poor, sustaining the rich–poor divide.
Concluding Comment
The impact of the built environment on human behavior is an impor￾tant source of continuity: The built environment generally changes slowly 
(some symbolically important parts of the built environment survive hun￾dreds and even thousands of years), influencing slow change in human 
behavior. Global warming is leading to dramatic changes in our environ￾ments, but in some important respects these changes are bringing about 
‘more of the same.’ For example, the detrimental impact of global warm￾ing falls disproportionally on the poor, and this sustains and extends the 
rich–poor divide.
In some parts of the world, urban centers are expanding very rapidly. 
For example, in Chinese cities such as Suqian, Suzhou, and Putian, entire 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press84 The Built Environment and Behavioral Continuity
neighborhoods are being built almost overnight to house additional resi￾dents. We might assume that such rapid changes in the built environ￾ment would influence rapid behavioral changes. But these rapid urban 
developments are being shaped by traditional Chinese architectural forms 
and elements,47 so continuity is an essential ingredient of the planning 
and architecture being undertaken. No doubt this trend is influenced by 
the priority given to certain structural and hierarchical continuities by the 
Chinese leadership.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressPart II
Change Agents, in Theory and Practice
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.010 Published online by Cambridge University Presshttps://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press87
chapter 8
Revolutions and Political Plasticity
Revolutions are attempts to overthrow the political and social order,1
 and 
when they succeed in this goal one might assume that major changes in 
different areas of behavior must follow. This assumption is generally cor￾rect with respect to political and economic processes, because revolutions 
involve shifts in political and economic power, as governments are toppled 
and some groups lose power and new governments are formed and new 
groups gain power. This assumption is also generally correct with respect 
to a great deal of at least surface-level cultural and social life, which are 
forcibly changed through power and ideology changes after revolutions. 
For example, after the 1917 revolution in Russia, much of the cultural 
and social life changed (at least outwardly) in order to conform to the 
new communist ideology and the new communist values that had become 
dominant in Russia. Another example is how (at least surface-level) cul￾tural and social life changed to become more Islamic in Iran, after the 1979 
anti-shah revolution.
But at the heart of studies on revolutions, there continues to be a giant 
puzzle: Why do so many revolutions fail to bring about foundational 
change? Why is there often a circularity in societies experiencing revolu￾tions, so that among many people there is a strong sense of ‘the more 
things change, the more they stay the same’ that at a deep level life really 
has not changed? I argue that this question can be adequately answered 
only by including psychologists in the study of revolutions, so psychologi￾cal insights can be added to those of political scientists, sociologists, econo￾mists, and researchers from the other disciplines who have traditionally 
studied revolutions. But, unfortunately, so far there has been scant psy￾chological research on revolutions.2
 In this discussion I use a psychological 
lens to reveal that revolutions run up against the enormous challenge of 
political plasticity in behavior, and revolutionaries generally fail to change 
behavior in the necessary ways toward their ideals because of limitations 
on political plasticity.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press88 Revolutions and Political Plasticity
At the heart of every revolution there is a contradiction: In order to 
achieve a revolution, the revolutionaries must give priority to grabbing and 
dominating political power. However, revolutionaries soon discover that 
political power, or even the ability to control economic resources, does not 
result in changes in behavior necessary for the achievement of their revo￾lutionary goals. Ultimately, political and economic power are necessary 
but not sufficient in order to reach the goals of the revolution, which also 
require changes in the psychological characteristics of the population. It is 
in working to change the psychological characteristics of the population 
that revolutions succeed or fail, and they almost always fail.
We can bring this challenge of behavioral change into sharp focus by 
considering the ideal societies put forward by seminal thinkers, such as 
Plato (428–348 bce) in his Republic,
3
 Thomas More (1478–1535) in Utopia,
4
and Karl Marx (1818–1883) in his writings on the classless society.5
 The 
characteristics of these ideal societies, which only exist on paper, could 
be achieved only through foundational behavioral change. For example, 
consider Plato’s argument that philosopher kings should be rulers and they 
should have wisdom but not be motivated by power. This is an ideal far 
removed from the personalities of contemporary rulers, who are character￾ized by a high need for power. Obviously, a great deal would have to change 
in the characteristics of rulers in order to achieve Plato’s ideal. Similarly, 
consider the absence of private property in ideal societies depicted by both 
Thomas More and Karl Marx. The behavior of populations would need 
to change in fundamental ways in order for society to function without 
private property. For example, people would have to be motivated to work 
hard not for personal gain but for collective rewards – exactly what did not 
happen in the collective farms and factories of the (now disbanded) Soviet 
Union. I argue that although such changes are not in theory impossible, 
in practice they are limited by political plasticity – and it is in relation to 
political plasticity that we can better understand the limitations and pos￾sibilities of revolutionary change.
Types of Revolutions and Change
From a psychological perspective, we must pay very close attention to the 
differences between two different types of revolutions. The vast majority 
of revolutions are Type 1 revolutions, which involve within-system change; 
when a government is toppled, a new ideology is established by the new 
ruling elite, and there is change in (at least some of) the groups who wield 
power and in (at least some of) the groups who own major resources. The 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressTypes of Revolutions and Change 89
cultural and social trappings of life are transformed, but there is no change 
in the deeper nature of how society is ruled. For example, Iran experi￾enced Type 1 revolution in 1979, when the dictator shah’s government was 
toppled, a new Islamic ideology replaced the old monarchist ideology, new 
groups such as the Islamic Republican Guards gained political power and 
economic resources, and the surface characteristics of cultural and social 
life changed (e.g., women were forced to wear the hejab and prohibited 
from singing in public), but dictatorial rule by a single male strongman 
continued (a strongman ayatollah replaced the shah). The new (suppos￾edly revolutionary) constitution of Iran enshrines this continuity of dic￾tatorial rule through the principle of velayat-e-faghih, rule by a supreme 
leader who must be a male and is the ultimate interpreter of Islamic law, 
the final decider on everything in Iranian society.
Type 2 revolutions involve between-system change. For example, a dicta￾torship is defeated and a democracy is established through a revolution. 
However, this kind of between-system change is rare in history; the more 
usual change is within-system, as when a dictatorship is brought crashing 
down by a revolution, only to be succeeded by a dictatorship with a new 
front. But there are instances of between-system change that involve back￾ward movement, from a more to a less open society – such as the Roman 
Republic returning to dictatorship or, as at the start of the twenty-first 
century, societies such as Turkey and Venezuela moving from more to less 
openness.
In social and political science discussions of revolutions,6 there has 
traditionally been a distinction between the great revolutions, such as 
the French Revolution (1789) and American Revolution (1776), and the 
lesser revolutions, such as the Mexican Revolution (1910), the Cuban 
Revolution (1959), and the Arab Spring revolutions (2010–2012). But this 
distinction does not stand up to scrutiny when we apply the distinction 
between Type 1 and Type 2 revolutions; the so-called great revolutions 
fall into the general category of Type 1 rather than Type 2 revolutions. 
For example, the French revolution resulted in the French king and the 
traditional aristocracy being swept away, but they were replaced by a new 
emperor (Napoleon), who gave royal titles to his own family and helped 
to create a new aristocracy.7
 Napoleonic rule continued the tradition of 
strongman leadership and was immediately followed by a return to mon￾archy. Clearly, this was not a Type 2 revolution, in the sense that lead￾ership style remained the same. However, it could be claimed that the 
American Revolution was Type 2, because there was transition from a 
hereditary king to an elected president. But we must be careful not to 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press90 Revolutions and Political Plasticity
rush to this judgement, because George Washington (1732–1799), the first 
president of the United States, was put into power by a small group of 
white men. In the presidential elections that followed the original con￾stitution, the electorate did not include women or slaves; in most states, 
only free white men who owned property or paid taxes could vote. It 
took well over another two centuries before women and minorities were 
allowed to vote in US presidential elections.
Psychological Stages of Revolutions
Psychology is at the heart of revolutions, as reflected in the centrality of 
psychological processes in the five major stages of collective mobiliza￾tion that result in revolutions. The first stage involves intense feelings 
of relative deprivation and a strong sense of collective violated rights, 
together with a belief that a much better alternative society is possible 
in practice. Stage two involves mass mobilization, guided by a talented 
and well-organized counter-elite, absolutely determined to topple the 
old elite and grab power. During stage three, following the toppling of 
the old regime and the coming to power of the new regime, the revolu￾tionaries shift their focus from the rights to the duties of the people and 
from higher social comparison targets to lower social comparison tar￾gets. During stage four, the ideals and actions of revolutionaries become 
constrained by political plasticity. In the final stage (five), as political 
plasticity exerts limitations on societal change toward the ideal society 
envisaged by the revolutionaries, the gap increases between revolution￾ary ideals and actual practices. There has been extensive psychological 
research relevant to the first three stages of revolutions (as discussed here) 
but scant research on the stages concerned with limitations imposed by 
political plasticity (stages four and five).
Stage 1. Relative Deprivation and the Identification of Possible Alternative 
Societies
The basic idea that people must feel relatively deprived in order to take 
collective action directly or indirectly underlies the major psychological 
theories of collective action, including the social identity model of collec￾tive action (SIMCA),8
 the elaborated social identity model (ESIM),9
 the 
politicized collective identity model,
10 and the disidentification, innovation, 
moralisation and energisation (DIME) model, which contrasts conven￾tional and radical forms of collective action.11 Most of the research also 
points to the idea that people are more likely to engage in collective 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressPsychological Stages of Revolutions 91
action when they feel fraternal (group) rather than egoistical (individual) 
relative deprivation. For example, Jane is more likely to participate in 
collective action when she feels that women as a group are being dis￾criminated against, rather than just herself as an individual woman.12 In 
order to join collective action, Jane has to feel that only by improving the 
situation of women as a group can she improve her personal situation. If 
she experiences only egoistical (and not fraternal) relative deprivation, she 
is more likely to attempt to improve her personal situation through indi￾vidual social mobility or some other individualistic strategy.13 As part of a 
strategy to mobilize people into collective action against the government, 
the counter-elite put a spotlight on the much better alternative societies 
that can be achieved and that people deserve and have a right to have.
Stage 2. Collective Mobilization Led by Rights-Focused Counter-Elite, with 
Attributions Focused on the Ruling Elite
The narratives of the counter-elite during the collective mobilization of 
the masses focus on the deprivation of collective rights, what the people 
are owed – what they are deprived of but deserve to have. ‘You people 
have a right to X, Y, Z …’ is at the heart of the counter-elite narratives. 
A second component of counter-elite narratives at this stage of mass 
mobilization is causal attributions that point directly at the ruling elite 
as the reason why the people do not have what they deserve, why their 
collective rights (to freedom, free health care and education, better 
housing, e.g.) have been denied. The cause of people being denied their 
collective rights is not their fate, or their lack of hard work, or limited 
talent, or anything other than the greed, incompetence, and other 
detrimental characteristics of the current ruling elite. If it were not for 
the ruling elite, the people would be able to enjoy life in a much better 
society, which they so justly deserve.
Stage 3. Shift from Rights to Duties, from Higher to Lower Social 
Comparison Targets
After the revolution takes place and the ruling elite is replaced by the 
counter-elite, two changes take place immediately. First, there is a shift in 
the narratives of the new elite from the rights to duties, from what people 
are owed to what people owe others, and in particular the duty to obey 
the law and the authorities. Second, the narratives of the new elite shift 
focus from encouraging people to compare themselves with much better 
off comparison targets (e.g., ‘You deserve to have a much better standard 
of living, you have the right to far better health care, education, housing, 
and social services …’) to far lower comparison targets (e.g., ‘The world is 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press92 Revolutions and Political Plasticity
full of starving people who suffer all kinds of injustices. You are fortunate 
to live in this revolutionary society.’). People who were encouraged to 
feel deprived and to aspire to a much better life are now guided to feel 
satisfied and grateful. The goal of the new elite is to achieve stability in 
society, after the turmoil and radical change of the revolution.
Stage 4. Revolutionary Ideals and Actions Constrained by Political Plasticity
Of course, after the revolution the revolutionaries are not satisfied with 
only achieving stability, they are also motivated to change society toward 
their revolutionary ideals, such as communist ideals in Russia after 1917 
and Islamic ideals in Iran after 1979. Achieving such revolutionary ideals 
requires radical changes to move individual and collective behavior from 
what it was before the revolution to reach the ideals espoused by the rev￾olutionaries. For example, in the build-up to the 1979 revolution, Islamic 
fundamentalists led by Khomeini attacked the shah’s regime as corrupt 
and as denying Iranians political rights and civil liberties. One might 
assume that when Khomeini and his followers came to power after 1979, 
they would change Iranian society to be in line with their revolutionary 
ideals. But judged by international standards Iran after the revolution 
remains a highly corrupt society,14 ranked by Transparency International 
as low as 149 out of 180 countries in being free of corruption.15 Similarly, 
the 1979 anti-shah revolution was supposed to bring political rights 
and civil liberties to Iranians, but in practice this is far from the case: 
Freedom House gives Iran a total score of only 16 out of 100 for human 
rights and civil liberties (Sweden and Norway achieve a score of 100 out 
of 100, and the United States and the United Kingdom score 83 and 93 
respectively).16 Thus, if we accept as sincere the espoused goals of Islamic 
revolutionaries in Iran, behavioral change has not taken place toward the 
ideal Islamic society in areas such as corruption, human rights, and civil 
liberties. One reason is limitations on political plasticity.
A more direct test of constraints imposed by political plasticity is 
found in Russia during the post-1917 era. This is because the revolu￾tionaries in Russia were directly focused on changing behavior toward 
their communist ideals. In attempting to achieve the goal of changing 
behavior, the Soviet communists adopted the best scientific tools avail￾able, even if those tools had to be adopted from their capitalist enemies. 
For example, the Soviet communists attempted to apply psychological 
science to reach their goals, being aware of the role of psychology in 
bringing about behavioral changes. This is particularly clear in the writ￾ings of Leon Trotsky (1879–1940):
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressPsychological Stages of Revolutions 93
To produce a new, “improved version” of man – that is the future task of 
communism. And for that we first have to find out everything about man, 
his anatomy, his physiology and that part of his physiology which is called 
his psychology.17
The Soviet communists turned to two schools of thought from 
Capitalist America to shape the “new, improved version” of humans that 
would make successful their ideal socialist society. The first school of 
thought is behaviorism, which came to dominate American and Western 
psychology for the first half of the twentieth century and still has 
indirect impact on mainstream psychological thinking in the twenty￾first century.18 Although behaviorism developed to acquire peculiarly 
American characteristics, it was influenced by the pioneering research 
of three Russians: Ivan Sechenov (1829–1905), Vladimir Bekhterev 
(1857–1927), and Ivan Pavlov (1849–1927). Pavlov won the Nobel Prize 
in physiology in 1904 and was a world-renowned scientist by the time 
of the 1917 Russian revolution. His research on classical conditioning 
is foundational in behaviorism. Pavlov’s scientific importance was such 
that even though he was not an enthusiastic supporter of the commu￾nists, he was granted special privileges and his research was supported 
by the Soviet government.19 But because Pavlov’s research was so central 
to behaviorism, in turning to American behaviorism the Soviet commu￾nists were also turning to researchers in their own society.
The Soviet communists shared a number of beliefs with the radical 
behaviorists, led by John B. Watson (1878–1958) in the United States.20
Most importantly, they shared the belief that human behavior is shaped 
by environmental conditions, and humans can be molded through envi￾ronmental engineering. Both the Soviet communists and the behaviorists 
rejected the idea that human characteristics are in important ways pre￾programmed (as a Kantian perspective would have it) and people behave 
in particular ways because of inherited characteristics. But in order for 
psychologists to contribute to the Soviet effort to change behavior, the 
right kinds of psychologists would need to get to work. The old style 
Wundtian psychologists who used introspection to examine conscious￾ness were excluded,21 and according to Trotsky, conditions were created 
for the development of the new behaviorist psychology in line with the 
goals of the revolution: “Socialism does not aim at creating a socialist 
psychology as a pre-requisite to socialism but at creating socialist condi￾tions of life as a pre-requisite to socialist psychology.”22
In the next main section, I examine the failure of the Soviet communists 
to change behavior using the new psychology.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press94 Revolutions and Political Plasticity
There was a second school of thought that the Soviet communists 
borrowed from Capitalist America in order to shape the “new, improved 
version” of humans that would bring to life their ideal socialist society, 
and this was Taylorism, the organization of work according to the ideas 
of the American industrial engineer Frederick Taylor (1856–1915).23 The 
essence of Taylorism is the deskilling of workers, by designing jobs to 
be as simple as possible, so that there is minimum investment in each 
worker and workers can easily replace one another.24 Lenin and other 
Soviet leaders found the (supposed) scientific nature of Taylorism highly 
appealing.25 In the new Soviet society, through Taylorism humans 
and machines would merge into one to achieve maximum efficiency.26
Taylorism was seen a successful foundation for mass production in 
the Ford Motor Company and other manufacturing companies in 
the United States, and the Soviet communists assumed this scientific 
approach to work organization would also enable the efficient reorga￾nization of work in the Soviet Union. However, rather than the private 
ownership and the individual incentives that were the norm in capitalist 
United States, in the Soviet communist system the citizens would be 
motivated by collective ownership and collective incentives.
Thus, in the immediate postrevolution period, Soviet communists 
set to work changing the behavior of Soviet citizens using behaviorist 
psychology and Taylorism.
Stage 5. Growing Gap between Original Revolutionary Ideals and Actual 
Practices
A common theme for almost all revolutions is that in the postrevolution 
era, behavioral changes are extremely slow, and take place minimally, 
in the direction of the ideal society envisaged by the revolutionaries. 
Of course, the regimes in power in the postrevolution era are primarily 
focused on retaining power, and their propaganda extolls the virtues of 
their revolutionary society. Thus, the Soviet Union after 1917, China after 
1949, Cuba after 1959, Iran after 1979 – in all postrevolution societies the 
governments invest heavily in propaganda, fabricating the great advances 
made in their postrevolution societies. However, in practice revolutions 
fail to change behavior in the direction and to the extent desired by revo￾lutionaries, illustrating the limits imposed by political plasticity. In the 
next section, I examine in greater detail the impact of political plasticity 
in specific areas of behavior in postrevolution societies.
For now, my focus is on the gap that typically develops between the 
ideals originally espoused by revolutionaries and the actual practices in the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressPolitical Plasticity after Revolutions 95
postrevolution era. This gap typically evolves to become enormous and 
shocking, so that the rhetoric and propaganda of the postrevolution govern￾ment drift further and further apart from actual practices on the ground. 
The outcome is two very different pictures of reality: first, the picture 
painted by the words of the revolutionary government and, second, the pic￾ture comprised of the practices of everyday life in the ‘revolutionary’ society. 
Thus, for example, in communist China the rhetoric around ideals espoused 
by Marx and Mao continues (extolling collective ownership and collectiviza￾tion generally), whereas in practice private wealth concentration and the rise 
of fabulously rich individuals and families are the realities on the ground.27
Similarly, whereas the revolutionary regime in Iran has propagated humane 
values and lofty virtues, in practice torture (including the rape of politi￾cal prisoners) and repression are routinely practiced by the regime.28 We 
can add to this list the tragic gap that existed in the United States after the 
American Revolution, between the lofty rhetoric of the US Constitution 
(1787) and the Bill of Rights (1791) and the reality of slavery and the exclu￾sion of women and minorities from voting and other political rights.
Whereas in the United States political and legal reforms over the 
past few centuries have decreased the gap between government rhetoric 
on freedoms and equality and actual practices, in dictatorships such as 
China, Russia, Cuba, and Iran, the gap has actually grown. The outcome 
of this growing gap between the picture fabricated by the ‘revolutionary’ 
regimes and events on the ground is that the regimes could retain their 
power monopoly only through extreme repression.
Political Plasticity and Behavior Change after 
Revolutions: The Example of Collectivization
Political plasticity imposes limits on the behavioral changes that can 
be brought about through revolutions. To clarify this point, it is useful 
to return to the distinction between surface behavior and deep behavior
(discussed in Chapter 1). Surface behavior concerns how things look, 
including public images and symbols. It does not involve deep cognition 
and sacred values, but it does involve conformity and obedience simply at 
the level of action – changing what we do without changing internal beliefs, 
convictions, and allegiances. For example, a woman being forced to wear 
the hejab in post-1979 Iran (i.e., conforming in her outward action to 
what the regime demands) but remaining convinced that women should 
be free to decide for themselves how they dress. Deep behavior involves 
values, motivations, allegiances, and the core psychological makeup of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press96 Revolutions and Political Plasticity
identity. These have been far more resilient to change than surface behav￾ior, as illustrated by the case of collectivization in the Soviet Union after 
the 1917 revolution.
Collectivization in the Soviet Union
Perhaps the most important behavioral change attempted by the Soviet 
communists was collectivization, which involved two foundational types 
of change. First, the move from private to collective ownership of the 
means of production, including in all industries, farming, mining, and so 
on, as well as all forms of housing and transportation, and wealth in gen￾eral. Second, the move from individual to collective incentives, so that 
people would receive rewards (wages, bonuses, etc.) as part of a group 
on the basic of group performance rather than as an individual on the 
basis of individual performance. The Soviet collectivization experience has 
been researched extensively,29 and here I limit the discussion to, first, psy￾chological research related to collectivization; second, the means through 
which behavior change toward collectivization was attempted; and, third, 
the general outcomes of the Soviet collectivization programs.
At the heart of the difference between capitalism and communism are 
different assumptions about human motivation. In capitalism, the assump￾tion is that people are best motivated to work harder and better by offering 
them individual incentives, so the harder and better they work the more 
individual rewards they receive. In line with this, capitalism is based on 
private ownership, so that the harder individuals work, the more they are 
personally rewarded and the more private property they can accumulate. 
In this way, private property and individual incentives have been at the 
heart of capitalism. Implicit in this capitalist perspective is the assump￾tion that individual motivation in response to individual incentives are 
natural, in the sense that individuals are born to work harder when they 
personally receive rewards for their individual efforts (of course, inherited 
wealth complicates the picture, because it means that some individuals can 
become extremely wealthy without ever working). According to this per￾spective, when property and incentives are collectivized, this goes against 
the (supposed) natural inclination of human beings.
The communist perspective is that human motivation is shaped by envi￾ronmental conditions, and people in capitalist societies are socialized to be 
motivated by individual incentives and the desire to accumulate private 
wealth. In this respect, the Soviet communists agreed with behaviorists, who 
argued that human behavior is not inborn but shaped through environmental 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressPolitical Plasticity after Revolutions 97
engineering. People can be shaped to be motivated by collective rewards and 
collective ownership. This leads to a rethinking of the results of research on 
social loafing, the tendency for people to work less hard in a group than when 
they work by themselves. It is incorrect to conclude that this social loafing 
research demonstrates a ‘natural’ human tendency to be more strongly moti￾vated by individual than collective incentives. First, people who have been 
socialized in more collectivist cultures do not show this social loafing ten￾dency.30 Second, even in capitalist societies under some conditions people 
work harder in response to group rather than individual incentives.31
There is, then, an argument in support of the claim that people can be 
socialized to engage in social laboring, that is, increased effort in response 
to collective incentives. A clear example of this in the context of Western 
capitalist societies is in sports, when team effort is essential. For example, 
consider a team of eight rowers, competing against other rowing teams. 
The teams are competing for group prizes. Individuals within teams could 
engage in social loafing – after all, when individuals work harder, the 
reward goes to the entire team and not only to themselves personally. The 
members of a rowing crew are not able to stand out for their individual 
efforts but must act in harmony with the other crew members. Despite 
this, being a team member motivates individuals to work even harder, and 
social laboring rather than social loafing takes place on competitive rowing 
teams. Conditions can also be created for social laboring rather than social 
loafing to be achieved in work contexts.32
The Soviet communists adopted a number of strategies to achieve col￾lectivization. If this was successfully achieved, then collective ownership 
and collective incentives would lead to social laboring and not social loaf￾ing. Education was a major tool for collectivization; in the Soviet Union 
private education was prohibited and educational institutions were all con￾trolled by the state. The Soviet education system was strongly influenced 
by a number of educators, particularly Anton Makarenko (1888–1939),33
who developed educational practices to socialize the new communist citi￾zen. Jonathan Tudge has explained Makarenko’s approach in this way:
He believed that education was not a passive medium within which chil￾dren could develop “as nature intended” but was a means to an end – 
a communist end. His methods were based on the primacy of collective 
thought and action. Everything was done with the collective in mind; 
individual activity, as such, was accorded little importance, and children 
were discouraged from engaging in “acollective” activities. He organized 
his colonies of youth in a semi-militaristic fashion … with the emphasis on 
working together as a team.34
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press98 Revolutions and Political Plasticity
In addition to education, the Soviet communists relied heavily on the 
built environment to reshape the behaviors of Soviet citizens. Recent 
research has confirmed the powerful impact of the built environment on 
human behavior,35 so the Soviet communists were correct in assuming that 
by changing the built environment they would change behavior. But in 
their experiments on environmental manipulation for behavioral change,36
the Soviet communists had more success in waging a war on privilege than 
in achieving specific behavioral changes toward their revolutionary ideals.
The war on privilege was waged relentlessly by the Soviet communists 
by collectivizing housing and reorganizing where people lived and how 
they used space. First, the grand palaces that belonged to the former aris￾tocracy now belonged to the people, and sometimes hundreds of families 
were given living space to share in a palace that formerly belonged to one 
family. Second, living spaces in houses and apartments were organized 
around collective living, with shared kitchens and other common spaces, 
and minimum space allocated as private. There was strong encouragement 
of shared activities, such as cooking and childcare, in common spaces. The 
idea was that shared activities in collectives, with minimum private space 
for individual seclusion, would transform the family, as well as behaviors 
associated with privacy and individualism. The individual would become 
subsidiary to, and immersed in, the collective.37
The Soviet communists also embarked on an extensive campaign to 
change and/or destroy symbols, images, names, and just about every fea￾ture of the built environment that could be changed.38 They recognized the 
emotional power of cultural carriers, the means by which values, norms, 
identities, and other aspects of culture are propagated.39 Trotsky and other 
communists recognized the need not only to destroy the prerevolution 
cultural carriers, such as those used by the church to propagate allegiance 
to the Tsar and his regime, but also to manufacture new revolutionary 
cultural carriers that would forge emotional and identity links between the 
people and the Soviet regime.40 An example of the postrevolution cultural 
carriers is Lenin’s Mausoleum, built in 1924 and situated in Red Square, 
Moscow (discussed in Chapter 2 of this book). This Mausoleum served as 
a powerful public remembrance of the great revolutionary and his ideology 
even after the collapse of the Soviet Union.41
The harsh war on privilege waged by the Soviet communists was suc￾cessful in that the traditional aristocracy and class system were largely 
overturned. However, among the negative consequences were extreme 
political repression and a terrifying atmosphere of neighbors, friends, and 
family members informing on, and sometimes fabricating stories about, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressPolitical Plasticity after Revolutions 99
neighbors, friends, and family members.42 In addition to a terrible atmo￾sphere of repression (an experience that is common to dictatorships and 
one that I suffered through in postrevolution Iran under the yoke of the 
mullahs), the communist war on privilege had at least two other detrimen￾tal consequences. First, although the prerevolution system of privileges 
and elite power and wealth concentration collapsed, a new postrevolution 
system of privileges arose, with a new Soviet elite that enjoyed relatively 
greater power and wealth.43 Second, although in some respects (at least 
surface-level) behaviors did change after 1917, such behavioral changes did 
not result in the success of collectivization programs.
Was Soviet collectivization a failure? To what extent did Soviet collec￾tivization contribute to the final collapse of the Soviet Union? Different 
answers can be given to these questions.44 In defense of Soviet collectiviza￾tion, one could argue that the problems that arose (such as widespread 
famine costing millions of lives in 1932–1933) were a result of poor man￾agement and implementation rather than proof that collectivization is not 
viable. The basic theory of collectivization, it could be argued, is valid, 
but it was not implemented correctly in the Soviet Union. A related argu￾ment is that in order to be implemented correctly, collectivization needs 
more time. That is, people have to have enough time and opportunity 
to change their behaviors, specifically their motivations and reactions to 
collective incentives, so that in time they learn to be incentivized by col￾lective rewards and collective ownership. With better management and 
more time, the Soviet people would have been socialized to behave in the 
appropriate and necessary ways in order to make collectivization a success. 
This standard defense brings us back to plasticity and how quickly, and by 
how much, human behavior can be changed.
The standard defense is basically arguing that the behavioral changes 
necessary in order to ensure collectivization takes place successfully need 
much more time to come about. Political plasticity in this domain is very 
limited. The shift is extremely slow from people being motivated by incen￾tives for individual effort to being motivated by incentives for collective 
effort, and from being motivated by private ownership to being motivated 
by collective ownership. From this perspective, if there had been more 
time, collectivization in the Soviet Union would have succeeded.
Critics of collectivization argue that Soviet collectivization failed not 
because of a lack of time but because human beings are by nature moti￾vated far more effectively by individual rather than collective incentives. 
Although in capitalist societies individual incentives operate in contexts 
where team/organizational performance is of the highest importance,45 the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press100 Revolutions and Political Plasticity
norm of private rather than collective ownership ensures that individual 
effort and rewards, rather than collective effort and collective rewards, 
remain the higher priority and line up with ‘natural’ human tendencies. 
Extensive empirical research supports the powerful impact of individual 
incentives on performance.46 But in a review of 106 empirical articles 
on collective performance for pay, Anthony Nyberg and his colleagues 
showed there is also empirical support for the view that even in capital￾ist societies,47 under certain conditions collective pay for performance is 
also effective. Consequently, the empirical evidence suggests that although 
individual incentives are very powerful, there are conditions in which col￾lective incentives can also have influence.
Collectivization is an important example of how revolutionaries in the 
Soviet Union, communist China, Cuba, and a number of other countries 
attempted to bring about rapid changes in behavior toward their revolu￾tionary goals but were thwarted by limited political plasticity.
Concluding Comment
Revolutions are the means by which power is transferred from one group 
of people to another. As part of their strategy to gain support and come 
to power, revolutionaries make promises and put forward ideals, such as 
a society that is just and fair, meritocratic, or even classless. But bringing 
about such ideals requires deep-level behavioral changes, and this is not 
possible, at least not in the short term (i.e., in a few years, or decades, and 
in some cases even centuries). Besides, in terms of personality character￾istics the kinds of individuals who rise to power after revolutions tend to 
be motivated by a strong desire for domination, wealth, and status. These 
individuals are driven to become the new elite and are the least likely to 
lead the revolution to a society based on justice and equality. Progress in 
human societies is more commonly achieved through a little change in a 
time of change, rather than through violent revolutions.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press101
chapter 9
War as Transformative
In September 1980 I was researching and teaching in Iran when Saddam 
Hussein’s Iraqi military invaded Iran from the west of the country. This 
was just one year after the tumultuous 1979 Iranian Revolution, which 
had driven the last shah of Iran and his family into exile, where he died 
(July 1980). A great deal had happened over the previous year, since the col￾lapse of the shah’s regime. Ayatollah Khomeini (1902–1989) had returned 
to Iran (in February 1979) and positioned himself as the leader of the revo￾lution, and he was soon to gain absolute power and take over as the new 
dictator. One of the tactics Khomeini used to become absolute dictator was 
to support and encourage the extremists who invaded the US Embassy in 
Tehran and took fifty-two US diplomats as hostages (this is discussed in 
greater detail in Chapter 12). The taking of US diplomats as hostages further 
added to the deep turmoil and confusion in Iran, and this created oppor￾tunities for Khomeini to attack, imprison, or kill his critics as American 
collaborators. Another tactic was to launch the so-called cultural revolu￾tion (copied from Mao Zedong’s, 1893–1976, cultural revolution) and close 
all universities in Iran in May 1980, because the universities had become 
centers of opposition to Khomeini’s plans to reestablish a dictatorship, this 
time with an Islamic front.1
 Consequently, Saddam Hussein had timed his 
military invasion of Iran to coincide with maximum turmoil in the country.
But Saddam Hussein had miscalculated, because he neglected an impor￾tant principle in intergroup dynamics: External threat to a group leads to 
internal cohesion of group members and support for strong centralized 
leadership. At the time that Saddam Hussein launched his invasion of 
Iran, the country was in postrevolution turmoil and disarray, the military 
and police had not recovered from devastating attacks on them during the 
revolution, and no political group, including Khomeini and his fanatical 
followers, had gained full control of Iranian society. At that time, women 
still enjoyed some level of political freedom, they were not forced to wear 
the Islamic hejab, and there was still strong but uncoordinated opposition 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press102 War as Transformative
to Khomeini’s push toward the establishment of an Islamic dictatorship. 
But the Iraqi invasion galvanized Iranian society to defend the nation and 
set off a series of events that are predictable on the basis of what we know 
about the psychology of group and intergroup dynamics.
First, all Iranian attention and resources became concentrated on fight￾ing the Iraqi invaders. Iran and Iraq had been engaged in territorial dis￾putes in the 1970s, competing to become the dominant power in the 
Persian Gulf region after the British withdrew in the 1960s. The invasion 
by Saddam Hussein’s forces revived nationalistic feelings among Iranians 
and there was rapid collective mobilization, pulling together a wide array of 
secular and religious groups to fight the invaders. I witnessed local neigh￾borhoods sending buses and trucks, loaded with men, food, and equip￾ment, to rush to the war front and defend the country. Second, Khomeini 
and his extremist followers could now use the excuse of the war to attack 
all their political competitors as working for the enemy – the enemy they 
mobilized people against included Saddam Hussein, the Great Satan (the 
United States), and the Little Satan (Israel).
By the second year of the Iran–Iraq War (1982), it was clear that neither 
side could achieve a military victory. The two sides were at a standstill, 
killing each other without gaining ground. But Khomeini was finding the 
war to be extremely useful for achieving his political goals, so he was not 
at all in a hurry to sign a peace treaty (when he was finally forced to agree 
to peace in 1988, he described it as like taking poison). As a consequence, 
the war was prolonged for eight grim and bloody years, and during that 
time millions of people were killed or seriously injured, entire cities were 
destroyed, and Iranian society underwent huge transformations. The rel￾atively benign Islamic politicians who had come to power immediately 
after the revolution (such as Mehdi Bazargan, 1907–1995, and Abolhassan 
Banisadre, 1933–2021) were pushed aside, to eventually make way for 
more aggressive and fanatical Islamic politicians (such as Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad and Ebrahim Raisi, known as the hanging-judge, because of 
the large numbers of killings he ordered). In addition to the radicalization 
of leadership, the war also gave unparalleled growth opportunities to the 
Republican Guards,2
 a fundamentalist Islamic fighting force that gradu￾ally came to dominate both domestic and foreign policy. The Republican 
Guards initially acted like Moa Zedong’s Red Guards in China but have 
since far expanded their role to include ideological police, domestic secu￾rity, economic and industrial enterprises, and overseas fighting force.3
 In 
this process, the leaders of the Republican Guards have become extremely 
rich and powerful.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressWar as Transformative 103
My time in Iran during the Iran–Iraq War gave me firsthand experience 
of how (at least certain types of) war can foundationally transform society, 
an idea that goes back as far as Aristotle, and probably earlier.4
 Throughout 
this chapter, my focus is on total war, the mobilization of all resources for 
war and the unrestricted destruction of all civilian and military targets 
without regard for the rules of war. This is because in order to bring about 
the deep and massive changes I am discussing, war has to penetrate all of 
society – as does total war. For example, with respect to wealth and income 
and the leveling effect of war, Walter Scheidel argues:
Only specific types of violence have consistently forced down inequality. 
Most wars did not have any systematic effect on the distribution of 
resources: although archaic forms of conflict that thrived on conquest and 
plunder were likely to enrich victorious elites and impoverish those on the 
losing side, less clear-cut endings failed to have predictable consequences. 
For war to level disparities in income and wealth, it needed to penetrate 
society as a whole, to mobilize people and resources on a scale that was often 
only feasible in modern nation-states. This explains why the two world wars 
were among the greatest levelers in history.5
Another way to understand the transformative power of war is to read 
accounts of life in a society before and after major wars. For example, 
reading Siegfried Sassoon’s (1886–1967) novel Memoirs of a Fox-Hunting 
Man gives us a picture of life in pre–World War I England,6 a world that 
was transformed by the (so-called) Great War (1914–1918). Sassoon was 
also one of the important poets of World War I,7
 and the poetry produced 
during this war illuminates how deeply people are transformed by war 
experiences. Hundreds of millions of people came out of World War I 
utterly changed, many of them deeply scarred.
Of course, the twenty-first-century electronic media provides us with an 
even harsher and real time understanding of the transformative power of 
war. As I research and write this book, like countless other people around the 
world, I am also anxiously following events in the Ukraine, after the barbaric 
decision of the dictator Vladimir Putin to order the invasion of Ukraine in 
March 2022. The cruel human and material destruction wreaked by Russian 
forces is forcibly changing Ukrainian society before our eyes. Ukrainian 
cities and infrastructure are being destroyed, the Ukrainian population of 
about forty-five million people is experiencing intense stress and pain, and 
millions of Ukrainians have become refugees. The total war waged by Putin 
is imposing horrific changes in Ukraine, as have similar total wars before.
The twentieth century witnessed two world wars, World War I 
(1914–1918) and World War II (1939–1945), which normalized total war. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press104 War as Transformative
Subsequent research highlighted the changes brought about by these wars, 
although there are differences in the interpretations that researchers have 
developed to explain how much societal change is brought about by wars.8
Although the main focus in this research is on the destructive and negative 
impact of war, from the early twentieth century, there has also evolved 
research that considers some (mostly unpanned) positive consequences, 
depicting war as also indirectly or directly bringing about some construc￾tive outcomes. An example of such constructive outcome is the supposed 
greater willingness of the elite (the super-rich, the aristocracy, the capital￾ists, or whatever other term we use to describe this ruling group) to make 
sacrifices and to have sympathy for the lower classes during wartime.
In the following section I discuss the impact of war on politics, brought 
about by psychological processes, such as increased pressures for people to 
conform and obey. Next, I consider changes brought about by war in the 
areas of social roles and social relations. Then, I focus on the impact of war 
on mental and societal health and the questions this raises about human 
rationality. Finally, I examine how war changes wealth distribution.
War, Psychological Processes, and Politics
The impact of war on politics is mediated by psychological processes, but 
it also depends to some extent on local circumstances. For example, the 
Iran–Iraq War transformed politics in Iran by enabling Khomeini and 
his fanatical followers to throttle all opposition and establish their com￾plete monopoly of power and resources. Very importantly, the pressurized 
war conditions gave Khomeini the opportunity to put into practice his 
idea of absolute rule by a mullah, himself of course (this was enshrined 
as Velayat-e-Faqih in the Iranian Constitution, as discussed in Chapter 4 
of this book). Khomeini was able to do this because of the heightened 
conformity and obedience brought about during the pressure-cooker war 
conditions.
Research since the early twentieth century has illuminated the powerful 
psychological forces that regulate conformity,
9
 changes in behavior that arise 
from real or imagined group pressure, and obedience,
10 changes in behavior 
that arise when people follow the instructions of persons in authority. This 
research has established that ordinary people can be induced to conform to 
norms that are incorrect and arbitrary, even when they are aware that they 
are conforming to incorrect norms.11 For example, participants in studies 
gave incorrect estimates of line lengths, even when they are aware they are 
giving the wrong answer.12
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressWar, Psychological Processes, and Politics 105
In everyday life, people often conform to norms that do not have an 
objective basis. For example, in the domain of sports, we conform to arbi￾trary norms such as ‘soccer teams are allowed eleven players on the field 
at any one time’ and ‘basketball teams play with five players.’ Why should 
soccer teams not have five players and basketball teams eleven players? 
Although there are no objective bases for these norms, and thousands of 
others (why should the sprint race in the Olympics be 100 meters and 
200 meters, and not 40 meters and 80 meters?), we rigidly conform to the 
norms. Similarly, in the domain of obedience, research shows that ordi￾nary people can be induced to follow instructions to inflict extreme harm 
to others and to justify their actions by explaining that they were ‘just fol￾lowing orders, just doing a good job the way I was told to do.’13
But it is essential to keep in mind that in psychological research on 
conformity and obedience, not all the participants conform to norms and 
obey authority figures. There are always some participants who show non￾conformist and disobedient behavior. For example, in Stanley Milgram’s 
(1933–1984) seminal study on obedience to authority,14 ordinary people 
were cast as teachers in a situation where they were ordered by a scientist in 
a white laboratory coat to give electric shocks to a learner (actually a con￾federate of the experimenter) each time the learner answered a question 
incorrectly. The learner initially gave correct answers but (acting according 
to Milgram’s plan) after a number of trials gave incorrect answers to the 
teacher. The main research question was: Would the teacher (a role played 
by naïve participants who were screened to ensure they were normal in 
terms of personality characteristics) follow orders and administer high 
or even lethal levels of electric shock to the learner? When this research 
was conducted in the United States, about 65 percent of participants were 
fully obedient – they gave lethal levels of shock (actually, the learner was 
a professional actor who behaved as if he received shocks; no shocks were 
administered in this study, and Milgram took great care to minimize harm 
to participants). In cross-cultural replications of this study, the level of 
obedience varied, from about 40 percent to as high as 90 percent.15 But in 
all the published studies, some participants (acting as teachers) disobeyed.
My research and everyday living experience in dictatorships line up with 
Milgram’s findings; I have witnessed that even in harsh dictatorships some 
courageous people disobey the authorities. For example, even under the 
harshest conditions in Iran, some people continue to go against the com￾mands of the ruling dictator (who was Khomeini after the revolution until 
his death in 1989, then Khamenei took over as the supreme leader). For 
example, when Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was declared the winner of the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press106 War as Transformative
rigged elections in 2009 and endorsed by the dictator Khamenei, massive 
demonstrations took place throughout Iran in what came to be called the 
Green Revolution.16 The Green Revolution was crushed through violent 
repression, with many people killed and injured. Millions of Iranians dared 
to disobey and publicly reject Khamenei’s directives, even though according 
to the principle of Velayat-e-Faqih enshrined in the Iranian Constitution 
(which supports dictatorship), as the supreme leader Khamenei had the 
constitutional right to decide the outcome of the election.
Nonconformity and disobedience in the face of harsh punishments give 
hope that even the most brutal dictatorships face opposition and will even￾tually collapse – as did the Soviet Union, for example. But in the fog of 
war, the consequences of actions and events are not always predicted. For 
example, during the turmoil of the civil war in Colombia, criminal and 
extremist armed groups took advantage of decentralization policies in the 
1990s to gain control of local institutions at the level of municipalities.17
In this way, the decentralization move that was supposed to strengthen 
democracy actually led to power falling into the hands of antidemocratic 
forces. In the context of the horrific civil war in Cambodia, the fog of 
war context enabled the enormously violent Khmer communist revolu￾tion in 1970–1974.18 This revolution included massive relocation of popu￾lations, including the emptying of major cities to move people to live in 
rural regions and to organize their lives to be part of collectives, regulated 
harshly through terror, disappearances, and mass killings.
Although in most cases war creates conditions for the concentration of 
power and the rise of authoritarian strongmen, research suggests that in 
some cases democratic tendencies can also take root in war conditions. For 
example, the research of Reyko Huang shows that in some cases,19 such 
as Mozambique, Nepal, Tajikistan, and Uganda, postwar changes toward 
democratization have wartime origins. This can arise when rebels depend 
heavily on civilian support to come to power in a country and in this way 
mobilize the population politically. Also, during the conflict rebels can 
develop decision-making processes and institutions that are inclusive, and 
this style of behavior can continue to the postwar society. Similar trends 
were found through research on involvement in wartime governance by 
armed groups in Angola, who showed a tendency to continue political 
involvement in peace time.20 War can also bring about policy changes that 
prove beneficial in peace time. For example, World War I and World War 
II both resulted in stronger progressive taxation in the United States, and 
World War II brought the GI Bill of Rights, which funded higher educa￾tion for two million returning veterans.21
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressWar, Social Relations, Social Class, and Gender 107
War, Social Relations, Social Class, and Gender
War has a profound impact on social roles and social relations broadly,22
although the exact nature of how war influences social class and gender roles 
depends to some degree on local circumstances. Part of the impact of war 
arises through the sheer size of mass mobilization and relocation. Total war 
typically results in millions of people forcibly relocating and even becoming 
refugees, often having to cross national borders. For example, as a result of 
the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine (March 2022), about ten million 
Ukrainians have become refugees and there is enormous displacement of 
people all around the country and the rest of the world. With men doing 
most of the fighting, it is women and children who make up most of the 
refugee population. Families are torn apart and social relations change.
Because large numbers of men move to the war front, they leave many 
empty employment positions during wartime (the tradition has been for 
men to be more prominent at the warfront and women to take over jobs 
left by men). This creates opportunities for women to take up jobs that 
were formerly monopolized by men, jobs to which women could not gain 
access during peacetime. For example, in the first year that the United 
States entered World War II, about 60 percent of federal employees were 
women, and 40,000 female stenographers and typists joined the govern￾ment workforce.
The pressure of war even creates opportunities for women to serve in the 
military and/or in direct support of the military. For example, the wars in 
Afghanistan (starting in 2001) and Iraq (starting in 2003) resulted in several 
hundred thousand US female service members being deployed overseas.23
Thousands of these women were killed or seriously injured. The Iran–Iraq 
War (1980–1988) created opportunities for Iranian women to serve in bat￾tle, with the result that 6,420 women were killed on the battlefront.24 This 
breaking out of traditional gender roles shows the power of war conditions, 
which in this instance forced changes opposite to the traditional gender 
roles demanded by the central authorities in the Islamic Republic of Iran. 
War also played a part in more Iranian women attending universities, so 
that by 1997–1998 60 percent of all university students in Iran were female 
(unfortunately, although women forced their way into universities by excel￾ling in competitive examinations, they were still treated as third-class citi￾zens after graduation).25 Similarly, during World War II, men being away at 
war meant that 282,000 women in the United States now had the opportu￾nity to be trained in engineering and science at universities, and numerous 
corporations funded technical training for women.26
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press108 War as Transformative
Elisabeth Wood has explored six social processes that undergo changes 
during civil wars,27 and two of these are highly relevant to our discussion 
of the impact of total wars on social relations, gender, and social class: 
transformation of gender roles and polarization of social identities. Wood 
believes that the most dramatic change comes about when women carry 
arms and become part of the fighting military force. Another change 
comes about when there are widespread sexual assaults against women 
during conflicts, and this experience traumatizes many women but also 
leads some to become active in political and human rights movements. 
Conformity and obedience pressures (discussed earlier in this chapter) 
mean that in wartime such movements are supported by the ingroup as 
long as the target of attacks are the enemy but not so when criticisms are 
made of the ingroup. For the same reasons, those who would advocate 
social class mobilization and give priority to class, with slogans such as “A 
bayonet is a weapon with a worker at both ends,” face fierce group and 
nationalist resistance.
Conflicts also bring about the polarization of social identities. Two 
nations engaged in total war change their view of not only what kind of 
a nation they believe the enemy to be but also what kind of a nation they 
believe themselves to be. This is an extreme version of the ‘exaggeration of 
between-group differences and minimization of within group differences’ 
that arise from categorization and intergroup competition (discussed in 
Chapter 3 in this book).28 Total wars in particular are often at the final 
stages of what I have termed mutual radicalization:
[T]he process during which two groups in effect ‘radicalize’ one another – 
that is, when they become increasingly extreme in their views, develop 
increasing distrust of one another, move further and further apart in the 
process, and often take actions that are contrary to their own apparent 
self-interests.29
War and Mental and Societal Health: 
Questioning Human Rationality
In examining the experiences of US military personnel deployed to Iraq 
after the 2003 invasion of Iraq by the United States and its allies, John Ni 
Dieter and Scot Engel write:
Many of our patients continue to fight a “war within” … they carry on a psy￾chological battle with an enemy who has taken up residence within them … 
the homeland is now experienced as dangerous, chaotic, and intrusive.30
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressWar and Human Rationality 109
After studying the long-term mental health consequences of war, Stefan 
Priebe and colleagues report:
Given the traumatic nature of war experiences and the consistent finding in 
the literature that PTSD [posttraumatic stress disorder] and depression are 
the most frequent mental disorders following war, anxiety and particularly 
posttraumatic stress symptoms, as well as depression, may be expected to be 
high. Raised levels of paranoia may be a result of the loss of trust in human 
relationships in war.31
The material consequences of total wars are well documented,32 but the 
mental health consequences are far more serious, more complex, and more 
difficult to deal with. This is particularly in the case of mental health suffer￾ing of children, who are especially vulnerable during wartime.33 Studies of 
children during wartime reveal a variety of severe mental health problems, 
including PTSD and depression, as well as severe problems in psycho￾logical development and progress in education.34 Sexual violence is often 
inflicted on children, with girls most often being the targets. In these cases, 
physical injury tends to be compounded by stigma, shame, and isolation.35
Another key theme in the twenty-first-century research on the mental 
health consequences of war is the long-term nature of these consequences. 
For example, through interviews conducted with about 4,000 people on 
average eight years after the war in the former Yugoslavia, it was found that 
severe mental health problems still persisted among most participants.36
Another study conducted twenty-five years after the conflict in the former 
Yugoslavia showed that particular groups of victims, such as those who 
continue to search for the body of a missing family member, still suffer 
trauma and have a lower quality of life.37 Research also suggests that the 
detrimental mental health effects of war carry across generations, so that 
the children of those who suffered in wartime also experience abnormally 
high mental health problems as adults.38
The fact that human beings repeatedly engage in total wars and suffer 
such serious mental health (and material damage) consequences leads us to 
question our rationality and to take more seriously Freud’s relatively pes￾simistic view that we can “bind together a considerable number of people 
in love so long as there are other people left over to receive the manifesta￾tions of their aggressiveness.”39 The direct implication of Freud’s perspec￾tive is that aggression against outgroups is inevitable; it is a price we pay 
for achieving peace and positive sentiments within the ingroup. But there 
are also rational, material perspective on war that lead us to be more opti￾mistic about solutions.40
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press110 War as Transformative
From a rationalist perspective, we can make ourselves aware of the fac￾tors that influence us, and we can act in ways that take into consideration 
and bring about the necessary adjustments for the impact of war on our 
behavior, including in politics and political behavior. For example, we are 
aware that under wartime pressures there is a tendency for us to conform 
and obey more and to suffer groupthink, the tendency for people in groups 
to converge on unwise courses of action they would have avoided if they 
were making the decision individually.41 Also, wartime conditions are more 
likely to result in polarization and mutual radicalization in politics.42 But 
the existence of knowledge about these trends among researchers and some 
others does not result, as rationalists would lead us to expect, in society at 
large being able to resist and avoid these same trends. There are numerous 
types of behavior that we know we should avoid, because they have harmful 
consequences that we can rationally recognize, yet we continue to repeat 
these harmful behaviors. This reflects some of the limits of the rationalist 
perspective.
Next, I turn to consider one of the perhaps surprising outcomes of total 
war, one that some would interpret as favorable: wealth distribution.
War and Wealth Distribution
Throughout recorded history, the most powerful leveling invariably 
resulted from the most powerful shocks … The physical destruction 
wrought by industrial-scale warfare, confiscatory taxation, govern￾ment intervention in the economy, inflation, disruption to global 
flows of goods and capital, and other factors all combined to wipe 
out elites’ wealth and redistribute resources.
Walter Scheidel43
The impact of total war on economic activity, such as the distribution of 
wealth in different economic sectors as a result of war and the difficulty 
and length of time needed for economic recovery following wars,44 has 
received robust research attention. Research has also made us more aware 
of the severe impact war has on poverty, so that countries that experience 
repeated and/or continuous conflicts accumulate a more significant conflict 
debt,
45 increasing the persistence and size of poverty. A related research 
literature has tested the thesis that total war leads to a redistribution of 
wealth and a decline in inequality,46 as indicated by the above quotation 
from Scheidel. In considering the impact of war on wealth distribution, 
an important question is the extent to which this impact is temporary. 
For example, on the issue of economic recovery following war, evidence 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressWar and Wealth Distribution 111
suggests that countries such as Germany returned to an established level 
of economic development following the end of World War II. After con￾sidering why war should lead to greater wealth equality, I address whether 
this is a temporary deviation from the ‘normal’ path of wealth inequality 
or whether this is a resetting of the normal path.
There are a number of key reasons why total wars should lead to a redis￾tribution and levelling of wealth (there is also some evidence that wars 
before the twentieth century could result in lower wealth inequality47). 
Of course, expensive wars have been waged by governments before the 
twentieth century, but expense alone does not result in a redistribution 
and levelling of wealth. What is new in total wars of the modern era is the 
complete and forced mobilization and involvement of the masses in the 
war effort. Total wars necessitate enormous sacrifices from everyone in the 
population, not just devoting themselves to producing for the war effort 
and fighting in the war but also being the targets and victims of all-out 
enemy aggression. Under these conditions, the idea that everyone, includ￾ing the rich, should pay their fair share becomes prominent.
Total wars require total mobilization and conscription as a means of 
raising a military. But conscription usually involves young men (and some￾times women), with older people being exempt. One way in which young 
people can be compensated is if older people, who own the vast majority 
of the wealth in society, are forced to make a larger monetary contribution 
to the war effort. This is another reason why governments feel justified to 
implement higher taxes on the rich during wartime, as happened in the 
United States and the United Kingdom,48 for example.
Moreover, in war conditions the masses become particularly sensitive to 
profiteering and intolerant toward those who seem to be taking advantage 
of the wartime situation. In wartime, the urgent needs of society change in 
some respects, the production of certain goods become more essential and 
others less so. But irrespective of which goods and services are a priority, it 
is companies owned by the rich that continue to produce and make prof￾its. But in wartime, the tolerance of the general population decreases for 
high wealth concentration and profit-making. The role of this ‘tolerance’ 
becomes particularly important in democracies, where people will be more 
supportive of wars if, as Jonathan Caverley puts it, “the costs in treasure 
can be shifted to an affluent minority.”49
Another feature of total wars that make wealth distribution and leveling 
more likely is that they push governments and societies to the brink, so 
that total defeat and collapse are either more probable or actual – for both 
sides in the conflict. For example, consider the circumstances of Britain 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press112 War as Transformative
and Germany in the two worlds wars: Britain came out on the winning 
side and Germany on the losing side in both world wars, but the human 
and material costs of these total wars for Britain was considerable and 
arguably an important factor in speeding up the decline of the British 
Empire. Because of both sides experiencing these extreme conditions, 
where everyone is faced with enormous sacrifices, governments feel more 
empowered than they do during peacetime to push the rich to make more 
sacrifices and share more of their wealth (by paying more of the war debt 
through progressive taxation, e.g.).
But it is not only in more democratic societies that wartime pressures 
lead to wealth redistribution and lower inequality. In an analysis of the 
impact of World War II on wealth distribution in Japan, a country that 
before World War II was characterized by very high inequality and dicta￾torial government, Scheidel reports:
In 1938, the country’s “1 percent” received 19.9 percent of all reported 
income before taxes and transfers. Within the next seven years, their share 
dropped by two-thirds, all the way down to 6.4 percent. More than half of 
this loss was incurred by the richest tenth of the top bracket: their income 
share collapsed from 9.2 percent to 1.9 percent in the same period … shifts 
in the distribution of income … pale in comparison to the even more dra￾matic destruction of the elite’s wealth. The declared real value of the larg￾est 1 percent of estates in Japan fell by … almost 97 percent between 1936 
and  1949 … the top 0.1 percent of all estates … lost more than 98 percent.50
The wealth distribution and leveling that took place in Japan through 
World War II arose in large part because of the demands made by total 
war, with Japan’s military growing twentyfold in size and sacrifices being 
forced on everyone. Because of the need for shared sacrifices, Japanese gov￾ernment wartime interventions basically ended the free-market economy 
and the profits it brought to a tiny super-rich group and provided support 
for ordinary people in areas such as housing and employment. Two atomic 
bombs and continuous wartime bombings killed about 700,000 Japanese 
civilians. Japan was defeated and occupied by US troops. At the end of the 
war, the new constitution imposed on Japan moved the country toward 
democracy, giving more power and influence to ordinary Japanese people. 
More than this, the economic reforms imposed on Japan in the occupa￾tion period were similar to the New Deal reforms in the United States, 
setting up the basic structure for a welfare state, with progressive taxation 
and wealth distribution.
In essence, because the Japanese elite were seen as responsible for Japan’s 
wartime aggression, major economic and political restrictions were placed 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressConcluding Comment 113
on them, and ordinary Japanese people were given more support in eco￾nomic and political domains. For example, labor unions were strength￾ened (60 percent of workers were unionized by 1949), land redistribution 
was implemented, and the new constitution imposed on Japan gave more 
freedoms and rights to ordinary people and made political leaders more 
accountable to voters.
Also, in all Western countries that participated directly in World War 
II, the wartime conditions brought not only stronger political rights for 
ordinary people (through stronger labor unions and voting rights, e.g.) 
but also more wealth distribution and equality that persisted for several 
decades after the war.51 Scheidel, who has conducted the most in-depth 
analysis of this issue, argues that both the world wars had the effect of 
compressing wealth disparities and that “[i]n World War II, this effect was 
at work both during the war itself as well as in its aftermath, sustained by 
the persistence of war-driven policies.”52 However, the research of Thomas 
Piketty and others on wealth inequality suggests that particularly since 
the 1970s the trend of increasing wealth concentration has accelerated.53
Although private wealth and inheritance fell as a result of the two world 
wars, as Piketty puts it, “this situation did not last long,”54 and by the lat￾ter part of the twentieth century wealth and inheritance accumulation had 
sharply risen. Research also shows that since the late twentieth century 
labor unions have been in decline.55 Although some of the political and 
labor rights that ordinary people had gained during World War II could 
not be taken back, wealth disparities have increased and labor unions rep￾resenting the rights of workers have been weakened. These shifts back to a 
historical norm suggest that changes in political plasticity were short term.
In conclusion, although total wars force increases in political plasticity 
in some domains, this effect does not last with respect to the rich–poor 
divide. Within four decades after World War II, wealth concentration has 
accelerated to reach new heights.
Concluding Comment
Total wars force governments to demand sacrifices from all of society, 
including the rich. Confronted with possible catastrophic national defeat, 
as happened to Japan in World War II, the rich are forced by circum￾stances to give up some of their wealth superiority, and ordinary people 
and minorities gain more economic clout and political rights.56 The sense 
of ‘shared sacrifice’ is reflected in the 1945 victory of the Labor Party in 
the UK general elections, with their social welfare platform, as well as the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press114 War as Transformative
presidency of the Democrat Franklin Delano Roosevelt from 1933 until 
1945, which brought the proworker New Deal policies. After total wars, 
it is not possible for governments, including those representing highly 
conservative interests, to take back all the political rights gained by ordi￾nary people during wartime. However, since World War II, and partic￾ularly since the last part of the twentieth century, wealth accumulation 
has increased, as has the relative wealth advantage of the rich. Also, labor 
unions have become weaker and the ‘gig economy’ has lowered welfare 
benefits and increased instability for workers.57
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press115
chapter 10
Technology Forces Change
There can be little doubt that the book was one of the great forces for 
change in sixteenth-century Europe. And at the center of this lay the 
Reformation. The connection between the book and the Reformation 
seems so obvious that it needs little extra comment. The powerful 
impetus given to the spread of the new doctrines by the medium of 
print was widely recognized in its own day – indeed, part of Luther’s 
great genius as a reformer was his speedy recognition of the power of 
the printed word to carry on his fight with the papacy and articulate 
his theological precepts.
Andrew Pettegree and Matthew Hall1
The invention of the movable-type printing press by Johannes Gutenberg 
(c. 1400–1468) enabled the mass production of pamphlets, books, and 
other printed materials in the West, paving the way for enormous changes, 
including in Christianity and other major religions.2
 For example, empiri￾cal assessment demonstrates that cities with at least one printing press by 
1500 were significantly more likely to have become Protestant,3
 suggest￾ing that printed material played an important role in strengthening the 
Reformation, shifting minds and hearts to join the new religious move￾ments. Of course, the changes brought about by the printing press also 
impacted political behavior and facilitated the great political revolutions 
and transformations of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. After all, 
without the printing press the Communist Manifesto (1848) would not 
have had such wide influence,4
 with major societies being transformed 
through communist ideas by the early twentieth century (e.g., the Russian 
Revolution of 1917 was in highly important respects influenced by com￾munist ideas).
Of course, I am not suggesting a simple causal relationship between 
technological innovation and social and political changes. As Denis 
Murray cautions,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press116 Technology Forces Change
While historical data do show that the introduction of different literacy 
technologies involves some similar phenomena – evolving and support￾ing technologies, resistance, fervent promotion, a belief in its inevitabil￾ity, and potential for control of liberation – the underlying premise that 
the technology causes a “revolution” is not supported by historical data. 
Hence, today we need to be very careful about drawing analogies between 
the possible effects of information technology and those of previous literacy 
technologies.5
But it is clear that technological innovations make certain social and poli￾tical changes more probable, just as the development of alphabetical writing 
from around 4,000 years ago enabled account keeping and the develop￾ment of more complex organizations and governments.6
While we can look with hindsight and some objectivity at the enormous 
changes associated with alphabetical writing and later the printing press, 
we are still in the midst of the ongoing electronic communications revolu￾tion and we continue to experience the enormous but changing impact 
of the Internet (“the electronic network of networks that links people 
and information through computers and other digital devices allowing 
person-to-person communication and information retrieval”7
), Facebook, 
Twitter, TikTok, and other forms of cutting-edge electronic communica￾tions systems. The electronics revolution has a dizzying pace of change, 
and the next few decades are not predictable – just as the situation we are 
experiencing today was not predicted even as the Internet emerged in the 
early 1980s and rapidly expanded in the 1990s.8
 We can look back critically 
and reassess some of the optimistic and perhaps simplistic perspectives on 
how the electronics revolution would lead to a flood of democratization 
and a decline of dictatorships.
From a rational viewpoint, one would expect the electronics revolu￾tion to increase political plasticity in a way that strengthens openness and 
democracies. I address this optimistic perspective in the first section of 
this chapter. But this optimistic perspective of the ‘electronics revolution 
as an aid to democracy’ fails to consider limitations imposed by political 
plasticity. Yes, electronic communications influence political changes but 
not always in a constructive and more open direction. Electronic com￾munications have also strengthened rigidity in political plasticity, bringing 
about more of the same, a continuation of dictatorship and strongman 
authoritarian leadership. This is examined in the second section, where 
I focus on the actual outcomes of the electronics revolution, which have 
been complex, mixed, and in some important respects (from a democratic 
perspective) negative. Third, I turn to consider the three main stages in the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe Electronics Revolution as an Aid to Democracy 117
development of how dictatorships have used electronic communications, 
to strengthen closed societies and weaken more open ones. In the conclud￾ing comment, I discuss the electronics revolution in relation to citizenship: 
What psychological characteristics do citizens need to have so that the 
electronics revolution strengthens democracy rather than dictatorship?
The Electronics Revolution as an Aid to Democracy
If one begins with the assumption that humans are rational creatures, it 
is logical to conclude that the electronics revolution will serve as a kind 
of equalizer, giving information and power to ordinary people and neces￾sarily strengthening democracies and weakening dictatorships. This opti￾mistic perspective was more evident early in the ‘liberation technology’ 
revolution, for example as reflected in Peter Levine’s description in 2002:
Enthusiasts believe that computer networks will make various forms of 
political participation more convenient, thus increasing participation. For 
example, we will be able to vote from home or make financial contribu￾tions with the click of a mouse. At the same time, information will be 
readily available, so citizens will possess the knowledge they need to par￾ticipate effectively. Faced with an informed and powerful citizenry, vari￾ous elites will grudgingly allow more public participation. Among other 
innovations, we may see frequent online referenda. Citizens may deliberate 
en masse, creating a kind of ongoing national town meeting. As a result, 
some argue, the public will make wise decisions without much need for 
mediating institutions such as newspapers, legislatures, parties – maybe 
even governments.9
If the above optimistic view of social media impact is correct, then data 
on the increasing use of social media around the world enhance the rosy 
picture of current trends and the development of the Internet as the new 
town square.10 According to data from the Pew Research Center, about 
70 percent of Americans use some kind of social media (this percent￾age remained steady from 2016 to 2021),11 and about 46 percent get news 
through social media (percentages who get news through social media are 
in a similar range in Europe).12 Among people with internet access, 85 
percent in China use social media and 29.8 percent use social media every 
day to find political information.13 A comparison of the United States, 
China, and five major European countries showed that social media plays 
an important role in the lives of people in all the countries examined (stud￾ies on social media use in Russia and Kazakhstan show the same14), but 
people in China continue to rely more on television as a source of political 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press118 Technology Forces Change
information and they are less likely to express their political opinions 
through social media.15
Supporters of the electronics revolution have argued that electronic 
communications are bringing enormous benefits to people in education,16
health care,17 and other important applied domains. This is particularly 
through the ‘Internet of Things’ (IoT) or the ‘Internet of Objects,’ which 
involves the integration of numerous different types of electronic devices 
into the same network, allowing people in many different (sometimes very 
distant) locations to collaborate in real time. For example, the health care 
system is benefitting from advances in electronic networks and devices, 
such as Body Area Network (BAN), a wireless network of integrated wear￾able computing devices. The BAN is a system that the patient can carry, 
providing continuous monitoring of vital signs of physical health, such 
as heartbeat, body temperature, respiration, blood pressure, and various 
physiological sensors (e.g., ECG – electrocardiogram). Information from 
health indicators is relayed to central monitors, so that health care profes￾sionals can be better informed and also alerted before emergencies arise. 
Electronic communications have also enabled what is termed ‘medical 
tourism,’ where people travel to another country to receive dental, surgi￾cal, or medical care.18
The Internet can serve as an equalizer in the medical field, because it 
gives power to patients, who are able to look for information about their 
illnesses, the treatments and medications they are receiving, as well as the 
online reputations of the medical doctors, nurses, and hospitals serving 
them. Over 70 percent of patients in the United States and the United 
Kingdom typically conduct Internet searches as part of their interactions 
with medical services.19 Patients can gain access to medical information 
that previously was available only to medical experts and professionals, 
and this can (in appearance or actuality) create a challenge to medical 
expertise.20 However, the overall outcome of patient power has been 
beneficial.21
The contributions of electronic communications to the international 
business sector, even those of low-income societies, have been tremen￾dous; as Lucas Dalenogare and colleagues argue, “From the market point 
of view, digital technologies allow companies to offer new digital solutions 
to customers … From the operational perspective, digital technologies … 
are proposed to reduce set-up times, labor and material costs and process￾ing times, resulting in higher productivity.”22 Empirical studies show that 
social media serves to improve communications and knowledge sharing 
among employees, resulting in increased productivity in organizations.23
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe Electronics Revolution as an Aid to Democracy 119
Of course, part of the greater productivity, efficiency, and cost-cutting 
comes from businesses replacing human labor with electronic systems and 
robots. This trend will undoubtedly continue, and advances in electronic 
systems and robotics will lead to human labor being replaced in many 
more types of work, although in domains such as care for the elderly 
(despite the cost-cutting ‘benefits’) there are ethical dilemmas concerning 
the extent to which ‘machine care’ can replace human care.24 But in many 
cases machines are helping to improve the quality of life of workers, by 
taking over work that is repetitive and boring.
The electronics revolution has also in some ways democratized the 
business world, by providing access to information and markets to tiny 
start-ups and small businesses. At the heart of this trend is digital entre￾preneurship and digital start-ups that have grown from businesses in home 
basements and garages into multibillion-dollar global businesses, such as 
Amazon, Google, Facebook, and Airbnb.25 The electronics revolution sug￾gests that anyone with a computer and access to the Internet can launch 
new businesses that could be the Amazon or Facebook of tomorrow. The 
age of digital entrepreneurship has in a sense globalized the American 
dream, the idea that anyone can become hugely successful and rise to the 
top of society, as long as they have talent and motivation – and Internet 
access. Indeed, the race for success in the electronics revolution seems rela￾tively fair, and on a level playing field, because it seems to require so little 
resource as a prerequisite for a person to enter the race.
But it is in the domain of politics that the electronic media revolu￾tion could bring most dramatic changes and benefits (as indicated by the 
quotation from Peter Levine that begins this section). Electronic com￾munications hold the promise of shrinking the distance between ordinary 
people and national political leaders, as well as bringing rural populations 
closer to elite politics in capital cities. This is an increasingly important 
potential, as populations rise (there are now close to 1.4 billion people in 
the largest democracy in the world, India) and the challenge of inclusive￾ness grows even greater. The enormous task of communicating with and 
integrating the views of such vast populations can be facilitated through 
the electronic communications. In a study of social media and democracy 
in 125 countries around the world, Facebook penetration (used as an indi￾cator of social media) was shown to be associated with improvements in 
democracy.26 Social network sites such as Facebook have been interpreted 
as generating social capital, the norms, networks, and other features of 
social life that enable participants to collaboratively pursue shared goals, 
and being associated with fuller political engagement.27 Also, researchers 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press120 Technology Forces Change
have documented how social media has assisted antidictatorship collec￾tive movements, such as the Green uprising in Iran in 2008–2009 and the 
Arab Spring revolutions in the early 2010s.28 Expansive use of electronic 
communications helped collective movements to push out of power the 
Philippine president Joseph Estrada in 2001 and the Spanish prime min￾ister José María Aznar in 2009 and also push the Catholic Church to stop 
harboring child sex offenders.29 In more developed democracies also, such 
as those in Europe and North America, the electronics revolution has the 
potential to help nurture better informed and more politically engaged 
citizens.
Four characteristics in particular make the contributions of electronic 
communications (at least potentially) highly powerful and beneficial in 
the political domain.30 First, anyone with access to the Internet can join 
the electronic town square. Given that one of the main reasons provided 
for low political participation is the high cost of entry (e.g., in the United 
States, even an action as ‘simple’ as voting requires scarce resources, par￾ticularly for minorities facing serious barriers to voting in some regions 
of the country), the low cost of entry into politics means that far larger 
numbers of people could become politically engaged. Evidence suggests 
that relatively easy political behaviors, such as commenting online on a 
political issue, can serve as a gateway to more serious political activism.31 A 
study of young people showed that political use of social network sites was 
a good predictor of their participation in traditional political activities.32 As 
Robert Faris and Bruce Etling have argued, “If we believe the thesis that …
organizational costs are an impediment to improving democratic action, 
then we might reasonably expect digital technologies to have an important 
positive impact on democracy.”33
Second, because vast numbers of people could contribute through elec￾tronic communications with little costs, as long as the Internet and social 
media are accessible it is more difficult to control or censor all the different 
voices. Through the expansion of electronic networks and the availability 
of mass-produced cheaper computers, there is a potential for the voices of 
a far larger number of people around the world to be heard uncensored. 
Because electronic communications have had some success at crossing 
national boundaries (of course, dictatorships set up barriers – such as the 
‘Great Firewall of China,’ discussed later in this chapter), prodemocracy 
protests can reverberate internationally and local collective movements can 
find global echoes. This happened during the Gezi Park protests in Turkey 
in 2013, when protesters changed their online activities both in relation to 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe Electronics Revolution as an Aid to Democracy 121
events on the ground locally in Istanbul, Turkey, and in relation to online 
activities internationally.34
Third, as argued for example by Andrew Feeberg,35 in some respects 
democracy has been extended to the domain of technology and electronic 
communications in particular. The future of democracy has become inter￾twined with, and dependent upon, the future of electronic communica￾tions. Looked at optimistically, as the electronics revolution progresses, so 
does democracy; as electronic communications become more inclusive of 
different voices, so does democracy. Although people are the recipients of 
information through electronic communications, every receiver can also 
contribute to the ‘electronic town square’ – much more easily than in 
traditional media. Given the advances we are experiencing through the 
electronics revolution, we can look forward to advances in democracy.
Fourth, the widespread use of electronic communications systems in 
different countries around the world means that governments that cen￾sor such communications go against the vast majority of people. By 2017 
about 64 percent of people in nineteen low-income economies reported 
that they use the Internet at least occasionally or own a smart phone, while 
87 percent of people in high-income economies reported using the Internet 
at least occasionally and 72 percent reported owning a smart phone.36 In 
2021, 81 percent and 69 percent of Americans reported using YouTube and 
Facebook respectively.37 Even in low-income societies, economies now rely 
heavily on electronic communications and particularly on mobile phones. 
Thus, a government that censors electronic communications would also 
seriously damage the economy of their own society.
In summary, then, the electronics revolution has the potential to 
democratize our world in many different ways. Ordinary people now 
have access to information that was previously available only to experts 
and the elite. There are practical possibilities for expanding participation 
in decision-making, so that through referenda and other means using 
electronic communication, the views and choices of ordinary people 
can more directly impact how we are governed. In health, education, 
business, and just about all the major sectors of society, the electronics 
revolution has given ordinary people access to almost infinite informa￾tion. These changes could democratize societies. There is a potential for 
political plasticity to be dramatically increased in support of actualized 
democracy. However, as we shall see in the next section, the actual impact 
of the electronics revolution has been in some ways antidemocratic and in 
support of authoritarianism.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press122 Technology Forces Change
The Actual Outcomes of the Electronics Revolution
[T]he best practical reason to think that social media can help bring 
political change is that both dissidents and governments think they 
can. All over the world, activists believe in the utility of these tools 
and take steps to use them accordingly. And the governments they 
contend with think social media tools are powerful, too, and are will￾ing to harass, arrest, exile, or kill users in response.
Clay Shirky38
In February 2018, the U. S. Justice Department indicted 13 Russian 
nationals, listing them – and the organization they worked for – 
as central to a Russian state effort to interfere with the 2016 U.S. 
Presidential election. 
Darren Linvill et al.39
In the early decades of the twenty-first century it has become abundantly 
clear that the electronics revolution is not unidirectional in impact, neces￾sarily changing political plasticity in a way that supports more open societ￾ies and the spreading of enlightened thinking and open minds around the 
world – far from it. The new electronic communications systems are also 
being used very effectively by potential (e.g., Donald Trump) and actual 
(e.g., Vladimir Putin) dictators, as well as dictatorship regimes (e.g., particu￾larly the largest ones, Russia and China) and authoritarian movements (e.g., 
the far-right nationalist movements headed by Recep Erdogan in Turkey, 
Narendra Modi in India, Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil, Marine Le Pen in France) 
broadly, to magnify divisions, strengthen ethnocentrism, and weaken open 
societies. The global potential of electronic communications has meant that 
not only do dictatorships control and censor such communications within 
their own borders but they invest heavily in spreading their influence across 
the world in order to help authoritarian movements and leaders in more 
open societies – as Russia has been doing in the United States (although it is 
notoriously difficult to measure the extent of this influence40).
Of course, attempts by dictatorships to influence politics in democ￾racies precede the age of electronic communications.41 In the 1960s the 
Soviet Union worked in several ways to try to prevent Richard Nixon 
(1913–1994) from becoming the US president, favoring instead John 
Kennedy (1917–1963). The Soviets also attempted to have Martin Luther 
King (1929–1968) replaced by a more radical individual as the leader 
of the civil rights movement; the Soviets preferred a leader who would 
link the American civil rights movement with a global anti-imperialist 
movement (with the United States interpreted as the global imperial￾ist power). Tactics used by the Soviets in those earlier years included 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressDictatorship Use of Electronic Communications 123
forging documents and spreading conspiracy theories, by planting articles 
in newspapers, for example.
Electronic communications have enabled dictatorships to develop a 
broader campaign to weaken democracies and strengthen authoritarianism, 
using a wider array of soft and hard tactics. Putin’s attacks on countries 
neighboring Russia, particularly Ukraine, illustrate this trend. Since tak￾ing over as absolute dictator in 2000, Putin has used cyber warfare, as well 
as more direct military pressures and attacks, to thwart democratic move￾ments in Eastern European countries that were once forced to be part of 
the Soviet Union. In Ukraine, Putin used cyber warfare to fight against 
the democratic movement that finally led to the election of Volodymyr 
Zelensky as president in 2019. But Putin also used direct violence, invading 
the Crimean Peninsula and annexing it from Ukraine in 2014, and then 
launching the invasion to try to capture all of Ukraine in 2022. Throughout, 
cyber warfare has been at the heart of the attacks on Ukrainian democracy. 
Putin’s antidemocracy campaign dovetailed with Trump’s attempts to use 
corrupt officials in Ukraine to find dirt on his political rival Joe Biden, and 
then Trump orchestrated a smear campaign to justify getting rid of Marie 
Yovanovitch, the US ambassador to Ukraine who would not do his bidding 
against Biden.42 In this case, the policies of an actual dictator in Russia were 
in harmony with those of a potential dictator in the United States.
Thus, the actual impact of electronic communications on political 
behavior has been mixed, in some cases supporting authoritarianism and 
dictatorships. The use dictatorships have made of electronic communica￾tions has gone through three stages, as described in the following section.
The Three Stages of Dictatorship Use 
of Electronic Communications
The world has now passed the initial euphoria about electronic communica￾tions and the Internet serving as a kind of ‘liberation technology.’43 Clearly, 
dictatorships have adapted and are now using this technology to support 
their own antidemocratic goals. As Alina Polyakova and Chris Meserole 
explain,44 “China and Russia have learned how to leverage both the internet 
and information technology in ways that have reduced rather than expanded 
human freedom. Worse, they have also begun to export their models of digi￾tal authoritarianism across the globe.” It is useful to assess the relationship 
between dictatorships and electronic communications as passing through 
three stages: stage one, negative control;45 stage two, cooptation; and stage 
three, self-censorship. Each of these stages is described here.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press124 Technology Forces Change
Negative Control: The initial reaction of dictatorships to electronic com￾munications was blunt and primitive, in the sense that they attempted to 
directly control access to such communications. Those who represented 
a threat to the dictatorship were denied access, and the Internet was shut 
down during times of unrest. The most extensive example of this nega￾tive control is still found in China, where the Great Firewall of China is 
used to limit information from the outside world and censor information 
within the country. An extensive centralized government bureaucracy has 
developed in China to monitor, censor, and limit electronic communica￾tions among about a billion users.46 This kind of negative control is also 
practiced in smaller dictatorships, such as Iran. For example, during wide￾spread unrests in Iran in 2008–2009, the regime routinely slowed down or 
shut down access to the Internet.
But negative control comes with heavy costs. First, because electronic 
communications are used so extensively in the twenty-first century, the 
denial of access immediately becomes common knowledge among the 
general population and can be interpreted by both opponents and sup￾porters of the regime as a sign of government weakness and vulnerability. 
This is a weakness that cannot be hidden. Second, because contemporary 
economies rely so heavily on electronic communications, there arises the 
‘dictator’s dilemma’:47 whether and how much to sacrifice the economy 
for political goals? Particularly in times of political unrest, if electronic 
communications are not shut down, then the regime could be in danger 
and might even topple, but if electronic communications are shut down, 
then the economy will suffer. This is actually not much of a dilemma 
when the regime is facing serious threat, because dictatorships give prior￾ity to self-preservation over economic performance, but it is a dilemma 
when dictatorial regimes face potential threat and they have to gage how 
much and how quickly opposition forces could mobilize using electronic 
communications.
Cooptation: Electronic communications and elections are now routinely 
coopted by what I have termed democratic dictatorships, which use “the 
language and rituals of democracy … to both divert attention away from 
and to justify absolute rule by a dictator.”48 With respect to elections, 
Russia, Iran and some other dictatorships routinely put on national and 
local elections that are rigged: Opposition candidates are excluded in dif￾ferent ways (e.g., killed, jailed, censored), and certain ‘acceptable’ candi￾dates are helped (e.g., through ballot stuffing).
These phony elections are useful to dictatorships in several ways. First, 
regime supporters are collectively mobilized and made more visible. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressDictatorship Use of Electronic Communications 125
Second, opposition groups are better identified and victimized. Third, 
many in the general population are coerced to cast votes in support of 
prescreened proregime candidates, and in this way they are positioned to 
count as regime supporters. Indeed, having cast proregime votes, acting 
(even secretly) as critics of the regime might lead citizens to experience 
cognitive dissonance, arising from the contradiction between voting for a 
proregime candidate and criticizing the regime. Phony elections are used 
by dictatorships to distract from the fact that control is in the hands of 
the dictator, but also to legitimize the regime as reflecting the will of the 
people, as reflected in ‘democratic elections.’
Electronic communications are now also coopted by dictatorships, 
particularly Russia and China.49 This cooptation takes place through a 
number of tactics that are more sophisticated than negative control. First, 
electronic communications are closely monitored so as to identify opposi￾tion to the regime. If this opposition calls for free and fair elections, a mul￾tiparty system, or other real prodemocracy changes, then it is shut down 
and the people involved are victimized. However, if the opposition calls 
attention to local corruption, inefficient programs, or other things that can 
be changed without diminishing the power of the central authority, then 
at least cosmetic changes are adopted and implemented. This gives the 
dictatorship new opportunities to demonstrate that it is responding to the 
will of the people. In this way, certain electronic communications critical 
of the regime are adapted to actually reinforce the dictatorship.
Second, the dictatorial regime invests heavily in building up the pres￾ence of actual and fabricated regime supporters, who include computer 
technicians hired by the regime to spread proregime messages, to disrupt, 
mystify, redirect, and if necessary to cripple antiregime groups using elec￾tronic communications. Because electronic communications allow for the 
source of messages to remain hidden, this second tactic can be highly effec￾tive, with the goal of shaping the contents of, rather than shutting down, 
electronic communications. By ‘disliking’ antiregime comments, leaving 
negative comments on antiregime websites, inserting false and mislead￾ing information, and in general creating chaos among regime critics using 
“the autocrat’s digital toolkit,”50 the proregime web armies in China and 
Russia have helped marginalize the opposition and strengthen networked 
authoritarianism.51
The third cooptation tactic used particularly by Russia is to try to influ￾ence political events in other countries by developing credible connec￾tions with populations there. An extensive study of Twitter tactics used 
by the Internet Research Agency (IRA), a tool of the Russian government, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press126 Technology Forces Change
showed that 52.6 percent of tweets intended to influence events in the 
United States were designed to give credibility to the IRA and to camou￾flage deeper political motives.52 Many of these tweets repeated sometimes 
mundane, noncontroversial events and facts. The goal is to first establish 
credible sources of information, then use these sources to influence politics 
in the United States.
Self-censorship:
[N]ew technologies now afford rulers fresh methods for preserving 
power … Surveillance empowered by artificial intelligence (AI) … allows 
despots to automate the monitoring and tracking of their opposition in 
ways that are far less intrusive than traditional surveillance … no one has 
to pay a software program to monitor people’s text messages, read their 
social media posts, or track their movements. And once citizens learn to 
assume that all those things are happening, they alter their behavior without 
the regime having to resort to physical repression. Andrea Kendall-Taylor, 
Erica Frantz, & Joseph Wright53
Self-censorship is the third stage in the relationship between dictator￾ships and electronic communications. During this stage, the dictatorial 
regime uses direct and indirect means to make it well known among the 
general population that electronic communications are monitored and 
antigovernment activities are seriously punished. Dictatorial regimes also 
intentionally but ‘unofficially’ spread news about harsh punishments such 
as torture.54 The objective is to influence populations to self-censor. Self￾censorship ensures that political plasticity, even if it increases, will return 
to lower levels in a self-censoring population.
In conclusion, the relationship between dictatorships and electronic 
communications has transformed, from simplistic negative control (e.g., 
slowing or shutting down the Internet) to cooptation and inducing self￾censorship among the population. Instead of revolutionizing and democra￾tizing societies, electronic communications now also serve as the dictator’s 
friend – at home and abroad.
Concluding Comment
The initial euphoria about the liberating effect of electronic communica￾tions has now passed,55 and we are in a position to undertake a more realis￾tic assessment of the relationship between the new electronic technologies 
and political behavior. It has become clear that the Internet and different 
types of electronic communications can shift political plasticity and bring 
about prodemocracy changes but only under certain limited conditions. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressConcluding Comment 127
For example, effectively gathering correct information through electronic 
communications requires higher technical Internet skills,56 as well as the 
ability to go to original sources rather than read commentaries made by 
others on those sources.57 Also, individuals need to develop skills to avoid 
being sucked into echo chambers, contexts in which users encounter only 
opinions, values, and beliefs that correspond with their own.58
Elsewhere I have discussed the psychological characteristics individuals 
need to have in order to successfully maneuver in this challenging new 
twenty-first-century electronic context and to participate in and sustain 
democracy.59 The first of these ten psychological characteristics is the abil￾ity to acknowledge ‘I could be wrong’ at the start of all encounters, debates, 
and investigations. This default position is not possible for individuals who 
have unshakeable faith in an ideology or faith or belief system. Other char￾acteristics that need to be nurtured in the democratic citizen is openness to 
interact with, learn from, and also share knowledge with dissimilar others. 
Developing an education system that socializes citizens capable of these 
behaviors is a highly difficult challenge but a very worthy one. Electronic 
technologies have a potentially highly important role in socializing demo￾cratic citizens, but in practice this potential remains unfulfilled. Electronic 
communications have not changed political plasticity in the direction that 
was initially envisaged.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press128
chapter 11
Globalization and Deglobalization
One of the most powerful, all-embracing, and irresistible sources of 
change has been globalization, the realization of the global village through 
increasingly deeper forms of interconnectedness between economies, orga￾nizations, and people across national boundaries and regions. Globalization 
is transforming a great deal around the world, including human behavior.1
In the ideal, the end goal of globalization is a world in which people, 
goods, services, ideas, and cultural products move freely across regions and 
national borders, and people perceive themselves to be part of one world 
and one group, humankind. The fruition of this ideal makes it possible 
for individual human beings to see their own interests in line with the 
interests of the rest of the world and to make sacrifices for the sake of all 
humanity to tackle serious challenges, such as global warming and world 
peace. The economic forces motoring globalization seem unstoppable, so 
that we will inevitably end up in “One World, Ready or Not” as one 
author puts it.2
On the surface, then, globalization seems to be a force that is changing 
human behavior to become high in political plasticity, even in domains 
such as ethnicity, nationalism, and religion. Ready or not, we are on a 
one-way road to a different future; our behavior is changing and the global 
village is taking shape – so it seems. The globalization movement seems 
irresistible and unstoppable. But particularly since the last decades of the 
twentieth century, there has evolved an anti- or de- globalization move￾ment. The globalization ideal has come under attack and been rejected by 
massive populist movements led by authoritarian strongmen, as well as 
radical white nationalists, extremist Muslims, and an array of other groups 
from different political backgrounds who see globalization ideals as being 
against their collective interests. There is increasing support for deglobal￾ization, the movement away from globalization, toward local identities 
and allegiances. As we shall see, there are ways in which the demise of the 
globalization ideal is shaped by limitations in political plasticity.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe Ideal of Globalization 129
In the first section of this chapter, I elaborate on progress already made 
toward the ideal of globalization. This includes the expansion of free trade and 
the free market, the increased movement of people across national borders 
and regions, the decrease in language diversity and the increased influence 
of English as a global language, the development of a global shared youth 
culture, and the development of larger regional units such as the European 
Union, going beyond the nation-state. In the second section, I discuss how 
globalization ideals go against certain psychological processes that limit 
political plasticity and inhibit change. These psychological processes include 
basic aspects of cognition such as categorization, as well as social behaviors 
such as ethnocentrism. In the third section, I examine limits to political plas￾ticity that have resulted in deglobalization. This has been associated with a 
disparate set of movements, including different types of radicalizations, such 
as radical national, ethnic, and religious movements. Associated with this is 
the rise of authoritarian strongman leadership, which strengthens ethnocen￾trism and extreme nationalism but weakens democracy.3
The Ideal of Globalization
Perhaps the inevitability and the ideal of globalization is best portrayed 
by the titles of two books by Kenishi Ohmae: Borderless World and The 
End of the Nation-State.
4
 This ideal of an open, integrated world, with 
people, ideas, cultures, and everything else moving freely from place to 
place, is contrasted with a world of static nation-states and robust nation￾alism, ethnocentrism, and different kinds of physical and symbolic borders 
between human groups. Globalization is associated with peace, whereas a 
world rigidly separated by national, religious, ethnic, linguistic, and other 
boundaries is associated with conflict. The ideal of an integrated and more 
peaceful world has been discussed by various thinkers particularly after 
World War II,5
 but from the 1980s there was an acceleration and diffusion 
of the idea that borders around the world would fall and the nation-state 
would experience a serious decline, and eventually perhaps even disappear. 
The result would be fewer conflicts. After all, most modern wars involve 
nations going to war against one another; the dissolution of nations would 
bring an end to this kind of war.
In line with economic arguments going back to Adam Smith (1723–1790), 
proponents of globalization propose that free trade and a global market 
economy bring commercial interdependencies that strengthen peace and 
bring economic benefits to all humanity. Major international institutions 
have been established to help achieve this goal. Since World War II, the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press130 Globalization and Deglobalization
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) have helped to expand international trade and the 
economic integration of the world. This economic integration helps keep 
the world peaceful (the idea being that economic partners are less likely 
to go to war against one another), with huge benefits for humankind – so 
globalization supporters argue.6
A review of discussions in favor of globalization, which were particularly 
dominant until the second decade of the twenty-first century, reveals two 
strong themes: first, an emphasis on the inevitability of globalization and, 
second, the highlighting of the economic and other (e.g., strengthening of 
peace) benefits of globalization. With respect to inevitability, a wide range 
of indicators are used to demonstrate the relentless march of globalization; 
for example, we learn that
[t]he value of trade (goods and services) as a percentage of world GDP 
increased from 42.1 percent in 1980 to 62.1 percent in 2007 … Foreign 
direct investment increased from 6.5 percent of world GDP in 1980 to 31.8 
percent in 2006 … The number of minutes spent on cross-border telephone 
calls, on a per-capita basis, increased from 7.3 in 1991 to 28.8 in 2006.7
In an influential book, Thomas Friedman discussed globalization as “the 
inexorable integration of markets, nation-states and technologies to a 
degree never witnessed before.8
 This inevitable march toward greater glo￾balization is seen to result in English as the lingua franca,9
 international 
standardization in (at least) science education,10 and global rankings of 
higher education institutions.11
With respect to the proposed benefits of globalization, China’s actions 
in the global context provide an interesting indicator. For example, in 2001 
China made English a compulsory subject for children in primary schools 
(China has since ended this policy) and also joined the WTO, which is 
designed to facilitate the free flow of international trade. It is estimated 
that joining the WTO raised China’s economic growth rate from 2002 to 
2007 by 2.4 percent and also benefited the rest of the world by increasing 
China’s export and import growth rates respectively by 13.2 percent and 
18.89 percent annually.12 With respect to changes in the rest of the world, 
between 1980 and 2010, international trade increased by about thirty-five 
times, and also trade became more global and brought benefits for the 
poor.13 According to Fredrik Erixon, Director of the European Center for 
International Political Economy, “On average, the gains from opening up 
to trade are 63 percent for the 10 percent of income earners with the lowest 
incomes and 28 percent for the 10 percent with the highest incomes. In 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressPolitical Plasticity and Globalization 131
other words, the lower the income, the bigger the gain.”14 In an expansive 
discussion, Gale Johnson identified increases in life expectancy, agricul￾tural productivity, and immunization as examples of the benefits of global￾ization.15 For example, life expectancy in all developing countries increased 
from 46 years in 1960 to 64.4 years in 1997, by 2000 the crop yields in both 
high- and low-income societies more than doubled compared to prior to 
1940, and immunization against tuberculosis and measles reached over 
79 percent for children in all developing countries.
It is the young who are most impacted by processes of globalization, as 
they are growing up in societies that are becoming in important respects more 
similar,16 and globalization provides the context for their development.17 First, 
compared to older adults the young have more potential to be impacted by 
globalization, because they are in the process of taking shape socially and 
cognitively. Second, the young are more integrated with the new electronic 
communications technologies and social media, which has greater global 
reach. Third, youth culture, particularly clothing and music, has become 
more global (I notice this when I give talks to groups of students in different 
countries – in some respects university students in different countries have 
become very similar). The ideal of a borderless world, with free movement for 
everyone and everything, is a good match for youthful idealism.
But the ideal of a global village is contradicted by certain psychological 
processes that limit political plasticity, as we see in the next section of the 
chapter.
Psychological Processes, Political Plasticity, 
and Globalization
The ideal of globalization requires that we perceive and interact with other 
people as individual human beings without placing them in categories 
and being influenced by their group memberships and that we give prior￾ity to an inclusive identity based on the larger world and on humanity 
as a whole. This jives with the suggestion that we treat other people as 
individual humans, rather than as women or men, black or white, Jewish 
or Christian or Muslim, rich or poor, American or Russian or Chinese, 
or as members of other types of categories. Very importantly, the ideal of 
globalization also requires that we give priority to the collective needs of 
humanity, particularly in order to solve problems such as global warming 
and collective violence and war. But to what extent do these requirements 
match our psychological characteristics, and if they do not match, how 
malleable are these characteristics?
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press132 Globalization and Deglobalization
I argue that globalization ideals are in important respects going against 
certain basic human psychological tendencies that are fairly rigid and low 
in political plasticity and that these directly shape behavior in ways that 
limit changes toward globalization ideals. These psychological character￾istics include categorization and its consequences, as well as the limited 
nature of altruism, and the role of ethnicity, religion, nationality, and 
other important criteria for group formation as a basis for identity devel￾opment. From this perspective, then, the movement toward globalization 
ideals could make progress only within the limitations set by our fairly 
rigid psychological characteristics, starting with the basic process of cat￾egorization and our use of categories.
Categories are partitions of the world,18 such as how we humans partition 
what for us is visible light, which is the small part of the electromagnetic 
spectrum that we can see. Cones, specialized neurons in the retina, enable 
us to detect color. This is part of a shared human visual processing system 
that results in certain universals in human color perception, such as the 
dominance of eleven or fewer color categories across different societies.19
As in most cases of how the world is partitioned, there are both universal 
(etic) and local or culture-specific (emic) aspects of color categorization.20
However, cross-cultural variations in how partitioning takes place should 
not lead us to neglect the fundamentally important point that partitioning 
always takes place, and categories are cognitive tools used by all humans.21
The partitioning of the social world begins very early in life. There is 
evidence that infants as young as three months can notice differences 
between the members of different ethnic and gender groups.22 By the end 
of the first year of life, infants are categorizing other people on the basis 
of ethnicity, at least differentiating between the ethnic ingroup and ethnic 
outgroups.23 Very importantly, social categorization has consequences that 
begin to be manifested by the end of the first year of life: There are signs 
of a preference for the ingroup.24 By the end of the second year of life, 
infants have an expectation that ingroup members will preferentially help 
one another, rather than help an outgroup member.25 By the age of five, 
children have developed ideas about ingroup members being morally obli￾gated to one another, in a way that makes it more acceptable to harm an 
outgroup member rather than an ingroup member.26 The particular ethnic 
groups involved, and thus the categories infants use to partition the social 
world, vary across cultures. What is consistent is the partitioning of the 
social world, along with the bias in favor of the ingroup.
Both the tendency to engage in social categorization and to show 
ingroup bias have a functional basis. Social categorization brings the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressPolitical Plasticity and Globalization 133
advantages of categorization processes to the social world,27 enabling indi￾viduals to more efficiently orient themselves in relation to different out￾groups and ingroup(s). Knowing the group membership of another person 
often serves as a shortcut, so the individual can plan for action more effi￾ciently. For example, when John learns that Sally belongs to a vegan cook￾ing group and has devoted herself to a vegan lifestyle, he can plan better 
for their dinner night out together (he should not attempt to romance her 
in a steakhouse!).
Similarly, the norm of ingroup favoritism makes the behavior of group 
members more predictable and better regulated. Group members have an 
understanding that they will receive special support from other ingroup 
members, and this enhances cooperation between group members.28 Also, 
in our evolutionary past, groups whose members favored the ingroup 
would have had a survival advantage, because group members would 
ensure that greater resources would be provided for the ingroup. In this 
sense, ethnocentrism has a functional basis.
The same evolutionary perspective has led most researchers to argue that 
there is no true altruism, behavior intended to help another without regard 
for benefit to oneself.29 For example, imagine if Jane spends hours looking 
around the neighborhood and finally finds and returns her neighbor’s lost 
dog to receive a $100 reward, is that altruism? Not necessarily, because Jane 
was rewarded with money. What if Jane tells her neighbor to donate the 
$100 reward to charity, is that altruism? Not necessarily, because Jane now 
benefits from the positive reputation she has in the neighborhood (‘Jane 
is so sweet, she found the lost dog and gave the reward to charity. She is a 
wonderful neighbor!’). Although a few researchers argue that there is true 
altruism,30 most argue against.
Sociobiologists propose that the most important forms of helping oth￾ers, as well as aggressions against others, are driven by the motivation to 
perpetuate our own genes.31 Consequently, we help others who share our 
genes and we are shocked when anyone behaves against this trend. For 
example, imagine how flabbergasted we are if parents leave their inheri￾tance to strangers rather than to their own children. The same trend is 
argued to underlie biases in ethnic relations: We are biased in favor of the 
ethnic ingroup and against ethnic outgroups.32 (From a sociobiological 
perspective, this is because we, unconsciously or consciously, perceive the 
ethnic ingroup to be genetically more similar and the ethnic outgroups to 
be more dissimilar to us.33)
These patterns of bias in favor of the ingroup have been amply docu￾mented by psychological research, in the shape of intergroup prejudice 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press134 Globalization and Deglobalization
and discrimination.34 Such biases work against the ideal of globalization, 
according to which we are expected to give priority to ‘humanity’ rather 
than local identities. The ideal of globalization requires that people adopt 
humanity as their primary superordinate or common group identity;35 if 
this occurs, local ethnic, religious, national, linguistic, and other identities 
become secondary. Movement to achieve this ideal requires high political 
plasticity.
Deglobalization: The Turn Away from Globalization
The globalization movement and its supporters adopt a rationalist￾materialist explanation of human behavior. Globalization is proposed as 
a major factor leading to material benefits for the world,36 and human 
beings are assumed to rationally recognize these benefits and support glo￾balization. The rationalist perspective is strongly represented in the field of 
economics through rational choice theory,37 which assumes that individu￾als perform cost–benefit analyses and make decisions that they calculate to 
be in their best self-interest. But human behavior is not entirely rational; 
some critics would contend that it is seldom if ever rational (as we discussed 
in Chapter 7 of this book). In this section, I discuss the often-irrational 
human motivations underlying deglobalization. In a sense, deglobalization 
is a movement guided by rigidities in political plasticity.
In the field of psychology and conflict resolution, the rationalist￾materialist perspective has been strongly influenced by a line of research 
originating with the Turkish American psychologist Mozafer Sherif 
(1906–1988).38 Sherif conducted highly influential field studies in a sum￾mer camp, where the research participants were eleven-to-twelve-year 
boys, selected for homogeneity so that ethnicity, gender, and other group 
differences would not influence the results. There were four stages to the 
basic study. In stage one, the boys arrived at the summer camp and got 
to know one another. During stage two, two groups were formed, mak￾ing sure that the boys who had made friends with one another ended up 
in different groups. This was so that interpersonal friendship would not 
influence the results. In stage three, the two groups competed against one 
another in tug-of-war and other such games. During this stage, the atti￾tudes and actions of each group became hostile and aggressive toward the 
outgroup. Also, more aggressive boys emerged in leadership positions in 
each group. Now the challenge facing Sherif and his associates was how 
to end this intergroup conflict and bring about peace between the two 
groups. This was achieved by introducing superordinate goals, which are 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressDeglobalization: The Turn Away from Globalization 135
goals desired by both groups but possible to achieve only if both groups 
cooperate in the solution. For example, a truck bringing food to the sum￾mer camp apparently broke down and the two groups of boys (who all 
wanted to be fed!) had to cooperate to pull the truck into the camp. After 
several such incidents in which solutions were found through the coop￾eration of all the boys, their attitudes and behavior changed and the two 
groups of boys became friends again.
Undoubtedly Sherif’s approach has great promise and has influenced 
both applied work and research in important respects.39 But there are 
severe limitations to the rationalist-materialist perspective. For example, 
consider the issues of global warming and world peace, both of which 
should serve as superordinate goals for humanity. All the scientific evi￾dence points to global warming bringing gigantic disasters for humanity 
by the end of the twenty-first century (as discussed in Chapter 7 of this 
book), and with about 12,000–13,000 nuclear warheads in the world we 
are in serious danger of obliterating all of humankind. Global warming 
and world peace should serve as superordinate goals, but they have failed 
to do so.
What is preventing humankind from adopting and acting on superordi￾nate goals such as global warming and world peace? One kind of answer is 
given by Garrett Hardin who first discussed The Tragedy of the Commons,
40
and there have been follow-up attempts to relate this ‘tragedy’ to world 
peace and climate change.41 The tragedy of the commons occurs when 
individuals have open access to a resource, unconstrained by institutions 
and laws, and they each act according to their own self-interests without 
being influenced by the common good and end up depleting the resource 
and damaging the interests of everyone. For example, in the domain of 
global warming, in the twenty-first century we still have many nations 
using fossil fuels and damaging the global environment in other ways, in 
pursuit of their own national interests and in disregard to the common 
good of humanity.
Another important way in which the rationalist-materialist perspective 
is limited concerns the lack of attention given to identity needs. In the next 
section, I argue that identity needs are deeply entrenched, low in political 
plasticity, and important factors bringing about deglobalization.
Identity Needs and Deglobalization
Globalization involves the group size becoming larger and larger until, in 
the ideal, it encompasses all humanity. The ideal end result is individuals 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press136 Globalization and Deglobalization
identifying humanity as their superordinate ingroup. However, when 
bipedalism began about five million years ago, we lived for long periods 
in relatively small hunter-gathering groups, typically numbering 100–300 
people. Our social and cognitive skills took shape in this small-group con￾text. On the basis of evolutionary studies, Robin Dunbar argues “that 150 
may be a functional limit on interacting groups even in contemporary 
Western industrial societies.”42 What has come to be known as ‘Dunbar’s 
number’ suggests a cognitive limit to the number of relationships indi￾viduals can maintain.43 This has important implications for organizational 
settings in particular, because when this limit is breached, group cohesion 
and job satisfaction suffer. In line with this evolutionary perspective, psy￾chological research shows that it is easier for individuals to identify with, 
and be loyal to, smaller rather than larger groups.44
One way in which we cope with this limitation is to organize our lives 
in small groups, even in the context of very large organizations and col￾lectives. For example, in the twenty-first century most universities consist 
of tens of thousands (and even hundreds of thousands) of students, and 
many thousands of faculty and administrative staff. However, the mem￾bers of each university do not personally know and work with all the other 
members, only a small subset, typically those of their own department. By 
organizing the university members in colleges and departments, we make 
the working unit more manageable in size. Similarly, large business orga￾nizations, such as Apple and Facebook, have numerous small departments 
and units that make it easier for individual employees to develop a sense of 
belonging and identity. The same happens in cities, which can consist of 
tens of millions of inhabitants, who achieve a sense of belonging through 
interactions within smaller districts and neighborhoods.
Although we interact within small groups and there are limits to the 
number of relationships we can maintain, we also identify with and show 
loyalty to some very large groups. This is achieved in part through cul￾tural carriers (discussed in Chapters 1, 2, and 8 of this book). For example, 
Liverpool soccer club serves as a cultural carrier for many inhabitants of 
Liverpool City, who do not all know one another personally but identify 
with one another through their support for the Liverpool soccer team.45
But the identification of individuals with sports teams, universities, cit￾ies, and even nations is still relatively small scale compared to the global￾ization ideal of identifying with humanity. The pull of local identities is 
one of the limitations on large-scale change, such as the creation of the 
European Union, and the even larger-scale example of the creation of a 
global identity for humanity. Another limitation is the difference between 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressDeglobalization: The Turn Away from Globalization 137
the maximum speed of change at macroeconomic and macropolitical levels 
and the micro level of psychological processes.46 This difference becomes 
particularly apparent after revolutions, when a revolutionary government 
comes to power and attempts to implement radical new programs that 
require major changes in behavior among the people (as discussed in 
Chapter 8 of this book). A change in regime, constitution, and govern￾ment policies can take place overnight at the stroke of a pen, but changing 
the behavior of citizens to be in line with these radical new policies is typi￾cally far slower, as successive postrevolution governments have discovered 
when they have failed to reach their radical goals, such as collectivization.
Among the factors limiting globalization are the relatively slow pace of 
change at the psychological level and the pull of local identities, associ￾ated with smaller groups that allow for more intimate relationships and 
direct contact. These factors have led to fractured globalization, with iden￾tity needs and allegiances pulling in a local direction but political and 
economic institutions and forces pushing to create larger units, such as the 
European Union, and fueling globalization.47 Fractured globalization and 
the pull of local identities are at the heart of the deglobalization movement.
Deglobalization and the pull back to the local level and smaller groups 
is deeply influenced by identity needs. Economic integration is pushing us 
to the global, but identity allegiances to the local level persist and create an 
irrational resistance to fuller global integration – irrational in the sense that 
in theory free trade, free movement of labor, and free movement of capital 
will bring material benefits to all the world. But the economic benefits 
of globalization do not overcome the serious identity threats associated 
with the global village. For example, the free movement of labor involves 
the arrival of dissimilar others (as immigrants, refugees, temporary work￾ers, etc.), who pose threats to ‘our way of life,’ our religion and values, our 
language, and our identity.
The threats associated with globalization have opened the door for 
authoritarian strongmen to come to power in a number of countries, 
including the United States. Of course, authoritarian strongmen continue 
to rule as dictators in traditional dictatorships, such as China, Russia, Iran, 
and North Korea. But the new trend at the start of the twenty-first century 
is the rise of authoritarian strongmen in countries that were making some 
progress toward democracy, such as Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil and Recep 
Tayyip Erdogan in Turkey, and countries that were considered to have 
made solid progress toward democracy, such as Narendra Modi in India 
and Donald Trump in the United States. We can add to this list populist 
leaders such Boris Johnson of the United Kingdom, Jimmie Akesson of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press138 Globalization and Deglobalization
Sweden, and Giorgia Meloni of Italy. The rise of all these leaders has been 
helped by threats associated with globalization, and particularly the threat 
of ‘invasions’ by large number of ‘dissimilar others.’ Brexit is a highly vis￾ible reaction to this threat, another example being the physical wall that 
Trump tried to build to ‘keep out illegals.’
Authoritarian strongmen, from Trump of the United States to Putin of 
Russia and Xi of China, have also reacted against globalization by propa￾gating a different kind of freedom, one that is based on the collective rather 
than the individual. The traditional liberal conception of freedom that was 
being spread around the world through globalization is individual-based. 
I term this detached freedom,
48 because it presents freedom as involving 
human rights and freedoms for independent individuals. But authoritar￾ian strongmen advocate attached freedom, which rejects individual human 
rights and freedoms but involves the individual feeling free through sub￾mersion into the collective and the glory and success of the group. This is 
the ‘great leader’ telling his adoring followers that he alone can save them, 
he alone can lead their group to glory, he alone can resurrect their powers, 
he alone can make Germany, America, Russia, China … great again.
In this way, the message of the authoritarian strongman carries with 
it strong themes of threat but also shining promises of future collective 
glory under his leadership. Threats are from those ‘others’ who are dis￾similar from us – and the nature of the dissimilar others varies across dif￾ferent societies. For Trump in America the threat is from Mexicans and 
Muslims, for Khomeini in Iran the threat is from Western culture and 
liberal values, particularly liberated women. These threats can be overcome 
only through the authoritarian strongman’s leadership, with individuals 
melting into the collective and doing his will.
In summary, the rise of authoritarian strongmen and the deglobaliza￾tion movement is influenced by rigidities in political plasticity. These are 
psychological limiting factors inhibiting change toward the democratic 
global village.
Concluding Comment
The globalization movement seemed to defy political plasticity, forcing 
behavioral change even in domains such as ethnicity, nationalism, and 
religion. It seemed we would all end up in a global village, identifying 
with humanity as our superordinate common group. The momentum and 
power of globalization seemed to make the global village inevitable, par￾ticularly as reflected in the evolving global youth culture.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressConcluding Comment 139
But the limits of political plasticity have been demonstrated by the 
deglobalization movement, which has emerged as a widespread backlash 
against globalization. Enormous changes continue to take place around 
the globe, but in a fragmented manner. The push of economic and politi￾cal forces toward global integration are resisted, sidetracked, and pushed 
back by identity needs that give priority to the distinctiveness of smaller, 
local groups. This is associated with the radical rejection of ‘the dissimilar 
other,’ whether it be by Khomeini and his fanatical Muslim supporters 
rejecting Westernization, or Donald Trump and his authoritarian sup￾porters rejecting Mexicans and Muslims and other outsiders ‘invading’ 
America, or extremist right-wing nationalists in Europe (such as Marie le 
Pen, the French politician) rejecting immigrants and refugees.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University Presshttps://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressPart III
Looking Ahead
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.015 Published online by Cambridge University Presshttps://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press143
chapter 12
The Eternal Dictator and Political Plasticity
Sometimes we receive advice that proves to be not only absolutely wrong 
but also dangerous because it blinds us to upcoming disasters. Three such 
experiences stand out for me, with regard to advice I received about dif￾ferent world leaders. The first piece of advice was given to me in 1978, just 
before the revolution that swept the last dictator shah of Iran from power 
and opened the door for Ayatollah Khomeini (1900–1989) to return from 
exile abroad and become the next dictator in Iran. I was returning from 
England to Iran at that time and this advice gave me a false sense of hope 
about Khomeini:
Don’t worry about Khomeini. After he gets back to Iran, he’ll retire to 
the holy city of Ghom and keep himself busy with theological debates in 
seminaries. Khomeini won’t get mixed up in politics. He’s not interested 
in earthly power.
Within a year of returning to Iran in 1979, Khomeini had decimated all 
prodemocracy groups and individuals, concentrated absolute power in his 
own blood-stained hands, and established a corrupt and ferocious dicta￾torship that still continues to rule Iran through extreme repression.
The next bit of advice that seemed innocuous at the time but proved to 
be lethally wrong was given to me in 2013, when Xi Jinping became the 
president of China:
As the Chinese middle-class grows, China will inevitably transform into a 
democracy. Xi was selected to lead China into a new democratic era. He 
is the right man for this job. You’ll see how under Xi, freedoms in China 
will flourish.
Over the next decade, Xi crushed democratic groups in Hong Kong, 
throttled possible internal rivals, reinstated repression throughout China, 
threatened Taiwan, and declared himself president for life. As Elizabeth 
Economy has insightfully argued,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press144 The Eternal Dictator and Political Plasticity
What makes Xi’s revolution distinctive is the strategy he has pursued: the 
dramatic centralization of authority under his personal leadership; the 
intensified penetration of society by the state; the creation of a virtual wall 
of regulations and restrictions that more tightly controls the flow of ideas, 
culture, and capital into and out of the country, and the significant projec￾tion of Chinese power.1
I received a third piece of advice in 2019 that proved to be utterly naïve 
and incorrect about another antidemocracy leader, the would-be dictator 
Donald Trump.
Trump has lost the presidential election and that is the end of that sad chap￾ter in American history. He won’t try anything now. He’ll disappear from 
the scene and we won’t hear from him again in American politics.
But after losing the 2020 US presidential election, Trump almost suc￾ceeded in sabotaging the peaceful transition of power by rallying his sup￾porters to violently attack Capitol Hill on January 6, 2021, to prevent the 
electoral college votes from being counted. Trump continues to repeat the 
fraudulent claim that the 2020 US presidential election was ‘stolen’ and 
he still refuses to accept defeat.2
 He continues to act as king-maker in the 
Republican Party and has amassed a war chest of hundreds of millions of 
dollars to use in his ongoing political campaign, looking forward to the 
2024 US presidential election, and beyond.
Common to these three dangerous and flatly wrong pieces of advice I 
received about Khomeini, Xi, and Trump is a lack of understanding about 
the dictator’s (or would-be dictator’s) mind, as well as the long history 
and continued presence of authoritarian strongmen in human societies. 
This shallow understanding is coupled with the lack of research attention, 
reflected in part by the absence of psychological research on this highly 
important topic.3
 It is noteworthy that very few psychologists have given 
attention to the psychological foundations of dictatorship and the person￾ality characteristics of actual and would-be dictators.4
 Associated with this 
neglect is a naïve optimism and a tragic lack of awareness of the serious 
danger that open societies face from individuals who have the personality 
characteristics of dictators and who can – and sometimes do – influence 
societies to move backward to become closed, changing democracies to 
dictatorships.
From the collapse of Athenian democracy 2,500 years ago to the failure of 
prodemocracy revolutions in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, his￾tory has provided repeated examples of antidictatorship revolutions lead￾ing to new dictatorships and even democracies collapsing and returning to 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.016 Published online by Cambridge University PressThe Dictator’s Mind in Historical Context 145
dictatorship.5
 We need to constantly remind ourselves of the insight pro￾vided by John Adams (1735–1826), second president of the United States, 
that throughout history all democracies have committed suicide.6 Even 
in societies such as the United States that have made some (albeit inad￾equate) progress toward actualized democracy, there persists the possibility 
that the springboard to dictatorship will come to life (with the help of an 
antidemocracy leader, such as Hitler in the early 1930s) and be used by a 
potential dictator to spring to absolute power.
The continued presence in every human society of individuals who 
in terms of personality characteristics are potential dictators serves as an 
important limitation on political plasticity. There are Donald Trumps in 
every democracy, ready to try to move society backward to create a dic￾tatorship – just as there are Vladimir Putins and Ruhollah Khomeinis in 
every dictatorship, ready to reestablish dictatorship under a different guise 
after a revolution has toppled the last dictator (as happened in Iran in 1979 
and Russia in 1990). It is important that we pay close attention to these 
potential dictators, because they are an ever-present danger to democracy 
and freedom throughout human history. The presence of these individuals 
is an important limiting factor on political plasticity and on how fast and 
how much societies can change toward actualized democracy.
In Chapter 3 I discussed the larger historical context in which dictato￾rial leadership emerges. I continue this discussion in the next section of 
this chapter, where I examine the context in which we need to understand 
the dictator’s mind. Next, I assess the psychological characteristics of the 
dictator’s mind. The minds of potential and actual dictators have a par￾ticular set of psychological characteristics that tend to be consistent across 
cultures (and to some extent also across time7
).
The Dictator’s Mind in Historical Context
The dictator’s mind evolved over very long time periods, and particularly 
from about 10,000 years ago since the development of a surplus, an excess 
of production that enabled societies to become materially richer (discussed 
in Chapter 3 of this book).8
 But the increase in societal wealth was also 
associated with greater inequalities, as some individuals and groups 
remained relatively poor and powerless while others accumulated rela￾tively enormous wealth and power. In this context of evolving inequalities, 
strongman leaders emerged with titles such as chief, king, and emperor to 
rule increasingly large and sophisticated human settlements and regions. 
Strongman leaders protected their positions by building up military and 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press146 The Eternal Dictator and Political Plasticity
security forces, as well as by propagating ideologies, such as the ‘divine 
right of kings,’ that served to justify their rule, often on a religious basis.
In this historical context, strong authoritarian leaders emerged as dic￾tators with legitimizing ideologies (this relates to the earlier discussion 
about the rich and the poor, in Chapter 2 of this book) and minds suitable 
for dictatorial rule.9
 The dictator’s mind evolved over thousands of years, 
under emergent conditions where the high level of control of the leader 
over resources resulted in the position of the leader becoming increasingly 
important.10 By influencing the distribution of resources, having a high 
level of control over military forces, and collaborating with religious lead￾ers (and in some cases, serving as the most important religious leader), the 
dictator came to influence society on all major issues, including law and 
justice. At the same time the dictator had to be continually hypervigi￾lant about threats and conspiracies against himself, as I discuss in the next 
section.
The ‘primordial’ mind of the twenty-first-century authoritarian strong￾man has to be understood in this evolutionary context, as well as in rela￾tion to the springboard to dictatorship,11 which provides the enabling 
conditions for the would-be dictator to spring to absolute power. The 
twenty-first century is proving to be a time when the springboard to dic￾tatorship is taking shape in different societies, creating new opportunities 
for potential dictators to spring to power. This is against expectations and 
received wisdom, as we were not supposed to witness a new age of dicta￾torship in the twenty-first century. The collapse of the Soviet Union in 
1991 resulted in euphoria in Western societies, since it seemed that the 
‘end of history’ had arrived and capitalist democracies had triumphed over 
communist dictatorships.12 It was assumed that the countries of the failed 
Soviet Union, including Russia, would become democracies. Similarly, 
China would be transformed to a more open society, shaped by strong 
economic ties to Western democracies, as well as the liberal needs of the 
fast-growing Chinese middle class. These trends would be in line with, 
and helped by, the rising economic and political strengths of the giant 
developing democracies of India and Brazil. The gigantic geographical and 
population size of India and Brazil seemed to add to the momentum of 
movement supportive of capitalist democracies. But these hopeful expec￾tations proved to be utterly wrong.
Enormous changes have been taking place in societies across the world 
in the twenty-first century, but in an anti- rather than a prodemocracy 
direction. Russia did not change to become a democracy after the fall 
of the Soviet Union; it continues as a threatening and highly aggressive 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.016 Published online by Cambridge University PressCharacteristics of the Dictator’s Mind 147
dictatorship under Tsar Putin – as witnessed by the Russian invasion of 
Ukraine in 2022. Perhaps this trend was set when the decision as to what 
would come after the Soviet Union was made by a tiny handful of men 
in Russia, without any meaningful input from the hundreds of millions 
of ordinary people living in the collapsing Soviet Union. China has not 
become a more open society and the Chinese middle class has not opened 
the door to liberalism in China; on the contrary, it has moved further away 
from democracy, toward an absolute dictatorship under Emperor Xi in the 
twenty-first century. The giant developing countries of India and Brazil 
have not helped strengthen democratization around the world. Instead, 
authoritarian strongmen and their violent, ethnocentric followers have 
moved India and Brazil toward a dark, ethnocentric nationalism.
Reports from independent sources such as Freedom House, the Varieties 
of Democracy (V-Dem) Institute, and Journalists without Borders are 
highlighting a clear trend: Democracy and the open society are under 
attack and becoming weaker around the world. The situation is summed 
up by the title of a recent independent report: Democracy under Siege.
13
Democracies evolved in part by imposing constraints, through institutions 
and constitutions, on leadership.14 In the most-well-developed democ￾racies, such as found in the Scandinavian countries, New Zealand, and 
Switzerland, constraints on leadership are strong and there is less likeli￾hood of a rogue authoritarian strongman emerging – as in the case of 
Donald Trump in the United States and Narendra Modi in India, who 
both thrive on stirring up intergroup conflicts and mobilizing extreme 
right-wing nationalism. Institutional and constitutional constraints have 
not proved to be strong enough in the United States, India, and some 
other democracies, allowing for authoritarian strongmen to mobilize pop￾ulist support for antidemocratic actions and thus adding momentum to 
the antidemocratic changes taking place.
In order to support and save democracy, it is essential that we better 
understand the mind of the men who lead this antidemocratic charge.
Characteristics of the Dictator’s Mind
Dictators and would-be dictators make decisions that the rest of us find 
puzzling, even perhaps incomprehensible. Idi Amin (1925–2003), dictator 
of Uganda from 1971 to 1979, declared himself the King of Scotland. The 
Chinese dictator Xi released a white paper in December 2021 declaring 
China to be a ‘democracy that works’ with freedom of speech, freedom 
of religion, and all other democratic freedoms, even though this claim is 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press148 The Eternal Dictator and Political Plasticity
farcical. Just as strangely, in the same year Xi forced the Chinese tennis 
player Peng Shuai to deny making accusations of sexual assault against 
former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli, even though this was seen around the 
world as an obviously coerced denial. Khomeini dismissed economics as 
being for donkeys, and after the 1979 revolution he rejected Iranian experts 
with advanced degrees as having corrupted minds – even though expert 
advice is badly needed in Iran. Donald Trump went on live television 
in 2020 to propose that people should inject themselves with disinfec￾tant as a solution to COVID-19 – advice that could kill people. Putin 
put on a presidential election in 2021, even though this was an extraordi￾narily corrupt election, with blatant and open ballet stuffing and the main 
opposition leaders either in jail or in exile. Why did Putin bother? Hitler 
knew about Napoleon’s disastrous invasion of Russia in 1812, yet in 1941 he 
made exactly the same mistake and invaded Russia – to be defeated in the 
same way by the Russian winter. What was Hitler thinking? In 2021 Kim 
Jong-Un banned laughing and birthdays for eleven days in North Korea. 
But why? (It was actually to commemorate the ten-year anniversary of the 
death of Kim Jong Il, Kim Jong-Un’s father – who had inherited the dic￾tatorship from his father and passed it on to his son.) The list of puzzling 
decisions by dictators and would-be dictators is endless. In order to better 
understand dictators, we need to identify the main underlying psychologi￾cal characteristics of the dictator’s mind.
The dictator’s mind reflects deep instinctual insights into how he should 
behave in order to lure adoring crowds to follow and obey him and to 
vilify and destroy those who defy and oppose him. The potential or actual 
dictator has an instinctive sense of how to communicate with the masses, 
a sense that is misunderstood by elites. Cultural and scientific elites will 
mock the dictator for being crude, speaking in simplistic language, lack￾ing sophistication, but the dictator has a sixth sense of how to connect to 
the adoring masses who will do his bidding and muzzle his critics. Like a 
primitive reptile that is driven by basic instincts, the dictator acts on how 
he feels, what his gut tells him to do – and he is greedy for absolute power, 
control, and domination in the twenty-first century.
At the core of the dictator’s personality and cognitive style is self-love 
and self-centeredness. We all exhibit some level of self-centeredness, self￾concern, and even vanity, and this contributes to normal self-worth and 
positive self-image. However, the dictator is a pathological narcissist,15
with a grossly inflated sense of his own importance, brilliance, uniqueness, 
and infallibility. Related to this, the dictator’s mind is guided by certain￾ties, dogmatism, and categorical thinking. Ambiguities are shunned, as the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.016 Published online by Cambridge University PressCharacteristics of the Dictator’s Mind 149
dictator is convinced he knows exactly what is right and what is wrong, 
how everyone should live, and which people are good and which are bad. 
Given that the dictator is the center of the universe and is infallible in rec￾ognizing right and wrong, good and bad, it is natural that the dictator also 
knows everything better than everyone else.
The dictator’s “I know everything” fallacy has many detrimental conse￾quences for society, including the dictator dismissing science and scientists 
because he knows better. A classic example is Stalin, who saw himself as 
the “choirmaster of science”16 – in practice, Stalin’s interferences hindered 
scientific progress in the Soviet Union and brought about hugely costly 
setbacks in agriculture and industry, as well as universities. I witnessed the 
same antiscience position taken by Khomeini and his followers in Iran; 
the Islamic regime closed down universities for several years during the so￾called ‘cultural revolution’ in the early 1980s and continues to restrict and 
censor objective research in the twenty-first century. The same antiscience 
bias is shown by Trump and his supporters who, nevertheless, have tried 
to use the credibility of science to spread misinformation.17
Given that the dictator is all-knowing, it is natural that he should also 
be all-powerful. The dictator is instinctively against power-sharing. That is 
why in dictatorships even when decision-making is supposed to be through 
collectives or committees of different types, in practice a single authoritar￾ian male makes the decisions. For example, after the 1917 revolution in 
Russia, Vladimir Lenin (1870–1924) and then Joseph Stalin (1878–1953) 
became all-powerful dictators, and since 2000 Vladimir Putin has fol￾lowed the same leadership tradition in Russia. The same disinclination 
to share power was shown by Donald Trump in his efforts on January 6, 
2021, to prevent the peaceful transition of power to the next democrati￾cally elected president of the United States. In Iran, Khomeini took this 
‘absolute power in the hands of an absolute dictator’ even further by forc￾ing the ratification of a constitution that enshrines this principle (through 
the velayat-e faghih, discussed in Chapter 4 of this book).
But even when the dictator has crushed opposition and grabbed abso￾lute power, he continually sees conspiracies against himself. He projects 
his own fears and motives onto others. The dictator is a conspiratorial 
thinker who sees danger in any sign of disagreement with his views.
The essence of all relationships between the dictator and others is 
subjugation, the need to dominate and control. This is best explained in 
relation to Machiavellianism, a manipulative, deceptive, detached, and 
amoral personality.18 Dictators are particularly high on two features of 
Machiavellianism: first, the perception that the world is a dangerous place 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press150 The Eternal Dictator and Political Plasticity
where you have to get the other guy before he finds the opportunity to get 
you – because he does intend to get you; second, the belief that ‘the ends 
justify the means,’ so you must use whatever methods necessary to grab 
and keep power.
The need to subjugate, together with high Machiavellianism, shapes the 
dictator’s relationships with other people, including women. Dictators 
require women to play subordinate, submissive roles. At the collective 
level, dictators attract the support of women who desire men who are con￾trolling, strong, aggressive, and domineering.
The dictator is driven to achieve control, to be in command in every 
way, but he has the illusion of control even when it is not achieved. This 
accounts for the often-grandiose declarations of even petty dictators from 
minor dictatorships, announcing that they will ‘level to the ground and 
utterly destroy America’ or some other major power. The need for control 
is coupled with emotional distancing from, and lack of empathy with, ordi￾nary people and events. Distancing enables the dictator to remain aloof, 
untainted by events, with himself as the untouched center of the universe. 
Of course, anything that goes wrong is the responsibility of others, not 
the dictator. This brings to mind the image of Hitler in the last months 
of World War II, urging young boys and old men to continue defending 
Berlin and blaming the German people for ‘betraying him,’ rather than 
taking personal responsibility for the catastrophic tragedies he caused.19
The most distinct and mysterious characteristic of the dictator’s mind 
is an astounding sensitivity to, and understanding of, the adoring masses 
who surround him. Again and again we witness the same pattern across 
different societies and across time, with the cultural and scientific elite 
scorning and looking down at the dictator as a ‘simpleton,’ as unsophisti￾cated, as someone who can hardly put a few sentences together correctly, 
but many ordinary people being charmed, captivated, mesmerized by him. 
I witnessed this pattern of reactions to Khomeini in Iran and to the would￾be dictator Trump in the United States. Like other dictators or would-be 
dictators, Khomeini and Trump displayed an uncanny understanding of 
their populist following and showed disdain for, and were disdained by, 
the cultural and scientific elites.
Crisis Incidents and the Springboard to Dictatorship
In terms of cognitive and personality characteristics, then, there are would￾be or potential dictators in all societies. What enables a would-be dictator 
to spring to power to become an actual dictator is the availability of the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.016 Published online by Cambridge University PressCrisis Incidents and Dictatorship 151
springboard to dictatorship. But would-be dictators are not passive or pow￾erless in relation to the springboard to dictatorship; they can take measures 
to manufacture and activate this springboard. For example, an essential 
ingredient of the springboard to dictatorship is a crisis incident, disruptive 
enough to create an emergency situation and allow the would-be dictator 
to declare martial law, end civil liberties, and bring all opposition groups 
under his control. (As discussed in Chapter 3 of this book, the idea of all 
powers being concentrated in the hands of a single strong leader in times 
of crisis seems functional from an evolutionary perspective. Particularly 
when a group is under attack and decisions that could determine survival 
have to be made rapidly, groups that had strong centralized leadership 
capable of speedy decisions and actions would be at an advantage.)
In the following examples of crisis incidents, there is some ambiguity 
about the role of the incoming dictator. What role did Hitler, Khomeini, 
and Putin play in bringing about the crisis incidents that helped bring 
them to grab power? Similarly, what role did Trump play in instigating the 
January 6, 2021, attempt to prevent the peaceful transition of power to the 
Biden administration? But there is no ambiguity in that Hitler, Khomeini, 
and Putin benefitted from the crisis incident that eventually gave them 
absolute power, and Trump would have been the main beneficiary of the 
January 6, 2021, coup attempt if it had been successful.
Hitler used the fire on February 27, 1933, at the Reichstag (the meet￾ing place of the lower house of Germany’s national legislature) in Berlin 
as his crisis incident. The fire destroyed the main assembly hall of the 
Reichstag. Police and firefighters found the self-confessed arsonist at the 
scene: Marinus van der Lubbe, a Dutch communist, was tried, convicted, 
and executed. Hitler and other Nazi leaders declared the fire to be a com￾munist plot to take over Germany. Almost immediately, President Paul 
von Hindenberg signed an emergency decree that ended civil liberties in 
Germany. Although to this day there is controversy about who started the 
Reichstag fire,20 there is no doubt that it was Hitler and the Nazis who 
benefitted from this crisis. Following the fire, Hitler created an absolute 
dictatorship that lasted until the end of World War II.
Khomeini used the invasion of the US Embassy in Tehran, which lasted 
from November 4, 1979, until January 20, 1981, as the crisis incident that 
enabled him to grab absolute power. More than fifty US diplomats were 
taken as hostages for 444 days, by radical student followers of Khomeini. I 
was teaching in universities in Tehran at the time, and believe this hostage￾taking was opportunistic. A number of different embassies were attacked 
at that time, but it was the US embassy that was the prime target for the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press152 The Eternal Dictator and Political Plasticity
students. Khomeini seized the opportunity to use the hostage-taking crisis 
to sideline and crush his political competitors. Political leaders, such as 
Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan (1907–1995), saw the hostage-taking as 
too radical and felt forced to resign or were pushed out. The end result 
was that at the start of the hostage-taking incident, Khomeini was sur￾rounded by politically active and powerful individuals and groups who 
opposed and restricted his actions. When the hostage-taking crisis ended 
and the diplomats were returned to the United States, all of Khomeini’s 
major political competitors had been wiped out. Whatever opposition to 
Khomeini remained was destroyed during the 1980–1988 Iran–Iraq War, 
which Khomeini extended because the lengthy war suited his political 
goals. The political opposition to Khomeini were more easily branded as 
‘un-Islamic traitors’ during wartime.
Putin manufactured a crisis incident in September 1999, when there 
were a series of apartment bombings in Moscow. The administra￾tion of President Boris Yeltsin (1931–2007) blamed Chechen militants 
and launched a full-scale invasion of Chechnya. Putin was not a well￾known national figure at that time, but the apartment bombings and the 
Chechnyan war enabled him to grab the national spotlight as the leader 
of the fight against the ‘Islamic external enemy.’ He used the opportunity 
to spring to power from an underdog position. After becoming president 
in 2000 with Yeltsin’s help, Putin immediately granted Yeltsin a pardon 
and immunity from prosecution for any actions he undertook while in 
office. This was necessary for Yeltsin, because there were serious corrup￾tion allegations against him. Putin has remained in dictatorial power since 
2000, even though there continue to be serious questions about the role of 
Russian government security forces in the 1999 apartment bombings that 
created the key political opportunity for him.21
Donald Trump attempted to use the invasion of Capitol Hill by his 
supporters on January 6, 2021, to create a crisis incident that would pre￾vent the peaceful transmission of presidential power to Joe Biden. On that 
day a joint session of the US Congress was set to convene to certify Biden’s 
electoral vote win to become the forty-sixth president of the United States. 
Trump urged Vice-President Mike Pence, who also served as the president 
of the US Senate, to reject Biden’s win. Pence refused to comply. Trump’s 
supporters stormed Capitol Hill and attempted to prevent the counting 
and certification of the electoral college votes. Trump did not manage to 
create a large enough crisis incident to result in martial law being declared, 
and some key Republican leaders refused to do his bidding and declare the 
presidential election of 2020 as stolen. But through his populist rhetoric 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.016 Published online by Cambridge University PressConcluding Comment 153
and strongman appeal, particularly to extremist white nationalists, Trump 
has remained a powerful political figure.
Concluding Comment
One of the most important continuities in human history is the persistent 
presence of individuals with the personality characteristics of dictators. 
Sometimes the springboard to dictatorship becomes available in a timely 
way, as it did in the 1920s and 1930s in Italy and Germany, and these indi￾viduals spring to power. In other instances, the potential dictator is avail￾able, but the springboard does not come to life, as in the case of Donald 
Trump in 2020.
The continued presence of individuals with dictator personalities places 
a restriction on political plasticity and is an ever-present danger that could 
cause societies to move back from democracy to dictatorship. Received 
wisdom tells us that the best way to defend democracy from dictator 
personalities is to strengthen formal institutions and the rule of law. The 
experience of the United States with Donald Trump demonstrates that 
informal norms and traditions are not enough,22 because a would-be dic￾tator who disregards government norms and traditions can wreak havoc 
and weaken democracy – as has Trump (e.g., by telling his group to not 
comply with congressional subpoenas).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press154
Afterword
Lessons Learned: The Example of Women in Education
What lessons do these discussions of political plasticity provide for the 
future of democracy and dictatorship? I argue that by attending to politi￾cal plasticity, we can better identify areas where there is high rigidity in 
change toward actualized democracy and we need to plan to bring about 
change through programs that are systematic but also designed to avoid 
backlash. For example, programs that involve immigration, large-scale 
importation of dissimilar others, and increased ethnic diversity typically 
result in backlash and the strengthening of extremist nationalist antide￾mocracy groups in society. Change in these low political plasticity areas 
requires special planning, in order to avoid the rise of ethnocentrism and 
authoritarian strongmen. But there are also areas of high political plastic￾ity, where change is far more probable and is also likely to have a cascading 
effect, to bring about liberating transformations in other areas. I discuss 
women in education as an illustrative case of high political plasticity that 
is generating prodemocracy change in other domains.
Recognizing and Planning for Low Political Plasticity
The concept of political plasticity has enabled us to highlight and unravel 
strong continuities in certain areas of human life. These continuities can 
serve as obstacles on the path to actualized democracy. Illustrative exam￾ples of this low political plasticity are the reliance on a single (typically 
older) male leader as the key decision-maker in society, the chasm between 
the rich and poor, distinctions (and conflicts) between ethnic groups and 
religious groups, and the role of the built environment in shaping behav￾ior and sustaining continuity. Revolutions, war, and technology are also 
assumed to bring about gigantic changes but, again, the sound and fury 
of surface-level changes often camouflage deeper continuities. I have par￾ticularly pointed to the role of language and narratives in distracting us 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.017 Published online by Cambridge University PressPlanning for Low Political Plasticity 155
from the difference between surface-level and deep-level changes and hid￾ing important continuities that persist over very long time periods. In a 
number of important areas, human behavior has low political plasticity 
and change takes place very slowly, if at all, over hundreds and sometimes 
thousands of years.
Throughout the earlier chapters in this book I have highlighted the 
importance of change at different levels. For example, in discussing revo￾lutions I distinguished between the very common Type 1 revolutions, 
which bring about a change of regime but not a change of political sys￾tems (such as changing the dictator shah for the dictator mullahs in Iran 
or changing the ‘tsar’ or ‘emperor’ for a ‘president’ or ‘party leader’ in 
Russia or China, without changing dictatorship for democracy), and the 
rare Type 2 revolutions, which bring about a change of regime and a 
change in political systems (for instance, changing both who rules and 
the form of government). A more general example is the distinction 
between surface-level and deep-level changes, when superficial changes 
take place (e.g., language used in referring to people and the titles of offi￾cials), but at a deeper level authority relations and resource inequalities 
do not change or sometimes become even more unequal. These continu￾ities underlie the puzzling popular support for authoritarian strongmen 
in the twenty-first century.
Donald Trump’s well-publicized record shows that he cheated as a 
student in university examinations, followed business strategies that were 
racist and also in many cases predatory, as US president he came on live 
television to tell viewers they should inject themselves with disinfectant 
to cure COVID-19, and gave tax breaks biased in favor of the super-rich. 
Despite all this, in the 2020 US presidential elections, he got backing from 
well over seventy million voters, many of them materially poor. In order 
to better understand the popularity of authoritarian strongmen such as 
Trump, we need to look at very-long-term processes and limitations to 
political plasticity. Authoritarian strongmen appeal to the deeply felt iden￾tity needs of large numbers of individuals,1
 needs that have long historical 
roots and are not changed without highly engaging and long-term pro￾grams of mass civic education.
Thus, a first important lesson from our discussions is that in planning for 
progress, we must distinguish between surface-level and deep-level changes. 
Particularly in areas of low political plasticity, such as leader–follower rela￾tions, it is easy to mistake surface-level changes for deep progress. Only 
serious and concerted programs of civic education and engagement 
will bring about the deep-level changes that get us closer to actualized 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press156 Afterword
democracy. This requires the mobilization of the entire education system 
and leadership focused on using education to nurture democratic citizens 
with the necessary psychological characteristics.2
A second lesson from our discussions is that we must look for areas 
where political plasticity is relatively high and take steps to bring about 
progress through those areas. An example I turn to next is that of women in 
education and the societal transformation that can result from changes in 
the role of women.
Women as Transformative
The end of men: And the rise of women, the title of Hanna Rosin’s influen￾tial book,3
 reflects the dramatic changes taking place in popular concep￾tions of the role and status of women in relation to men. Since the dawn 
of humankind, men have been the dominant sex in the larger society, 
and also the sex preferred by most parents. But now there is widespread 
discussion about how boys are falling behind in school, female students 
are outperforming male students, and men are in decline at work, feeling 
lost, and slipping down from their dominant position overall.4
 Are these 
changes imaginary or are they actually taking place?
I argue that the changed role of women in the larger society has been 
motored by the tremendous success of women in education. Until rela￾tively recently, the scientific viewpoint was that women should not be 
allowed to enter higher education, because (purportedly) they are not 
born with the ability to compete with men in advanced studies. Yet in the 
twenty-first century, we find that women have made rapid progress in edu￾cation and there is now concern about males falling behind. This dramatic 
change has taken place in countries as different as the United States and 
Iran and resulted in a need for explanations of the “worldwide boom in 
higher education of women.”5
I have experienced this shift at my own university over the course of my 
working life. When I joined my university department in 1990, only two 
out of the fifteen faculty were female. It was extremely difficult at that time 
for women to have a successful academic career and a family. But now in 
the 2020s, male faculty are a small minority in my department, and the 
norm is for the majority female faculty to both successfully advance in 
their careers and have families. The majority of our doctoral students are 
also female. My academic department is a microcosm of the changes tak￾ing place in education throughout the world.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.017 Published online by Cambridge University PressWomen as Transformative 157
In reviewing the advances of women in education, I begin with a small 
reminder of the position of many scientists on the topic of sex differences. 
I conclude by considering how the low political plasticity of gender roles 
can be used to generate larger changes in society.
Women’s Advances in Education
In the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, craniologists tried to account 
for sex differences in intellectual achievement by measuring the skull. Anato￾mists asserted that the larger male skull held a heavier and more powerful 
brain. In the mid-nineteenth century, social Darwinists invoked evolution￾ary biology to argue that a woman was a man whose evolution – both physi￾cal and mental – had been arrested in a primitive stage. In this same period, 
doctors used their authority as scientists to discourage women’s attempts to 
gain access to higher education. Women’s intellectual development, it was 
argued, would proceed only at great cost to reproductive development. As 
the brain develops, so the logic went, the ovaries shrivel.6
As Londa Schiebinger (quoted above) has pointed out, over the centuries 
a variety of arguments supposedly based on science were put forward to 
justify the exclusion of women from higher education. The history of psy￾chology is also replete with examples of (supposed) objective evidence that 
purportedly shows the inferiority of the female brain.7
 On the same basis, 
women were also excluded from joining scientific associations; the Royal 
Society was founded in England in 1660, but women were not allowed 
to join as members until 1945. Women were similarly excluded from the 
Russian National Academy until 1939, the American National Academy of 
Sciences until 1925, and the French Académie des Sciences until 1962 (!). 
The great Polish-French scientist Marie Curie (1867–1934) won her second 
Nobel prize in 1911, but in that year her application to become a member 
of the French Académie des Sciences was rejected.
Until the post–World War II era, women were widely excluded from 
higher education. This exclusion was on a political rather than a scientific 
basis, and so there needed to be changes in the political conditions in order 
for women to gain access to higher education. The gradual opening up 
of higher education institutions to women came through political pres￾sures, associated with the women’s liberation movement and the higher 
participation of women in political and economic spheres. From the late 
nineteenth century, there was a sharp rise in the participation of women 
in work outside the home, and by the early twenty-first century 60–80 
percent of women worked outside the home in the thirty-eight OECD 
(Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) countries.8
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press158 Afterword
Of course, the advances of women in education and in the labor force rein￾forced one another, so that as women gained more advanced education 
they were more competitive in the labor force, and as they progressed at 
work each generation of women gained greater access to higher education 
for the next generation of women.
The advancement of women in education from the late twentieth cen￾tury has been truly astonishing. In a study of educational advancement 
in 120 countries, Gary Becker and his associates found that from 1970 to 
2010, the percentage of persons thirty to thirty-four years old with univer￾sity education increased from three to eleven in low-income countries and 
from twelve to twenty-seven in high-income countries.9
 As these research￾ers report, “Even more remarkable than the breadth and magnitude of this 
boom in higher education is how it is coming about: most of the growth 
in higher education is due to women, so much so that in most countries, 
women have not only matched but surpassed men in college attainment.”10
Reports from UN organizations monitoring changes in international edu￾cation also show this same trend, with women catching up with, and in 
many cases outperforming, men in education.11 “In the United States in 
the 1970s, male college graduates outnumbered female college graduates 3 
to 2; today, the ratio is reversed.”12
Research suggests that behind the progress made by women in educa￾tion and their higher test scores are also changes in values and educational 
expectations. Whereas traditional values and psychological outlook led to 
expectations that women would give priority to marriage, children, and 
the family, particularly after the 1960s the expectation was that women 
would give priority to success in higher education and professional careers 
outside the home. These changes in educational and career expectations 
particularly impacted teenage girls.13 In line with this, a study of adolescent 
boys and girls in fifty national education systems involved with TIMSS 
(Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study) found that in 
forty-four out of the fifty education systems girls have higher expectations 
of attaining higher education than boys.14 Strikingly, then, the same trend 
of girls generally doing better than boys is being reported in both high￾and low-income societies.15 The presence of this trend around the world in 
part reflects the impact of globalization.16
These educational trends showing girls outperforming boys have resulted 
in a wide discussion about ‘boys falling behind’ in the mass media, as well 
in as academic circles. Books with mass market appeal have been pub￾lished, with titles such as The war against boys: How misguided policies are 
harming our young men and The boy crisis: Why boys are struggling and what 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.017 Published online by Cambridge University PressWomen as Transformative 159
we can do about it (with discussions on topics such as ‘sorry, it’s a boy’).17
A simplistic explanation is that whereas before there was a bias against girls 
in education, there is now a bias against boys. But we need to reach a more 
multifaceted and more comprehensive explanation.
It is useful to seek an explanation for the success of women in edu￾cation by looking at not only Western but also non-Western societies. 
For example, there has been a dramatic increase in women’s performance 
in education in Iran,18 so that there are now more females than males in 
undergraduate programs at Iranian universities. In my experience of teach￾ing in postrevolution Iran, the explanation for why Iranian women are 
doing so well in education is that this is the only avenue open to them to 
compete and do well. In every other avenue, including in employment 
outside the home, there are enormous legal, political, and cultural barriers 
used by the mullahs and their authoritarian supporters to prevent women 
from making progress. In short, in Iran women graduate from universities 
at higher numbers than men, but they are not given job opportunities. In 
the field of education, the biases against women are fewer (although they 
are still present!).
The performances of girls and boys in many other Muslim countries cor￾respond to the Iranian experience. According to a report in The Economist, 
in Arab countries girls are less likely to be sent to school than boys, “but 
in the classroom girls vastly outperform their male peers – to a degree 
unmatched anywhere else in the world … Shoddy boys schools are turning 
out insecure young men who are more likely to feel that their livelihoods 
depend on keeping better-educated women out of work.”19 This matches 
my experience in postrevolution Iran, where educated progressive women 
are the targets of extreme prejudice from the mullahs and their supporters, 
who are typically males with low education. Iran ranks 150th (out of 156) 
in the Global Gender Gap Index,20 and it is this third-class status given to 
Iranian women by the mullah regime that prevents them from being able 
to use their higher education achievements to the benefit of themselves 
and the larger Iranian society.
The advancement of women in education in the Islamic world helps us 
to reflect back on the situation in Western societies and around the world. 
Women have advanced in education around the world for the same reasons 
that they have advanced in Islamic societies: Education is the domain that 
offers them the most level playing field to compete against men. The mass 
testing system used in the West, particularly in the United States, has been 
exported to many non-Western societies. In this testing system, all indi￾viduals take the same standardized tests, answer the same test questions, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press160 Afterword
and are assessed using the same criteria. Mass testing commonly involves 
machine scoring. Women have a better chance of being treated equally 
in this system, and they have jumped at the opportunity and excelled. In 
societies where the laws have been reformed so that women no longer face 
discrimination in employment, success in education has led to success in 
jobs and this has helped the whole economy to grow.21
Looking Ahead
Of course, the success of women in education has not resulted in a world 
in which there is gender parity. First, women are still internationally under￾represented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) 
fields.22 Second, women are still confronted by the glass ceiling in a number 
of important domains, particularly in politics and business.23 But the suc￾cess of women in education has opened up tremendous possibilities for 
change. This is because of the central role women play in the family.
The advancement of women in education changes their role in the fam￾ily, even if they do not work outside the home. More educated women can 
play a different, more enriching role in the socialization and education of 
children. Their status in the family is enhanced by their more advanced 
education, and the role model they present to their daughters and sons 
is changed. The major schools of psychology, including behaviorism, 
psychoanalysis, humanistic psychology, Gestalt psychology, and cogni￾tive psychology, have foundational differences, but they all agree in the 
importance of family dynamics and early childhood experiences in shaping 
adult behavior. The changed role of women in the family through higher 
education not only changes the family dynamics for the present but also 
transforms the future psychological citizens emerging from the family.
Two other consequences of women’s success in education are notewor￾thy. The first concerns the ongoing challenge of overpopulation in the 
world. With limited arable land, drinkable water, and other resources nec￾essary for survival, in this era of global warming we continue to face what 
Paul Ehrlich accurately calls The Population Bomb.
24 One of the conse￾quences of women entering higher education is a delay in the birth of the 
first child and a decrease in the total fertility rate.25 In this way, greater 
resources can be invested in each child because there will be fewer chil￾dren, and we have a greater chance of escaping the ‘population bomb.’
A second important consequence of women’s success in education 
arises from the method of this success and the lesson it provides for other 
minority movements. Women have succeeded in education by demanding 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.017 Published online by Cambridge University PressConcluding Comment 161
equality of opportunity and a level playing field, not by ‘celebrating their 
differences,’ positioning themselves as different from men, and demand￾ing that they be assessed using a different set of criteria. Women have 
competed with men on the standard educational tests and demonstrated 
that they are just as good – and in some respects better. In essence, women 
have given priority to human commonalities, not differences. This is in 
line with omniculturalism, which gives priority to the characteristics that 
all humans share, and not multiculturalism, which celebrates differences 
across human groups.26 The path followed by women in education is an 
important example for other minority movements.
Concluding Comment
Progress toward more democratic societies has been extremely bumpy and 
even hazardous, because it has sometimes involved movement backward 
toward dictatorship. By taking into consideration political plasticity in 
different domains, we can better plan for democratic changes. Political 
plasticity is extremely low in some domains, and we need to plan for incre￾mental change. But in other domains, political plasticity is higher and 
there is potential for bringing about cascading transformations in society. 
The area of women in education is high in political plasticity, and it is 
motoring changes in the role of women more broadly. In many important 
respects, the future of progress in democracy is dependent on the future 
of women.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press162
Notes
Preface
1 Much of the discussion on deglobalization by Walden Bello (2004) and others 
has focused on economic processes, but as becomes clear my focus is more on 
identity needs and psychological processes.
1 Political Plasticity, the Key to Understanding 
the Future of Democracy and Dictatorship
1 The pervasive nature of dictatorial authority, with the dictator having the final 
say on every subject, is also noted in the context of China; see The Economist
(2021, p. 34).
2 Woodward & Costa (2021) provide an entertaining account of events around 
the January 6, 2021, coup attempt.
3 Psychologists have given some attention to populism; see readings in Forgas, 
Crano, & Fiedler (2021).
4 Berg (2020).
5 There is a vast research literature demonstrating continued racial bias against 
African Americans in the United States. The report by Horowitz, Brown, & 
Cox (2019) is of particular value.
6 Anderson (2018).
7 Much of the research on plasticity explores neuroplasticity (Costandi, 2016).
8 Political plasticity is given some attention in Moghaddam (2019).
9 There is some discussion of the ‘global roots’ of democracy (see Sen, 2003), but 
here I limit my discussion to democracy in the Western form; for an example 
of the non-Western roots of democracy, see the discussion in chapter 10 on 
‘contextualized democracy’ in Moghaddam (2006).
10 Machiavelli gave a great deal of attention to the Florentine Republic and its 
collapse; see Clarke (2018).
11 Moghaddam (2013, 2016, 2019); Wagoner, Moghaddam, & Valsiner (2018).
12 Moghaddam (2019).
13 Dictatorship and authoritarian ‘strongman’ leadership have support from 
some factions of the population, particularly those who fit the pattern of the 
authoritarian personality (Altemeyer, 1988; Moghaddam, 2013).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressNotes to pages 5–14 163
14 Moghaddam (2016, p. 4).
15 Allemand, Zimprich, & Martin (2008).
16 Green & Daniels (2020).
17 Shadbolt & Hampson (2019) provide a lively discussion of the relationship 
between technology and human behavior.
18 Xu (2021).
19 Moghaddam (2019).
20 Xu (2021).
21 Hsieh et al. (2011).
22 See Moghaddam (2019) for a critical analysis of the influential ‘escape from 
freedom’ thesis put forward by Eric Fromm.
23 Grossi (2017).
24 Moghaddam (2002).
25 For example, see Smith’s (2017) highly insightful discussion of attempts by rev￾olutionaries to change everyday behaviors after the Russian Revolution (1917).
26 I say ‘so-called’ communist societies, because in China and a number of other 
societies that position themselves as ‘communist,’ the concentration of wealth 
and the life of the affluent parallel those of capitalist societies.
27 There has been a rethinking of traditional conceptualizations of moderniza￾tion, religion, and ethnicity (e.g., see Ammerman, 2020).
28 Moghaddam (2016).
29 O’Brien & Piscopo (2019).
2 Hardwiring inside and outside People
1 Greenfield (2013).
2 Churchland (2002).
3 Other terms that help clarify the meaning of these two extremes are: ‘hard￾wired’ versus ‘programmable,’ ‘hardware’ versus ‘software,’ ‘unlearned’ versus 
‘learned,’ ‘present at birth’ versus ‘acquired after birth,’ and ‘universal’ versus 
‘culture specific.’
4 For example, see Grossi (2017) and Persson & Savulescu (2017).
5 Bjorklund (2018).
6 Baker et al. (2017).
7 Brandt et al. (2020).
8 Simonton (2018).
9 For example, Westerhof & Keyes (2010) report on findings from a Dutch 
sample.
10 Schönfeld, Brailovskaia, & Margraf (2017).
11 Lomanowska et al. (2017, p. 120).
12 Moehler, Biringen, & Poustka (2007).
13 McGowan & Roth (2015).
14 For social identity research tradition, see chapter 5 in Moghaddam (2008). For 
collective identities, see, for example, Smeekes & Verkuyten (2015)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press164 Notes to pages 14–22
15 Moghaddam (2019).
16 The research of Opie & Opie (2001/1959) on this theme is timeless.
17 Smith (2017, p. 369).
18 Riegel (2005, p. 108).
19 Quoted in Fitzpatrick (2017, p. 99).
20 For examples of this literature, see readings in Feierman & Oviedo (2020).
21 Tumarkin (1981, p. 37).
22 Moghaddam (2002, p. 40).
23 For example, see Strang (2019) for a discussion of the originalist position on 
the US Constitution.
24 Strang (2019, p. 1).
25 Chemerinsky (2018).
26 For example, see Lang’s (2013) discussion of the case of Egypt.
27 Tomba (2017).
28 Fitzpatrick (1994, p. 19).
29 Fitzpatrick (1994, p. 128).
30 Khomeini (1979).
31 Moghaddam (2002).
32 I am aware of the argument that the hejab ‘protects’ women. First, women 
would not need such ‘protection’ when they have equal rights; second, the 
hejab is a restriction on women that is integral to their subjugation as third￾class citizens with unequal rights.
33 Edwards, Gillies, & Horsley (2015).
34 For sex differences, see Franks (2019, pp. 101–105); for sexism, see Jordan￾Young & Rumiati (2012).
35 See discussions in van Ooyen & Butz-Ostendorf (2017).
36 Rinke et al. (2018, p. 251).
37 For example, see Pfeifer & Bongard (2007) and Proffitt & Baer’s (2020) user￾friendly book.
38 Pfeifer & Bongard (2007, p. 2).
39 Lambert (2018, pp. 172–173).
40 Goldstein & Cacciamani (2022).
41 Griffey & Little (2014).
42 Langlois et al. (2000).
43 Ito et al. (2016).
44 Ebner (2008).
45 Weyl (1983).
46 Huang et al. (2018). See also the discussion of the ‘social brain’ by Atzil et 
al. (2018), who argue that “[t]he extended developmental course in humans, 
along with massive neural plasticity, makes brain development susceptible to 
environmental input” (p. 626).
47 McAndrew (2021).
48 Van Vugt & Hardy (2009).
49 Nkengne et al. (2008).
50 Russell et al. (2019).
51 Moghaddam (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressNotes to pages 25–30 165
3 Why Do Leaders Still Exist? Leadership and Followership
1 For example, Lewis & Malmgren (2019).
2 For example, Harris et al. (2019) provide a new perspective on spirituality and 
maturity among leaders.
3 Meng (2020).
4 The argument that the United States is governed by an all-powerful ‘imperial’ 
president has been countered by those who claim that public opinion shapes 
presidential decisions (see Christenson & Kriner, 2020).
5 Roberts (2014, p. 7).
6 For examples of perspectives on leadership, see Spisak (2020) and Van Vugt 
(2006).
7 The role of leaders in intergroup conflicts is highlighted by many, including 
Diamond (1997).
8 Van Vugt (2006, p. 356).
9 Von Rueden (2020, p. 167).
10 Garfield & Hagen (2020, p. 1).
11 Bowles & Choi (2013); this study was quickly followed up by others (e.g., 
Gallagher, Shennan, & Thomas, 2015) arguing that property rights, but not 
necessarily increased productivity, are necessary for the transition to farming 
and, eventually, more complex societies with centralized leadership.
12 Mattison et al. (2016) provide a highly useful wide-ranging discussion on this 
theme.
13 Mayshar, Moav, & Pascali (2020) give central importance to the higher defen￾sibility of cereal grains.
14 Mattison et al. (2016, p. 194).
15 Mattison et al. (2016, p. 195).
16 Weinberger et al. (2020).
17 Peoples, Duda, & Marlowe (2016).
18 Wood & Eagly (2002, 2012).
19 Wood & Eagly (2012, p. 61).
20 For Tiwi, see Hart, Pilling, & Goodale (2001). For Tsimane, see Von Rueden 
et al. (2014).
21 Bernard (2012).
22 Chagnon (1997) has been criticized for his research mainly on ethical grounds, 
but I believe there is value in considering his basic message about patterns of 
group dynamics.
23 Sherif (1966).
24 Lintott (1999).
25 Brown (1991); Van Vugt, Hogan, & Kaiser (2008).
26 Garfield, Syme, & Hagen (2020).
27 Mouton (2019) provides an insightful discussion of Thomas Carlyle’s (1795–
1881) ‘Great Man’ theory of history and Leo Tolstoy’s (1828–1910) critical 
assessment and counternarrative.
28 Economy (2018, p. 10).
29 The Economist (2021, p. 34).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press166 Notes to pages 31–38
30 Ruparelia (2019, p. 97).
31 Moghaddam (2019).
32 Couzin (2008, p. 36).
33 Raper (2003).
34 Couzin et al. (2011).
35 Couzin (2008, p. 39).
36 Moscovici, Mugny, & Van Avermaet (1984).
37 Dyer et al. (2008).
38 See chapter 9 and the discussion on democracy without leaders in 
Lord (2003).
39 Dreesen et al. (2020).
40 Hanzl (2007).
41 Levenda et al. (2020).
42 For examples of smart-city developments, see Cowley, Joss, & Dayot (2018).
43 See discussions in McLaverty (2017).
44 Moore et al. (2019).
45 See Lunenburg (2012) for a discussion of sources of power.
46 Freud (1955, p. 116).
47 Freud (1961, p. 119) asserts that love and hate are always tied together.
48 Freud (1955, pp. 93–94).
49 Freud (1955, pp. 123–124).
50 See Milgram (1974) and Zimbardo (2007).
51 See the discussion of power and corruption, with references to experimental 
studies, in Moghaddam (2016, pp. 104–105).
52 Whitson et al. (2013).
53 Lopes da Hora & Sampaio (2019) provide an excellent discussion of corrup￾tion experiments.
54 See Krishnamurti, Shams, & Velayutham (2018) on corporate corruption in 
global context.
4 Rich and Poor – Still Just as Different
1 Piketty (2014).
2 Examples are Atkinson (2015) and Dorling (2014).
3 For example, Hammar & Waldenstrom (2020) and Waldenstrom (2021).
4 Saez & Zucman (2019).
5 Oxfam International (2021).
6 Actually, the most expensive yachts now cost over a billion dollars;
 https://wealthygorilla.com/most-expensive-yachts/
7 Mechanic (2021).
8 Jefferson (2020).
9 Atkinson (2015); Piketty (2014).
10 Goodman (2022).
11 Bratanova et al. (2016).
12 Marmot (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressNotes to pages 38–44 167
13 Arndt (2020).
14 Piketty (2014).
15 Robeyns et al. (2021).
16 Kohler & Smith (2019).
17 Aries & Duby (1992).
18 Contamine (1988).
19 Duby (1988).
20 Bourguignon & Morrison (2002); Ravallion (2016).
21 Kim (2018b, p. 1).
22 Kohler & Smith (2019).
23 Milanovic (2011).
24 Scheidel (1917, p. 6).
25 Piketty (2014); Anderson (2015).
26 For example, the research of Daniel Waldenstrom and his colleagues does not 
support the view that free-market capitalism, unfettered by mass mobilization 
wars, pandemics, progressive taxation, and the like, would inevitably lead to 
extreme inequalities and wealth concentration. See Hammar & Waldenstrom 
(2020) and Waldenstrom (2021).
27 Jones (2005).
28 Moghaddam (2000).
29 Paine (1791/2021).
30 Lees (1998).
31 United Nations (2015).
32 Sachs (2012).
33 Dhahri & Omri (2020).
34 Kim (2018a, p. 1427).
35 Barry & Øverland (2016).
36 Berkey (2021).
37 Gans (1995).
38 Santiago (2015).
39 Moghaddam (2022).
40 For example, Rosenbaum (2018).
41 Zuo (2021).
42 Bikales (2021).
43 Hourdequin (2018).
44 Phiri & Abdullahi (2018, p. 99).
45 Dickens (1843/44, p. 1).
46 Research shows that the rich justify their own ‘superior’ resources and status 
by adopting more conservative political positions (Page, Bartels, & Seawright, 
2013).
47 For example, the Five-Stage Model (Taylor & McKirnan, 1984).
48 Luttig (2013).
49 For examples, see Henry, Wetherell, & Brandt (2015) and Major et al. (2002).
50 Marx did not provide clear definitions of social class or class consciousness 
(Fantasia, 1995).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press168 Notes to pages 45–51
51 Jost (2018).
52 Hafer & Bègue, 2005; Lerner (1980).
53 Heiserman & Simpson (2017).
54 Lerner & Simmons (1966).
55 Lerner & Simmons (1966, p. 203).
56 See discussions in Lehmann & Myers (1989).
57 Quoted in Burgess (1992, p. 837).
58 For the early development of this papal role, see Richards (1979).
59 The supreme leader can shape policy in any and all areas, such as foreign policy 
(see Alam Rizvi, 2012).
60 Peoples, Duda, & Marlowe (2016).
61 Bastos Jr. et al. (2015).
62 Komlos (2018).
5 Ethnicity Is Forever
1 Uvin (1997). See also bbc.com/news/world-africa-26875506
2 Uvin (1997, p. 92).
3 Waters (1995).
4 Fearon & Laitin (2003).
5 Bandarage (2009, p. 201).
6 Hughes (2011).
7 Worchel (2004, p. 292).
8 The pioneering work of Horowitz (1985) is important here.
9 Kaufman (2011, p. 91).
10 Lee et al. (2004).
11 Gat (2012).
12 For Western societies, see Lijphart (1977); for non-Western societies, see Harff 
& Gurr (2019).
13 Smith (1981).
14 For examples reflecting the ancient roots of ethnicity, see Atkinson (1995) and 
Waters (1995).
15 For example, see Helms & Talleyrand (1997) and Zagefka (2009).
16 Braun, Wolfgang, & Dickersin (2013).
17 Zuckerman (1990).
18 Learoyd, Douiri, & Hart (2021).
19 Goodyear-Grant & Tolley (2019).
20 Deere, Kanbur, & Stewart (2018).
21 Hadzic, Carlson, & Tavits (2017).
22 Boudreau, Elmendorf, & MacKenzie (2019).
23 Jones (2018, p. 9).
24 Salter (2008, p. 41).
25 Worchel (1999).
26 Varshney (2007, pp. 282–285).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressNotes to pages 51–56 169
27 Kaufman (2011).
28 See readings in Kelley & Lewis (2000).
29 Heyer et al. (2009).
30 Salter (2008).
31 Dawkins (1989).
32 Van den Berghe (1981).
33 Mersha & Beck (2020, p. 2).
34 Braun (2002).
35 Manica, Prugnolle, & Balloux (2005); also, see Whaley (2003).
36 See Moghaddam (2008) for a critical overview of psychological theories of 
intergroup relations.
37 Tajfel & Turner (1979); see also chapter 5 in Moghaddam (2008).
38 Turner et al. (1987).
39 Regarding between-group differentiation and within-group minimization of 
differences, see Turner et al. (1987, pp. 101–102). For a discussion of the cogni￾tive turn in social identity research, see Turner (1982).
40 Turner et al. (1987, pp. 54–55).
41 See chapter 9 in Turner et al. (1987) and Moghaddam (2002).
42 See Pruitt-Young (2021).
43 See Blok’s (1998) excellent discussion of Freud’s insights on ‘the narcissism of 
minor differences.’
44 Tajfel et al. (1971).
45 See Moghaddam & Stringer (1986).
46 Brainyquotes.com/quotes/bill_shankly_312046
47 For example, see Rothbart & Bartlett (2008).
48 See Varshney (2007, pp. 289–291).
49 Easterly (2001, p. 687).
50 See readings in Alcock et al. (2001), particularly chapter 12.
51 Feldstein (2019).
52 Beraja et al. (2021).
53 See Piketty (2014), Atkinson (2015), and Zucman (2019).
54 Haller (2015).
55 For example, see Dincer & Hotard (2011), Fum & Hodler (2010), and 
Ravallion (2020).
56 For an example of research on continued discrimination against ethnic minor￾ities, see Veit & Thijsen (2021).
57 Haller (2015, p. 230).
58 Leighley (2021).
59 Colby & Ortman (2015).
60 See the discussion on minority population size and threat in Craig, Rucker, & 
Richeson (2018).
61 See Estevens (2018) on the security and defense issues seen to be related to the 
influx of ethnic minorities to Europe.
62 Moghaddam (2006).
63 Ryan (1981).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press170 Notes to pages 56–62
64 Mann (2006).
65 Caldwell (1985).
66 The isolation of Japan was complex; see Kazui’s (1982) discussion of foreign 
relations during the isolation period.
67 Moghaddam (2019).
68 Snel, Bilgili, & Staring (2021).
69 Jenne (2011, p. 112).
70 For example, see Bell-Fialkoff (1996) and Bulutgil (2016).
71 For indigenous Indians of America, see Anderson (2014); for ethnic minorities 
in Europe, see Mojzes (2015).
72 See Ther (2014) for modern nation-states and Mann (2004) for democracies.
73 Raza (2019).
74 Pistol (2017).
75 Kamusella (2019).
76 Zahed (2021).
77 Cederman (2019).
78 As Sosnowski (2020) points out, even so-called ‘peace agreements’ are used by 
the Assad regime to further subjugate the Syrian population.
79 Stein (2017).
80 Kiernan (2007).
81 Levine (2005).
82 Kite & Whitley (2016).
83 Such publicly stated ethnic biases do not always have the desired effect, as in the 
case of the public opinion shift against Trump’s Muslim ban (Collingwood, 
Lajevardi, & Oskooii, 2018).
6 Religion, Eternally Present but with a Thousand Faces
1 Zinnbauer & Parganebt (2014). Whitehouse (2004) defines religion in a simi￾larly broad way, as “any set of shared beliefs and actions appealing to super￾natural agency” (p. 2).
2 Norris & Inglehart (2004).
3 Hill & Pargament (2003).
4 Hill (2009).
5 Evans & Evans (2008).
6 Pietschnig & Voracek (2015).
7 Zuckerman, Silberman, & Hall (2013).
8 For example, see the book series ‘Routledge Studies in Religion and Politics’ 
edited by Jeffrey Haynes.
9 Inglehart (2020).
10 Brauer (2018).
11 Fox (2006).
12 Moghaddam (2019).
13 Wilcox & Robinson (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressNotes to pages 62–71 171
14 Iversen (2004).
15 Dreher (2020).
16 See chapters 10 and 11 in Hood, Hill, & Spilka (2018).
17 Hamer (2004).
18 Smith (1776/1976).
19 Rappaport & Corbally (2020).
20 Atran & Henrich (2010); Bulbulia et al. (2013); Sosis (2009).
21 Levin (2010); Yonker, Schnabelrauch, & DeHaan (2012).
22 Garssen, Visser, & Pool (2021).
23 Levin (2013).
24 Pargament & Raiya (2007); see readings in Vail & Routledge (2020).
25 Rounding et al. (2012).
26 There is also some effort to try to combine the ‘adaptive’ and ‘byproduct’ 
camps; see Powell & Clarke (2012).
27 Barrett (2004).
28 Guthrie (1993).
29 Barrett & Lanman (2008, p. 116).
30 Legare et al. (2012).
31 Collins (2007).
32 Stepaniants & Johnson (2005).
33 Graham & Haidt (2010).
34 Pyszczynski, Solomon, & Greenberg (2003).
35 Pyszczynski, Solomon, & Greenberg (2003, p. 149).
36 Goldstein (2006); Turner (1991).
37 Berkessel et al. (2021).
38 Marmot (2015).
39 Pareto (1935).
40 Pareto (1935, III, p. 1430).
41 Moghaddam (2008, p. 70).
42 Brenneman & Miller (2016, p. 90).
43 Chaucer (2006).
44 See Scott’s (2011) discussion of the vast social movements of which the great 
Gothic cathedrals were a part.
45 Köllner (2018).
46 Kroesen (2008).
47 Beekers & Arab (2016).
48 There is continued debate about the processes through which Christianity, 
in particular, influences and is influenced by indigenous cultures (Vilaça, 
2015).
49 Roszko (2012, p. 26).
50 Brooks & Manza (2004); De La & Rodden (2008); Wald & Calhoun-Brown 
(2018).
51 Research is showing that abortion is not just a national religious issue but 
is also influenced by local religious context (Adamczyk & Valdimarsdóttir, 
2018).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press172 Notes to pages 72–81
7 The Built Environment and Behavioral Continuity
1 Macleod et al. (2014).
2 This is the Tower of London test (Shallice, 1982).
3 For a broad discussion of how the built environment influences human behav￾ior, see Goldhagen (2017).
4 For example, see Kopec (2018).
5 Watson (1913).
6 Skinner (1971).
7 See Danzinger’s (1990) constructionist presentation of the history of 
psychology.
8 Maslow (2014).
9 Gestalt psychologists demonstrated that when there are greater degrees of free￾dom in a context and the range of possible behaviors is extended, then even 
animals can show initiative and creativity. But human experience is structured 
by prewiring (Kohler, 1975).
10 Moghaddam (2005, ch. 4).
11 Goldstein (2022) provides a comprehensive overview of cognitive psychology.
12 Buss (2022).
13 Milligan (2007, p. 106).
14 Sowinska-Heim (2020, p. 1).
15 Moghaddam (2002).
16 Khalaf (2020).
17 Wyly (1999).
18 Wyly (1999, p. 335).
19 Kipnis (2016).
20 Ladino (2019).
21 Boyer (1996).
22 Yarrow (2018).
23 Willes (2022) provides an excellent discussion of the history of St. Paul’s 
Cathedral.
24 Vestbro & Horelli (2012, p. 317).
25 Goudie (2019).
26 Laufkötter, Zscheischler, & Frölicher (2020).
27 Caminade, McIntyre, & Jones (2019).
28 Nielsen et al. (2021).
29 Scott (2000).
30 Aumann (2019).
31 Scott (2000, p. 128).
32 Moghaddam (2022).
33 Bennett & Hacker (2022, see particularly chapter 3, The mereological fallacy 
in neuroscience, and chapter 16, Reductionism).
34 Simon (1997).
35 Shapiro (2014).
36 Tolman (1948).
37 This research is well represented by Kahneman (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressNotes to pages 81–94 173
38 Todorov & Oh (2021).
39 Kahneman (2011).
40 Bolsen, Druckman, & Cook (2013).
41 For the impact of global warming on biodiversity, see Walsh et al. (2019). 
The literature on the impact of global warming on human health has become 
enormous; examples are Landrigan et al. (2020) and Munawer (2018).
42 Min (2021).
43 Feygina, Jost, & Goldsmith (2010).
44 Min (2021); Van der Linden et al. (2021).
45 Horton & Keith (2016).
46 Miles-Novelo & Anderson (2019).
47 Chen (2011).
8 Revolutions and Political Plasticity
1 Moghaddam & Hendricks (2020).
2 See readings in Wagoner, Moghaddam, & Valsiner (2018) for reviews and 
discussions of psychological research on revolutions.
3 Plato (1987).
4 More (2005/1516).
5 There are ambiguities (stemming from the work of Marx himself) as to the 
meaning of class and the classless society. For an example of modern interpre￾tations, see Nielsen (1978).
6 For example, see readings in Goldstone (2003).
7 Roberts (2015) provides an exceptionally good biography of Napoleon.
8 Van Zomeren, Postmes, & Spears (2008).
9 Reicher & Drury (2011).
10 Simon & Klandermans (2001).
11 Louis et al. (2020).
12 Experimental research has shown that, in the Western context at least, peo￾ple prefer individual rather than group action to rectify injustices (Wright, 
Taylor, & Moghaddam, 1990).
13 Moghaddam (2008); Walker & Smith (2002).
14 See Afshari (2011) for a discussion of cultural relativism and why Iran should 
be judged according to international human rights standards.
15 See www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2020/index/irn
16 See https://freedomhouse.org/countries/freedom-world/scores
17 Quoted in Figes (2002, p. 447).
18 Harré & Moghaddam (2012).
19 Todes (1995).
20 Watson (1913).
21 Kozulin (1984).
22 Trotsky (1906/2010, p. 109).
23 Taylor (1911).
24 See Moghaddam (1997, pp. 62–64, 72–74).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press174 Notes to pages 94–105
25 Figes (2002, p. 463).
26 Figes (2002, pp. 463–464).
27 Knight, Li, & Wan (1917).
28 Mirzaei et al. (2021).
29 For examples, see Livi-Bacci (1993) and Viola (1987). For a comparison of collectiv￾ization across countries in the Soviet Block, see Lordachi & Bauerkämper (2014).
30 Earley (1989).
31 Garbers & Konradt (2014).
32 Van Dick, Tissington, & Hertel (2009).
33 Makarenko (2004).
34 Tudge (1991, pp. 125–126).
35 Goldhagen (2017).
36 Stites (1988).
37 Figes (2002, pp. 445–457).
38 Figes & Kolonitski (1999).
39 Moghaddam (2002).
40 Kertzer (1988, p. 14).
41 Oushakine (2013).
42 Figes (2007).
43 Matthews (1978).
44 There have been shifts and continue to be differences in the interpretation of 
the Soviet experience (Kassymbekova & Chokobaeva, 2021).
45 See Gauriot & Page (2015) for an examination of behavior in relation to indi￾vidual and collective incentives.
46 See the meta-analysis of this literature by Cerasoli, Nicklin, & Ford (2014).
47 Nyberg et al. (2018).
9 War as Transformative
1 Razavi (2009).
2 Blanchette (2019) argues that Mao’s radical influence has continued and 
China still has a Red Guard.
3 Afshon (2016).
4 See the introduction in Smith (1986).
5 Scheidel (2017).
6 Sassoon (2017/1928).
7 The most important poets in this group are discussed by Johnston (1964).
8 See particularly Titmus (1950) and Arthur Marwick (e.g., 1974, 1988), who 
wrote extensively on this subject.
9 Sherif (1966).
10 Milgram (1974).
11 See Moghaddam (2005, ch.15).
12 Asch (1956).
13 See Moghaddam (2005, ch.16).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressNotes to pages 105–113 175
14 Milgram (1974).
15 Moghaddam (1998, ch.7).
16 Dabashi & Nikzadfar (2017) refer to it as a Green Movement.
17 Steele & Schubiger (2018).
18 Quinn (1976).
19 Huang (2016).
20 Justino & Stojetz (2019).
21 Mayhew (2005).
22 Lubkemann (2008).
23 Mattocks et al. (2012).
24 Koolaee (2014, p. 281).
25 Koolaee (2014, p. 283).
26 Dumenil (2020).
27 Wood (2008).
28 Moghaddam (2008).
29 Moghaddam (2018a, p. ix).
30 Dieter & Engel (2019, p. 14).
31 Priebe et al. (2013, p. 53).
32 For example, see Robben (2021) on the destruction of Rotterdam during 
World War II.
33 Wessells (2016).
34 Hasanovic (2011).
35 Stark et al. (2016).
36 Priebe et al. (2013).
37 Lovric & Pecanac (2020).
38 Forrest, Edwards, & Daraganova (2018).
39 Freud (1930/1961, p. 114).
40 See chapter 4 in Moghaddam (2008).
41 Janis (1972).
42 Moghaddam (2018a).
43 Scheidel (2017, pp. 6–7).
44 For distribution of wealth, see Camyar & Ulupinar (2015); for economic 
recovery, see Vonyo (2018).
45 Mueller (2020).
46 For example, see Cosgel & Ergene (2012) and Scheve & Stasavage (2012).
47 Cosgel & Ergene (2012).
48 For the United States, see Bank, Stark, & Thorndike (2008); for the United 
Kingdom, see Daunton (2002).
49 Caverley (2014, p. 2).
50 Scheidel (2017, p. 115).
51 See chapter 5 in Scheidel (2017) and also Feinstein (1996).
52 Scheidel (2017, p. 208).
53 Piketty (2014); Atkinson (2015).
54 Piketty (2014, p. 397).
55 Western & Rosenfeld (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press176 Notes to pages 113–121
56 For example, see Collins (2001) on the issue of African American advancement 
during the 1940s in the United States.
57 For a ‘neutral’ description of the gig economy, see Duggan et al. (2021).
10 Technology Forces Change
1 Pettegree & Hall (2004).
2 Burnett (2000).
3 Rubin (2014).
4 Marx & Engels (1848/2021).
5 Murray (2000, p, 40).
6 Boyes & Steele (2020).
7 DiMaggio et al. (2001).
8 Abbate (1999).
9 Levine (2002).
10 Dougherty (2005).
11 Pew Research Center (2021).
12 Newman et al. (2019).
13 Miao (2019).
14 Sairambay (2022).
15 Hölig, Hasebrink, & Behre (2021).
16 Gómez et al. (2013).
17 Dhanvijay & Patil (2019).
18 Cesario (2018).
19 Bussey & Sillence (2019).
20 Hardey (1999).
21 For example, for the benefits of internet-based education prior to colonos￾copy, see Trasolini et al. (2020).
22 Dalenogare et al. (2018).
23 Nisar, Prabhaker, & Strakova (2019).
24 Sparrow & Sparrow (2006).
25 Sahut, Landoli, & Teulon (2019).
26 Jha & Kodila-Tedika (2020).
27 Bode (2012).
28 Smidi & Shahin (2017). Faris & Etling (2008) provide a very useful list of 
uprisings helped by electronic communications.
29 Shirky (2011).
30 For a fuller discussion of this issue, see Zhuravskaya, Petrova, & Enikolopov 
(2020).
31 Bode (2017).
32 Bode et al. (2014).
33 Faris & Etling (2008, p. 69).
34 Varol et al. (2014).
35 Freeberg (1999).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressNotes to pages 121–131 177
36 Poushter, Bishop, & Chwe (2018).
37 Auxier & Anderson (2021).
38 Shirky (2011, p. 40).
39 Linvill et al. (2019).
40 Nimmo (2020).
41 Andrew & Mitrokhin (1999) provide numerous examples.
42 See the US ambassador’s memoir (Yovanovitch, 2022).
43 Diamond (2010).
44 Polyakova & Meserole (2019).
45 Gunitsky (2015).
46 Roberts (2020).
47 Acemoglu & Robinson (2006).
48 Moghaddam (2013, p. 28).
49 Gunitsky (2015).
50 Keremoglu & Weidmann (2020, p. 1695).
51 MacKinnon (2011).
52 Linvill et al. (2019).
53 Kendall-Taylor, Frantz, & Wright (2020).
54 Moghaddam (2007).
55 Deibert & Rohozinski (2010).
56 Beam, Hmielowski, & Hutchens (2018).
57 Anspach & Carlson (2020).
58 Cinelli et al. (2021). Also, see Dubois & Blank (2018) for a discussion of how 
the echo chamber is overstated.
59 Moghaddam (2016).
11 Globalization and Deglobalization
1 Reese, Rosenmann, & Cameron (2019).
2 Greider (1997).
3 Moghaddam (2019).
4 Ohmae (1990, 1995).
5 Wright (1990).
6 One such supporter is Wolf (2004).
7 Gómez (2008).
8 Friedman (2000, p. 9).
9 Dewey (2007).
10 Editorial (2006).
11 Altbach (2012).
12 Ching et al. (2011).
13 Erixon (2018).
14 Erixon (2018, p. 7).
15 Johnson (2002).
16 Lloyd (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press178 Notes to pages 131–144
17 See the special issue edited by McKenzie (2019).
18 Kallens, Dale, & Smaldino (2018).
19 Kay & Regier (2003).
20 Jameson (2005).
21 Rosch & Levitin (2002).
22 For ethnic groups, see Ellis et al. (2017); for gender groups, see Quinn et al. 
(2008).
23 Quinn et al. (2016).
24 Kelly et al. (2005).
25 Jin & Baillargeon (2017).
26 Chalik & Rhodes (2015), Chalik & Dunham (2020).
27 See Rosch & Levitin (2002) for a discussion of categorization and its benefits 
to human cognition and action.
28 Hammond & Axelrod (2006).
29 See chapter 9 in Moghaddam (1998).
30 Batson (1995) is the leading voice arguing that humans are altruistic.
31 Daly & Wilson (1988).
32 Hammond & Axelrod (2006).
33 Van den Berghe (1987).
34 Kite & Whitley (2016).
35 For superordinate, see Huo et al. (1996); for common group, see Nier et al. 
(2001).
36 Johnson (2002).
37 Sugden (1991).
38 Moghaddam (2015).
39 Dost-Gozkan & Sonmez Keith (2015).
40 Hardin (1998).
41 Kyburz-Graber (2021).
42 Dunbar (1993, p. 687).
43 For an example of a test of Dunbar’s number, see Carron, Kaski, & Dunbar 
(2016).
44 Hornsey & Jetten (2004, p. 251) discuss this research.
45 Of course, some of them identify with the City of Liverpool by supporting 
Everton.
46 Moghaddam (2018b).
47 Moghaddam (2008, p. 13).
48 Moghaddam (2019).
12 The Eternal Dictator and Political Plasticity
1 Economy (2018, p. 10).
2 Among the numerous accounts of the transition period between the Trump 
and Biden presidencies, Woodward and Costa (2021) provide the most 
compelling.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressNotes to pages 144–156 179
3 Although research psychologists have given little attention to this topic, some 
relevant books are: The Mind of the African Strongman (H. J. Cohen, 2015), 
Tyrannical Minds: Psychological Profiling, Narcissism, and Dictatorship (D. 
Haycock, 2021), and Delusions of a Dictator: The Mind of Marcos as Revealed 
in His Secret Diaries (W. C. Rempel, 1993). There are also numerous pub￾lished biographies of individual dictators, such as Montefiore’s (2003) book 
on Stalin.
4 I wrote The Psychology of Dictatorship (Moghaddam, 2013) as a small step 
toward filling this gap.
5 Moghaddam (2016, 2019).
6 Moghaddam (2016).
7 Historical assessments of the minds of dictators are often hindered by lack of 
detailed accounts of their behavioral and cognitive styles.
8 My working assumption is that prior to the development of stable agriculture, 
the domestication of animals, and large settlements from about 10,000 years 
ago, a reliable surplus was not produced. For a more in-depth and nuanced 
discussion on the surplus, see Baran (1953).
9 For an assessment of contemporary psychological theories that address legiti￾mizing ideologies, see Vargas-Salfate et al. (2018).
10 See discussions in Vaughn, Eerkens, & Kantner (2009).
11 Moghaddam (2013).
12 Fukuyama’s (2006) best-selling – but incorrect – book on the so-called ‘end 
of history’ became a symbol of the supposed universal and eternal triumph of 
capitalist democracies.
13 Freedom House (2021).
14 Meng (2020) provides some excellent illustrative case studies of the construc￾tive role of institutionalized constraints on leadership.
15 Pincus & Lukowitsky (2010).
16 Montefiore (2003, p. 577).
17 Prasad (2022).
18 The psychological characteristics of those high on Machiavellianism was 
researched first by Richard Christie and Florence Geis (1970), using a psycho￾logical measure inspired by Niccolò Machiavelli’s (1469–1527) writings.
19 Bullock’s (1993) majestic work depicts Hitler and Stalin as similar in blaming 
others for failures.
20 Rabinbach (2008) rejects the view that the Nazis started the fire.
21 Dunlop (2014).
22 Pfiffner (2021).
Afterword
1 For an in-depth discussion of these identity needs, see Moghaddam (2019).
2 These characteristics are discussed in Moghaddam (2016).
3 Rosin (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press180 Notes to pages 156–161
4 For example, see Garcia (2008).
5 Becker, Hubbard, & Murphy (2010, p. 203).
6 Schiebinger (1987, pp. 324–325).
7 Shields (1975).
8 Jaumotte (2003).
9 Becker, Hubbard, & Murphy (2010).
10 Becker, Hubbard, & Murphy (2010, pp. 203–204).
11 For example, see UNESCO (2016).
12 Becker, Hubbard, & Murphy (2010, pp. 203–204).
13 Reynolds & Burge (2008).
14 Lauglo & Liu (2019).
15 Ullah & Ullah (2019).
16 Mitch & Cappelli (2019).
17 Sommers (2015) and Farrell & Gray (2019) respectively.
18 Mitch (2019).
19 The Economist (2022).
20 Table 1.1 in World Economic Forum (2021).
21 Klasen (2018) provides a useful review of this research area.
22 Stoet & Geary (2018).
23 Bertrand (2018).
24 Ehrlich (1970).
25 Hwang & Ha Lee (2014).
26 Moghaddam (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press181
References
Abbate, J. (1999). Inventing the Internet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Acemoglu, D., & Robinson, J. (2006). Economic backwardness in political per￾spective. American Political Science Review, 100, 115–131.
Adamczyk, A., & Valdimarsdóttir, M. (2018). Understanding America’s abortion 
attitudes: The role of local religious context. Social Science Research, 71, 129–144.
Afshari, R. (2011). Human rights in Iran: The abuse of cultural relativism. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Afshon, O. (2016). Spreading Iranian influence in the Middle East: Explaining 
the effectiveness of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Ahmad, M. G., & Loch, C. (2020). What do the followers want? The core func￾tions of leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 31, 101293.
Alam Rizvi, M. M. (2012). Velayat-e-Faqih (supreme leader) and Iranian foreign 
policy: An historical analysis. Strategic Analysis, 36, 112–127.
Alcock, S. E., D’Altray, T. N., Morrison, K. D., & Sinopoli, C. M. (2001). Empires: 
Perspectives from archeology and history. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Allemand, M., Zimprich, D., & Martin, M. (2008). Long-term correlated change 
in personality traits in old age. Psychology and Aging, 23, 545–557.
Altbach, P. G. (2012). The globalization of college and university rankings. 
Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning, 44, 26–31.
Altemeyer, B. (1988). Enemies of freedom: Understanding right-wing authoritarian￾ism. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Ammerman, N. T. (2020). Rethinking religion: Toward a practice approach. 
American Journal of Sociology, 126, 6–51.
Anderson, C. (2018). One person, no vote: How voter suppression is destroying our 
democracy. New York: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Anderson, G. C. (2014). Ethnic cleansing and the Indian: The crime that should 
haunt America. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Andrew, C., & Mitrokhin, V. (1999). The sword and the shield: The Mitrokhin 
archive and the secret history of the KGB. New York: Basic Books.
Anspach, N. M., & Carlson, T. N. (2020). What to believe? Social media com￾mentary and belief in misinformation. Political Behavior, 42, 697–718.
Aries, P., & Duby, G. (Series Eds.) (1991). A history of private lives (5 vols.). 
Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Published online by Cambridge University Press182 References
Arndt, H. L. (2020). Varieties of affluence: How political attitudes of the rich are 
shaped by income or wealth. European Sociological Review, 36, 136–158.
Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and conformity: A minority of one 
against a unanimous majority. Psychological Monographs, 70 (9), 1–70.
Atkinson, A. (2015). Inequality: What can be done? Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Atkinson, R. R. (1995). The roots of ethnicity: The origins of the Acholi of Uganda 
before 1800. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Atran, S., & Henrich, J. (2010). The evolution of religion: How cognitive by￾products, adaptive learning heuristics, ritual displays, and group competition 
generate deep commitments to prosocial religions. Biological Theory, 5, 18–30.
Atzil, S., Gao, W., Fradkin, I., & Barrett, F. (2018). Growing a social brain. 
Nature Human Behaviour, 2, 624–636.
Aumann, R. J. (2019). A synthesis of behavioral and mainstream economics. 
Nature Human Behaviour, 3, 666–670.
Auxier, B., & Anderson, M. (2021). Social media use in 2021. Pew Research 
Center. www.pewresearch.org/internet/2021/04/07/social-media-use-in-2021
Baker, K. D., Loughman, A., Spencer, S. J., & Reichelt, A. C. (2017). The impact 
of obesity and hypercaloric diet consumption on anxiety and emotional behav￾ior across the lifespan. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 83, 173–182.
Balbulia, J., Geertz, A. W., Atkinson, Q. D., et al. (2013). The cultural evolution. 
In P. J. Richerson & M. H. Christiansen (Eds.), Cultural evolution: Society, 
technology, language, and religion (pp. 381–404). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bandarage, A. (2009). The separatist conflict in Sri Lanka. New York: Routledge.
Bank, S., Stark, K., & Thorndike, J. (2008). War and taxes. Washington, DC: 
Urban Institute Press.
Baran, P. (1953). Economic progress and economic surplus. Science & Society, 17, 
289–317.
Barrett, J. L. (2004). Why would anyone believe in God? Walnut Creek, CA: 
AltaMira Press.
Barrett, J. L., & Lanman, J. A. (2008). The science of religious beliefs. Religion, 
38, 109–124.
Barry, C., & Øverland, G. (2016). Responding to global poverty: Harm, responsibil￾ity, and Agency. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bastos, M. A. V. Jr., De Oliveira Bastos, P. R. H., Gonçalves, L. M., Osório, I. H. 
S., & Lucchetti, G. (2015). Mediumship: Review of quantitative studies pub￾lished in the twenty-first century. Archives of Clinical Psychiatry, 42, 129–138.
Batson, C. D. (1995). Prosocial motivation: Why do we help others? In A. Tesser 
(Ed.), Advanced social psychology (pp. 333–381). Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Beam, M. A., Hmielowski, J. D., & Hutchens, M. J. (2018). Democratic digital 
inequalities: Threat and opportunity in online citizenship from motivation and 
ability. American Behavioral Scientist, 62, 1079–1096.
Becker, G. S., Hubbard, W. H. J., & Murphy, K. M. (2010). Explaining the 
worldwide boom in higher education of women. Journal of Human Capital, 4, 
203–241.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 183
Beekers, D., & Arab, P. T. (2016). Dreams of an iconic mosque: Spatial and tem￾poral entanglements of a converted church in Amsterdam. Material Religion, 
12, 137–164.
Bell-Fialkoff, A. (1996). Ethnic cleansing. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Bellow, W. (2004). Deglobalization: Ideas for a new world economy. New York: 
Zed Books. Updated edition.
Bennett, M. R., & Hacker, P. M. S. (2022). Philosophical foundations of neurosci￾ence. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell. 2nd ed.
Beraja, M., Kao, A., Yang, D. Y., & Yuchtman, N. (2021). AI-TOCRACY. 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 29466. www.nber
.org/papers/w29466
Berg, G. A. (2020). The rise of women in higher education: How, why, and what’s 
next. New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
Berkessel, J. B., Gebauer, J. E., Joshanloo, M., et al. (2021). National religiosity 
eases the psychological burden of poverty. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Science, 118, 1–6.
Berkey, B. (2021). Sweatshops, structural injustice, and the wrong of exploita￾tion: Why multinational corporations have positive duties to the global poor. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 169, 43–56.
Bernard, S. (2012). Cohesion from conflict: Does intergroup conflict motivate 
intragroup norm enforcement and support for centralized leadership? Social 
Psychology Quarterly, 75, 107–130.
Bertrand, M. (2018). The glass ceiling. Economics, 85, 205–231.
Bikales, B. (2021). Reflections on poverty reduction in China. Sinoptic.ch/textes/
eco/2021/202110608_Bikales.Bille_Poverty.Reduction.in.China-en.pdf
Bjorklund, D. F. (2018). Behavioral epigenetics: The last nail in the coffin of 
genetic determinism. Human Development, 61, 54–59.
Blanchette, J. (2019). China’s new Red Guard: The return of radicalism and the 
rebirth of Mao Zedong. New York: Oxford University Press.
Blok, A. (1998). The narcissism of minor differences. European Journal of Social 
Theory, 1, 33–56.
Bode, L. (2012). Facebooking it to the polls: A study in online social network￾ing and political behavior. Journal of Information Technology & Politics, 9, 
352–369.
Bode, L. (2017). Gateway political behaviors: The frequency and consequences 
of low-cost political engagement on social media. Social Media + Society, 1–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305117743349
Bode, L., Vraga, E. K., Borah, O., & Shah, D. V. (2014). A new space for political 
behavior: Political social networking and democratic consequences. Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communications, 19, 414–429.
Bolsen, T., Druckman, J. N., & Cook, F. L. (2013). The influence of partisan 
motivated reasoning on public opinion. Political Behavior, 36, 235–262.
Boudreau, C., Elmendorf, C. S., & MacKenzie, S. A. (2019). Racial or special vot￾ing? The effect of candidate ethnicity and ethnic group endorsements in local 
elections. American Journal of Political Science, 63, 5–20.
Published online by Cambridge University Press184 References
Bourguignon, F., & Morrison, C. (2002). Inequality among world citizens, 1820–
1992. American Economic Review, 92, 727–744.
Bowles, S., & Choi, J. K. (2013). Coevolution of farming and private property during 
the early Holocene. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 110, 8830–8835.
Boyer, M. C. (1996). The city of collective memory: Its historical imagery and archi￾tectural entertainments. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boyes, P. J., & Steele, P. M. (Eds.) (2020). Understanding relations between scripts 
II: Early alphabets. Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Brandt, N. D., Becker, M., Tetzner, M., et al. (2020). Personality across the lifes￾pan: Exploring measurement invariance of a Short Big Five inventory from 
ages 11 to 84. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 36, 162–173.
Bratanova, B., Loughnan, S., Klein, O., & Wood, R. (2016). The rich get richer, 
the poor get even: Perceived socioeconomic position influences micro-social 
distributions of wealth. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 57, 243–249.
Brauer, S. (2018). The surprising predictable decline of religion in the United 
States. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 57, 654–675.
Braun, L. (2002). Race, ethnicity, and health: Can genetics explain disparities. 
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 45, 159–174.
Braun, L., Wolfgang, M., & Dickersin, K. (2013). Defining race/ethnicity and 
explaining difference in research studies on lung function. European Respiratory 
Journal, 41, 1362–1370.
Brenneman, R., & Miller, B. J. (2016). When bricks matter: Four arguments for 
the sociological study of religious buildings. Sociology of Religion, 77, 82–101.
Brooks, C., & Manza, J. (2004). A great divide? Religion and political change 
in U.S. national elections, 1972–2000. The Sociological Quarterly, 45, 421–450.
Brown, D. (1991). Human universals. Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Bullock, A. (1993). Hitler and Stalin: Parallel lives. New York: Vintage Books.
Bulutgil, H. Z. (2016). The roots of ethnic cleansing in Europe. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Burgess, G. (1992). The divine right of kings reconsidered. The English Historical 
Review, 107, 837–861.
Burnett, S. G. (2000). Christian Hebrew printing in the sixteenth century: 
Printers, humanism and the impact of the Reformation. Helmantica: Revista de 
Filogia Clásica y Hebrea, 51, 13–42.
Buss, D. (2022). Evolutionary psychology: The new science of the mind. New York: 
Routledge. 5th ed.
Bussey, L. G., & Sillence, E. (2019). The role of Internet resources in health deci￾sion-making: A qualitative study. Digital Health, 5, 1–13.
Caldwell, J. C. (1985). The social repercussions of colonial rule: Demographic 
aspects. UNESCO, 7, 458–486.
Caminade, C., McIntyre, K. M., & Jones, A. E. (2019). Impact of recent and 
future climate change on vector-borne diseases. Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences, 1436, 157–173.
Camyar, I., & Ulupinar, B. (2015). War and the sectoral distribution of wealth: 
Evidence from United States firms. International Studies Quarterly, 59, 641–653.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 185
Carron, P. M., Kaski, K., & Dunbar, R. (2016). Calling Dunbar’s number. Social 
Networks, 47, 151–155.
Caverley, J. D. (2014). Democratic militarism: Voting, wealth, and war. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Cederman, L. E. (2019). Blood for soil: The fetal temptations of ethnic politics. 
Foreign Affairs, March/April, 61–68.
Cerasoli, C. P., Nicklin, J. M., & Ford, M. T. (2014). Intrinsic motivation and 
extrinsic incentives jointly predict performance: A 40-year meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 140, 980–1008.
Cesario, S. K. (2018). Implications of medical tourism. Nursing for Women’s 
Health, 22, 269–273.
Chagnon, N. (1997). Yanomamo. New York: Harcourt Brace. 5th ed.
Chalik, L., & Dunham, Y. (2020). Beliefs about moral obligation structure chil￾dren’s social category-based expectations. Child Development, 91, e108–e119.
Chalik, L., & Rhodes, M. (2015). The communication of naïve theories of the 
social world in parent-child conversation. Journal of Cognitive Development, 16, 
719–741.
Chaucer, G. (2006). The Canterbury Tales. New York: Barnes & Noble. First 
published c. 1400.
Chemerinsky, E. (2018). We the people: A progressive reading of the constitution for 
the twenty-first century. New York: Picador.
Chen, F. (2011). Traditional architectural forms in market oriented Chinese cit￾ies: Place for localities or symbol of culture? Habitat International, 35, 410–418.
Ching, H. S., Hsiao, C., Wan, S. K., & Wang, T. (2011). Economic benefits of 
globalization: The impact of entry to the WTO on China’s growth. Pacific 
Economic Review, 16, 285–301.
Christenson, D. P., & Kriner, D. L. (2020). The myth of the imperial presidency. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Christie, R., & Geis, F. (1970). Studies in Machiavellianism. New York: Academic 
Press.
Churchland, P. S. (2002). Brain-wise: Studies in neurophilosophy. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Cinelli, M., Morales, G. F., Galeazzi, A., Quattrociocchi, W., & Starnini, M. 
(2021). The echo chamber effect on social media. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 118, e2023301118, 1–8.
Clarke, M. T. (2018). Machiavelli’s Florentine Republic. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Colby, S. L., & Ortman, J. M. (2015). Projections of the size and composition of 
the U.S. population: 2014–2060. U.S. Census Bureau. www.census.gov/content/
dam/Census/library/publications/2015/demo/p25-1143.pdf
Collingwood, L., Lajevardi, N., & Oskooii, K. A. R. (2018). A change of heart? 
Why individual-level public opinion shifted against Trump’s “Muslim Ban.” 
Political Behavior, 40, 1035–1072.
Collins, F. (2007). The language of God: A scientist presents evidence for belief. New 
York: Free Press.
Published online by Cambridge University Press186 References
Collins, W. J. (2001). Race, Roosevelt, and wartime production: Fair employ￾ment in the World War II labor markets. The American Economic Review, 91, 
272–286.
Contamine, P. (1988). Peasant hearth to papal palace: The fourteenth and fif￾teenth centuries. In G. Duby (Ed.) (Trans. A. Goldhammer), A history of pri￾vate life: Revelations of the medieval world (pp. 425–505). Cambridge, MA: The 
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Cosgel, M. M., & Ergene, B. A. (2012). Inequality of wealth in the Ottoman 
empire: War, weather, and long-term trends in eighteenth-century Kastamonu. 
The Journal of Economic History, 72, 308–331.
Costandi, M. (2016). Neuroplasticity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Couzin, I. D. (2008). Collective cognition in animal groups. Trends in Cognitive 
Science, 13, 36–43.
Couzin, I. D., Ioannou, C. C., Demirel, G., et al. (2011). Uninformed individuals 
promote democratic consensus in animal groups. Science, 334, 1578–1580.
Cowley, R., Joss, S., & Dayot, Y. (2018). The smart city and its publics: Insights 
from across six UK cities. Urban Research & Practice, 11, 53–77.
Craig, M. A., Rucker, J. M., & Richeson, J. A. (2018). The pitfalls and promise of 
increasing racial diversity: Threat, contact, and race relations in the twenty-first 
century. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 27, 188–193.
Dabashi, H., & Nikzadfar, N. (2017). The Green Movement in Iran. New York: 
Routledge.
Dalenogare, L. S., Benitez, G. B., Ayala, N. F., & Frank, A. G. (2018). The 
expected contribution of Industry 4.0 technologies for industrial performance. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 204, 283–294.
Daly, M., & Wilson, M. (1988). Homicide. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Danzinger, K. (1990). Constructing the subject: Historical origins of psychological 
research. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Daunton, M. (2002). Just taxes: The politics of taxation in Britain, 1914–1979. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Dawkins, R. (1989). The selfish gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2nd ed.
De La, A. L., & Rodden, J. A. (2008). Does religion distract the poor? Income 
and issue voting around the world. Comparative Political Studies, 41, 437–476.
Deere, C. D., Kanbur, R., & Stewart, F. (2018). Horizontal inequalities. In J. E. 
Stiglitz, J. P. Fitoussi, & M. Durand (Eds.), For good measure: Advancing research 
on well-being metrics beyond GDP (pp. 85–100). Paris: OECD Publishing.
Deibert, R., & Rohozinski, R. (2010). Liberation vs. control: The future of cyber￾space. Journal of Democracy, 21, 43–57.
Dewey, M. (2007). English as a lingua franca and globalization: An intercon￾nected perspective. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 17, 332–354.
Dhahri, S., & Omri, A. (2020). Foreign capital toward SDGs 1 & 2 – ending 
poverty and hunger: The role of agricultural production. Structural Change and 
Economic Dynamics, 53, 208–221.
Dhanvijay, M. M., & Patil, S. C. (2019). Internet of Things: A survey of enabling 
technologies in healthcare and its applications. Computer Networks, 153, 113–131.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 187
Diamond, J. (1997). Guns, germs, and steel: The fates of human societies. New York: 
Norton.
Diamond, L. (2010). Liberation technology. Journal of Democracy, 21, 69–83.
Dickens, C. (1843/44). Martin Chuzzlewit. Herts, UK: Wordsworth Editions 
(republished 1994).
Dieter, J. N., & Engel, S. D. (2019). Traumatic brain injury and posttraumatic 
stress disorder: Comorbid consequences of war. Neuroscience Insights, 14, 1–17.
DiMaggio, P., Hargittai, E., Newman, W. R., & Robinson, J. P. (2001). Social 
implications of the Internet. Annual Review of Sociology, 27, 307–336.
Dincer, O. C., & Hotard, M. I. (2011). Ethnic and religious diversity and income 
inequality. Eastern Economic Journal, 37, 417–430.
Dorling, D. (2014). Inequality and the 1%. New York: Verso.
Dost-Gozkan, A., & Sonmez Keith, D. (Eds.) (2015). Norms, groups, conflict, and 
social change: Rediscovering Mozafer Sherif’s psychology. London: Transaction 
Publishers.
Dougherty, P. (2005). A newspaper talks with readers in a cyber town square. 
Nieman Reports, 59, 48–50.
Dreesen, T., Akseer, S., Brossard, M., et al. (2020). Promising practices for equi￾table remote learning: Emerging lessons from COVID-19 education responses 
in 127 countries. UNESCO. www.unicef-irc.org/publications/1090-promising￾practices-for-equitable-remote-learning-emerging-lessons-from-covid.html
Dreher, S. (2020). Religions in international political economy. Palgrave Macmillan. 
Ebook. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-41472-6_1
Dubois, E., & Blank, G. (2018). The echo chamber is overstated: The moderat￾ing effect of political interest and diverse media. Communication & Society, 21, 
729–745.
Duby, G. (Ed.) (1988). A history of private life: Revelations of the medieval world
(2 vols.). (Trans. A. Goldhammer). Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of 
Harvard University Press.
Duggan, J., McDonnell, A., Sherman, U., & Carbery, R. (2021). Work in the gig 
economy. London: Routledge.
Dumenil, L. (2020). American working women in World War II: A brief history 
with documents. New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1993). Coevolution of neocortical size, group size and language 
in humans. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 681–735.
Dunlop, J. B. (2014). The Moscow bombings of September 1999. Stuttgart, Germany: 
Ibidem-Verlag Press. 2nd ed.
Dyer, J. R. G., Ioannou, C. C., Morrell, L. J., et al. (2008). Consensus decision 
making in human crowds. Animal Behaviour, 75, 461–470.
Earley, P. C. (1989). Social loafing and collectivism: A comparison of the United States 
and the People’s Republic of China. Administrative Science Quarterly, 34, 565–581.
Easterly, W. (2001). Can institutions resolve ethnic conflict? Economic Development 
and Cultural Change, 49, 687–706.
Ebner, N. C. (2008). Age of face matters: Age-group differences in ratings of 
young and old faces. Behavioral Research Methods, 40, 130–136.
Published online by Cambridge University Press188 References
Economy, E. C. (2018). The third revolution: Xi Jinping and the new Chinese state. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Editorial (2006). Globalization in science education: An inevitable and beneficial 
trend. Medical Hypotheses, 66, 869–873.
Edwards, R., Gillies, V., & Horsley, N. (2015). Brain science and early years pol￾icy: Hopeful ethos or “cruel” optimism? Critical Social Policy, 35, 167–187.
Ehrlich, P. R. (1970). The population bomb. New York: Ballantine Books.
Ellis, A. E., Xiao, N. G., Lee, K., & Oakes, L. M. (2017). Scanning of own- versus 
other-race faces in infants from racially diverse or homogeneous communities. 
Developmental Psychobiology, 59, 613–627.
Erixon, F. (2018). The economic benefits of globalization for business and consumers. 
Brussels: European Center for International Political Economy.
Estevens, J. (2018). Migration crisis in the EU: Developing a framework for analy￾sis of national security and defence strategies. Comparative Migration Studies, 6, 
28. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40878-018-0093-3
Evans, J. H., & Evans, M. S. (2008). Religion and science: Beyond the epistemo￾logical conflict narrative. Annual Review of Sociology, 34, 87–105.
Fantasia, R. (1995). From class consciousness to culture, action, and social organi￾zation. Annual Review of Sociology, 21, 269–287.
Faris, R., & Etling, B. (2008). Madison and the smart mob: The promise and 
limitations of the Internet for Democracy. The Fletcher Forum of World Affairs, 
32, 65–85.
Farrell, W., & Gray, J. (2019). The boy crisis: Why our boys are struggling and what 
we can do about it. Dallas, TX: BenBella Books.
Fearon, J., & Laitin, D. (2003). Ethnic structure and cultural diversity by country. 
American Political Science Review, 91, 75–90.
Feierman, J. R., & Oviedo, L. (Eds.) (2020). The evolution of religion, religiosity 
and theology. Oxford: Routledge.
Feinstein, C. (1996). The equalizing of wealth in Britain since the Second World 
War. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 12, 96–105.
Feldstein, S. (2019). The global expansion of AI surveillance. Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, September 17. https://carnegieendowment.org/2019/09/17/
global-expansion-of-ai-surveillance-pub-79847
Feygina, I., Jost, J. T., & Goldsmith, R. E. (2010). System justification, the 
denial of global warming, and the possibility of “system-sanctioned change.” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36, 326–338.
Figes, O. (2002). Natasha’s dance: A cultural history of Russia. New York: Picador.
Figes, O. (2007). The whisperers: Private life in Stalin’s Russia. New York: 
Metropolitan Books.
Figes, O., & Kolonitski, B. (1999). Interpreting the Russian revolution: The language 
and symbols of 1917. New York: Henry Holt.
Fitzpatrick, S. (1994). Stalin’s peasants: Resistance and survival in the Russian village 
after collectivization. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fitzpatrick, S. (2017). The Russian revolution. New York: Oxford University Press. 
4th ed.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 189
Forgas, J. P., Crano, W. D., & Fiedler, K. (Eds.) (2021). The psychology of popu￾lism: The tribal challenge to liberal democracy. London: Routledge.
Forrest, W., Edwards, B., & Daraganova, G. (2018). The intergenerational conse￾quences of war: Anxiety, depression, suicidality, and mental health among the 
children of war veterans. International Journal of Epidemiology, 47, 1060–1067.
Fox, J. (2006). World separation of religion and state into the twenty-first cen￾tury. Comparative Political Studies, 39, 537–569.
Franks, D. D. (2019). Neurosociology: Fundamentals and current findings. 
Dordrecht, Switzerland: Springer.
Freeberg, A. (1999). Questioning technology. London: Routledge.
Freedom House (2021). Freedom under siege. https://freedomhouse.org/report/
freedom-world/2021/democracy-under-siege
Freud, S. (1955). Group psychology and the analysis of the ego. In J. Strachey (Ed. 
and Trans.), The standard edition of the complete psychological words of Sigmund 
Freud (Vol. 18, pp.67–143). London: Hogarth Press. Original work published 
1921.
Freud, S. (1961). Civilization and its discontents. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), 
The standard edition of the complete psychological words of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 
21, pp. 64–145). London: Hogarth Press. Original work published 1930.
Friedman, T. L. (2000). The Lexus and the olive tree: Understanding globalization. 
New York: Anchor Books.
Fukuyama, F. (2006). The end of history and the last man. New York: Free Press.
Fum, R. M., & Hodler, R. (2010). Natural resources and income inequality: The 
role of ethnic divisions. Economic Letters, 107, 360–363.
Gallagher, E. M., Shennan, S. J., & Thomas, M. G. (2015). Transition to farming 
more likely for small, conservative groups with property rights, but increased 
productivity is not essential. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112, 
14212–14223.
Gans, H. J. (1995). The war against the poor: The underclass and antipoverty policy. 
New York: Basic Books.
Garbers, Y., & Konradt, U. (2014). The effect of financial incentives on perfor￾mance: A quantitative review of individual and team-based financial incentives. 
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 87, 102–137.
Garcia, G. (2008). The decline of men. New York: Harper Perennial.
Garfield, Z. H., & Hagen, E. H. (2020). Investigating evolutionary models of 
leadership among recently settled Ethiopian hunter-gatherers. The Leadership 
Quarterly, 31, 101290.
Garfield, Z. H., Syme, K. L., & Hagen, E. H. (2020). Universal and variable 
leadership dimensions across human societies. Evolution and Human Behavior, 
41, 397–414.
Garssen, B., Visser, A., & Pool, G. (2021). Does spirituality or religion posi￾tively affect mental health? Meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. International 
Journal of Psychology of Religion, 31, 4–20.
Gat, A. (2012). Nations: The long history and deep roots of political ethnicity and 
nationalism. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Published online by Cambridge University Press190 References
Gauriot, R., & Page, L. (2015). I take care of my own: A field study on how lead￾ership handles conflict between individual and collective incentives. American 
Economic Review, 105, 414–419.
Goldhagen, S. W. (2017). Welcome to your world: How the built environment shapes 
our lives. New York: HarperCollins.
Goldstein, E. B. (2022). Cognitive psychology: Connecting mind, research and every￾day experience. Boston: Cengage. 4th ed.
Goldstein, E. B., & Cacciamani, L. (2022). Sensation & perception. Boston: 
Cengage. 11th ed.
Goldstein, W. S. (Ed.) (2006). Marx, critical theory and religion: A critique of ratio￾nal choice. Boston: Brill Academic Publishers.
Goldstone, J. A. (Ed.) (2003). Revolutions: Theoretical, comparative, and historical 
studies. Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth.
Gómez, J., Huete, J. F., Hoyos, O., Perez, L., & Grigori, D. (2013). Interaction 
system based on Internet of Things as support for education. Procedia Computer 
Science, 21, 132–139.
Gómez, S. (2008). Globalization – a brief overview. International Monetary Fund 
Issues Brief, May, 1–8.
Goodman, P. (2022). Davos man: How the billionaires devoured the world. New 
York: Custom House.
Goodyear-Grant, E., & Tolley, E. (2019). Voting for one’s own: Racial group iden￾tification and candidate preferences. Politics, Groups, and Identities, 7, 131–147.
Goudie, A. S. (2019). Human impact on the natural environment: Past, present and 
future. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 8th ed.
Graham, J., & Haidt, J. (2010). Beyond beliefs: Religions bind individuals into 
moral communities. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 14, 140–150.
Green, J. S., & Daniels, S. (2020). Digital governance: Leading and thriving in a 
world of fast-changing technologies. London: Routledge.
Greenfield, P. M. (2013). The changing psychology of culture from 1800 to 2000. 
Psychological Science, 24, 1722–1731.
Greider, W. (1997). One world, ready or not: The manic logic of global capitalism. 
New York: Touchstone.
Griffey, J. A. F., & Little, A. C. (2014). Infant’s visual preferences for facial traits 
associated with adult attractiveness judgements: Data from eye-tracking. Infant 
Behavior and Development, 37, 268–275.
Grossi, G. (2017). Hardwiring: Innateness in the age of the brain. Biology & 
Philosophy, 32, 1047–1982.
Gunitsky, S. (2015). Corrupting the cyber-commons: Social media as a tool of 
autocratic stability. Perspectives on Politics, 13, 42–54.
Guthrie, S. E. (1993). Faces in the clouds: A new theory of religion. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Hadzic, D., Carlson, D., & Tavits, M. (2017). How exposure to violence affects 
ethnic voting. British Journal of Political Science, 50, 345–362.
Hafer, C. L., & Bègue, L. (2005). Experimental research on just-world theory: 
Problems, developments, and future challenges. Psychological Bulletin, 131, 128–167.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 191
Haller, M. (2015). Ethnic stratification and economic inequality around the world: 
The end of exploitation and exclusion? Surrey, UK: Ashgate.
Hamer, D. (2004). The God gene: How faith is hardwired into our genes. New York: 
Doubleday.
Hammar, O., & Waldenstrom, D. (2020). Global earning inequality, 1970–2018. 
The Economic Journal, 130, 2526–2545.
Hammond, R. A., & Axelrod, R. (2006). The evolution of ethnocentrism. Journal 
of Conflict Resolution, 50, 926–936.
Hanzl, M. (2007). Information technology as a tool for public participation in 
urban planning: A review of experiments and potentials. Design Studies, 28
(Participatory Design), 289–307.
Hardey, M. (1999). Doctor in the house: The Internet as a source of lay health 
knowledge and the challenge to expertise. Sociology of Health & Illness, 21, 820–835.
Hardin, G. (1998). Extensions of “The tragedy of the commons.” Science, 280, 
282–283.
Harff, B., & Gurr, T. R. (2019). Ethnic conflict in world politics. New York: 
Routledge. 2nd ed.
Harré, R., & Moghaddam, F. M. (Eds.) (2012). Psychology for the third millen￾nium: Integrating cultural and neuroscience perspectives. London & Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. Hardcover and softcover.
Harris, D. E., Holyfield, L., Jones, L., Ellis, R., & Neal, J. (2019). Spirituality and 
developmentally mature leadership: Toward an expanded understanding of leader￾ship in the twenty-first century. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature.
Hart, C. W. M., Pilling, A. R., & Goodale, J. C. (2001). The Tiwi of North 
Australia. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Thomson Learning.
Hasanovic, M. (2011). Psychological consequences of war-traumatized children 
and adolescents in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Acta Medica Academica, 40, 45–66.
Heiserman, N., & Simpson, B. (2017). Higher inequality increases the gap in the 
perceived merit of the rich and poor. Social Psychology Quarterly, 80, 243–253.
Helms, J. E., & Talleyrand, R. M. (1997). Race is not ethnicity. American 
Psychologist, 52, 1146–1247.
Henry, P. J., Wetherell, G., & Brandt, M. J. (2015). Democracy as a legitimizing 
ideology. Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology, 21, 648–664.
Heyer, E., Balaresque, P., Jobling, M. A., et al. (2009). Genetic diversity and 
the emergence of ethnic groups in Central Asia. BMC Genetics, 10, https://doi
.org/10.1186/1471-2156-10-49
Hill, J. P. (2009). Higher education as moral community: Institutional influ￾ences on religious participation during college. Journal for the Scientific Study of 
Religion, 48, 515–534.
Hill, P. C., & Pargament, K. I. (2003). Advances in the conceptualization and 
measurement of religion and spirituality: Implications for physical and mental 
health research. American Psychologist, 58, 64–74.
Hölig, S., Hasebrink, U., & Behre, J. (2021). Keeping on top of the world: Online 
news usage in China, the United States and five European countries. New 
Media & Society, 23, 1798–1823.
Published online by Cambridge University Press192 References
Hood, R. E., Hill, P. C., & Spilka, B. (2018). The psychology of religion: An empiri￾cal approach. New York: The Guilford Press. 5th ed.
Hornsey, M. J., & Jetten, J. (2004). The individual within the group: Balancing 
the need to belong with the need to be different. Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 8, 248–264.
Horowitz, D. L. (1985). Ethnic groups in conflict. Lexington, MA: Lexington 
Books.
Horowitz, J. M., Brown, A., & Cox, K. (2019). Race in America 2019. Pew 
Research Center. apo.org.au/node/229656
Horton, J., & Keith, D. (2016). Solar geoengineering and obligations to the global 
poor. In C. J. Preston (Ed.), Climate justice and geoengineering: Ethics and pol￾icy in the atmospheric Anthropocene (pp. 79–92). Lanham, MD: Rowman & 
Littlefield International.
Hourdequin, M. (2018). Climate change, climate engineering, and the “global 
poor”: What does justice require? Ethics, Policy & Environment, 21, 270–288.
Hsieh, C. T., Miguel, E., Ortega, D., & Rodriguez, F. (2011). The price of political 
opposition: Evidence from Venezuela’s Maisanta. American Economic Journal: 
Applied Economics, 3, 196–214.
Huang, R. (2016). The wartime origins of democratization: Civil war, rebel gover￾nance, and political regimes. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Huang, Y., Xue, X., Spelke, E., Huang, I., & Peng, K. (2018). The aesthetic pref￾erence for symmetry dissociates from early-emerging attention to symmetry. 
Scientific Reports, 8, 6263.
Hughes, J. (2011). Genocide. In K. Cordell & S. Wolff (Eds.), Routledge Handbook 
of Ethnic Conflict (pp. 122–139). New York: Routledge.
Huo, Y. J., Smith, H. J., Tyler, T. R., & Lind, E. A. (1996). Superordinate identi￾fication, subgroup identification, and justice concerns: Is separatism the prob￾lem; is assimilation the answer? Psychological Science, 7, 40–45.
Hwang, J., & Ha Lee, J. (2014). Women’s education and the timing and level of 
fertility. International Journal of Social Economics, 41, 862–874.
Inglehart, R. F. (2020). Giving up on God: The global decline in religion. Foreign 
Affairs, September/October, 110–118.
Ito, A., Fujii, T., Abe, N., et al. (2016). Gender differences in ventromedial pre￾frontal cortex activity associated with valuation of faces. Neuroscience, 328, 
194–200.
Iversen, H. R. (2004). Religion in the twenty-first century. Dialog: A Journal of 
Theology, 45, 28–33.
Jameson, K. A. (2005). Culture and cognition: What is universal about the rep￾resentation of color experience? Journal of Cognition and Culture, 5, 293–347.
Janis, I. L. (1972). Victims of groupthink: A psychological study of foreign-policy deci￾sions and fiascoes. Oxford: Houghton Mifflin.
Jaumotte, F. (2003). Labour force participation for women: Empirical evidence 
on the role of policy and other determinants in OECD countries. OECD 
Economic Studies, No. 37. citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.
411.6862&rep1&type=pdf
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 193
Jefferson, P. N. (2020). Global poverty: Trends, measures, antidotes. In B. Greve 
(Ed.), Routledge international handbook of poverty (pp. 119–129). New York: 
Routledge.
Jenne, E. K. (2011). The causes and consequences of ethnic cleansing. In K. 
Cordell & S. Wolff (Eds.), Routledge Handbook of Ethnic Conflict (pp. 112–121). 
New York: Routledge.
Jha, C. K., & Kodila-Tedika, O. (2020). Does social media promote democracy? 
Some empirical evidence. Journal of Policy Modeling, 42, 271–290.
Jin, K., & Baillargeon, R. (2017). Infants possess an abstract expectation of ingroup 
support. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114, 8199–8204.
Johnson, D. G. (2002). Globalization: What is it and who benefits? Journal of 
Asian Economics, 13, 427–439.
Johnston, J. H. (1964). English poetry of the First World War. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Jones, D. (2018). Kin selection and ethnic group selection. Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 39, 9–18.
Jones, G. S. (2005). An end to poverty: The French Revolution and the promise 
of a world beyond want. Historical Research, 78, 193–207.
Jordan-Young, R., & Rumiati, R. I. (2012). Hardwired for sexism: Approaches to 
sex/gender in neuroscience. Neuroethics, 5, 305–315.
Jost, J. T. (2018). A quarter century of system justification theory: Questions, 
answers, criticisms, and societal applications. British Journal of Social Psychology, 
58, 263–314.
Justino, P., & Stojetz, W. (2019). Civil legacies of wartime governance. WIDER 
Working Paper 2019/104. https://doi.org/10.35188/UNU-WIDER/2019/740-8
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking fast and slow. New York: Farrar, Strauss & Giroux.
Kallens, P. A. C., Dale, R., & Smaldino, P. E. (2018). Cultural evolution of cat￾egorization. Cognitive Systems Research, 52, 765–774.
Kamusella, T. (2019). Ethnic cleansing during the Cold War. The forgotten 1989 
expulsion of Turks from communist Bulgaria. New York: Routledge.
Kassymbekova, B., & Chokobaeva, A. (2021). On writing Soviet history of Central 
Asia: Frameworks, challenges, prospects. Central Asian Survey, 40, 483–503.
Kaufman, S. J. (2011). Ethnicity as a generator of conflict. In K. Cordell & S. 
Wolff (Eds.), Routledge handbook of ethnic conflict (pp. 91–102). New York: 
Routledge.
Kay, P., & Regier, T. (2003). Resolving the question of color naming universals. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100, 9085–9089.
Kazui, T. (1982). Foreign relations during the Edo period: Sakoku reexamined. 
The Journal of Japanese Studies, 8, 283–306.
Kelley, R. D. G., & Lewis, E. (Eds.) (2000). To make our world anew: A history of 
African Americans. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kelly, D. J., Gibson, A., Smith, M., et al. (2005). Three-month-olds, but not 
newborns, prefer own-race faces. Developmental Science, 8, 31–36.
Kendall-Taylor, A., Frantz, E., & Wright, J. (2020). The digital dictators: How 
technology strengthens autocracy. Foreign Affairs, 99, 103–115.
Published online by Cambridge University Press194 References
Keremoglu, E., & Weidmann, N. B. (2020). How dictators control the Internet: 
A review essay. Comparative Political Studies, 53, 1690–1703.
Kertzer, D. J. (1988). Ritual, politics, and power. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press.
Khalaf, R. W. (2020). Authenticity or continuity in the implementation of the 
UNESCO World Heritage Convention? Scrutinizing statements of outstand￾ing universal value, 1978–2019. Heritage, 3, 243–274.
Khomeini, R. (1979). Islamic governance. New York: Manor Books.
Kiernan, B. (2007). Blood and soil: A world history of genocide from Sparta to 
Darfur. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Kim, J. Y. (2018a). Eliminating poverty in the twenty-first century: The role of 
health and human capital. Journal of the American Medical Association, 320, 
1427–1428.
Kim, J. Y. (2018b). Rich and poor: Opportunities and challenges in an age 
of disruption. Spring Meeting Positioning Speech, Washington, DC. www
.worldbank.org/en/news/speech/2018/04/10/rich-and-poor-opportunities￾and-challenges-in-an-age-of-disruption
Kipnis, A. B. (2016). From village to city: Social transformation in a Chinese county 
seat. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Kite, M. E., & Whitley, B. E. (2016). Psychology of prejudice and discrimination. 
New York: Routledge. 3rd ed.
Klasen, S. (2018). The impact of gender inequality on economic performance in 
developing countries. Annual Review of Resource Economics, 10, 279–298.
Knight, J. B., Li, S., & Wan, H. (1917). The increasing inequality of wealth in China, 
2002–2013. CHCP Working Paper, No. 2017–15, The University of Western 
Ontario, Center for Human Capital and Productivity (CHCP), London, 
Ontario, Canada. Econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/180860/1/1027488080.pdf
Kohler, T. A., & Smith, M. E. (Eds.) (2019). Ten thousand years of inequality: The 
archeology of wealth differences. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press.
Kohler, W. (1975). Gestalt psychology: An introduction to new concepts in modern 
psychology. New York: Liveright. First published 1947.
Köllner, T. (2018). On the restitution of property and the making of “authentic” 
landscapes in contemporary Russia. Europe-Asia Studies, 70, 1083–1102.
Komlos, J. (2018). The economic roots of the rise of Trumpism. CESifo Working 
Paper No. 6868, Center for Economic Studies and ifo Institute (CESifo), 
Munich. www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/174991/1/cesifo1_wp6868.pdf
Koolaee, E. (2014). The impact of Iraq-Iran war on social roles of Iranian women. 
Middle East Critique, 23, 277–291.
Kopec, D. (2018). Environmental psychology for design. New York: Bloomsbury. 
3rd ed.
Kozulin, A. (1984). Psychology in utopia: Toward a social history of Soviet psychology. 
Boston, MA: MIT Press.
Krishnamurti, C., Shams, S., & Velayutham, E. (2018). Corporate social respon￾sibility and corruption risk: A global perspective. Journal of Contemporary 
Accounting & Economics, 14, 1–21.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 195
Kroesen, J. E. A. (2008). From mosques to cathedrals: Converting sacred space 
during the Spanish reconquest. Mediaevistik, 21, 113–137.
Kyburz-Graber, R. (2021). Coping with the commons dilemma in complex issues: 
The climate change example. In A. Zeyer & R. Kyburz-Graber (Eds.), Science, 
environment, health: Contributions from science education research (pp. 71–83). 
Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Ladino, J. K. (2019). Memorials matter: Emotion, environment and public mem￾ory at American historical sites. Reno & Las Vegas: University of Nevada 
Press.
Lambert, K. (2018). Biological psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Landrigan, P. J., Stegeman, J. J., Fleming, L. E., et al. (2020). Human health and 
ocean pollution. Annals of Global Health, 86, 1–64.
Lang, A. F. (2013). From revolutions to constitutions: The case of Egypt. 
International Affairs, 89, 345–363.
Langlois, J., Rubenstein, A., Larson, A., Hallam, M., & Smoot, M. (2000). 
Maxim or myth of beauty? A meta-analytic and theoretical review. Psychological 
Bulletin, 126, 390–423.
Laufkötter, C., Zscheischler, J., & Frölicher, T. L. (2020). High-impact marine 
heatwaves attributable to human-induced global warming. Science, 369, 
1621–1625.
Lauglo, J., & Liu, F. (2019). The reverse gender gap in adolescents’ expectations 
of higher education: Analysis of 50 education systems. Comparative Education 
Review, 63, 28–57.
Learoyd, A. E., Douiri, A., & Hart, N. (2021). COVID-19 and ethnicity: Has his￾tory repeated itself? Thorax, 76, 537–538.
Lee, Y. T., McCauley, C., Moghaddam, F. M., & Worchel, S. (Eds.) (2004). The 
psychology of ethnic and cultural conflict. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Lees, L. H. (1998). The solidarities of strangers: The English poor laws and the people, 
1700–1948. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Legare, C. H., Evans, E. M., Rosengren, K. S., & Harris, P. L. (2012). The coex￾istence of natural and supernatural explanations across cultures and develop￾ment. Child Development, 83, 779–793.
Lehmann, A. C., & Myers, J. E. (Eds.) (1989). Magic, witchcraft, and religion. 
Mountain View, CA: Mayfield. 2nd ed.
Leighley, J. E. (2021). Strength in numbers? The political mobilization of racial and 
ethnic minorities. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lerner, M. J. (1980). The belief in a just world: A fundamental delusion. New York: 
Plenum.
Lerner, M. J., & Simmons, C. H. (1966). Observer’s reaction to the “innocent 
victim”: Compassion or rejection? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
4, 203–210.
Levenda, A. M., Keough, N., Rock, M., & Miller, B. (2020). Rethinking public 
participation in the smart city. The Canadian Geographer, 64, 344–358.
Levin, J. (2010). Religion and mental health: Theory and research. International 
Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studies, 7, 102–115.
Published online by Cambridge University Press196 References
Levin, J. (2013). Religious behavior, health, and well-being among Israeli Jews: 
Findings from the European social survey. Psychology of Religion and Spirituality, 
5, 272–282.
Levine, M. (2005). Genocide in the age of the nation state (Vols. 1 & 2). London: 
I. B. Tauris.
Levine, P. (2002). Can the Internet rescue democracy? In R. Hayduk & K. Mattson 
(Eds.), Democracy’s moment: Reforming the American political system for the twenty￾first century (pp. 121–137). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Lewis, C., & Malmgren, P. (2019). The leadership lab: Understanding leadership in 
the twenty-first century. London: Kogan Page.
Lijphart, A. (1977). Political theories and explanations of ethnic conflict in 
the Western world: Falsified predictions and plausible post dictions. In M. 
J. Esman (Ed.), Ethnic conflict in the Western world (pp. 46–64). Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press.
Lintott, A. W. (1999). The constitution of the Roman Republic. Oxford: Clarendon.
Linvill, D. L., Boatwright, B. C., Grant, W. J., & Warren, P. L. (2019). “THE 
RUSSIANS ARE HACKING MY BRAIN!” investigating Russia’s internet 
research agency twitter tactics during the 2016 United States presidential cam￾paign. Computers in Human Behavior, 99, 292–300.
Livi-Bacci, M. (1993). On the human costs of collectivization in the Soviet Union. 
Population and Development Review, 19, 734–766.
Lloyd, C. B. (Ed.) (2005). Growing up global: The changing transitions to adulthood 
in developing countries. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Lomanowska, A. M., Boivin, M., Hertzman, C., & Fleming, A. S. (2017). Parenting 
begets parenting: A neurobiological perspective on early adversity and the trans￾mission of parenting styles across generations. Neuroscience, 342, 120–139.
Lopes da Hora, K., & Sampaio, A. A. S. (2019). Units of analysis for corruption 
experiments: Operant, culturobehavioral lineage, culturant, and macrobehav￾ior. Perspectives in Behavioral Science, 42, 751–771.
Lord, C. (2003). The modern prince: What leaders need to know now. New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press.
Lordachi, C., & Bauerkämper, A. (Eds.) (2014). The collectivization of agricul￾ture in communist Eastern Europe: Comparison and entanglements. New York: 
Central European University (CEU) Press.
Louis, W., Thomas, E., McGarty, C., et al. (2020). The volatility of collective 
action: Theoretical analysis and empirical data. Political Psychology, 41, 35–74.
Lovric, S. R., & Pecanac, A. (2020). Quality of life after traumatic loss and the 
role of social support – Examining the psychological consequences of the war 
twenty-five years later. Psiholoska istrazivanja, XXIII, 121–140.
Lubkemann, S. C. (2008). Culture in chaos: An anthropology of the social condition 
in war. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lunenburg, F. C. (2012). Power and leadership: An influence process. International 
Journal of Management, Business, and Administration, 15, 1–9.
Luttig, M. (2013). The structure of inequality and Americans’ attitudes toward 
redistribution. Public Opinion Quarterly, 77, 811–821.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 197
MacKinnon, R. (2011). China’s “networked authoritarianism.” Journal of 
Democracy, 22, 32–46.
MacLeod, S., Sandell, R., Dodd, J., et al. (2014). Prisoners, punishment and torture: 
Developing new approaches to interpretation at the Tower of London. Report from 
the Research Centre for Museums and Galleries, Leicester University, UK.
Major, B., Gramzow, R. H., McCoy, S. K., et al. (2002). Perceiving personal 
discrimination: The role of group status and legitimizing ideology. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 269–282.
Makarenko, A. (2004). Makarenko, his life and work: Articles, talks and reminis￾cences. Honolulu: University Press of the Pacific.
Manica, A., Prugnolle, F., & Balloux, F. (2005). Geography is a better deter￾minant of human genetic differentiation than ethnicity. Human Genetics, 118, 
366–371.
Mann, C. C. (2006). 1491: New revelations of the Americas before Columbus. New 
York: Knopf.
Mann, M. (2004). The dark side of democracy: Explaining ethnic cleansing. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Marmot, M. (2015). The health gap: The challenge of an unequal world. London: 
Bloomsbury Press.
Marwick, A. (1974). War and social change in the twentieth century: A compara￾tive study of Britain, France, Germany, France, Germany, Russia, and the United 
States. London: Macmillan.
Marwick, A. (Ed.) (1988). Total war and social change. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Marx, K., & Engels, F. (2021). The communist manifesto. New York: Chump 
Change Edition. Originally published 1848.
Maslow, A. H. (2014). Toward a psychology of being. Floyd, VA: Sublime Books.
Matthews, M. (1978). Privilege in the Soviet Union: A study of elite life-styles under 
communism. Oxford: Routledge.
Mattison, S. M., Smith, E. A., Shenk, M. K., & Cochrane, E. E. (2016). The 
evolution of inequality. Evolutionary Anthropology, 25, 184–199.
Mattocks, K. M., Haskell, S. G., Krebs, E. E., et al. (2012). Women at war: 
Understanding how women veterans cope with combat and military sexual 
trauma. Social Science & Medicine, 74, 537–545.
Mayhew, D. R. (2005). Wars and American politics. Perspectives on Politics, 3, 
473–493.
Mayshar, J., Moav, O., & Pascali, L. (2020). The origin of the state: Land pro￾ductivity or appropriability? https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/economics/staff/
omoav/mmp_feb_2020.pdf
McAndrew, F. T. (2021). Costly signaling theory. In T. K. Shackelford & V. A. Weekes￾Shackelford (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Evolutionary Psychological Science (1525–1532). 
Cham, Switzerland: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-19650-3_3483
McGowan, P. O., & Roth, T. L. (2015). Epigenetic pathways through which 
experiences become linked with biology. Development and Psychopathology, 27, 
637–648.
Published online by Cambridge University Press198 References
McKenzie, J. (2019). Introduction to the special issue: Globalization as a context for 
youth development. In J. McKenzie (Ed.), Globalization as a context for youth 
development. New Directions in Child and Adolescent Development, 164, 7–9.
McLaverty, P. (Eds.) (2017). Public participation and innovations in community 
governance. London: Routledge.
Mechanic. M. (2021). Jackpot: How the super-rich really live – and how their wealth 
harms us all. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Meng, A. (2020). Constraining dictatorship: From personalized rule to institutional￾ized regimes. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mersha, T. B., & Beck, A. F. (2020). The social, economic, political, and genetic 
value of race and ethnicity in 2020. Human Genomics, 14, 37. https://doi
.org/10.1186/s40246-020-00284-2
Miao, H. (2019). Media use and political participation in China: Taking three 
national large-N surveys as examples. Asian Journal for Public Opinion Research, 
7, 1–22.
Milanovic, B. (2011). A short history of global inequality: The past two centuries. 
Explorations in Economic History, 48, 494–506.
Miles-Novelo, A., & Anderson, C. A. (2019). Climate change and psychology: 
Effects of rapid global warming on violence and aggression. Current Climate 
Change Reports, 5, 36–46.
Milgram, S. (1974). Obedience to authority. New York: Harper & Row.
Milligan, M. J. (2007). Buildings as history: The place of collective memory in the 
study of historic preservation. Symbolic Interaction, 30, 105–123.
Min, S. S. (2021). Who believes in conspiracy theories? Network diversity, politi￾cal discussion, and conservative conspiracy theories on social media. American 
Politics Research, 49, 415–427.
Mirzaei, S., Alizadeh, H., Zarei, S., & Alksiri, E. (2021). Psychosocial consequences of 
widespread torture and sociopolitical pressure in Iran. Social Medicine, 14, 37–43.
Mitch, D. (2019). Globalization and the rise of women’s literacy sand primary edu￾cation in Iran, from 1880 to the present day. In D. Mitch & G. Cappelli (Eds.), 
Globalization and the rise of mass education (pp. 311–334). Cham, Switzerland: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Mitch, D., & Cappelli, G. (Eds.) (2019). Globalization and the rise of mass educa￾tion. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.
Moehler, E., Biringen, Z., & Poustka, L. (2007). Emotional availability in a sample of 
mothers with a history of abuse. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 77, 624–628.
Moghaddam, F. M. (1997). The specialized society: The plight of the individual in an 
age of individualism. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Moghaddam, F. M. (1998). Social psychology: Exploring universals across cultures. 
New York: Freeman.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2000). Toward a cultural theory of human rights. Theory & 
Psychology, 10, 291–312.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2002). The individual and society: A cultural integration. New 
York: Freeman.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 199
Moghaddam, F. M. (2005). Great ideas in psychology: A cultural and historical 
introduction. Oxford: Oneworld.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2006). From the terrorists’ point of view: What they experience 
and why they come to destroy. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2007). Interrogation policy and American psychology in 
global context. Peace & Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology, 13, 437–443.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2008). Multiculturalism and intergroup relations: Psychological 
implications for democracy in global context. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2012). The omnicultural imperative. Culture & Psychology, 
18, 304–330.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2013). The psychology of dictatorship. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association Press.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2015). Conclusion: A scholar between and beyond. In A. 
Dost-Gozkan & D. Sonmez Keith (Eds.), Norms, groups, conflict, and social 
change: Rediscovering Mozafer Sherif’s psychology (pp. 365–373). London: 
Transaction Publishers.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2016). The psychology of democracy. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association Press.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2018a). Mutual radicalization: How groups and nations drive each 
other to extremes. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Press.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2018b). Political plasticity and revolution: The case of Iran. 
In B. Wagoner, F. M. Moghaddam, & J. Valsiner (Eds.), The psychology of 
radical social change: From rage to revolution (pp. 122–139). Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2019). Threat to democracy: The appeal of authoritarianism in an 
age of uncertainty. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Press.
Moghaddam, F. M. (2022). How psychologists failed. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Moghaddam, F. M., & Hendricks, M. J. (2020). The psychology of revolution. 
Current Opinion in Psychology, 35, 7–11.
Moghaddam, F. M., & Stringer, P. (1986). “Trivial” and “important” criteria 
for social categorization in the minimal group paradigm. Journal of Social 
Psychology, 126, 345–354.
Mojzes, P. (2015). Balkan genocides: Holocaust and ethnic cleansing in the twentieth 
century. New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
Montefiore, S. S. (2003). Stalin: The court of the red tsar. London: Weidenfeld & 
Nicholson.
Moore, C., Mayer, D. M., Chiang, F. F. T., et al. (2019). Leaders matter morally: 
The role of ethical leadership in shaping employee moral cognition and mis￾conduct. Journal of Applied Psychology, 104, 123–145.
More, T. (2005). Utopia (Trans. R. Robinson). New York: Barnes & Noble.
Moscovici, S., Mugny, G., & Van Avermaet, E. (Eds.) (1984). Perspectives on 
minority influence. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Published online by Cambridge University Press200 References
Mouton, N. (2019). A literary perspective on the limits of leadership: Tolstoy’s 
critique of the great man theory. Leadership, 15, 81–102.
Mueller, H. (2020). Conflict and poverty. Policy Research Working Paper 9455, 
World Bank Group (Poverty and Equity Global Practice). documents1.world￾bank.org/curated/en/519741603804458786/pdf/Conflict-and-Poverty.pdf
Munawer, M. E. (2018). Human health and environmental impacts of coal com￾bustion and post-combustion wastes. Journal of Sustainable Mining, 17, 87–96.
Murray, D. E. (2000). Changing technologies, changing literacy communities? 
Language Learning & Technology, 4, 39–53.
Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Kalogeropoulos, A., et al. (Eds.) (2019). Reuters Institute 
Digital News Report. Oxford: Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism. 
www.digitalnewsreport.org
Nielsen, K. (1978). On the very possibility of a classless society: Rawls, Macpherson, 
and revisionist liberalism. Political Theory, 6, 191–2008.
Nielsen, K. S., Clayton, S., Stern, P. C., et al. (2021). How psychology can help 
limit climate change. American Psychologist, 76, 130–144.
Nier, J. A., Gaertner, S. L., Dovidio, J. F., et al. (2001). Changing interracial eval￾uations and behavior: The effects of a common group identity. Group Processes 
& Intergroup Relations, 4, 299–316.
Nimmo, B. (2020). The breakout scale: Measuring the impact of influence oper￾ations. Foreign Policy at Brookings. www.brookings.edu/wp-content/
uploads/2020/09/Nimmo_influence_operations_PDF.pdf
Nisar, T. M., Prabhaker, G., & Strakova, L. (2019). Social media information 
benefits, knowledge management and smart organizations. Journal of Business 
Research, 94, 264–272.
Nkengne, A., Bertin, C., Stamatas, G., et al. (2008). Influence of facial skin attri￾butes on the perceived age of Caucasian women. Journal of European Academy 
of Dermatology and Venerology, 22, 982–991.
Norris, P., & Inglehart, R. (2004). Sacred and secular: Religion and politics world￾wide. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Nyberg, A. J., Maltarich, M. A., Abdulsalam, D., Essman, S. M., & Cragun, O. 
(2018). Collective pay for performance: A cross-disciplinary review and meta￾analysis. Journal of Management, 44, 2433–2472.
O’Brien, D. Z., & Piscopo, J. M. (2019). The impact of women in parliament. In 
S. Franceschet, M. Krook, & N. Tan (Eds.). The Palgrave handbook of women’s 
political rights (pp. 53–72). London: Macmillan.
Ohmae, K. (1990). Borderless world. London: Collins.
Ohmae, K. (1995). The end of the nation-state. New York: Free Press.
Opie, I., & Opie, P. (2001). The lore and language of schoolchildren. New York: 
New York Review Books. Originally published 1959.
Oushakine, S. A. (2013). Remembering in public: On the affective management 
of history. Ab Imperio, 1, 269–302.
Oxfam International (2021). World’s billionaires have more wealth than 4.6 
billion people. www.oxfam.org/en/press-releases/worlds-billionaires-have￾more-wealth-46-billion-people
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 201
Page, B. I., Bartels, L. M., & Seawright, J. (2013). Democracy and the policy pref￾erences of wealthy Americans. Perspectives on Politics, 11, 51–73.
Paine, T. (2021). Rights of man. Independently published. Originally published 
1791.
Pareto, V. (1935). The mind and society: A treatise on general sociology (Vols. 1–4). 
New York: Dover.
Pargament, K. I., & Raiya, H. A. (2007). A decade of research on the psychology 
of religion and cooping. Psyke & Logos, 28, 742–766.
Peoples, H. C., Duda, P., & Marlowe, F. W. (2016). Hunter gatherers and the 
origins of religion. Human Nature, 27, 261–281.
Persson, I., & Savulescu, J. (2017). Moral hard-wiring and moral enhancement. 
Bioethics, 31, 286–295.
Pettegree, A., & Hall, M. (2004). The Reformation and the book. The Historical 
Journal, 47, 785–808.
Pew Research Center (2021). Social media use in 2021. www.pewresearch.org/
internet/wp-content/uploads/sites/9/2021/04/PI_2021.04.07_Social-Media￾Use_FINAL.pdf
Pfeifer, R., & Bongard, J. (2007). How the body shapes the way we think: A new 
view of intelligence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pfiffner, J. P. (2021). Donald Trump and the norms of the presidency. Presidential 
Studies Quarterly, 51, 96–124.
Phiri, J., & Abdullahi, K. T. (2018). Is economic globalization the ideal remedy 
for ending poverty and enhancing development? In I. Siriner & Z. Y. Kilickan 
(Eds.), Institutions, development, and economic growth (pp. 99–109). London: 
IJOPEC Publications.
Pietschnig, J., & Voracek, M. (2015). One century of global IQ gains: A formal 
meta-analysis of the Flynn Effect. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10, 282–306.
Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the twenty-first century (Trans. A. Goldhammer). 
Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Pincus, A. L., & Lukowitsky, M. R. (2010). Pathological narcissism and narcis￾sistic personality disorder. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 6, 421–446.
Pistol, R. (2017). Internment during the Second World War: A comparative study of 
Great Britain and the USA. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Plato (1987). Republic (Trans. D. Lee). Harmondsworth, England: Penguin Books.
Polyakova, A., & Meserole, C. (2019). Exporting digital authoritarianism: The 
Russian and Chinese models. Foreign Policy at Brookings. www.brookings
.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/FP_20190827_digital_authoritarianism_
polyakova_meserole.pdf
Poushter, J., Bishop, C., & Chwe, H. (2018). Social media use continues to rise in 
developing countries but plateaus across developed ones. Pew Research Center. 
https://medienorge.uib.no/files/Eksterne_pub/Pew-Research-Center_Global￾Tech-Social-Media-Use_2018.06.19.pdf
Powell, R., & Clarke, S. (2012). Religion as an evolutionary byproduct: A cri￾tique of the standard model. The British Journal of the Philosophy of Science, 63, 
457–486.
Published online by Cambridge University Press202 References
Prasad, A. (2022). Anti-science misinformation and conspiracies: COVID-19, 
post-truth, and science and technology studies (STS). Science, Technology & 
Society, 27, 88–112.
Priebe, S., Gavrilovic, J. J., Bremner, S., et al. (2013). Psychological symptoms as 
long-term consequences of war experiences. Psychopathology, 46, 45–54.
Proffitt, D., & Baer, D. (2020). Perception: How our bodies shape our minds. New 
York: St. Martin’s Press.
Pruitt-Young, S. (2021). American Psychological Association says it’s sorry for 
perpetuating systemic racism. NPR. www.npr.org/2021/11/03/1051992407/
american-psychological-association-apology-for-systemic-racism-apa
Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S., & Greenberg, J. (2003). In the wake of 9/11: The 
psychology of terror. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Press.
Quinn, K. M. (1976). Political change in wartime: The Khmer Krahom revolution 
in southern Cambodia, 1970–1974. Naval War College Review, 28, 3–31.
Quinn, P. C., Lee, K., Pascalis, O., & Tanaka, J. W. (2016). Narrowing in categori￾cal responding to other-race face classes by infants. Developmental Science, 19, 
362–371.
Quinn, P. C., Uttley, L., Lee, K., et al. (2008). Infant preference for female 
face occurs for same- but not other-race faces. Journal of Neuropsychology, 2, 
15–26.
Rabinbach, A. (2008). Staging antifascism: “The brown book of the Reichstag fire 
and Hitler terror.” New German Critique, 35, 97–126.
Raper, C. L. (2003). Group decision-making in animals. Nature, 421, 155–158.
Rappaport, M. B., & Corbally, C. J. (2020). The emergence of religion in human 
evolution. Oxford: Routledge.
Ravallion, M. (2016). Economic of poverty: History, measurement and policy. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Ravallion, M. (2020). Ethnic inequality and poverty in Malaysia since May 1969. 
Part I: Inequality. World Development, 134, 105040.
Raza, Z. (2019). China’s “political re-education” camps of Xinjiang’s Uyghur 
Muslims. Asian Affairs, 1, 488–501.
Razavi, R. (2009). The cultural revolution in Iran, with close regard to the universi￾ties, and its impact on the student movement. Middle Eastern Studies, 45, 1–17.
Reese, G., Rosenmann, A., & Cameron, J. E. (2019). The psychology of globaliza￾tion: Identity, ideology, and action. London: Academic Press.
Reicher, S., & Drury, J. (2011). Collective identity, political participation and the 
making of the social self. In A. E. Azzi., X. Chryssochoou, B. Klandermans, & 
B. Simon(Eds.), Identity and participation in culturally diverse societies: A multi￾disciplinary perspective (pp. 158–176). Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Reynolds, J. R., & Burge, S. W. (2008). Educational expectations and the rise in 
women’s post-secondary attainments. Social Science Research, 37, 485–499.
Richards, J. (1979). The popes and the papacy in the Early Middle Ages, 476–752. 
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Riegel, K. G. (2005). Marxism-Leninism as a political religion. Totalitarian 
Movements and Political Religions, 6, 97–126.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 203
Rinke, S., Butz-Ostendorf, M., Hermanns, M. A., Naveau, M., & Wolf, F. 
(2018). A scalable algorithm for simulating the structural plasticity of the brain. 
Journal of Parallel and Distributive Computing, 120, 251–266.
Robben, A. C. G. M. (2021). Metonyms of destruction: Death, ruination, and the 
bombing of Rotterdam in the Second World War. Journal of Material Culture, 
26, 324–343.
Roberts, A. (2015). Napoleon: A life. London: Penguin Books.
Roberts, M. E. (2020). Censored: Distraction and diversion inside China’s Great 
Firewall. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Roberts, N. (2014). The Holocene: An environmental history. Oxford: Wiley￾Blackwell. 3rd. ed.
Robeyns, I., Buskens, V., van de Rijt, A., Vergeldt, N., & van der Lippe, T. (2021). 
How rich is too rich? Measuring the riches line. Social Indicators Research, 154, 
115–143.
Rosch, E., & Levitin, D. J. (2002). Principles of categorization. In D. J. Levitin 
(Ed.), Foundations of cognitive psychology: Core readings (pp. 251–270). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rosenbaum, S. (2018). The war on poverty, 2018-style. The Milbank Quarterly, 
96, 231–234.
Rosin, H. (2013). The end of men: And the rise of women. New York: Penguin.
Roszko, E. (2012). From spiritual homes to national shrines: Religious traditions 
and nation-building in Vietnam. East Asia, 29, 25–41.
Rothbart, D., & Bartlett, T. (2008). Rwandan radio broadcasts and Hutu/Tutsi 
positioning. In F. M. Moghaddam, R. Harré, & N. Lee (Eds.), Global conflict 
resolution through positioning analysis (pp. 227–246). New York: Springer.
Rounding, K., Lee, A., Jacobson, J. A., & Ji, L. J. (2012). Religion replenishes self￾control. Psychological Science, 23, 635–642.
Rubin, J. (2014). Printing and Protestants: An empirical test of the role of printing 
in the Reformation. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 96, 270–286.
Ruparelia, S. (2019). Modi’s saffron democracy. Dissent, 66, 94–106.
Russell, R., Batres, C., Courreges, S., et al. (2019). Differential effects of makeup 
on perceived age. British Journal of Psychology, 110, 87–100.
Ryan, L. (1981). The aboriginal Tasmanians. St. Lucia: University of Queensland Press.
Sachs, J. D. (2012). From millennium development goals to sustainable develop￾ment goals. Lancet, 379, 2206–2011.
Saez, E., & Zucman, G. (2019). The triumph of injustice: How the rich dodge taxes 
and how to make them pay. New York: W.W. Norton.
Sahut, J. M., Landoli, L., & Teulon, F. (2019). The age of digital entrepreneur￾ship. Small Business Economics, 56, 1159–1169.
Sairambay, Y. (2022). Internet and social media use by young people for informa￾tion about (inter)national news and politics in Russia and Kazakhstan. Studies 
of Transition States and Societies, [S.l.] ISSN 1736–8758. http://publications.tlu
.ee/index.php/stss/article/view/1007
Salter, F. (2008). Evolutionary analysis of ethnic solidarity: An overview. People 
and Place, 16, 41–51.
Published online by Cambridge University Press204 References
Santiago, A. M. (2015). Fifty years later: From a war on poverty to a war on the 
poor. Social Problems, 62, 2–14.
Sassoon, S. (2017). Memoirs of a fox-hunting man. New York: Faber & Faber. First 
published 1928.
Scheidel, W. (2017). The great leveler: Violence and the history of inequality from the 
stone age to the twenty-first century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Scheve, K., & Stasavage, D. (2012). Democracy, war, and wealth: Lessons from 
two centuries of inherited taxation. American Political Science Review, 106, 
81–102.
Schiebinger, L. (1987). The history and philosophy of women in science. Signs: 
Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 12, 305–332.
Schönfeld, P., Brailovskaia, J., & Margraf, J. (2017). Positive and negative men￾tal health across the lifespan: A cross-cultural comparison. Journal of Adult 
Development, 17, 110–119.
Scott, J. (2000). Rational choice theory. In G. Browning, A. Halcli, & F. Webster 
(Eds.), Understanding contemporary society: Theories of the present (pp. 126–138). 
London: Sage.
Scott, R. A. (2011). The Gothic enterprise. Berkeley, CA: California University 
Press. 2nd ed.
Sen, A. (2003). Democracy and its global roots: Why democratization is not the 
same as Westernization. The New Republic, October 6, 28–35.
Shadbolt, N., & Hampson, R. (2019). The digital ape: How to live (in peace) with 
smart machines. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shallice, T. (1982). Specific impairments of planning. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London B Biological Sciences, 298, 199–209.
Shapiro, L. (Ed.) (2014). The Routledge handbook of embodied cognition. London: 
Routledge.
Sherif, M. (1966). Group conflict and cooperation: Their social psychology. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Shields, S. A. (1975). Functionalism, Darwinism, and the psychology of women. 
American Psychologist, 30, 739–754.
Shirky, C. (2011). The political power of social media: Technology, the public 
sphere, and political change. Foreign Affairs, 90, 28–41.
Simon, B., & Klandermans, B. (2001). Politicized collective identity: A social 
psychological analysis. American Psychologist, 56, 319–331.
Simon, H. A. (1997). Models of bounded rationality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Simonton, D. K. (2018). From giftedness to eminence: Developmental landmarks 
across the lifespan. In S. I. Pfeiffer, E. Shaunessy-Dedrick, & M. Foley-Nicpon 
(Eds.), APA handbook of giftedness and talent (pp. 273–285). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Skinner, B. F. (1971). Beyond freedom and dignity. New York: Knopf.
Smeekes, A., & Verkuyten, M. (2015). The presence of the past: Identity continu￾ity and group dynamics. European Review of Social Psychology, 26, 162–202.
Smidi, A., & Shahin, S. (2017). Social media and social mobilization in the Middle 
East. India Quarterly, 73, 196–209.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 205
Smith, A. (1776/1976). An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations. 
Vols. 1 & 2. R. H. Campbell & A. S. Skinner (Eds.). London: Clarendon Press.
Smith, A. D. (1981). The ethnic revival. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.
Smith, H. L. (Ed.) (1986). War and social change: British society in the Second 
World War. Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press.
Smith, S. A. (2017). Russia in revolution: An empire in crisis, 1890–1928. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Snel, E., Bilgili, O., & Staring, R. (2021). Migration trajectories and transpor￾tation support within and beyond Europe. Journal of Ethnic and Migration 
Studies, 47, 3209–3225.
Sommers, C. H. (2015). The war against boys: How misguided policies are harming 
out young men. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Sosis, R. (2009). The adaptationist-byproduct debate on the evolution of religion: 
Five misunderstandings of the adaptationist program. Journal of Cognition and 
Culture, 9, 339–356.
Sosnowski, M. (2020). Reconciliation agreements as strange contracts: 
Ramifications for property and citizenship rights in the Syrian civil war. 
Peacebuilding, 8, 460–475.
Sowinska-Heim, J. (2020). Adaptive reuse of architectural heritage and its role 
in the post-disaster reconstruction of urban identity: Post-communist Lodz. 
Sustainability, 12, 8054. http://doi.org/10.3390/su12198054
Sparrow, R., & Sparrow, L. (2006). In the hands of machines? The future of aged 
care. Mind Mach, 16, 141–161.
Spisak, B. R. (2020). Tinbergen’s take on the evolution of leadership: A frame￾work for clarifying and integrating contributions. The Leadership Quarterly, 31. 
101401.
Stark, L., Landis, D., Thomson, B., & Potts, A. (2016). Navigating support, resil￾ience, and care: Exploring the impact of informal social networks on the reha￾bilitation and care of young female survivors of sexual violence in Northern 
Uganda. Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology, 22, 2017–225.
Steele, A., & Schubiger, L. I. (2018). Democracy and civil war: The case of 
Colombia. Conflict Management and Peace Science, 35, 587–600.
Stein, A. A. (2017). Ethnicity, extraterritoriality, and international conflict. Ethnic 
and Racial Studies, 40, 2020–2038.
Stepaniants, M., & Johnson, J. (2005). Religion and identity in modern Russia. 
London: Routledge.
Stites, R. (1988). Revolutionary dreams: Utopian vision and experimental life in the 
Russian revolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
Stoet, G., & Geary, D. (2018). The gender-equality paradox in science, technol￾ogy, engineering, and mathematics education. Psychological Science, 29, 589–593.
Strang, L. J. (2019). Originalism’s promise: A natural law account of the American 
Constitution. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sugden, R. (1991). Rational choice: A survey of contributions from economics and 
philosophy. The Economic Journal, 101, 751–785.
Published online by Cambridge University Press206 References
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In 
W. G. Austin & S. Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology of intergroup relations
(pp. 33–47). Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Tajfel, H., Flament, C., Billig, M. G., & Bundy, R. F. (1971). Social categorization 
and intergroup behaviour. European Journal of Social Psychology, 1, 149–177.
Taylor, D. M., & McKirnan, D. J. (1984). A five-stage model of intergroup rela￾tions. British Journal of Social Psychology, 23, 291–300.
Taylor, F. D. (1911/1964). The principles of scientific management. New York: 
Harper & Row.
The Economist (2021). Xi Jinping thought for children. September 4, 34.
The Economist (2022). Boy trouble. May 7, 39–40.
Ther, P. (2014). The dark side of nation states: Ethnic cleansing in modern Europe
(Trans. C. Kreutzmüller). New York: Berghahn.
Titmus, R. M. (1950). Problems of social policy. London: Her Majesty’s Stationary 
Office.
Todes, D. (1995). Pavlov and the Bolsheviks. History and Philosophy of the Life 
Sciences, 17, 379–341.
Todorov, A., & Oh, D. W. (2021). The structure and perceptual basis of social 
judgements from faces. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 63, 189–245.
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychological Review, 55, 
189–208.
Tomba, M. (2017). Politics beyond the state: The 1918 Soviet Constitution. 
Constellations, 24, 503–515.
Trasolini, R., Nap-Hill, E., Suzuki, M., et al. (2020). Internet-based patient edu￾cation prior to colonoscopy: Prospective, observational study of a single center’s 
implementation, with objective assessment of bowel preparation quality and 
patient satisfaction. Journal of the Canadian Association of Gastroenterology, 3, 
274–278.
Trotsky, L. (1906/2010). The permanent revolution and results and prospects. Seattle, 
WA: Ref Letter Press.
Tudge, J. (1991). Education of young children in the Soviet Union: Current prac￾tice in historical context. The Elementary School Journal, 92, 121–133.
Tumarkin, N. (1981). Religion, Bolshevism, and the origins of the Lenin cult. The 
Russian Review, 40, 35–46.
Turner, D. (1991). Religion: Illusions and liberation. In T. Carver (Ed.), 
The Cambridge Companion to Marx (pp. 320–338). New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Turner, J. C. (1982). Toward a cognitive redefinition of the social group. In 
H. Tajfel (Ed.), Social identity and intergroup relations (pp. 15–40). Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., & Wetherell, M. S. 
(1987). Rediscovering the social group: A self-categorization theory. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell.
Ullah, R., & Ullah, H. (2019). Boys versus girls’ educational performance: 
Empirical evidence from global north and global south. African Educational 
Research Journal, 7, 163–167.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 207
UNESCO (2016). Global education monitoring report. Gender review. Paris: 
UNESCO.
United Nations (2015). The millennium development goals report. 
www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2015_MDG_Report/pdf/MDG%202015%20
rev%20(July%201)pdf
Uvin, P. (1997). Prejudice, crisis, and genocide in Rwanda. African Studies Review, 
40, 91–115.
Vail, K., & Routledge, C. (Eds.) (2020). The science of religion, spirituality and 
existentialism. San Diego, CA: Elsevier.
Van den Berghe, P. L. (1987). The ethnic phenomenon. New York: Praeger.
Van der Linden, S., Panagopoulos, C., Azevedo, F., & Jost, J. T. (2021). The 
paranoid style in American politics revisited: An ideological asymmetry in con￾spiratorial thinking. Political Psychology, 42, 23–51.
Van Dick, R., Tissington, P. A., & Hertel, G. (2009). Do many hands make light 
work? How to overcome social loafing and gain motivation in work teams. 
European Business Review, 21, 233–245.
Van Ooyen, A., & Butz-Ostendorf, M. (Eds.) (2017). The rewiring brain: A com￾putational approach to structural plasticity in the adult brain. London: Academic 
Press.
Van Vugt, M. (2006). Evolutionary origins of leadership and followership. 
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10, 354–371.
Van Vugt, M., & Hardy, C. L. (2009). Cooperation for reputation: Wasteful 
contributions as costly signals in public goods. Group Processes & Intergroup 
Relations, 13, 101–111.
Van Vugt, M., Hogan, M., & Kaiser, R. B. (2008). Leadership, followership, and 
evolution: Some lessons from the past. American Psychologist, 63, 182–196.
Van Zomeren, M., Postmes, T., & Spears, R. (2008). Toward an integrative social 
identity model of collective action. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 504–535.
Vargas-Salfate, S., Paez, D., Liu, J. H., Pratto, F., & Gil de Zuniga, H. (2018). 
A comparison of social dominance theory and system justification: The role 
of social status in 19 nations. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 44, 
1060–1076.
Varol, O., Ferrara, E., Ogan, C. L., Menczer, F., & Flammini, A. (2014). Evolution 
of online user behavior during social upheaval. Proceedings of the 2014 ACM 
conference on web science, 81–90. http://doi.org/10.1145/2615569.2615699
Varshney, A. (2007). Ethnicity and ethnic conflict. In C. Boix & S. C. Stokes 
(Eds.), The Oxford handbook of comparative politics (pp. 274–294). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Vaughn, K. J., Eerkens, J. W., & Kantner, J. (Eds.) (2009). The evolution of lead￾ership: Transitions in decision making from small-scale to middle-range societies. 
Santa Fe, NM: SAR Press.
Veit, S., & Thijsen, L. (2021). Almost identical but still treated differently: Hiring 
discrimination against foreign-born and domestic-born minorities. Journal of 
Ethnic and Migration Studies, 47, 1285–1304.
Vestbro, D. U., & Horelli, L. (2012). Design for gender equality: The history of 
co-housing ideas and realities. Built Environment, 38, 315–335.
Published online by Cambridge University Press208 References
Vilaça, A. (2015). Dividualism and individualism in indigenous Christianity. 
HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory, 5, 197–225.
Viola, L. (1987). The best sons of the Fatherland: Workers in the vanguard of Soviet 
collectivization. New York: Oxford University Press.
Von Rueden, C. (2020). Making and unmaking egalitarianism in small-scale 
human societies. Current Opinion in Psychology, 33, 167–171.
Von Rueden, C., Gurven, M., Kaplan, H., & Stieglitz, J. (2014). Leadership in an 
egalitarian society. Human Nature, 25, 538–566.
Vonyo, T. (2018). The economic consequences of the war: West Germany’s miracle 
growth after 1945. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wagoner, B., Moghaddam, F. M., & Valsiner, J. (Eds.) (2018). The psychology 
of radical social change: From rage to revolution. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Wald, K. D., & Calhoun-Brown (2018). Religion and politics in the United States. 
New York: Rowman & Littlefield. 8th ed.
Waldenstrom, D. (2021). Wealth and history: An update. IFN Working Paper, No. 
1411, Research Institute of Industrial Economics (IFN), Stockholm.
Walker, I., & Smith, H. (Eds.) (2002). Relative deprivation. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
Walsh, B. S., Parratt, S. R., Hoffmann, A. A., et al. (2019). The impact of climate 
change on fertility. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 34, 249–259.
Waters, T. (1995). Tutsi social identity in contemporary Africa. The Journal of 
Modern African Studies, 33, 343–347.
Watson, J. B. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychological Review, 
20, 159–177.
Weinberger, A., Gallagher, N., Warren, Z., et al. (2020). Implicit pattern learn￾ing predicts individual differences in belief in God in the United States and 
Afghanistan. Nature Communications, 11, 1–12.
Wessells, M. G. (2016). Children and armed conflict: Introduction and overview. 
Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology, 22, 198–204.
Westerhof, G. J., & Keyes, C. L. (2010). Mental illness and mental health: The two 
continua model across the lifespan. Journal of Adult Development, 17, 110–119.
Western, B., & Rosenfeld, J. (2012). Workers of the world divide: The decline of 
labor and the future of the middle class. Foreign Affairs, 91, 88–99.
Weyl, H. (1983). Symmetry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Whaley, A. L. (2003). Ethnicity/race, ethics, and epidemiology. Journal of the 
National Medical Association, 95, 736–742.
Whitehouse, H. (2004). Modes of religiosity: A cognitive theory of religious transmis￾sion. New York: AltaMira Press.
Whitson, J. A., Liljenquist, K. A., Galinsky, A. D., et al. (2013). The blind lead￾ing: Power reduces awareness of constraints. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 49, 579–582.
Wilcox, C., & Robinson, C. (2019). Onward Christian soldiers? The religious right 
in American politics. New York: Routledge. 4th ed.
Published online by Cambridge University PressReferences 209
Willes, M. (2022). In the shadow of St. Paul’s Cathedral: The churchyard that shaped 
the world. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Wolf, M. (2004). Why globalization works. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Wood, E. J. (2008). The social processes of civil war: The wartime transformation 
of social networks. Annual Review of Political Science, 11, 539–561.
Wood, W., & Eagly, A. H. (2002). A cross-cultural analysis of the behavior of 
women and men: Implications for the origins of sex differences. Psychological 
Bulletin, 128, 699–727.
Wood, W., & Eagly, A. H. (2012). Biosocial construction of sex differences and 
similarities in behavior. In J. M. Olson & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), Advances in experi￾mental social psychology (Vol. 46, pp. 55–123). Burlington: Academic Press.
Woodward, B., & Costa, R. (2021). Peril. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Worchel, S. (1999). Written in blood. New York: Worth.
Worchel, S. (2004). Some unique characteristics of ethnic conflict and their 
implications for managing the conflict. In Y. T Lee, C. McCauley, F. M. 
Moghaddam, & S. Worchel (Eds.), The psychology of ethnic and cultural conflict
(pp. 289–303). Westport, CT: Praeger.
World Economic Forum (2021). Gender Gap Report. www3.weforum.org/docs/
WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf
Wright, K. (1990). The road to the global village. Scientific American, 262, 83–95.
Wright, S. C., Taylor, D. M., & Moghaddam, F. M. (1990). Responding to 
membership in a disadvantaged group: From acceptance to collective protest. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 994–1003.
Wyly, E. K. (1999). Continuity and change in the restless urban landscape. 
Economic Geography, 75, 309–338.
Xu, X. (2021). To repress or to co-opt? Authoritarian control in the age of digital 
surveillance. American Journal of Political Science, 65, 309–325.
Yarrow, T. (2018). Retaining character: Heritage conservation and the logic of 
continuity. Social Anthropology, 26, 330–344.
Yonker, J. E., Schnabelrauch, C. A., & DeHaan, L. G. (2012). The relationship 
between spirituality and religiosity on psychological outcomes in adolescents 
and emerging adults: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Adolescence, 35, 299–314.
Yovanovitch, M. (2022). Lessons from the edge: A memoir. New York: Mariner Books.
Zagefka, H. (2009). The concept of ethnicity in social psychological research: 
Definitional issues. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 33, 228–241.
Zahed, I. (2021). The state against the Rohingya: Root causes of the expulsion of 
Rohingya from Myanmar. Politics Religion & Ideology, 22, 436–460.
Zhuravskaya, E., Petrova, M., & Enikolopov, R. (2020). Political effects of the 
Internet and social media. Annual Review of Economics, 12, 415–438.
Zimbardo, P. (2007). The Lucifer effect: Understanding how good people turn evil. 
New York: Random House.
Zinnbauer, B. J., & Pargament, K. I. (2014). Religiousness and spirituality. In R. 
F. Paloutzian & C. L. Park (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of religion and 
spirituality (pp. 21–42). London: The Guilford Press.
Published online by Cambridge University Press210 References
Zuckerman, M. (1990). Some dubious premises in research and theory on racial 
differences: Scientific, social, and ethical issues. American Psychologist, 45, 
1297–1303.
Zuckerman, M., Silberman, J., & Hall, J. A. (2013). The relation between intel￾ligence and religiosity: A meta-analysis and some proposed explanations. 
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 17, 325–354.
Zucman, G. (2019). Global wealth inequality. Annual Reviews of Economics, 11, 
109–138.
Zuo, C. (V). (2021). Integrating devolution with centralization: A comparison of 
poverty alleviation programs in India, Mexico, and China. Journal of Chinese 
Political Science, 27, 247–270, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11366-021-09760-5
Published online by Cambridge University Press211
actualized democracy, 5, 7
altruism, 133
American Dream narrative. See legitimizing 
ideologies
Arendt, Hannah, 58
artificial intelligence (AI) technologies as 
weapons, 55
authoritarianism and technology, 7
Becoming a person, 19
Becker, Gary, 158
behaviorism, 74
adopted by Soviets, 93
blaming the victim. See Lerner, Mel
Body Area Network (BAN), 118
Brenneman, Robert, 70
built environment, 9, See also continuity
impact on behavior, 73
and memory and identity, 72
religious buildings and continuity. See continuity
shared narratives about places. See heritage 
buildings
Tower of London. See continuity
categorization
social categorization, 133
universal process, 132
Chagnon, Napoleon, 29
climate change, 79
cognitive psychology. See salience
collective decision making
in animals, 31
in humans, 32
collective decision-making and technology, 33
collective memory, 77
collectivization
as against human nature, 99
as ‘second Serfdom’, 18
and social laboring, 97
Collins, Francis, 66
conformity. See obedience
conspiracy theories, 83
continuity, 2
audition, 20
authoritarian strongmen, 3
and collective culture, 19
and dictatorship, 18
evolutionary origins of leadership and 
inequality, 25
and the human body, 20
leader–follower relations, 2
leadership, 25
neglect of, 13
and religious behavior, 15
and Social Identity, 14
strongman leadership, 36, See also Leadership
women in Islamic societies, 11
Corbally, Christopher, 64
costly signaling theory, 21
counter-elites. See Pareto, Vilfredo
cultural carriers, 19, See also Continuity
as hardwired, 8
in the Soviet Union, 98
deglobalization, 10, See also globalization
and human irrationality, 134
democratic dictatorships, 124
deserving poor. See war on poverty
Dickens, Charles, 43
dictator, in the Roman Republic, 30
dictatorship
and civic education, 155
dictators and subjugation, 149
dictators are anti-science, 149
dictator’s mind and the masses, 148
evolution of dictator’s mind, 145
examples of ‘crisis incidents’, 151
and legitimizing ideologies. See legitimizing 
ideologies
neglected in psychological science, 144
potential dictators always present, 
145
Index
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press212 Index
springboard to dictatorship, 146
use of ‘crisis incidents’ to create springboard 
to dictatorship, 151
DIME model, 90
divisions of labor
and gender roles, 29
in religion, 28
Dunbar, Robin, 136
Ehrlich, Paul, 160
the population bomb, 160
elaborated social identity model (ESIM), 
90
embodies cognition. See Cognition
Erixon, Fredrik, 130
ethnic cleansing, 58
ethnic diversity
as additive, 55
as subtractive, 55
ethnicity
confusion on ethnicity and race, 49
ethnic civil wars. See Rwanda
ethnic diversity, 54
ethnic mobilization, 48
is forever, 51
and mainstream psychology, 53
ethnicity and COVID-19 pandemic, 50
ethnicity as a basis for collective mobilization, 
54
evolutionary psychology. See sociobiology
false consciousness. See legitimizing ideologies
fracture globalization. See deglobalization
freedom
attached vs. detached. See globalization
Freedom House, 147
Freedom House rankings, 92
Freud, Sigmund, 109
genetics. See sociobiology
genocide, 60
Gestalt psychology, 74
Gini coefficient, 40
for earlier societies, 40
Global Gender Gap Index, 159
global warming, 79
globalization. See deglobalization
and authoritarianism, 137
and basic human tendencies, 132
in the ideal, 129
as inevitable, 130
trade benefits, 130
Great Man (or Woman) theory of history, 
30
groupthink, 110
Haller, Max, 56
hard-wiring
beauty preferences, 21
hard-wiring inside and outside individuals, 8, 
16, 17, 20
formal, 17
informal, 18
hard-wiring soft-wiring continuum, 12
Hardin, Garrett
tragedy of the commons, 135
heritage buildings, 77, See also built 
environment
Holocene, 26
Horelli, Liisa, 78
Huang, Reyko, 106
human motivation
in communist vs. capitalist societies, 96
humanistic psychology, 74
Hyperactive Agency Detection Device 
(HADD), 65
invasive species in human life, 56
irrationality. See Kahneman, Daniel; Freud, Sigmund
Johnson, Gale, 131
Kahneman, Daniel, 81
Kaufman, Stuart
ethnicity in history, 49
kinship ties. See ethnicity
leader as commander in chief, 28
leader–follower relations, 2
leadership, 16
legitimizing ideologies. See continuity
divine and secular, 46
Lerner, Mel, 45
Levine, Peter, 117
Machiavelli, Niccolò, 44
Makarenko, Anton, 97
Marx, Karl, 44, 88, See also Religion
Maslow, Abraham, 74
mereological fallacy, 80
Meserole, Chris, 123
Milgram, Stanley, 105
Miller, Brian, 70
modernization
and the end of ethnicity, 49
More, Thomas, 88
Murray, Denis, 115
Narcissism of minor differences. See Freud, 
Sigmund
nonconformity and disobedience, 105, See
conformity and obedience
dictatorship (cont.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.019 Published online by Cambridge University PressIndex 213
obedience. See conformity
Ohmae, Kenishi, 129
onmiculturalism, 161
Opie, Iona and Opie, Peter, 14
originalism, 17
Paine, Thomas, 41
Pareto, Vilfredo, 44, 69
Pavlov, Ivan, 93
Piketty, Thomas, 38, 40, 47, 56, 113
Plato, 69, 88
political plasticity, 4
and immigration, 154
and roadblocks to democracy, 7
Polyakova, Alina, 123
power and corruption, 35
Priebe, Stefan, 109
primitive social relations, 16
private lives of the rich and poor, 39
private property
collectivization, 88
private property, evolution of. See surplus, 
emergence of
property rights. See private property
psychoanalysis. See Freud, Sigmund
psychology and long-term changes, 6
Rappaport, Margaret, 64
rational choice theory, 80
reductionism, 80
relative deprivation. See wealth inequality
and revolution, 90
reliance on individual leaders, 33
Freud’s perspective, 34
religion, 61, See also continuity
as adaptation, 64
advantages for believers, 65
as business enterprises, 64, 66
as byproduct of human cognitive structure, 65
evolutionary roots of spiritual experience, 64
global decline in religion, 61
as ideology, like communism and capitalism, 
68
and IQ, 61
Lenin as religious icon, 15
resurgence of Islam, 62
role of cultural carriers, 15
and secularization theory, 61
sociobiological explanation. See sociobiology
types of religious experience, 62
has wider societal and identuty functions, 67
reproductive fitness signals, 21
revolution, 90
and change. See continuity
constrained by political plasticity, 92, 94, 95
cycle of rights and duties, 91
great versus lesser. See Type 1 and Type 2 
changes
and political plasticity, 87
post–revolution system of privilege, 99
and the puzzle of continuity, 87
and Type 1 and Type 2 changes, 88
Roszko, Edyta, 71
Rwanda genocide, 48
salience, cognitive. See social identity theory
Sassoon, Siegfried, 103
Scheidel, Walter, 40, 103, 110, 112, 113
Schiebinger, Londa, 157
shamanism. See legitimizing ideologies
Sherif, Mozafer, 134
shortcoming of brute force. See legitimizing 
ideologies
Smith, Adam, 129
social constructionist psychology, 74
social identity model of collective action (SIMCA), 
90
social identity theory. See Tajfel, Henri; 
Turner, John
social laboring, 97
social loafing, 97
societies to cells approach, 12
sociobiology, 51
altruism and aggression. See altruism
St. Paul’s Cathedral
heritage buildings. See built environment
superordinate goals, 135, See also Hardin, Garrett
surface behavior and deep behavior, 95
surplus
divisions of labor and inequality, 26
surplus, emergence of, 26, 38, See also Continuity
and leadership, 27
Sustainable Development Goals (STGs), 41
Tajfel, Henri, 52
Tasmanian vs. Japanese tactics, 57
Taylorism, 94
Technology forces change
democracy in business, 119
dictatorships fabricate supporters, 125
electronic communications as social capital, 119
electronic revolution, 116
electronic revolution and democracy, 118
Great firewall of China, 124
Internet as equalizer, 118
self-censorship, 126
sometimes toward democracy, 121
sometimes toward dictatorship, 122
technology used to weaken democracy, 123
the printing press, 115
Ten Thousand Years of Inequality. See wealth 
concentration
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press214 Index
Terror Management Theory (TMT)
and religion. See religion
the rich and dominant narratives. See
legitimizing ideologies
Theory of Mind (ToM), 65
threat and internal cohesion, 101
Tiwi of North Australia, 29
Tolman, Edward, 81
total war, 103, 108
and consequences in Japan, 113
and the masses, 111
and mental health, 109
and wealth distribution, 110
Tower of London
shared narratives about. See built 
environment
Transparency International rankings, 92
Trotsky, Leon, 92
Tsimane of Bolivia, 29
Turner, John. See social identity theory
Tversky, Amos, 81
Type 1 and Type 2 changes, 10
United Nations Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), 41
van den Berghe, Pierre, 51
Vestbro, Dick, 78
war
and social roles, 107
war on poverty, 42
in China, 42
Watson, John B, 93
wealth concentration, 37
Women as transformative
in education broadly, 158
in higher education, 157
political plasticity, 156
women in Islamic societies, 159
Wood, Elizabeth, 108
Worchel, Stephen, 49
Wyly, Elvin, 76
Yanomamo, 29
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009277129.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
