Debdatta Ratna, Bikash Chandra Chakraborty
Polymer Matrix Composite MaterialsAlso of interest
Biopolymers and Composites.
Processing and Characterization
Samy A. Madbouly, Chaoqun Zhang (Eds.), 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Thermoplastic Composites.
Principles and Applications
Haibin Ning, 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Plant and Animal Based Composites
Kaushik Kumar, J. Paulo Davim (Eds.), 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Polymers and Composites Manufacturing
Kaushik Kumar, J. Paulo Davim (Eds.), 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----Debdatta Ratna, Bikash Chandra Chakraborty
Polymer Matrix
Composite
Materials
Structural and Functional ApplicationsAuthors
Dr. Debdatta Ratna
E-2/G 2 Mohan Puram
Kansai Section 421501
Maharashtra
India
ratnad29@hotmail.com
Dr. Bikash Chandra Chakraborty
Flat No. 46 B Wing
No. 36, Sector-5 Progressive Ambar CHS
Navi Mumbai 400709
Maharashtra
India
bikash051954@gmail.com
ISBN 978-3-11-078148-9
e-ISBN (PDF) 978-3-11-078157-1
e-ISBN (EPUB) 978-3-11-078170-0
Library of Congress Control Number: 2023940079
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;
detailed bibliographic data are available on the internet at http://dnb.dnb.de.
© 2024 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston
Cover image: XXLPhoto/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Typesetting: Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
Printing and binding: CPI books GmbH, Leck
www.degruyter.comPreface
This book is dedicated to polymer matrix composites especially fibre reinforced com￾posites. In the last few decades, we have witnessed some remarkable developments in
the field of composite materials. The composite materials are used to not only im￾prove the performance of a component or system but also made user to rethink about
the entire design. In a recent book on Recent Advances and Applications of Thermoset
Resins written by one of the authors (D. Ratna), the area of thermoset composites is
briefly covered. The objective of the present work is to provide the readers a self￾sufficient book on polymer matrix composites covering different type of matrices like
thermoplastic, rubbers or elastomer and thermoset resins. We have also covered the
experimental characterization method used for composites and their life time assess￾ment which is very important from the application point of view.
We have divided this book into seven chapters. It is started with general introduc￾tion to composite materials. The thermoplastics, rubber and thermoset resin-based com￾posites are covered in Chapters 2, 3 and 4, respectively. Chapter 5 deals with elaboration
on smart composites which have drawn considerable attention in recent years. The tech￾niques/instrumentations (their principle) used to characterize a polymer matrix compos￾ite are covered in Chapter 6. Chapter 7 exclusively deals with the lifetime assessment of
composites materials. With such a broad technical contents covering the basic concepts
and recent advances on polymer matrix composites, especially fibre-reinforced compo￾sites, we are sanguine that this book will serve as a useful textbook-cum-handbook for
the students, researchers, engineers and R&D scientists from academia, research labora￾tories and industries. It will be extremely useful for the scientists and researchers to
make a knowledge-base in the subject as well as to plan their future works because
we have not only presented the review of the recent advances in this book but also
highlighted the future directions of research in the various areas of polymer matrix
composites.
We would like to dedicate this book to our late parents. We are indebted to the
members of our families for their patience and for always being the source of inspira￾tion, without which this book would not have been a reality. Dr. Ratna would like to
place on record his sincere thanks to his wife (Sujata) and sons (Saptarshi and Debar￾shi). Dr. Chakraborty thanks his wife (Mitali), son (Abhishek) and daughter (Anwesha)
for their encouragement and support. We are thankful to our colleagues Sri Ramakant
Khushwaha and Shri Prakash Vislavath for their help in preparing the book. We
would also like to sincerely thank the publication team of De Gruyter for their support
for publishing this book.
Debdatta Ratna
B. C. Chakraborty
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110781571-202Contents
preface V
About the authors XIII
Chapter 1
Introduction to composite materials 1
Description of abbreviations 1
1.1 Introduction 1
1.1.1 Classification of composites 4
1.1.2 Constituents of polymer composites 5
1.2 Polymer matrices 6
1.2.1 Interpenetrating polymer network (IPN) 6
1.2.2 Ionomeric elastomers 14
1.3 Reinforcement 24
1.3.1 Natural fibres 26
1.4 Strength and toughness of composites 37
1.4.1 Tensile cracking 37
1.4.2 Interlaminar stresses 40
1.4.3 Prediction of strength and toughness 42
1.5 Fracture mechanics 49
1.5.1 Fracture toughness 50
1.5.2 Environmental stress cracking (ESC) 63
References 67
Chapter 2
Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC) 73
Abbreviations 73
2.1 Thermoplastic polymer 73
2.2 Particulate thermoplastic composite 75
2.2.1 Effect of filler: mechanical property 77
2.2.2 Effect of filler: thermal conductivity 80
2.2.3 Example 80
2.2.4 Electrical properties 81
2.3 Short-fibre composite 86
2.3.1 Mathematical models 87
2.3.2 Example 90
2.3.3 Natural short-fibre composites 96
2.3.4 Bio-degradable composites 97
2.4 Nanocomposite 98
2.4.1 Thermoplastic elastomer nanocomposite 1032.5 Rheological properties 105
2.5.1 Thermoplastic melts 105
2.5.2 Rheology of thermoplastic composites 109
2.5.3 Mathematical models 110
2.5.4 Example 111
2.6 Processing 116
2.6.1 Extrusion 116
2.6.2 Blow moulding 120
2.6.3 Fibre spinning 122
2.6.4 Additive manufacturing 124
2.7 Conclusion 127
References 128
Chapter 3
Thermosetting polymer-based composites 131
Description of abbreviations 131
3.1 Thermoset matrix 132
3.1.1 General-purpose resins 133
3.1.2 High-temperature resin 137
3.2 Kinetics of thermoset curing 148
3.2.1 Isoconversion kinetics 148
3.2.2 Integral form of model-free kinetics 151
3.2.3 Advanced isoconversion models 153
3.2.4 Prediction of Tg 160
3.3 Classification of thermoset composites 164
3.4 Processing of FRP composites 165
3.4.1 Wet lay-up moulding 165
4.3.2 Resin transfer moulding 166
3.4.3 Pultrusion 168
3.4.4 Filament winding 170
3.4.5 Resin film infusion bolding 172
3.4.6 Autoclave moulding 173
3.5 Toughened thermoset composites 176
3.6 Thermoset nanocomposites 178
References 183
Chapter 4
Elastomer-based composites 189
Description of abbreviations 189
4.1 Elastomer matrices 189
4.2 Particulate rubber composite 192
4.2.1 Carbon black 192
VIII Contents4.2.2 Graphite 193
4.2.3 Mineral particulate fillers 194
4.3 Properties of particulate composites 197
4.3.1 Hardness 198
4.3.2 Elastic modulus 199
4.3.3 Filler effect on reinforcement 202
4.4 Short fibre rubber composites 206
4.4.1 Mathematical predictions 209
4.4.2 Examples 211
4.5 Steel chord reinforced rubber composite 216
4.5.1 Adhesion of steel cord to rubber 217
4.5.2 Mathematical models 218
4.5.3 Examples 219
4.6 Elastomer nanocomposite 222
4.6.1 Elastomer /nanoclay composites 223
4.6.2 Elastomer /carbon nanotube composites 226
4.6.3 Elastomer /graphene nanocomposites 227
4.7 Rheology of elastomer composites 229
4.7.1 Viscoelastic properties 230
4.7.2 Dynamic viscoelasticity 234
4.7.3 Effect of filler inclusion 237
4.8 Processing of elastomer composites 243
4.9 Application of elastomer composite 246
4.9.1 Vibration damping 246
4.9.2 EMI shielding and absorbing elastomer 248
4.9.3 Examples 252
4.10 Conclusion 254
References 255
Chapter 5
Smart composites 262
Description of abbreviations 262
5.1 Self-healing Composites 263
5.2 Smart structural composites 266
5.2.1 Passive constrained layer damping (PCLD) 266
5.2.2 Magnetic CLD 270
5.2.3 Structural health monitoring (SHM) 271
5.3 Electrically conducting composites 272
5.3.1 EMI shielding 276
5.3.2 Microwave-absorbing composites 283
5.4 Application of smart composites 294
5.4.1 Biomedical application 296
Contents IX5.4.2 Industrial application 297
5.4.3 Application in defence 299
5.5 Conclusions 301
References 302
Chapter 6
Experimental techniques 306
Description of abbreviations 306
6.1 Introduction 307
6.2 Mechanical testing 309
6.2.1 Universal testing machine (UTM) 309
6.2.2 Tensile test 311
6.2.3 Flexure test 312
6.2.4 Compression test 316
6.2.5 Shear test 318
6.2.6 Stress, strain and modulus in shear 321
6.3 Impact testing 322
6.3.1 Izod and Charpy tests 322
6.3.2 Drop weight impact test 324
6.3.3 Post-impact testing 326
6.4 Dynamic mechanical analysis 329
6.5 Thermal analysis 331
6.5.1 Differential thermal analysis (DTA) 332
6.5.2 Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) 333
6.5.3 Thermomechanical analysis (TMA) 336
6.5.4 Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) 338
6.5.5 Dielectric analysis (DEA) 340
6.6 Morphological study 342
6.6.1 Light microscopy 342
6.6.2 Scanning electron microscopy 344
6.6.3 Transmission electron microscope 347
6.6.4 X-ray diffraction analysis 349
6.7 Conclusion 351
References 352
Chapter 7
Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix composite 353
Description of abbreviations 353
7.1 Introduction 353
7.2 Physical ageing and life estimation 355
7.2.1 Basic features 356
7.2.2 Example of creep 357
X Contents7.2.3 Relaxation spectra 359
7.2.4 Theory of physical ageing 360
7.2.5 Example 368
7.2.6 Conclusion 371
7.3 Chemical ageing 371
7.3.1 Thermal degradation kinetics 372
7.3.2 Isoconversion kinetics 374
7.3.3 Differential form of isoconversion kinetics 374
7.3.4 Peak rate method 376
7.3.5 Integral form of isoconversion model-free kinetics 378
7.3.6 Advanced isoconversion kinetics 381
7.3.7 Accuracy of kinetics analysis 385
7.3.8 Estimation of lifetime 387
7.3.9 Example 388
7.3.10 Conclusion on predictive Lifetime 394
7.4 Lifetime estimation by creep and relaxation 394
7.4.1 Stress relaxation and creep 395
7.4.2 Time-temperature superposition models 396
7.4.3 Time-temperature-stress superposition 397
7.4.4 Time-temperature superposition in stress relaxation 398
7.4.5 Shift factor 399
7.4.6 Master curve 399
7.4.7 Lifetime prediction 401
7.4.8 Critical considerations 401
7.4.9 Creep strain 402
7.4.10 Creep study: master curve 403
7.4.11 Life estimation from creep 404
7.4.12 Ageing study under stress 405
7.4.13 Bailey Criteria 406
7.4.14 Lifetime estimation 408
7.4.15 Example 408
7.4.16 Solution 409
7.4.17 Conclusion 411
References 413
Index 417
Contents XIAbout the authors
Dr. Debdatta Ratna has been working as a scientist at the Naval Materials
Research Laboratory (Defence Research and Development Organization, DRDO),
Ambernath, Maharashtra, India, for the last 28 years and presently heads the
polymer science and technology department. He obtained his MSc in chemistry,
MTech in materials science and engineering, and a PhD in polymer science
from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. He was a visiting scientist
to Monash University, Australia, on BOYSCAST Fellowship in 2000, sponsored by
the Department of Science and Technology, India. He was also a visiting
scientist to Technical University, Kaiserslautern, Germany, on a prestigious
Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship from 2006 to 2008. He has also
visited a number of foreign universities and institutions in the United States, Australia, and Germany to
deliver lectures. Dr. Ratna has carried out extensive work on toughened epoxy composites,
nanocomposites, interpenetrating polymer networks, shape memory polymers, shape-healing polymers
and composites, etc. He has published more than 100 technical papers in reputed international journals
and authored four books. He has served as a reviewer for several international journals and research
grant councils of Hong Kong, Czech Republic, and the United States. He has received laboratory level and
national awards for product development and technology innovation. His name has figured in top 2% of
Indian scientists in the global list compiled by Stanford University, USA.
Dr. B. C. Chakraborty graduated in Chemical Engineering from Jadavpur
University (India) and earned a PhD in Chemical Engineering from IIT Bombay
(India). He served on the Defence Research and Development Organisation in
Mumbai and Ambernath (India) till 2016 and retired as an “outstanding
scientist.” He thereafter served as Director, Polymer Nano Technology Centre in
BSA Crescent Institute of Science & Technology (Chennai, India) for one year.
Dr Chakraborty has vast research experience in dynamic viscoelasticity, acoustic
polymers, blends, IPNs, composites and nano composites. He has carried out
extensive work on vibration damping materials and developed a number of
products. He has received several prestigious awards from the Defence
Research and Development Organization (DRDO) and is a member of various committees for several
DRDO laboratories. He has published approximately 60 papers in varoius international journals and has
10 patents to his credit.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110781571-204Chapter 1
Introduction to composite materials
Description of abbreviations
Abbreviation Description Unit
ABS Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene
AFP Automated Fibre Placement
A-GFRP Aramid-Glass Fibre-Reinforced Plastic
APTES Aminopropyl triethoxysilane
ATBN Amine-terminated butadiene-nitrile
CTBN Carboxyl-terminated butadiene-nitrile
CTPEGA Carboxyl-terminated poly(ethylene glycol adipate)
CTPEHA Carboxyl-terminated poly(-ethyl hexyl acrylate)
DCB Double Cantilever Beam
DMA Dynamic mechanical Analysis/Analyser
DMC Dough Moulding Compound
ENF End Notch Flexure
ENR Epoxidized natural rubber
ESC Environmental Stress Cracking
ESCR Environmental Stress Cracking Resistance
ETBN Ethoxy-terminated butadiene-nitrile
FA Fly ash
FEM Finite Element Method . . . .
FRP Fibre-Reinforced Plastic
GPa Giga Pascal  N/m
GPTES Glycidoxy propyl triethoxysilane
GRP Glass-Reinforced Plastic
HNT Halloysite nanotube
HTBN Hydroxyl-terminated butadiene-nitrile
ILSS Interlaminar Shear Stress N/m
LEFM Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics
MEKP Methyl ethyl ketone peroxide
MLG Multi layer graphene
MMF Micromechanics of Fracture
MoPTMS Methacryloxy propyltriethoxysilane
MPa Mega Pascal  N/m
MTBN Mercaptan-terminated butadiene-nitrile
MWCNT Multiwall carbon nanotube
NBR-PVC Nitrile Rubber-Polyvinyl Chloride
PPS Poly(phenylene sulphide)
PTBN Phenol-terminated butadiene-nitrile
SENB Single end notch bend
SEN-TPB Single end notch-three-point bending
SiC Silicon carbide
SIF Stress Intensity Factor MPa.m.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110781571-001(continued)
Abbreviation Description Unit
SSA Sewage Sludge Ash
WLF Williams-Landel-Ferry
XCT X-Ray-Computed Tomography
FRP Fibre-reinforced plastic
PMC Polymer matrix composite
MMC Metal matrix composite
CMC Ceramic matrix composite
RTM Resin transfer moulding
VARTM Vacuum-assisted resin transfer moulding
FRC Fibre-reinforced composite
SRIM So-called structural RIM
RFI Resin film infusion
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
SBS Short beam shear
DMA Dynamic mechanical analysis
TGAP Trifunctional epoxy resin
GFRP Glass fibre-reinforced plastic
UPE Unsaturated polyester
GFRT Glass fibre-reinforced thermoset
CFRT Carbon fibre-reinforced thermoset
BFRT Besalt fibre-reinforced thermoset composite
KFRT Kevlar fibre-reinforced thermoset
RIM Reaction injection moulding
CFRP Carbon fibre-reinforced plastic
TGDDM Tetraglycidylether of ,′ diaminodiphenyl methane
DGEBA Diglycidyl ether of bis-phenol-A
ILSS Interlaminar shear stress
TGAP Triglycidyl p-amino phenol
LCM Liquid composites moulding
CFRC Carbon fibre-reinforced composite
CNT Carbon nanotube
CNF Carbon nanofibre
CVD Chemical vapour deposition
DCB Double cantilever beam
CFRC Carbon fibre-reinforced composite
CVD Chemical vapour deposition
CSRP Core-shell rubber particle
SEM Scanning electron microscope
2 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materials1.1 Introduction
The word “composite” means that two or more materials are combined together in a
certain order on a macroscopic level to form a new material with different and useful
properties. The properties of constituent materials of a composite remain intact within
the composite, which makes composite materials distinct from materials that are simply
a mixture of ingredients. Composite materials are characterized by distinguishable in￾terfaces unlike polymer blend or alloys, which are homogeneous on macroscopic level.
A composite material comprises two phases: the primary phase is a bulk material
known as matrix and the secondary phase is a reinforcing filler of some types such as
fibres, whiskers or particles, and so on. The secondary phase remains embedded into
the primary phase (matrix). Wood is a classic example of a natural composite where
cellulose fibres act as reinforcement in a lignin matrix. People have worked in the past
in order to reshape the raw materials they discovered in nature to create the items they
needed. The development of composite material is a continuation of similar effort in a
sophisticated way, because composite materials are not just available off the shelf but
engineered specifically to fit a particular application [1, 2].
Although composite materials have been used to resolve technological issues for
a long time, it was only in the 1970s, when polymer-based composites were intro￾duced, it could draw the attention of industries, leading to technological proliferation
in this area. Since then, composite materials have been extensively used as common
engineering materials and are designed and manufactured for a number of applica￾tions both in civil and defence sectors, e.g. consumer goods, automotive components,
sporting goods, aerospace parts, naval components, etc. In the last few decades we
have witnessed some remarkable developments in composite materials. As we know
our civilization’s history has been defined by the materials and moved from the Stone
Age, to the Bronze Age, to the Iron Age. It is certainly realistic to say that in continua￾tion we have entered into composite age, because composites are not only used to im￾prove the performance but has also made users rethink about the entire design.
Polymer composites are known for their high specific stiffness and strength, di￾mensional stability, adequate electrical properties and excellent corrosion resistance.
Due to higher specific strength of composite materials compared to metal, the weight
component for a composite product will be much lower compared to metallic ones for
a given design load. Thus, use of composite materials offers technological advantages
like easy transportability, high payload for vehicle, low stress for rotating parts, high
ranges for rockets and missiles. Such advantages have made composite materials very
attractive for application in both civil and defence sector. Replacement of steel and
aluminium components with composite can save 70 to 80% and 30 to 50% in compo￾nent weight, respectively. At the same time, polymer composites are corrosion-free,
and hence there is no issue in using them in marine or industrial corrosive environ￾ment. In addition, composites offer better dampening effect compared to conventional
materials like metal and ceramics. The growth in composite usage is also attributed to
1.1 Introduction 3increased awareness regarding product performance, the need for energy savings
through reduced product weight, significant noise and vibration dampening leading
to increased competition in the global market for lightweight composite-based compo￾nents. Noise and vibration dampening is not only necessary to reduce human discom￾fort and component fatigue but also necessary from stealth point of view. In naval
platforms, the vibration generated by the machineries radiate as sound in sea water,
which is called underwater noise (UWN). Naval platforms can be detected through
the detection of UWN by an enemy SONAR. Better damping properties of composites
helps to reduce the radiated UWN in naval platforms. Therefore, a composite has the
potential for reduced fuel consumption, reduced UWN for marine platforms and in￾creased range with passenger aircraft and enhances the stealth performance for mili￾tary aircrafts due to very high transmissibility of electromagnetic radiation [3, 4].
1.1.1 Classification of composites
Composite materials can be classified in various manners as shown in Fig. 1.1. On the
basis of the matrix used for making the composites, they are conventionally classified
into four categories, viz. polymer matrix composite, metal matrix composite, ceramic
matrix composite and carbon matrix composite or carbon-carbon composites. Polymer
matrix composite can be classified into thermoplastic matrix, thermoset matrix and rub￾ber or elastomer matrix [5]. Depending on the shape of reinforcement, composites are
divided into particulate composite, chopped or short-fibre composites, long-fibre compo￾sites and laminar composite. On the basis of size of reinforcement, it divided into three
categories namely macrocomposite, microcomposite and nanocomposites. In macro￾composite the reinforcement sizes are in the range of mm or cm. Stone or steel rod￾reinforced concrete is a classic example of macrocomposite. Such composites are ex￾amples of the oldest man-made composite. When the reinforment size is in micron
scale, then the related composites are called microcomposite. Particulate and fibre￾reinforced polymer composites, which have formed the basis of multicrores industries
today are examples of microcomposites. When the reinforcement size is reduced to
nanoscale (1–100 nm) at least in one dimension, then they are called nanocomposites.
The driving force towards reduction of reinforcement sizes is the increase in surface
area, which offers better scope to manipulate the interaction of the reinforcement with
matrix and design the interface to achieve desired properties. On the basis of applica￾tion, composites can be divided into structural composites, functional composites and
smart composites. Structural composite is again divided into two categories: sand￾wiched composite and laminated composite. The main focus of this book is on polymer
matrix composites, which will be elaborated in subsequent sections.
4 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materials1.1.2 Constituents of polymer composites
Polymer based composites are prepared by using two major constituents, viz. the
polymer-based matrix (thermoplastic, thermoset or rubber) and the reinforcement.
Unlike the polymer blends in which the properties of constituent polymers are lost, in
polymer composites both the polymer matrix and reinforcing filler retain their identi￾ties. As a whole, the composite displays properties that can never be achieved with ei￾ther of the polymer matrix or the reinforcing filler. The fibres are usually much stronger
and harder than the matrix and predominantly responsible for load-bearing capacity of
composites. The function of a matrix resin is to keep the fibres in the proper location
and orientation. A minimum separation distance between the fibres is to be maintained;
otherwise, mutual abrasion of fibres may take place during the deformation of the com￾posites. When a load is applied into the composite, it is distributed into the fibres
through the matrix. Therefore, toughness property of the composites depends on the ma￾trix. By using a ductile matrix it is possible to develop a tough composite even by using
very brittle fibres. However, translation of matrix toughness into the toughness of com￾posite depends on various factors and various complex energy dissipating mechanisms
are involved. Therefore, it is very difficult to predict the toughness of a composite using
modelling and simulation.
Fig. 1.1: Classification of composite materials.
1.1 Introduction 51.2 Polymer matrices
The matrices used for polymer matrix composites are of three types, viz. thermoplas￾tic resin, thermosetting resins and rubber or elastomer. The composites related to
these three types of matrices, i.e. thermoplastic composites, thermoset composites and
rubber composites will be elaborated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4, respectively. The corre￾sponding matrices will be covered in the respective chapter. In the present chapter,
some new materials like interpenetrating polymer network (IPN), reprocessable ther￾mosets and vitrimers will be discussed.
1.2.1 Interpenetrating polymer network (IPN)
IPNs are formed when a crosslinkable polymer is crosslinked in the immediate pres￾ence of another polymer. If the other polymer is a thermoplastic and not capable of
crosslinking, then the resulting IPN is called a semi-IPN. If both the polymers are capa￾ble of undergoing crosslinking reaction, then the generated IPN is called full IPN.
From this we can understand that IPN offers a wide scope for modification to produce
material with tunable and multifunctional properties by changing the synthetic varia￾bles available at our disposal, such as the type of the polymer pair, sequence of poly￾merization, rate of polymerization, ratio of the polymers and their compatibility,
mechanism and degree of crosslinking, among others [6−10]. Topological features of
IPN are quite different than observed in polymer bends or graft copolymers, in the
sense that the constituent polymers in IPNs are held together by physical entangle￾ments or secondary forces of interactions without any covalent bonding [11]. IPNs ex￾hibit very broad viscoelastic transition region and the temperature range of the glass
transition encompasses the relaxation or glass transition temperature of the individ￾ual polymers with a connected interphase. Due to this remarkable feature of visco￾elastic transition in a very broad frequency range initial studies were focused on
damping of sound waves [12, 13]. However, in recent years, IPNs have been viewed
for many potential applications such as membranes, drug delivery, templates for po￾rous networks, double network hydrogels [14, 15], etc.
Ratna et al. [16, 17] have reported semi-IPN of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and poly￾methacrylates. Methyl methacrylate (MMA) and 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA)
were used separately as a monomer for the synthesis of IPNs. The IPNs were synthe￾sized by polymerizing the methacrylate monomer in the immediate presence of PEO,
using benzoyl peroxide as an initiator and triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDM)
as a crosslinker. The IPNs made using MMA and HEMA are designated as PEO/x-PMMA
and PEO/x-PHEMA, respectively. PEO is miscible with the methacrylate monomers
(MMA or HEMA) and TEGDM mixture at 60 °C. However, with the advancement of the
free radical-initiated crosslinking reaction of methacrylate/TEGDM system, the combi￾natorial entropy of mixing decreases. As a result, the crystalline part of PEO undergoes
6 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsreaction-induced phase separation leading to the formation of a two-phase microstruc￾ture, and the amorphous part of PEO remains dissolved with the methacrylate network.
Thus, the methacrylate network forms the continuous phase and the intermingled crys￾talline phase of PEO forms the dispersed phase, as we can see from scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) photographs shown in Fig. 1.2. The scheme for synthesis of IPN and
DSC plot of PEO, PMMA and the IPN are also presented in Fig. 1.2. We can see that PEO
shows a crystalline melting peak at 65 °C and PMMA shows glass transition at 100 °C,
whereas IPN shows both the melting peak and glass transition although the melting peak
and glass transition is shifted to lower temperature due to phase mixing to a certain ex￾tent. Such IPNs exhibit shape memory property because the crystalline PEO component
acts as the switching phase due to the reversible process of melting and crystallization.
Such IPNs exhibit shapes memory property because the crystalline PEO component
acts as the switching phase due to the reversible process of melting and crystallization.
If a material can be deformed and fixed to temporary shape, and if it recovers to the
permanent shape on demand by using a stimulus, then the material is said to have
shape memory property [18]. Figure 1.3 demonstrates the shape memory property
showing the recovery of a temporary shape at different times. The IPN shows almost
100% shape recovery. Shape memory polymers have potential applications [19–22] in
many fields such as biomedical implant, drug delivery, smart textile etc. If a big bio￾medical implant is to be inserted into a human body, it requires a major surgery. If the
Fig. 1.2: The scheme for synthesis of IPN, DSC plots of PEO, PMMA and the IPN and SEM photographs of
fracture surfaces of IPN. Reprinted with permission from Debdatta Ratna and J. Karger Kocsis Polymer 52
(2011) 1063. © 2011 Elsevier Publishers.
1.2 Polymer matrices 7implant is made of shape memory polymers, then it can be given a temporary shape
like a string and can be inserted into the body with the help of a laparoscope. The im￾plant is expanded on demand into a permanent shape at body temperature. In the pro￾cess, a major surgery can be avoided.
As mentioned above, when both the polymers used for synthesis of IPN are crosslink￾able then it is called full IPN. Based on method of preparation IPN can be classified
into two categories: sequential IPN and simultaneous IPN and latex IPN. Rubber￾based IPNs are made either by the sequential method as discussed above or by latex
polymerization. In sequential IPN, the second polymeric component is crosslinked
after the completion of the crosslinking of the first one [23, 24]. The usual procedure
is to first make a cured sheet of rubber by using a peroxide crosslinker such as di￾Original shape
Recovered shape
Deformed shape
0 s
40 s
55 s 65 s 75 s
25 s 15 s
Fig. 1.3: Shape memory property of PEO/PMMA IPN showing the recovery of a temporary shape at
different times. Reprinted with permission from Debdatta Ratna and J. Karger Kocsis Polymer 52 (2011)
1063. © 2011 Elsevier Publishers.
8 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialscumyl peroxide and swell the rubber sheet in a mixture of monomer, initiator plus
crosslinker and allowed to crosslink. Note that sulphur, which is conventionally
used to vulcanize the rubber, cannot be used for preparation of IPNs because it in￾terferes the crosslinking reaction of second polymer. By varying the swelling time,
the composition of the IPN can be adjusted and properties can be tailored for partic￾ular applications as discussed above. For the synthesis of latex IPN, rubber latex is
swelled with a mixture of monomer and initiator and allowed to polymerize to pre￾pare the IPN in the form of latex. This process is called the “monomer-flooded pro￾cess.” An alternate procedure can also be adopted by adding the monomer (for
the second polymer) into the emulsion or dispersion at a slow and controlled rate in
such a way that the rate of addition and the rate of polymerization are equal. This
process is known as the monomer-starved process. It may be noted that the mono￾mer used in this process must be water-soluble and one must use a water-soluble
initiator like potassium or ammonium per sulphate. If we analyse in the perspective
of application, then latex method certainly has an advantage because the latex can
be directly used for coating application. Since there is no requirement for organic
solvent the application process is environment-friendly. It may be noted that the
need to reduce the volatile organic compound in various applications is not only ex￾pressed by acute government regulation but equally and persuasively by various so￾cial concerns for environment. However, preparation of IPN by latex method is
associated with some issues. For example, there is the possibility of formation of
graft copolymer during polymerization in the latex, which may adversely affect the
final property of the IPN. Generally, the IPN prepared by latex method exhibits infe￾rior thermal and water resistance compared to the same prepared by simultaneous
method.
A number of IPNs based on rubber and polyacrylates have been reported [25–29].
The IPNs were prepared using a sequential method by swelling in different types of
acrylate monomers. All the IPNs show broad glass transition, covering almost the
entire range of Tgs of rubber and polyacrylates. However, the loss factor decreases
as a result of IPN formation. For example, maximum value of loss factor for carbox￾ylated nitrile rubber (XNBR) is 1.4, which reduces to 0.6 due to formation of IPN
with poly(ethyl methacrylate) (PEMA) [29]. The behaviour can be explained thermo￾dynamically by considering free energy of mixing of the two components. When
free energy of mixing is highly negative, then phase mixing takes place leading to
formation a single homogeneous phase, which shows a single narrow glass transi￾tion. This behaviour is observed in a compatible blend. When the free energy is
highly positive, macrophase separation takes place, which shows two distinct Tg.
Such behaviour is observed in an incompatible polymer blend. When the free en￾ergy of mixing is near zero, two phases are formed, namely component 1-rich phase
and component 2-rich phase. When the phases are very small (<1 μ) as it happens in
the case of an IPN, we get a single broad Tg due to formation of a microheterogene￾ous phases as shown in Fig. 1.4.
1.2 Polymer matrices 9Unlike rubber-based IPNs, thermoset-based IPNs are generally prepared by a simulta￾neous method. In this method, IPNs are prepared by a process in which both the compo￾nent networks are polymerized simultaneously. They are processed as a homogeneous
solution containing the required crosslinker for network formation. The formation of
both the networks takes place simultaneously. The polymerization mechanism for two
polymers may be similar or different. One may face issues related to interference of one
curing process with the other one. The major advantage of this type of IPNs is that they
are well-suited for different types of coating applications, e.g. casting, brushing, spraying
and injection moulding. However, as mentioned above, they have disadvantages in terms
of achieving a homogeneous solution out of a mixture containing different resins and
other ingredients; and curing reaction of one polymer may interfere with that of the
other. Karger Kocsis and co-workers [30] reported simultaneous IPN of vinyl ester (VE)
and epoxy resins (EP), in which EP undergoes crosslinking via polyaddition and homopo￾lymerization, while VE resin gets crosslinked through free radical-induced copolymeriza￾tion with styrene. IPNs having a broad range of VE/EP composition were prepared.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) indicates that strand width and mean roughness increase
with an increasing concentration of the EP in the IPN. This result is substantiated by dy￾namic mechanical analysis indicating phase segregation and enhancement in toughness
up to an optimum EP concentration in the IPN. Giavery et al. [31] reported an IPN binder
Fig. 1.4: SEM microphotographs of (A) X-NBR/poly(ethyl methacrylate) blend and (B) the corresponding
IPN. Reprinted with permission from N. R. Manoj, R. D. Rout, P. Shivraman, D. Ratna, B.C. Chakraborty
J. Appl. Polym Sci. 96 (2005) 4487. © 2005 John Wiley and Sons Publishers.
10 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsformed by simultaneous polymerization of silicone and epoxide prepolymers and used
for high-temperature (>400 °C) coating applications. When the IPN-based binder is ap￾plied on a metal surface and given thermal treatment at 450 °C, a ceramic layer compris￾ing silica and fillers remains on the metal’s surface and acts as a thermal barrier coating.
The property can be improved by judiciously selecting the organic substituents of silicone
or adding nanoparticles like graphene.
Simultaneous IPNs of epoxy and soybean oil-based polyurethane (PU) were also in￾vestigated [32]. Addition of PU converted the glassy epoxy into a rubbery elastomer re￾sulting in a 13-fold increase in percentage of elongation at break as compared to the
pure epoxy. Tg values of PU/epoxy IPNs are lower than those of the neat epoxy. Due to
slower cure rate of epoxy compared to PU, some of the epoxide groups remain un￾reacted and act as plasticizers leading to a lowering of Tg of IPNs. When the reaction
proceeds, Tg is increased due to formation of graft structure through the reaction of
hydroxyl groups of epoxy with the isocyanate group of PU [33]. Yu et al. [34] incorpo￾rated PU into EP to prepare the IPNs and observed a significant improvement in me￾chanical properties and proposed for an application like water-lubricated bearing
materials. In the case of vegetable oil (e.g. castor oil)-based PU, after curing reactions of
castor oil with diisocyanate, the double bonds present along the fatty acid backbone
can also participate in the radical polymerization, in the presence of vinyl or acrylic
monomers leading to the formation of EP/PU IPNs. The IPNs based on castor oil-based
polyurethane were copolymerized with different compounds derived from petroleum
or renewable resources like nitrokonjac glucomannan, poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), poly
(hydroxyethyl methacrylate), benzyl starch, chitosan, nitrocellulose, etc. [35–40] to opti￾mize the thermomechanical properties of the networks.
Meier et al. [41] reported a series IPNs based on novolac-type cyanate ester (CE)
resin and phenyl-ethynyl-terminated imide (PETI), which exhibit thermal properties
slightly higher than those of pure CE resin. However, no significant improvement in
fracture toughness was observed, probably to the high crosslinking density as well as
the existence of macroscopic phase separation. Such problems observed in an IPN sys￾tem can be overcome [42] by generating chemical crosslink points between two net￾works, thus generating a class of IPNs called graft-IPNs. An example is the graft-IPNs
based on a highly stiff copolymer phase, consisting of bisphenol-bis (2-hydroxy-3-
methacryloxypropyl) ether (BisGMA) resin and two acrylic monomers: methyl methac￾rylate (MMA) and triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEDGMA), and a soft, rubbery
polyurethane phase (PU). The crosslinking of the two networks is accomplished by
polyaddition between the secondary (–OH) groups and the (NCO) groups of the isocya￾nate. It was observed that the miscibility of the different network and toughness
properties of the resulting IPNs can be considerably enhanced by generating chemical
crosslinks between the networks. Wen and co-workers [43] investigated IPNs based
on highly soluble fluorinated ethynyl-terminated imide (FETI) oligomers and bisphe￾nol A dicyanate ester (BADCy) through a solvent-free procedure. FETI oligomers were
prepared via a conventional one-step method in m-cresol, using 4, 4′-(hexafluoro iso￾1.2 Polymer matrices 11propylidene) diphthalic anhydride and 2, 2′-bis (trifluoromethyl) benzidine as the
monomers and ethynylphthalic anhydride as the end-capper. The IPNs exhibited a
glass transition temperature of > 300 °C and improved mechanical properties com￾pared to pure BADCy. The IPNs could be potentially utilized for high-temperature ad￾hesives and composite applications.
A series of IPNs prepared from glassy epoxy and crosslinked acrylates, wherein the
former is crosslinked by a short chain diamine, i.e. ditheylene triamine (DETA), and the
latter by diisocyantes, has been patented [44]. The crosslink density of DETA-cured
epoxy is expected to be high and hence glassy, leading to IPNs with a narrow spectrum
of segmental dynamics. Recently, Ratna and co-workers [45] reported sequential IPNs
based on a rubbery epoxy and polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA). A polyether amine
hardener (D-900) was used as hardener for epoxy, and azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN)
and tetraethyeneglycol methacrylate (TEGDM) are used as initiator and crosslinker for
MMA, respectively. From the discussion mentioned above, it appears that rubber-based
IPNs are prepared by the sequential method and thermoset-based IPNs reported so far
are simultaneous types. The probable reason for this might be the high crosslink den￾sity of thermoset, i.e. low molecular weight between crosslinks (Mc), which makes it
difficult to achieve the required level of swelling for an IPN synthesis. On the other
hand, rubbers being lightly crosslinked allowed sufficient swelling of monomer due to
the presence of high free volume.
Selection of rubbery epoxy network, in the present case, makes it possible to syn￾thesize the IPNs using sequential method. Schematic of the sequential IPN formation
steps is presented in Fig. 1.5. The details of the preparation of epoxy/PMMA IPNs using
the sequential method are described below. Initially, cured epoxy network was made
by mixing difunctional epoxy (LY556) and polyether amine hardener (D-900) in a ratio
of 20:15 (w/w). In order to remove the air bubbles, the mixture was degassed under
vacuum for 20 − 30 min. The mixture was then cast in a Teflon mould and cured at
80 °C for 5 − 6 h. The cured epoxy network was immersed in an MMA/AIBN/TEGDM
solution for swelling to take place. The MMA was allowed to soak in the epoxy sheet
till the desired weight gain was achieved. The swollen film of cured epoxy was kept
10 min for equilibrium and heated at 80 °C for 4 to 6 h and 100 °C for 2 h. Thus, the
polymerization and crosslinking of MMA takes place in the existing cured epoxy net￾work forming an IPN. The resultant film was hardened and kept in vacuum for the
complete removal of the unreacted MMA monomer.
The IPNs were characterized by Positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS)
analysis to study the morphology of the networks at the molecular level. The details of
PALS analysis are provided in Chapter 6. It was observed that the free volume de￾creases with increasing MMA concentration, which is attributed to the interpenetration
of stiffer PMMA chains into the flexible epoxy matrix. However, interpenetration lead
to generation of small free volume at the interface. Thus, with increase in PMMA con￾centration, the size of the smaller defects at the interfacial regions decreases while its
concentration increases. The IPN shows minimum free volume at a PMMA concentra￾12 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialstion of 20 wt% and increases with further increase in PMMA concentration. This obser￾vation is quite different from the studies on styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR)/PMMA
IPNs reported by James et al. [46] in which the free volume was reported to be mono￾tonically increased up to 40 wt% of PMMA. This difference in behaviour can be ex￾plained by considering the inherently lower free volume of the elastomeric epoxy
network compared to that of SBR. All the IPNs exhibit broad tan δ vs. temperature peak,
which when deconvoluted appeared to be a combination of four peaks, as we can see in
Fig. 1.6. The four peaks are attributed to the existence of four different phases in the
IPNs, namely epoxy phase, PMMA phase, epoxy-rich phase and PMMA-rich phase. How￾ever, there is a shift of tan δ peak temperature of epoxy and PMMA. In the case of epoxy,
it shifts to the higher side, whereas for PMMA it shifts to lower side. For example in the
IPN, the tan δ peak temperature for epoxy phase is 18–20 °C, whereas pure epoxy net￾work shows the same at 0 °C. As we can see, the Tg of epoxy used in the present case is
much lower than the conventional amine or anhydride-cured epoxy network (Tg > 60 °C).
This can be attributed to the use of polyether amine hardener, which enhances the flex￾ibility of the network by introducing ether linkage in the network and reducing the
crosslink density because of the presence of polyether chain. The IPNs have potential
applications in the field of vibration damping and shape memory applications.
Fig. 1.5: Schematic of the sequential IPN formation:
(a) preformed polyetherdiamine cured epoxy film,
(b) MMA monomer, (c) swelling of the epoxy network
by MMA and (d) interpenetration of polymer chains
during polymerization and crosslinking of MMA
leading to epoxy-PMMA sequential IPN. Reprinted
with permission from Debdatta Ratna and J. Karger
Kocsis Polymer 52 (2011) 1063. © 2011 Elsevier
Publishers.
1.2 Polymer matrices 131.2.2 Ionomeric elastomers
1.2.2.1 Covalently crosslinked elastomer
Elastomers are basically lightly crosslinked rubber. Elastomers are a class of polymers
that exhibit rubber-like elasticity and deformability. They are characterized by their
ability to return to their original shape after being stretched or deformed, unlike ther￾moplastics, which can deform permanently under stress. Elastomers can be found in
a wide variety of products and applications, from everyday consumer products like
shoe soles and rubber bands to more specialized applications in the automotive, aero￾space, and medical industries. Elastomers are typically formed through the polymeri￾zation of monomers that contain unsaturated bonds, such as butadiene, isoprene, and
chloroprene. These unsaturated bonds are used for crosslinking by sulphur or perox￾ide. These crosslinks forms in moderate concentration give elastomers their rubber￾like properties. It may be noted that if they are highly crosslinked they will turn hard
and brittle.
Elastomers can be further classified into two categories, namely natural and syn￾thetic. For example, natural rubber is an elastomer that is derived from the latex of
certain trees and contains predominantly cis-1,4-polyisoprene chains. Some common
Fig. 1.6: Curve fitting results of tan δ vs temperature profiles of the IPNs into component Gaussian peak
shapes. The black profiles correspond to the experimental result and the red curves are the simulated
results: (a) EPMA90:10, (b) EPM80:20, (c) EPMA75:25, and (d) EPMA70:30. Reprinted with permission from
Debdatta Ratna, Vishal G. Dalvi, Srikanth Billa, Sandeep K. Sharma, Sangram K. Rath, Kathi Sudarshan, and
Pradeep K. Pujar ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 3 (2021) 5073 − 5086. © 2021 ACS Publishing Company.
14 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialssynthetic elastomers include styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR), neoprene (poly chloro￾prene), and nitrile rubber (NBR). Both natural and synthetic rubber are crosslinked
by using sulphur and the process is known as vulcanization to improve their mechan￾ical properties. The vulcanization process was first discovered by Charles Goodyear in
the mid-nineteenth century when he accidentally spilled a mixture of natural rubber
and sulphur on a hot stove, resulting in the creation of a strong and elastic material.
Since then, vulcanization has become an essential process for the production of a wide
range of rubber products. Vulcanization transforms a plastic rubber compound into a
highly elastic product by forming a three-dimensional crosslinked network structure in
the rubber matrix. The vulcanization proceeds through the abstraction of alpha hydro￾gen leading to the formation of sulphur-sulphur (S-S) bonds [47] as shown in Fig. 1.7. The
degree of crosslinking and the resulting mechanical properties of the elastomer can be
controlled by adjusting the temperature, time and amount of vulcanizing agent used.
Vulcanization of rubbers by sulphur alone is an extremely slow and inefficient pro￾cess. The chemical reaction between sulphur and the rubber occurs mainly at the un￾saturation sites and each crosslink requires 40 to 55 sulphur atoms in the absence of
an accelerator. The process takes around 6 h at 140 °C for completion, which is uneco￾nomical by any production standards. The vulcanizates thus produced are extremely
prone to oxidative degradation and do not possess adequate mechanical properties
for practical rubber applications. These limitations were overcome through the inven￾tion of accelerators, which subsequently became a part of rubber-compounding for￾mulations. A typical recipe of rubber compound comprises 0.5–3 parts per hundred
grams of rubber (phr) sulphur, 0.1 to 4 phr accelerator, 3 to 10 phr Zinc oxide and 1 to
4 phr stearic acid. Some of the common accelerators are N-Cyclohexyl-2-benzothiazole
Sulphenamide (CBS), bis(2-benzothiazole)disulphide (MBTS), 2-mercaptobenzothiazole
(MBT) and zinc salt of mercaptobenzothiazole (ZMBT), tetramethyl thiuram monosul￾fide (TMTM), and tetramethyl thiuram disulphide (TMTD) and dipentamethylene
thiuram tetrasulphide (DPTT) etc.
Heat
Sulfur
Heat
Sulfur
Raw Rubber Vulcanized (Crosslinked) Rubber
Sx
Fig. 1.7: Schematic representation of the vulcanization of rubber.
1.2 Polymer matrices 151.2.2.2 Ionic elastomer
Ionic elastomers are a class of elastomeric materials [48, 49] that possess mobile ionic
groups within their polymer chains, which can facilitate the transport of ions and con￾tribute to unique properties such as self-healing and actuation. One common method of
crosslinking elastomeric ionomers is through the use of multifunctional crosslinking
agents. These agents typically contain two or more functional groups, such as epoxide
or carboxyl groups, that can react with ionomer polymer chains to form covalent
bonds. The resulting crosslinked structure is highly resistant to deformation and has
improved mechanical properties. Another method of crosslinking elastomeric ionomers
is through ion-induced crosslinking. In this method, the ionic groups within the ion￾omer polymer chains can interact with ions in the surrounding environment, leading to
the formation of crosslinks. For example, in a poly(acrylic acid)-based ionomer, the car￾boxylate groups can interact with metal ions to form crosslinks within the polymer ma￾trix. Carboxylated nitrile butadiene ionic elastomer (XNBR) is a type of ionic elastomer
that is made by copolymerizing nitrile butadiene rubber (NBR) with anionic monomers,
such as acrylic acid. Due to the presence of carboxyl group, it can be ionically cured
using metal oxides like zinc oxide, magnesium oxide and also can be covalently cured
by using sulphur or peroxide due to the presence of unsaturation in the chemical struc￾ture as shown in Fig. 1.8. Because of the dual crosslinking, XNBR has two transitions,
namely α and α1 at –16 °C and 45 °C respectively. Therefore, it offers superior acoustic
property compared to conventional rubber.
Prakash et al. [50] prepared a series of ionically (I-X series) and mixed system (co￾valent and ionic)-cured XNBR networks, (M-X series) with and without stearic acid
(SA) as the processing aid in the curative system. Small angle X-ray (SAX) analysis
shows a single ionomeric peak for the network processed without SA, implying a
liquid-like ordering of ionic aggregate in the elastomer matrix. On the other hand,
the network processed with SA shows multiple higher-order reflections as ob￾served for a block copolymer in their SAXS profiles, suggestive of lamellar mor￾phology resting due to self assembling of the ionic aggregates. The schematic of the
Fig. 1.8: Schematic representation of vulcanization chemistry of XNBR.
16 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsionic phase morphology XNBR networks processed with and without SA is shown
in Fig. 1.9.
1.2.2.3 Reprocessable thermoset
Today polymer composite industries are dominated by thermosetting resins. The com￾posites used for aircraft application are predominantly carbon or glass epoxy prepreg.
It is not only the composite industries; if we look at the paint & rubber industries,
thermosetting polymers have become an indispensable part. This is because of the ob￾vious advantages of thermosetting polymers, which a thermoplastic cannot offer.
These advantages include ease of processing, better dimensional stability and envi￾ronmental stress cracking resistance of the cured network. The properties of thermo￾plastic-based product may change even due to presence of solvent, which may initiate
formation of a crack. However, thermosets being in the 3D network form in the cured
state, their performance is not significantly affected due to presence of traces of sol￾vent. However, the network structure, although provide lot of advantages, has a
downside in terms of reprocessability. Thermosets cannot be reprocessed or recycled
because of the formation of irreversible linking by covalent bonds. Note that in ther￾moplastic, the polymer chains are held together by weak interactions like van der
Waals; therefore, they can be deformed reversibly above their glass-transition tem￾perature or their crystalline melting and can be easily processed by extrusion, injec￾tion moulding and welding, like a thermoplastic.
Fig. 1.9: Schematic of the ionic phase morphology XNBR networks processed with and without SA:
networks processed without SA show a liquid-like ordering of ionic domains dispersed in the hydrocarbon
XNBR matrix as evidenced from a single ionomeric peak in SAXS profile (a), which is schematically shown
in (b). Lamellar morphology of the ionic domains is observed for the networks processed with SA, as
evidenced from the multiple higher order reflections seen from SAXS profiles (c). Schematic of the
lamellar morphology is shown in (d). Reprinted with permission from Vislavath, P., Billa, S., Bahadur, J.,
Sudarshan, K., Patro, T. U., Rath, S. K., & Ratna, D. Macromolecules,55 (2022) 6739–6749. © 2022 ACS
Publishing Company.
1.2 Polymer matrices 17Hence, after the life of a thermoset-based product is over, it will simply go to a
landfill and cause environmental hazard because they cannot be destroyed biologi￾cally. If the materials are burnt, they will produce carbon dioxide and other toxic
gases leading to environmental pollution and greenhouse effect. It may be noted that
solid waste management issue has become alarming and has posed various social con￾cerns for the environment. Hence, the issues need to be addressed very seriously.
Thus, there is a need to develop a new generation of materials like thermoplastics
that can be reprocessed, yet still retain the beneficial properties of a crosslinked ther￾moset material. In the last few years, a lot of research activities have been initiated all
over the world with the objective of developing reprocessable thermoset, which will
be reviewed in subsequent sections.
Introduction of exchangeable chemical bonds into thermoset network can generate
plasticity in crosslinked polymer networks due to the formation of dynamic crosslinks.
Dynamic crosslinks can also be supramolecular adaptable networks comprising non￾covalent interactions such as hydrogen bonding, host-guest interactions, or metal-ligand
coordination [51, 52], etc. If chemical crosslinks can be efficiently exchanged between dif￾ferent positions of the organic polymer chains, macroscopic flow can be achieved without
causing structural damage or permanent loss of material properties. Polymer networks
containing such exchangeable bonds are also known as covalent adaptable networks
(CANs). CANs may be further classified into two groups depending on their exchange
mechanism. The first group of CANs makes use of a dissociative crosslink exchange mech￾anism. In this exchange, chemical bonds are first broken and then formed again at an￾other place. The second group of CANs makes use of associative bond exchanges between
polymer chains in which the original crosslink is only broken when a new covalent bond
to another position has been formed. In other words, a pendent reactive group within the
network undergoes a substitution reaction with an existing crosslink.
Sumerlin and co-workers [53] published an elegant review highlighting the most
enticing methods of accessing CANs and summarized the fundamental properties and
behaviour of these materials to provide both new and experienced researchers in the
field with a thorough sense of the state of the art as well as an unambiguous under￾standing of the characteristics of each class of CANs. As the author mentioned, the
rapid pace of recent developments has obscured the previously distinct line between
thermoplastics and thermosets, and there have also emerged challenges and miscon￾ceptions in distinguishing dissociative and associative mechanisms of bond exchange
in CANs. The dissociative and associative bond exchange pathways reported for vari￾ous CANs are depicted [53] in Fig. 1.10. Reprocessable thermosets have been reported
using a number of thermoreversible crosslinking chemistries as shown in Fig. 1.11
such as Diels-Alder (DA) cycloadditions [54–58] triazolinedione Alder-ene reactions
[59, 60] hindered urea exchange [61–63] oxime-enabled transcarbamoylation [64]
1,2,3-triazolium [65, 66] and anilinium [67] transalkylation, boronate ester [68] and
aminal bond [69] exchange, thiol-Michael [70] and aza-Michael [71] reactions, radical
oligosulphide exchange [72, 73], ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) [74]
18 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsFig. 1.10: Depiction of dissociative and associative bond exchange pathways for covalent adaptable
networks (CANs). Reprinted with permission from Georg M. Scheutz, Jacob J Lessard, Michael B. Sims,
and Brent S. Sumerlin J. Am. Chem. Soc. 41 (2019) 16181–16196. © 2019 ACS Publishing Company.
Fig. 1.11: Overview of crosslinking chemistries used for dissociative covalent adaptable networks. See refs
57–58 (1a), refs 59–60 (1b), ref 64 (2a), refs 61–63 (2b), refs 65–66 (3a), ref 67 (3b), ref 69 (4), ref 40 (5), refs
77–78 (6a), ref 79 (6b) and refs 70–71. Reprinted with permission from Georg M. Scheutz, Jacob J Lessard,
Michael B. Sims, and Brent S. Sumerlin J. Am. Chem. Soc. 41 (2019) 16181–16196. © 2019 ACS Publishing
Company.
1.2 Polymer matrices 19and persistent radical approaches using nitroxide [75, 76], thionitroxide [77, 78] or
biaryl radicals [79, 80].
Very recently, our group reported [81] a series of two component poly(urethane￾urea) (PUU) networks with varied hard segment (HS) concentrations that exhibit quadru￾ple shape memory (QSM), thermally activated intrinsic self-healing as well as multiple
cycles of thermal reprocessability. The first component was an isocyanate-capped bi-soft
segment blend of polybudadiene diol and polypropylene glycol and the second compo￾nent consisted of an aromatic diamine chain extender solubilized in an oligomeric poly￾oxypropylene triol. The PUU networks showed thermally activated intrinsic self-healing
property. The demonstration of self healing properties is presented in Fig. 1.12. A cut
up to half of the thickness is generated into the PUU sheet and the damaged samples
are subjected to a temperature of 120 °C for 1–4 h. As can be seen from the optical
microscope images in Fig. 1.12 a, the cut marks for all the sample disappear after the
thermal treatment. This clearly implies the completion of the healing process. It also
may be noted that about 70–80% of the original tensile strength is retained after heal￾Fig. 1.12: Self-healing results of the PUU networks: (a) optical microscope images of the PUU networks
showing the deep cut marks in the left panel and the disappearance of the marks upon thermal treatment
at 120 for 4 h, (b) pictorial representation of the self healing process in which a strip of PUU sample is cut,
healed at 120 °C for h, and then it is able to sustain a load of 0.84 kg after self-healing and (c) comparative
stress-strain profiles of as-cast, cut and self-healed samples as a function of thermal treatment time at
120 °C: c1-pristine as cast samples; c2: PUU-18; c3-PUU-21 and c4-PUU-25. Reprinted with permission from
Srikanth Billa, Prakash Vislavath, Jitendra Bahadur, Sangram K Rath, Debdatta Ratna, Manoj N R, Bikash
C. Chakraborty, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 5 (2023) 3079–3095. © 2023 ACS Publishing Company.
20 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsing. The high mobility of the hard segment at 120 °C, which is higher than the glass
transition temperature of PUU, and considerable H-bonding and dynamic reversible
cleavage of urea and urethane linkages (as confirmed by time-dependent FTIR) are
the possible origins of self-healing property.
1.2.2.4 Vitrimer
The term “vitrimer” was coined by Leibler and colleagues in 2011 [82]. Vitrimers are
materials that can be reprocessed or recycled like thermoplastics, and at the same time
they offer all the useful thermomechanical properties and environmental stress cracking
resistance like thermosets. In the previous section we have discussed about dissociative
and associative CANs. Now the question is “should we call all CAN-containing materials
as vitrimer?” The answer is no; only associative CAN-containing materials are known as
vitrimer. Associative CANs-based mechanism is known as exchange reaction in which
the original crosslinks are only broken when new ones are formed. These associative
CANs have excellent solubility because their crosslink density is fixed and they retain
their three-dimensional structure during rearrangement. Due to the acceleration of asso￾ciative exchange reactions upon heating, these CANs that rely on exchange reactions ex￾hibit an Arrhenius-like viscosity dependence as opposed to a pronounced viscosity
decrease for normal thermoset. Due to vitreous silica’s insolubility and gradual thermal
viscosity behaviour, these materials are referred to as vitrimers by Leibler and co￾workers [82, 83] who first demonstrated the unique properties by adding a transesterifi￾cation catalyst to polyester-based epoxy networks. The associated behaviour is described
as malleability. Since then, several dynamic chemistries, such as transamination, trans￾alkylation, siloxane equilibration, disulfide metathesis, olefin metathesis, and dioxaboro￾lane metathesis have been investigated to explore possible vitrimer materials [84–94].
Wu et al. [95] had developed a fully bio-based and recyclable vitrimer from epoxi￾dized soybean oil and glycyrric acid (obtained from liquorice roots) using triazabicy￾clodecene (TBD) as a catalyst. The topological rearrangements of the network take
place upon reaction of ester bonds with free –OH groups in the network (at 200 °C/
15 min) and generate a fresh –OH group. With this mechanism, healing and recycling
of the networks were achieved with efficiency more than 90%. Shape fixity and shape
recovery efficiencies are also found to be decent with a three-cycle average of 92%
and 94% respectively. Similar kind of work has been reported by Liu et al. [96] who
developed eugenol-derived vitrimer networks. The networks are made by reacting
epoxy-functionalized eugenol with succinic anhydride in the presence of Zn(acac)2
catalyst. The resultant networks are self-healed by heating at 190 °C/h, which recovers
more than 90% of the mechanical strength of polymer. Dual shape memory of the net￾works was achieved by change in topology of the network segments at 160 °C. Haya￾shiand Katayama [97] reported an epoxy-based vitrimer using thiol click chemistry
using commercially available epoxy. The molecular design for the synthesis of the vit￾1.2 Polymer matrices 21rimer is shown in Fig. 1.13. The vitrimer is highly transparent and exhibits other at￾tributes like room temperature ductility and shape memory property.
Sheng Wang et al. [98] investigated the use of metal coordination to improve the prop￾erties of polyimine vitrimers. Addition of metal complexes such as Mg2+, Fe3+, and Cu2+
to the network of polyimine vitrimer, improved its thermal and mechanical properties,
resistance to creep, resistance to solvents and chemical stability. The modified vitrimers
retained their ability to be reprocessed and recycled. This research is a valuable contri￾bution to the development of advanced materials that can be used in many different
ways. Mao Chen et al. [99] developed a novel epoxy vitrimer with rapid stress relaxa￾tion and moderate temperature malleability, which was synthesized using two different
exchange reactions of disulphide metathesis and carboxylate transesterification as
shown in Fig. 1.14.
This is the first paper to describe the synthesis of vitrimer networks with dual
exchange reactions, which they refer to as “dual dynamic vitrimers”. They created
the dual dynamic vitrimer using a classic epoxy chemical reaction of the diglycidyl
ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA) and 4, 4′- dithiodibutyric acid (DTDA) at 180 °C for
4 h with triazobicyclodecene (TBD) as a transesterification catalyst. Once hydroxyl
groups are formed as a result of the ring-opening reaction of epoxy and acid, they
continue to react with epoxy or acid, resulting in polymer chain branching and
network formation. When the epoxy network is heated, the polymer chains can be
rearranged via simultaneous disulphide metathesis and carboxylate transesterifi￾cation. The resulting vitrimer shows faster exchange reactions and more efficient
stress relaxation and low Tm due to the dual exchangeable crosslinks of disulphide
bonds and carboxylate ester bonds.
There is growing interest in the development of vitrimer composites for applica￾tions such as crack repairing and correction of moulding defects. Vitrimer-based com￾Fig. 1.13: Molecular design of the present vitrimer. The transparency of the vitrimer film is also provided.
Reprinted with permission from Hayashi, M.; Katayama, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 2020, 2 (6),
2452–2457. © 2020 ACS Publishing Company.
22 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsposites will have numerous advantages including reprocessability, reparability, and re￾cyclability. Applying different types of process and process parameters for composite
manufacturing and their optimization is essential for potential industrial prospects.
However, successful introduction of vitrimer properties into a well-known resin may
induce considerable modifications of the intrinsic parameters such as viscosity, gel time
and curing procedure. It is important to choose a chemistry that works well with the
curing chemistry and is based on monomers that are readily available commercially.
This ensures that the dynamic chemistry can be easily integrated into the manufactur￾ing process and will not cause any negative effects on the composite material’s proper￾ties. The fibres or particles may positively or negatively interact with the dynamic
chemistry and this should be carefully taken into consideration. Despite the challenges,
vitrimer composites represent an important alternative toward durable and recyclable
thermoset composites with expected bright future for industrial application.
Fig. 1.14: (a) Synthesis and crosslinked structure of the dual dynamic vitrimer. (b) Network rearrangement
of the dual dynamic vitrimer and the simultaneous exchange reactions of disulphide metathesis and
carboxylate transesterification. (c) Swelling experiment of the dual dynamic vitrimer in trichlorobenzene
from 100 to 180 °C. Reprinted with permission from M. Chen, L. Zhou, Y. Wu, X. Zhao, and Y. Zhang ACS
Macro Lett. 8 (2019) 255–260. © 2019 ACS Publishing Company.
1.2 Polymer matrices 231.3 Reinforcement
The reinforcement can be in the form particulate, whisker or fibre. For a particular
fibre, again, there is wide variety in terms of nature and orientation. The reinforcing
fibres can be classified into three categories, namely: i) inorganic fibre like glass, car￾bon, basalt, silicon nitride, etc. ii) polymeric fibre, e.g. Kevlar, spectra, etc. and iii) nat￾ural fibre, e.g. jute, coir, bamboo, etc. The fibres, as they are, if used for composite
fabrication, do not result good mechanical properties because of poor interfacial ad￾hesion. As is mentioned earlier, design of interface is very important for achieving
desirable mechanical properties of a composite. The strength of interfacial bonding is
generally quantified as inter laminar shear strength (ILSS). ILSS value of 30 MPa or
above is required for a composite to be used for structural application. It may be
noted that very high ILSS value is detrimental with respect to the impact properties of
the composite. Therefore, the interface has to be designed optimally to achieve both
the desirable mechanical and impact property or damage tolerance. Therefore virgin
fibres are not used for composite fabrication. Fibre surfaces are to be treated judi￾ciously depending upon the chemistry of fibre material. For example, glass fibres are
treated with organisilane coating, which contains some function groups that can form
chemical bonding or H-bonding with the matrix polymer. A number of oxidative and
non-oxidative methods [100–104] are used to modify carbon fibre and polymeric fi￾bres to improve their adhesion with polymeric matrices. For each fibre, there are
again different variations possible, like unidirectional fibre, fibre mat, 2D fabric, 3D
fabric, etc. Zhang and co-workers [105] reported various reinforcements in order to
improve the out-of-plane properties of polymer composites, namely 3D orthogonal
preform, 3D through-the-thickness preform, 3D angle interlock preform and 3D or￾thogonal circular perform [105, 106] as shown in Fig. 1.15.
Wide varieties of composites can be made using the same matrix, which may dif￾fer in respect of type of fibre, amount of fibre, fibre length, fibre orientation, etc. The
properties of a composite can also tailored by fibre hybridization as discussed above.
On the basis of length, fibres are classified in two categories, namely short fibre and
long continuous fibres. Continuous fibre-reinforced composites contain reinforce￾ments having lengths much greater than their cross-sectional dimensions. A composite
is considered to be discontinuous or short fibre composite if its properties can be varied
by changing the length of the fibre. On the other hand, when the length of the fibre is
such that any further increase in length does not result in any enhancement in mechan￾ical properties of the composite, then it is called continuous fibre- reinforced composite.
Most continuous fibre-reinforced composites contain fibres, which are comparable in
length to the overall dimension of the composite part. Thus, continuous fibre-reinforced
composites offer superior mechanical properties compared to short fibre-based
composites. Hence short fibre composites are used for secondary structural applica￾tions whereas continuous fibre composites are used in primary structural applica￾tions and considered high-performance engineering materials.
24 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsFig. 1.15: Various forms of textile structural composites. a) Fibre laminate; b) non-woven mat;
c) unidirectional fibres; d) non-crimp stitched fabric [106]; e) carbon woven fabrics; f) 3D orthogonal
1.3 Reinforcement 251.3.1 Natural fibres
The inorganic and polymeric fibres as discussed above are not biodegradable. When
the life of products made with such fibre is over, they simply go to landfill and contrib￾ute towards waste management issue. Burning of such fibre produces carbon dioxide
and other toxic gases and creates greenhouse effect and environmental pollution. It
may be noted that solid waste management is being viewed as a big challenge in times
to come. The need has been expressed not only by government regulation but also vari￾ous social concerns for environment. Therefore, for sustainable product development,
it is necessary to use fibres that are biodegradable and produced from renewable re￾sources. With this objective in mind, various natural fibres have been investigated with
the intension to use them as substitutes for inorganic or polymeric fibres. In the last
two decades, considerable works have been done on natural fibre composites, which
will be reviewed in subsequent sections.
Natural fibres can be divided into three categories [108, 109] depending on their
source of extraction: animal fibres (silk), vegetable fibres (abaca) and mineral fibres (as￾bestos) as shown in Fig. 1.16. Plant fibres have been extensively investigated for compos￾ite applications. Such fibres are composed of cellulose, hemicelluloses, lignin, pectin,
wax, ash, and moisture. Precisely, the cellulose content in any natural fibre governs the
mechanical properties of the fibre, as it controls the cell geometry condition, whereas
the lignin content in natural fibres is responsible for water uptake into the core. There￾fore, it is necessary to know their composition [110, 111]. Some of these fibres, which
have gained popularity for their potential to use in fibre-reinforced polymer composites,
are abaca, jute, sisal, kenaf, coconut and bamboo [112]. Table 1.1 presents [111–117] the
average chemical composition of popular natural fibres. Table 1.2 shows [111] the me￾chanical and physical properties of the fibres. The mechanical properties of composites
depend on the nature fibre, matrix, ILSS, fibre dispersion and fibre orientation [112]. The
properties of some selected composites are presented [113, 115–117–123] in Tab. 1.3.
As we can see from the table natural fibre-based composites exhibit inferior me￾chanical properties compared to inorganic or polymeric fibre-based composites. Natu￾ral fibres are generally hydrophilic in nature because of the presence of many
hydroxyl groups. When such fibres are used to reinforce polymer matrices, which are
mostly hydrophobic in nature, the resulting composites show poor interfacial bond￾ing. As a solution to this problem, natural fibres are modified with various pre￾treatment processes, which can enhance fibre-matrix adhesion, i.e. ILSS. Alkali treat￾ment is one of the most important methods used to clean and modify the fibre surface
Fig. 1.15 (continued)
preform and g) 3D angle interlock preform [107] Reprinted with permission from Jianbin Li, Zhifang
Zhang, Jiyang Fu, Zhihong Liang, and Karthik Ram Ramakrishnan Nanotechnology Reviews 10 (2021)
1438–1468. © 2021 De Gruyter Publishing Company.
26 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsTab. 1.1: Average chemical composition of natural fibres. Reprinted with permission from Agnivesh
Kumar Sinha, Harendra K. Narang and Somnath Bhattacharya,J. Polym. Eng. 37 (2017) 879–895.
© 2017 De Gruyter Publishing Company.
Type of
fibre
Cellulose Hemicelluloses Lignin Pectin Wax Ash Moisture Others References
Abaca – – – – –– – – []
Jute .  . . . .–.  – []
Sisal .  . . . .  – []
Kenaf . – . – – . – – []
Coconut – – – – –– –  []
Bamboo . – . – –– – – []
Natural fibers
Animal Cellulose/Lignocellulose
Hair
Wood
Silk
Bast Leaf Seed Fruit
Jute Sisal
Flax Banana
Abaca
PALF
Hemp
Kenaf
Roselle
Ramie
Mesta
Agave
Henequen
Milk
weed
Loofah
Cotton
Kapok Coil
Oil
palm
Wood
Soft
Wood
Hard
wood
Stalk Grass/
reeds
Rice
Wheat
Barley
Maize
Oat
Rye
Cancry
Esparto
Rape
Sabai
Com
Bagasse
Bamboo
Mineral
Asbestos
Fig. 1.16: Classification of NF [109]. Reprinted with permission from M. Alhijazi, Q. Zeeshan, Z. Qin, Babak
Safaei, and M. Asmael, Nanotechnology Reviews 9 (2020) 853–875. © 2020 De Gruyter Publishing
Company.
1.3 Reinforcement 27Tab. 1.2: Mechanical and physical properties of natural fibres. Reprinted with permission from Agnivesh
Kumar Sinha, Harendra K. Narang and Somnath Bhattacharya, J. Polym. Eng. 37 (2017) 879–895. © 2017 De
Gruyter Publishing Company.
Type of fibre Diameter (um) Density
(g/cm
)
Tensile strength
(MPa)
Young’s modulus
(GPa)
References
Abaca – .  . []
Jute – .–. – –. []
Sisal .– . – . []
Kenaf . . . . [, ]
Coconut . . – .–. [, , ]
Bamboo – .–. – – []
Tab. 1.3: Mechanical properties of various NFCs. Reprinted with permission from Agnivesh Kumar Sinha,
Harendra K. Narang and Somnath Bhattacharya, J. Polym. Eng. 37 (2017) 879–895. © 2017 De Gruyter
Publishing Company.
Fibre type Matrix Fibre
loading
(WT.%)
Treatment Tensile
strength
(MPa)
Flexural
strength
(MPa)
Impact
strength
Jute/GF bidirectional woven
mat
Epoxy – – . – –
Jute/glass fibre Polyester – – . – –
Jute-sisal / glass fibre Polyester – –  – –
Oil palm – jute (:) Epoxy  – . – –
Oil palm-jute (:) Epoxy  – . – –
Oil palm-jute (:) Epoxy  – . – –
Jute Epoxy  – . – –
Jute (longitudinally
laminated)
Epoxy – – . . –
Jute (transverse laminated) Epoxy – – . . –
Jute PP – Benzene/ethanol
v:v,:
– ––
Bidirectional jute Epoxy  –   . J
Jute UP – –  – –
Jute-banana (/)wt. ratio Epoxy – – . . . J
Jute-banana (/)wt. ratio Epoxy – – . . . J
28 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsTab. 1.3 (continued)
Fibre type Matrix Fibre
loading
(WT.%)
Treatment Tensile
strength
(MPa)
Flexural
strength
(MPa)
Impact
strength
Jute-banana (/)wt. ratio Epoxy – – . . . J
Jute-banana (/)wt. ratio Epoxy – – . . . J
Pultruded jute/glass fibre
(/) by volume
UP – – . . –
Woven jute (at low
frequency)
HDPE – Oxygen plasma
Treatment ( W)
. . –
Woven jute (at
radiofrequency)
HDPE – Oxygen plasma
Treatment ( W)
. . –
Abaca PLA – –   . kJ/m
Abaca PP  Benzene diazonium
salt
   J/m
Abaca PP  Benzene diazonium
salt
   J/m
Abaca PP – Fungamix (enzyme)   . mJ/m
Intralayer abaca-jute-glass
fibre
Epoxy – – . . . J
Abaca/glass fibre Epoxy – – . .  J
Abaca-jute/glass fibre Epoxy – –  .  J
Coconut sheath fibre Epoxy – % NaOH  h . . . J/mm
Coconut sheath fibre Epoxy – % NaOH  h . . . J/mm
Coconut spathe: kenaf bast
fibre (.:.)
Epoxy  % NaOH  h    J
Coconut spathe: kenaf bast
fibre (.)
Epoxy  % NaOH  h   . J
Coconut spathe: kenaf bast
fibre (.:.)
Epoxy  % NaOH  h   . J
Coconut spathe Epoxy  % NaOH  h    J
Kenaf Epoxy – –  – –
Kenaf Epoxy – –  – –
Kenaf Epoxy – –  – –
1.3 Reinforcement 29to lower surface tension and enhance interfacial adhesion between natural fibre and
polymeric matrix [124].
Another disadvantage of natural-fibre-reinforced thermosetting PMCs is their
poor toughness. This issue can also be successfully resolved by chemical treatment
of natural fibre [125] such as alkali treatment, silane treatment, acrylic acid (AA)
treatment and benzylation. The fact can be elaborated taking bagasse fibre as an
example. Bagasse is the by-product of sugarcane industry. It is a fibrous matter
that remains after the extraction of sugarcane juice. The inner (pith) and outer
Tab. 1.3 (continued)
Fibre type Matrix Fibre
loading
(WT.%)
Treatment Tensile
strength
(MPa)
Flexural
strength
(MPa)
Impact
strength
Woven kenaf (K) aramid (A)
four-layered (A/K/A/K)
Epoxy – % NaOH  h  . –
Random oriented kenaf mat Epoxy – % NaOH  h . . –
Random oriented kenaf mat Epoxy – % NaOH  h . . –
Unidirectional kenaf Epoxy – % NaOH  h . . –
Unidirectional kenaf Epoxy – % NaOH  h . . –
Sisal-banana Epoxy – –   –
Sisal Epoxy – –   –
Sisal unidirectional at ° Epoxy  % NaOH  h . . . kJ/m
Sisal unidirectional at °,
°,°
Epoxy  % NaOH  h  . . kJ/m
Sisal Epoxy  – . . –
Sisal Epoxy  – . . –
Sisal Epoxy  – . . –
Sisal Epoxy  – . . –
Sisal mat Epoxy  – . . –
Bamboo Polyester – % NaOH  . –
Bamboo cellulosic fibre PLA – % NaOH  – . kJ/m
Bamboo Epoxy  –  – –
Unidirectional bamboo fibre
(longitudinal)
Epoxy  – –  –
Unidirectional bamboo fibre
(transverse)
Epoxy  – – . –
30 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materials(rind) part of the bagasse fibre show different properties [126]. Incorporation of
15 vol % of outer part of bagasse-fibre in unsaturated polyester resin resulted an
increase in flexural strength to 30 MPa from 13 MPa for the unfilled resin. When
the same volume of inner part of bagasse-fibre was incorporated into the polyester
resin, the increase in flexural strength was found to be for 22.4 MPa. This has been
explained by considering the fact that the outer part of the fibre, i.e. pith contains
small fibres consisting mainly of sucrose whereas the rind contains longer and
finer fibres arranged throughout the stem and bound together by lignin and hemi￾celluloses, providing better strength.
Cao et al. [127] reported that when bagasse fibres polyester treated with 1% al￾kali (NaOH) solution were used to make composites using unsaturated polyester
matrix, an improvement by 13% in tensile strength (TS), 14% in flexural strength
and 30% in impact strength of the related composites were observed. Scanning elec￾tron microscopy (SEM) analysis shows better surface modification and improved
fibre-matrix adhesion of alkali-treated fibres. Similar observation was reported by
Goulart et al. [128] who have investigated the effect on the mechanical properties of
sugarcane-bagasse-fibre-reinforced polypropylene (PP) composites due to the chemical
treatment of the fibres. The fibres were pre-treated with 10% sulphuric acid solution
and delignified with 1% NaOH solution. An improvement in the TS by 16%, flexural
modulus by 51% and impact strength by 45% compared to pure polymers was observed.
The reason for the improvement of properties is the pre-treatment process carried out
on the fibres, which removes considerable amount of moisture and other materials
such as cellulose lignin, hemicelluloses and lignin from fibres, thus increasing fibre￾matrix adhesion.
Recently, Lala et al. [129] reviewed natural fibre-based composites using both
plant and animal based natural fibres. Plant-based natural fibres and composites
have been elaborated in previous sections. Biocomposites in the true sense can be
made by using natural fibre as well as biodegradable polymers like poly(lactic acid)
(PLA) and poly(3 hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate). Such composites are also
covered by Lala et al. [129] in their work. The properties of various biofibre-based
composites are presented in Tab. 1.4. Although mechanical properties of natural
fibre-based composites have been improved by adopting various chemical modifica￾tions, not much success has been so far achieved in enhancing the thermal proper￾ties of such composites. It may be noted that natural fibres are inferior to inorganic
fibres in term of their thermal properties. A lot of focused research and develop￾ment activities are to be initiated with the objective of making a breakthrough in
this direction.
1.3 Reinforcement 31Tab. 1.4: Mechanical properties of composites. Reprinted with permission from Sumit Das Lala , Ashish B. Deoghare and Sushovan Chatterjee, Sci Eng Compos Mater
25 (2018) 1039–1058. © 2018 De Gruyter Publishing Company.
S.no Reinforcements Mechanical properties
Tensile strength Elastic modulus Flexural
strength
Flexural
modulus
Storage modulus Impact
strength
Yield strength Hardness
 Sugar beet pulp . ± .MPa – –– – –– –
 Bagasse – – MPa
(outer)
.MPa
(inner)
–  MPa
(untreated fibres)
 MPa (NaOH￾treated)  MPa
(acrylic acid￾treated)
– – –
 Hemp MPa .MPa
with PLA matrix
.GPa(for poly(-
hydroxybutyrate-co￾hydroxy valerate)
matrix)  GPa for
copolyester amide
matrix
. MPa
with PLA
matrix
– – . kJ/m
PLA matrix
– –
 Ramie . MPa
. MPa, for
,-hexane
Diisocyanate (HDI)
. MPa for ,-
diphenyl methane
diisocyanate (MDI)
. MPa for
isophorone
diisocyanate (IPDI)
– . MPa –– – – –
32 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materials Kenaf  MPa –  MPa –– – – –
 Abaca – –  MPa  MPa – –– –
 Beech fibres  MPa  MPa – –– – – –
 Hildegardia
populifolia
– – – –– – . MPa (treated)
. MPa (untreated)
fibres at % fibre
weight . MPa
(treated) . MPa
(untreated) fibres at %
fibre weight
–
 Corn husk .MPa – –– – –– .kP/
mm
 Roselle and sisal . MPa
( wt.%). MPa
( wt.%) and .
MPa ( wt.%)
 mm fibre
length,
respectively
.MPa ( wt%),
. MPa
( wt%), .
MPa  wt% at
 mm fibre
length
– –– – . kJ/m
at  mm
fibre
length
– –
 Jowar  MPa . GPa – –– – – –
(continued)
1.3 Reinforcement 33Tab. 1.4 (continued)
S.no Reinforcements Mechanical properties
Tensile strength Elastic modulus Flexural
strength
Flexural
modulus
Storage modulus Impact
strength
Yield strength Hardness
 Pine fibre –  MPa . MPa  MPa – –– –
 Sisal fibres . MPa . GPa . MPa – – . kJ/m – –
 Pineapple . MPa . MPa – –– – – –
 Banana/sisal – – –– MPa – – –
hybrid fibre
 Sugar palm fibre . MPa  MPa – –– – – –
 Argan-nut shell . MPa – –– – –– –
 Rubber seed
shell
. (– mesh)
. (–
mesh) . MPa
(– mesh)
– ––  MPa – – –
 Almond shell  MPa (with
coupling agent), 
MPa (without
coupling agent),
. MPa (binary
untreated) & 
MPa (ternary
untreated)
– –– – –– –
34 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materials Fish water
soluble protein
(FWSP)
. ± . MPa for
 FWSP . ± .
MPa for  FWSP
– –– – –– –
 Bamboo fibre  MPa (without
compatibilizer)
 MPa (addition of
compatibilizer)
 GPa (without
compatibilizer)
 GPa (addition of
compatibilizer)
– –– – – –
 Acetylated
cellulose
nanocrystals
–  MPa – –– –  MPa –
 Micro fibrillated
cellulose (MFC)
–  MPa for  wt%
MFC,
 MPa for  wt%
MFC,
 MPa for  wt%
MFC
– –– – – –
 Microcrystalline
cellulose (MCC)
 MPa . GPa – –  MPa at %
fibre wt
– – –
 Cellulose
nanocrystal
(CNC)
–  MPa at . wt%
CNC
– –– –  MPa at . wt% CNC –
 Lignocellulosic
fibres
 MPa  GPa – –– – – –
(continued)
1.3 Reinforcement 35Tab. 1.4 (continued)
S.no Reinforcements Mechanical properties
Tensile strength Elastic modulus Flexural
strength
Flexural
modulus
Storage modulus Impact
strength
Yield strength Hardness
 Cellulose and
cellulignin fibres
from sugarcane
bagasse
.–. MPa
(in between)
– –– – –– –
 Bo-cell fibres  MPa  GPa – –– – – –
 Polylactic acid . (±.) MPa . (± .) MPa – –– – – –
 Chitosan . MPa (for non￾treated fibres)
. MPa (for
treated fibres)
. MPa (for non￾treated fibres)
. MPa (for
treated fibres)
– –– . J/m
(for non￾treated
fibres)
. J/m
(for non￾treated
fibres)
– –
36 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materials1.4 Strength and toughness of composites
Polymer matrix composites can be either homogeneous or anisotropic in physical
properties. For example, rubber with fine pigment loading can behave as a homoge￾neous mass, with same strength in all directions, but the same rubber with short fibre
will show anisotropy in strength, and the extent of anisotropy would depend on orien￾tation. However, the anisotropy depends on the size and critical aspect ratio of the
non-spherical particle. For example, a polymer with nanoparticle of graphene, which
has the maximum dimension as 500 nm, would behave almost as an isotropic compos￾ite, although the aspect ratio could be more than 300. For micron-sized long or contin￾uous fibre and other non-spherical fillers, the anisotropy is predominant.
Toughness, defined as the ability to absorb strain energy till failure, is decided by
the strength as well as flexibility of the polymer and also the reinforcing ability of the
dispersed phase. The forces of interaction among the polymer molecules and the filler
and clustering of the filler particles play important role in the toughness of a compos￾ite. It is generally observed that the presence of hydrogen bonding, polar groups and
even a long chain of -CH2 (forming a flexible spring) would result in high toughness
compared to a stiff polymer such as cured epoxy thermoset. Fracture toughness, on
the other hand, is the ability to resist the growth of a critical crack in the composite.
The arresting of a critical crack growth can be done in a stiff matrix by chemical mod￾ification (flexibilizing) or even physically adding a rubbery material.
Toughness of a composite is decided by the matrix as well as type of inclusion.
Certain inclusions reinforce the polymers in all mechanical properties, such as carbon
black, carbon nanotubes, nanosilica, etc. Toughness can be much compromised in
case of long or continuous brittle fibre inclusion compared to an isotropic composite.
The toughness is also predominantly dependent on dispersion and distribution of fill￾ers. A non-uniformity in dispersion may lead to considerable difference in shear
stress in two neighbouring phases of a microregion of the filler-matrix blend, and the
failure can occur prematurely than for a uniform dispersion of the same filler.
1.4.1 Tensile cracking
The tensile force acting on a composite results in different strain in the matrix, the in￾terface of filler and matrix, the solitary filler particle and the cluster of filler. The inter￾face decides the extent of shear stress for debonding of the filler from the matrix, and
the difference in strain for the filler is almost negligible compared to that in the matrix.
Hence, the transfer of stress from either phase is very minimal, when the modulus of
the filler is very high compared to that of the matrix. Tensile cracking could occur due
to several reasons, viz. breaking of interface after a critical shear stress, braking of clus￾ter due to the tensile stress exceeding the interparticle cohesion, or matrix failure
1.4 Strength and toughness of composites 37mainly due to defects such as critical cracks, or split in the composite due to interlami￾nar shear failure (in case of long/continuous fibre-reinforced composites).
Analytical studies to define each mode of tensile cracking is difficult due to super￾imposing events, and more so because the matrix as such is non-linear in high strain
regime. There is also a difference in transverse cracking of the matrix in off-axis ten￾sile loading between prepreg- based or dry fabric-based multidirectional fibre laying.
Transverse cracking for prepreg-based composites is more likely because the wavi￾ness of the dry fabric (multidirectional) results in better off-axis strength. The high
waviness of the layers introduced in the fibre bundles in the out-of-plane direction
improves the interlaminar fracture toughness and reduces the important in-plane
properties compared to prepreg laminates. As an alternative to conventional prepreg
laminates, the use of weaving, stitching knitting, braiding, etc. with resin infiltration
helps overcome such disadvantages. However, matrix failure due to defects and the
cluster cracking can be neglected as the dominant cause, since it is generally the inter￾face that fails first, and therefore, for fibre-reinforced polymer matrix composites, in￾terlaminar shear failure or split, as it is defined, is common [130–133]. Patel and Wass
[133] studied interlaminar splitting in carbon fibre-epoxy composite having multidi￾rectional fibre orientation, using multiscale modelling of progressive damage analysis
tool validated by open-hole tension experiments. Wang et al. [134] studied the thread
pull-off failure of carbon fibre-epoxy composites under tensile load. The authors ex￾perimentally determined the pull-off strength, conducted an FEM-based simulation to
calculate matrix tensile damage distribution under loads of different percentages and
observed the damaged specimens by ultrasonic imaging. Schiffer et al. [135] used an
underwater tensile loading simulation device to explore the response of laminates
under high-strength underwater tensile loads and established a theoretical analysis
model for the dynamic response of composite laminates.
The studies indicate that the tensile stress in a composite is non-linear, and the
composite shows plastic deformation near the matrix failure load, and the final com￾posite failure in tension is due to fibre cracking. The off-axis tension failure is more
likely to occur earlier during a tension experiment. The failure process is the usual
progressive damage phenomenon. In the process of tensile cracking of a composite
laminate, the earliest damage is expected to the fibre or particle-matrix interface fail￾ure due to excessive shearing or tension beyond the critical interface shear stress. In￾termediate failures can occur among the twisted bundled fibres due to poor interface
in fibre-based composites and breakdown of clusters of particulate fillers (especially
nanofillers) irreversibly due to continuous tensile loading. The failure sequence can,
therefore be summarized as: (1) transverse matrix cracking due to manufacturing de￾fects also in long fibre-composites, (2) delamination/filler-matrix interface failure and
(3) fibre cracking or declustering of particle agglomerates.
The development of each crack has two stages: initiation and propagation. The initi￾ation is usually from a micro-crack present as a defect in the matrix or interface and is
independent of mesoscale geometry. The propagation is due to attainment of the critical
38 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialstension level, beyond which the crack growth takes place and the phenomenon is ex￾plained according to linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM).The probability of trans￾verse crack initiation is defined by The Weibull initiation stress distribution as [136]:
Pin = 1 − exp − V
V0
σT
σin0
   m
(1:1)
where Pin is the probability of crack initiation when the element´s transverse tensile
stress is σT, m and σin0 are the shape and the scale parameters obtained in tests with
reference specimens of the element volume V0 and V is the volume of the considered
element. The probability of crack initiation at a specific stress Pin (σT0) is defined as
the ratio of the number of elements with initiated cracks to the number of elements,
M in the layer:
Pinð Þ σT0 = Mcr=M (1:2)
and
M = L=tk (1:3)
where L is the length of the composite layer containing M elements, and Mcr number
of initial cracks, while tk is the ply thickness. The length of one element is taken as
equal to the ply thickness and the stresses of a crack do not interfere with that of the
neighbouring crack.
Under the cyclic tensile loading, eq. (1.1) is modified as:
Pin =
ρk σ fat
T ,N
 
ρk max
= 1 − exp − V
V0
Nn σ fat
T
σ00 " # !m
(1:4)
where N is the number of loading cycles and σT
fat is the cyclic stress, ρk is the crack
density in a damaged k-th layer and the suffix “max” indicates maximum value.
The experimental determination of the cracks in a composite laminate is best
done by the method of acoustic emission. An acoustic signal, however small in inten￾sity, is generated as the crack propagates and the energy released is higher than crack
initiation. The frequency of such acoustic signal varies from 10 to 100 kHz. A sensitive
acoustic transducer of low mass is attached to the test specimen and the acoustic sig￾nal and the strain are simultaneously recorded with time to obtain the crack density
evolution as a function of strain attained at the instant.
X-ray computed tomography (XCT) is also more or less accurate and applicable for
any complex shape of many heterogeneous items for determination of internal design
and defects. XCT illuminates the object layer-wise and the image formation is dependent
on the relative absorption coefficient of the particular portion of the object (say, defect
or damage) acquired from different angles of illumination. The image contrast relies on
differences in the attenuation of X-rays through the portion of the object. However, in
1.4 Strength and toughness of composites 39case of some composites, the poor phase contrast and long acquisition times among
other drawbacks are limiting the applications of the XCT to the study of composites.
Optical microscopy can be used off-line, taking the sample out of the machine. It
is easy and quite fast, but difficult to detect any edge crack without loading (initial).
There can be a solution to this by printing the edge crack on a rubber film under a
very low force and the film can be observed after the test in the microscope. This
method can eliminate the removal of the specimen from the test set-up. However,
suitability of any method would depend on the specific composite laminate.
1.4.2 Interlaminar stresses
Long or continuous fibres and woven fabrics are most commonly used for production
of conventional polymer matrix composites. These composites are much stronger
than short fibre composites by dough moulding compounds and particulate compo￾sites. The continuous or long fibre/fabric composites are thus used commonly as struc￾tural elements that replace the metals. A typical carbon fabric composite may have a
Young’s modulus of 50 GPa, while that of a DMC composite of short carbon fibre
would be 22 GPa. Composites of long fibres and fabrics are made as layers of resin￾wet fibre/fabric assembly in either one (0 degree) or multi-direction (0, 90, + 45, − 45
etc.). Manufacturing processes such as hand lay-up, resin transfer, vacuum-assisted
resin transfer, resin infusion, prepreg method, etc. are widely used to obtain high￾fibre composites with maximum mechanical strength. Unidirectional composites have
very high strength and modulus in the direction of laying but are quite weak in of￾axis load, because in the fibre direction, the maximum load is borne by the fibre and
in transverse direction, the load is borne by the resin. In multidirectional composite,
the anisotropy in behaviour is much reduced and the strength is almost similar in all
directions for equal lay-up in several cross directions (0,90, + 45, − 45). Figure 1.17
shows typical unidirectional and multidirectional composites.
In all the above arrangements, the subsequent layers are bonded by the interfacial
force between the fibre and the resin. In case of glass fibres, “sizing” is used for a
Fig. 1.17: (a) unidirectional and (b) multidirectional fibre-based composite.
40 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsfabric, such as aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) or methacryloxypropyltrimethox￾ysilane (MoPTMS), or glycidoxy- propyltriethoxysilane (GPTES), applied as a coating
on glass fibre for enhancing the bond strength of the interface between the fibre and
the resin [137]. The interface is therefore a vulnerable site for composite failure. If the
fibres are assumed to be of circular cross section, then the individual fibre-resin inter￾face may experience stresses in radial, axial and circumferential directions. The ra￾dial stress can be simulated with a direct pull-off analysis in tension, but the axial and
circumferential detachment is almost like a lap shear failure.
Figure 1.18 shows the stresses in axial, circumferential and radial direction that
can arise due to straining a composite in tension. The stresses at the interface in axial
direction and circumferential direction are mainly shear; therefore, in general, the
upper limit of the stress just before failure is less than the tensile strength of the resin
and far less than the tensile strength of the common reinforcing fibres such as glass,
Kevlar or carbon.
In automated fibre placement process (AFP), gaps and overlaps parallel to the fibre
direction can be introduced between the adjoining tapes. These gaps and overlaps can
cause a reduction in strength compared with pristine conditions. Li et al. [138] mod￾elled the gaps and overlaps in a composite in the direction of fibre lay-up in FEM and
analysed the intra-ply and inter-ply stresses to capture the influence of splitting and
delamination. Out-of-plane waviness and ply thickness variations caused by gaps and
overlaps were modelled. The FEM models thus designed were used to predict the re￾duction of strength as a function of the magnitude and type of the defects. The pris￾tine composite tensile strength was about 740 MPa. The defects (gaps and overlaps)
were created across the whole width of the specimen with the defect size varying be￾tween 0 and 4 mm, the percentage area of the defects varying between 0 and 5.7%,
and the failure initiation in tensile load was at about 670 MPa. In general, with vari￾ous combinations of staggering of ply and defects, the average reduction in tensile
strength due to the defects was about 10%.
To test the interlaminar stresses to failure, there must be a special experimental
arrangement for tension, bending and shear mode. As described in various interna￾tional test standards, the most used methods are: (1) double cantilever beam tension
(ASTM D5528 Standard), (2) sliding Shear and (3) three-point bending for interlaminar
shear (ILSS) tests. The DCB specimens are prepared with a non-adhesive insert on the
σ
σ
σa
Fig. 1.18: Fibre-resin interface and three-directional stresses at the interface in a composite.
1.4 Strength and toughness of composites 41midplane of the laminate and the width and thickness measurements at midpoint are
done as described in the method. The standard specimen length is at least 125 mm (5.0
in), the standard width is 20 to 25 mm (0.8 to 1.0 in) and the standard laminate thick￾ness is 3 to 5 mm (0.12 to 0.2 in). The sample loading in each case is shown in Fig. 1.19.
In the three-point bending test, the ILSS is calculated as:
ILSS = 3P
4bh (1:5)
where P is the load, b and h are width and thickness, respectively, of the composite
specimen.
1.4.3 Prediction of strength and toughness
The strength of a polymer matrix composite can be defined in many ways, involving
parameters of deformation vectors, stress tensors, inherent properties termed as
hardness, elastic modulus, creep, relaxation, dynamic complex stiffness, etc. and are
estimated according to the end application. Two examples can explain the differences
in the concept of strength, such as a high-pressure hydraulic ball valve and an engine
mount, both made of composite. The first one needs high ultimate strength to with￾stand hoop stress, while the second must have good complex stiffness to damp undue
vibration. Therefore, prediction of composite strength depends on the property to be
considered in a specific stress environment. In a simple consideration, tensile strength
estimation or Young’s modulus prediction can be done with composites of different
Fig. 1.19: Different modes of interlaminar stress testing.
42 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsreinforcements. Details about the prediction of strength and elastic modulus and ef￾fect of shape, size and stiffness of the reinforcements on mechanical properties of
elastomer and thermoplastics are already discussed in Chapters 2 and 4. However,
there is no direct predictive method for composite fracture toughness. However, the
toughness in terms of dynamic mechanical properties can be predicted to some ex￾tent, which in turn can be applicable to fracture toughness, since viscoelastic proper￾ties are responsible also for regulating the strain energy. In a dynamic mechanical
study, the loss of energy in each cycle of straining is calculated as an imaginary part
of the input energy. The loss occurs due to the viscoelastic damping by the matrix
polymer. Therefore, it prevents failure due to brittle fracture. For example, the dy￾namic strain energy of different carbon black-filled NBR-PVC based composites is
shown in Fig. 1.20, calculated from dynamic mechanical response at 0.05% strain and
1 Hz frequency. The strain energy increases with the carbon black loading, indicating
the increase in resisting brittle failure or crack propagation.
The ability to withstand an impact or brittle fracture is related by a viscoelastic loss
energy per cycle of stressing per unit volume of the sample as:
WL = πE′′ε2
0 (1:6)
In a composite, tensile strength, dynamic modulus, etc. cannot be predicted by simple
law of mixing, as understood by micromechanical theories, and hence the loss too
cannot be predicted. However, since the strain energy absorption by the fillers is al￾most nil and occurs only due to the polymer matrix, the modified energy loss can be
written as [139]:
WL = πE′′ Mε2
M 1 − φe ð Þ (1:7)
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
Dynamic Strain Energy, (Es),
x 10–4 J/m
Fig. 1.20: Dynamic strain energy of NBR-PVC- HAF black composites.
1.4 Strength and toughness of composites 43where the subscript M refers to the viscoelastic matrix. The quantity (1 – φe) is the
volume fraction of the matrix material capable of dissipating energy.
The Kerner equation [140] pertaining to modulus reinforcement in simple tension is:
E′
C
E′
M
=

G′
f φf
	 ð Þ 7 − 5ν G′
M + ð Þ 8 − 10ν G′
f

 o
+ f 1 − φf
 	
½ g 15 1ð Þ − ν
fG′
Mφf
	 ð Þ 7 − 5ν G′
M + ð Þ 8 − 10ν G′
f

 g + 1 − φf
 	
½  15 1ð Þ − ν
n o (1:8)
The elastic tensile modulus E′ and shear modulus G′ here are real parts of the corre￾sponding complex modulus in dynamic stressing of the composite. However, the same
could be applied for quasi-static experimental results too. The symbol ν represents
Poisson’s ratio, taken as 0.5 for elastomer composites.
The equation above does not show direct dependence of composite modulus on the
filler content unlike many subsequent equations, although semi-empirical in nature.
The storage modulus and loss modulus of a filled polymer are estimated by the
modified Kerner equation on reinforcement of a polymer by rigid, spherical particles
of very high elastic modulus compared to the polymer and assuming that the shear
modulus of the polymer is approximately one-third of the tensile modulus (Poisson’s
Ratio = 0.5) [141–143]. Following are the modified Kerner equations suggested by Ziegel
and Rommanov [141]:
E′
c
E′
M
= 1 + 1.5φf B
1 − φf B (1:9)
E′′M
E′′
c
= 1 − φf 1 +
ΔR
R
 3
(1:10)
tan δc = tan δM
	 1 + 1.5φf B
  (1:11)
where,
B = 1 +
ΔR
R
 3
(1:12)
B is an interaction parameter and defines the interaction at the interface of the filler
and polymer. Higher value of B is attributed to better interaction, φf is the volume
fraction of the filler and suffixes M and c indicate unfilled and filled polymer, respec￾tively. The ratio (ΔR/R) represents the relative increase in the size of a filler (assumed
spherical) in the matrix polymer due to the adhered polymer to the filler particle. If
ΔR = 0, there is no interaction, while for any finite values of ΔR, there is interaction
between the filler and the polymer [141]. Figure 1.21 shows the interaction parameters
of nanocomposites of NBR-PVC blend with graphene nanoplates at various frequen￾cies of dynamic strain. The real and imaginary modulus were obtained from a DMA
experiment in frequency scale at 30 °C. Higher filler-polymer interaction was noticed
44 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsfor lower volume fraction of graphene because at higher loading, filler-filler interac￾tion becomes more dominant. Additionally, there is hardly any difference in interac￾tion with change in frequency.
There is a difference in the volume fraction φe in eq. (1.7) and φf in all subsequent
equations. If it is accepted that due to the filler-polymer interaction, the true volume
fraction includes the adhered polymer material, the volume fraction φe would be re￾lated to φf by the following equation:
φe = φfð Þ 1 + ΔR=R0
3 (1:13)
where the term ΔR/Ro is the relative increase in particle diameter for spheres and can
be estimated from the eq. (1.10).
A general theory of strength of anisotropic materials was given by Tsai and Wu
[144] way back in 1971, which is still used because of excellent agreement with experi￾mental findings for continuous fibre composites. The authors suggested that the basic
assumption of strength criterion is that there exists a failure surface in the stress￾space as:
fðσkÞ = Fiσi + Fijσij = 1 (1:14)
where i, j, k are = 1,2,.6 and Fi and Fij represent strength tensors of the second and
fourth rank, respectively. The linear terms in σi takes into account the internal
stresses and the quadratic terms in σiσj define an ellipsoid in the stress space. The
authors ignored higher-order terms for practical consideration. The failure takes
place due to all the type of stresses in a composite, but with different weightage.
It is difficult to predict the failure stress because of the inhomogeneous morphol￾ogy of the composite and it is difficult to exactly find out by experiment, where the
Fig. 1.21: Interaction parameter for NBR-PVC-graphene nanocomposite at various frequencies of dynamic
loading.
1.4 Strength and toughness of composites 45failure actually initiated – the matrix, or the fibre-matrix interface or in the fibre. The
failure stress level and the failure mechanism in these three phases are definitely dif￾ferent. The difficulty in predicting constituent failure is in part due to the lack of in￾formation about the correlation between macro (ply) stress/strain and micro stress/
strain. Subsequently, there are many modifications of this original work such as by
Chang and Chang [145], who considered several possibilities of failures: matrix crack￾ing, fibre-matrix shearing and fibre breakage, also considered a material degradation
model. Ha et al. [146] introduced a set of equations to calculate micro stresses from
macro stresses and used micromechanics of failure (MMF) for predicting fibre-matrix
interface failure, matrix failure and fibre failure for continuous fibre-reinforced
composites.
Accelerated test methods developed along with MMF models can best describe ul￾timate strength and failure criteria of a composite, which in any form is far from ho￾mogeneous material, except for small amounts of inclusion of micron-size spherical
particles, without agglomeration. More detail on degradation of composites due to
ageing is discussed in Chapter-7.
Determination of interaction parameters, Krenchel orientation factors for modi￾fied mixing rules, Halpin-Tsai model or many such micromechanical models can then
be applied with reasonable accuracy. The theoretical and semi-empirical analysis of
the polymer nanocomposites with plate-type filler such as nanoclay or graphene
showed that the nature of the constitutive equations are only valid with different co￾efficients and indices of volume fractions of the fillers, as shown by Murali et al. [147]
Nguyen and co-workers [148] attempted to predict microstructure and mechanical
properties of long- glass fibre (13 mm length, 17.4 μm diameter) 40% loaded in poly￾propylene injection- moulded thermoplastic composite, but opined that to match the
experimental results, accuracy in fibre length distribution and fibre orientation distri￾bution measurement/prediction is essential. The authors defined number average
length (Ln) and weight average length ðLw) of fibres and Weibull distribution function
to match the experimental fibre length distribution. Haneefa et al. [149], however,
found good agreement with theoretical models for prediction of tensile strength and
elastic modulus for composite of hybrid short fibre consisting of treated banana and
glass (both 6 mm chopped) in polystyrene matrix.
Huang et al. [150] suggested that in any mechanics of continuum media, the stress
of any point in a material is defined as an average value of an infinitesimal element
containing the point as:
σi = 1
Vf
ð
Vf
σ~idV   (1:15)
The resulting stress, σi is a point-wise value. Vf is the volume of the representative
volume element (RVE). For a composite, however, one cannot take an infinitesimal
element, because both the fibre and matrix must form one element. Thus, a composite
46 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsstress is defined as a homogenized one satisfying eq. (1.15), as long as only two constit￾uents are involved, the fibre and the matrix:
σi = 1
Vf
ð
Vf
σ~idV   ≡ Vf
σ f
i + Vmσm
i (1:16)
The subscript m stands for the matrix polymer. The bigger the volume element, the
more will be the error in strength prediction compared to the experimental result. The
smallest volume element in a short-fibre composite should be a single fibre in a volume
of matrix, which is adhered to the fibre and extended to such a distance from the fibre
surface that the outer surface of the volume element is the same in strength as the bulk
matrix, since there could be a positive or negative gradient of adhesion strength from
the surface of the fibre towards the bulk matrix. However, since fibre strength is always
much higher than the matrix, the failure is essentially at the matrix or matrix-fibre in￾terface depending on the interaction of the fibre and matrix. Therefore, for a true value
of stress in the composite, one must have a bridging equation, as:
σ m
i
  = aij 
  σ f
j
n o (1:17)
where [aij] is a bridging tensor, and i, j = 1,2, . . . 6. The tensor consists of longitudinal
modulus, shear modulus of the matrix and for the fibre, the tensor values are for lon￾gitudinal, transverse and in plane shear modes, Poisson’s ratio of both and compli￾ance tensors. The homogenized stresses in the matrix and the fibre are given by:
σm
i
  = aij 
  Vf ½ I + Vm aij   
  −1
σj
  (1:18)
σ f
i
n o = Vf ½ I + Vm aij   
  −1
σj
  (1:19)
where [I] is a unit tensor and σj is the external stress applied. The stresses in the fibre
are uniform, but in the matrix, there can be different stress concentrations, and there￾fore, the authors determined the true stresses in the matrix by multiplying the stress
concentration factors, which were elaborately described [150]. The results of their
study showed fairly good agreement with experimental data on tensile strength of
unidirectionally aligned short-fibre composite and the bridging model was seen to be
good for glass fibre epoxy than carbon fibre-epoxy at Vf = 0.55 for both and aspect
ratio of both the fibres as 455. For randomly oriented fibre, the bridging model is es￾sential for better prediction of strength.
Barnett and co-workers [151] studied discontinuous carbon fibre-loaded compo￾sites of (1) polyphenylene sulphide (PPS), (2) acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) and
(3) epoxy thermoset composite. Stochastic microstructure was considered for predic￾tion of strength and modulus. The fibre used was of two varieties, recycled and virgin,
in the form of non-woven mat and the composites were fabricated by compression
moulding. The average lengths were about 30 and 40 mm for the virgin and recycled
1.4 Strength and toughness of composites 47carbon fibres, while the diameters were similar, about 7.9 and 7.3 μm, respectively.
The volume fraction and void volumes in the composites were determined by optical
microscopy, image analysis and a MATLAB programme for pixel counting. The fibre
orientation in layers was determined by X-ray tomography. The Cox shear lag model
was used to predict the stiffness in the fibre direction:
El = Elf Vf ηL + EmVm (1:20)
where
ηL = 1 − tanhð Þ ns
ns
(1:21)
s = Lf
2rf
(1:22)
n =
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
2 Gm
Elf log rm
	
rf
  s
(1:23)
where Vf is the fibre volume fraction, Vm is the matrix volume fraction, Elf is the longi￾tudinal modulus of the fibre, Em and Gm are the longitudinal and the shear modulus
of the matrix, related through Poisson’s ratio (νm) as:
Gm = Em
2 1ð Þ + νm
(1:24)
Lf and rf are the length and radius of the fibre, rm is the radius of the matrix layer
around the fibre (Fig. 1.18) and is given by:
rm = rf
ffiffiffiffiffi
Vf
p (1:25)
The Poisson’s ratio of each digital lamina was calculated using the rule-of-mixtures:
ν12 = ν12f Vf + νmVm (1:26)
The failure stresses in longitudinal, transverse and in pane shear mode was calculated as:
σ1 = E1σf
E1f
1
1 − sech Lfc
2
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
Em
E1f rf rm − rf
 ð Þ 1 + νm
 ! s (1:27)
σ2 = σm 1 − 2
ffiffiffiffiffi
Vf
π
 ! r
(1:28)
48 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsτ12 = σm
ffiffi
3
p (1:29)
The failure stress depends on the critical fibre length Lfc, given by:
Lfc = rf σf
τi
(1:30)
where τi is the fibre-matrix interfacial shear strength.
The authors [151] reported quite good agreement with the findings of lamina mi￾crostructure determined by X-ray tomography and optical microscopy. Consequently,
the mathematical calculation of strength, longitudinal, transverse, shear modulus and
strain to failure of the composites were also in good agreement with the experimental
results.
Estimation of sustainable strength and failure stress can be an important aspect
when a composite is subjected to continuous vibration, at random or specified fre￾quency. In that case, prediction of the strength under fatigue is more complicated.
Long-term creep prediction can be one method to study the long-term fatigue. Gener￾ally, a set of limited time experiment at different temperature is converted to a time￾scale master curve, generated by time-temperature superposition principle, for exam￾ple using WLF equation, to shift the isotherms to time scale by shift factors. However,
if it is assumed that the time-temperature transformation process can predict a long￾term creep of a composite, then the same shift factors can be used to predict long￾term fatigue from a limited time experiment at different temperatures, just like a
creep study. At each fatigue cycle, the time to failure is a deciding parameter. In order
to calculate the shift factors at each temperature in creep experiment, it is best to re￾sort to graphical shifting process, since in that case, there would be no assumptions of
numerical coefficients or WLF constants. However, the long-term creep determination
has another complication of physical ageing, which shifts the relaxation and retarda￾tion time of the matrix polymer, especially when the glass transition of the polymer is
above the application temperature. The details of the physical ageing and correspond￾ing determination of relaxation time and creep compliance are discussed separately
in the Chapter 7.
1.5 Fracture mechanics
Fracture in composites is caused by sudden stresses or by a constant loading, when
there is a crack growth in the material to such an extent that the material fails cat￾astrophically. When a crack reaches a certain critical length, it can propagate cat￾astrophically through the structure, even though the gross stress is much less than
would normally cause yield or failure in a tensile specimen. The crack growth may be
initiated due to a small crack with sharp tip, wherein the stress concentration far ex￾1.5 Fracture mechanics 49ceeds that in the bulk, and the growth of the crack becomes fast enough to fracture
the item suddenly. The stress concentration depends on the crack tip radius; hence
sharp tips would be more prone to grow and fracture. However, even a round hole is
considered as a crack with blunt tip. The energy required for growth of a crack is the
summation of the energy required for overcoming the surface energy of the atomic
layer to create a new surface and the energy required to overcome the cohesive en￾ergy of the material. For a ductile material, the energy required to overcome the vis￾coelastic energy is dominant.
The growth of a micro-crack to a critical crack length under a stress depends on
the ductility of the material, because of large deformability without losing integrity.
Under increasing stretching, the crack growth is also arrested to a large extent due to
the high strain energy absorbing capacity of the material. This is a basic principle of
designing polymeric composite backing of bullet-proof armour panels. A typical exam￾ple is ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene. The arresting of crack growth can be
achieved by a multi-phase matrix where the dispersed phase is made up of flexible
particles finely distributed in the continuous phase, so that the flexible particles arrest
the crack tip from further propagation by absorbing the strain energy. A typical ex￾ample is a blend of epoxy and carboxyl-terminated polybutadiene.
The definition of toughness may be the ability to absorb strain energy under
quasi-static and dynamic stress while fracture toughness can be defined as the ability
to arrest a fracture or crack from further propagation. Toughness is generally quanti￾fied by one of the three quantities, namely the area under the stress-strain plot
(quasi-static experiment), or by the area under the loss modulus (vs. temperature or
frequency) plot or by the Izod or Charpy impact energy.
1.5.1 Fracture toughness
The term is used to quantitatively determine the ability of the material to arrest a
crack so that the material does not fail catastrophically under a mechanical stress.
The definition does not include the condition of any crack generation, but assumes
that a crack already exists in the material. For fracture toughness, the extent of criti￾cal stress intensity factor and strain energy of fracture are computed to define the
fracture toughness. The quantification of stress intensity factor and the strain energy
release rates are described in brief in the section below.
The stress intensity approach was developed by Inglis [152], way back in 1913. He
stated that the local stress at the corner or a hole in a plate could be many times
higher than the average applied stress. He showed that the degree of magnification of
a local stress depends on the radius of curvature of the hole, higher stress for smaller
radius. Therefore, he defined a Stress Intensity Factor (SIF)k, for quantification of the
local stress. For an elliptical hole in a plate, Inglis proposed following expression:
50 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsκ = 1 + 2
ffiffiffi
c
ρ
r
(1:31)
where c is the radius of the hole and ρ is the curvature at the tip of the hole where
the local stress is estimated.
Figure 1.22 explains the extent of stress concentration at various c/ρ ratios. Obvi￾ously, for a circular hole, c/ρ = 1 and hence, the factor k = 3.
Irwin [153] showed that the stress field σ(r,θ) in the vicinity of an infinitely sharp
crack tip could be described mathematically by:
σx = KI
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
2πr p cos
θ
2 1 − sin θ
2
sin 3θ
2
  (1:32)
The first term on the right-hand side describes the magnitude of the stress, while the
terms associated with θ describe the distribution of the stress. The constant K1 is
termed as Stress Intensity factor and is defined as:
K1 = σaY ffiffiffiffiffi
πc p (1:33)
The term Y is a geometric factor, σa is the externally applied stress and c is the half
crack length. For a particular crack system, π and Y are constants, so the stress inten￾sity factor indicates that the magnitude of the stress at position (r,θ) depends only on
the external stress applied and the square root of the crack length.
At large distances from the crack tip, these relations cease to apply and the
stresses approach their far-field values that would be obtained where the crack is not
present. The KI in eq. (1.33) is a very important parameter known as The Stress Inten￾sity Factor (SIF). The factor KI contains the dependence on applied stress σa, the crack
length a, and the specimen geometry. The KI factor gives the overall intensity of the
stress distribution.
0 20
0
40 60
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
ҡ
Fig. 1.22: Stress intensity factor for varying ratios of c/ρ in eq. (1.6).
1.5 Fracture mechanics 51The equation shows three factors that, taken together, depict the stress state near
the crack tip: the denominator factor (2πr)
−1/2 shows the singular nature of the stress
distribution; σ approaches infinity as the crack tip is approached, with a/r1/2 depen￾dency. The angular dependence is separable as another factor; e.g.
fðxÞ = cos
θ
2 1 − sin θ
2
sin 3θ
2
  (1:34)
For the specific case of a central crack of width 2a or an edge crack of length 2a in a
large sheet,
KI = σ∞
ffiffiffiffiffi
πa p (1:35)
and for an edge crack of length a in a large sheet,
KI = 1.12σ∞
ffiffiffiffiffi
πa p (1:36)
These stress intensity factors are used in design and analysis under a consideration
that the material can withstand crack tip stresses up to a critical value of stress inten￾sity, termed KIc, beyond which the crack propagates rapidly. This critical stress inten￾sity factor is then a measure of material toughness. The failure stress σf is then
related to the crack length a and the fracture toughness by:
σf = K1c
α ffiffiffiffiffi
πa p (1:37)
where α is a geometrical parameter equal to 1 for edge crack and generally unity in
many situations. Expressions for α are tabulated for a wide variety of specimen and
crack geometries, and specialty finite element methods are used to compute it for
new situations.
Strain energy concept was developed by Griffith [154], who proposed that the re￾duction in strain energy due to the formation of a crack must be equal to or greater
than the increase in surface energy required by the new crack faces. Using an energy
balance method, he arrived at an equation for the stress to failure relating to the
strain energy as:
σf =
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
EGc
πa
r
(1:38)
where E is the Young’s modulus and GC is the Critical Strain Energy Release Rate, and
“a” is the size of the flaw. This expression describes the interrelation between three
important aspects of the fracture process: the material property as GC, the stress level
σf and the size, a, of the flaw. In a design situation, one might choose a value of a
based on the smallest crack that could be easily detected. Then for a given material
with its associated value of GC, the safe level of stress σf could be determined. The
52 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsstructure would then be sized so as to keep the working stress comfortably below this
critical value.
1.5.1.1 Compliance calibration
A number of means are available by which the material property Gc can be measured.
One of these is known as compliance calibration, which employs the concept of com￾pliance as a ratio of deformation to applied load:
C = δ
P (1:39)
The total strain energy U can be written in terms of this compliance as:
U = 1
2
Pδ = 1
2
CP2 (1:40)
G = ∂U
∂a = 1
2
P2 ∂C
∂a
(1:41)
If the compliance C is plotted against corresponding flaw size a, then the slope at the
point of a is s, taken to calculate the strain energy release rate G according to eq.
(1.41). Therefore, at the critical crack length ac, the slope is taken to calculate the Criti￾cal Strain Energy Release Rate GC.
GC = 1
2
P2
C
∂C
∂a




a=aC
(1:42)
The mode-I (refer Fig. 1.19) delamination energy (GIC) of the composite specimens are
calculated using the double cantilever beam (DCB) tests according to the ASTM D 5528
standard [155]. The general formula from linear elastic fracture mechanics is used to
evaluate GIC as follows [156]:
GIC = P2
2b
∂C
∂a = Pδ
2bC
∂C
∂a
(1:43)
The term δ is the crack opening displacement (COD) and a is the crack length. The
crosshead displacement of the DCB test is taken as COD of the specimen. There is a
small correction, though not very necessary for practical applications, about the crack
length, because of slight deformation around the crack tip. The crack length can be
modified as a+Δ, and it can be determined by plotting C1/3 against crack extension
[155–157]. Finally, the modified GIC is calculated as:
GIC = 3Pδ
2b að Þ + Δ (1:44)
For Mode-II delamination test according to ILSS as shown in Fig. 1.19 with end￾notched flexure (ENF) specimen, the GIIC is calculated as [158]:
1.5 Fracture mechanics 53GIIC = 9Pδa2
2b 2L3 + 3a3 ð Þ (1:45)
Here, 2 L is the length of the beam in between the two end supports and a is the crack
length measured from the end support on the beam.
1.5.1.2 Example
A typical compliance calibration curve (tensile cracking) is shown in Fig. 1.23 for an
FRP composite of E-glass fabric and epoxy having Young’s modulus of 22 GPa and ten￾sile strength of 350 MPa, maximum % elongation at break is 2.5%. The dimension for
the Mode-I fracture toughness study was 180 mm × 12.5 mm × 3.5 mm and an initial
crack length was 50 mm. The critical crack length was 68 mm (δ = 18 mm) and the
corresponding slope (δC/δa) was calculated at this crack length and corresponding GIC
was found to be 365 J/m2 using the eq. (1.43).
1.5.1.3 Mode-II fracture toughness: End Notch Flexure
The Mode-II fracture energy release rate GII can be determined without monitoring
the crack length “a” during the experiment, which is somewhat difficult, following the
equation [159]:
GII = 9P2a2
e
16B2b3Ef
(1:46)
Effective flexural modulus Ef is given by:
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
50 60 70 80 90 100
C =d/P, mm/N
∂C
∂a
___
Fig. 1.23: Compliance calibration for Mode-I fracture toughness determination of an FRP composite.
54 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsEf = 3a3
0 + 2L3
8Bb3 C0 − 3L
10BbGLT  −1
(1:47)
where
P = load, C0 = initial compliance, a0 = initial crack length, L = half span length, B = speci￾men width, b = specimen height, GLT = Shear modulus of specimen and
ae = Cc
C0c
a3
0 +
2
3
Cc
C0c
− 1
 L3
 1=3
(1:48)
where
Cc = C − 3L
10BbGLT
; C0c = C0 − 3L
10BbGLT
(1:49)
The specimen compliance C can be given following the Timoshenko beam theory
[160, 161]:
C = 3a3 + 2L3
8Bb3EL
+
3L
10BbGLT
(1:50)
where EL is the longitudinal elastic Modulus.
1.5.1.4 Example
Consider one epoxy-chopped carbon fibre composite laminate with following proper￾ties and sample dimension for ENF test to determine the Mode-II fracture energy re￾lease rate GII:
EL: 50,000 N/mm2
, GLT: 5000 N/mm2
, L: 50 mm, B: 25 mm, b: 5 mm, a0: 25 mm,
C0: 3.269 × 10−4 mm/N.
The load-deflection curve in ENF test is given below as Fig. 1.24. The plot shows that
the composite is almost linear in flexure deformation. The absence of viscoelastic ef￾fect is negligible due to the rigid thermoset and high Young’s modulus of the carbon
fibres. The sample fractured to failure at 650 N, corresponding to 6.5 mm deflection as
seen in the plot.
All the data on properties, sample initial crack length and load-deflection values
are arbitrary, taken as an example only. For subsequent calculations, eqs. (1.46) to
(1.50) were used here.
Figure 1.25 shows the compliance at progressive crack lengths during the ENF
test, calculated using eq. (1.50) and not by simply taking the ratio of deflection to load
(δ/P). The compliance increases with crack propagation, indicating the loss of elastic
modulus as the crack increases. The nature of the plot is a second-order polynomial,
but with a very small non-linearity. The fracture energy release rate GII for Mode-II
fracture is shown in Fig. 1.26 at progressing crack length. The fracture energy is obvi￾1.5 Fracture mechanics 55ously low at initial stage of deformation, but non-linearly increases with deflection,
till the failure. The critical energy release rate GIIC is 2205 J/m2 in the present example.
1.5.1.5 Toughening methods
A large number of studies have been done on fracture toughness determination of
composites based on thermosets and engineering plastics reinforced with various fi￾bres of glass, carbon, Kevlar, SiC, boron nitride, etc., particulate mineral fillers, nano￾fillers of various aspect ratios and those which have unique reinforcing ability. The
fracture toughness arises basically from the ability to arrest the crack opening and
propagating in the continuous phase (matrix). That is exactly the reason for many re￾search studies on toughening of composites by means of:
02468
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Load (P), N
Fig. 1.24: Load-deflection curve for ENF test (all data are arbitrary, only used as example).
26 28 30 32 34
C, mm/N
3.80E-4
3.75E-4
3.70E-4
3.65E-4
3.60E-4
3.55E-4
3.50E-4
3.45E-4
3.40E-4
3.35E-4
Fig. 1.25: Compliance calculated using eq. (1.50).
56 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materials(1) physical blends of a rubber or a viscous oligomer in the thermoset matrix, such
as nitrile rubber, polyurethane, epoxidized natural rubber, pitch or tar, low mo￾lecular weight resol, etc.
(2) nanofillers such as fumed silica, nano titanium dioxide, carbon nanofibres, nano￾tubes, graphene oxide, reduced graphene oxide, asbestos, etc.
(3) organically modified layered silicate clays such as cloisite and montmorillonite,
which can be intercalated or exfoliated by the low molecular weight uncured
resin upon physical mixing.
(4) chemically bonding with hyperbranched polymers with selected functional groups.
(5) chemically bonding a soft moiety such ascarboxyl or amin terminated butadiene￾nitrile rubber (CTBN/ATBN), amine-terminated polysulphones, acrylic oligomers,
carboxyl-terminated polyethylene glycol adipate (CTPEGA), etc.
(6) using long chain reactants such as long-chain epoxy resin, or long-chain poly
(ether) amine, or both.
Way back in 1976, Bolger [160] reviewed different studies on toughening of epoxy ther￾moset by addition of nitrile rubber and other elastomers, polyurethanes, glass fibres, as￾bestos and other fillers, and also chain-extending latent curing agents. The author also
presented experimental data on a series of flexible anhydride-cured epoxy and it was
possible to incorporate toughness as well as good hydrolytic and thermal stability by
using flexible polyesters and avoiding use of excessive amines for curing. Bucknall and
Gilbert [161] and Hourston and Lane [162], studied blending of polyetherimide in tetra￾functional epoxy for toughening. Ratna et al. developed carboxyl-terminated poly(2-ethyl
hexyl acrylate) (CTPEHA) liquid oligomer [163], amine-terminated polysulphones [164],
and carboxyl-terminated polyethylene glycol adipate (CTPEGA) [165, 166] for chemical
modification of epoxy resin as well as a flexible, damping-type toughened epoxy using a
87654
Deflection (δ), mm
1.0E+1
G
1.0E+2
II, J/m2
1.0E+3
321
Fig. 1.26: Fracture energy release rate for the composite Mode-II ENF test.
1.5 Fracture mechanics 57series of long chain polyetheramine (Jeffamine) as curing agent [167] and also studied
the effect of organically modified nanoclay (amine modified Cloisite Na+clay)-filled flexi￾ble epoxy-based composite [168] for dynamic mechanical loss, which indicates tough￾ness. Zavareh and Vahdat [169] have shown that only 2% bitumen addition improved
the impact energy and fracture toughness by three times, while the mechanical strength,
elongation and elastic modulus remained unchanged. Unnikrishnan and Thachil [170]
reviewed several toughening methods for epoxy thermosets using various functional
group-terminated butadiene-acrylonitrile (low molecular weight nitrile rubber), such as
carboxyl (CTBN), amine (ATBN), epoxy (ETBN), phenol (PTBN), hydroxyl (HTBN) and
mercaptan (MTBN). The authors dwelt extensively on phase morphology, miscibility, me￾chanical properties and fracture toughness properties of the unmodified and modified
epoxy thermoset, in particular, CTBN modified ones, and tabulated the fracture tough￾ness in terms of critical stress intensity factor (KIC) and Mode-I critical fracture energy
release rate (GIC). It was shown that the fracture toughness improved from the pure
epoxy thermoset KIC = 0.8 M/Nm3/2 and GIC = 0.3 kJ/m2 to about 2M/Nm3/2 and 2.1 kJ/m2
,
respectively when CTBN or ATBN was used as toughening agents to the extent of 10–15%
by weight.
Ratna et al. [171] studied impact energy of clay-reinforced epoxy nanocomposite
and shown that 5% addition of octadecylammonium salt of montmorillonite clay
(Nanocore I 30E) could improve impact energy from 0.7 kJ/m to about 1.1 kJ/m. Seyhan
et al. [172] investigated Mode-I and Mode-II interlaminar fracture toughness, and in￾terlaminar shear strength of E-glass non-crimp fabric/multiwall carbon nanotube￾modified polymer matrix composites. The MWCNT was amino-functionalized and
added to the vinyl ester-polyester hybrid resin to the extent of only 1% by weight. The
mixing of MWCNT in the base epoxy oligomer was done in a triple roll mill, which is
usually used for making solvent-free paints and putty type pastes. The compliance C
was calculated using the following equation for a three-point bending ENF test:
C = 2L3 + 3a3
8E1bh3 (1:51)
C is also the ratio of the beam deflection at the load point to the corresponding ap￾plied load (C = δ/P). Mode-II critical fracture energy release rate is calculated accord￾ing to eq. (1.45).
The authors reported that there was no significant difference in onset fracture
energy in Mode-I. The propagation Mode-I critical fracture energy was highest at
20–30 mm increase in crack length (Δa = 0.02 to 0.03 m) and lower thereafter for the
base laminate without MWCNT, but the fracture toughness has comparatively lower
value all through for any Δa, but almost monotonically increased. However, the Mode-II
fracture toughness has shown about 11% higher value for MWCNT-modified laminates
compared to the base laminate.
58 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materials1.5.1.6 Mode-I and III fracture with crack orientation
Alsaadi and Erkliğ [156] studied S-glass fibre-epoxy composite laminates filled with so￾dium tetraborate decahydrate (Na2B4O7, 10H2O), commonly known as borax and silicon
carbide (SiC) particles separately. The particles were maximum 35 mm size and were
added at 5, 10, 15 and 20%. The composite laminates were produced by adding borax or
SiC particles in epoxy resin. It was observed that the borax improved mechanical prop￾erties of the laminates better than SiC, and 10% borax addition showed maximum im￾provement while 15% SiC showed best result among all SiC contents. In fact, flexural
strength and modulus were improved to maximum extent for 10% borax among all the
studied laminates. However, Mode-I fracture toughness showed 46% increase for 15%
borax-filled laminate at the onset and 34% at the propagation, while the corresponding
value was 37% and 23% for 15% addition of SiC. The interesting part of the study was
observation of fibre pull-out for the base laminate, while the particles had higher inter￾action with the resin, showing no debonding at particle-resin interface, and decrease in
properties and toughness for high loading was simply because of agglomeration.
In an attempt to use unconventional wastes for improvement of polymeric com￾posites, Aslaadi and co-workers [173] used sewage sludge ash (SSA), from domestic
and industrial sewage systems, which contains mainly phosphate and silicates of cal￾cium, magnesium, aluminium, and traces of sodium, manganese, iron, zinc, etc., and
fly ash (FA), which is a waste from industry such as thermal power plants, contains
mainly silicates of iron, aluminium, calcium, potassium, magnesium and traces of so￾dium and sulphates. The effectiveness of these two fillers were compared with SiC
filler. All the fillers were of maximum 35 μm size. These were used as fillers in an
unsaturated polyester resin, which was cured with the catalyst methyl ethyl ketone
peroxide (MEKP). The authors carried out extensive mechanical and fracture tough￾ness studies covering the following tests: (1) tensile test, (2) single end notch bend test
(SENB) for mixed Mode-I/III fracture toughness, (3) SENB with different angles of the
notch as shown in Fig. 1.27, the crack inclination angles of θ = 30°, 45°, 75° and 90° to
the beam axis. The beam dimensions are also shown in the figure.
The tensile strength of all the filled composites were almost the same as the pris￾tine polyester thermoset up to 10% fillers (about 48–51 MPa), and reduced to about 40
MPa for 20% loading, irrespective of the filler type. However, the Young’s modulus
increased significantly and uniformly from 2100 MPa to about 2900 MPa for SSA, 3350
MPa for FA and 3530 for SiC at 20% addition. The Poisson’s ratio also decreased from
0.36 to 0.31/0.32 for 20% filler loading. The change in these properties indicated that
the effect of the fillers so chosen were to increase the hardness without any improve￾ment in strength. Similarly, three-point bending test (flexural test) for un-notched
samples indicated slight increase in fracture load from 3040N to about 3300N at 5%
loading of SSA and FA filler, but not for SiC filler. The fracture load decreased steadily
with further addition of the fillers, from 3040N to about 2670N for SSA, 2750 for FA
fillers, and lowest load of 2420N was observed for SiC filler, all at 20% loading in the
thermoset. The results indicated that flexural strength of the filled thermoset was bet￾1.5 Fracture mechanics 59ter for SSA and FA filers compared to the conventional SiC. The reason for reduction
of strength at high loading (>10%) is due to agglomeration. The authors observed the
size of agglomerates to be on average 41, 71 and 101 μm for 20% FA, SSA and SiC￾loaded thermoset, respectively.
The critical stress intensity factor for Mode-I was calculated by using initial notch
depth method from the following equations:
KA = P
BW1=2
 f a
W
  (1:52)
where KA is termed as apparent stress intensity factor and f(a/W) is a correction factor
given by [174]:
f a
W
  = 3sA1=2
2W
1.99 − Að Þ 1 − A 2.15 − 3.93 A + 2.7 A2  
ð Þ 1 + 2A ð Þ 1 − A 3=2 (1:53)
where A = a
W
The Mode-I and Mode-III critical stress intensity factors were determined from KA as
[173]:
KIC = KA sin2
θ (1:54)
KIIIC = KA sin θ cos θ (1:55)
The corresponding critical strain energy release rates were calculated as:
GIC = 1 − ν2  
E
K2
IC (1:56)
GIIIC = ð Þ 1 + ν
E
K2
IIIC (1:57)
where ν is the Poisson’s ratio and E is the Young’s modulus.
S
a
L
θ
L=88, S=80, W=20, B=10, a=9
W
B
P
Fig. 1.27: Sample dimensions and initial notch
for SENB test.
60 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsThe results of the study showed that the KIC of all the composites increased with
angle of notch, attaining a maximum beyond 80° and KIIIC values are highest at about
30–40° and decrease with notch angle and is practically zero at 90° crack orientation
angle. Further, KIC values are much higher than KIIIC values for al composites, due to
the mode of deformation imposed. A typical example of dependence of KIC and KIIIC
on the notch (initial crack) angle for sewage slag ash (SSA)-filled polyester thermoset
as studied by the authors is represented here as Fig. 1.28. It is seen that the fracture
toughness, both in Mode-I and Mode-III deformations, has improved significantly on
inclusion of 5% SSA filler, also for higher loading, but with less effect.
However, the critical fracture energy release rates GIC and GIIIC of unfilled polyester
thermoset was higher than most filled composites, except for the 5% filler loading,
and for SSA filler, the values of both GIC and GIIIC for unfilled thermoset were same as
those for 5% loading as taken from Ref [173]. in Fig. 1.29. The reason for higher value
for unfilled thermoset could be lower value of the Young’s modulus compared to com￾posites, since it was seen that the enhancement in modulus was quite significant
(about 40% to 60%).
Ngo et al. [175] studied a large number of epoxy-clay (Cloisite 30B) nanocompo￾sites for fracture toughness in terms of critical stress intensity factor (KIC) and critical
strain energy release rate (GIC). Epoxy resin cured with Jeffamine D-2000 is a rubbery
material with a glass transition temperature Tg = −46.3 °C, while the material prepared
with Jeffamine D-230 is a glassy solid with a higher Tg of 86.8°. A glassy solid with Tg =
150.4 °C was obtained on curing with BF3-MEA via polymerization of epoxy and hy￾Fig. 1.28: Mode-I and Mode-III critical stress intensity factors for polyester thermoset-SSA particulate
composites: dependence on crack orientation angle (refer Fig. 1.11). Reprinted with permission from
Alsaadi, M., Erkliğ A., Bulut, M. Sci Eng Compos Mater 25 (2018) 679–687. © 2018, De Gruyter Publishing
Company.
1.5 Fracture mechanics 61droxyl groups. The authors observed that both KIC and GIC decreased sharply with in￾creasing size of clay agglomerates, especially if the size is above 1 micron. At 2% clay
loading, the fracture toughness was maximum. The study showed that the enhance￾ment of fracture toughness in J2000 cured epoxy was highest (KIC 4.8 times, GIC 9
times), for curing with BF3 (2.1 times and 4.6 times) and least for J230-cured epoxy
(47% and 40% increase), all with 6% clay loading in each, in comparison to the corre￾sponding pristine epoxy.
Sharuddin [176] studied the mechanical properties of polyester-based nanocompo￾sites using halloysite nanotubes (HNT) in small quantities (approximately 1%) and also
halloysite-graphene hybrid nanocomposite for comparison. The dynamic viscoelastic
properties and glass transition improved significantly with incorporation of 1% HNT,
and water absorption studies showed plasticizing effect, reducing the Tg by about 2–3 °C.
Seawater absorption was also seen to be substantially reduced on 1% HNT addition, but
the Tg decreased more for higher (>0.75%) HNT in seawater immersion test, possibly due
to the interaction of water with the polar organic modifier of the HNT. The degradation
of dynamic viscoelastic properties on seawater immersion was significant, reducing
the loss modulus (E″) value as well as the temperature of E″
max. A single edge notch
three-point bending (SEN-TPB) test was used to investigate the Mode-I fracture
toughness KIC of the nanocomposite, following the equation:
KIC =
Pmaxf a
W
 
BW1=2 (1:58)
Fig. 1.29: Mode-I and Mode-III critical strain energy release rates for polyester thermoset-SSA particulate
composites: dependence on crack orientation angle (refer Fig. 1.11). Reprinted with permission from
Alsaadi, M., Erkliğ A., Bulut, M. Sci Eng Compos Mater 25 (2018) 679–687. © 2018, De Gruyter Publishing
Company.
62 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialswhere
f a
W
  =
2 +
a
W
  0.0866 + 4.64 a
W
  − 13.32 a
W
 2
+ 14.72 a
W
 3
− 5.6 a
W
 4  
1 − a
W
 3=2 (1:59)
where a = crack length (between 0.45 W and 0.55 W), W = width of the sample, B =
thickness of the sample, Pmax = maximum load to fracture.
The fracture toughness of individual nanocomposites of HNT and multilayer gra￾phene (MLG) on 0.1%addition had shown maximum improvement compared to the
pristine polyester thermoset, while the hybrid nanofiller composite (0.5% each filler)
was having less effect. Secondly, the KIC value increased to maximum extent (100%)
for MLG composite, but less so for HNT or hybrid composites.
1.5.2 Environmental stress cracking (ESC)
Crack development and catastrophic failure are very common for polymer matrix
composites in the presence of a hostile environment, such as a reactive chemical
fluid, a solvent or any penetrator moiety. A seemingly not-so-harmful environment
alone or a seemingly safe stress alone might not cause a failure of the composite, but
in combination, these might cause crack propagation leading to failure. The effect of
the environment may be in two ways, either physical or chemical. In the case of physi￾cal effect, mass transfer of a gas or liquid molecule in a composite can occur in two
steps, the first one being sorption, meaning entry into the composite via the exposed
surface and subsequently diffusion, which is a random distribution of the molecules
inside the composite, driven by concentration gradient. The result would be plasticiza￾tion, and weakening of the secondary valence bonds between the polymeric molecules
(van der Waals) such as simple dispersive forces, polar attraction, induced dipoles and
hydrogen bonds, thus increased separation of the polymer chains creating larger void
volume. Secondly, the penetrant can weaken the interface of the reinforcing material
(fibre or particulates) and the polymer matrix. Chemical effect is the reaction with the
polymer, the easiest example being hydrolysis by moisture, acid or alkali. There are
many more examples depending on the environment in which the composites are used.
However, it is very difficult to accommodate the two simultaneous parameters in a
mathematical model described so far simply because the molecular level phenomenon
involved in the effect of environment – either rate of weakening of the secondary va￾lence forces due to mass transfer or the deterioration rate due to chemical reaction can￾not be coupled with a mechanical phenomenon of crack propagation. Only through
experimental methods of simultaneous determination of the two phenomena it may be
possible, such as, seawater ingress with Mode-I cracking experiment on a FRP used in
underwater application at regular interval of exposure. This method of experiment
1.5 Fracture mechanics 63may lead to a large number of studies on composite-environment-stress combinations.
The ESC study being based on experimentation, there are many reports on such studies,
especially with polyethylene products. A few international standards of ESC tests are:
(1) ISO 4599 – Bent Strip Method
(2) ISO 6252–Constant Tensile Stress method
(3) ASTM D 3681 – Fibreglass (glass-reinforced thermostetting resin) Pipe in a de￾flected condition
1.5.2.1 Factors affecting ESC
In a composite, the polymer material is the most vulnerable for ESC. A polymer of low
molecular weight has lower interchain bond strength and more end groups and
hence, is more prone to failure due to interaction with the penetrant molecules, by
both physical and chemical process. Higher the molecular weight, greater would be
the intermolecular attraction and chain entanglement and hence more resistive to the
penetrant, hence less vulnerable to ESC. However, a rigid chain segment may cause
easier crack propagation under even a small interaction with the penetrant. That is
exactly why semi-crystalline polymers are more investigated than other polymers.
The second factor is compatibility of the solute-solvent pair, defined by solubility
parameter:
δ = ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
ð Þ CED p =
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
HV − RT
Vm
r
(1:60)
where δ = Hildebrand Solubility Parameter, CED = Cohesive Energy Density, Hv = heat
of vaporization, Vm = molar volume, R = universal gas constant and T = temperature
(in K).
If the solubility parameter of a polymer and the solvent is similar then the solvent
will be compatible with the polymer, and hence will be more affected by diffusion
and absorption. However, in order to accommodate polar force, induced dipoles and
hydrogen bonding in the polymer molecule, the total solubility parameter is ex￾pressed as:
δ2 = δ2
D + δ2
P + δ2
H (1:61)
where D stands for dispersive, P is for polar forces and H is for hydrogen bonds.
These are termed as Hansen solubility parameters and similarity of these individual
parameters of a solvent and polymer decides the solubility.
In addition, the difference in the solubility parameters is a measure of extent of
interaction among the polymer and the solvent. The quantification of the difference
or similarity in these parameters of a solute and solvent is done by defining a distance
of solubility parameters as:
64 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsR2
a = 4ð Þ δD2 − δD1
2 + ð Þ δP2 − δP1
2 + ð Þ δH2 − δH1
2 (1:62)
Here, 4 stands for constant representing solubility data as a sphere encompassing
good solvent.
The relative energy difference is defined as the ratio of the Ra to the radius of
interaction sphere in Hansen space calculated for each solute-solvent system to un￾derstand the solubility of a solvent in a polymer. If the relative energy difference is
zero, then the solvent can be perfectly miscible, and a value greater than 1 indicates
less likely to be compatible.
The determination of solubility parameter of the polymer is sufficient, since to
use the composite is not a practical proposition due to possible disintegration of the
filler-polymer interface. The solubility parameter of a solid polymer is determined by
swelling experiment in various solvents, graded as polarity and solubility parameter.
The solubility parameter of the solvent in which the polymer swelled to maximum
extent, is considered as the solubility parameter of the polymer [177].
Most common applications of composites are in atmospheric environment with
humidity and temperature. Effect of water ingress and deterioration in strength de￾pends on surface tension of water and the polymer. For most engineering thermoplas￾tics, the surface tension is far less than that of water (72.5 dynes/cm) [178], and hence
the wetting of the polymer surface by water is poor. In case of polar polymers such as
polylactic acid, the wettability is much better. When a composite is to be immersed in
water continuously, the effect of water on the ESC is much higher than that of atmo￾spheric moisture, where the water is in gaseous state, although the mobility in gas
phase is much higher than the liquid phase, where the water molecules are in associa￾tion or cluster due to hydrogen bonding. According to the mass transfer principles,
the absorption and diffusion of moisture in a polymer exposed to humid atmosphere
is dependent of the relative humidity of the air.
For effect of chemicals in degradation of properties of plastics and elastomers,
PDL (Plastic Design Library) table of rating of resistance to chemicals is mostly re￾ferred as a first information to begin with a study on ESC. The chemical resistance is
graded according to the extent of effect it could have on the test material [178]. There
are similar rating tables available from commercial manufacturers of plastic items.
Overall general conclusion [179] on the chemical resistance and ESC of polymers
can be:
(i) Glassy amorphous thermoplastics/elastomers, without exception, offer poor resis￾tance to dynamic fatigue and corrosive chemicals.
(ii) Glassy amorphous thermoplastics/elastomers are poor in resistance to a wide
range of organic fluids under stress.
1.5 Fracture mechanics 651.5.2.2 ESC of composites
Chen and co-workers [180] studied GRP based on epoxy resin with and without epoxi￾dized natural rubber (ENR) as toughening agent and short glass fibre (6 mm length) to
the extent of 12% for ESC. The glass fibre was used as such and also as treated with
2% solution of a silane coupling agent. The experiment was done in flexure mode (3
point bending) in air (as natural environment), dilute aqueous NaOH and HCl media.
The water absorption testing was performed to study the percentage of water ab￾sorbed by the GRPs with different proportions of short glass fibre. The observation
made in the study was that the surface treatment of the fibre together with the tough￾ening of the epoxy with ENR had a profound effect on improvement in environmental
stress cracking resistance (ESCR). Secondly, there was not much difference in the
ESCR in different media for the treated fibre-toughened epoxy GRP, with slight lower
values of ESCR for alkaline and acidic media, which showed excellent ESCR for the
treated short fibre-toughened GRP.
Compared to glass fibre, aramid fibre is more ductile and is expected to improve
fracture toughness and environmental stress cracking resistance in an FRP. Imieliń￾ska [181] studied epoxy glass composite (GRP) and epoxy-glass-aramid hybrid fibre
composite (A-GFRP) for ESC in water under constant stress for three months and ob￾served the crack growth and also in air medium for comparison. Both the fibres were
in the form of fabric and the volume fraction was approximately 40% in all the com￾posites. The water uptake of (A-GFRP) composite is higher than glass fibre GRP in gen￾eral. However, the hybrid composite was reported to be relatively immune to the
environmental effects in crack propagation in the time span of the study, since ara￾mid was less prone to corrosion by water, which prevented fibre fracture and re￾sulted in complex failure mechanism. The crack rate in air and water for the GP was
the same under the identical tensile load, which is obvious due to the time-dependent
surface absorption process. Subsequently, the crack rate in water increased signifi￾cantly with time. The stress intensity factor of the GRP in water reduced by 50% com￾pared to that in air. Transverse fracture of the glass fabric and fibre pull-out was
observed for the GRP in water under stress in three months of test.
With the advancement in environment-friendly composites for structural applica￾tion, many natural fibres such as jute, kenaf, cotton, flax, banana, wood, etc. are being
increasingly used. These fibres mostly consist of cellulose fibre and some hemicellu￾lose, and are more ductile, but have lower strength compared to glass, Kevlar or car￾bon fibres. Due to the ductility, these fibres might be better in fracture toughness and
environmental stress cracking resistance (ESCR). However, the inherent characteris￾tics and shortcoming of natural fibres, like poor adhesion, high moisture absorption,
poor wettability, etc. cause lower bonding with the polymer matrix. Therefore, modi￾fication or pre-treatment of natural fibres is done prior to composite preparation. Al￾kali treatment is mostly used to reduce hydrogen bonding, remove hemicellulose,
lignin, impurity, etc., followed by drying to make the fibre surface rough, and for bet￾ter interface bond with polymer matrix [182, 183].
66 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsBonnia et al. [184] studied ESCR of kenaf fibre-loaded composite of unsaturated
polyester resin cured with styrene as crosslinker in the presence of organo-cobalt
compound as catalyst. The authors used 3% liquid natural rubber as toughening agent
for the polyester thermoset. The addition of the toughening agent improved flexural
and impact strength by 66–70%. The ESC study was done in 1% acidic, 1% alkaline and
air medium for maximum 300s with three-point bending mode. Critical stress inten￾sity factor KIC was improved to some extent for the rubber toughened composites.
However, 20% fibre content was optimum for highest fracture toughness. Similarly,
ESCR was slightly better for rubber-toughened composite. The composite was more
affected by acid than by alkaline medium or air. In fact, there was not much differ￾ence in alkaline and air medium in respect of resistance to crack.
References
[1] Gujjala, R., Bandyopadhyay, S., eds. Toughened Composites: Micro and Macro Systems. CRC press,
London, 12 Dec 2022.
[2] Wang, R.-M., Zheng, S.-R., Zheng, Y.-P. G. Polymer Matrix Composites and Technology. Elsevier,
London, 14-Jul-2011.
[3] Middleton, D. H., ed. Composite Materials in Aircraft Structure. Longman, New York, 1990.
[4] Bakker, A. A., Jones, R., Callinan, R. J. Compos. Struct. 1985, 15, 154.
[5] Jang, B. Z. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 1991, 2, 29.
[6] Lipatov, Y. S., Sergeeva, L. M. Russ. Chem. Rev. 1976, 45, 63–74.
[7] Roland, C. M., Kobayashi, S., Mullen, K., eds. Encyclopedia of Polymeric Nanomaterials. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin and Heidelberg, Germany, 2015, pp. 1004–1011.
[8] Hourston, D. J., Mccluskey, J. A. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1986, 31, 645–655.
[9] Narine, S. S., Kong, X., Bouzidi, L., Sporns, P. I. Elastomers. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 2007, 84, 55–63.
[10] Madbouly, S. A. Polym. Test. 2020, 89, 106586.
[11] Silverstein, M. S. Polymer. 2020, 207, 122929–122943.
[12] Sperling, L. H. An introduction to Polymer Networks and IPNs. Plenum Press, New York, 1981,
Chapter 1, pp. 1–10.
[13] Klempner, D., Frisch, K. C., eds. Introduction to Physical Polymer Science. Technomic Publishing Co.,
Lancaster, PA, Vol. I−III, 1989, pp. 1–15.
[14] Lohani, A., Singh, G., Bhattacharya, S. S., Verma, A. J. Drug Deliv. 2014, 2014, 583612. Chao Meng,
Sheng Huang, Dongmei Han, Shan Ren, Shuanjin Wang, and Min Xiao Advances in Polymer
Technology 23 (2020) 1–8.
[15] Ratna, D., Karger Kocsis, J. Polymer. 2011, 52, 1063.
[16] Jagtap, S., Dalvi, V., Shankar, K., Ratna, D. Polym. Int. 2019, 68, 8812–8817.
[17] Han, J., Fei, G., Li, G., Xia, H. Macromol. Chem. Phys. 2013, 214, 1195.
[18] Ratna, D., Karger-Kocsis, J. J. Mater. Sci. 2008, 43, 254–269.
[19] Metzger, M. F., Wilson, T. S., Schumann, D., Mathew, D. L., Maitland, D. J. Biomed. Microdevices.
2002, 4, 89.
[20] Wache, H. M., Tartakowska, D. J., Hentrich, A., Wagner, M. H. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 2003, 14, 109.
[21] Gall, K., Mikulas, M., Munsi, N., Tupper, M. J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct. 2000, 11, 877.
[22] Enomoto, M., Suehiro, K. Text Res. J. 1997, 67, 601.
References 67[23] Roland, C. M. Interpenetrating Polymer Networks (IPN): Structure and Mechanical Behavior. In
Kobayashi, S., Müllen, K., eds. Encyclopedia of Polymeric Nanomaterials. Berlin, Heidelberg,
Springer, 2013.
[24] Gong, J. P., Katsuyama, Y., Kurokawa, T., Osada, Y. Adv. Mater. 2003, 15, 1155–1158.
[25] Samui, A. B., Suryavansi, U. G., Patri, M., Chakraborty, B. C., Deb, P. C. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1998, 68,
275.
[26] Mathew, A., Chakraborty, B. C., Deb, P. C. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1997, 65, 549.
[27] Mathew, A., Deb, P. C. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1994, 53, 1104.
[28] Samui, A. B., dalvi, V. G., Chandrasekhar, L., Patri, M., Chakraborty, B. C. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2006, 99,
2542.
[29] Manoj, N. R., Rout, R. D., Shivraman, P., Ratna, D., Chakraborty, B. C. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2005, 96,
4487.
[30] Gryshchuk, O., Karger-kocsis, J. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2006, 6, 345.
[31] Giaveri, S., Gronchi, P., Barzoni, A. Coatings. 2017, 7, 213.
[32] Jin, H., Zhang, Y., Wang, C., Sun, Y., Yuan, Z., Pan, Y., Xie, H., Cheng, R. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2014,
117, 773.
[33] Zhang, Y., Hourston, D. J. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1998, 69, 271.
[34] Yu, P., Li, G., Zhang, L., Zhao, F., Chen, S., Dmitriev, A. I., Zhang, G. Tribol. Int. 2019, 131, 454.
[35] Gao, S., Zhang, L., Huang, Q. Polymer networks. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2003, 90, 1948.
[36] Lu, K. T., Liu, C. T., Lee, H. L. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2003, 89, 2157.
[37] Huang, J., Zhang, L. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2002, 86, 1799.
[38] Zhang, L., Huang, J. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2001, 81, 3251.
[39] Cao, X., Zhang, L. Biomacromolecules. 2005, 6, 671.
[40] Yeganeh, H., Hojati-Talemi, P. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2007, 92, 480.
[41] Meier, C., Parlevliet, P., Dring, M. High Perform. Polym. 2017, 29, 556.
[42] Ballestero, R., Sundaram, B. M., Tippur, H. V., Express, M. L. Polym. Lett. 2016, 10, 204.
[43] Wen, Y., Yan, J., liu, J., Wang, Z. Express Polym. Lett. 2017, 11, 963.
[44] Patent No. CN110964282 A (China) EP/PMMA-IPN ring crush enhancer and preparation method
thereof:// w.w.w. webofscience.com/wos/alldb/full-record/DIIDW:2020314970.
[45] Ratna, D., Dalvi, V., Billa, S., Sharma, S. K., Rath, S. K., Sudarshan, K., Pujari, P. K. ACS Appl. Polym.
Mater. 2021, 3, 5073–5086.
[46] James, J., Thomas, G. V., Akhil, P. M., Nambissan, G., Nandakumar, K., Thomes, S. Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 2020, 22, 18169–18182.
[47] Eisenberg, A., Kim, J., . S. Introduction to Ionomers. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1988.
[48] Grady, B. P. Polym. Eng. Sci. 2008, 48, 1029–1051.
[49] Basu, D., Das, A., Stockelhuber, K. W., Jehnichen, D., Formanek, P., Sarlin, E., Vuorinen, J., Heinrich,
G. Macromolecules. 2014, 47, 3436–3450.
[50] Vislavath, P., Billa, S., Bahadur, J., Sudarshan, K., Patro, T. U., Rath, S. K., Ratna, D. Macromolecules.
2022, 55, 6739–6749.
[51] Krishnakumar, B., Sanka, R. V. S. P., Binder, W. H., Parthasarthy, V., Rana, S., Karak, N. Chem. Eng.
J. 2020, 385, 123820.
[52] Yue, L., Guo, H., Kennedy, A., Patel, A., Gong, X., Ju, T., Gray, T., Manas-Zloczower, I. ACS Macro. Lett.
2020, 9, 836–842.
[53] Scheutz, G. M., Lessard, J. J., Sims, M. B., Sumerlin, B. S. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 41, 16181–16196.
[54] Chen, X., Dam, M. A., Ono, K., Mal, A., Shen, H., Nutt, S. R., Sheran, K., Wudl, F. A. Science. 2002, 295,
1698–1702.
[55] Oehlenschlaeger, K. K., Mueller, J. O., Brandt, J., Hilf, S., Lederer, A., Wilhelm, M., Graf, R., Coote,
M. L., Schmidt, F. G., Barner-Kowollik, C. Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 3561–3566.
[56] Reutenauer, P., Buhler, E., Boul, P. J., Candau, S. J., Lehn, J. M. Chem. Eur. J. 2009, 15, 1893–1900.
68 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materials[57] Bergman, S. D., Wudl, F. Mendable polymers. J. Mater. Chem. 2008, 18, 41–62.
[58] Adzima, B. J., Aguirre, H. A., Kloxin, C. J., Scott, T. F., Bowman, C. N. Macromolecules. 2008, 41,
9112–9117.
[59] Billiet, S., De Bruycker, K., Driessen, F., Goossens, H., Van Speybroeck, V., Winne, J. M., Du Prez,
F. E. Nat. Chem. 2014, 6, 815.
[60] Van Herck, N., Du Prez, F. E. Macromolecules. 2018, 51, 3405–3414.
[61] Ying, H., Zhang, Y., Cheng, J. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3218.
[62] Zhang, Y., Ying, H., Hart, K. R., Wu, Y., Hsu, A. J., Coppola, A. M., Kim, T. A., Yang, K., Sottos, N. R.,
White, S. R., Cheng, J. Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 7646–7651.
[63] Zhang, L., Rowan, S. J. Macromolecules. 2017, 50, 5051–5060.
[64] Liu, W.-X., Zhang, C., Zhang, H., Zhao, N., Yu, Z.-X., Xu, J. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 8678–8684.
[65] Obadia, M. M., Mudraboyina, B. P., Serghei, A., Montarnal, D., Drockenmuller, E. Chem. Soc. 2015,
137, 6078–6083.
[66] Obadia, M. M., Jourdain, A., Cassagnau, P., Montarnal, D., Drockenmuller, E. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017, 27.
[67] Chakma, P., Digby, Z. A., Shulman, M. P., Kuhn, L. R., Morley, C. N., Sparks, J. L. ACS Macro. Lett.
2019, 95–100.
[68] Cash, J. J., Kubo, T., Bapat, A. P., Sumerlin, B. S. Macromolecules. 2015, 48, 2098–2106.
[69] Chao, A., Zhang, D. Macromolecules. 2019, 52, 495–503.
[70] Zhang, B., Digby, Z. A., Flum, J. A., Chakma, P., Saul, J. M., Sparks, J. L., Konkolewicz,
D. Macromolecules. 2016, 49, 6871–6878.
[71] Baruah, R., Kumar, A., Ujjwal, R. R., Kedia, S., Ranjan, A., Ojha, U. Recyclable Macromol. 2016, 49,
7814–7824.
[72] Griebel, J. J., Nguyen, N. A., Astashkin, A. V., Glass, R. S., Mackay, M. E., Char, K., Pyun, J. ACS Macro.
Lett. 2014, 3, 1258–1261.
[73] Kleine, T. S., Nguyen, N. A., Anderson, L. E., Namnabat, S., LaVilla, E. A., Showghi, S. A., Dirlam, P. T.,
Arrington, C. B., Manchester, M. S., Schwiegerling, J., Glass, R. S., Char, K., Norwood, R. A., Mackay,
M. E., Pyun, J. ACS Macro. Lett. 2016, 5, 1152–1156.
[74] Liu, H., Nelson, A. Z., Ren, Y., Yang, K., Ewoldt, R. H., Moore, J. S. ACS Macro. Lett. 2018, 7, 933–937.
[75] Amamoto, Y., Kikuchi, M., Masunaga, H., Sasaki, S., Otsuka, H., Takahara, A. Macromolecules. 2009,
42, 8733–8738.
[76] Jin, K., Li, L., Torkelson, J. M. Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 6746–6750.
[77] Takahashi, A., Goseki, R., Ito, K., Otsuka, H. ACS Macro. Lett. 2017, 1280–1284.
[78] Takahashi, A., Goseki, R., Otsuka, H. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 2016–2021.
[79] Ping, Z. Z., Zhi, R. M., Qiu, Z. M. Funct. Mater. 2018, 28, 1706050.
[80] Zhang, C., Liu, Z., Shi, Z., Yin, J., Tian, M. ACS Macro. Lett. 2018, 7, 1371–1375.
[81] Billa, S., Vislavath, P., Bahadur, J., Rath, S. K., Ratna, D., Manoj, N. R., Chakraborty, B. C. ACS Appl.
Polym. Mater. 2023, 5, 3079–3095.
[82] Montarnal, D., Mathieu, C., François, T., Leibler, L. Science. 2011, 334, 965–968.
[83] Capelot, M., Montarnal, D., Tournilhac, F., Leibler, L. J.Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 7664–7667.
[84] Yang, Y., Pei, Z., Zhang, X., Tao, L., Wei, Y., Ji, Y. Chem. Sci. 2014, 5, 3486–3492.
[85] Brutman, J. P., Delgado, P. A., Hillmyer, M. A. ACS Macro. Lett. 2014, 3, 607–610.
[86] Altuna, F. I., Pettarin, V., Williams, R. Green Chem. 2013, 15, 3360–3366.
[87] Denissen, W., Rivero, G., Nicoläy, R., Leibler, L., Winne, J. M., Du Prez, F. E. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015,
25, 2451–2457.
[88] Obadia, M. M., Mudraboyina, B. P., Serghei, A., Montarnal, D., Drockenmuller, E. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2015, 137, 6078–6083.
[89] Lu, Y.-X., Tournilhac, F., Leibler, L., Guan, Z. J. Am. Chem.Soc. 2012, 134, 8424–8427.
[90] Pepels, M., Filot, I., Klumperman, B., Goossens, H. Polym. Chem. 2013, 4, 4955–4965.
[91] Taynton, P., Yu, K., Shoemaker, R. K., Jin, Y., Qi, H. J., Zhang, W. Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 3938–3942.
References 69[92] Krishnakumar, B., Sanka, R. V. S. P., Binder, W. H., Parthasarthy, V., Rana, S., Karak, N. Chem. Eng.
J. 2020, 385, 123820.
[93] Yue, L., Guo, H., Kennedy, A., Patel, A., Gong, X., Ju, T., Gray, T., Manas-Zloczower, I. ACS Macro. Lett.
2020, 9, 836–842.
[94] Rottger, M., Domenech, T., Weegen, R., Breuillac, A., Nicolay, R., Leibler, L. Science. 2017, 356, 62–65.
[95] Wu, J., Yu, X., Zhang, H., Guo, J., Hu, J., Li, M. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2020, 8, 6479–6487.
[96] Liu, T., Hao, C., Wang, L., Li, Y., Liu, W., Xin, J., Zhang, J. Macromolecules. 2017, 50, 8588–8597.
[97] Hayashi, M., Katayama, A. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 2020, 2(6), 2452–2457.
[98] Wang, S., Ma, S., Li, Q., Xu, X., Wang, B., Huang, K., liu, Y., Zhu, J. Maromolecules. 2020, 53,
2919–2931.
[99] Chen, M., Zhou, L., Wu, Y., Zhao, X., Zhang, Y. ACS Macro. Lett. 2019, 8, 255–260.
[100] Drzal, L. T., Rich, M., Lloyd, P. J. Adhes. 1983, 16, 1.
[101] Hook, K. J., Agrawal, R. K., Drzal, L. T. J. Adhes. 1990, 32, 157.
[102] Zhang, H., Zhang, Z., Claudia, B. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2004, 64, 2021.
[103] Yang, Y., He, F., Wang, M., Zhang, B. J. Mater. Sci. 1998, 33, 3651.
[104] Ratna, D., Kushwaha, R., Dalvi, V., Manoj, N. R., Samui, A. B., Chakraborty, B. C. J. Adhes. Sci.
Technol. 2008, 22(1), 93.
[105] Jianbin, L., Zhang, Z., Jiyang, F., Liang, Z., Ramakrishnan, K. R. Nanotechnol. Rev. 2021, 10,
1438–1468.
[106] Bilisik, K., Syduzzaman, M. Polym. Compos. 2021, 42, 1670–1697.
[107] Bilisik, K. Text Res. J. 2017, 87, 2275.
[108] Alhijazi, M., Zeeshan, Q., Qin, Z., Safaei, B., Asmael, M. Nanotechnol. Rev. 2020, 9, 853–875.
[109] Kozlowski, R., Wladyka-Przybylak, M. Uses of Natural Fiber Reinforced Plastics. Natural Fibers,
Plastics and Composites. Springer, Boston, MA, 2004, pp. 249–274.
[110] Faruk, O., Bledzki, A. K., Fink, H., Sain, M. Prog. Polym. Sci. 2012, 37, 1552–1596.
[111] Kumar Sinha, A., Narang, H. K., Bhattacharya, S. J. Polym. Eng. 2017, 37, 879–895.
[112] Pickering, K. L., Efendy, M. G. A., Le, T. M. Compos. A Appl. Sci. Manuf. 2016, 83, 98–112.
[113] Cai, M., Takagi, H., Nakagaito, A. N., Li, Y., Waterhouse, G. I. N. Compos. Part A Appl. Sci. Manuf.
2016, 90, 589–597.
[114] Bledzki, A. K., Gassan, J. Progr. Polym. Sci. 1999, 24, 221–274.
[115] Fiore, V., Di Bella, G., Valenza, A. Compos. Part B Eng. 2015, 68, 14–21.
[116] Zakikhani, P., Zahari, R., Sultan, M. T. H., Majid, D. L. Mater. Des. 2014, 63, 820–828.
[117] Vijaya, R. B., Manickavasagam, V. M., Elanchezhian, C., Vinodh, K. C., Karthik, S., Saravanan,
K. Mater. Des. 2014, 60, 643–652.
[118] Ramesh, M., Palanikumar, K., Reddy, K. H. Compos. Part B Eng. 2013, 48, 1–9.
[119] Asim, M., Jawaid, M., Abdan, K., Ishak, M. R. J. Bionic Eng. 2016, 13, 426–435.
[120] Brahmakumar, M., Pavithran, C., Pillai, R. M. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2005, 65, 563–569.
[121] Justiz-Smith, N. G., Virgo, G. J., Buchanan, V. E. Mater. Charact. 2008, 59, 1273–1278.
[122] Abdul Khalil, H. P. S., Bhat, I. U. H., Jawaid, M., Zaidon, A., Hermawan, D., Hadi, Y. S. Mater. Des.
2012, 42, 353–368.
[123] Bachtiar, D., Sapuan, S. M., Hamdan, M. M. Mater. Des. 2008, 29, 1285–1290.
[124] Liu, Q., Hughes, M. Compos. Part A Appl. Sci. Manuf. 2008, 39, 1644–1652.
[125] Nirmal, U., Hasim, J., Megat, M. M. H. Tribol. Intl. 2015, 83, 77–104.
[126] Lee, S. C., Mariatti, M. Mater. Lett. 2008, 62, 2253–2256.
[127] Cao, Y., Shibata, S., Fukumoto, I. Compos. Part A Appl. Sci. Manuf. 2006, 37, 423–429.
[128] Goulart, S. A. S., Oliveira, T. A., Teixeira, A., Mileo, P. C., Mulinari, D. R. Procedia Eng. 2011, 10,
2034–2039.
[129] Das Lala, S., Deoghare, A. B., Chatterjee, S. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2018, 25, 1039–1058.
[130] Kashtalyan, M., Soutis, C. Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 2005, 41, 152–173.
70 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materials[131] Prabhakar, P., Waas, A. M. Compos. Struct. 2013, 98, 85–92.
[132] Pineda, E. J., Bednarcyk, B. A., Waas, A. M., Arnold, S. M. Int. J. Solids Struct. 2013, 50, 1203–1216.
[133] Patel, D. K., Waas, A. M. Compos. Part C. 2020, 2, 100016.
[134] Wang, J., Chen, L., Shen, W., Zhu, L. Polymers. 2022, 14, 2318.
[135] Schiffer, A., Tagarielli, V. L. Int. J. Impact Eng. 2014, 70, 1–13.
[136] Kahla, H. B. Micro-cracking and delamination of composite laminates under tensile quasistatic and
cyclic loading. Ph.D. Thesis, Division of Materials Science, Department of Engineering Sciences and
Mathematics, Luleå University of Technology, SE-971 87. Luleå, Sweden, 2019 Ch.1, p.8.
[137] Thomason, J. A review of the analysis and characterisation of polymeric glass fibre sizings. Polym.
Test. 2020, 85, Article 106421.
[138] Li, X., Hallett, S. R., Wisnom, M. R. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2015, 22, 115–129.
[139] Ziegel, K. D., Romanov, A. I. Inorganic fillers. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1973, 17, 1119.
[140] Kerner, E. H. Proc. Phys. Soc B. 1956, 69, 808–813.
[141] Ziegel, K. D. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 1969, 29, 72–80.
[142] Rooj, S., Das, A., Stöckelhuber, K. W., Reuter, U., Heinrich, G. Macromol. Mater. Eng. 2012, 297,
369–383.
[143] Tsai, S. W., Wu, E. M. J. Compos. Mater. 1971, 5, 58–80.
[144] Chang, F. K., Chang, K. Y. J. Compos. Mater. 1987, 21, 834–855.
[145] Ha, S. K., Jin, K. K., Huang, Y. J. Compos. Mater. 2008, 42, 1873–1895.
[146] Murali, D. M., Chakraborty, B. C., Begum, S. S. Iran Polym. J. 2022, 31, 1129–1145.
[147] Nguyen, B. N., Bapanapalli, S. K., Holbery, J. D., Smith, M. T., Kunc, V., Frame, B. J., Phelps, J. H.,
Tucker, C. L. J. Compos. Mater. 2008, 42, 1003–1029.
[148] Haneefa, A., Bindu, P., Aravind, I., Thomas, S. J. Compos. Mater. 2008, 42, 1471–1489.
[149] Huang, Z. M., Guo, W. J., Huang, H. B., Zhang, C. C. Materials. 2021, 14, 2708.
[150] Barnett, P. R., Young, S. A., Patel, N. J., Penumadu, D. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2021, 211, 108857.
[151] Inglis, C. E. Trans. Inst. Nav. Archit. London. 1913, 55, 219–230.
[152] Irwin, G. R. J. Appl. Mech. 1957, 24, 361–364.
[153] Griffith, A. A. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London Ser A. 1920, 221, 163–198.
[154] ASTM Standard D 5528-94a. Test Method for Mode-I Interlaminar Fracture Toughness of
Unidirectional Fiber-Reinforced Polymer Matrix Composites. American Society for Testing and
Materials, West Conshohocken, PA, 2001.
[155] Srivastava, V. K., Hogg, P. J. J. Mater. Sci. 1998, 33, 1119–1128.
[156] Alsaadi, M., Erkliğ, A. Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 2017, 42, 4759–4769.
[157] Seyhan, A., Tanoglu, M., Schulte, K. Eng. Fract. Mech. 2008, 75, 5151–5162.
[158] de moura, M. F. S. F., Dourado, N., Morais, J. J. L., Pereira, F. A. M. Fatigue Fract. Eng. Mater. Struct.
2010, 34, 149–158.
[159] de Moura, M. F. S. F., Silva, M. A. L., de Morais, A. B., Morais, J. J. L. Eng. Fract. Mech. 2006, 73,
978–993.
[160] Bolger, J. C. SAE Trans. 1976, 85, 1065–1072.
[161] Bucknall, C. B., Gilbert, A. H. Polymer. 1989, 30, 213–217.
[162] Hourston, D. J., Lane, J. M. Polymer. 1992, 33, 1379–1383.
[163] Ratna, D., Banthia, A. K., Deb, P. C. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2001, 80, 1792–1801.
[164] Ratna, D., Patri, M., Chakraborty, B. C., Deb, P. C. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1997, 65, 901–907.
[165] Ratna, D., Samui, A. B., Chakraborty, B. C. Flexibility improvement of epoxy resin by chemical
modification. Polym. Int. 2004, 53, 1882–1887.
[166] Murali, M., Ratna, D., Samui, A. B., Chakraborty, B. C. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2007, 103, 1723–1730.
[167] Ratna, D., Manoj, N. R., Chandrasekhar, L., Chakraborty, B. C. Polym. Adv. Technol. 2004, 15,
583–586.
[168] Jagtap, S. B., Rao, V. S., Ratna, D. J. Reinf. Plast. Compos. 2013, 32, 183–196.
References 71[169] Zavareh, S., Vahdat, G. J. Reinf. Plast. Compos. 2012, 31, 247–258.
[170] Unnikrishnan, K. P., Thachil, E. T. Des. Monomers Polym. 2006, 9, 129–152.
[171] Ratna, D., Manoj, N. R., Varley, R., Raman, R. K. S., Simon, G. P. Polym. Int. 2003, 52, 1403–1407.
[172] Seyhan, A. T., Tanoglu, M. Eng. Fract. Mech. 2008, 75, 5151–5162.
[173] Alsaadi, M., Erkliğ, A., Bulut, M. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2018, 25, 679–687.
[174] Moghadam, B., Taheri, F. J. Strain Anal. Engng. Design. 2013, 48, 245–257.
[175] Ngo, T. D., Ton-That, M. T., Hoa, S. V., Cole, K. C. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2010, 17, 19–30.
[176] Saharudin, M. Mechanical properties of polyester nano-composites exposed to liquid media. Ph.
D. thesis, Faculty of Engineering and Environment, Northumbria University, 2017, Accessed April 1,
2023 at http://nrl.northumbria.ac.uk/policies.html.
[177] Mathew, A., Chakraborty, B. C., Deb, P. C. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1994, 53, 1107.
[178] Ebnesajjad, S. Effect of Chemicals on Plastics. In Baur, E., Ruhrberg, K., Woishnis, W., eds. Chemical
Resistance of Commodity Thermoplastics -A volume in Plastics Design Library. Elsevier, 2016, Ch.2, xI.
[179] Chandrasekaran, C. Anticorrosive Rubber Lining – A volume in Plastics Design Library. Elsevier,
2017, Ch.23, pp. 191–197.
[180] Chen, R. S., Muhammad, Y. H., Ahmad, S. Polym. Test. 2021, 96, Article No. 107088.
[181] Imielińska, K. Kompozyty (Composites). 2006, 6, 4.
[182] Asim, M., Jawaid, M., Abdan, K., Ishak, M. R. J. Bionic Eng. 2016, 13, 426–435.
[183] Fiore, V., Di Bella, G., Valenza, A. Compos. B Eng. 2015, 68, 14–21.
[184] Bonnia, N. N., Ahmad, S. H., Zainol, I., Mamun, A. A., Beg, M. D. H., Bledzki, A. K. EXPRESS Polym.
Lett. 2010, 4, 55–61.
72 Chapter 1 Introduction to composite materialsChapter 2
Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)
Abbreviations
2.1 Thermoplastic polymer
The earliest linear polymer identified was the naturally occurring cellulose in 1838 by
the French chemist Anselme Payen, who isolated it from plant matter and determined
its chemical formula. Subsequently, the first thermoplastic “Celluloid”, which is nitro￾cellulose, was made by Hyatt manufacturing Co. in 1870. Other modifications such as
methyl cellulose, carboxyl methyl cellulose, hydroxyl propyl cellulose, etc. were subse￾quently developed and commercialised.
Abbreviation Description
PE Polyethylene
PP Polypropylene
TPU Thermoplastic polyurethane
PMMA Polymethyl methacrylate
PES Polyether sulphone
PEEK Polyether ether ketone
PTFE Polytetrafluoroethylene
PET Polyethylene terephthalate
PC Polycarbonate
PVC Polyvinyl chloride
PPO Poly(phenylene oxide)
CPVC Critical pigment volume concentration
CB Carbon black
HDPE High density polyethylene
CSA Composite sphere assemblage
PTC Positive temperature coefficient
SG Synthetic graphite
PVDF-CIP Polyvinylidene fluoride-carbonyl iron powder
TPU Thermoplastic polyurethane
TPE Thermoplastic elastomer
GNP Graphene nanoplates
OMMT Organically modified montmorillonite
MA Maleic anhydride
WLF William-Landel-Ferry
ISB Injection stretch blow
LDH Layered double hydroxide
PHA Polyhydroxyalkanoates
PLA Polylactic acid
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110781571-002However, following the famous invention of Ziegler-Natta catalyst in the mid￾twentieth century of the synthesis process of alkene polymerisation, a new, vast area of
thermoplastics were opened with innumerable varieties of homopolymers, copolymers
and derivatives. Subsequently, in the 1930s, Wallace Carothers and other researchers of
Du Pont invented a step-growth polymerization process to synthesize polyester, which
is a thermoplastic. Today, most common thermoplastics such as Nylon, polyethylene
(PE), polypropylene (PP), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polycarbonate (PC), polyethylene
terephthalate (PET), polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), polyether ether ketone (PEEK), pol￾yether sulphone (PES), Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), thermoplastic polyurethane
(TPU), etc. are considered essential materials for consumer goods and many other in￾dustrial applications. A few commonly used thermoplastics with their physical proper￾ties are listed in Tab. 2.1.
The usefulness of a thermoplastic is based on its chemical structure, molecular
weight, polydispersity and stereo specific configuration, since these characteristics de￾cide all other properties such as ease of processing, crystallinity, mechanical strength,
toughness, electrical and thermal properties. A large number of thermoplastics are re￾ferred to as “Engineering Thermoplastics” because of their high mechanical strength,
toughness and thermal stability. Most engineering thermoplastics have high Young’s
modulus, about 2–5 GPa at ambient temperature, and high thermal stability. One advan￾tage of using thermoplastics for large-scale commodity is that these are recyclable as
these can be moulded repeatedly and hence do not require incineration or other waste
disposal methods, which increase the atmospheric pollution. However, excessive use of
PE, in particular, is causing waste disposal problems due to the techno-economic con￾straints of quality of reprocessed items and the corresponding cost. A typical example is
the reprocessing cost of very thin PE bags and wrappers. Most thermoplastics are not
bio-compatible or bio-degradable, for example PE, PP, PS, PVC, PEEK, PES, etc. The pres￾ent awareness in environment has seen more application of bio-compatible and bio￾degradable polymers such as starch, polylactic acid and their derivatives in packaging,
the food processing industry and in medical fields.
Being linear polymers, one disadvantage of thermoplastics for structural applica￾tion is the higher creep and stress relaxation compared to thermosets like epoxy, phe￾nolics, etc. Secondly, the rheology of thermoplastic melts is very complex and can be
varying for the same material, according to the molecular weight and polydispersity.
Due to the complexity of the chain configuration, some more complications are en￾countered such as the effects of normal force, time-dependent behaviour, etc., which
complicate the process technology. The polarity, hydrogen bonding and crystallinity
also aggravate the rheological complexity. The other disadvantage is that the fabrica￾tion of items with thermoplastics is energy-intensive due to the high temperature re￾quirement for the melting and moulding process. Added to this, there is criticality in
pressure distribution for accurate mould flow. This necessitates the use of relatively
expensive and efficient machineries such as extruder, injection moulding, thermo￾forming, blow moulding systems, etc.
74 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)Nevertheless, consumption of thermoplastics has increased from about 270 million
metric tons in 2010 to about 400 million metric tons in 2020 and growing at the rate of
almost 6–8% every 5 years, with PE and PP being the major contributors.
2.2 Particulate thermoplastic composite
Transparent thermoplastics are very common in the commodity market. However, in
many applications, thermoplastics are filled with various types of additives such as
colouring agents, pigments, particulate fillers, etc. for reinforcement, aesthetics and
cost reduction. For example, reinforcement of polypropylene by carbon black im￾proves both strength and UV stability. The effect of a particulate filler reinforcement
for a thermoplastic depends on the elastic modulus of the plastic and the filler, the
polarity of the plastic and the filler, particle size and aspect ratio of the filler and its
agglomeration due to the filler-filler interaction, and obviously the extent of filler
loading in the composite. The critical pigment volume concentration (CPVC) can be
determined for a polymer-filler system by measuring its mechanical properties at var￾ious filler loading levels.
Most engineering thermoplastics have reasonably high Young’s modulus and
hence, the effective transfer of force from the filler to the matrix is expected to be
much better than of rubber. Common reinforcing particulate filler is carbon black
(CB) in a variety of forms as described in Chapter-4. Because of the small size and the
presence of some organic groups on the surface of CB, it enhances the mechanical
strength to a great extent. It is highly compatible with all types of thermoplastics. One
Tab. 2.1: Common thermoplastics.
Thermoplastc Glass transition
temperature (Tg), °C
Density, g/cc Molecular
weight range
(g/mol)
Poly(ethylene) − (max.) .−. ,−,
Poly(propylene) − to − .−. ,−,
Poly(vinyl chloride)  . ,−,
Poly(methyl methacrylate)  . ,−,
Poly(styrene)  . ,−,
Poly(lactic acid)  . ,−,
Polyamide (Nylon  and Nylon ) − . ,−,
Poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET)  . ,−,
Polycarbonate (PC)  . ,−,
Poly(ether sulphone) (PES)  . ,−,
Poly(ether ether ketone) (PEEK)  . ,−,
Poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) − (DMA), − (DSC & Calc.),
+ (DMA), + (Dilatometry),
. ,−,,
Poly(phenylene oxide) (PPO)  . ,=,
2.2 Particulate thermoplastic composite 75other most important effect is that the resistance against UV degradation of plastics is
largely improved by the addition of carbon black. In fact, CB-reinforced PE and PP
pipes and vessels can be used in open sunlight for several years. Certain conducting
CB can be used for making conducting thermoplastic composites for use as antistatic
application. Liang and Yang [1] used CB of particle size of about 18 microns in high￾density PE (HDPE) and observed the increase in tensile fracture strength by about
100% at 8% loading of CB, while the tensile strength did not improve at all. The elon￾gation-at-break improved by about 12% at 5% CB and reduced on further addition.
The Flexural modulus monotonically improved linearly with CB content and at 8%,
the improvement was about 12%. Similarly, the flexural strength improved by about
10%. Huang and Wu [2] studied the effect of CB on the processing parameters of mix￾ing, improvement of mechanical and electrical properties of EVA-CB composites,
based on three types of EVA filled with 2.5 to 30% CB of surface area 1475 m2
/g. The
work energy of mixing 30% CB was 80 times higher than that of unfilled EVA of two
varieties. The tensile strength reduced by 9–28% in two types of EVA but increased by
25% in the third variety. The elongation-at-break drastically reduced for all three EVA.
The electrical volume resistivity reduced drastically from 1015 ohm-cm to 105 ohm-cm
for 25% CB-filled EVA of all varieties, with the threshold at 6–10% CB.
Gill et al. [3] reported a composite filled with hybrid CB-Nickel particles, where the
matrix was a blend of PP with 5% PP-graft-maleic anhydride for imparting some polar￾ity to enable better dispersion of the filler mixture, as confirmed by SEM micrograph.
Both the tensile strength and modulus attained a maximum at 2% filler loading, reduc￾ing on further addition (up to 5%). The non-linearity in modulus with respect to filler
loading cannot be explained by a simple mixing rule. Electrical conductivity also had a
percolation threshold at 2.5% hybrid filler. The optimum hybrid filler loading was thus
reported as 2.5%. Ding et al. reported a PP-CB composite [4] where the electrical percola￾tion threshold was at 3% CB (by volume). A silane-coupling agent was used to treat the
CB for better dispersion in PP, and the authors reported significant (20–30%) improve￾ment in the tensile properties and impact energy using this method of reinforcement.
Graphite is another form of flake-type carbon filler that is used for imparting
electrical conductivity to thermoplastic composites. Thermal and electrical conductiv￾ity, thermal diffusivity of high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polystyrene/graphite
composites were investigated by Krupa and Chodak [5]. The authors observed differ￾ent percolation thresholds for HDPE composites, with two types of graphite differing
in morphology. Young’s modulus, thermal and electrical properties showed significant
improvement on graphite loading at 0.3 volume fraction (30 volume %), while relative
elongation decreased drastically. Altay et al. [6] reported a composite of polyamide 4,6
with synthetic graphite-graphene nanoplatelet hybrid filler and observed synergistic
effect on the mechanical and thermal properties of the composite. Addition of only
5% graphene in 40% graphite-loaded composite enhanced the thermal conductivity
1.5 times and the tensile modulus by 1.65 times. However, the ultimate tensile strength
76 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)with and without graphene addition in 40% graphite-loaded PA did not change, and
was reported to reduce by 43% compared to pristine polyamide.
Several minerals and glass beads are also reported to be used in thermoplastics
for the enhancement of strength [7–13].
Metal powder-filled electrically conducting thermoplastic composites are reported
in some literatures. Krupa et al. [14] studied HDPE-nickel (special grade-branched struc￾tured nickel particle) composite to improve the electrical conductivity and also adhe￾sion with metal surfaces. The authors reported the electrical percolation threshold to
be at 8 volume% nickel in the composite. The hydrophilicity of the composite was ob￾served to be increased significantly (contact angle 80° compared to 93° of pristine
HDPE), but the adhesive bond strength for aluminium foil improved to 1.7 times the
bond strength with pristine HDPE. Mamunya et al. [15] used nickel and copper particles
as fillers in PVC, and Boudenne et al. [16] used copper particle in PP for the enhance￾ment of thermal and electrical conductivities.
2.2.1 Effect of filler: mechanical property
The effect of rigid particle inclusion on the tensile strength can be expressed by the
Nicolais and Narkis [11] equation as:
σc = σm 1 − 1.21ϕ2=3
f
  (2:1)
where σc and σm represent the tensile strengths of the composite and the matrix, re￾spectively, and ϕf represents the volume fraction of the rigid filler.
Whereas, Liang and Li [12, 13] introduced a new concept of the interfacial adhe￾sion angle (θ), and deduced the following modified equation for tensile strength:
σc = σm 1 − 1.21sin2
θϕ2=3
f
  (2:2)
If the angle is 90°, then eq. (2.2) becomes identical to eq. (2.1).
According to these equations, the strength reduces on the addition of the rigid
particulate filler, instead of reinforcing. The improvement in the Young’s modulus is,
on the other hand, observed in all such reinforcements, particularly, where the par￾ticles interact with the polymer, due to some functionality or polarity.
Liang and Yang [1] proposed the following relationship for flexural strength and
modulus for the composite of HDPE, based on carbon black and mica reinforcement:
σFl = β0 + β1ϕf (2:3)
EFl = α0 + α1ϕf (2:4)
2.2 Particulate thermoplastic composite 77β0 and α0 are the values of the pristine polymer and ϕf is the weight fraction of the
filler in the composite.
The impact strength was seen to be decreasing and the authors have shown that
it is best described by the binomial equation:
σIm = B0 + B1ϕf + B2ϕ2
f (2:5)
B0 being the impact strength of the unfilled HDPE. All the coefficients in eqs. (2.3) to
(2.5) are dependent on the type of polymer and filler and on the polymer-filler and
filler-filler interactions. It is therefore best to determine these coefficients for a pair
of filler-polymer by experimentation. The authors reported a negative value of B1 and
a small positive value of B2 in eq. (2.5) for the HDPE-CB composite.
A generalized equation of the filler effect on polymeric composite is given by [17]:
EC
Ep
= 1 + ABϕf
1 − Bϕf
(2:6)
where
B = Ef
	
Ep
  − 1
Ef
	
Ep
  + A (2:7)
The constant A is a material-dependent term, involving the Poisson’s ratio and the as￾pect ratio of the filler, and is related to the generalized Einstein coefficient, k.
Finally, the shear modulus ratio of the composite to the polymer matrix as given
by Nielsen [17] is:
EC
Ep
= 1 + ð Þ k − 1 Bϕf
1 − Bϕf
(2:8)
For, the low volume fraction of the filler (filler-filler interaction neglected) and the
ratio of filler to polymer modulus are very high.
Nielsen also suggested the value of k for different Poisson’s ratios of the filler, tak￾ing the Poisson’s ratio of the polymer as 0.5. However, the assumption may not be
applicable for thermoplastics because the Poisson’s ratio of most engineering thermo￾plastic is much less than 0.5.
Krupa et al. [14] took the value of A as 6.5 for HDPE-nickel powder composite and
estimated the composite modulus to be in fairly accurate agreement with the experi￾mental result.
The model by Gold as shown in Chapter-4, eq. (4.17) without considering agglom￾eration and eq. (4.18) for agglomerated filler, for example carbon black in a rubber
matrix, may also be used for thermoplastic-particulate composites with some errors.
Ogorckiewicz and Weidman [9] reported modelling and experiments with a poly￾propylene-glass spheres composite, and suggested some models in series and in paral￾78 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)lel and in combinations of stress components in the prism-in-prism, cube-in-cube, etc.
form of unit cells. Two types of equations yielded close results of composite Young’s
modulus in tension.
With the series stress model:
EC = Ef Ep
ϕf Ep + 1 − ϕf
 Ef
(2:9)
Cube-in cube model:
EC =
Ep Ef 1 − ϕ1=3
f + ϕf
  + Ep ϕ1=3
f − ϕf
n o  
Ef 1 − ϕ1=3
f
  + Epϕ1=3
f
(2:10)
Bourkas et al. [18] derived composite elastic modulus using a cube-in -cube model
where the filler particle is a considered as a small cube and the load components in
the matrix-filler unit cell are in various series-parallel combinations. The authors as￾sumed perfect filler-matrix interactions and no agglomeration. Further, the uniaxial
stresses have no other components in any other direction.
The longitudinal modulus was derived as:
EC = Ep 1 +
ϕf
1=ð Þ m − 1 + ϕ1=3
f − ϕ2=3
f
0
@
1
A (2:11)
where m = ratio of the longitudinal modulus of filler to polymer, (Ef /Ep).
The corresponding shear modulus was given by:
GC = Gp 1 +
ϕf
1=ð Þ ρ − 1 + ϕ1=3
f − ϕ2=3
f
0
@
1
A (2:12)
where ρ = ratio of the shear modulus of filler to polymer, (Gf/Gp).
A simplified model for spherical inclusion as a filled polymer composite is given
by Kerner-Nielsen’s equation as follows [19, 20]:
EC = Ep 1 +
ϕf
1 − ϕf
15 1 − νp
 
8 − 10νp
 !   (2:13)
where νp is the Poisson’s ratio of the polymer.
Ramsteiner and Theysohn carried out experiments on the tensile behaviour of PP
with different types of filler in which small glass beads of diameter less than 15 μm
were used as spherical fillers. They observed that the cube-in-cube model was in good
agreement with the experimental data and the Kerner-Nielsen model was in close
approximation.
2.2 Particulate thermoplastic composite 792.2.2 Effect of filler: thermal conductivity
The Hashin-Shtrikman model [14, 21, 22] predicts a lower bound in thermal conductiv￾ity of a filled thermoplastic:
λc = λm +
ϕf
1
λf − λm
+
1 − ϕf
3λm
(2:14)
Here, ϕ represents the volume faction of the filler and λ represents the thermal con￾ductivity. The above expression considers a uniform particle distribution, therefore,
the percolation due to the contact of the conducting filler particles is not taken into
account. The equation is thus valid only for up to 10–12% filler (by volume). Budiansky
[23] proposed the following expression for N number of fillers:
X
N
i=1
ϕi
2
3 +
1
3
λi
λc
    −1
= 1 (2:15)
The Lewis-Nielsen model is defined by following equations for various shapes of
fillers:
λ = λm
1 + ABϕf
1 − Bψϕf
(2:16)
where
ψ = 1 +
1 − ϕmax ð Þϕf
ϕ2
max
, B =
λf
λm
− 1
λf
λm
+ A
(2:17)
‘A’ is a parameter that depends on the shape of the particles and ϕmax is the maximum
packing fraction. Different values A and ϕmax are reported in the literature [14, 24] for
various shapes (spheres, fibres, flakes, irregular particles and various packing geome￾tries; e.g., hexagonal, face and body centred cubic, simple cubic, random). Krupa et al.
[14] found fitting values as A = 5.5 ± 0.7 and ϕmax = 0.6 (approximately) for the compos￾ite they studied.
2.2.3 Example
Let us take an example of an antistatic thermoplastic shield to be designed with HDPE
of melt-flow index (MFI) of about 6 g/10 min, a 99.3% pure graphite non-spherical
powder of average particle size of 2.6 μm, thermal conductivity of the particle as
80 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)159.6 W/m.K. and that of HDPE as 0.53 W/m.K. The Young’s modulus in tension is 1.07
GPa for HDPE and 20GPa for graphite powder and the corresponding densities are
0.97 and 2.25 g/ml. The Poisson’s ratio of HDPE is taken as 0.40. The loading of graphite
was up to 30% by volume of the composite. The predicted Young’s modulus and ther￾mal conductivity of this composite with respect to the filler volume fraction is to be
calculated with the help of the various models described above, for comparison.
Figure 2.1 shows the composite Tensile Modulus calculated for HDPE-Graphite
particulate composite using the mixing rule (eq. 2.4), generalized model by Nielsen
(eq. 2.6), Ogorckiewicz and Weidman (O&W) model on series stress (eq. 2.9) and cube￾in-cube model (eq. 2.10), Bourkas model (eq. 2.11) and Kerner-Nielsen model (eq. 2.13).
The prediction by the mixing rule showed highest reinforcement, while the series
stress model showed a negative growth with increase in the volume fraction of graph￾ite. However, except the mixing rule and the series stress, all the other four composite
models gave somewhat close results.
Figure 2.2 shows the composite conductivity, calculated using the models by Hashin￾Shtrikman (eq. 2.14), Budiansky (eq. 2.15) taking the binary phase, and by Lewis￾Nielsen (eqs. 2.16 and 2.17). The specific gravities of HDPE and graphite were taken as
0.97 and 2.25, respectively. Graphite volume fraction was taken from 0 to 0.30 (50%
HDPE and 50% Graphite by weight). For the Lewis-Nielsen model, the values of A and
ϕmax values taken are 6 and 0.6, respectively.
2.2.4 Electrical properties
One of the important applications of particulate thermoplastic composites is in the
field of electrically conducting material, which is a structural component in large elec￾0.0
0 10 20 30 40
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
Ec, GPa
5.0
6.0
7.0
Bourkas
Kemer-Nielsen
Mixing Rule
Generalisedmodel
O&W (Series stress)
O&W (Cube-in-Cube)
8.0
9.0
Fig. 2.1: Tensile modulus of HDPE-Graphite composite: theoretical models.
2.2 Particulate thermoplastic composite 81trical power systems, such as in EMI shielding, antistatic sheets and floor mats, radar
absorbing sheets, etc. The particulate fillers, especially metal powders such as carbonyl
iron, nickel, silver, conducting carbon, etc. are widely used to impart electrical conduc￾tivity, similar to a semiconductor. All thermoplastics are basically electrical insulators,
having electrical resistivity in the range of 1012 to 1016 Ohm-cm [2, 14, 15, 24, 25].
In this part of discussion, the so-called conducting polymers, having linear chain
with conjugate double bonds, are not included as these polymers do not have other
structural properties like a typical engineering thermoplastic. Some examples are pol￾yacetylene, polythiophene, polyaniline, polypyrrole, etc. Even those conducting poly￾mers have electrical conductivity that is much lower than typical semiconductors,
and need to be doped with ionic molecules so that electron hopping is possible from
one chain to the other, which is actually the cause of electronic conductivity of these
polymers. Typical examples are polyaniline doped with acids such as H2SO4, HClO4,
HNO3 HI, HCl, HBR, etc. [26, 27] These doped conducting polymers can have conductiv￾ity as high as 0.10 to 102 s/cm (undoped about 10−6 to 10−4 s/cm) and are best used in
organic coating (paint) as a conducting material dispersed in a resin matrix, such as
acrylic or polyurethanes.
The mathematical models describing the effect of conducting filler inclusion on
electrical conductivity is almost similar to thermal conductivity models. Hashin and
Shtrikman [21] derived the following equation for the prediction of an articulate com￾posite conductivity, based on the composite sphere assemblage (CSA) model.
μc = μp +
ϕf
1
μf − μp
+
1 − ϕf
3μp
(2:17)
Hashin-Shtrikman
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35
Lewis-Nielsen
λc W/m K
Budiansky
Fig. 2.2: Thermal conductivity of HDPE-Graphite composite: theoretical models.
82 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)The same can be applicable to magnetic permeability, electrical permittivity, thermal
conductivity, diffusivity, etc.
However, the increase in conductivity with conducting filler loading is not linear,
and has a percolation threshold concentration of the filler at which the conductivity
sharply increases, similar to the trend of thermal conductivity. When the volume frac￾tion of the conducting filler reaches the maximum packing, known as the percolation
threshold, the conductivity abruptly increases by several folds and thereafter reaches
the maximum conductivity of the composite. Below the threshold, the conductivity is
very low, almost equal to or slightly higher than that of the polymer, and increases
slowly. Above the threshold also, the increase is slow till the maximum value.
Huang and Wu [2] studied the electrical conductivity of three types of ethylene￾vinyl acetate (EVA) copolymer filled with carbon black and reported a decrease in vol￾ume resistivity by a ratio of 1012 for all the three EVAs at a CB loading of 25% (by wt).
The percolation threshold concentration was 5–10% CB, depending on the type of EVA.
Beyond the percolation threshold, the decrease in resistivity was slow, as expected.
Krupa and Chodák [5] studied polystyrene (PS) and HDPE filled with two types of
graphite particles of average size 15 to 40 μm, and evaluated the various physical
properties. The conductivity ratio of the composite to polymer (σc/σp) of PS showed
100 times higher than that of HDPE composite with similar graphite particles size at
similar CB loading. Another observation was that the smaller particles showed better
reinforcement in terms of electrical conduction. The percolation threshold was almost
the same for the HDPE and PS filled with the particles of the same size. Krupa et al.
[14] studied HDPE-nickel (average particle size: 2–20 μm) composite for electrical con￾ductivity and found the percolation concentration range of 0.03 to 0.10 volume frac￾tion (mid value = 0.08) of the nickel filler. The conductivity of the composite was
enhanced compared to HDPE by a factor of 1022 for nickel volume fraction of 0.30.
Percolation is defined as a point of inflection where the eq. (2.17) is discontinuous.
An empirical equation to define this point is suggested as [5, 28]:
logð Þ σC=σm = B 1 − exp½−aϕf 
 n
(2:18)
where B, a and n are empirical constants and can be determined through experimental
result. σ is the conductivity, c and m denote the composite and matrix, respectively, and
ϕf is the volume fraction of the filler. The coefficient B is approximately given by:
B ffi logð Þ σC max=σm (2:19)
where σCmax is the maximum conductivity attained for the composite.
The authors also suggested the percolation concentration from the following
equation:
ϕi = ϕC = lnð Þ n =a (2:20)
2.2 Particulate thermoplastic composite 83where ϕi is the volume fraction of the filler at the point of inflection, defined as the
percolation threshold. The authors [5] summarized the sets of values of B, a and n and
also calculated the percolation threshold for each polymer-graphite combination
from experimental results.
The percolation threshold volume fraction of the conductive site is related to the
maximum packing factor (F) as:
ϕC = XCF (2:21)
where XC is a percolation probability factor and the values of XC and F are such that
the ϕC is = 0.16 in evenly distributed filler with the most probable packing in a poly￾mer matrix [15, 29].
The packing factor is most important for a filler-polymer system as it is the pack￾ing limit of the filler that is equal to the highest possible filler volume fraction at a
particular type of packing. It decides the conducting connectivity through a continu￾ous path and the maximum reinforcement by filler. The packing factor can be calcu￾lated as:
F = Vf
Vf + Vp
(2:22)
where Vf is the volume occupied by the filler at the highest possible filler volume frac￾tion and Vp is the volume occupied by the polymer in the space among the filler par￾ticles [15].
For spherical particulate fillers with the most probable packing and uniformly
dispersed in a polymer matrix, F = 0.64. Beyond the percolation concentration of the
filler, the conductivity changes with the filler volume fraction as [15]:
σC = ϕ − ϕc ð Þt (2:23)
where ϕc is the filler volume fraction at the percolation threshold, ϕ > ϕc and t is the
critical exponent = 1.6 to 1.9. The experimental value can be different due to the
filler–polymer interaction, clustering, uniformity in distribution, particle packing
type, etc. The above equation can also be written in a normalized form:
ð Þ σ − σc =ð Þ σm − σc = ϕ − ϕc ð Þ= F − ϕc ½  ð Þ t for ϕ > ϕc (2:24)
where σm is the maximum conductivity of the composite.
Mamunya et al. [15] stated that for a randomly distributed spherical conducting
filler in a non-conducting matrix, F = 0.64, XC = 0.25 and ϕf = 0.16. The authors used car￾bonyl nickel (10 μm) and copper (100 μm) particles as conducting fillers in PVC and
obtained the percolation threshold in the range of 4 to 8.5%, depending on the filler
type, and the critical exponent (t) was also much higher than the usual range 1.6–1.9.
84 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)At the threshold point, the conductivity abruptly increased by approximately 1017
folds compared to the pristine polymer (PVC).
Ding et al. [4] studied the effect of a highly conducting carbon black filler (resistiv￾ity approximately 0.8 Ohm-cm) for a PP-CB composite on the change in conductivity
and on the positive temperature coefficient (PTC) effect. The commercially obtained
carbon black was surface treated with a silane-coupling agent and heat treated for
improvement in dispersion in PP. The authors observed a 6-fold decrease in electrical
volume resistivity at the percolation threshold filler volume fraction of 0.03. The au￾thors also reported a positive temperature coefficient (PTC) effect of the CB-filled PP
near about 145–150 °C (onset of increase in resistivity) and found maximum resistivity
at about 165–176 °C (melting region), depending on the carbon black content in the
composite. The addition of the treated carbon black also improved the mechanical
properties.
Altay et al. [6] developed a particulate composite of polyamide 4, 6 (PA46) filled
with synthetic graphite (SG) of 50μm average particle size. There was a 105
-fold in￾crease in the electrical conductivity when the SG content increased from 30% to 40%,
and the overall increase in conductivity was 1011-folds, compared to pristine PA46.
However, addition of 5% graphene nanoplatelets (10–20 nm) improved the conductiv￾ity by another 102
-folds. However, the composites showed reduction in mechanical
strength, but increase in elastic modulus, indicating harder and lower flexibility.
Joseph et al. [25] developed a composite EMI shield with polyvinylidene fluoride￾carbonyl iron powder (PVDF-CIP), with maximum 50% volume of the filler. CIP is
known to be highly conducting material, being a small particle (1–3 μm), while PVDF
is a flexible thermoplastic, having excellent dielectric properties, excellent atmo￾spheric and thermal stability. The electrical conductivity of the composite with the
highest filler content was maximum about 10–11 S/cm, and the EMI shielding was ob￾served to be more due to the absorption of electromagnetic wave energy rather than
by reflection.
However, some thermoplastic composites are designed to improve the electrical
insulation property along with dielectric strength and frequency-dependent dielectric
properties for many industrial applications. Insulation properties of non-polar ther￾moplastics are good in general, but the ease of processing and tailoring the properties
are not as good as those of thermoplastic polyurethane. Thermoplastic polyurethane
(TPUs) based on polyether polyol and aromatic diisocyanate are highly stable and are
commercially available in a wide range of hardness, viscoelastic properties and offer￾ing resistance to moisture and to many chemicals.
Ramraj [30] used PTFE powder (300–600 μm size) as a filler in thermoplastic poly￾urethane (TPU). The PTFE was used for a maximum of 10 wt% in the composite and a 10-
fold increase in volume resistivity and substantial improvement in dielectric strength
were observed. However, there was a decrease in mechanical strength and increase in
flexibility.
2.2 Particulate thermoplastic composite 85He at al. [31] developed a filler of core-shell structure using a polydopamine￾treated 40–100 nm sized titanium carbide particles (PDA-TiC) and loaded in a TPU for
improvement of dielectric properties, specifically frequency-dependent dielectric con￾stant (μ′) and dielectric loss factor (tan δ) in the KHz to MHz range. The dielectric con￾stant and the loss factor both improved substantially on adding the filler system, and
the increase was monotonic with the doping of TiC. The effect is reduced as the fre￾quency is increased. The reason for the increase of complex dielectric property at
lower frequencies was suggested by the authors as the polarization effect of the inter￾face between PDA and TiC, the disruption of hydrogen bond among the chains of TPU
due to the presence of TiC and the corresponding increase in the dipole polarization
of the TPU chains. However, relaxation of dipoles is a strongly frequency-dependent
phenomenon. Polarization effects are not observed at a higher frequency due to the
mismatch in the relaxation frequency of the dipoles with that of the dynamic electric
field. The dielectric strength improved to some extent for PDA-TiC filled composite up
to a certain doping content and beyond that, the strength gradually decreased with
dopant content. The dielectric strength of the TPU with undoped TiC was less than
that of pristine TPU.
2.3 Short-fibre composite
Short fibres play an important role in reinforcing thermoplastics for the improvement
in their overall mechanical strength, thermal and electrical properties and also bar￾rier properties. The advantages of short fibres are the ease of mixing and processing,
higher reinforcing effect compared to particulate fillers and near-homogeneous com￾posite with almost isotropic properties. The methods of composite manufacturing can
be hot compression moulding of the polymer and the chopped fibre or hot pressing of
the chopped fibre-polymer prepreg, extrusion and injection moulding. Chopped glass
fibres are most common among short fibres, although carbon and Kevlar short fibres
are also used in some thermoplastic composites. There are some exceptional short fi￾bres such as PEEK fibres in thermoplastic matrix, for example, single-polymer com￾posite. Generally, the length of such short fibres is 2–6 mm and their cross sections
are in microns, similar to long fibres. In fact, short fibres or chopped strands are pro￾duced by chopping the long fibres.
Apart from filler–polymer interaction, the reinforcement by a short fibre depends
on the aspect ratio (length-to-diameter), and below a critical aspect ratio, the rein￾forcement is almost similar to the agglomerated particulate filler. Similarly, the visco￾elastic damping by a shot-fibre composite is more if the fibre is beyond a critical
length so that friction damping and longitudinal-to-shear mode conversion under vi￾bration significantly contribute to more damping than particulate-filled thermoplas￾tics. The advantages of the effect of enhanced localized loss of shear strain energy and
frictional damping is neither possible by particulate fillers nor by the continuous fi￾86 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)bres. The other advantage is the less possibility of agglomeration (bunching) and entan￾glement. The size range of short fibres as such is quite big enough for inter-particle
physical bonding, and short enough for any entanglement. This facilitates almost homo￾geneous dispersion and distribution of the short fibres in the polymer matrix.
2.3.1 Mathematical models
There are various mathematical attempts to analyze and describe the properties of a
short fibre thermoplastic composite. The most discussed model, way back in 1938, was
given by Guthand Gold [32], while predicting the composite’s viscosity, and Guth used
the same expression for carbon black particles forming agglomerates in a rod-shape,
cube, etc., similar to a short cylindrical inclusion.
However, there is a critical length of the short fibre at which the reinforcement is
optimum. The shear stress at the end of a fibre is zero and gradually increases with
distance along the surface as the load is transferred to the fibre from the matrix. Max￾imum reinforcement is achieved when the fibre is long enough for complete stress
transfer. The minimum length required for this condition is given by the following
equation by Rosen [33] using a shear-lag analysis. It was assumed that the matrix and
the fibre are both elastic materials (no viscoelastic loss).
δ
d = 1
2
Ef
Gm
1 − ν
1=2
f
ν
1=2
f
2
4
3
5
1=2
(2:25)
There are classical rules in mixing theory for describing the strength of perfectly
aligned short fibres in a composite [34]:
σc = σf Vf F lð Þ =lc + σ′
m 1 − Vf
  (2:26)
where σ′m is the stress on the matrix at the breaking strain of the fibre, l is the length
and lc is the critical length of the short fibre. The function F(l/lc) is ideally maximum 1
at l = lc, and it is the factor that defines the efficiency of the reinforcement when the
length of the fibre is below the critical value. However, considering the higher stress
concentration at the end of the fibre, the upper bound of F was found by the FEM
method as 0.5, at a high fibre aspect ratio [35].
For non-aligned fibre orientation, the strength is described by:
σc = Cσf Vf F lð Þ =lc + σ′
m 1 − Vf
  (2:27)
The value of the coefficient C varies on orientation, for example, Cox [36] used the
classical shear-lag analysis and estimated C = 1/3 for 2-D and 1/6 for 3D orientation of
the fibre.
2.3 Short-fibre composite 87Halpin-Sai models [37–40] suggest the elastic modulus of short-fibre composites
in oriented and transverse directions as:
E11 = Em
1 + ξηVf
1 − ηVf
  (2:28)
where
η = Ef
	
Em − 1
Ef
	
Em + ξ
, ξ = 2 l
d
  (2:29)
The transverse modulus E22 is the same, with a difference that ξ = 2 in that case [38]. A
modified Halpin-Tsai equation is used for the overall composite modulus, combining
longitudinal and transverse moduli, assuming uniform distribution of the short fibre
[40]:
Ec
Em
= 3
8
1 + ξf ηf ?Vf
1 − ηf ?Vf
 ! +
5
8
1 + 2ηf TVf
1 − ηf TVf
 ! (2:30)
Here, Vf is the volume fraction of the filler and Em is the matrix elastic modulus, while
ξ and η are defined as in eq. (2.29).
Load transfer models based on the shear lag theory [41, 42] are based on some
assumptions such as the fibre is a circular cylinder, the fibre to matrix adhesion is
perfect, the axial stress around it reduces with distance of the fibre surface from the
matrix, and is equal to the general stress at a certain distance R from the fibre. Both
the fibre and the matrix behave elastically with no loss; the axial stress at the fibre
end is zero; and the fibre–fibre interaction is absent. Here, the fibre surrounded by a
cylindrical matrix element becomes the composite element in such an analysis as
shown in Fig. 2.3. Lacroix et al. derived that the maximum interfacial and axial stress
values in a short-fibre polymer composite occur at the fibre end and at the centre of
the fibre, respectively. Both fibres are fully elastic in nature.
In the case of perfect adhesion between the fibre and the matrix, load transfer occurs
in a purely elastic manner and the following stress distribution is obtained from the
shear lag theory [42]:
d
Matrix
Fiber
t
dm
Fig. 2.3: A model element of a cylindrical fibre in a cylindrical matrix.
88 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)Axial stress: σt = Etε + a sinh 2ð Þ nx=d + b cosh 2ð Þ nx=d (2:31)
Shear stress: τ = − n
2
½  b sinh 2ð Þ nx=d + a cosh 2ð Þ nx=d (2:32)
where
n2 = Em
Efð Þ 1 + νm ln 2ð Þ R=d (2:33)
The interface radial stress arising out of Poisson’s contraction for perfect adhesion at
the interface and when the matrix element diameter (dm) is 100 times larger than
fibre diameter (d), is given by:
σPois = Ef Em νf − νm
 
Efð Þ 1 + νm + Em 1 + νf
  1 − 2νf
  ε (2:34)
where νf and νm are the Poisson’s ratios, Ef and Em are elastic modulus of fibre and
the matrix, respectively, ε is the axial strain and s is the aspect ratio = (l/d) of the fibre.
The maximum axial and shear stress values are:
σf ,max = Ef ε½  1 − sechðnsÞ
τmax = 1
2
nEf ε tanhðnsÞ
(2:35)
Carrara and McGarry [43] derived the force in the matrix surrounding a discontinu￾ous fibre at any distance x from the fibre end (x is in the perpendicular direction to
the axial load) as:
P = Ef Af ε 1 −
sinh β l
2 − x
 
cosh β l
2
 
2
6
6
4
3
7
7
5
(2:36)
where
β = H
Ef Af
 1=2
and H = 2πGm
ln rm
	
rf
  (2:37)
The shear stress parallel to the direction of fibre’s length at any point on the interface
is given by the authors as:
τint = σcK1
sinh β l
2 − x
 
cosh βð Þ l=2 (2:38)
where
2.3 Short-fibre composite 89K1 = BAf Ef − Em
 
2πrf Em
(2:39)
σc is the uniform composite stress and ε is the composite strain applied in the axial
direction.
For a randomly oriented short-fibre composite, Tsai-Pagano model [44, 45] may
be more effectively used to predict the Young’s modulus and shear modulus as also
the tensile and shear strengths:
Young’s Modulus: Ec = 3
8 Vf Ef + 1 − Vf
 Em

  +
5
8
Ef Em
Vf Em + 1 − Vf
 Ef
(2:40)
Tensile strength: σc = 3
8 Vf σf + 1 − Vf
 σm

  +
5
8
σf σm
Vf σm + 1 − Vf
 σf
(2:41)
Shear Modulus: Gc = 3
8 VfGf + 1 − Vf
 Gm

  +
5
8
GfGm
VfGm + 1 − Vf
 Gf
(2:42)
The first term on the right hand side is the Voigt model, assuming the fibre is oriented
along the direction of the applied force and the second term is the Reuss model, as￾suming the fibre’s alignment is in a direction that is transversal to the force.
2.3.2 Example
Let us take an example of a graphite fibre-loaded thermoplastic elastomer (TPE) hav￾ing Young’s modulus = 1.242 × 109 N/m2 and shear modulus of 4.43 × 108 N/m2
, Poisson’s
ratio of 0.40, ultimate tensile strength of 5.6 × 107 N/m2 and elongation-at-break of
about 123%. The graphite fibre is 0.5 μm in diameter and four samples of varying av￾erage lengths –7.5 μm, 15 mm, 25 mm and 50 μm are considered. The morphology of
one sample by SEM is shown in the Fig. 2.4. The average aspect ratio, defined as
length-to-diameter is therefore 15, 30, 50 and 100. The Young’s modulus of the graphite
along the axis is about 1.42 × 1011 N/m2
.
The axial modulus of the composite for perfect alignment of the fibre along the
axis of the load application is calculated using eq. (2.28), together with eq. (2.29), for
fibre volume fractions of 0.0422 to 0.166 (10 phr to 45 phr) and the ratio of the Young’s
modulus of the composite to the matrix is shown in Fig. 2.5. The transverse modulus
for this condition was also calculated and plotted in the figure.
The transverse modulus is the same for all aspect ratios of the fibre, obviously
because the value of ξ is 2 and hence η is also constant at 0.974. The example shows
that the modulus of the composite increases with aspect ratio. However, the increase
in not linear for any fixed fibre content. Figure 2.6 shows the modulus ratio Ec/Em for
two volume fractions: 0.081 (20 phr) and 0.165 (45 phr) of graphite fibre against fibre
90 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)aspect ratio (l/d), theoretically calculated taking the matrix and graphite fibre proper￾ties. The optimum aspect ratio is near 400 as seen in the figure, for both the volume
fractions. This value is for an ideal reinforcement, assuming no filler–filler interac￾tion and the interface of the filler–matrix is perfect.
In a real situation, these are not realized because the small particles tend to ag￾glomerate, and more so when they have polar groups or when there is a possibility of
hydrogen bonding; the interface of the filer–matrix is never perfect because at a criti￾cal shear stress, there will be a slip at the interface due to the large difference in the
shear modulus of the filler and the matrix. If the interactive bond is a physical bond,
then this slip is a reversible phenomenon.
When the fibres are not perfectly aligned and are uniformly distributed, the rein￾forcement is reduced. This is demonstrated in Fig. 2.7 by calculating the modulus ratio
Fig. 2.4: SEM micrograph of a sample of graphite.
18 1/d = 15
1/d = 30
1/d = 50
1/d = 100
Transverse
15
12
9
6
3
0 0.03 0.06 0.09 0.12 0.15 0.18
Ec/Em
Fig. 2.5: Axial Young’s modulus of TPE/Graphite fibre composites at different aspect ratios of
the graphite fiber.
2.3 Short-fibre composite 91by eq. (2.30). The effective reinforcement is obviously much lower than the perfect
alignment as shown in Fig. 2.5 above. In this case, the transverse stress is calculated
taking the ξ value as 2 and the corresponding η is calculated using the axial Young’s
modulus of the graphite fibre.
A comparison of the Guth equation for the composite modulus for a non-spherical
shape of the filler such as rod-like agglomerate of carbon black particle filler in a rub￾ber, and the modified Halpin-Tsai equation (eq. 2.30) is done for two aspect ratios. The
Guth equation used was [46]:
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0 100 200 300
aspect ratio (l/d) of filler
400 500
Vf = 0.081
Vf = 0.165
600
Ec/Em
Fig. 2.6: Ratio of composite’s to matrix’s modulus at different aspect ratios of graphite fibre (theoretical
calculation as example).
7
1/d = 15
1/d = 30
1/d = 50
1/d = 100
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0 0.03 0.06 0.09 0.12 0.15 0.18
Graphite Vf
Ec/ E
m
Fig. 2.7: Reinforcement by randomly oriented graphite fibre in the thermoplastic elastomer.
92 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)EC = Em 1 + 0.67ϕ.Vf + 1.62ϕ2
V2
f
h i (2:43)
where ϕ is the aspect ratio of the filler. Figure 2.8 shows the comparison of these two
theories for the same thermoplastic elastomer filled with the graphite filler.
It is seen that the semi-empirical Guth equation yields quite a different prediction, a
much higher reinforcement for the same aspect ratio of 15 compared to the modified
Halpin-Tsai model for random orientation of the filler (eq. 2.30). This is obvious be￾cause the semi-empirical equation was developed for the carbon black reinforcement
of elastomers.
It is well known that carbon black reinforces a polymer more than any other
graphite because carbon black, as a result of its manufacturing process, contains
some organic functional groups that enhance the intermolecular interaction with the
polymers, while graphite is a much purer form of carbon and therefore does not rein￾force to that extent as carbon black. Hence, the prediction of carbon black-based com￾posite is higher and also non-linear, which fairly agrees with experiments on rubber
reinforcement with carbon black having some rod-shaped agglomerate. Secondly, it is
seen from the figure that a spherical filler (l/d = 1) does not augment mechanical mod￾ulus to the extent a fibre or plate-type filler (l/d1) can.
Unal and Mimaroglu [47] experimentally measured the tensile and flexural prop￾erties and Izod impact energy of short-fibre composites of polyamide (Nylon 6) filled
with a mineral fibre (RF-MF) and E-glass fibre (GF), having average diameters of
5.5 μm and 10.5 μm and lengths of 150–200 μm and 3000–4500 μm, respectively. The
Young’s modulus in both tensile and flexure modes were seen to be much higher for
glass-fibre reinforcement, almost 4 times the pristine PA at 30% GF content by weight
14 HT:1/d = 15
Guth:1/d = 1
12 Guth:1/d = 15
10
8
6
4
2
0
0 0.03 0.06 0.09
Graphite Vf
0.12 0.15 0.18
Ec/ Em
Fig. 2.8: Reinforcement by randomly oriented graphite fibre in the thermoplastic elastomer: Comparison
of the modified Halpin-Tsai with the Guth model.
2.3 Short-fibre composite 93as against 2 times by the rock fibre at the same filler content. A comparison of the
mathematical model, as per eq. 2.30 (random orientation of short fibber), with the ex￾perimental result by the authors is done and the results are shown in Fig. 2.9. For the
purpose of the calculations, the Elastic modulus of the RF-MF was taken as 70GPa (av￾erage value), as determined for similar mineral fibres by Bombac et al. [48] and that
for short-GF (E-glass) as 80 GPa [49]. The volume fraction of each filler in each com￾posite was calculated, taking the weight percent of the respective short-fibre and PA,
6 and the densities of each component from ref [45]. The tensile strength was in￾creased from 69 MPa for pristine PA 6 to about 165 MPa for 30 wt% short GF, but only
up to 81 MPa for the same loading of the mineral fibre. The stiffness (Young’s modu￾lus) of the short fibres effectively improved at the expense of the % elongation at
break, which was seen to be drastically reduced from 105% for pristine PA 6 to about
3.5% and 17% for even 10 wt% loading of short GF and mineral fibre, respectively. The
loss of flexibility is one disadvantage of brittle fibres. A combination of these two
types of fibres also resulted in similar mechanical properties, and much closer to the
properties of the glass-fibre composite.
Lou et al. [50] reported an interesting method of improvement of short-glass-fibre PA 66
composite in respect of dimensional stability and properties, upon injection moulding,
using the supporting mould by three routes of hydrothermal conditioning treatment, in￾cluding immersion in a boiling water bath and drying at an elevated temperature. The
dimensional accuracy was improved after the hydrothermal treatment. More noticeable
improvement was for mechanical strength in tension and bending, as these improved
by about 140% and 160%, respectively. The authors explained that the hydrothermal con￾ditioning reduced the residual stress in the composite that is caused due to moulding.
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Ec/Em
RF-MF: HT Model
RF-MF: Expmt.
GF: HTModel
GF-Expmt.
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2
Fiber Vf
Fig. 2.9: Experimental and Halpin Tsai prediction of the Young’s modulus of the two types of
short-fibre-filled Polyamide (PA 6) composites, Reprinted with permission from Unal, H., Mimaroglu, Sci.
Eng. Compos. Mater. 21 (2014), 323–328. © 2014, De Gruyter Publishing Company.
94 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)Zheng and co-workers [51] reported improvement in the hardness and tribological prop￾erties of different commercial PTFE-short-glass-fibre composites with molybdenum sul￾phide (as additive for reduction of coefficient of friction). Li and others [52] also studied
PEEK-chopped glass-fibre composite for possible improvements of tribological proper￾ties. The authors used a commercial product of 30 wt% short-glass-fibre-loaded PEEK
and evaluated the tensile, flexural and tribological properties by a specifically designed
ball-on-disc wear test apparatus. The tensile and flexural strengths improved to 1.65
times of the unfilled poly(ether ether ketone) (PEEK), but the flexural modulus improved
better (2.4 times) compared to the tensile modulus (1.75 times).The coefficient of friction
increased by 50% for the composite compared to that of unfilled PEEK at lower load, but
the difference substantially reduced when a higher load was applied for the wear test.
However, the wear substantially reduced for the composite, by about 65% at low load,
and by about 40% at the highest load applied.
Ramsaroop et al. [53] studied fracture toughness of PP-chopped glass fibre (l = 15 mm,
d = 10 μm) composite by the determination of Mode 1 stress intensity factor K1, accord￾ing to ASTM D 5045. The authors compared the fracture toughness of chopped glass￾fibre composite with MMT nanoclay composite and woven glass-fibre composites and
found that the chopped glass-fibre composite showed the highest fracture toughness
among these three types. The critical stress intensity factor for chopped glass fibre-PP
composite was about 4 times that of pristine PP, and the failure load was also more
than 4 times that for PP. The results show that the short fibre incorporation at 0.3
weight fraction can reinforce a polymer more effectively than nanoclay or continuous
random fibre. Yuan and others [54] studied the properties of extruded pipes made with
a commercial short glass fibre-PP composite (30% SGF by weight) blended with HDPE.
The mass ratio was HDPE/SGFPP = 60/40. The composite pipes were extruded using a
shearing-drawing two-dimensional compound stress-field pipe-extrusion device. The
axial strength was not much improved compared to that of the conventional composite
pipe, but the circumferential (circular) strength improved substantially (about 37%). Ari
and co-workers [55] compared the properties of PP-based composites filled with chopped
glass fibre, carbon fibre and aramid fibre, each 6 mm in length, and the maximum vol￾ume fraction was 0.30. The authors used a twin screw extruder to make the composites.
The tensile strength of the carbon fibre was about 18% higher than that of glass fibre
and 42% higher than that of aramid fibre. However, the authors observed the maximum
strength by chopped glass-fibre inclusion at 30% by volume, although the values are al￾most similar for all the three chopped fibres at the same loading. The fibre efficiency
was best for aramid, possibly due to more compatibility. The flexural strength of glass￾fibre composite was remarkably higher than of other composites. However, the impact
force was least for chopped glass-fibre composite and highest for chopped carbon-fibre
composite at all volume fractions.
Kabiri and others [56] developed the PP-short-chopped glass-fibre composite (PP￾SCGF) for potential use as bone fracture fixation plates. The process of making the
composite plate was by hot pressing of the PP-SCGF in a mould. The Young’s modulus
2.3 Short-fibre composite 95in tension and flexure and the strengths and impact energy of such a composite was
seen to be meeting the desired requirement. The tensile modulus was 3 times the un￾filled PP and the corresponding strength was 1.5 times that of unfilled PP when the
SCGF was 15 volume% in the composite.
2.3.3 Natural short-fibre composites
Natural fibres such as fibres of flax, jute, hemp, coir, sisal, bamboo, rice husk, etc. are
being used in untreated and treated forms for the development of more environmen￾tally acceptable and biocompatible/degradable or recyclable thermoplastic compo￾sites. For example, Kuruvilla and Mattoso [57] discussed the different composites with
sisal fibre reinforcement way back in 1998. Recently, Rabbi et al. [58] reviewed re￾search works pertaining to natural fibre-based thermoplastic and thermoset compo￾sites filled with both long and short natural fibres. For short natural fibres, various
aspects of the injection moulding process for thermoplastic composites were dis￾cussed. An example of a completely biocompatible/degradable composite is a short
sisal fibre used as filler in starch-based polymer by Alvarez et al. [59, 60] However,
synthetic polymers are also being used, such as in PP by Joseph et al. [61] and PLA by
Samouh et al. [62].
Natural fibres are polar, due to the presence of -OH groups and therefore, hydro￾philic, while many host polymers are hydrophobic such as PE,PP, PVC, PLA, etc. There￾fore, the interface of the fibre and the matrix is poor if the fibre is not treated specially
for composite application. Secondly, natural fibres are not as thermally stable as syn￾thetic fibres. Hence, natural fibres are often treated to improve their reinforcing ability,
compatibility and thermal stability. Most common is alkali treatment [59], which re￾moves the lignin, wax, and oil on the surface of natural fibres and increases the rough￾ness of the surface of fibres. This ensures a better interlocking of the fibres with the
polymer matrix. Sun and Mingming [63] studied the effect of sol–gel modification of
sisal fibre on PP-based composite’s properties. Apart from chemical treatment, physical
treatments are also done, for example, using a coupling agent for the improvement of
compatibility. Sood and Dwivedi [64] reviewed the various treatments on natural fibres
being reported in literature since 2000. The authors gave an approximate analysis of
the composition of the different natural fibres. Cellulose is the main component while
other ingredients, in small quantities, are lignin, hemicellulose, pectin and wax. Among
the fibres, the most available are jute, wood fibrils, cotton, hemp and sisal. In Asian
coastal areas, coconut coir is another short fibre, which is a potential reinforcing filler.
Hassani and co-workers studied the injection moulding process with the prediction of
mould filling of PP-coir short-fibre composite [65] using the melt-flow process, applying
the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation to study the flow front, and claimed to be in
good agreement with the experimental results of moulding. In a separate article, the
authors also predicted the mechanical properties of the composite [45]. The authors de￾96 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)termined the gradual decrease in fibre length by grinding, sieving, extrusion with PP
and injection moulding of the composite to obtain an almost homogeneous length of
2.25 mm and an average diameter of 290 μm. The tensile strength did not improve
much on 10 wt% coir addition, but the Young’s modulus was remarkably increased by
about 16%, compared to unfilled PP. Further, it was observed from the predictive analy￾sis that the self-consistent model and the Tsai-Pagano model were more suitable than
other models for mechanical properties such as Young’s modulus, tensile strength, etc.
Adeniyi et al. [66] published a review of coir-filled polymeric composites.
2.3.4 Bio-degradable composites
Research on natural fibre-based bio-compatible and bio-degradable composites is ever
increasing as an obvious necessity. Till now, the strength and thermal properties of such
composites are not in any scale near to those of synthetic non-degradable thermoplastic￾based composites reinforced with glass, carbon, aramid, etc. Therefore, many research￾ers are working on the development of synthetic polymer-natural fibre combinations to
obtain more acceptable alternatives. PE, PP and poly(butyleneadipate-co-terephthalate),
which are non-degradable are used for making natural fibre composites, where at least,
on an average, 20% strength and elastic modulus enhancement is possible, by a simple
theoretical calculation using the Halpin Tsai or Tsai-Pagano models. Some natural fibres
have tensile strength ranging from 400 MPa to 1000 MPa such as cotton, hemp, flax, jute,
sisal, pineapple, abaca, ramie and banana, with Young’s modulus of 30 to 80 GPa. Jute,
hemp, sisal and pineapple fibres have both maximum strength and modulus. The prob￾lem of waste disposal of synthetic polymer- short-fibre thermoplastic composites can be
reduced by using hybrid short fibres like a combination of glass-sisal, glass-jute, etc.,
with an added advantage of higher strength in both tensile and flexure modes. At pres￾ent, bio-degradable thermoplastic composites are being used in some sectors such as
components in automobiles, furniture, packaging, household small items and fancy arte￾facts, but in limited scale. Considering the recyclability/reprocessability of thermoplastic
short-fibre composites, the use of many natural polymers and fibres has the disadvan￾tage of stability during melt processing, lower strength and modulus, and durability in
various application environments. Fully bio-degradable composites made from poly(lac￾tic acid) (PLA), modified starch, cellulose derivatives, poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate), poly(3-
hydroxybutyrate),poly(3-hydroxybutirate-3-hydroxyvalerate), polycaprolactone (PCL),
etc. have the advantage of disposal by bio-degradation, and are not dependent on recy￾cling by melt processing such as injection moulding or extrusion. End-of-life options for
bio-compatible/degradable thermoplastic-composites are (1) aerobic digestion (domestic
and industrial composting), (2) anaerobic digestion (to biogas), (3) mechanical recycling,
(4) chemical recycling, (5) incineration, (6) land filling, (7) metabolization by soil or with
organism. Recycling at industrial scale has not been taken up till the present day due to
purely economic considerations since the scale of bio-composite production has not
2.3 Short-fibre composite 97been reached for cost effective recycling. For example, the cost of a polyethylene bag is
much less than a PLA-based bag; hence the production scale of PLA is far less than that
of polyethylene, consequently, recycling of PLA composite is not economically viable.
2.4 Nanocomposite
Nanocomposites of thermoplastics have been, of late, the most researched materials. The
high reinforcement ability of nano particles has opened a new generation of high￾performance thermoplastic composites. The reinforcement ability being directly propor￾tional to the surface area of a filler, nano fillers are very effective even in very minute
quantity, commonly 0.1 to 5%. This results in substantial reduction in the weight of the
composite and hence saves transportation energy. On a simple analysis, work/energy of
moving an object is directly proportional to mass, and hence even 10% reduction in
mass is equivalent to a 10% reduction in energy consumption. Because of the high physi￾cal force of attraction with any molecule, there is an obvious advantage of a higher rein￾forcement effect compared to micron-sized particles but the disadvantage is also of a
higher extent of agglomeration. The high agglomeration of nano particles leads to diffi￾culty in dispersion in thermoplastics because the melt viscosity of the thermoplastics is
very high, and is non-linear with shear rate. A typical apparent viscosity of molten PP is
in the range of 50 to 280 Pa.s at the corresponding shear rates of 600 to 30/s at 190 °C
and the viscosity-shear rate relationship is in logarithmic form. This implies that to re￾duce the viscosity by about six folds, the shear rate has to be increased by 20 times.
Therefore, to obtain homogeneity in dispersion and distribution of the nano particles in
thermoplastics, high shear force in a mixing machine, such as an internal mixer or ex￾truder is needed. The best way of mixing nano particles in a thermoplastic is by using a
twin-screw extruder, either as single or multiple pass, as needed. The morphology of the
nanocomposite is extremely important to achieve the maximum benefit of the nano
filler since all nano filers are used in small quantities. Secondly, depending on the polar￾ity of the nano filler, the filler–matrix interaction as well as filler–filer interaction, simul￾taneously affect the reinforcing ability and agglomeration. Depending on the type of
nano filler, the physical and, in some cases, the chemical properties of the thermoplastics
change with filler content. With a spherical nano particle such as nano titanium dioxide
or nanoceramic powder, the increase in mechanical strength of a polyolefin improves
almost linearly, but with a rod-like or plate type nano filler, the strength increases non￾linearly. The reinforcement depends much on the shape, in addition to size. For exam￾ple, a carbon nanotube with a diameter of 20 nm and length of 1 μm has an aspect ratio
of 50 (l/d), but for a length of 2 μm, the aspect ratio is 100, and hence the effective com￾posite modulus would be enhanced accordingly. Unlike elastomers, which are soft mate￾rials, thermoplastics have high elastic modulus, commonly 1–4 GPa, and hence the load
transfer between the filler and the matrix is better in thermoplastic nanocomposites.
The remarkable advantage of an efficient reinforcement is reported in innumerable re￾98 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)search work on thermoplastic nanocomposites. A simple analysis of how the surface
area of a filler increases with the reduction of particle size was shown by Su and others
[67] for spherical, cylindrical and plate-type fillers:
Spherical: S = 4πr2 Va
ð Þ 4=3 πr3
  = 3aV
r
(2:44)
Cylindrical: S = 2πrh Va
πr2h
  = 2a
r
V (2:45)
Plate type: S = 2r2 Va
r2t
  = 2
a
t
V (2:46)
where r is the radius in (2.44) and (2.45), but lateral dimension in (2.46), V is the vol￾ume of a cube containing N number of particles, a is the fraction of the volume occu￾pied by the particles and t is the thickness of the plates in (2.46). The inter-particle
space for spherical particles in a cube of volume V (in a composite) having a lateral
dimension L is also given by:
ΔL = r
ffiffiffiffiffi
4π
3a
3
r
− 2
 ! (2:47)
Let us consider two composites, one with 20 nm radius (r) and the other with 20 μm
radius (r) spherical filler in an identical volume (V) of 50 μm3 of both the composites.
The total surface area of the fillers in each composite was calculated using eq. (2.44)
for volume fractions (a) from 0.01 to 0.5 for each filler. Figure 2.10 shows the variation
of the surface area (S) of nano-sized sphere compared to microspheres at various vol￾ume fractions of the fillers. The total surface area of nanospheres is exactly 1000
times that of microspheres. This demonstrates the scale of reinforcement by a nano
filler compared to micron-sized fillers at the same volume occupied in a composite.
However, the extent of reinforcement enhancement is never realized due to more ag￾glomeration as the particle size decreases. The theoretical inter-particle distance cal￾culated using eq. (2.47) is shown in Fig. 2.11 for this example.
The reinforcement by a nano particle cannot be expressed by a simple mixing
rule because of the very small size compared to the size of the test sample. As dis￾cussed earlier, there is a critical length of the fibre at which the load transfer is opti￾mum. Therefore, a length efficiency factor is introduced in the mixing rule for the
determination of composite elastic modulus:
EC = ηl
Ef − Em
 Vf + Em (2:48)
where ηl is the Krenchel length efficiency factor [68] and is less than 1, below a critical
length of the fibre. The above expression is valid for fibres perfectly aligned in the
direction of the applied force. The factor ηl is dependent on the aspect ratio (l/d) and
modulus ratio (Em/Ef) as well as the volume fraction (Vf) of the filler:
2.4 Nanocomposite 99ηl = 1 − tanh½  a lð Þ =d
½  a lð Þ =d (2:49)
and a is given by:
a =
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
−3Em
2Ef ln Vf
  s
(2:50)
The Krenchel factor increases with the volume fraction of the filler. However, the ori￾entation of such tiny particles can be in different directions in one plane or randomly
in three dimensions. An orientation factor is therefore introduced into the eq. (2.48)
to account for the reduced reinforcing effect of the filler [69]:
5.0E+2
5.0E+1
5.0E+0
5.0E-1
5.0E-2
0.01 0.1 1
Volume fraction (a)
Surface area, μm2
microspheres
nanospheres
Fig. 2.10: Surface area of nano- and micron-sized fillers. Interparticle distance, μm
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0 0.1 0.2 0.3
microspheres
nanospheres
0.4 0.5 0.6
Volume fraction of filler
Fig. 2.11: Inter-particle distance for nano- and micron-sized fillers at various volume fractions.
100 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)EC = η0ηl
Ef − Em
 Vf + Em (2:51)
where η0 is estimated [69] as 3/8 for 2D orientation (all fibres in one plane) and 1/5 for
random orientation in 3D.
Considering a nanocomposite of PP of Young’s modulus 1.2 GPa, filled with an
MWCNT sample of average diameter of 20 nm and length of 500 nm and a Young’s
modulus of 500 GPa, the Young’s modulus of the composite was calculated taking eq.
(2.48) along with eq. (2.49) and eq. (2.50) and also taking eq. (2.51) for both 2D and 3D
orientations. The variation of the composite modulus with the volume fraction of the
multi wall carbon nanotube ( MWNCT) is shown in Fig. 2.12.The reinforcing effect is
drastically reduced due to the non-alignment of the filler as seen in the figure. The
composite with 3D oriented filler showed least reinforcement, as expected. Since the
filler modulus is much higher than the polymer, the ideal mixing rule predicts a very
high composite modulus due to the assumption of perfect load transfer between the
fibre and polymer with prefect alignment and orientation, while the values calculated
using the effective factors of length and orientation leads to approximate closeness to
real examples [67–69].
As an example, Mohan and Kanny [70] developed a composite fibre of PP with Cloisite
20A nanoclay (up to 5 wt%) using extrusion. Since the fibre is aligned in the axial di￾rection of the extruder, it can be assumed that the alignment of most of the fibre is
along the length of the fibre. The Young’s modulus in tension was measured by the
authors and is taken for comparison with the theoretical modulus as expressed by eq.
(2.48), which assumes orientation factor as 1 and with the simple mixing rule as eq.
(2.52), which assumes both the length factor and orientation factors as 1.
Ec, GPa
14
12
Aligned CNT
2D oriented
10 Random
8
6
4
2
0
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12
Volume fraction of CNT
Fig. 2.12: Composite Young’s modulus for various alignments.
2.4 Nanocomposite 101EC = Ef − Em
 Vf + Em (2:52)
The composite modulus is in close agreement with eq. (2.52) when the filler modulus
is not very different from that of the matrix. In the present case, the Young’s modulus
of PP is 1.25 GPa and that of Cloisite 20A is about 50 GPa, and densities are 0.95 and
1.77 g/cc, respectively. The aspect ratio (l/d) of Cloisite was taken as 60 (l = 6 μm, d =
100 nm). The experimental and the calculated values using eqs. (2.48) and (2.52) are
presented in Fig. 2.13. The theoretical values are in close agreement with the experi￾mental values in this case, which are better for taking the length efficiency factor
(Krenchel factor) by eq. (2.48).
Deviations from established models are also reported in literature. In a study by Iva￾nova and Kotsilkova [71] on two types of polymer nanocomposites using PLA-reinforced
with MWCNT and graphene nanoplatelets (GNP), the dynamic shear modulus at 200 °C
was determined for each composite and found to follow a logarithmic dependence of
the modulus with log volume fraction. The aspect ratio of the GNP was about 240 and
that of MWCNT was nearly 1000. The values of dynamic shear modulus at a very low
frequency (0.1 rad/s = 0.016 Hz) was only 1.5 Pa for pristine PLA and increased by 5 or￾ders of magnitude from pristine PLA to 12 wt% MWCNT and 4 orders for 12 wt% GNP.
Figure 2.14 shows the composite dynamic shear modulus of PLA-MWCNT composites
with varying volume fractions. The density of PLA was taken as 1.24 g/cc, that of CNT as
2.1 g/cc and the maximum volume fraction of MWCNT was 0.071, corresponding to
12 wt%. The equation fitting to the composite modulus is given by: Ec, GPa
2.75
2.25
2.5
2
1.75
1.5
1.25
0.75
0.5
0 0.005
Expt.
Mixing rule: Eq. (2.52)
theory: Eq. (2.48)
0.01
Volume fraction of clay
0.015 0.02 0.025 0.03
1
Fig. 2.13: PP-nanoclay Composite Young’s modulus for various volume fractions of clay: experimental
result and aligned clay particles eq. (2.46), Reprinted with permission from T.P. Mohan and K. Kanny,
J. Polym. Eng 35 (2015) 773–784. © 2015, De Gruyter Publishing Company.
102 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)log G′
C − G′
mÞ = 3.1456 log Vf
  + 9.156  (2:53)
We can see a good agreement with the experimental data (R2 = 0.988) by the authors
[71]. The equation shows that the reinforcement by MWCNT to PLA is non-linear and
increases sharply as the volume fraction of the filler crosses 1%.
Similarly, the composite dynamic shear modulus for PLA-GNP is also non-linear
with the filler volume fraction and sharply increases beyond 2% filler volume. Figure 2.15
shows the variation of dynamic shear modulus at 0.017 Hz for PLA-GNP nanocomposite
with filler volume fraction. The density of the GNP was taken as 2.2 and the maximum
volume % was 0.071, corresponding to 12 wt%.
The fitting equation for GNP-reinforced PLA composite is obtained as:
log G′
CÞ = 64.7Vf + 0.176  (2:54)
with a very good agreement (R2 = 0.997) with the experimental data of the authors [71].
However, the modulus enhancement by GNP is one order lower than that by MWCNT,
which is expected since CNT is known to be more efficient in reinforcement due to
the much larger aspect ratio and correspondingly large specific surface area, which
results in additional force of attraction.
2.4.1 Thermoplastic elastomer nanocomposite
Thermoplastic elastomers (TPE) are a special class of thermoplastics that show me￾chanical properties nearer to a vulcanized elastomer but are mostly linear polymers.
6
5.5
5
4.5
4
3.5
2.5
3
2
–2.2
Experiment
Equation
R2 = 0.988
–2 –1.8
log (G'), Pa
–1.6 –1.4 –1.2 –1
Fig. 2.14: Dynamic shear modulus of PLA-MWCNT composite at varying filler volume fractions, Reprinted
with permission from Ivanova, R., Kotsilkova, R. Rheological, Appl. Rheol. 28 (2018) 54014. © 2018,
De Gruyter Publishing Company.
2.4 Nanocomposite 103Many thermoplastic elastomers are made by blending an engineering thermoplastic
having high stiffness with a highly flexible linear polymer. Typical example is PC￾Copoly(ether-ester) blend[72, 73]. A special class of thermoplastic elastomer is thermo￾plastic polyurethane (TPU), which is blended with a variety of linear polymers such as
ABS, PEO, PBT, PMMA, PLA, PTFE, PP, PC, etc. [74]. A special thermoplastic elastomer
blend was developed by Manoj et al. with 50/50 PVC-NBR blend and TPU [75]. Wide
use of TPU compared to other similar soft thermoplastics is due to the enormous pos￾sibilities of molecular size and structural variation using varying sizes and chemistry
of polyols, diisocyanates and NCO:OH ratios. A TPU hardness can range from 20 to 90
Shore “A”, which is not possible by any other thermoplastic material.
In the electrical insulation industry, thermoplastic elastomer-based composites
are third-generation insulators having good electrical resistance, adequate flexibility
and strength. Very common TPEs in this industry are based on PE and PP with EPDM,
TPU and styrene-ethylene-butylene-styrene (SEBS) triblock copolymer. An example of
thermoplastic elastomer-nanocomposite is PP/EPDM nanocomposite filled with hybrid
fillers (1.5 vol% ammonium polyphosphate (APP) and 2 vol% organoclay) for good
electrical insulation and dielectric breakdown strength, low dielectric constant and
low dielectric loss [76]. A very comprehensive review of thermoplastic elastomer
nanocomposites for electrical application is published by Ismail and Mustapha [77].
Other few examples of thermoplastic elastomer nanocomposites are given in refer￾ence [78–81].
The advantage of TPEs and, rather, more with TPU is the low energy requirement
in manufacture and processing to composite formation because of the low melting
pint and low melt viscosity. In TPU, the nanocomposite formation can take place dur￾ing the urethane formation as such in a mould or in melting TPU granules like other
Experiment
0
G', Pa
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
0.02 0.04
Vf
0.06 0.08
Equation
R2 = 0.997
Fig. 2.15: Dynamic shear modulus of PLA-GNP composite at varying filler volume fractions, Reprinted with
permission from, Ivanova, R., Kotsilkova, R. Rheological, Application. Appl. Rheol. 28 (2018) 54014. © 2018,
De Gruyter Publishing Company.
104 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)thermoplastics. However, blending of engineering thermoplastics with low molecular
weight soft Copoly (ester-ether) [82] and TPU requires high temperature for melt proc￾essing of nanocomposites because of the high melting temperature of the engineering
thermoplastic.
2.5 Rheological properties
Flow behaviour of the composites of thermoplastic melts is widely researched for the
industrial application to predict the operating parameters for the perfect item fabrica￾tion by mould filling, extrusion, blow moulding, injection moulding, thermoforming
and many such processes. In an industrial scale of production, the rate of production
with the desired quality requires very precise rheological analysis. On the other hand,
solid thermoplastic composites show non-linear deformation behaviour under an exter￾nal force, static or time-dependent (oscillatory). This complex elastic–inelastic response
is another area of rheological study of thermoplastics. The precise determination of
elastic and inelastic energies can be achieved by a dynamic force with varying fre￾quency of the oscillatory force. In addition, the temperature of melt processing could
change the rheological behaviour of the same thermoplastic composite. Thermoplastic
nanocomposite processing requires detailed analysis of the effects of the filler geome￾try, size, filler–polymer interaction, filler–filler interaction and the extent of filling.
Processing of the nanocomposite of a thermoplastic is best done by a melt blending in a
twin-screw extruder. The advantage of such a mixing method is the complex shearing
in the extruder and the repeatability of operation in a short time. However, different
thermoplastic melts behave differently under similar melt-flow conditions.
2.5.1 Thermoplastic melts
Rheological behaviours of thermoplastic melts can be classified into two main catego￾ries, time-independent and time-dependent. In the case of time-independent fluids,
the viscosity changes with shear rate, but does not change with time at a fixed shear
rate, while for a time-dependent fluid, the viscosity changes with time. In the time￾independent category, different types of fluids show reduction of viscosity with shear
rate in various patterns. The most common behaviour can be defined by the Power
Law or Ostwald-de Waele relationship [83],:
σ = k dγ
dt  n
(2:55)
and the apparent viscosity is defined by instantaneous viscosity, which changes with
the shear rate. For a pseudoplastic, the viscosity gradually decreases with the shear
2.5 Rheological properties 105rate and the value of “n” is positive, less than 1, while for a dilatant fluid, the viscosity
increases with shear rate and “n” is greater than 1. The apparent viscosity can be ex￾pressed as:
ηapp = σ
dγ=dt = k dγ
dt  n−1
(2:56)
Figure 2.16 shows a typical apparent viscosity at varying shear rates for a dilatant and
pseudoplastic fluid as an example.
Bingham Model: The fluid has a threshold stress value, below which the flow does
not take place, and beyond that, the behaviour can be predicted by a simple Newto￾nian law.
σ = σ0 + k dγ
dt , for σ > σ0
dγ
dt = 0, for σ ≤ σ0
(2:57)
However, many thermoplastic composites show different non-Newtonian characteris￾tics other than the above, and some of the established predictive constitutive equa￾tions relating the shear flow parameters (rate, stress and apparent viscosity) are
given below:
Herschel-Bulkley Model: It is a modification of the Bingham model where the shear
rate has an index n:
100
Dilatent
Pseudoplastic
10
1
0
Apparent Viscosity, Pa.s.
100 200 300
Shear rate, s–1
400 500 600
Fig. 2.16: Example of dilatant and pseudoplastic fluids. Numerical values are arbitrary, chosen only for
example.
106 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)σ = σ0 + k dγ
dt  n
, for σ > σ0
dγ
dt = 0, for σ ≤ σ0
(2:58)
Casson Model: The Casson model is a modification of the Bingham plastic model and
shows non-linearity beyond the threshold stress as follows:
ffiffiffi
σ p = ffiffiffiffiffi
σ0
p +
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
k dγ
dt r
, for σ > σ0
dγ
dt = 0, for σ ≤ σ0
(2:59)
Cross Model: It is a general shear-thinning fluid model where the apparent viscosity
is constant at low shear rate and is termed as a “zero-shear viscosity” and beyond a
certain shear rate, the fluid shows shear-thinning effect like a pseudoplastic, but with
a finite constant viscosity at infinite shear rate. The model equation is given as:
η0 − ηapp
η0 − η∞
= 1
1 + kðγ_Þ
m (2:60)
and
τ = η∞ð Þ dγ=dt n + η0 − η∞ ð Þ
1 + αð Þ dγ=dt n ð Þ dγ=dt (2:61)
Carreau Model: It is also a generalised fluid model, where the relaxation time of the
polymer chain segments is taken to accommodate the viscosity expression:
ηapp − η∞
η0 − η∞
= 1 + τ
dγ
dt  2 " #n−1
2
(2:62)
where τ is the relaxation time of the segmental mobility.
Ellis Model: It is an inverse form of the above models described so far:
ηapp = η0
1 + σ
	
σ1=2
 α−1 (2:63)
where η0 is Zero-Shear viscosity and α is found out from the best fit of data on shear
stress vs viscosity. σ1/2 is taken as the stress at which the apparent viscosity has
dropped to half the Newtonian value. For shear-thinning effect, α must be greater
than 1. It can be readily seen that at very high value of σ1/2, the model becomes a New￾tonian fluid model and at (σ/σ1/2)≫1, the model becomes a Power Law.
2.5 Rheological properties 107The above expressions are for the fluid behaviour where, on a constant shear
force, the apparent viscosity does not change with the time of measurement. How￾ever, there are fluids, where the viscosity changes with time at a constant shear, for
example a Thixotropic fluid, which shows a decreasing viscosity with time and a Rheo￾pectic fluid, which shows an increasing viscosity with time. Therefore, a thixotropic
fluid thins down with time while the rheopectic fluid thickens with time. The first cat￾egory is very useful for thickness building of a paint coating in a single coating opera￾tion and widely used in paint industry, while the rheopectic fluids are best utilized in
smart shock and vibration damping application. These fluids have the characteristics
of building reversible physical structure under a constant shear force with time, ei￾ther breaking for thixotropy or forming for rheopecty behaviour. On withdrawal of
the shear force, fluid viscosity is restored with time to zero-shear value.
The other important molecular response to resist the flow of a long chain polymer
melt is the elastic force. The resistance to movement is dependent on the length of the
chain, secondary valence forces among the chains and the extent of entanglement.
This resistance has both elastic and shear stress components in the bulk melt. The
total pressure difference required for the flow to occur is the sum of the elastic and
shear stresses. The effect of the elastic force is to retract the molecules to coil up
again, on withdrawal of the force, with a time-dependent relaxation, and results in a
normal force that acts in the transverse direction of the flow, while the shear force is
in the direction of the flow. Since a minimum molecular weight, Mc, is necessary for
segmental entanglements to influence bulk viscosity appreciably, a higher minimum
molecular weight (Mc)e, (probably > 2Mc) is expected for such interactions to produce
an effective elastic network.
The processes of this uncoiling/recoiling lead to multiple phenomena that are usu￾ally called elastic effects. Extrudate swell, sharkskin, melt fracture, Weissenberg Effect
(rod climbing), draw down and frozen-in orientation are some of the important elastic
effects. The viscosity, calculated from the extensional strain, is termed as Elongational
Viscosity, also known as Extensional Viscosity; it is a coefficient of viscosity when ap￾plied stress is an extensional stress. This parameter is often used for characterizing
polymer melts. It can be measured by a rheometer that applies an extensional force.
Acoustic Rheometer is an example of such an instrument
ηe = σn
dε=dt (2:64)
where σn is the normal stress and ε is the extensional strain.
Elongational viscosity is expressed in a melt flow as:
ηe = 3ðn + 1ÞΔPe
8ðdε=dtÞ (2:65)
108 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)where
dε
dt = 4ηsðdγ=dtÞ
3ðn + 1ÞΔPe
(2:66)
However, the elongational viscosity can be related to shear viscosity by a relaxation
time (dynamic force), as given by Liang and Zhong for single axial extension and
steady state flow [84]:
ηeðγ_Þ = 2ηsðγ_Þ

1 − 2
ffiffi
3
p λðγ_Þγ_
  + ηsðγ_Þ

1 +
1
ffiffi
3
p λðγ_Þγ_
  (2:67)
where γ_ is the shear strain rate and λ is the relaxation time. Since a Newtonian fluid
has a very small relaxation time compared to the shear strain rate in practical ex￾truder operations, the above equation can be approximately:
ηe = 3ηs ð Þ Trouton ratio (2:68)
Zhao and Zhong [85] derived a modified expression of eq. (2.67) taking into consider￾ation three material parameters k1, k2 and k3:
ηeð Þε_ = 2
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
k2
k1ε_
2 η0 +
1
4ε_
2
k2
k1
 2
s
− k2
2k1ε_
2
2
4
3
5
,
1 − 2
ffiffi
3
p λ1ε_= 1 + k3 ð Þε_
 
+
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
k2
k1ε_
2 η0 +
1
4ε_
2
k2
k1
 2
s
− k2
2k1ε_
2
2
4
3
5
,
1 − 1
ffiffi
3
p λ1ε_= 1 + k3 ð Þε_
 
(2:69)
where η0 is the zero-shear viscosity, k2/k1 has a unit of viscosity, k3 is a dimensionless
coefficient and λ1 is the relaxation time.
As the relaxation of chain segments are time-dependent, the elastic behaviour in￾creases with the increase in the residence time of the melt at a molten state. For exam￾ple, Schreiber et al. [86] has shown that the die swell (ratio of the outer diameter of the
extrudate polymer to the die’s internal diameter) increases form 1.22 to 1.41 for a resi￾dence time of 0.5 h and 2 h at an extrusion temperature of 190 °C for polyethylene.
2.5.2 Rheology of thermoplastic composites
Thermoplastic composites are more complicated in rheological characteristics, which
demand additional analytical considerations apart from the above classical rheology
of non-Newtonian equations of flow. Adding fillers to a neat polymer melt changes its
rheology, influencing both the way the melt processes and the properties of the ulti￾mate product. Key factors are filler size and shape, filler concentration, and the extent
of any interactions among the particles. The consequences of adding fillers are an in￾crease in melt viscosity and a decrease in die swell. Moreover, particle interactions
2.5 Rheological properties 109increase the non-Newtonian range and cause it to occur at a lower shear rate than for
the unfilled polymer melt. Filled polymers have a higher viscosity at low shear rates,
and yielding may occur with increased filler concentration. In addition, the tempera￾ture of melt processing is very important for analysis and control of the rheological
behaviour in respect of operating parameters such as threshold pressure require￾ment, L/D, of the extruder barrel, die swell, elongational stress, etc.
2.5.3 Mathematical models
There are many relationship expressions involving the Normalized Rheological Func￾tion. Γ (= suspension viscosity/solvent viscosity) and the filler volume fraction, ξg. The
equations assume that rigid fillers are suspended in the bulk amorphous phase. Some
of the early developments are listed by Lamberti et al. [87].
The earliest theory of viscosity of suspensions was given by Einstein [88] as:
Γ = 1 +
5
2
ξg (2:70)
The above linear equation assumes rigid, non-interacting spherical fillers in low con￾centration (below 2.5%) in a Newtonian Fluid. Batchelor [89] modified the above using
a second-order polynomial expression, taking into account the interactive nature of
the spherical, rigid filler, also at low concentration:
Γ = 1 +
5
2
ξg + 6.2ξg
2 (2:71)
Mooney [90] gave an expression for the viscosity of a suspension with higher concen￾tration of rigid, spherical fillers. The author modelled the rise in viscosity exponen￾tially with filler volume fraction:
Γ = exp
5
2
  ξg
1 − ξg=ξg max   " # (2:72)
where ξgmax is the maximum filler volume fraction occupied by the spheres in the
suspension.
Ball and Richmond [91] proposed an expression of concentrated rigid spherical
inclusion as:
Γ = 1 − ξg
ξg max !− 5
2
ξg max
(2:73)
An almost similar expression was proposed by Krieger & Dougherty [92] for concen￾trated suspension of a rigid particle, with the intrinsic viscosity [η] of the unfilled
110 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)fluid as the negative index, which signifies the effect of hydrodynamic volume of the
unfilled melt/solution:
Γ = 1 − ξg
ξg max !−ξg max½  η
(2:74)
Kitano et al. [93] gave a similar expression involving a shape factor of the fillers to
accommodate non-spherical shapes in a polymer melt:
Γ = 1 − ξg
A
 −2
(2:75)
A = 0.68 for smooth spheres.
Graham [94] proposed the following equation for viscosity of concentrated sus￾pension of spherical rigid fillers:
Γ = 1 +
5
2
ξg +
9
4
1
ψð Þ 1 + 0.5ψ ð Þ 1 + ψ 2
" # (2:76)
where ψ is given by:
ψ = 2 1 −
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
ξg
	
ξg max 3 h i   q . ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
ξg
	
ξg max 3   q
(2:77)
Frankel and Activos [95] suggested the following viscosity expression for concentrated
suspension of rigid spheres:
Γ = 9
8
  ξg
	
ξg max  1=3
1 − ξg
	
ξg max  1=3 (2:78)
Tanner [96] proposed a second-order polynomial expression, similar to eq. (2.71) by
Batchelor, with the coefficients as fitting parameters for any filled polymer solution
or melt:
Γ = 1 + a1ξg + a2ξg
2 (2:79)
2.5.4 Example
Let us consider the rheological properties of a nanocomposite of polylactic acid and gra￾phene nanoplates studied by Evanova and Kotsilkova [71] for steady-state viscosity
under varying shear rates. A TEM image of the PLA-6%GNP is shown in Fig. 2.17. The
GNP filler is thin platelets and some clustering is seen. The image is a cross-section of
2.5 Rheological properties 111the filament of the composite. The GNP used by the authors had average size of 5–7 μm,
thickness 30 nm and aspect ratio of approximately 240. A series of compositions with 0,
1.5, 3, 6, 9 and 12% GNP was made and melt viscosities were measured at shear rates
from 0.05 to 500/s at 200 °C. The data on shear rate vs. apparent viscosity was taken for
each GNP content, at a constant 0.05/s shear rate. The above equations were examined
to observe the closeness to the experimental data. For calculation, ξg is taken from data
in Fig. 2.15 and ξgmax was taken as the highest content (12 wt% = 0.071 Volume fraction).
Four models by Einstein, Mooney, Graham and Frankel & Activos are used for the com￾parison. Figure 2.18 shows the experimental [71] and the calculated data using the four
models.
From the Fig. 2.18, it is seen that the models by Graham (eq. (2.76) with eq. (2.77)) and
Frankel & Activos (eq. 2.77) are somewhat close to the experimental data. In the plot,
the data for 12 wt% GNP composite is avoided since it is taken as the maximum filler
Fig. 2.17: TEM image of PLA-GNP nanocomposite with
6 wt% GNP, Reprinted with permission from, Ivanova, R.,
Kotsilkova, R. Rheological, Application. Appl. Rheol. 28
(2018) 54014. © 2018, De Gruyter Publishing Company.
12
Experiment
Einstein
Mooney
Graham
Frankel % Activos
10
8
6
4
2
0 0.02 0.04
ξg GNP
0.06
ηs (Pa. s.)
0
Fig. 2.18: Apparent viscosity of GNP-filled PLA nanocomposite melts as a function of GNP weight fraction
at 200 °C and at a constant shear rate of 0.05 s-1. Red dotted line is a second order polynomial fit as per
Tanner model, Reprinted with permission from, Ivanova, R.,Kotsilkova, R. Rheological, Application. Appl.
Rheol. 28 (2018) 54014. © 2018, De Gruyter Publishing Company.
112 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)content (ξgmax). A polynomial fit as Tanner model was used to obtain the coefficients
a1 and a2 (eq. 2.79). The fitting equation is given below:
Γ = 1 − 1.455ξg + 1132ξ
2
g R2 = 0.988   (2:80)
The coefficient of the first-order is quite small compared to the second, and the nega￾tive value also indicates a slow increase on the addition of graphene nanoplates at
lower concentration levels. There is a rapid rise in the composite viscosity beyond 5%
and for the model calculations too. It was seen from the study that the Newtonian
range for the pristine PLA melt is extended till 10/s shear rate, which can be termed
as the Zero-Shear Viscosity. This is also true for lower GNP content (below 6 wt%).
This is reflected in the Fig. 2.18 since the reinforcing effect of GNP is significant only
beyond 6 wt% in the nanocomposite.
Nanoclay is another non-carbon reinforcing filler, which is used to make polymer￾clay nanocomposites. The melt processing of the thermoplastic clay nanocomposite is
very common, as it is efficient in distributing and dispersing nanoclay in the polymer
and shows better intercalation/exfoliation. The rheological properties of polymer–clay
nanocomposite is therefore of great interest. Chafidz and co-workers [97] studied the melt
rheology of PP–clay nanocomposite. PP with 0, 5, 10, and 15 wt% organically modified
montmorillonite clay (OMMT) was melt-compounded and to study the effect of reprocess￾ing on the properties of the nanocomposites, the melt compounding process was carried
for two cycles. The PP-OMMT master batch containing 50% OMMT was a commercial
product and the four experimental composites were made using necessary additional PP,
along with maleic anhydride (MA) as the compatibilizer. The authors measured the dy￾namic complex viscosity (η✶
) using a parallel disc rheometer (25 mm dia, 2 mm gap) at a
constant temperature (260 °C) and oscillation stress (500 Pa), with an angular frequency
range of 0.1–628.3 rad/s. The trend of complex viscosity with increasing angular fre￾quency (a measure of shear rate) showed that (1) The zero-shear viscosity range (Newto￾nian range) reduces with increasing OMMT loading and is almost nil for 15% OMMT
composite, (2) The second cycle melt processing marginally improved the viscosity com￾pared to first cycle, and the trend of improvement is similar. Figure 2.19 shows the experi￾mental plots as reported by the authors.
The experimental result also revealed that the sharp rise in viscosity, beyond 10%
OMMT, is only observed at lower frequency (lower shear rate). The effect of OMMT
volume fraction on the logarithm of complex viscosity at 0.1, 10 and 100 rad/s angular
frequency is plotted in Fig. 2.20. The viscosity is normalized by the viscosity of the
pristine PP melt and is used as Γ✶
, and the volume fraction (ξg) is calculated taking the
density of OMMT as 2.5 g/cc and for PP as 0.95 g/cc. The OMMT volume fractions are
0.019, 0.037 and 0.054 for 5, 10 and 15 wt%, respectively.
The change in log (complex viscosity) at 100 rad/s is linear with filler volume frac￾tion, but follows a second-order polynomial against filler volume fraction for lower an￾gular frequencies of 0.10 and 10 rad/s. The fitting equations are listed in Tab. 2.2 below.
2.5 Rheological properties 113The logarithm of complex viscosity indicates that the effect of the filler is quite
significant in enhancing the melt viscosity and hence also the dynamic mechanical
properties. Further, the polynomial fit indicates much more enhancement with in￾creasing filler loading. The data on pristine PP is eliminated for fitting the equations
since Г✶ is 1, and hence log(Г✶
) = 0 in that case. The fitting empirical equations are
modifications of the Tanner model, as log(Г✶
) is used here instead of Г✶
. The disper￾sion and distribution of OMMT is observed to be uniform but the authors could not
0.1
1.0E+00
1.0E+01
1.0E+02
1.0E+03
1.0E+04
1.0E+05
1.0E+06
1
x NC-0-l NC-5-ll
NC-0-ll
NC-10-ll
NC-15-ll
NC-5-l
NC-10-l
NC-15-l
lη+l, Complex Viscosity (pa.s)
ω, Angular frequency (rad/s)
10 100
x x xxx xxxx xx xxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxx x
x
Fig. 2.19: Complex viscosity at varying angular frequencies for PP-OMMT composites for two cycles of
processing. (Symbols: Cycle I, lines: Cycle II), Reprinted with permission from, Chafidz, A., Ma’mun, S.,
Fardhyanti, D. S., Kustiningsih, I., Hidayat, IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 543 (2019) 012036. © 2019, IOP
Publishing Company.
0.10 rad/s 10 rad/s 100 rad/s 3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.010
log (Г✶), Pa. s.
0.020 0.030 0.040 0.050 0.060
ξg
Fig. 2.20: Complex viscosity of the PP-OMMT clay nanocomposite at various filler contents at different
angular frequencies. Reprinted with permission from, Chafidz, A., Ma’mun, S., Fardhyanti, D. S.,
Kustiningsih, I., Hidayat, IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 543 (2019) 012036. © 2019, IOP Publishing
Company.
114 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)conclude about the extent of exfoliation or intercalation of the clay layers. Figure 2.21
shows the SEM morphology of 5% OMMT-filled composite after the first and second
cycles. The platelets of clay are seen as bright thin plates in the micrograph.
In both the above examples, it is observed from the reinforcement effect of two
completely different nano fillers that the deviation from classical models is an indica￾tion of the nano effect, small size, increased surface area of contact with the matrix
per unit mass and very high aspect ratio, all of which results in higher forces of at￾traction between a filler particle and the polymer matrix. There was a quantum jump
of apparent viscosity at low shear rates (zero-shear viscosity) for about 10 wt% fillers
in the thermoplastic composite melts. However, enhancement of melt viscosity may
not be observed in all types of thermoplastic nanocomposite processing. For instance,
Cho and Paul [98] studied melt mixing and rheology of Nylon 6 (polycaprolactam, also
known as PA6) filled with Na+ MMT (Cloisite Na), OMMT and short glass fibre. At 5%
loading of all fillers, it was seen that the apparent viscosity of PA6-OMMT nanocompo￾site is much less than the pristine PA6 throughout the experimental shear range. The
OMMT was well dispersed and partially exfoliated as reported by the authors. PA6 is
a polyamide, partially crystalline, highly polar, with hydrogen bonding and all the
Tab. 2.2: Dependence of complex viscosity on OMMT
volume fraction in PP-OMMT composite melts.
ω, rad/s Fitting equation R
. log Γ✶ ð Þ = 900ξ
2
g − 1.57ξg 
 log Γ✶ ð Þ = 356ξ
2
g + 6.95ξg .
 log Γ✶ ð Þ = 18.24ξg .
Fig. 2.21: SEM morphology of the fractured surface of 5% OMMT-filled PP composite. Reprinted with
permission from, Chafidz, A., Ma’mun, S., Fardhyanti, D. S., Kustiningsih, I., Hidayat, IOP Conf. Ser. Mater.
Sci. Eng. 543 (2019) 012036. © 2019, IOP Publishing Company.
2.5 Rheological properties 115amide groups are in same direction in the chain. As the polymer segments entered
the clay gallery, both the polar attraction and the hydrogen bonding are partly dis￾rupted in the molten state, thus reducing the inter-chain interaction and the melt vis￾cosity, although the mechanical properties of the solid composite PA6-OMMT was
better than that of the pristine polymer.
2.6 Processing
Processing of thermoplastic is a well-established industrial practice. Processing of
thermoplastic-based composites is no exception. Addition of reinforcing or inert fillers
could change the rheological properties due to the variation in thermal diffusivity,
elastic forces (elongational viscosity) and shear forces (shear viscosity), compared to
the neat polymer. Discussions in the previous para brought out some numerical ex￾amples of wide variation in the rheological parameters of some thermoplastic compo￾sites. However, the processing principles are almost unaltered for the composites,
except for a few changes in the case of special fillers such as nanoparticles. Due to
their very tiny size, the nanoparticle dispersion in a thermoplastic melt is much more
difficult than micron-sized fillers, irrespective of the shape/aspect ratio. The first con￾sideration in a proper unit operation is homogenizing the solid particles in the molten
state of the polymer. Therefore, melt mixing is done to incorporate the filler uni￾formly under severe deformation of the pellets. Subsequent melting under shear
force and heat allow the dispersion of the solid filler in the melt, finally forming ho￾mogeneous composite pellets, on cooling. This process can be effectively carried out
in a single- or twin-screw extruder with proper barrel length, temperature zones,
motor power and attachments for pellet production at the die outlet. The composite
pellets thus produced can be processed to make moulded items by several methods
such as injection moulding, blow moulding, coaxial extrusion, filament making, com￾pression moulding, thermoforming, etc. according to the end product. Some impor￾tant processes for thermoplastic composite are described here.
2.6.1 Extrusion
The basic function of the extruder is to convey the solid polymer and the filler from
the feed section to the forward sections towards the exit die. A sketch of the barrel￾and-screw geometry is shown below as Fig.2.22. The polymer pellets are heated up in
the first zone due to the high frictional force in the annular space of the barrel and
then in the rotating screw. Then, as the mass moves to the higher temperature zone,
the polymer melts and dispersion of the filler takes place in the molten mass. The ad￾vantage of a twin-screw is to enhance the mixing process by additional shearing be￾116 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)tween the two adjacent screws. The homogenizing may require more than one cycle
of extrusion. The use of twin-screw reduces the number of repeat cycles.
The study by Chafidz et al. [97] showed that two cycles of extrusion mixing of
PA6-Clay and PP-Glass fibre in a twin-screw extruder was marginally beneficial, and
only one cycle can be adopted with fair homogeneity. For composite processing, the
residence time of the mix has to be such that the mixing is uniform. This is achieved
by a lower rotational speed of the screw and by taking a higher L/D ratio of the ex￾truder screw compared to those in the case of pure polymer processing. The complete
melt mixing of the polymer-filler is ensured by the longer residence time and by set￾ting the end zone temperature somewhat above the melting point of the polymer for
reducing the viscosity and the normal force. For example, the melting point of poly￾propylene (atactic) is about 160–170 °C, while the extruder processing of neat PP is at
190–210 °C, but for PP-based composites with glass, mineral or talc filler, the process￾ing temperature is higher, about 230 to 260 °C. One of the measuring parameters is
the volumetric flow rate of extrusion, which is the resultant flow due to drag, and
opposed by the viscous force (pressure).
The expressions for drag flow, pressure flow and the resultant volumetric flow rate are:
Drag Flow: Qd = 1
2
π2
D2
NH sin φ cos φ (2:81)
Pressure Flow: Qp = 1
η
dP
dl   πDH3 sin2
φ
12 " # (2:82)
Total Flow: Q = Qd − Qp = 1
2
π2
D2
NH sin φ cos φ − 1
η
dP
dl   πDH3 sin2
φ
12 " # (2:83)
H
(a)
(b)
dp
dl T φ D
Pitch
Fig. 2.22: (a) Twin-screw Extruder, with contra-rotating screws and (b) barrel-and-screw geometry in a
single-screw.
2.6 Processing 117where D is the diameter of the screw, H is the annular space between the barrel and
the screw, φ is the angle of the screw helix, N is the rotation of the screw (cycles
per second) and dP/dl is the pressure per unit length in the flow direction (refer
Fig.2.22). The expression does not consider wall-slip.
The term η is assumed to be Newtonian viscosity in this expression, which means
that it is independent on the rotaional speed of the screw. However, in the case of
non-Newtonian fluids such as polymer melts, it can be apparent viscosity, and can be
calculated at equivalent shear rates from a previous viscometric experiment. For ex￾ample, the relation between N and shear rate in an extruder is given by:
dγ
dt = πDN
H (2:84)
The factor ½ in the drag-flow expression should be replaced by f, which can be experi￾mentally determined for individual composite melt processing.
When the pressure is very low, only the drag flow is significant, and the flow rate
is maximum through the die. This condition is stated as the characteristic, Qmax, of
the extruder:
Q = Qmax = 1
2
π2
D2
NH sin φ cos φ (2:85)
When the pressure is very high, the flow stops, and the condition gives the maximum
pressure, Pmax, extruder characteristics:
Q = 0, 1
2
π2
D2
NH sin φ cos φ = 1
η
P
l
  πDH3 sin2
φ
12 " #
Pmax = 6πDNlη
H2 tan φ
(2:86)
From the knowledge of conduit flow of a fluid, it can be said that the output flow rate
and the corresponding pressure are definitely linearly related. Hence,
Q = kP (2:87)
From the equations of momentum balance, we get
k = πR4
8ηL (2:88)
The plot of output flow rate against the corresponding pressure is the characteristic
plot for the extruder, and is shown as Fig. 2.23.
The melting capacity of a screw increases at a slower rate compared to the screw
speed, mainly because the residence time of the solid bed inside the screw decreases as
the screw speed increases. The melting capacity eventually becomes the limiting factor
118 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)in the output rate as the screw speed increases. Some pellets in the solid bed eventually
become incompletely molten at the end of the screw at high screw speeds, resulting in
poor melt quality. Most high-performance screws are designed to eliminate incom￾pletely molten pellets and to increase the melting capacity. Due to the high viscosity of
thermoplastics composite melts, a large amount of heat is generated within the melt by
dissipating the mechanical energy of the drive motor. Since viscosity is the result of fric￾tion between molecules, the mechanical energy converts into thermal energy. The melt
transfers heat into the solid bed, melting the solid bed at the melt film–solid bed inter￾face. This melting mechanism is termed as dissipative melting. Preferred conditions for
a high dissipative melting capacity of a screw at a given screw speed are:
– High barrel temperature, well above the melting point of the polymer
– Large solid bed–barrel contact area
– Small channel width
– Tight flight clearance
– High feed temperature
– High polymer viscosity for large amount of heat generation
– Low melting point
– Low heat capacity for melting
When the solid reduces in the bed, the bed as such becomes unstable, known as solid
bed breakup, and the solids get mixed up with the melt over an approximate L/D =
20–25. The solids subsequently melts due to the conduction of heat from the surround￾ing hot molten mass. This phenomenon is termed as conduction melting. Preferred
conditions for fast conduction melting are:
– Small pellet size with a large surface area
– Good mixing of the melt and the solid pieces
– High feed temperature
– Low melting point
– Low heat capacity for melting
Qmax
Q
Die output
Operating
Point
P Pmax
Fig. 2.23: Extruder characteristics: Output
volumetric flow rate vs. pressure.
2.6 Processing 119Generally, the viscosity in processing is reduced by employing a temperature higher
than the melting point. Since polymers are generally bad conductors of heat, the
power requirement for raising the temperature is substantial, even considering the
initial frictional heat generated in the feed zone. However, when a carbonaceous filler
like carbon black, CNT, graphite, graphene, etc. is used for making the composite, the
thermal diffusivity in the mix drastically increases, which facilitates uniformity in
temperature and also aids in reducing the thermal requirement and melt viscosity.
Minerals, glass fibre, etc., on the contrary, take more heat as these are bad conductors,
and the extruder temperature has to be increased to more than that for carbon-based
composites.
Nevertheless, the estimation of viscosity at any temperature can be done by the
Arrhenius or William-Landel-Ferry (WLF) equation as shown below:
Arrhenius: η = η0 exp
E
RT   (2:89)
WLF: ηð Þ T
ηð Þ Tr
= log aT = −C1ð Þ T − Tr
C2 + T − Tr
  (2:90)
The values of C1 and C2 are 8.86 and 101.6, respectively.
From eq. (2.85), the Activation energy can be calculated from the slope of a
straight line plot of ln(η) against 1/T. These two equations are useful to predict the
viscosity at any temperature, once the shift factor (ratio of viscosity at a temperature
and that at the reference temperature) is known.
2.6.2 Blow moulding
Blow moulding is a manufacturing process by which hollow plastic parts are formed.
It is a well-known method of making glass vessels. In general, there are three main
types of blow moulding:
(1) Extrusion Blow Moulding,
(2) Injection Blow Moulding, and
(3) Injection Stretch Blow Moulding.
The blow moulding process begins with the melting down of the plastic and forming
it into a Parison or in the case of injection and injection stretch blow moulding (ISB),
a Preform. The parison is a tube-like piece of plastic with a hole at one end through
which compressed air can pass.
The parison is then clamped into a mould and air is blown into it. The air pres￾sure then pushes the plastic out to match the mould. Once the plastic has cooled and
hardened, the mould opens up and the part is ejected. The cost of blow-moulded parts
120 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)is higher than that of injection–moulded parts but lower than that of rotational￾moulded parts.
Conventional process of extrusion blow moulding can be batch, continuous or in￾termittent process. Continuous process is fast and is used to determine the thickness
of the moulded object. It will swell when it comes out of the mould. When the molten
object emerges from the die, it swells due to the recovery of elastic deformation. Im￾portant dimensions in blow moulding are shown as a sketch in Fig. 2.24.
It can be shown that the following relationship applies:
BSH = B2
ST (2:91)
where
BSH – Swelling of the thickness = hi/hd
BST – Swelling of the diameter = Di/Dd
hi = Swelling occurs in Parison
hd = Swelling occurs in Die
Di = Diameter of Parison
Dd = Diameter of Die
and
hi = hd
Di
Dd
 2
(2:92)
Now consider the situation that the parison is inflated to fill a cylinder die of diameter
Dm as in Fig. 2.24. Assuming constant volume and neglecting draw-down effect,
hd
DT
Dd
Dm
hI
hm
Fig. 2.24: Sketch of a Blow moulding system.
2.6 Processing 121πDihi = πDmhm, ∴ hm = Di
Dm
hi
From eqs: ð2:91Þ and ð2:92Þ;
hm = Di
Dm
hdB2
ST  
∵ Di = DdBST , ∴ hm = B3
ST hd
Dd
Dm
(2:93)
The most common method of extrusion blow moulding is based on the principle of
downward extrusion of a tube of molten polymer, known as parison. Two mould
halves close around the tube, which is then blown to the shape of the mould by com￾pressed air. In the case of bottles it is possible to blow upside down and inflating it by
introducing compressed air through a spigot that is inserted into the neck of the bot￾tle. In order to achieve a high rate of extrusion, the moulding time must be at a mini￾mum. It is important to control the thickness to avoid wastage. In order to obtain a
strong item, the parison should not have die lines.
The rheological parameters are temperature–viscosity relationship, shear-induced
crystallisation, die swell, draw-down characteristics, flow behaviour in the extruder
die, melt fracture and/or shark skin. Study of elongational viscosity, molecular weight
distribution, and effect of filler are also important to control the die swell and the sub￾sequent thickness of the blown item.
Moulding time is minimized by lowering the operational temperature, but viscos￾ity is high and thickness may not be optimum at low temperatures. Moreover, elastic
effects are high at a low temperature and could cause melt fracture or shark skin.
Crystalline polymers when used at a temperatures of a few degrees higher than the
melting point may show shear-induced crystallization, thus making the operation
difficult.
Die swell is very important in blow moulding since the blown plastic items are
generally thin. The slight swelling may change the thickness to unacceptable quality,
and in large production volumes, such as mineral water bottles, the economy is
greatly affected. Die swell increases with shear rate (up to the critical shear rate), and
with MW and polydispersity index (MWD). However, the swell decreases with temper￾ature and with the length of the die. In the downward extrusion of the parison, an
uneven thickness is caused by the opposing effects of die swell and draw down.
2.6.3 Fibre spinning
Use of thermoplastic nanocomposite fibres is a new area; most probably, the earliest
repot was in 1993 by Kojima et al. [99, 100] on melt-spinning of Nylon 6-clay nanocom￾posite. Fibres with colouring pigments that are conventionally used are not reinforc￾122 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)ing, and do not qualify for a high-performance fibre in critical applications such as in
Defence, aerospace and medical fields. Exception is carbon black.
Fibre spinning of thermoplastic polymers is conventionally done using any of the
three methods, viz., Melt spinning, Wet spinning and Dry spinning. Of these methods,
melt spinning is the preferred method so far for thermoplastic nanocomposites.
Melt-spinning is simply the extrusion of the molten polymer composite through a
spinneret plate with large number of holes for multiple fibre production. In the recent
past, melt spinning of layered double hydroxide (LDH)/high density polyethylene
(HDPE) nanocomposites was reported for the first time by Kutlu et al. [101]. Ivanova
and Kotsilkova [71] developed filaments of 1.75 mm diameter with two types of PLA
nanocomposites with MWCNT and Graphene nanoplates for fused deposition model￾ling using 3D printing. Redondo and co-workers [102] developed cellulose nanocrystal￾filled polyurethane melt-spun fibres. Sandler and others [103] studied melt-spinning
of Nylon 12-based nanocomposites with two nanocarbons, MWCNT and nanocarbon
fibre.
A schematic presentation of the dry spinning process is shown in Fig. 2.25. In the
dry spinning method, the polymer composite is in a solution form and the solvent
evaporates after the filament leaves the spinneret hole. The filament is thus dried by
hot air. Dry spinning of nanocomposite fibres is rare and no significant work has
been done so far for dry spinning of nanocomposite fibres.
Wet spinning is a method of extrusion of the solution made by dissolving the ther￾moset in a solvent and extruded through the spinneret hole. The drawn fibre is
passed through a solvent–non-solvent mixture to extract the solvent, thus forming the
precipitate in the fibre form. Figure 2.26 shows a sketch of the wet-spinning process.
In this process, the drawing speed is much less than melt spinning due to the lower
strength of the polymer solution. During the spinning process, the filaments are first
extruded through an air gap where the filaments undergo strains of 2 to 3 times,
which produces a high degree of molecular orientation in the filaments. This air gap
is of the order of one inch. It also allows the spinneret plate to be warm (100 °C) while
the extraction bath can be cool (ca 15 °C). The hot filaments strike the cooling bath
where the filaments are “quenched” and much of the orientation is locked in by the
rapid cooling action.
Solvent
evaporation
Drying
air
Fig. 2.25: Dry spinning.
2.6 Processing 123Lu et al. [104] used wet spinning of conductive composite fibre made from sur￾face-modified silver nanowire and thermoplastic polyurethane. The authors claimed
high electrical conductivity of the fibres containing a maximum of 75% of nano silver
wires by weight in the composite fibre and stretched to 200%. There is no significant
progress in this area of nanocomposite fibre spinning technology so far.
2.6.4 Additive manufacturing
The conventional composite manufacturing processes, as discussed above, inherit a
lot of defects that limit their use for many applications. Such defects primarily include
delamination, interlaminar voids, improper orientation, variation in dimensions, etc.
Mechanical properties of the parts produced by such processes also show a consider￾able deviation, which makes it very difficult to standardize the properties. Additive
manufacturing of such components can be utilized to overcome the mentioned de￾fects. Additive manufacturing (AM), commonly known as 3D printing, is defined as
the process of layer-by-layer creation of three-dimensional physical model, directly
from 3D-CAD data. AM technique is also known as rapid prototyping, automated fabri￾cation, solid free-form fabrication, etc. 3D printing was first described by Charles
W. Hull in the 1984 patented stereolithography additive manufacturing process. Ear￾lier, AM was considered only for prototyping purpose.
The first step of 3D printing is to create a 3D model of the object to be printed. This
model can be designed with a computer-aided design (CAD) software. The CAD file is
then converted to a standard additive manufacturing file format i.e. standard tessella￾tion language (STL) file. The file is then digitally sliced into layers. In the fourth step,
the machine that is only controlled by a computer builds the model layer-by-layer, in
other words, this step is basically providing printing parameters to slice the model and
providing supports for overhang parts. The fifth and sixth steps are part building and
post-processing (removal of supports, surface finishing), respectively. The layer thick￾ness dictates the final quality and this depends on the machine and the process [105].
According to ISO/ASTM D52900-15 [106], additive manufacturing is categorized as
material extrusion, vat photo polymerization, powder bed fusion, material jetting,
binder jetting, sheet lamination and direct energy deposition. The use of the processes
Air gap
Solvent leaching in
non-solvent
Fig. 2.26: Wet spinning.
124 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)depends upon the material to be manufactured. It offers several technological advan￾tages over conventional manufacturing processes. For example, 3D printing does not
require any tooling, which is essential for conventional manufacturing techniques
such as injection moulding. The requirement of tooling in widely used manufacturing
techniques mentioned above can be a barrier to production due to the high cost. In
the case of 3D printing, various parts of a component can be sent digitally and printed
in homes or locations near to consumers. As a result, the necessity of transport and
the related expenditure can be reduced. Thus, 3D printing is a more environmental
friendly process compared to conventional manufacturing processes. Due to the pro￾cess flexibility, additive manufacturing processes offer more design and material free￾dom than conventional composite manufacturing processes. Taking such advantage
of the process accuracy, good dimensional tolerances and surface finish can be
achieved. With only a smaller deviation in mechanical properties as compared to tra￾ditionally manufactured composites, additively manufactured composites can also be
vastly used in many fields such as in aerospace, automotive, energy production, etc.
Additive manufacturing of composites can be achieved through several techniques
such as stereolithography (SLA), selective laser sintering (SLS), direct energy deposition
(DED), fused deposition modelling (FDM), etc. [107]. Of all these methods, FDM is the
most investigated one and utilized for composite manufacturing. S. Scott Crump in￾vented and patented the FDM process in 1989. FDM rapid prototyping, in general, con￾sists of an extrusion system, which has the ability to precisely control where the
extrudate is laid in three-dimensional space in order to build a prototype with complex
geometry. Basically, layers are built by extruding a small bead of material in a particular
lay-down pattern such that the layers are covered with the beads. After a layer is com￾pleted, the height of the extrusion head is increased and the subsequent layers are built
to construct the part. The quality of the printed parts can be controlled by altering the
printing parameters such as layer thickness, printing orientation, raster width, and ras￾ter angle and air gap. FDM printers also offer advantages, including low cost, high speed
and simplicity. It allows the deposition of diverse materials simultaneously by using
multiple extrusion nozzles. Since different materials can be loaded at a time, multifunc￾tional parts with the desired composition can be easily made. The viscosity of molten
material plays an important role in the FDP process. If the viscosity is very high it will
be difficult to extrude the same. At the same time if the viscosity is very low, the struc￾tural support will be disturbed. Therefore, the optimum melt viscosity of the polymer
has to be used for processing. The molten viscosity should be high enough to provide
structural support and low enough to enable extrusion. Also, complete removal of the
support structure used during printing may be difficult.
The process works on the principle of heating the filament material slightly above
its melting temperature, allowing it to flow from the nozzle and re-solidification of the
molten material due to cooling via convection. Figure 2.27 shows the schematic of an
FDM process. The material spool rotates to feed the material to the nozzle using an ex￾trusion mechanism. The heating element inside the nozzle head heats the material to
2.6 Processing 125slightly above its melting temperature. The molten material flows from the nozzle to
the build platform. The print bed is allowed to move laterally to print the molten mate￾rial within the layer. After the layer is completed, the nozzle head moves upward by an
equivalent layer thickness and the next layer is deposited.
In the FDP process, the fibre reinforcement can be achieved in multiple ways. Blend￾ing short fibres in polymer spool is one of the ways to obtain a fibre-reinforced com￾posite material as shown in Fig. 2.28 (a). Mixing the continuous fibres with the matrix
filament inside the nozzle head just prior to printing is also presented in Fig. 2.28 (b).
However, an improper bonding between the fibre and the matrix material can cause
defects in the printed part. A new technique has been developed which uses two noz￾zles to build the part, one each for the fibre and the matrix. Initially, the matrix layers
are deposited on the build platform and then the fibre layers are deposited, which
ensures the proper adhesion between them Fig. 2.28 (c). This technique has emerged
as a prominent research domain due to its ability to 3D-print continuous fibre as well
as deliver a good quality product.
Mechanical properties of traditionally manufactured composites are found to
slightly vary from that manufactured with additive manufacturing. Current research
focuses on the composite material using a variety of fibres and matrices, along with
hybrid manufacturing processes to take advantage of the merits of both the conven￾tional and additive manufacturing. New processes are being developed to eliminate
Fig. 2.27: Schematic of Fused Deposition Modelling.
126 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)the fibre-matrix delamination issues and to improve the product quality in terms of
mechanical properties and surface finish. Such processes can help to implement the
additive technology for end-use products.
2.7 Conclusion
A very important advantage of thermoplastic-based composites is recyclability, thus re￾ducing the solid and gaseous pollution and also carbon footprint when compared with
composites of cross-linked elastomer and thermosets. Thermoplastics can have a wide
range of hardness and flexibility to replace some applications where elastomers are
being used. Particularly, thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU)-based nanocomposites are
of great promise. As for engineering plastics, especially, PE, PP, PVC, acrylates, PEEK,
PEKK, PC, ABS, etc., there is a wider opportunity to replace thermoset composites based
on epoxy, phenolic, polyester vinyl ester, etc. Most of the desired properties, specific to
an application, can be imparted to thermoplastics by blending, copolymerisation, nano
inclusion and chemical modifications of thermoplastics. With the increasing use of poly￾mer technology in the medical field and with increasing awareness of compatibility
with nature, more bio-compatible and bio-degradable thermoplastic composites are
being developed. Numerous studies are being reported in recent times on chemistry
and technologies of thermoplastic composites, aiming applications in the medical, food
packaging, and agriculture industries and for raw stock preservation. Polylactic acid
Short fiber filled
polymer material
spool
Nozzle head with heating 
arrangement
Print bed/
Platform
Nozzle
(a)
(c)
(b)
Fiber
material
spool
Fiber
material
spool
Fiber
material
layers
Matrix
material
layers
Nozzle heads
with heating
arrangement
Nozzle head
with heating
arrangement
Nozzle
Nozzle
Print bed/
Platform
Print bed/
Platform
Matrix
material
spool
Matrix
material
spool
Fig. 2.28: Additive manufacturing of composite materials using FDM.
2.7 Conclusion 127(PLA) and its derivatives, polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA), and proteins (which are ther￾moplastic heteropolymers) and their composites are best examples. There are also new
thoughts on bio-compatible reinforcements such as starch nano powders, cellulosic fi￾bres from nature (plants, flowers, vegetation) like cotton, jute, flax fibres, wood shav￾ings, saw dust and also natural basalt rock fibre, etc. The advantage of recycling can be
more for polymer-nanocomposites over long- or short-fibre-reinforcement because of
better accuracy in mould flow, blowing, extrusion and thermoforming. Overall, the
prospects of reusable and bio-compatible thermoplastic nanocomposites with natural,
biocompatible reinforcements are increasing in critical applications of medical and
food processing industries.
References
[1] Liang, J. Z., Yang, Q. Q. J. Reinf. Plast. Compos. 2009, 28, 295–304.
[2] Huang, J. C., Wu, C. L. Adv. Polym. Technol. 2000, 19, 132–139.
[3] Gill, Y. Q., Irfan, M. S., Khan, F. H., Saeed, F., Ehsan, H., Shakoor, A. Res. Express 2019, 6, 085343.
[4] Ding, X., Wang, J., Zhang, S., Wang, J., Li, S. Polym. Bull. 2016, 73, 369–383.
[5] Krupa, I., Chodák, I. Eur. Polym. J 2001, 37, 2159–2168.
[6] Altay, L., Kızılkan, E., Sekı, Y., İşbilir, A., Sarıkanat, M. Plast. Rubber Compos. 2021, 15, 1–12.
[7] Alghamdi, M. N. Int. J. Eng. Res. Technol. (IJERT) 2016, 5, 633–637.
[8] Helanto, K., Talja, R., Rojas, O. J. J. Polym. Eng. 2021, 41, 746–758.
[9] Ogorckiewicz, R. M., Weidman, G. W. J. Mech. Eng. Sci. 1974, 16, 10–17.
[10] Agoudjil, B., Ibos, L., Majeste, J. C., Candau, Y., Mamunya, Y. P. Compos. A. 2008, 39, 342–351.
[11] Nicolais, L., Narkis, M. Polym. Eng. Sci. 1971, 11, 194–199.
[12] Liang, J. Z., Li, R. K. Y. Polym. Compos 1998, 19, 698–703.
[13] Liang, J. Z., Li, R. K. Y. Polym. Int 2000, 49, 170–174.
[14] Krupa, I., Cecen, V., Boudenne, A., Prokeš, J., Novak, I. Mater. Des. 2013, 51, 620–628.
[15] Mamunya, Y. P., Davydenko, V. V., Pissis, P., Lebedev, E. V. Eur. Polym. J. 2001, 38, 1887–1897.
[16] Boudenne, A., Ibos, L., Fois, M., Majeste´, J. C., Ge´hin, E. Compos. A. 2005, 36, 1545–1554.
[17] Nielsen, L. E. Generalized Equation for the Elastic Moduli of Composite Materials. J. Appl. Phys. 1970,
41, 4626–4627.
[18] Bourkas, G., Prassianakis, I., Kytopoulos, V., Sideridis, E., Younis, C. Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2010, 1–13.
[19] Ramsteiner, F., Theysohn, R. On the tensile behavior of filled composites. Composites 1984, 5, 121–128.
[20] Nielsen, L. E. Mechanical Properties of Polymers. Reinholds Publishing Corp., Chapman & Hall,
London, 1962.
[21] Hashin, Z., Shtrikman, S. J. Appl. Phys. 1962, 33, 3125–3131.
[22] Hashin, Z. J. Appl. Mech 1983, 50, 481–505.
[23] Budiansky, B. J. Compos. Mater. 1970, 4, 286–295.
[24] Bigg, D. M. Adv. Polym. Sci. 1995, 119, 1–30.
[25] Joseph, N., Sebastian, M. T. Mater. Lett. 2013, 90, 64–67.
[26] Catedral, M. D., Tapia, A. K. G., Sarmago, R. V., Tamayo, J. P., Del rosario, E. J. Sci. Diliman 2004, 16,
41–46.
[27] Hammo, S. M. Tikrit J. Pure Sci. 2012, 17, 76–78.
[28] Chodak, I., Krupa, I. J. Mater. Sci. Lett 1999, 18, 1457–1459.
[29] Scher, H., Zallen, R. J. Chem. Phys. 1970, 53, 3759–3761.
128 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)[30] Ramaraj, B. Polym. Plast. Technol. Eng 2007, 46, 575–578.
[31] He, X., Zhou, J., Jin, L., Long, X., Wu, H., Xu, L., Gong, Y., Zhou, W. Materials. 2020, 15, 3341.
[32] Guth, E., Gold, O. Phys. Rev 1938, 53, 322.
[33] Rosen, B. W. Tensile failure of fibrous composites. in Mechanics of Fiber Strengthening. Fiber
Composite Materials, ASM Publication October 1960, Chapter 3.
[34] Termonia, Y. J. Polym. Sci. B: Polymer Physics 1994, 32, 969–979.
[35] Chen, P. E. Eng. Sci. 1971, 11, 51.
[36] Cox, H. L. J. Appl. Phys 1952, 3, 72–79.
[37] Halpin, J. C., Kardos, J. L. Polym. Eng. Sci. 1976, 16, 344–352.
[38] Halpin, J. C., Kardos, J. L. Polym. Eng. Sci. 1978, 18, 496–504.
[39] Osoka, E. C., Onukwuli, O. D. Int. J. Eng. Sci. Invent (IJESI) 2018, 7, 63–70.
[40] Luo, Z., Li, X., Shang, J., Zhu, H., Fang, D. Adv. Mech. Eng. 2018, 10, 1–13.
[41] Piggott, M. R. Load Bearing Fibre Composites. Pergamon, Oxford, UK, 1980, 83–89.
[42] Piggott, M. R. J. Mater. Sci 1978, 13, 1709–1716.
[43] Carrara, A. S., McGarry, F. J. J. Compos. Mater. 1968, 2, 222–243.
[44] Hassani, F.-Z. S. A., Ouarhim, W., Zari, N., Bensalah, M. O., Rodrigue, D., Bouhfid, R., Qaiss, A. Polym.
Compos. 2019, 40, 1919–1929.
[45] Ariawan, D., Surojo, E., Triyono, J., Purbayanto, I. F., Pamungkas, A. F., Prabowo, A. R. Theor. Appl.
Mech. Lett. 2020, 10, 57–65.
[46] Guth, E. Theory of Filler Reinforcement. J. Appl. Phys. 1945, 16, 20–27.
[47] Unal, H., Mimaroglu, A. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2014, 21, 323–328.
[48] Bombac, D., Lamut, M., Mrvar, P., Širok, B., Bizjan, B. Materials 2021, 14, 6108.
[49] E-Glass Fibre, Documents@AZoM.com. AZO Materials, Azonetwork UK Ltd. www.AZoM.com
(accessed on 27 December, 2022).
[50] Lou, S., Zhang, H., Liu, F., Wang, J., Yin, W., Chen, Z., Su, C. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2021, 28, 466–477.
[51] Zheng, J., Zhou, H., Wan, Z., Sang, R. Adv. Mater. Res. 2012, 535–537, 144–148.
[52] Li, E. Z., Guo, W. L., Wang, H. D., Xu, B. S., Liu, X. T. Physics Procedia 2013, 50, 453–460.
[53] Ramsaroop, A., Kanny, K., Mohan, T. P. Mater. Sci. Appl. 2010, 1, 301–309.
[54] Yuan, Y., Liu, C., Huang, M. Materials 2019, 12, 1323.
[55] Ari, A., Bayram, A., Karahan, M., Karagöz, S. Polym. Polym. Compos. 2022, 30, 1–13.
[56] Kabiri, A., Liaghat, G., Alavi, F., Saidpour, H., Hedayati, S. K., Ansari, M., Chizari, M. J. Compos. Mater.
2020, 54, 4903–4919.
[57] Kuruvilla, J., Mattoso, L. H. C. Nat. Polym. Compos. 1998, 333.
[58] Rabbi, M. S., Islam, T., Islam, G. M. S. Int. J. Mech. Mater. Eng. 2021, 16.
[59] Alvarez, V. A., Ruscekaite, R. A., Vazquez, A. J. Comp. Mat. 2004, 37, 1575–1588.
[60] Alvarez, V., Vazquez, A., Bernal, C. J. Compos. Mater. 2006, 40, 21–35.
[61] Joseph, K., Thomas, S., Pavithran, C., Brahmakumar, M. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1993, 47, 1731–1739.
[62] Samouh, Z., Molnar, K., Boussu, F., Cherkaoui, O., El Moznine, R. Polym. Adv. Technol. 2019, 30,
529–537.
[63] Sun, Z., Mingming, W. Ind. Crop. Prod. 2019, 137, 89–97.
[64] Sood, M., Dwivedi, G. Egypt. J. Pet. 2018, 27, 775–783.
[65] Hassani, F. Z. S. A., Ouarhim, W., Zari, N., Bensalah, M. O., Rodrigue, D., Bouhfid, R., Qaiss, A. Polym.
Compos. 2019, 40, 4042–4055.
[66] Adeniyi, A. G., Onifade, D. V., Ighalo, J. O., Adeoye, A. S. Compos. Part B. Eng. 2019, 176, 107305.
[67] Su, X., Wang, R., Li, X., Araby, S., Kuan, H.-C., Naeem, M., Ma, J. Nano. Mater. Sci. 2022, 4, 185–204.
[68] Li, Z., Young, R. J., Wilson, N. R., Kinloch, I. A., Vallés, C., Li, Z. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2016, 123, 125–133.
[69] Li, Z., Young, R. J., Kinloch, I. A., Wilson, N. R., Marsden, A. J., Raju, A. P. A. Carbon 2015, 88, 215–224.
[70] Mohan, T. P., Kanny, K. J. Polym. Eng. 2015, 35, 773–784.
[71] Ivanova, R., Kotsilkova, R. Appl. Rheol. 2018, 28, 54014.
References 129[72] Mishra, V. S., Khuswa, R., Chandrasekhar, L., Barman, S., Sivaraman, P., Manoj, N. R., Samui, A. B.,
Chakraborty, B. C. Polym. Test. 2004, 23, 527–532.
[73] Gaztelumendi, M., Nazabal, J. J. Polym. Sci. Part B. Polym. Phys. 1995, 33, 603–610.
[74] Ahad, N. A. InIOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 957 2020, 012045. IOP
Publishing.
[75] Manoj, N. R., Sivaraman, P., Praveen, S., Raut, R. D., Chandrasekhar, L., Chakraborty, B. C. J. Appl.
Polym. Sci. 2005, 97, 1763–1770.
[76] Hamzah, M. S., Mariatti, M., Kamarol, M. J. Polym. Mater 2016, 33, 605–613.
[77] Ismail, N. H., Mustapha, M. Polym. Eng. Sci. 2018, 58, E36–E63.
[78] Balaji, S., Balasubramanian, R., Fathima, R. M., Sarojadevi, M. Polym Eng. Sci. 2018, 58, 691–700.
[79] Guo, J., Xu, Y., He, W., Wang, N., Tang, M., Chen, X., Hu, S., He, M., Qin, S. Polym. Eng.sci. 2018, 58,
752–758.
[80] Tumnantong, D., Rempel, G. L., Prasassarakich, P. Polym. Eng. Sci. 2018, 58, 759–766.
[81] Liang, N., Liu, W., Zuo, D., Peng, P., Qu, R., Chen, D., Zhang, H. Q. Polym. Eng. Sci. 2018, 85, 767–774.
[82] Dupont Hytrel Thermoplastic Polyester Elastomer Product Reference Guide. http://www.dupont.
com/products-and-services/plastics-polymers-resins/thermoplastics. (Accessed on 7 January, 2023).
[83] Ostwald, W. Ueber die rechnerische Darstellung des Strukturgebietes der Viskosität. Kolloid￾Zeitschrift 1929, 47, 176–187.
[84] Liang, J. Z., Zhong, L. Polym. Test. 2010, 29, 972–976.
[85] Liang, J.-Z., Zhong, L. J. Elastomers Plast. 2014, 46, 662–672.
[86] Schreiber, H. P., Rudin, A., Bagley, E. B. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1965, 9, 887–892.
[87] Lamberti, G., Peters, G. M. W., Titomanlio, G. Intern. Polymer Processing XXII 2007, 3, 303–310.
[88] Einstein, A. Annalen der Physik 1906, 19, 289–306.
[89] Batchelor, G. K. J. Fluid. Mech 1977, 83, 97–117.
[90] Mooney, M. J. Colloid Sci. 1951, 6, 162–170.
[91] Ball, R., Richmond, P. J. Phys. Chem. Liquids 1980, 9, 91–116.
[92] Krieger, I. M., Dougherty, T. J. Trans. Soc. Rheol. 1959, 3, 137–152.
[93] Kitano, T., Kataoka, T., Shirota, T. Rheol. Acta. 1981, 20, 207–209.
[94] Graham, A. L. Appl. Sci. Res. 1981, 37, 275–286.
[95] Frankel, N. A., Activos, A. Eng. Sci. 1967, 22, 847–853.
[96] Tanner, R. L. J. Non-Newtonian. Fluid Mech. 2003, 112, 251–268.
[97] Chafidz, A., Ma mun, S., Fardhyanti, D. S., Kustiningsih, I., Hidayat, A. IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng.
2019, 543, 012036.
[98] Cho, J. W., Paul, D. R. Polymer 2001, 42, 1083–1094.
[99] Kojima, Y., Usuki, A., Kawasumi, M., Okada, A., Kurauchi, T., Kamigaito, O. J. Polym. Sci. Part
A: Polym. Chem. 1993, 31, 983–986.
[100] Usuki, A., Kojima, Y., Kawasumi, M., Okada, A., Fukushima, Y., Kurauchi, T., Kamigaito, O. J. Mater
Res. 1993, 8, 1179–1184.
[101] Kutlu, B., Mein, J., Leuteritz, A., Brünig, H., Heinrich, G. Polymer 2013, 54, 5712–5718.
[102] Redondo, A., Chatterjee, S., Brodard, P., Korley, L. T. J., Weder, C., Gunkel, I., Steiner, U. Polymers
2019, 11, 1912.
[103] Sandler, J. K. W., Pegel, S., Cadek, M., Gojny, F., Van es, M., Lohmar, J., Blau, W. J., Schulte, K.,
Windle, A. H., Shaffer, M. S. P. Polymer 2004, 45, 2001–2015.
[104] Lu, Y., Jiang, J., Yoon, S., Kim, K.-S., Kim, J.-H., Park, S., Kim, S.-H., Piao, L. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2018, 10, 2093–2104.
[105] Gibson, I., Rosen, D. W., Stucker, B. Additive Manufacturing Technologies. Springer, 2015.
[106] ISO/ASTM D52900-15, Additive manufacturing — General principles — Terminology Dec, 2015.
[107] Yakout, M., Elbestawi, M. A., Additive Manufacturing of Composite Materials: An Overview. VMPT,
2017, Montréal.
130 Chapter 2 Thermoplastic matrix composites (TMC)Chapter 3
Thermosetting polymer-based composites
Description of abbreviations
Abbreviation Description
FRP Fibre-reinforced plastic
PMC Polymer matrix composite
MMC Metal matrix composite
CMC Ceramic matrix composite
RTM Resin transfer moulding
VARTM Vacuum-assisted resin transfer moulding
FRC Fibre-reinforced composite
SRIM So-called structural RIM
RFI Resin film infusion
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
SBS Short beam shear
DMA Dynamic mechanical analysis
TGAP Trifunctional epoxy resin
GFRP Glass fibre-reinforced plastic
UPE Unsaturated polyester
GFRT Glass fibre-reinforced thermoset
CFRT Carbon fibre-reinforced thermoset
BFRT Besalt fibre-reinforced thermoset composite
KFRT Kevlar fibre-reinforced thermoset
RIM Reaction injection moulding
CFRP Carbon fibre-reinforced plastic
TGDDM Tetraglycidylether of ,′-diaminodiphenyl methane
DGEBA Diglycidyl ether of bisphenol-A
ILSS Interlaminar shear stress
TGAP Triglycidyl p-aminophenol
LCM Liquid composites moulding
CFRC Carbon fibre-reinforced composite
CNT Carbon nanotube
CNF Carbon nanofibre
CVD Chemical vapour deposition
DCB Double cantilever beam
CFRC Carbon fibre-reinforced composite
CVD Chemical vapour deposition
CSRP Core-shell rubber particle
SEM Scanning electron microscope
PEBA Poly(ether-block-amide)
CTPEGA Carboxyl-terminated poly(ethylene glycol)
DGEBA Diglycidyl ether of bisphenol-A
HBP Hyperbranched polymer
CSRP Core-shell rubber particle
CF Carbon fibre
RIFT Resin infusion flexible tooling
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110781571-0033.1 Thermoset matrix
In previous chapter we have discussed composites based on thermoplastic matrix. Un￾like thermoplastic, thermosetting resins do not soften on heating and stiffen on cool￾ing repeatedly several times. Like rubbers they undergo some chemical curing on
heating and form 3-dimensional (3-D) network resulting in conversion into an infus￾ible and insoluble material. The difference between rubbers and thermosetting resin
is that rubbers are generally high-molecular-weight polymer whereas thermosetting
resins are mostly low-molecular-weight viscous liquid.
The composite industries are dominated by thermoset resins. The reason behind
this popularity of thermoset resin for composite application is their historic availability
with varying consistency like from viscous liquid to tack-free solid, relative ease of proc￾essing, lower cost of capital equipment for processing and low material cost. Since the
thermosetting resins are available in oligomeric or monomeric low-viscosity liquid
forms, they have excellent flow properties to facilitate resin impregnation of fibre bun￾dles and proper wetting of the fibre surface by the resin. Thermoset-based products can
be moulded, in general, at a much lower temperature and pressure compared to ther￾moplastics. By virtue of their crosslinked structure, thermoset composites offer better
creep properties and environmental stress-cracking resistance compared to many ther￾moplastics, for example, polycarbonate [1–4]. The presence of the traces of solvent may
cause catastrophic failure in case of thermoplastic whereas cured thermosetting poly￾mers being in the 3D network state are not affected significantly due to the presence of
solvent. Another important characteristic of a thermosetting resin is that their proper￾ties are not only dependent on the chemistry and molecular weight of the resin (as in
the case of thermoplastic) but also largely dependent on the crosslink density of the
resin network. A wide range of properties can be achieved by simply tailoring the cross￾link density of a network without changing the chemical structure.
For detailed chemistry and properties of thermoset resins, the readers may con￾sult the author’s recent book published [5] in 2022. However, for the sake of the read￾ers the thermosetting matrix will be elaborated briefly. The thermosetting resins can
be classified into two categories, namely general-purpose resin, for example, unsatu￾rated polyester (UPE), epoxy, vinyl ester and high-temperature resins, for example,
phenolic, benzoxazine, polyimide, bismaleimide, cyanate ester and pthalonitrie. Look￾ing at the properties, a resin can be selected for a particular application considering
especially the service temperature in which the product will be used. It may be noted
that thermal stability of reinforcing fillers is much higher compared to the resin sys￾tem. Since thermal resistance of polymeric resin is much inferior to the reinforcing
filer, the thermal performance of a composite material is mostly controlled by resin
system used as a matrix. If service temperature (the maximum temperature at which
a material has to work) is higher than the glass transition temperature of the resin,
the related composite will lose its dimensional stability whatever be the strength of
reinforcing fibre used for making the composite. Once the resin loses its dimensional
132 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesstability the related composite cannot be used anymore for load-bearing applications.
The resin should be selected in such a way that the glass transition temperature of
the resin should be at least 50 ºC higher than the service temperature. For an applica￾tion, it may so happen that a material has to work partly at a low temperature and
partly at a high temperature. In that case, the higher service temperature has to be
considered for the selection of resin system for fabrication of composite for such ap￾plications. However, for other application this condition may not hold good. For ex￾ample, in case of sealant application wherein the resin has to be rubbery in nature,
the glass transition temperature of the resin should be well below the service temper￾ature. If the service temperature is less than the glass transition temperature of the
resin, the material will be hard and brittle at the service temperature and will not be
suitable for sealing applications. For adhesive and coating applications the glass tran￾sition temperature should be close to the service temperature. In the subsequent sec￾tions, various thermosetting resins will be briefly discussed under the heading of
general-purpose and high-temperature resins.
3.1.1 General-purpose resins
3.1.1.1 Unsaturated polyester resin
Unsaturated polyester resin (UPE) resins are a mixture of unsaturated polyester, sty￾rene and an inhibitor [6–9]. Polyesters are a type of condensation polymer, which are
made by reacting a diacid or dianhydride with a dihydroxy compound (diols). Unsatu￾rated polyester can be made by using acid monomer containing unsaturation in its
structure (namely maleic anhydride or fumeric acid) in addition to saturated acid
monomers like phthalic anhydride. The most common diols used for unsaturated poly￾ester synthesis are ethylene glycol or propylene glycol. The unsaturation generated in
the structure due to incorporation of maleic anhydride is utilized for curing of the resin
through free radical mechanism. Styrene is added up to a concentration of 40 wt% to
act as a reactive diluent to reduce viscosity of the resins. Styrene can also be polymer￾ized by free radical mechanism. The inhibitor is used to enhance the storage life of the
resin. When the resin is mixed with a peroxide initiator and activator (cobalt octoate/
naphthenate), the free radicals are formed. The free radicals produced at the initial
stage are consumed by the inhibitor due to higher stability of inhibitor radicals. Once
the inhibitor molecules are depleted, the free radicals, produced from the initiator, initi￾ate the polymerization of the polyesters and styrene; both the intermolecular and intra￾molecular crosslinking of polyester with or without involving styrene. Chain branching
on the polyester molecules and homopolymerization of styrene may also take place.
Organic peroxides, azine and azo compounds are used as to generate free radi￾cals. UPE industry is dominated by the use of peroxides namely methyl ethyl ketone
peroxide (MEKP), benzoyl peroxide (BPO) and t-butyl peroxide (TBO). MEKP decom￾poses at room temperature whereas BPO and TBO require higher temperatures 70
3.1 Thermoset matrix 133and 140 ºC, respectively, to decompose. It is necessary to use some accelerators which
accelerate the decomposition of peroxides in order to ensure room temperature or
low-temperature curing at a reasonable rate. Generally, transition metal oxides (e.g.
cobalt naphthenate and cobalt octoate) are used as accelerators for curing UPE resins.
The free radicals initiate the chain reaction which propagates through the unsatu￾rated sites of the polyester and monomer leading to the formation of a network struc￾ture, which is insoluble and infusible.
3.1.1.2 Epoxy resins
Epoxy resins constitute a class of thermosetting polymers characterized by the pres￾ence of two or more oxirane rings or epoxy groups within their molecular structure
[3, 4]. The resins form network on curing through the reaction of epoxide groups with
a suitable curing agent. The most common epoxy resin is diglycidylether of bisphenol￾A (DGEBA), which is prepared by the reaction of epichlorohydrin (ECD) and bisphe￾nol-A (BPA). Today, a wide variety of epoxy resins of varying consistency and physico￾chemical properties are available in the market after the first production started
simultaneously in Europe and in the United States in the early 1940s. It is important
for a material scientist to judiciously select the resin considering the nature of fibre,
sizing and the processing technique to be used [10–21]. The common types of epoxy
resins and curing agents that are used [22] for commercial application and research
and development are presented in Tab. 3.1.
Tab. 3.1: The epoxy resins and curing agents commonly used in researches and productions.
Resin epoxy Curing agent Application References
DGEBA Cycloaliphatic diamine, bis
p-amino cyclo-hexyl methane
CF sizing [, ]
Phenyl glycidyl ether Cyclohexane dicarboxylic
anhydride
Research of carbon
fibre-reinforced
plastic (CFRP)
composite
[]
Tetraglycidyl diaminodiphenyl
methane (TGDDM)
Diaminodiphenyl sulfone (DDS) Prepreg CFRP []
DGEBA Aliphatic polyethertriamine CFRP sheet []
DGEBA Anhydride CF sizing []
DGEBA and diglycidyl ether of
bisphenol-F (DGEBF)
Trioxatridecane diamine Adhesive []
DGEBA Mixing of diethylenetriamine and
triethylenetetramine
Civil construction []
134 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesA difunctional epoxy resin, that is, diglycidyl ether of bisphenol-A (reactive function￾ality = 2) is mostly used for composite applications as a matrix material. Multifunctional
epoxies like trifunctional, tetrafunctional or novolac epoxy resins are recommended for
applications where service temperature is higher than 100 ºC (e.g. aerospace). Amines
and anhydrides are used as curing agents. In case of amine, the epoxy group first under￾goes ring-opening reaction with primary amine to produce and secondary amine and
hydroxyl group. Then, the secondary amine reacts with other epoxide groups producing
additional hydroxyl groups and tertiary amines as shown in Fig. 3.1. This reaction contin￾ues until all active groups of hardener and/or epoxy resins have been completely con￾sumed. However, the reaction becomes diffusion-controlled and extremely slow once
the glass transition temperature of the network crosses the cure temperature. This is
called vitrification. Post-curing is necessary to expedite the further reaction. Although a
single activation energy and heat of reaction are experimentally obtained for both the
steps, reactivities of primary and secondary amino groups may be different. The hy￾droxyl groups generated during the cure can also react with the epoxy ring, forming
ether bonds (etherification). The etherification reaction competes with the amine-epoxy
cure when the reactivity of the amine is low or when there is an excess of epoxy groups.
The tendency of etherification reaction to take place depends on the temperature and
basicity of the diamines and increases with the concentration of epoxy in the mixture.
Let us now discuss the curing reaction in the presence of anhydride hardener.
Because the anhydride group cannot react directly with the epoxy group, the anhy￾dride ring first initiates a reaction by binding to the hydroxyl (OH) group existing in
the system to form a monoester containing a carboxylate group. Furthermore, the car￾boxylate group undergoes esterification reaction with an epoxy group to produce an
ester and hydroxyl bond. The reaction scheme is shown in Fig. 3.1. The curing reaction
Tab. 3.1 (continued)
Resin epoxy Curing agent Application References
Diglycidyl ester of
hexahydrophthalic acid and
,-epoxycyclohexyl methyl-,
epoxycyclohexane carboxylate
Hexahydrophthalic anhydride and
methylhexahydrophthalic
anhydride
CRFP composite []
TGDDM and novolac resin DDS Modified by novolac
resin
[]
DGEBA, merk Araldite GY-
with solvent of triglycidylether of
trimethylolpropane (TGETMP)
 wt% isopharone diamines
(vestamin IPD) and  wt%
trimethyl hexamethylene diamine
(vestamin TMD)
CFRP composite []
,-Epoxy cyclohexane
,-dicarboxylate diglycidyl
Polyamine and acid anhydride Prepreg CFRP []
3.1 Thermoset matrix 135with anhydride generally requires high temperature (200 ºC) and the cure tempera￾ture can be reduced by using a suitable catalyst. Unlike in the amine-cured system,
post-curing does not have much effect on the final structure of the epoxy resins [23].
The epoxy group can also react with the OH group in the system forming ether bonds
(the reaction is called etherification), and if the OH group comes from a resin back￾bone, a homopolymerization reaction will occur. Esterification and homopolymeriza￾tion reactions are likely to occur with an increase of the curing temperature, either
with an amine curing agent or anhydride.
3.1.1.3 Vinyl ester resin
VE resin was first produced commercially by Shell Chemical Co. in 1965 under the
trade name “Epocryl”. Subsequently Dow Chemical Co. introduced a similar series of
resins under the name “Derakane”. VE resins are prepared by reacting an epoxy resin
(difunctional or multifunctional) with an unsaturated carboxylic acid like acrylic acid
or methacrylic acid [24, 25]. For example, reaction between 1 mol of diglycidyl ether
of bisphenol-A and 2 mol of methacrylic acid can be used to synthesize a simple form
of vinyl ester. Synthesis of a VE resin is usually catalysed by tertiary amines, phos￾phines and alkalies or onium salts. The reaction is carried out in a temperature range
of 90–120 ºC and taking the reactants in a stoichiometric ratio. The complete esterifi￾cation of the epoxy resin, in practice, is difficult to achieve because of the gelation of
estherification
anhydride
initiation
probably another
initiation
O
O
O
O O
HO OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O O
O
O
O
O
(a)
(b)
O
O
R1 = R2 =
R2 
R2 R2 
R2 R2 
R2 R2 
R2 R2 
R1 
R1 
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
HC
HC
HC HC
x CH3 O
O
O
2
O O O
O
O
O
O
O
O
1 3
CH2 +
+ +
H H +
N N
N
H2C
H2C
H2C
CH
CH
H CH 2C CH
H H
N
Fig. 3.1: Network scheme generated by the reaction between epoxy DGEBA: (a) polyetheramine hardener
and (b) anhydride hardener [23].
136 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesthe product before an acid value below 10 is attained. Therefore, an excess of epoxide
resin is always employed in the esterification reactions. In order to stop the polymeri￾zation of methacrylic acid an inhibitor such as hydroquinone is used. A wide variety
of VE resin can be synthesized by changing the nature of base commercial epoxy res￾ins namely halogenated or phosphorous-containing resins and unsaturated acids (e.g.
acrylic, methacrylic, crotonic and cinnamic).
Like UPE resin, it is necessary to add reactive diluents like monofunctional vinyl
compounds or acrylates to overcome the increased processing time and to reduce the
high risks of inhomogeneity and consequent defect generation in the specimens [26].
The diluents are required for better control over the process and to modify the rheo￾logical and thermomechanical properties of the related VE resins.
3.1.2 High-temperature resin
3.1.2.1 Phenolic resin
Phenolic resin or phenol formaldehyde (PF) resin is the first man-made polymer mate￾rial produced commercially. The concept of producing high-molecular-weight substan￾ces from the oligomeric product was first discovered by Leo H. Baekeland in 1909 [27].
Although nature has long demonstrated the synthesis of polymers like protein, carbohy￾drate and natural rubber and modification of natural polymers using sulphur, that is,
vulcanization or curing of natural rubber, was discovered by Goodyear in 1839, the
macromolecular hypothesis was profounded by Staudinger in 1920 [28] or a base cata￾lyst and the process initially adopted by Barkeland has been perfected to higher and
higher level of sophistication and reached the modern phenolic resin technology. When
phenol is used in excess the product is called novolac and when formaldehyde is used
in excess the product is called resole. Resole is self-curable and does not need any addi￾tional curing agent. However, novolac requires extra formaldehyde for curing to take
place and generally cured with 10–15% of hexamethylene tetramine (HMTA), a conden￾sation product of formaldehyde and ammonia [29]. Under the curing condition, HTMA
decomposes to generate formaldehyde which converts novolac to a crosslinked network
structure. In the case of novolac it is necessary to add plasticizers like methyl benzoate
(non-reactive) or furfuryl alcohol (reactive) to achieve uniform and complete curing re￾quired to ensure high modulus and performance at elevated temperatures [30].
Phenolic resins by virtue of its aromatic backbone display a number of useful prop￾erties namely high mechanical strength, long-term thermal and mechanical stability, ex￾cellent fire, smoke and low toxicity characteristics and excellent thermal insulating
capability. The smoke density is 40 times higher than epoxy and vinyl ester resins. The
cured phenolic resin exhibit Tg more than 150 ºC and therefore suitable for high￾temperature applications. Novolac and resole-based phenolic resins and their compo￾sites are extensively used in aerospace industries due to good heat and fire resistance
and excellent ablative properties. The main attraction of such phenolic resin is low cost
3.1 Thermoset matrix 137in addition to the properties mentioned above. However, several technological issues
are associated with the processing of such resins and the related composites. This is be￾cause of the cure chemistry involving condensation mechanism with the evolution of
volatile gases, which initiates the formation of microvoids leading to the substantial de￾terioration of deterioration of mechanical properties of the related components. More￾over, acidic catalyst used to cure the resin initiates corrosion in the metallic structure.
Most importantly the phenolic resin networks are highly brittle, which limits their use
for many applications. As a solution to these problems of conventional phenolic resins,
addition-cure phenolic resins have been developed [31–37] by using various approaches
like (i) incorporation of thermally stable addition-curable groups onto a novolac back￾bone; (ii) structural modification (transformation) involving phenolic hydroxyl groups;
(iii) curing of novolac by suitable curatives through addition reactions of OH groups and
(iv) reactive blending of structurally modified phenolic resin with a functional reactant.
3.1.2.2 Benzoxazine resin
Benzoxazine monomers are characterized by the presence of oxazine rings, that is, het￾erocyclic six-membered rings with oxygen and nitrogen atoms and attached to a benzene
ring. Holly and Cope [38] first reported the synthesis through Mannich condensations of
phenols with formaldehyde and amines. The work related to the possibility of commer￾cial applications for the preparation of phenolic materials with improved properties
was first patented by Schreiber [39]. Polybenzoxazines are prepared by reacting a phe￾nol with formaldehyde and an aromatic amine and are cured by thermal ring-opening
polymerization [40, 41]. Aminomethylol group is formed as an intermediate due to reac￾tion between the amine and formaldehyde which further reacts to form 1,3,5-triaza-like
structure. Subsequent reaction with phenol and formaldehyde leads to the formation of
oxazine rings. The resin can polymerize via a thermally induced ring-opening reaction
via ortho attack to form a phenolic structure characterized by a Mannich base bridge
(CH2-NR-CH2). If we compare with novolac or resole-based phenolic resin, then we can
see the presence of Mannich base bridge (CH2–NR–CH2) in benzoxazine resin instead of
the methylene bridge structure associated with traditional phenolic resins [42, 43]. The
better impact properties of banzoxazine compared conventional phenolic can be ex￾plained considering the change in chemical structure. The synthetic chemistry offers
wide scope to play with chemical structure using different types of phenol and amine to
synthesize a variety of benzoxazine polymers. The polybenzoxazine polymers derived
from monofunctional monomers (containing one oxazine ring) forms linear polymers,
whereas di- or polyfunctional benzoxazine monomers (having two or more oxazine
rings) display crosslinking networks which are very useful for commercial applications.
Benzoxazines are known for their excellent thermal and dielectric properties, low water
absorption and surface energy, zero shrinkage and structure design flexibility.
Recently Yan et al. [44] developed bio-based resin which is curable completely
below 200 ºC. They used bio-based phloretic acid (PHA), p-coumaric acid (pCOA) and
138 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesferulic acid (FEA) containing a carboxylic group as a phenol source and furfurylamine
(FA) as an amine source are used to prepare three full bio-based benzoxazines (PHA-fa,
pCOA-fa and FEA-fa). Synthetic routes of PHA-fa, pCOA-fa and FEA-fa monomers are
shown in Fig. 3.2. Note that other biobased enzoxazine resins exhibit lower thermal sta￾bility and inferior low-temperature curing performance compared to the resin made
from fossil feedstock. The curing mechanisms of PHA-fa, pCOA-fa and FEA-fa monomers
are shown in Fig. 3.3. The mechanism includes ring opening, electrophilic substitution,
structural rearrangement and crosslinking of the double bond. On heating, the oxazine
ring is first opened to generate a Schiff base structure, and then the Schiff base structure
attacks the phenol ortho-position (aryl attack), O atom in the oxazine ring (O-attack) or
the furan ring (furan ring attack). Meanwhile, Mannich-base phenoxy-type polybenzoxa￾zine was formed by insertion of the monomers via the oxygen of the oxazine ring. Fi￾nally phenoxy-type polybenzoxazine rearranges into phenolic-type polybenzoxazine.
The presence of double bond creates the possibility of formation of another crosslinked
structure formed by the double bond for poly(pCOA-fa) and poly(FEA-fa) resins. Apart
from crosslinkable benzoxazine resins, main-chain benzoxazines are also developed
[45–48]. The main-chain benzoxazine resins behave like a thermoplastic and can be
processed as self-supporting films, which can used for various applications.
Fig. 3.2: Synthetic routes of PHA-fa, pCOA-fa and FEA-fa monomers, Yan, Zuomin Zhan (reprinted with
permission from Yan, Zuomin Zhan, Huaqing Wang, Jie Cheng and Zhengping Fang, ACS Appl. Polym.
Mater. 3 (2021) 3392−3401. © 2021, ACS Publishing Company).
3.1 Thermoset matrix 1393.1.2.3 Polyimides
Polyimides are another class high-temperature resins, which were made commercial
available by DuPont in the early 1960s in the trade name of Kapton, Vespel, etc. Poly￾imides are generally made by reacting a dianhydride with an aromatic amine. A wide
variety of polyimides can be made by using different types of anhydrides and amine
compound. The first step of the reaction is the formation of a polyamic acid interme￾diate in an organic solvent like dimethylacetamide or N-methyl pyrrolidone. The in￾termediate formation requires 6–20 h and the reaction time depends on reactivity of
the precursors. The polyamic acid intermediate undergoes further polymerization
under heat treatment to produce polyimide.
Polyimides are polymers having ring structure with –CO–NR–CO– backbone [49–52]
and by virtue of their aromatic backbone display outstanding thermal stability. Because
of their excellent thermal stability, superior mechanical strength and good chemical re￾sistance properties, aromatic PIs are widely used in various industrial applications. How￾ever, such outstanding properties of PIs are also associated with poor processability due
to their stiff chain structures and strong interchain interactions. When flexible linkages
are introduced into the structure the glass transition temperature tends to decrease lead￾ing to a sacrifice in thermal stability. Han et al. [53] reported a series of homo- and copo￾lyimides based on mixed thioetherdiphthalic anhydride (TDPA). TDPA is an aromatic
bridged anhydride and available as a mixture of three isomeric form as shown in
Fig. 3.4. The chemistry of synthesis of polyimides with TDA and different kinds of aro￾matic diamines is shown in Fig. 3.5. The idea is to introduce the flexible thioether moiety
into the network structure to improve the flexibility and easy melt processability. The
copolyimides from 1,3-phenylenediamine (m-PDA) and 3,4ʹ-oxydianiline (3,4ʹ-ODA) were
obtained with higher Tg and lower melt viscosity. Addition polyimides can synthesized in
Fig. 3.3: Curing mechanisms of PHA-fa, pCOA-fa and FEA-fa monomers (reprinted with permission
from Yan, Zuomin Zhan, Huaqing Wang, Jie Cheng and Zhengping Fang, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 3 (2021)
3392−3401. © 2021, ACS Publishing Company).
140 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesa similar way as discussed above for condensation polyimide using an aromatic com￾pound with the desired unsaturated group. By changing the unsaturated functional
groups, for example, vinyl, nadic, acetylene and phenyl ethynyl, different types of addi￾tion polyimides can be synthesized.
When a cured polyimide product is processed through such polyamic acid, the presence
of traces of high boiling solvent causes a significant reduction of the properties of the
polyimide networks. As a solution to this problem in situ polymerization of monomeric
reactants (PMR) resins have been developed in which half ester of a tetracarboxylic acid
like 3,3ʹ,4,4ʹ-benzophenone tetracarboxylic acid anhydride (BTDA) is used in place of dia￾nhydride and mixed with an amine using low boiling solvent like methanol or ethanol.
Because of lower reactivity of half ester, its mixture with aromatic amine can be stored
for a long time in ambient temperature and at higher temperature (>100 ºC) anhydride
is reformed and reacts with the amine groups to produce a polyimide oligomer. PMR-30
and PMR-5 resins are widely used as commercial resins (marketed by SP Systems Imitec
Inc., Hycomp. Inc., Eikos Inc.). The resin offers an upper use temperature greater than
300 ºC and widely used for fabrication of carbon fibre-reinforced composites [54]. Sec￾4,4'-TDPA 3,3'-TDPA 3,4'-TDPA
o
o
o
s
o
o
o o
o
o
s o
o
o
s
o
o
o
o
o
o
Fig. 3.4: The structures of thioetherdiphthalic anhydride isomer (reprinted with permission from Y. Han,
X. Z. Fang, X. X. Zuo, eXPRESS Polymer Letters 4 (2010) 712–722. © 2010 Online Publishing).
TPER
Ar: PDA
+ NH Ar NH + N Ar N N N
n
m-cresol, isoquinoline
200ºC
o
o
o s
o o
o
o
o
m-PDA 4,4’-ODA 3,4’-ODA
TPEQ
o o
o o
o
o
o o
s
o o
o o
o o
o
Fig. 3.5: Synthesis of polyimides derived from mixed-TDPA via one-step polymerization (reprinted with
permission from Y. Han, X. Z. Fang, X. X. Zuo, eXPRESS Polymer Letters 4 (2010) 712–722. © 2010 Online
Publishing).
3.1 Thermoset matrix 141ond generation PMR resin (PMR-II) offers higher thermal stability compared to first￾generation PMR resin (PMR-I) and can be synthesized in the similar way (as used for
PMR-I) by replacing BTDA with fluorine-containing anhydrides such as 4,4ʹ-(hexafluoroi￾sopropylidene)-diphthalic acid, 4,4ʹ-(2,2,2-trifluoro-1-phenylethylidene) diphthalic anhy￾dride [55, 56].
As it is applicable for any thermoset resin, polyamide resins are required to be
cured at high temperature to achieve high glass transition temperature. In fact the resin
has to be cured at higher than the targeted glass transition temperature for a longer
time. It is not possible to get a network with glass transition temperature higher than
the cure temperature. Because when the glass transition temperature reaches the curing
temperature, the vitrification takes place and the reaction becomes very slow due to dif￾fusion controlled reaction mechanism. Therefore, it is necessary to cure at a sufficiently
high temperature for a longer time to get a high crosslink density which results high
glass transition temperature. The glass transition temperature of the network tends to
increase with increasing cure temperature. For example, a polyimide resin (PMR-15)
cured at 270 and 300 ºC for a few hours exhibits Tg values 190 and 280 ºC, respectively.
Post-curing at higher temperature is necessary for further increase in glass transition
temperature. The crosslinking reaction of polyimide involves various steps such as imid￾ization, isomerization and double Diels-Alder adduct formation. In the case of nadic
end-capped polyimides, retro Diels-Alder reactions of norborene end group take place
leading to the formation of maleimide groups and cyclopentadiene [57].
3.1.2.4 Bismaleimide resin
Bismaleimide resins are monomers or prepolymers with two or more maleimide end
groups. Bismaleimides offer advantages of both epoxy resins in terms of processabil￾ity (autocave moulding) and thermal stability like polyimides. Bismaleimide resins
display excellent physical property retention in hot/wet condition, flame retardancy
and easy processability [58]. Bismaleimide resins are prepared by reacting maleic an￾hydride with a suitable amine and reaction proceeds through bismaleimic acid inter￾mediate. The examples of commercial resins are Kerimid 601 (marketed by Rhone
Poulenc), which is a product of bis(4-maleimidophenyl) methane (BDM) and MDA. De￾pending on the nature of amines, different types of bismaleimide network can be
made. Hu and co-workers [59] investigated a BMI resin, comprising 2,2ʹ-diallylbisphe￾nol A (DBA) and 4,4ʹ-bismaleimidodiphenylmethane (BDM) which shows improved
thermal stability, mechanical and dielectric properties. The curing mechanism of the
resin involves multiple reactions, for example, “Ene” and “Diels-Alder” reactions be￾tween maleimide group of BDM and allyl group of DBA and the self-polymerization of
BDM via C=C bonds as shown in Fig. 3.6.
142 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesThe common issue of low toughness for all the thermoset networks is also applicable
to BMI resin. The research efforts have been made to resolve the issue. Use of BMI mono￾mer containing ether group such as 2,2′-bis[4-(4-maleimidephen-oxy) phenyl] propane
(BMPP) with conventional monomer used for making BMI resin is reported to result in
significant enhancement in toughness [60]. Incorporation of optimal concentration of
BMPP with BDM and DBA, the impact strength and critical stress intensity factor (GIC)
can be enhanced up to 103% and 85%, respectively, without a significant sacrifice in
thermal property (i.e. glass transition temperature of about 300 ºC). A number of
research papers have also been published addressing issue of processability of BMI
resin using asymmetric monomer for the synthesis namely 2-[(4-maleimidophenoxy)
methyl]-5-(4-maleimidophenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole (Mioxd) and 2-[(4-maleimidophenoxy)
phenyl]-5-(4-maleimido-phenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole (m-Mioxd), 2,3,3′4′-oxydiphthalic dia￾nhydride (a-ODPA). Various combinations of symmetric anhydride, asymmetric anhy￾dride, symmetric amine and asymmetric amine can be used [61–63]. The asymmetric
monomers hinder the packing of the molecular chains and thereby reduce the crystal￾linity, melting point and viscosity of the uncured BMI resins. As a result, solubility of
the resin in low boiling solvents such as 1,4-dioxane and chloroform is significantly im￾R R
R
OH
OH
DBA BDM
CH
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O O
O
O
O
O
O O
O
N
N N
N
N N N N
N
Ar N
Ar
Ar Ar Ar Ar
Ar
Ar Ar
Ar
Ene reaction
Further crosslinking
Homopolymerization
R
OH
OH
CH CH
+BDM
‘Diels-Alder’ reaction 
(above 200°C)
100–200°C
CH2 CH2
CH2 CH2
CH2
H
O
O O
+
+
Fig. 3.6: The chemical reactions among BDM and DBA (reprinted with permission from J. Hu, A. Gu,
G. Liang, D. Zhuo, L. Yuan eXPRESS Polymer Letters (2011) 555–568. © 2011 Online Publishing).
3.1 Thermoset matrix 143proved. However, such improvement in solubility is associated with a significant sacri￾fice in thermal stability and service of the related composites. The glass transition tem￾perature of the asymmetric precursors-based bismaleimide is found to be close to 250 ºC,
which is much lower than polyimide resin. In addition to use of BMI resin for structural
application, it is also used to modify the thermomechanical properties of other resins
like phenolic and epoxy. When an allyl group containing addition phenolic resin is
blended with bismaleimide resin, chemical bonding between phenolic and bismaleimide
takes place through Alderene reaction leading to the formation of a crosslinked network.
The properties of the blends in terms of thermal stability and impact strength can be
tuned as a function of blend composition depending of the application as a wide varia￾tion in glass transition temperature (150–290 ºC) and impact strength (175–230 kJ/m) can
be generated. If thermal stability is the prime requirement we can select a blend with
higher concentration BMI and if high impact strength is required for a particular appli￾cation then a blend with higher concentration of phenolic has to be chosen.
3.1.2.5 Cyanate ester resin
Cyanate ester resin (CE) are characterized by the presence of two or more cyanate
functional groups (–O–C≡N–) having an aromatic or cycloaliphatic backbone, which
are known for good thermal stability. The monomer required for synthesizing CE
resin was first reported by Grigat et al. [64] and commercial production of CE resin
started sometime in the mid-1980s. CE resins are generally prepared by reacting cyan￾ogen chloride with an alcohol or phenol in the presence of a tertiary amine [65, 66].
Diethylcyanamide is formed as a gaseous by-product. The formation of the by-product
is more when cyanogen bromide is used instead of cyanogen chloride. Cyanogen bro￾mide is preferable from a handling point of view as it is a solid substance unlike cyan￾ogen chloride, which is a gas. In order to reduce the formation of the undesirable by￾products, the reaction is carried out at low temperatures for a longer time to reduce
the formation diethylcyanamide. The hydroxyl compounds used as a precursor for
the reaction can also act as a catalyst for the trimerization of CE resin product. That is
why for the preparation of CE resin with long shelf life, it is necessary to ensure al￾most complete consumption of phenol or alcohol in the reaction [67, 68]. The un￾reacted phenol present in the resin catalyses the curing of CE resin and reduces the
shelf life. The curing of CE resin takes place through a thermally activated cyclotri￾merizaton reaction at a temperature above 200 ºC, which is basically an addition type
of reaction and resulted in the formation of three-dimensional crosslinked network
structure. It may be noted that cure temperature can be reduced by using a suitable
catalyst. Like other thermoset the curing reaction is highly exothermic in nature, so
adequate precaution should be adopted while processing the CE resin. The network
structure comprises triazine rings, which are chemically bonded to the backbone
structure through ether linkages. The presence of ether linkage is responsible for
higher toughness of cured CE resin compared to bismaleimide or polyimides. Unlike
144 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesin the phenolic resin where volatile gases are formed during curing, CE resin under￾goes curing via an addition reaction and hence there is no issue of void formation
observed during curing of CE resin. CE resin exhibits outstanding water absorption
properties because of the symmetric cyclic structure and a very less number of polar
groups it shows exceptionally low water absorption and dielectric loss. The cured CE
resins when subjected to adequate post-curing offers a glass transition temperature of
350–400 ºC and sustain a thermal ageing of more than 100 h at 300 ºC with any signifi￾cant loss in mechanical properties.
3.1.2.6 Phthalonitrile resins
Phthalonitriles (PN) are comparatively new class of high-temperature-resistant thermo￾setting resin family, which have drawn considerable research interest. Because of their
high thermal stability and outstanding mechanical properties and superior fire retard￾ancy many potential applications [69–76] in the area of high-temperature structural
composites and adhesives have been proposed. Similar to cyanate ester resin, PN resin
has a chemical structure in which aromatic and heterocyclic rings linked through. The
high-temperature resistance of PN resins is the outcome of its chemical structure having
aromatic and heterocyclic rings linked with flexible ether linkages form the backbone.
PN resins are basically the product of reaction between 4-nitro-phthalonitrile and an ar￾omatic dihydroxy compound in the presence of a basic catalyst, for example, K2CO3 in
polar aprotic solvents like DMSO. The initial product which is formed is called “Stage A”
resin. The same can be transformed into a stable prepolymer (green-coloured) known as
Stage B resin. The Stage B resin can be stored for indefinite time. This property is quite
different compared to other high-temperature thermoset resin which expires after a
time of about a year at room temperature. Therefore, it is necessary to store them in
subambient temperature. Another advantage is the ease of processing for fabrication of
composites using various techniques. Phthalonitriles are potential high-temperature ma￾terials which work for thousands of hours at 200 ºC, hundreds of hours at 300 ºC and
minutes at 540 ºC without a considerable sacrifice in mechanical properties. In addition
these materials retain useful properties under particular conditions like pressure or vac￾uum; mechanical loading, radiation, chemical or electrical exposure, all at temperatures
ranging from subambient to above 500 ºC. Unlike other thermosetting resins which are
readily available in commercial market by a number of industries, PN resins are com￾mercialized only by few companies, for example, M/s. Maverick Corporation, M/s. Cardo￾lite Corporation, USA, M/s. JFC Technologies, USA.
Although PN resins offer many useful properties as mentioned above, there are
some technical challenges which are related to very high curing temperature, slow and
complex curing reaction [77–79]. Therefore, new tools and machineries are to be fabri￾cated to process the composite parts using PN resin systems. In addition, more research
and development initiative are required to tailor the chemistry in such a way so that to
make these resins user-friendly encompassing variety of processing methods. The curing
3.1 Thermoset matrix 145process and thermal stability can be improved [80] by using a novel curing process with
mixed curing agents. With this objective, a new type of phthalonitrile-etherified resole
resin from resole resin and 4-nitrophthalonitrile was reported [81]. The curing reaction
is accelerated resulting a decreased cure time compared to those of phthalonitrile resin
due to synergistic effect among the phenolic hydroxyl groups, hydroxymethyl and nitrile
groups. Self-curing triphenol-A-based phthalonitrile resin precursor has also been re￾ported [82], which can act as a flexibilizer and curing agent for phthalonitrile resin.
Chen and co-workers synthesized [83] a new phthalonitrile-based resin-containing
benzoxazine (A-ph) using the aniline and 3-aminophenoxyphthalonitrile (3-APN) in a
mole ratio of 3:1 as the ammonia source. The PN resin is ended with CE resin and the
effect of bending on processability and fracture behaviour was investigated. The chemi￾cal structure of the PN resin and CE resin is shown in Fig. 3.7. As the resin blend is
cured copolymerization between PN and CE resins takes place. The probable polymeri￾zation processes and mechanisms are presented in Fig. 3.8. It can be seen that the ring￾opening polymerization of oxazine rings occurred preferentially in the presence of
trace hydrogen (Fig. 3.8a). Then, more active hydrogen and amine groups are generated,
which would significantly promote the ring-forming polymerization of cyanate and ni￾trile groups (Fig. 3.8b–d). In the end, the crosslinked network would be formed with
various heteroaromatic rings (Fig. 3.8e) including isoindole, triazine. In the blend sys￾tem, no clear boundary between ring opening of oxazine ring and self-crosslinking po￾lymerization of CE was observed. However, copolymerization occurred between PN
and CE resins due to ring-opening polymerization of oxazine and ring-forming polymer￾ization of cyanate and nitrile groups. When the concentration of CE was more than
40 wt%, the self-polymerization of cyanate would dominate the ring-forming polymeri￾zation. First ring-opening polymerization of oxazine occurs and then the ring-forming
polymerization of cyanate and nitrile groups would be encouraged by active hydrogen
and amine structures generated from ring-opening of oxazine rings. It was concluded
than addition 1 wt% CE resin with the PN resins resulted in optimum thermomechani￾cal properties.
N
N N
R R
R
NC
NC
a)
b)
C C C N
CH3
CH3
R1:
R2:
O
O O
O
O
Fig. 3.7: Structures of (a) phthalonitriles-containing benzoxazine (A-Ph) and (b) cyanate ester (CE)
(reprinted with permission from L. Chen, D. X. Ren, S. J. Chen, H. Pan, M. Z. Xu, X. B. Liu, eXPRESS Polymer
Letters (2019) 456–468. © 2019 Online Publishing).
146 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesFig. 3.8: (a) The Mannich bridge structure of ring-opened benzoxazine rings in A-ph; (b) and (c) cyanate
esters form a triazine ring structure through phenolic hydroxyl groups and its thermal polymerization,
3.1 Thermoset matrix 1473.2 Kinetics of thermoset curing
Conventionally, the study of a chemical reaction by thermo-analytical tools needs a suit￾able reaction rate model which is either derived from the reaction mechanism or empir￾ically described on the basis of experimental data, particularly for complex multi-step
process. However, generally the mathematical models assume constant values of activa￾tion energy (E) and pre-exponential factor (A) throughout the reaction process with a
fixed function of conversion f(α), for example, first order. Such approach may not actu￾ally represent a complex chemical reaction involving a solid core or where solidification
(vitrification) takes place from a liquid reactant mass, for example, in a curing reaction
of epoxy oligomer with a liquid diamine leading to an epoxy thermoset. This is because,
with the progress of the reaction, several factors such as heat flow, autocatalysis and
increasing crosslinking influence E and A for the most probable f(α). Hence, these pa￾rameters no longer remain independent of each other as assumed for simple reactions.
In reaction involving vitrification, the rate of reaction is controlled more by diffusion
(mass transfer) of the reacting species in the solid state rather than kinetic process. Near
the gel point, the kinetic parameters before and after vitrification will be different. Such
complexities may result in approximate fit for more than one model, leading to different
model dependent values of E and A. Additionally, neither the activation energy nor the
pre-exponential factor is constant during the progress of the reaction.
3.2.1 Isoconversion kinetics
Since E and A are not constant during the course of curing, these parameters are to
be determined at every conversion to describe the curing process. Such conversion
dependent kinetics treatment is called isoconversion kinetics. Using the same basic
kinetic equation with Arrhenius temperature dependence of rate constant, the param￾eters E and A are determined from the DSC thermogram of a curing reaction. Since
one particular model of conversion function f(α) must be valid for the reaction, it is
advantageous to eliminate the function from the equation variable terms. The method
then becomes a model-free kinetics. A and E are determined from identical conver￾sion (α) from a set of experiments by a thermo-analytical tool. The study of the reac￾tion can be in isothermal mode, several of them at different constant temperature or
Fig. 3.8: (continued)
respectively; (d) the nitrile group in A-ph forms an isoindole ring, a phthalocyanine ring and a triazine ring
by the action of the stimulus; (e) the possible structures of the composites. A general formula for the
representation of alkyl by “R”, R3, R4ʹ (reprinted with permission from L. Chen, D. X. Ren, S. J. Chen,
H. Pan, M. Z. Xu, X. B. Liu, eXPRESS Polymer Letters (2019) 456–468. © 2019 Online Publishing).
148 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesnon-isothermal mode with several runs with constant heating rate. The isothermal
mode has a disadvantage that during the preheating from ambient to the isothermal
set temperature, the sample reactants may undergo some change or reaction and
hence the total enthalpy evolved is not possible to capture and the kinetic parameters
may be inaccurate. This is particularly important for high-temperature curing of ther￾mosets. Second, non-isothermal study always enables one to calculate the changes in
activation energy at various temperatures as the reaction progresses, which in iso￾thermal study would require large number of isothermal experiments.
Two independent studies by Ozawa [84, 85] and Flynn and Wall [86] first used
this method for calculation of activation energy of a reaction by thermo-analytical
methods at constant heating rates as a non-isothermal process. Subsequently, there
were many reports in the literature for determination of activation energy, and a few
are given here as references [87–94] and also the pre-exponential factor of Arrhenius
expression of rate constant-temperature relationship [95].
The general kinetic equation can be stated as follows:
dα
dt = kðTÞfðαÞ (3:1)
For a non-isothermal reaction, the expression will be
dα
dt = Ae−E=RTfðαÞ (3:2)
where R is universal gas constant and A is the pre-exponential factor, also referred to
as Arrhenius frequency factor.
In a DSC experiment, the heat flow rate (dH/dt) is recorded against time at a con￾stant temperature (isothermal curing) or against temperature using a dynamic tem￾perature run (non-isothermal curing) at a constant heating rate. In both the methods,
the heat generated at any instant normalized by the total exotherm is taken as the
conversion at that instant:
α = ΔHt
ΔH0
(3:3)
and hence,
dα
dt = 1
ΔH0
dHt
dt (3:4)
dHt/dt being simply the Y-axis value in the DSC plot at any instant t. The enthalpies
ΔHt and ΔH0 are the area under the DSC thermogram up to the instant t and total area
of the thermogram, respectively.
3.2 Kinetics of thermoset curing 1493.2.1.1 Friedman’s method
Equation (3.2) can be solved for E by differential method. This method is termed as
Friedman’s method [96]:
ln dα
dt  
α,j
= ln½  Aαfð Þ α − Eα
RTα,j
(3:5)
The subscript α implies that the data are taken for same extent of conversion from
non-isothermal reaction experiment with different constant heating rates (β), where
β = dT
dt
so that
dα
dt = dT
dt   dα
dT   = β dα
dT   (3:6)
and j in eq. (3.5) represent the particular thermal programme, for example, at a heat￾ing rate (β) of 5, 10, 15, 20 . . . K/min, etc.
In eq. (3.5), the first term in the right hand side is constant, since at the particular
conversion, A and the function f(α) are constant. From a non-isothermal DSC thermo￾gram, the sets of (dα/dt) −1/T for identical α at heating rates (β) 5, 10, 15 and 20 ºK/min
are calculated and the plot of eq. (3.5) represents a straight line for each set of α. The
slope of the plot is –Eα/R, from which Eα is calculated. The result gives an E-dependency
on conversion. Since f(α) is not evaluated for calculation of Eα, the result is independent
of the model describing f(α). For isothermal DSC, the dα/dt –1/T sets are taken at identi￾cal conversions in each thermogram of several isothermal temperatures (e.g. 100, 120,
130 and 140 ºC).
3.2.1.2 Kissinger method
Considering eq. (3.2), Kissinger [97] used the condition of the conversion rate maxima
by taking derivative of the rate and equating to zero:
d
dt
dα
dt   = 0 = d
dt Ae−E=RT fð Þ α
h i (3:7)
or,
Hence,
Eβ
RT2
p
= A d
dt fðαÞ
 
p
exp − E
RTP
  (3:8)
The Arrhenius pre-exponent A and the derivative of f(α) at peak are constant due to
the fixed conversion at the peak. Therefore, taking logarithm of eq. (3.8), we get
150 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesln β
T2
p
 ! = ln A d
dt fðαÞ
 
p
 ! − ln Ep
R
  − Ep
RTp
(3:9)
A plot of the left-hand side against 1/Tp would result in a straight line and the activa￾tion energy can be calculated from the slope of the line.
Since the activation energy is calculated without f(α), it is also a model-free
method. Generally, if the curing mechanism is same for the envelop of the tempera￾ture considered, then it has been observed that the peak rate corresponds to a partic￾ular conversion irrespective of heating rate (β). However, the activation energy thus
calculated is not applicable to conversions other than at peak rate. Otherwise, being a
differential method, it should yield same value of activation energy as Friedman
method at the conversion corresponding to the peak rate.
3.2.2 Integral form of model-free kinetics
The model-free kinetics of isoconversion can be in the integrated form of eq. (3.2). The
integration of eq. (3.2) gives
gðαÞ =
ð
α
0
dα
fðαÞ
= A
β
ð
T
T0
exp − Eα
RT  dT (3:10)
or
gðαÞ = AEα
βR
 p
Eα
RT   = AEα
βR
 pðxÞ (3:11)
where x = E
RT
and p(x) is the integral defined as
pðxÞ = e−E=RT
E=RT
+
ð −E=RT
−∞
e−x ð Þ =x dx
2
4
3
5 (3:12)
The integral in eq. (3.10) cannot be analytically solved. However, there can be either a
numerical integration or an approximate value of the integral may be used. Doyle
[98] Murray and White [99] gave approximate values. Coats and Redfern [100] used
an approximation by assuming an nth-order kinetic expression. A rational approxi￾mation up to four degrees of x is more frequently used for better accuracy which is
given by Senum and Yang [101, 102]. Various solutions to eq. (3.10) based on approxi￾mations give minor variations in the value of activation energy.
From eq. (3.11), taking logarithm,
log½gðαÞ = logð Þ AE=R − log β + log p x½  (3:13)
3.2 Kinetics of thermoset curing 151A table of x (=E/RT) and corresponding –log p(x) is given by Toop [103] for the first
approximate value. With Doyle’s approximation [97] for the value of log p(x):
log p
E
RTi
  ffi −2.315 − 0.457
E
RTi
(3:14)
and value of g(a):
gð Þ α = 7.03 AEα
βR ð10−3
Þ expð−1.052xÞ (3:15)
3.2.2.1 Flynn-Wall-Ozawa method
Flynn-Wall-Ozawa (FWO) method [87, 88] is based on Doyle’s approximation as shown
in eqs. (3.14) and (3.15). Taking logarithm of eq. (3.15), we have
lnðβÞ = ln AEα
R
  − ln½  gð Þ α − 4.9575 − 1.052 Eα
RT (3:16)
At a constant conversion a, the functions g(α), A and Eα are constant. Therefore, eq.
(3.16) can be written as
lnðβÞ = Cons. − 1.052 Eα
RT (3:17)
Therefore, when a particular extent of decomposition is to be taken for life time assess￾ment, the TGA runs for several heating rates β1, β2, . . . should be taken and correspond￾ing temperatures T1, T2, . . . should be noted at that constant extent of conversion
(weight loss). Subsequently, a plot of log(β) vs 1/T should yield activation energy Eα from
the slope of the curve. If more than one conversion is taken, then we should ideally
have parallel lines for each conversion; otherwise the data scattering will be too high to
determine a reliable activation of energy at various conversions.
FWO method is not so accurate because of the Doyle’s approximation. However,
it gives comparatively acceptable result.
3.2.2.2 Kissinger-Akahira-Sunose (KAS) method
Integral form of KAS method [103] uses the approximate integral value of p(x) from
Murray and White [98] as
pðxÞ ffi e−x
x2
The KAS equation is supposed to give more accurate estimation of activation energy:
152 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesln β
T2
  = ln AR
Eα
  − ln½  gð Þ α − Eα
RT (3:18)
ln β
T2
  = Cons. − Eα
RT (3:19)
A plot of left side of the equation against 1/T will be a straight line with a slope Eα/R
and the value of Eα is calculated therefrom.
3.2.2.3 Starink method
A comparison of all approximation of p(x) was done by Starink [104] where it is seen
that all the approximations are derived from the series expansion of p(x) by different
researchers. The following approximation given by Starink for p(x) is supposed to be
more accurate:
pðxÞ ffi expð Þ −1.0008x − 0.312
x1.92 (3:20)
and corresponding expression for estimate of activation energy:
ln β
T1.92   = Cons. − 1.0008 Eα
RT (3:21)
The plot of the left side against (1/T) would give a straight line with the slope (1.0008Eα/R).
It is seen that the Starink method is almost similar to KAS method, with a small difference
in the power of T on the left side expression and also a minute difference for the slope.
3.2.3 Advanced isoconversion models
The integral methods use integration of the function p(x) at every conversion for 0 to
t. Therefore, there is always adding up of errors in each infinitesimal step. This results
in so-called flattening of data and gives rise to errors. Vyazovkin [105–107] suggested
a modification of the determination of activation energy by integration of a small in￾terval of conversion and a non-linear iterative process to determine activation energy
more accurately. The small interval of conversion (Δα) can be 0.01. He proposed mini￾mization of the following function by iteration to arrive at a successively constant
value of activation energy in each conversion:
ϕð Þ Eα =
Xn
i=1
Xn
j≠1
J E½  α, Tið Þ tα
J Eα, Tjð Þ tα

  (3:22)
where J is the integral defined as
3.2 Kinetics of thermoset curing 153J E½  α, Tið Þ tα =
t
ðα
tα−Δα
exp
Eα
RTiðtÞ
 dt (3:23)
Cai and Chen [108] subsequently used a linear iterative method, also using small con￾version interval (Δα = 0.01).
gð Þ α, α − Δα = Aα−Δα=2
β
T
ðα
Tα−Δα
exp −Eα−Δα=2=RT 
 dT
= Aα−Δα=2
β
T
ðα
0
expð−Eα−Δα=2=RTÞdT −
ð
Tα−Δα=Δα22
0
exp −Eα−Δα=2=RTÞdT 
2
4
(3:24)
Budrugeac [109] proposed the following iterative process with small conversion
interval:
ln β
T2 − T1
= ln A
gð Þ α2 − gð Þ α1
+ ln Rl − E
RT2
(3:25)
Details of all the above methods and the advantages, limitations, applicability and the
methods to carry out a meaningful kinetics by thermal analysis suggested by various
researchers and organizations are discussed in Chapters 6 and 7.
3.2.3.1 Pre-exponential factor
The pre-exponential factor is considered as the frequency of collisions of reacting spe￾cies. This is assumed to be constant in case of unhindered collisions, particularly in gas￾eous or liquid state. However, in a progressively vitrifying reaction mass, the number of
collisions may not be same as the reaction progresses. It is thus important to study this
parameter when considering a curing reaction. In order to get a complete reaction rate
from DSC thermogram, we need the pre-exponential factor (Aα) of Arrhenius equation of
rate constant. From eq. (3.5), Aα can be calculated from the intercept as follows:
lnð Þ Aα = Iα − ln fð Þ α (3:26)
where Iα is the intercept. The function f(α) can be defined by many mathematical ex￾pressions mostly derived from basic theories as tabulated below in Table 3.2. There￾fore, using different f(α) selected from the list, one can get various values of Aα.
Therefore, a set of Eα – ln(Aα) pair for each conversion can be obtained. It is generally
observed that the relationship is linear
lnð Þ Aα = a + bEα (3:27)
This is termed as compensation effect for variation of model specific values of Eα and
Aα. However, the relationship could be a simple polynomial function as well.
154 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based composites3.2.3.2 Model fitting
It can be seen that the values of Eα and Aα are independent of heating rate. Hence, in
order to investigate the most suitable model f(α) satisfying the pair of Eα – Aα for vari￾ous conversions, calculated values of conversions from eq. (3.9) can be compared with
the conversions (α) taken from the DSC thermogram for any heating rate. Equation
(3.9) is actually the integrated form of eq. (3.2):
α = Aα
ð
n
Ti=1
exp − Eα
RTα
 fðαÞdt (3:28)
The integral ð
exp − E
RT  dt can be evaluated by some approximation and such ap￾proximate integrals are listed in several literatures [97–102, 104, 105]. It should be
noted that the function f(α) is constant for a constant conversion. However, for conve￾nient analysis, numerical integration is done to obtain the conversion at various tem￾peratures corresponding to chosen conversions of the DSC thermogram with one
heating rate. An average f(α) vs α of all heating rates can be calculated and compared
with the corresponding average calculated values using eq. (3.9). For that, the average
values of Tα, Aα, dα/dt and f(α) for each conversion should be calculated. The calculated
conversion function f(α) using eq. (3.9) can be tried to fit with a model in Table 3.2.
3.2.3.3 Case study
An epoxy resin of average epoxy equivalent of 180 is being cured by a polyether di￾amine of molecular weight 800 under a non-isothermal DSC programme at heating
Tab. 3.2: Some reaction models f(α) used for study of reaction kinetics of solids.
No. Name of the model Symbol f(a)
 Power law P a/
 Power law P a/
 Power law P a/
 Power law P/ (/) a−/
 First order F  − a
 Second order F ( − a)

 Avrami–Erofeev A ( − a)[−ln( − a)]/
 Avrami–Erofeev A ( − a)[−ln( − a)]/
 Avrami–Erofeev A ( − a)[−ln( − a)]/
 Contracting Cylinder R ( − a)
/
 Contracting Sphere R ( − a)
/
 -Dimensional diffusion D (/) a−
 -Dimensional diffusion D [−ln(( − a)]−
 -Dimensional diffusion D (/)( − a)
/
[−( − a)
/
]
−
 Modified Sestak-Berggren SB am ( − a)
n
3.2 Kinetics of thermoset curing 155rates 5, 10, 15 and 20 ºC/min with a nitrogen flow. The sample and the cell initially
were cooled down to −30 ºC and the runs were taken up to 250 ºC in each experiment.
Subsequently, the cell was cooled down to −30 ºC and the run was repeated to ensure
completion of the curing reaction. The data was recorded as W/g (dH/dt per g) against
temperature. The base line correction was done solving a linear equation taking the
coordinates of start to end of the DSC peak in the thermogram. Figure 3.9 shows the
four thermograms of the non-isothermal DSC study. The noticeable beginning of the
reaction can be seen at about 70–75 ºC and completed at around 250 ºC. The peak heat
flow rate takes place at higher temperature as the heating rate is increased.
0
–0.8
–0.7
–0.6
–0.5
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0
0.1
25 50 75 100 125
Temperature, ºC
5 ºC/min
10 ºC/min
15 ºC/min
20 ºC/min
HeatFlow (dH/dt), W/g
150 175 200 225 250 275 300
Fig. 3.9: DSC thermogram of epoxy curing at four heating rates (non-isothermal).
0.0
300
5º C /min
10ºC/min
15ºC/min
20º C/min
350
Temperature, K
Conversion (α)
400 450 500 550
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Fig. 3.10: Conversion (extent of reaction) of epoxy curing by non-isothermal DSC scan.
156 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesThe enthalpies of reaction were calculated and are shown in Table 3.3. The con￾version (α) corresponding to the temperatures for each heating rate plot is calculated
using eqs. (3.3) and (3.4) and plotted as T – α in Fig. 3.10. The conversion lines are al￾most parallel, indicating identical reaction mechanism of curing for all heating rates.
The conversion at a particular temperature is higher for slower heating rate.
The kinetic parameters calculated from the thermograms according to one differential
method of Friedman using eq. (3.5) and one integral method by Starink using eq. (3.21).
The kinetic plots for these two methods are shown as Fig. 3.11 (Friedman) and Fig. 3.12
(Starink) at conversions from 0.05 to 0.95. Both the kinetic plots are almost perfectly linear
for all conversions, indicating fairly good DSC thermogram data, baseline correction and
calculated values of ΔH0 and conversion-dependent ΔH from α = 0.05–0.95.
The conversion-dependent activation energy was calculated for these two methods in
the same conversion range and plotted against conversion in Fig. 3.13. The activation
energy Friedman method has overall range of 50–60 kJ/mol, but have some variations
around 50–60% and 80% conversion, and with average value of 54.5 kJ/mol while Star￾ink method has resulted in almost constant activation energy ranging from 52 to 56 kJ/mol
with an average of 54 kJ/mol, same as Friedman method. The variation of the activation
energy for Friedman method is obviously due to the differential method, where even
Tab. 3.3: Enthalpy of curing of epoxy at four heating rates: non-isothermal DSC.
Heating rate (Δ), ºC/min    
Enthalpy of curing (ΔH), J/g . . . .
0.0018
–8.5
–8
–7.5
–7
–6.5
–6
–5.5
–5
0.002 0.0022 0.0024
1/T, K–1
Friedman: Epoxy curing
ln(dα/dt)
0.0026 0.0028 0.003
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.95
Fig. 3.11: Kinetic plot according to Friedman method: non-isothermal DSC study.
3.2 Kinetics of thermoset curing 157minute error in dα/dt data can cause such variation, while in Starink method of approxi￾mate integration, the cumulative errors are averaged out.
The compensation parameters were calculated to obtain a nearly perfect linear rela￾tionship of Eα and Aα when the sets of these two parameters are calculated for all the
function f(α) in Table 1 (except Sestak-Berggren model). The calculation was done
using the following rearranged equation:
ln 1
fkðαÞ
dα
dt   = ln Ak,α − Ek,α
RTk,α
(3:29)
0.0018
–14.4
–14
–13.6
–13.2
–12.8
–12.4
–12
0.002 0.003
Starink: Epoxy curing
0.0022
1/T,K–1
1n(β/T192)
0.0024 0.0026 0.0028
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.95
Fig. 3.12: Kinetic plot according to Starink method: non-isothermal DSC study.
0
40
45
50
55
60
65
0.2
Friedman
DSC Curing : Activation Energy
Starink
0.4
Ea, KJ/mol
0.6 0.8 1
Fig. 3.13: Conversion-dependent activation energy of epoxy curing by Friedman and Starink methods.
158 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesIn the above expression, k stands for the particular model f(α) taken from Table 1. The
da/dt and T values correspond to a heating rate. Therefore, for the four heating rates,
we have four sets of calculated values of compensation parameters. The plots of the
compensation parameters are shown in Fig. 3.14.
Subsequent to the four sets of Eα – Aα of the four heating rates, f(α) for the heating
rates were calculated using the rearranged equation:
fð Þ α = ðdα=dtÞα
Aα exp −Eα=RTα½ (3:30)
Hence, we have four f(α) calculated values for four heating rates. We need to have one
function only for the reaction because the reaction model should not depend on heating
rate or any thermal programme. In order to do an averaging, we can find average A, T, α,
dα/dt and calculate f(α) for each heating rates and then calculate average f(α).
In this case, we resort to the first method. The average values, fitted to linear or
polynomial equations, are given in Tab. 3.4.
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–50 –25 0 25 50 75 100
In(Ak) = 0.3072✶Ek – 7.1766
R2
 = 0.9954
In(Ak), S–1
β=5°C/min
Ek, kJ/mol
(a)
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–50 –25 0 25 50 75 100
In(Ak) = 0.2918✶Ek – 6.6037
R2
 = 0.9952
In(Ak), S–1
β=10°C/min
Ek, kJ/mol.
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–60 –10 –20 0 20 40 60 80
In(Ak) = 0.2898✶Ek – 6.2564
R2
 = 0.9948
In(Ak), S–1
β=15°C/min
Ek, kJ/mol
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–40–60 –20 0 20 40 60 80
In(Ak) = 0.2828✶Ek – 5.9855
R2
 = 0.9954
In(Ak), S–1
β=20°C/min
Ek, kJ/mol
(b)
Fig. 3.14: Compensation parameters: (a) 5 ºC/min, (b) 10 ºC/min, (c) 15 ºC/min and (d) 20 ºC/min.
3.2 Kinetics of thermoset curing 159Having the average f(α) from the above parameters for a = 0.05 to a = 0.95 range,
we now observe that the shape of the f(α) against α is S-shaped, which indicates that it
should be an autocatalytic reaction, and we find a best fit using Sestak-Berggren
model (No. 15 in Table 1). The calculated values of f(α) and the fitted Sestak-Berggren
model are shown in Fig. 3.15. The regression coefficient R2 = 0.9954 suggests that the
model is quite in agreement with the experimental data.
3.2.4 Prediction of Tg
The glass transition temperature is the temperature below which it is glassy (hard) and
above which it behaves like a soft rubbery material. Thermodynamically glass transition
is a second-order transition at which the second derivative of free energy (volume, heat
capacity) versus temperature plot is continuous. The second derivative of free energy
(volume, heat capacity) versus temperature plot is discontinuous for melting, which is a
thermodynamically first-order transition. For melting the first derivative of free energy
(enthalpy) versus temperature plot is discontinuous. Polymers being long chain molecule
cannot be more than 80% crystalline. Therefore polymers are either amorphous or semi￾Average function 3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Sestak-Berggren model
Conversion (α)
f(α) Fig. 3.15: Model fitting: Sestak-Berggren model for epoxy-curing study. Comparison with the calculated
f(α) values as studied by non-isothermal kinetics.
Tab. 3.4: Average values: best-fit equations.
Parameters Best-fit equation for average values of four heating rates R
α – T/, α = – (T/,)
 + , (T/,)
 – . (T/,) + . .
α – Eα Eα = . α – . α + . α + . .
Eα – ln(Aα) ln(Aα) = . Eα − . .
α − dα/dt dα/dt = . α − . α + . α + E- .
α − f(α) f(α) = −. α + . α – . α + . α
– . α + . α + . .
160 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositescrystalline. Thermosets are mostly amorphous in nature and characterized by a glass
transition [110, 111]. The glass transition is the consequence of segmental motion and
called α-relaxation. According to reptation theory polymer chains can be considered to be
made up with a large number of segments having number of carbon atom ranging from
20 to 40 nos. As the temperature increases the free volume of the polymer increases and
at a certain temperature the free volume becomes sufficient to start the segmental mo￾tion. The segments undergo motion keeping the end-to-end distance unaltered like the
snake does. The temperature is called glass transition temperature (Tg). Below Tg also
some relaxations take place. These are called β- and γ-relaxations.
The modulus of a polymer drastically decreases when it attains the Tg. A composite
cannot work for structural applications if the glass transition temperature of the matrix
resin is lower than service temperature even if it is made with extremely high modulus
fibre. Because the composite will lose its dimensional stability once the Tg is attained. As
mentioned earlier the resin should be selected in such a way that the glass transition
temperature of the resin should be at least 50 ºC higher than the service temperature.
For an application, it may so happen that a material has to work partly at a low temper￾ature and partly at a high temperature. In that case, the higher service temperature has
to be considered for selection of resin system for fabrication of composite for such appli￾cations. Therefore prediction and determination of Tg is very important from composite
application point of view. The various methods of determination of Tg will be discussed
in Chapter 6. The prediction of Tg of a thermoset network will be discussed here.
The state of a thermoset resin is determined by its chemical conversion as a result
of curing or its extent of cure. From the process control point of view, it is important to
know the relationship between the chemical conversion of a thermoset and its glass
transition temperature. A unique relationship between the Tg and chemical conversion
independent of cure temperature and thermal history has been reported for many ther￾mosets although it does not hold well for all the thermoset resins. The one-to-one rela￾tionship between Tg and the conversion implies that either the network structure does
not change with cure temperature or the associated change in network structure does
not have any significant effect on Tg. Such relation is found to hold good for epoxy/
amine systems. However, the temperature-independent relationship is reported to be
not valid for epoxy/dicyanamide [112], phenolic/hexamethylene tetramine and UPE res￾ins [113]. For the thermosetting resin systems for which the relationship exists, mea￾surement of conversion is equivalent to the measurement of Tg. Both the data can be
generated from DSC analysis and compared. Tg can be measured from a more sophisti￾cated instruments like dynamic mechanical thermal analysis (refer to Chapter 6 for de￾tailed information). The Tg measurement can be used as a practical means for the
determination of the degree of cure. This is especially useful where the determination
of heat of reaction is erroneous due to the loss of crosslinker or for analytical errors.
With the advancement of curing reaction, it is very easy to understand that the Tg
of the resin will increase. However, the goal is to quantitatively predict the Tg of a
resin as a function of cure conversion. Several models have been proposed to correlate
3.2 Kinetics of thermoset curing 161the Tg with the conversion or extent of curing (α). With the increase in conversion, the
concentration of reactive functionalities decreases, crosslinks or junction points is
formed leading to the departure from Gaussian behaviour. The steric hindrance arises
on the chain conformation at high crosslink densities. The models basically are based
on the statistical description of network formation and calculation of the concentration
of junction points of different functionalities as a function of conversion. However,
one issue, which complicates the calculation and not fully resolved, is that whether to
consider all the junction point or only those which are elastically effective.
Dibenedetto equation has been successfully utilized to correlate the experimental
values of Tg as a function of conversion for many thermosetting resins like epoxy,
phenolics. The relation is presented below [114]:
Tg − Tg0
Tg∞ − Tg0
= λα
1 − ð Þ 1 − λ α
(3:31)
where Tg0 is the Tg of the resin mixture before cure, Tg∞ is the Tg obtainable after maxi￾mum possible curing and λ is an adjustable parameter. A similar equation can be derived
considering the isobaric heat capacity change as a variable as given below [115, 116]:
Tg = αΔcp∞Tg∞ + ð Þ 1 − α Δcp0Tg0
αΔcp∞ + ð Þ 1 − α Δcp0
(3:32)
where Δcp0 and Δcp∞ are the change in heat capacity corresponding to Tg0 and Tg∞.
Comparing the two equations we get
λ = Δcp∞
Δcp0
(3:33)
As the curing reaction advances, the heat capacity change decreases. Montserrat [117]
proposed an equation to correlate Δcp Tg
  with the Tg of the network as given below:
Δcp Tg
  = x +
b
Tg
(3:34)
Neglecting the constant (x), which may be applicable for a particular case we get
λ = Δcp∞
Δcp0
= Tg0
Tg∞
(3:35)
Combining eqs. (2.31) and (2.34) and rearranging we get
1
Tg
= ð1 − αÞ
Tg0
+
α
Tg∞
(3:36)
This is an equation similar to the Fox equation, which is widely used to predict Tg of a
copolymer as a function of composition. This simple rule-of-mixture equation can very
162 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesprecisely predict the glass transition temperature of a copolymer; however, it cannot
precisely explain the experimental results of glass transition temperatures obtained by
partially curing the thermoset. Therefore, a modified equation is proposed [118, 119]:
1
Tg
= ð1 − αÞ
Tg0
+
α
Tg∞
+ cαð Þ 1 − α (3:37)
This equation predicts the increment of the glass transition temperature of cured
thermoset at various stages of cure (from monomer stage to network polymer).
A number of modelling and simulation works have been initiated to predict the Tg of
a thermoset resins by using group additive property method [120, 121] and a more
general quantitative structure–property relationships [122, 123]. A model for predic￾tion of the dependence of Tg on the stoichiometric ratio of co-monomers in amine￾cured epoxy systems was also developed [124]. Recently, machine learning (ML) ap￾proach has been utilized for the prediction of Tg of thermoset resins, which are based
either on very small datasets and/or predominantly on datasets obtained using molec￾ular dynamics [125, 126]. For example, artificial neural network has been used to opti￾100
100
150
200
250
300
150 200
MAE = 16.15, R2 = 0.86
True Tg / ºC
250 300
Fig. 3.16: Comparison between experimental (true) and predicted Tg using the optimized ensemble model
with composition 53% GBR and 47% KRR. The predictions were performed for the test (29 samples) using
the model trained with the training set (65 samples). MAPE = 9.38% (accuracy = 90.62%) [127].
3.2 Kinetics of thermoset curing 163mize the method of prediction of Tg for multicomponent epoxy resin systems [125].
Meier et al. [127] used machine learning with the aim to predict the Tg for resin￾hardener thermosets using an ML ensemble approach based solely on theoretical mo￾lecular descriptors that can be easily calculated for any molecular structure present
in a thermoset. They have performed the predictions for the 29 samples using the
model trained with the training sets. The performance of the trained ensemble model
evaluated using 53% gradient boosting regression (GBR) AND 47% kernel ridge regres￾sion (KRR) is shown in Fig. 3.16, where mean absolute error (MAE), and R2 are equal
to 16.15 ºC and 0.86, respectively, indicating about 90% accuracy.
3.3 Classification of thermoset composites
Thermoset composites can be broadly classified into three categories: (i) particulate
composites; (ii) fibre-reinforced plastic (FRP) composites and (iii) nanocomposites
[128, 129] depending on the reinforcement. In particulate composites, various particu￾late fillers like silica, carbon black, calcium carbonate, glass bead, glass balloons and
silicon carbide are used and processed by mechanical mixing followed by casting,
compression moulding, matched-die moulding, etc. FRP composites are of two types:
chopped fibre-reinforced composite and long fibre-reinforced composites. Chopped
fibre-reinforced composites are processed through dough moulding compound (DMC).
DMCs contain about 25–40 wt% chopped fibre. The component or products which re￾quire very low permeability, for example, valve and pump, DMCs are used because long
fibre-reinforced composites which typically contain more than 60 wt% and permeability
particularly at high pressure is comparatively higher due to the presence of interfacial
free volume. Recently author’s research group has developed FRP composite ball valve
using DMC comprising epoxy resin and a combination of chopped glass and carbon fibre
[130]. It may be noted that fabric-based FRP composites failed to stop leakage at high
pressure (20–30 bar). The DMC-based fabrication process is described below.
A typical recipe for making DMC comprises a thermoset resin (1.0 kg), required
amount of curing agent, ammonium polyphosphate 25 g, melamine cyanurate 15 g
and 11 g antimony trioxide. All the ingredients are mixed in a drum using a mechani￾cal stirrer. Then 200 g wollastonite and halloysite clay 25 g were added and thor￾oughly mixed. Mixing takes about 30 min. Then the chopped glass or carbon fibre
(360 g) are added and mixed with the help of a sigma kneader. The mixing should be
done for about 10 min. The DMC can be used to prepare sheet for coupon test or com￾ponent by using compression moulding. Generally about 10 kg/cm2 pressure is applied
for moulding and cure and post-curing are to be carried out depending on the cure
schedule of the resin to be used for fabrication. The process has to be optimized tak￾ing resin manufacturer’s data sheet as guidelines especially for thick and complex
164 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositescomponent. It may be noted that the tools used are to be extremely precise to achieve
very low dimension tolerance of ±50 μm. The process is described in Fig. 3.17.
The long fibre-reinforced composites are made using uniaxial fibres or biaxial (2D) or
3D fabric and processed using various techniques like wet lay-up followed by compres￾sion moulding, prepreg lay-up with vacuum bagging and autoclave moulding, filament
winding with oven-curing, pultrusion, resin transfer moulding (RTM), vacuum bag
moulding, liquid composite moulding (LCM) and structural reaction engineering mould￾ing, which will be discussed in detail in the subsequent sections. Such FRP composites
offer very high strength and opportunity to tailor the material properties through the
control of fibre and matrix combinations and processing conditions. The sizes of rein￾forcement for particulate and FRP composites are in the micron level. So they are called
microcomposites. When reinforcement sizes are further reduced to nanolevel (1–100 μm)
then the resultant composite is called nanocomposites. It is not necessary that for a
nanocomposite enforcement sizes are nano in all dimensions; at least in one dimension,,
it should be in the nanosize. For example, carbon nanotube is nano in diameter but mi￾cron size in length. Therefore a nanocomposite can be defined as the composite in
which one of the constituents is in nanoscale in at least one dimension. Nanocomposites
are prepared by using nanofillers like nanosilica, nanocalcium carbonate, nanotitania,
nanoclay, carbon nanofibres and carbon nanotubes and processed by mechanical mix￾ing and sonication followed by casting or compression moulding. Processing of long
fibre-reinforced composites is elaborated as given below.
3.4 Processing of FRP composites
3.4.1 Wet lay-up moulding
This method involves combination of resin and reinforcment fibre by usual hand lay-up
or spray-up techniques. The process is described schematically in Fig. 3.18. The reinforce￾ment (uniaxial or 2D or 3D fabric or rovings) are cut into the desired size and shape
using a scissor or knife. The reinforcement of desired shape is kept on a clean mould and
Fig. 3.17: Description of processing of DMC for manufacturing of FRP component.
3.4 Processing of FRP composites 165impregnated with liquid resin and hardener mixture. A suitable mould release agent like
silicone grease has to be applied to ensure easy removal of the product from the mould.
Depending on the design of the products, the reinforcements are applied layer by layer
and laid on the mould. The mould is then kept inside a compression mould press and
subjected to cure at required temperature under pressure. The cure temperature has to
be decided from the product data sheet or considering the chemistry of the resin. Similar
process when carried out without pressure is called contact moulding, in which a gel coat
of about 0.5-mm thick resin-rich layer for providing a smooth, hard surface prevents the
fibre reinforcements coming to the surface. The gel coat can be provided with a particu￾lar colour on request depending on the application using a suitable colourant. Reinforce￾ment of desired size and shape is then laid over the resin layer.
The process involves the application of alternate layers of resin and fibre reinforce￾ments until the required thickness is built up. The fibres are continually rolled to ensure
proper wetting of the fibres, expulsion of air and consolidation of the materials. The glass
content of 25 to 30 wt% can be achieved. However, press moulding can produce a product
containing up to 65 wt% or 45 vol% glass content. The major advantages of this process
are low capital investment, fast cycle time and capability to produce product with good
finish and high content of the reinforcing fillers and structural integrity. The technique is
versatile and can be easily learned and suitable for a wide range of fibres and resins.
However, this process is not an automated one and involves human error, and therefore
the composite materials made using this method suffer from the lack of consistency and
quality. The quality of composite made by this method is very much dependent on skill of
operator. The composites made using this process cannot satisfy the criteria for high-end
applications like aerospace. In order to increase the production rate, spray-up technique
(using multiple headed spray gun) is used instead of a hand lay-up technique.
3.4.2 Resin transfer moulding
The resin transfer moulding involves filling a mould cavity by injecting a resin through
one or several, points. The number of points is decided based on the size of the
component. The reinforcements are placed in the interior of the mould and the mould
is closed and locked firmly. Because of closed mould process, it allows faster
Fig. 3.18: Description of wet-lay process for fabrication of composites.
166 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesgelling as compared to contact moulding process. It is possible to achieve good toler￾ances and control of emission of volatiles by using a closed mould. RTM differs from
the compression moulding in the sense that in RTM the resin is inserted into the
mould containing the reinforcement, whereas in compression moulding, both rein￾forcement and resin remain in the mould, where heat and pressure are applied. In
the RTM process, the positive injection pressure is applied to process the fibre￾reinforced composite and the injection pressure is significantly higher than the envi￾ronmental pressure.
RTM requires a long filling time which is a disadvantage for the production of
large-scale composite parts with a high fibre volume fraction. As solution to this prob￾lem reported an effective process incorporating the method of compression into RTM
known as compression RTM (CRTM) has been developed [131, 132]. The idea is to en￾hance the fibre volume fraction and to reduce the mould filling time. Unlike in RTM,
in which the resin is injected into a closed mould,, in CRTM, the resin is injected into a
partially closed mould cavity filled with the loose preform and thus the resin injection
time is reduced due to the lower flow resistance offered by the loose preform. After
the required volume of resin is injected, the rigid mould platens are brought together
at a constant speed or clamping force, driving the resin through the remaining dry
preform and compacting the laminate to the final thickness of the part.
Another adaptation of the resin transfer moulding (RTM) process is vacuum￾assisted RTM (VARTM) which exploits vacuum pressure to draw off resin to the im￾pregnate performs [133, 134]. The set-up comprises vacuum bag, flow distribution me￾dium, peel ply, sealing tape and resin tubing. Peel ply is used to cover the preform.
The flow distribution medium layer (which is connected to the resin injection port) is
applied on the top of the peel ply to enhance the resin infusion speed. An omega￾shaped or a helical open tube can also be used as a resin injection line source. The
vent port is required to be placed on top of the peel ply above the preform. The vac￾uum port should be opened after closing the injection port in order to apply the vac￾uum inside the assembly. A debulking process is generally adopted by cyclically
compressing and relaxing the preform to achieve better compactness of the fibre pre￾form by removing entrapped air. After completion of curing process as per the pre￾scribed cure schedule, the vacuum is turned off and the composite part is demoulded.
In this process, the pressure difference between the vacuum pressure and the envi￾ronmental pressure is utilized as driving force to infuse the resin into the preform.
The same is also used to compress the preform and keep them in place against the
mould. In this process making arrangement for larger mould is much easier com￾pared to simple RTM. In other words VARTM offers greater flexibility to alter moulds
as per the prescribed design compared to simple RTM. VARTM process has advantages
of both RTM in terms of reduced emission of volatile organic compounds, clean han￾dling, high quality product, repeatability as well as wet lay-up method in terms of
scalability and flexibility of the process. VARTM is widely used for the fabrication of
composite products in both the civil and defence sectors.
3.4 Processing of FRP composites 167Chang et al. [135] reported a hybrid process of bag compression and RTM, called
vacuum assisted CRTM (VACRTM). VACRTM uses an elastic bag placed between the
upper mould and the preform. Various stages in VACRTM are identical to RTM, but not
to the filling process as shown in a schematic diagram (Fig. 3.19). The filling process of
the VACRTM is composed of two phases including resin injection and flexible bag com￾pression. During resin injection the preform is preplaced in the mould cavity and the
vacuum is drawn into the mould cavity. After enough volume of resin is injected, the
inlet is closed. A compression pressure is applied on the bag that compacts the preform
to the final part thickness and drives the resin through the remaining dry preform.
The basic difference between VARTM and VACRTM is that in VARTM the bag materials
replace the upper mould and resin is infused into the preform under vacuum, whereas
in VACRTM, the resin is injected into a closed mould with vacuum assistance and then
a flexible bag compacts the preform in constant pressure. It was reported that for an
UPE/E glass composite, VARTM and VACRTM processes are associated with infusion
time and flexural strength of 1066 s, 448 s and 1,150 kgf/cm2
, 1,315 kgf/cm2 indicating
58% increase in infusion time and 10% enhancement in flexural strength.
3.4.3 Pultrusion
Pultrusion is a simple processing technique for the fabrication of thermosetting resin￾based FRP composite products using continuous fibre or fabric. A pultrusion is a well￾established industrial process mainly utilized for making composite products like ladders,
stanchions, pipes, aerial booms, building parts using UPE or vinyl ester resins [136–138]. A
typical pultrusion process [139] is depicted in Fig. 3.20, which comprises a creel for supply￾ing fibre, a resin tank, forming dies, machined die with a temperature control facility,
puller and saw for cutting the product from the continuous system. The continuous fibre
is passed through a resin tank containing a mixture of resin and suitable curing agent.
After passing through the resin bath the resin-impregnated fibres or fabrics were then
Vacuum Vacuum Atmospheric pressure
Upper mold
Bag
Resin
Fiber Vacuum
Lower mold
Vacuum
X
Fig. 3.19: Schematic diagrams for VACRTM (reprinted with permission from Chih-Yuan Chang and
Hung–Jie Lin Journal Polymer Engineering 32 (2012) 539–546. © 2012 De Gruyter, Publishing Company).
168 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositespulled through a series of forming dies. The final die is heated to cure the resin system in
order to produce a rigid composite structure. The cured profile is continuously pulled out
of the die which provides the driving force for the impregnation of fibres to be forced
through the die. Hence the raw materials are basically pulled through the combining,
shaping and curing operations; therefore, the process is called pultrusion.
The process has a similarity with extrusion which is generally used for the processing of
thermoplastics. The difference is that in extrusion the thermoplastic is forced through the
die from inside by a rotating screw; on the other hand in pultrusion the thermoset mate￾rial is pulled through the die orifice from the outer side. Both solid and hollow products
with high stiffness and strength can be made using this technique. Typical products made
by pultrusion are ladders, stanchions, pipes, aerial booms and building parts. Pultrusion
offers the advantages like high specific strength of the product, easy handling and a vari￾ety of product profiles. Pultruded FRP composites have a relatively higher fibre volume
ratio (60–70 vol %) compared to the laminates made by the wet lay-up technique dis￾4
+ +
5
+ +
Creel
Caterpillar puIl-off
Heated pultrusion die
Impregnation unit
Cutter
1
1 2
4 5
3
2 3
Fig. 3.20: Basic pultrusion process (reprinted with permission from Maik Gude, Florian Lenz, Andreas
Gruhl, Science Engineering Composite Materials 22 (2015) 187–197. © 2015 De Gruyter, Publishing Company).
Fig. 3.21: Process principle for a continuous pultrusion of profiled driveshaft bodies (reprinted with
permission from Maik Gude, Florian Lenz, Andreas Gruhl, Science Engineering Composite Materials 22 (2015)
187–197. © 2015 De Gruyter, Publishing Company).
3.4 Processing of FRP composites 169cussed above (up to 50 vol%). The mechanical strength is known to increase with fibre
volume ratio and hence high strength FRPs for civil infrastructure can be made by
pultrusion.
For conventional pultrusion, no continuous industrial process is known. Gude et al.
[139] published a concept in which established lay-down processes are combined with
the state-of-the-art infusion processes to form a production arrangement. This arrange￾ment eliminates the manual process steps and utilizes highly productive and automated
preforming processes such as braiding or continuous winding. It also contains a novel
device for the continuous preforming of the profiled geometry, which is validated exper￾imentally on a laboratory scale. This way a significant reduction of part cost combined
with an enhancement of the reproducibility of the manufacturing can be achieved. The
general concept for serial manufacturing feasible for both preforming processes is de￾picted in Fig. 3.21, which comprises the steps such as (i) preforming of the profiled lami￾nate on continuously fed mandrels; (ii) forming of the profile; (iii) supply of the axial
reinforcement; (iv) preforming of the cylindrical outer laminate; (v) infiltration in a pul￾trusion nozzle; and (vi) consolidation, straightening and pull-off.
3.4.4 Filament winding
Filament winding is another continuous processing technique, which is widely uti￾lized to fabricate structures like pressure vessels, drive shaft and radomes used in de￾fence sectors.
The process can be automated to produce high-quality components and high￾volume products. Filament winding involves winding of reinforcement in hoop direc￾tion unlike in pultrusion the same is in the longitudinal direction. In this process,
resin-impregnated reinforcement is laid down in the form of rovings or tapes onto a
mandrel. A continuous length of roving or tape of fibres is passed through a bath con￾taining resin and curatives. The excess resin is squeezed out before winding over a
mandrel. The components of different sizes and shapes can be produced by using a
specified mandrel. The winding process is to be carried out till the desired thickness
is achieved required for a particular application. After completion of initial curing (as
per the recommended cure schedule), the component is pulled off the mandrel and
subjected to the post-curing treatment. A number of patterns like helical, hoop or
polar can be generated depending on the manner and direction of fibre lay down. Xu
et al. [140] used filament winding process for making polyurethane-based gasbag.
They used four-axis winding machine and the winding pattern is shown in Fig. 3.22.
The measured data are as follows: the distance between adjacent gauges is 50.4 mm,
and the width of yarn is 50 mm in this experiment; then, the precision of the winding
path is 0.4 mm. Generally, the mandrel is rotated continuously in one direction and
the fibre source reciprocates parallel to it. In order to achieve the total coverage of
the mandrel surface, synchronization of rotation and reciprocation has to be estab￾170 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositeslished. A judicious selection of winding type, mandrel design and winding equipment
is absolutely necessary for the successful development of a product using a filament
winding process.
A comprehension of the complex curing process of thermosetting resins can be made
possible by using analytical models. All models may not be correct to simulate actual
condition, but they are very useful to reduce the number of rejection and predict
both, the process behaviour and its final characteristics. Marchetti and co-workers
[141] reported the models, which represent the whole process in the form of mathe￾matical equations and solved them numerically to explore the effects of a systematic
variation of process parameters, without any scrap for experimental controls or for
Fig. 3.22: Filament winding mandrel (reprinted with permission from Jiazhong Xu, Meijun Liu, Hai Yang,
Tianyu Fu, and Jiande Tian Science Engineering Composite Materials 26 (2019) 540–549. © 2019 De Gruyter,
Publishing Company).
3.4 Processing of FRP composites 171rejects. It also allows to compare different simulation trials and to point out advan￾tages, defects or critical points for any specific production cycle. A numerical code
structural flow chart is shown in Fig. 3.23.
3.4.5 Resin film infusion bolding
Resin film infusion (RFI), is one of the most promising methods for the fabrication of
composites in aerospace, automotive and military applications. It is a cost-effective
technique for the fabrication of complex-shaped parts resolving several critical con￾cerns of conventional liquid composite moulding methods. RFI also ensures near-zero
void fractions because of better compaction and local flow of the polymer resin. In
Stop
Winding cycle Yes
Yes
No
No
Curing cycle
End of curing process
Design thickness achieved?
Calculate stress strain due to the winding tension,
temperature and chemical reaction
Calculate temperature distribution,
curing reaction speed, degree of
reaction, viscosity
Calculate fibre displacement within
the resin and update layers position
and corresponding tension
Update physical and mechanical properties related
to temperature and winding angle
Curing process
(i = i+1)
Winding one layer (J=J+1)
Geometry, material properties, process parameters
Compaction pressure
ti+1 = ti
+Δ t
Fig. 3.23: Flow chart of filament winding numerical code of simulation (reprinted with permission from
G. Ikonomopoulos and M. Marchetti, Science Technology Composite Materials 7 (1998) 215–222. © 1998 De
Gruyter, Publishing Company).
172 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesthis method, the thermoset resin is cast to film forms and the same is used as a matrix
unlike in the wet lay-up process where liquid resin is used [142, 143]. Although in prin￾ciple resin film moulding can be used for any thermoset resin, the process for making
partially cured film with uniform thickness has only been standardized industrially
for epoxy resin. A suitable mixture of solid and liquid epoxy and hardener can be cast
into a partially cured tacky film which can be used to make composite.
Once the firms are ready they can be stored in similar way as followed for storage of
prepregs. For the fabrication of composite, the resin firms are transferred to fabric layers
(over a metallic mould plate), ensuring that the film just sticks to the fabric [144]. The
process is depicted in Fig. 3.24. The process is repeated to yield sandwiches of resin films
with two fabric layers on both sides. Such sandwiches are cut to the desired dimension
and placed on one another to build desired thickness. The sandwich stack over the
mould is then cured by vacuum bagging technique inside an oven. Heated moulds can
replace the use of ovens for large structures. The limitation of RFI process is that uniform
resin films are difficult to with filled epoxy system and therefore the process cannot be
used for many functional composites which requires high loading of functional fillers.
Second the epoxy system used for making resin film is generally a combination of solid
and liquid epoxy. Solid epoxies due to their higher epoxy equivalent generate a network
with lesser crosslink density and glass transition temperature. Therefore composites with
very high glass transition temperature (>200 ºC) are difficult to make using this process.
3.4.6 Autoclave moulding
In autoclave moulding, the pressures and temperature required for moulding is pro￾vided by an autoclave. As we have discussed for the other manufacturing processes the
curing is carried out either by using oven or self-heating set up namely the placement
of the heating fabric. An illustration [145] of the energy required to cure composite
parts using various manufacturing techniques using oven, autoclave and self-heating
set-up is shown in Fig. 3.25. Autoclave processing is a robust and well-understood pro￾cess because of considerate research and wide spread industrial applications especially
in the aerospace industries [146–148]. In this process the reinforcement is impregnated
with matrix resin and partially cured in such a way that it forms a tacky semi-solid
To
Mold
Release film
Resin film/
fabric sandwich
Breather
Caul plate
Vacuum bag
Vacuum
sealant
Fig. 3.24: Schematic of the resin film infusion process [144].
3.4 Processing of FRP composites 173stage as B-stage. The reinforcement with impregnated partially cured resin is called pre￾preg. The prepreg on heating the resin viscosity decreases and it undergoes curing to
produce composite depending on the desired design. Using various types of reinforce￾ment, a wide variety of prepreg can be made, for example, unidirectional prepreg, mul￾tidirectional tape-prepreg, woven fabric prepreg and tow prepregs.
The resin has to be selected considering the application of resulting composite. If
the application is for general-purpose use then the prepreg is called general-purpose
prepreg and if the same is for high performance use such as aerospace then the pre￾preg is called high performance prepreg. Whether it is general purpose or high per￾formance, prepregs are generally prepared by solvent impregnation method. The
reinforcement is passed through a bath containing the resin solution and allowed
soak with the resin. The role of the solvent is to reduce the viscosity of the resin to
ensure required impregnation and wetting of the reinforcement. The impregnated re￾inforcement (fabric) is then allowed to pass through a series of nip-rollers to sqeeze
the excess resin. During this process majority of solvent is removed. The rest of the
solvent present in the prepreg is removed by passing it through a heated drying
chamber. The complete removal of solvent is to be ensured because even traces of
solvent present in the prepreg may initiate bubble (defect) formation during process￾ing. Therefore, selection of solvent and adjustment of nip gap and drying condition
are to be addressed properly to develop successful prepreg technology. In order to
Fig. 3.25: An illustration of the energy required to cure composite parts using various manufacturing
techniques (reprinted with permission from Nithin Jayasree, Sadik Omairey, and Mihalis Kazilas Science
Engineering Composite Materials 27 (2020) 325–334. © 2020 De Gruyter, Publishing Company).
174 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesavoid contamination, prepregs are covered with polyester film from both sides before
winding on a drum. It may be noted that prepregs are required to be stored in subam￾bient temperature (<−10 ºC). The maximum temperature for storing is decided de￾pending on the resin system. If we look at the commercial market the cTech is the
supplier of wide variety of prpreg-based various epoxy systems which includes tough￾ened and flame-retardant epoxy, for example, MTM45-1, MTM47-1 and Cycom 5320.
Gurit (Sprint ST94), Hexcel (Hexply M56) and Toray (2510) are the other suppliers of
epoxy-based prepreg. Tencate deals with epoxy (BT250E, TC250y and TC275TC350-1) as
well as cyanate ester (TC420, TC800 BMI+)-based prepregs.
As discussed above autoclave moulding offers the highest level of uniformity and
remains a benchmark for manufacturing of composite as far as the quality and reliabil￾ity of the composite part are concerned. However, autoclaves involve significant costs
for acquisition, operation and tooling, particularly for large parts. Compared to other
processing technique autoclaves moulding offers less flexibility terms of manufacturing
of parts because the potential part designs are constrained by available vessel sizes and
production rates are restricted by scheduling. Hence the process is not being practical
for medium and small-scale industries although the same is extensively used in aero￾space sector. Therefore recent trend in prepreg manufacturing technology is to move
from autoclave moulding and adopt out-of-autoclave process to produce autoclave qual￾ity products.
As a result a new generation prepregs have been introduced [149] which can be
processed by vacuum bag moulding and offer properties close to the same processed
with autoclave. By introducing such prepregs the process can be cost-intensive and
the production costs can be considerably reduced. In addition such processes are com￾patible with a varying range of lower-cost cure set-ups, including conventional ovens,
heating blankets and heated tools. Hexcel and Henkel have commercialized the new
generation epoxy-based (TC250) and benzoxazine-based (Loctite BZ) prepregs, respec￾tively. However, some considerations related to these new generation prepregs are
required to be discussed in this context. In autoclave moulding very high pressure is
used which takes care of errors and imperfections in lay-up and material factors,
such as absorbed moisture, air entrapment and out time. When we are replacing au￾toclave moulding with vacuum bag moulding it is necessary to take extra care for ma￾terial storage and handling, along with a skilled workforce and attention to lay-up
procedures. This is absolutely necessary for successful fabrication of autoclave mould￾ing quality part using vacuum bag moulding. It may be noted that prepregs being par￾tially cured a composite product undergoes significant compaction during cure. This
large thickness change from the as-laid-up state can lead to wrinkling and fibre bridg￾ing especially in contoured parts [150].
3.4 Processing of FRP composites 1753.5 Toughened thermoset composites
Thermoset composites have poor damage tolerance due to inherent brittle nature by
virtue of the 3D network structure. When a crack is generated in such composite struc￾ture it propagates very fast leading to a catastrophic failure. Therefore a lot of research
have been made to enhance the impact strength of thermoset composites [151–159]. If
we consider the impact properties of individual constituents then we find a synergistic
enhancement. For example the notched Izod impact an epoxy–glass fibre composite is
800–900 J/m which is several times higher than the value for cured epoxy or glass
(<20 J/m). Thus the impact behaviour of a composite is quite different compared to
other mechanical properties like tensile strength or modulus where we get a good
agreement with the predicted value from rule-of-mixture. This behaviour can be ex￾plained by considering various energy-absorbing or energy dissipating mechanisms,
which operate when an impact load is subjected to a composite structure. The mecha￾nisms include rearrangement of the reinforcement, creation of damaged areas, matrix
fibre delamination fibre breakage, fibre pull-out and fibre debonding.
There are four important ways to improve the impact strength or damage toler￾ance of a thermoset composites namely (i) use of high strain fibre; (ii) interleaving,
that is, insertion of interlaminer “interleaf” layers); (iii) stitching, that is, introduction
fibre in z-direction; (iv) resin toughening. The impact strength of a thermoset compos￾ite can be improved by using high strain fibre. For example, polymeric fibre like Kev￾lar fibre or spectra fibre (ultra high polyethylene fibre)-based composites exhibit
higher impact strength compared to inorganic fibre (like glass or carbon) composites
using same matrix. There are two issues with such fibres. First processing technology
for such fibre is costly. Second, use of high strain fibre produce composite with lower
modulus which restricts their applications in many high performance engineering ap￾plications. As will be discussed in the subsequent sections, the modulus of a composite
mostly depends on modulus of fibre reinforcement. The high strain fibre-based com￾posites find application for ballistic applications like bullet proof laminate.
The second approach is interleaving in which a tough resin layer, whisker or
nanofibres are incorporated in the interface which introduce plastic deformation into
the elastic interface. Abdelal et al. [160] investigated the effect of SiC whiskers-based
interleaving on Mode I interlaminar fracture toughness of carbon fibre-epoxy compo￾sites manufactured using hand lay-up vacuum bagging process. It was observed that
the composites containing 5 wt% whiskers exhibited 67% increase in the crack initia￾tion interlaminar fracture toughness GIC. Thermoplastic and liquid rubbers have also
been successfully utilized as interleaving materials [161–163]. The use of 3-carboxy
phenyl maleimide-styrene copolymer-based interphase in graphite epoxy-based com￾posite resulted in two-fold increase in critical strain energy factor (KIC) while main￾taining the interlaminar shear strength at around the same value as for controlled
composite. However, the use of interleaving layer may affect the impregnation behav￾iour of the reinforcement due to reduction of in-plane and out-of-plane permeability
176 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesof the fabric reinforcement leading to a decrease in process efficiency and final prop￾erties of the composite.
Wimolkiat and Bell [164] electro-polymerized a high-temperature thermoplastic (3-
carboxy phenyl maleimide-styrene copolymer) interphase onto graphite fibre and eval￾uated the fibre-reinforced epoxy composites. The improvement in critical strain energy
factor of about 100% and notched impact strength of about 60% were achieved. Other
thermoplastic and liquid rubbers have also been successfully utilized as interleaving
materials [161–163]. However, the use of such fillers in high concentration (>5 wt%) re￾quired for achieving the desired toughness is associated with a significant deterioration
in modulus and glass transition temperature. Another issue is that an excessive inter￾laminar toughener between plies may reduce the in-plane and out-of-plane permeabil￾ity of textile reinforcements, which will affect resin impregnation characteristics and
decrease the process efficiency of liquid composites moulding (LCM) processes. Polyam￾ide-6 (Nylon 6) was used for interleaving of carbon-woven fabric by Zhao et al. [165].
The Nylon 6 powder is dissolved in ethanol and applied onto the surface of carbon fab￾ric by spray technique. The ethanol was removed by drying at 70 ºC. It was observed
that incorporation of 5 wt% of Nylon-6 tackifier resulted in enhancement GIC and GIIC
from 0.147 and 1.243 kJ/m2 to 0.619 and 1.482 kJ/m2
, respectively.
The third approach is stitching in which fibre is introduced in Z-axis as well. In
order to study the effect of stitching a series of vinyl ester/glass composites were
made using 3D fabric, 2D fabric and a combination of two and they are subjected to a
blast test. The photographs showing the condition of the FRP composites after the
blast test is shown in Fig. 3.26. We can see that 2D fabric-based laminate had broken
into pieces whereas the 3D-based laminate is able to retain its integrity even after
experiencing the blast. It is observed that extensive delaminations have taken place
which are actually the source of absorption and dissipation of mechanical energy. In
case of hybrid composite we can see the intermediate situation. This clearly indicates
that the impact strength or damage tolerance of a composite can be significantly en￾hanced by stitching approach.
Fig. 3.26: Photographs taken after blast testing of FRP composites made with 2D, 3D fabric and the
combination.
3.5 Toughened thermoset composites 177The fourth approach is resin toughening which is much easier approach compared
to the other three. The basic idea is to make the resin tough which can be translated
into composite toughness. The resin can be toughened in two ways: (i) making the resin
ductile by changing chemistry or crosslink density; (ii) dispersing micron-size rubber
particles uniformly into resin matrix. The advantage of second approach is that the
higher toughness can be achieved without compromising the thermal property, that is,
Tg. Kim and co-workers reported [166] the effect of incorporation of core shell rubber
(CSR) particles on the impact strength of carbon fibre-reinforced plastic composites fab￾ricated using the vacuum-assisted resin transfer moulding process. The impact strength
versus rubber concentration plot is shown in Fig. 3.27. As we can see from the plot, an
87% increase in impact strength was reported for incorporation about 20 wt% of CSR.
They have attributed this increase in impact performance to three mechanisms as
given in Fig. 3.28, namely (i) the energy consumption due to deformation of rubber
phase; (ii) cavitation followed by shear deformation which absorbs energy; (iii) dis￾persed particles uniformly serve as crack terminators to stop crack growth. Ratna and
co-workers [167] reported similar results using hyperbranched polymer-based toughen￾ing agent in epoxy/glass fibre system. For details of matrix toughening, the readers may
refer recently published book [6] of one of the authors (DR).
3.6 Thermoset nanocomposites
Thermoset nanocomposites are thermoset matrix composites, in which one of the in￾corporated filler is in nanosize (1–100 nm) at least in one dimension. Nanosize fillers
are called nanofillers. It we look at the literature of thermoset nanocomposites, we
will find four types of systems namely (i) themoset resin + nanofiller; (ii) thermoset
resin + nanofiller + fibre; (iii) thermoset resin + nanofiller + rubber; (iv) thermoset
Fig. 3.27: Three mechanisms for CSRs to improve the impact proper ties of composites: (A) deformation,
(B) cavitation and (C) crack termination (reprinted with permission from Hyeongcheol Park, Hana Jung,
Jaesang Yu, Min Park and Seong Yun Kim e-Polymers 15 (2015) 369–375. © 2015 De Gruyter, Publishing
Company).
178 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesresin + nanofiller + rubber + fibre. In this section, those systems with fibre will only be
covered since the book is focused on fibre-reinforced composites. The other systems
are already discussed elsewhere. The various nanofillers used are single-walled car￾bon nanotube (SWCNT), multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT), graphene, graphene
oxide (GO), layered silicates or nanoclay, polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS),
carbon nanofibre and so on. The nanofillers can be incorporated in various ways ei￾ther with the matrix or directly with the reinforcement. Recently, Zhang et al. [168]
published a review on carbon nanotube (CNT)-modified FRP composites and elabo￾rated different methods of incorporation of CNT as shown in Fig. 3.29. The same is
applicable for other nanomaterials as well.
In the previous section it was discussed that introduction of ductile tackifier,
for example, nylon 6 in carbon fibre-reinforced epoxy composites resulted in signifi￾cant improvement in interlaminar fracture energy. When GO is incorporated in the
tackifier, the enhancement in fracture energy is found to be more compared unfilled
tackifier. Incorporation of 0.5% GO resulted GIC and GIIC from 0.619 and 1.482 kJ/m2 to
0.679 and 1.557 kJ/m2
, respectively. It may be noted that GO is incorporated into the
tackifier by in situ polymerization ring-opening method [169]. In this work graphene
oxide is incorporated into the fibre along with a tough thermoplastic. Similar work is
reported with graphene without any tough thermoplastic [170]. Graphene sheets were
prepared by a simple thermal reduction method in air and used as interleave materi￾als for epoxy/CF composite. It was observed that the GIC is enhanced up to 145%.
Molnar et al. [171] investigated the effect of polyacrylonitrile nanofibrous inter￾laminar layers on the impact properties of unidirectional and woven carbon fabric
(CF)-reinforced epoxy (EP) matrix composite. The electrospinning set-up used for the
Fig. 3.28: Impact strength of CFRPs with CSR content (reprinted with permission from Hyeongcheol Park,
Hana Jung, Jaesang Yu, Min Park and Seong Yun Kim e-Polymers 15 (2015) 369–375. © 2015 De Gruyter,
Publishing Company).
3.6 Thermoset nanocomposites 179preparation of carbon nanfibres is shown in Fig. 3.30. Electrospinning was carried out
in an air-conditioned chamber with controlled humidity of 20%. The flexural stress
versus strain plot is shown in Fig. 3.31. We can see that for both UD fibre and fabric
the flexural strength is increased as a result of interleaving. However, the flexural
strength increases only in case UD fibre but decreases for fabric. A summary of the
nanomaterials used in various fibre-reinforced thermoset resin systems and their ef￾fect on fracture toughness of the resulting composites are presented in Table 3.5.
Hand lay up
Maunal spreading
Transfer printing
Ultrasonication
Ball milling
Calendaring Dispersion in
matrix
Growth onto fiber
Prepreg
modification
Preparation
method of
CNT￾reinforced
FRP
CNT film
insertion
Shear mixing either
mechanical or magnetic
Extrusion
Chemical grafting
Electrophoretic deposition (EPD)
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
Spreading of CNTs powder
Fig. 3.29: Different preparation methods of CNT-reinforced FRP (reprinted with permission from Jianbin
Li, Zhifang Zhang, Jiyang Fu, Zhihong Liang and Karthik Ram Ramakrishnan Nanotechnology Reviews 10
(2021) 1438–1468. © 2021 De Gruyter, Publishing Company).
180 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based composites0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
5 10
Flexural strain [%]
Flexural stress [MPa]
15
WCFRP
WCFNRP
UD CFRP
UD CFNRP
20
Fig. 3.31: Typical flexural curves of the prepared composites (reprinted with permission from K. Molnár,
E. Kostáková, L. Mészáros, eXPRESS Polymer Letters. 8 (2014) 62–72. © 2014 Online Publishing).
Fig. 3.30: Electrospinning set-up used to collect nanofibres on the surface of reinforcing materials:
(1) rotary electrode; (2) grounded plate electrode; (3) high-voltage power supply; (4) polymer solution;
(5) fibre formation space; (6) rollers; (7) moving belt collector; (8) air inlet; (9) air outlet; (10) chamber
(reprinted with permission from K. Molnár, E. Kostáková, L. Mészáros, eXPRESS Polym. Lett. 8 (2014)
62–72. © 2014 Online Publishing).
Tab. 3.5: Improvements in interlaminar fracture energy of fibre-reinforced thermoset nanocomposites.
Nanofiller dispersion techniques in interleaves/interlayer GIC (kJ/m
) GIIC (kJ/m
) Reference
Interlayer with CNF powder ( g/m
) % – []
Interlayer with CNT paste ( g/m
) % – []
Interlayer with CNT/epoxy composite (. wt%) −% – []
Interlayer with CNT/epoxy composite (. wt%) % – []
3.6 Thermoset nanocomposites 181Tab. 3.5 (continued)
Nanofiller dispersion techniques in interleaves/interlayer GIC (kJ/m
) GIIC (kJ/m
) Reference
Interlayer with sprayed CNT (. g/m
) % – []
Interlayer with sprayed CNT (. WT%) % – []
Interlayer with CVD grown CNT arrays (for IM carbon fabrics) % – []
Interlayer with CVD grown CNT arrays (for AS carbon fabrics) % – []
Interlayer with short carbon fibre tissue (for fibre length of
. mm)
% – []
Interlayer with short carbon fibre tissue (for fibre length of
. mm)
% – []
Interlayer with carbon tissue or CNT-modified fibre tissue for
carbon fibre tissue
−% – []
Interlayer with carbon tissue or CNT-modified fibre tissue for
CNT-modified tissue
% – []
Growth of CNTs on CF by CVD % – []
Growth of CNTs on CF by flame % – []
Interlayer with GO/E composite ( g/m
) % – []
Interlayer with graphene/epoxy composite( wt%– g/m
) % – []
Interleaving with carbon fabric
Polyamide/GO ./. wt%
% %
Interleaving with carbon fabric
Polyamide/GO ./. wt%
% %
SWCNTs/. wt% % % []
f-CNTs % []
COOH-MWCNTs % % []
CNTs . wt% % – []
CNTs . wt% % – []
CNT films (two methods to prepare CNT films/laminate curing) % % []
CNT films (RTM process) No change % []
COOH-MWCNTs . wt% % – []
COOH-MWCNTs  wt% % – []
COOH-MWCNTs . wt% % – []
COOH-MWCNTs % – []
182 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesReferences
[1] Bakker, A. A., Jones, R., Callinan, R. J. Compos. Struct. 1985, 15, 154.
[2] Jang, B. Z. Sci. Eng. Composite Mater. 1991, 2, 29.
[3] Ratna, D., Chongderand, T. K., Chakraborty, B. C. Polym. Int. 2000, 49, 815–819.
[4] Ratna, D. Rapra. Rev. Rep. 2005, 16, 1.
[5] Okamoto, M. Rapra. Rev. Rep. 2003, 14, 1–166.
[6] Ratna, D. Recent Advances and Applications of Thermoset Resins. London, Elsevier, 2022.
[7] Gum, W. F., Rinse, W., Ulrich, H. eds. Reaction Polymer, Munich, Germany, Hanser Publishers, 1992,
p. 838.
[8] Bhatnagar, R., Verma, I. K. J. Therm. Anal. Calorimetry. 2005, 35, 1241.
[9] Baffa, F., Borrajo, J. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2006, 102, 6064.
[10] Miyagawa, H., Mohanty, A., Burgueno, R., Drzal, L. T., Misra, M. J Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys.
2007, 45, 698–704.
[11] Varelidis, P. C., McCullough, R. L., Papaspyrides, C. D. Compos. Sci. Technol. 1999, 59, 1813–1823.
[12] Hexion-Chemicals. EPON™ resin 828. Trade Lit Broch. 2005, 3942, 1–8.
[13] Shibata, K. Recycling of carbon fiber and epoxy resin from carbon fiber reinforced plastics
Kumamoto University, 2014.
[14] Morgan, R. Structure-property relations of epoxy used as composite matrices. In: Dusek, K. ed.
Advances in Polymer Science, 51st ed., Berlin Heidelberg, Springer Verlag, 1986, pp. 1–40.
[15] Morgan, R. J., Kong, F. M., Walkup, C. M. Structure-property relations of polyethertriamine-cured
bisphenol-A-diglycidyl ether epoxies. Polymer (United Kingdom), 1984, 25, 375–386.
[16] Hughes, J. D. H. The carbon fibre/epoxy interface – a review. Compos. Sci. Technol. 1991, 41, 13–45.
[17] Aspin, I., Brownhill, A., Bugg, D. Soc. Chem. Ind. 2003, 1–4.
[18] Gonçalez, V., Barcia, F. L., Soares, B. G. J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 2006, 17, 1117–1123.
[19] Kultzow, R., Foxhill, S. Cycloaliphatic Epoxy Resin. In: Thermoset Resin Formulator Association.
Woodlands, Texas, TRFA Publisher, 2007, pp. 1–6.
[20] He, H., Li, K., Wang, J., Gu, J., Li, R. Polym. Compos. 2011, 16, 227–235.
[21] Sprenger, S., Kothmann, M. H., Altstaedt, V. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2014, 105, 86–95.
[22] Zhiyuan, Y. Mater. Sci. Adv. Compos. Mater. 2018, 1, 1–6.
[23] Sukanto, H., WisnuRaharjo, W., Ariawan, D., Triyono, J., Kaavesina, M. Open Eng. 2021, 11, 797–814.
[24] Son, D. R., Raghu, A. V., Reddy, K. R., Jeong, H. M. J. Macromol. Sci. Part B. 2016, 55, 1099.
[25] Cousinet, S., Ghadban, A., Fleury, E., Lortie, F., Pascault, J. P., Portinha, D. Eur. Polym. J. 2015, 67, 539.
[26] Sultania, M., Rai, J. S. P., Srivastava, D. Eur. Polym. J. 2010, 46, 2019–2032.
[27] Jahandideh, A., Muthukumarappan, K. Eur. Polym. J. 2017, 87, 360.
[28] Gardziella, A., Pilato, L. A., Knop, A. Phenolic resins. 2nd ed., Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 2000.
Tab. 3.5 (continued)
Nanofiller dispersion techniques in interleaves/interlayer GIC (kJ/m
) GIIC (kJ/m
) Reference
CNT films – % []
CNTs % – []
CNTs – % []
Bucky paper – % [
References 183[29] Fisher, H. L. Chemistry of Natural and synthetic rubbers. New York, Reinhold Publishing
Corporation, 1958.
[30] Hiltz, J. A., Kuzakand, S. G., Waitkus, P. A. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2001, 79, 385.
[31] Patel a, J. P., Zhao, C. X., Deshmukh a, S., Zou, G. X., Wamuo, O., Hsu, S. L., Schoch, A. B., Carleen,
S. A., Matsumoto, D. Polymer. 2016, 107, 12–18.
[32] Reghunadhan Nair, C. P. Prog. Polym. Sci. 2004, 29, 401.
[33] Dekar, A., Stretz, H., Koo, J. Polym. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2000, 83, 105.
[34] Yan, Y., Shi, X., Liu, J., Zhao, T., Yu, Y. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1651, 83(2002).
[35] Liang, G. Z., Fan, J. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1999, 73, 1623.
[36] Dao, B., Hodgkin, J. H., Morton, J. H. High Perfor. Polym. 1997, 9, 413.
[37] Augustine, D., Mathew, D., Reghunadhan Nair, C. P. Eur. Polym. J. 2015, 71, 389–400.
[38] Augustine, D., Mathew, D., Reghunadhan Nair, C. P. Eur. RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 91254–91261.
[39] Holly, F. W., Cope, A. C., Am, J. Chem. Soc. 1944, 66, 1875.
[40] Schreiber, H. Ger Offen. 1973, 2, 225, 504.
[41] Brunovska, Z., Liu, J. Macromol. Chem. Phys. 2015, 5, 3709–3719.
[42] Rucigaj, A., Alic, B., Krajnc, M., ebenik, U. Express Polym. Lett. 2015, 9, 647–657.
[43] Andreau, R., Reina, J. A., Ronda, J. C. J. Polym. Sci. Part A: Polym. Chem. Ed. 2008, 46, 3353.
[44] Burke, W. J., Glennie, E. L., Weatherbee, C. J. Org. Chem. 1964, 29, 909.
[45] Yan, Z. Z., Wang, H., Cheng, J., Fang, Z. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 2021, 3, 3392–3401.
[46] Chernykh, A., Liu, J. P., Ishida, H. Polymer. 2006, 47, 766–7669.
[47] Takeichi, T., Kano, T., Agag, T. Polymer. 2005, 46, 12172.
[48] Agag, T., Takeichi, T. J Polym Sci Part A. 2007, 45, 1878–1888.
[49] Gong, W., Zeng, K., Wang, L., Zheng, S. X. Polymer. 2008, 49, 3318–3326.
[50] Mark, H. F., Biikles, N. M., Overberger, C. G., Menges, G. eds. Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and
Engineering. 2nd ed., Vol. 10, New York, Wiley, 1989.
[51] Mittal, K. L. ed. Polyimides: Synthesis, Characterization and Applications. New York, Plenum, 1984.
[52] Cheng, S. Z. D., Lee, S. K., Barley, J. S., Hsu, S. L. C., Harris, F. W. Macro Mol. 1991, 24, 1883.
[53] Cheng, S. Z. D., Arnold, F. E., Zhang, A., Hsu, S. L. C., Herris, F. W. Macro Mol. 1991, 24.
[54] Han, Y., Fang, X. Z., Zuo, X. X. Express Polym. Lett. 2010, 4(11), 712–722.
[55] Brydson, J. A. Plastic Materials. Sixth ed., Butterworth- Heinemann, 1982, pp. 499–512.
[56] Allen, S. G., Bevington, J. C. eds. Compr. Polym. Sci. 1989, 5, 423.
[57] Hu, A. J., Hao, J. Y., He, T., Yang, S. Y. Macromolecules. 1999, 32, 8046.
[58] Lauver, R. W. J. Polym. Sci. 1979, 17, 2529.
[59] Margolis, J. M. ed. Advanced Thermoset Composites: Industrial and Commercial Applications.
New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold Co, 1986.
[60] Hu, J., Gu, A., Liang, G., Zhuo, D., Yuan, L. Express Polym. Lett. 2011, 5(6), 555–568.
[61] Qu, C., Zhao, L., Wang, D., Li, H., Xiao, W., Yue, C. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2014, 40395, 1–8.
[62] Petrovicki, H., Stenzenberger, H. D., Harnier, A. V. In Proc. 32nd SPE Ann. Techn. Conf. Society of
Plastics Engineers, San Francisco, 1974, 88.
[63] Stenzenberger, H. D. J. Appl. Polym. Sci.: Appl. Polym. Symp. 1977, 31, 91–104.
[64] Yu, P., Zhang, Y.-L., Yang, X., Pan, L.-J., Dai, Z.-Y., Xue, M.-Z., Liu, Y.-G., Wang, W. Polym. Eng. Sci.
2019, 59, 2265–2272.
[65] Grigat, E., Putter, R. Ger. Pat. 1963, 1, 746.
[66] Hamerton, I. ed. Chemistry and Technology of Cyanate Ester Resins. London, Blackie Academic &
Professional (Chapman and Hall), 1994.
[67] Fang, T., Shimp, D. Prog. Polym. Sci. 1995, 20, 61.
[68] Shimp, D. Polym. Mater. Sci. Eng. 1994, 70, 561.
[69] Abed, J. C., Mercier, R., McGrath, J. E. J. Polym. Sci., Part A Polym. Chem. 1997, 35, 977.
184 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based composites[70] Derradji, M., Ramdani, N., Zhang, T., Wang, J., Gong, L. D., Xu, X. D., Lin, Z. W., Henniche, A.,
Rahoma, H., Liu, W. B. Polym. Compos. 2017, 38, 1549.
[71] Laskoski, M., Schear, M. B., Neal, A., Dominguez, D. D., Ricks-Laskoski, H. L., Hervey, J., Keller,
T. M. Polymer. 2015, 67, 185.
[72] Ma, J.-Z., Cheng, K., Lv, J.-B., Chen, C., Hu, J.-H., Zeng, K., Yang, G. Chin. J. Polym. Sci. 2018, 36, 497.
[73] Shan, S., Chen, X., Xi, Z., Yu, X., Qu, X., Zhang, Q. High Perform. Polym. 2017, 29, 113.
[74] Xu, S., Han, Y., Guo, Y., Luo, Z., Ye, L., Li, Z., Zhou, H., Zhao, Y., Zhao, T. Eur. Polym. J. 2017, 95, 394.
[75] Augustine, D., Chandran, M. S., Mathew, D., Nair, C. R. Polyphthalonitrile Resins and their High-End
Applications. Amsterdam, Elsevier, 2018, pp. 577.
[76] Bulgakov, B., Sulimov, A., Babkin, A., Kepman, A., Malakho, A., Avdeev, V. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2017,
134, 44786.
[77] Hu, Y., Weng, Z., Qi, Y., Wang, J., Zhang, S., Liu, C., Zong, L., Jian, X. RSC Adv. 2018, 8, 32899.
[78] Dominguez, D. D., Jones, H. N., Keller, T. M. Polym. Compos. 2004, 25, 554.
[79] Sastri, S. B., Keller, T. M., Polym, J. Sci. Part A: Polym. Chem. 1885, 36, 1998.
[80] Wu, D., Zhao, Y., Zeng, K., Yang, G. J. Polym. Sci. Part A: Polym. Chem. 2012, 50, 4977.
[81] Wu, Z., Han, J., Li, N., Weng, Z., Wang, J., Jian, X. Polym. Int. 2017, 66, 876–881.
[82] Zhang, D., Liu, X., Bai, X., Zhang, Y., Wang, G., Zhao, Y., Rong, L., Mi, C. E-Polymers. 2020, 20,
500–509.
[83] Hu, Y., Weng, Q. Y., Wang, J. Y., Zhang, S. H., Liu, C. RSC Adv. 2018, 8, 899–908.
[84] Chen, L., Ren, D. X., Chen, S. J., Pan, H., Xu, M. Z., Liu, X. B. Express Polym. Lett. 2019, 13, 456–468.
[85] Ozawa, T. A. New Method of Analyzing Thermogravimetric Data. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 1881–1886,
38, 1965.
[86] Ozawa, T. Kinetic analysis of derivative curves in thermal analysis. J. Therm. Anal. 1970, 2, 301–324.
[87] Flynn, J. H., Wall, L. A. J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Lett. 1966, 4, 323–328.
[88] Vyazovkin, S. Thermochim. Acta. 1992, 211, 181–187.
[89] Flynn, J. H. J. Therm. Anal. 1983, 27, 95–102.
[90] Vyazovkin, S., Lesnikovich, A. I. Thermochim. Acta. 1992, 203, 177–185.
[91] Vyazovkin, S., Linert, W. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 1994, 34, 1273–1278.
[92] Vyazovkin, S., Dollimore, D. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 1996, 36, 42–45.
[93] Vyazovkin, S., Wight, C. A. Thermochim. Acta. 1999, 340-341, 53–68.
[94] Khawam, A., Flanagan, D. R. Thermochim. Acta. 2005, 436, 101–112.
[95] Stanko, M., Stommel, M. Polymers. 2018, 10, 698.
[96] Sbirrazzuoli, N. Thermochim. Acta. 2013, 564, 59–69.
[97] Friedman, H. L. J. Polym. Sci. C Polym. Symp. 1964, 6, 183–195.
[98] Kissinger, H. E. Analy Chem. 1957, 29, 1702–1706.
[99] Doyle, C. D. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1962, 6, 639–642.
[100] Murray, P., White, J. Trans. Brit. Ceram. Soc. 1955, 54, 204–238.
[101] Coats, A., Redfern, J. Nature. 1964, 201, 68–69.
[102] Senum, G. I., Yang, R. T. J. Thermal Anal. 1977, 11, 445–447.
[103] Perez-Maqueda, L. A., Criado, J. M. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2000, 60, 909–915.
[104] Toop, D. J. IEEE Trans. Electr. Insul. 1971, 6, 2–14.
[105] Akahira, T., Sunuse, T. T. Joint Res. Rep. Chiba Inst. Technol Chiba, 1971, 16, 22–31.
[106] Starink, M. J. Thermochim. Acta. 2003, 404, 163–176.
[107] Vyazovkin, S. J. Comput. Chem. 1997, 18, 393–402.
[108] Vyazovkin, S. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2006, 83, 45–51.
[109] Cai, J., Chen, S. J. Comput. Chem. 2009, 30, 1986–1991.
[110] Budrugeac, P. Thermochim. Acta. 2010, 511, 8–16.
[111] Billmeyer, F. W. Textbook of Polymer Science. 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1984.
[112] Hayaty, M., Honarkar, H., Beheshty, M. H. Iran Polym. J. 2013, 22, 591–598.
References 185[113] Lin, Y. G., Gally, J., Sautereau, H., Pascault, J. P. Crosslinked Epoxies. In: Sedlecek, B., Kahobek, J. eds.
Berlin, Walter de Gruyter, pp. 147–168.
[114] Adaboo, H. E., Williams, R. J. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1982, 29, 1327–1334.
[115] Nielsen, L. E., Macromol, J. Sci. Rev. Macromol. 1969, C3, 69.
[116] Pascault, J. P., Williams, R. J. J. J. Polym. Sci. Part B. 1990, 28, 85.
[117] Couchman, P. R. Macromolecules. 1987, 20, 1712.
[118] Montserrat, S. Polymer. 1995, 36, 435.
[119] Havlicek, I., Dusek, K. Crosslinked Epoxies. In: Sedlacek, B., Kahovec, J. eds. Berlin, de Gruyter, 1987,
pp. 417–424.
[120] Stepto, R. F. T. ed. Polymer Networks, Blackie Academic and Professional. New York, 1998.
[121] Weyland, H. G., Hoftyzer, P. J., Van Krevelen, D. W. Prediction of the glass transition temperature of
polymers. Polymer. 1970, 11, 79–87.
[122] Katritzky, A. R., Sild, S., Lobanov, V., Karelson, M. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 1998, 38, 300–304.
[123] Katritzky, A. R., Rachwal, P., Law, K. W., Karelson, M., Lobanov, V. S., J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 1996,
36, 879–884.
[124] Camelio, P., Cypcar, C. C., Lazzeri, V., Waegell, B. J. Polym. Sci, Part A: Polym. Chem. 1997, 35,
2579–2590.
[125] Jin, K., Luo, H., Wang, Z., Wang, H., Tao, J. Mater. Des. 2020, 194.
[126] Higuchi, C., Horvath, D., Marcou, G., Yoshizawa, K., Varnek,. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 2019, 1,
1430–1442.
[127] Meier, S., Albuquerque, R. Q., Demleitner, M., Ruckdäschel, H. J. Mater. Sci. 2022, 57, 3991–14002.
[128] Ratna, D. Rapra. Rev. Rep. 2005, 16, 1.
[129] Okamoto, M. Rapra. Rev. Rep. 2003, 14, 1–166.
[130] Ratna, D., Mishra, V. S. “Materials and Fabrication Process for Manufacturing Fibre Reinforced
Polymer (FRP) Composite Ball Valves for Sea Water Flow Control” Indian Patent Application No.:
202111019568 dated April 28, 2021.
[131] Chang, C. Y. Adv. Compos. Mater. 2011, 20, 197–211.
[132] Young, W. B., Chiu, C. W. J. Compos. Mater. 1995, 29, 2180–2191.
[133] Bhatt, A. T., PGohil, P. IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2020, 1004.
[134] ArySubagia, I. D. G., Kim, Y. Sci. Eng. Composite Mater. 2014, 21, 211–217.
[135] Chang, C.-Y., Lin, H.-J. J. Polym. Eng. 2012, 32, 539–546.
[136] Baran, I. Pultrusion: State-Of-The-Art Process Models, ISBN 191024242X, Smithers RapraTechnoogy,
London, 2015
[137] Starr, T. F. Pultrusion for Engineers. Cambridge, Woodhead, 2000.
[138] Peters, S. T. Handbook of Composites. 2nd ed, Chapman & Hall, London, 1998.
[139] Gude, M., Lenz, F., Gruhl, A., Witschel, B., Ulbricht, A., Hufenbach, W. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2015,
22, 187–197.
[140] Xu, J., Liu, M. J., Yang, H., Fu, T., Tian, J. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2019, 26, 540–549.
[141] Ikonomopoulos, G., Marchetti, M. Sci. Techno. Compos. Mater. 1998, 7, 215–222.
[142] Williams, C., Summerscales, J., S, G. Appl. Sci. Manuf. 1996, 27(7), 517–524. 4. B) Antonucci, V.,
Giordano, M., Nicolais, L., Calabro, A.
[143] Cusano, A., Cutolo, A., Inserra, S. Resin Flow monitoring in resin film infusion process. J. Mater.
Process. Technol. 2003, 143-144, 687–692.
[144] Anand, A., Joshi, M. J. Indian Inst. Sci. 2015, 9, 233–247.
[145] Jayasree, N., Omairey, S., Kazilas, M. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2020, 27, 325–334.
[146] Drakonakis, V. M., Seferis, J. C., Doumanidis, C. C. Curing Pressure Influence of Out-of-Autoclave
Processing on Structural Composites for Commercial Aviation. Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2013, 2013,
1–14.
186 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based composites[147] Mouritz, A. P. Manufacturing of fibre–polymer composite materials. In: Mouritz, A. P. Ed.
Introduction to Aerospace Materials Woodhead Publishing, 2012, pp. 303–337.
[148] Campbell, F. C. Chapter 7 – polymer matrix composites. In: Campbell, F. C. ed. Manufacturing
Technology for Aerospace Structural Materials Oxford. Elsevier Science, 2006, pp. 273–368.
[149] Centea, T., Grunenfelder, L. K., Nutt, S. R. Compos Part A Appl Sci Manuf. 2014, 70, 132–154.
[150] Centea, T., Hubert, P. J. Compos. Mater. 2014, 48, 2033–2045.
[151] Slow, J. P., Shim, V. P. W. J. Compos. Mater. 1998) 1178, 32.
[152] Kessler, A., Bledzki, A. K. Polym. Compos. 1999, 20, 269.
[153] Peijs, A. A. J. M., Venderbosch, S. W., Lemstra, P. J. Composites. 1990, 25.
[154] Cantwell, W. J., Morton, J. Composites. 1991, 22.
[155] Patridge, I. K., Cartie, D. D. R. Compos. A. 2005, 36, 55.
[156] Hosur, M. V., Vaidya, U. K., Ulven, C., Tuskegee, J. S. Compos. Struct. 2004, 64, 455.
[157] Chen, J. C., Lu, C. K., Chiu, C. H., Chin, H. Composites. 1994, 25, 251.
[158] Dutra, R. C. L., Soares, B. G., Campose, E. A., Silva, J. L. G. Polymer. 2000, 41, 3841.
[159] Sohn, M. S., Hu, X. Z. Compos. Sci. Technol. 1998, 58, 211.
[160] Abdelal, N. R., Aljarrah, M. T. J. Ceram. Int. 2018, 44, 2700–2708.
[161] Kunz, S., Sayre, J., Assink, R. Polymer. 1982, 23(13), 1897–1906.
[162] Ma, J., Mo, M. S., Du, X. S., Dai, S. R. I. Polym. Sci. 2008, 110, 304–312.
[163] Thompson, Z. J., Hillmyer, M. A., Liu, J., Sue, H.-J., Dettloff, M., Bates, F. S. Macromolecules. 2009, 42,
2333–2335.
[164] Wimolkiatisak, A. S., Bell, J. P. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1899, 46(1992).
[165] Zhao, X., Chen, W., Han, X., Zhao, Y., Du, S. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2020, 191, 108094.
[166] Park, H., Jung, H., Yu, J., Park, M., Kim, S. Y. E-Polymers. 2015, 15, 369–375.
[167] Ratna, D. Compos. A. 2008, 39, 462–469.
[168] Li, J., Zhang, Z., Fu, J., Liang, Z., Ramakrishnan, K. R. Nanotechnol. Rev. 2021, 10, 1438–1468.
[169] Zhao, X., Li, Y., Chen, W., Li, S., Zhao, Y., Du, S. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2019, 171, 180–189.
[170] Xusheng, D., Zhou, H., Sun, W., Liu, H.-Y., Zhou, G., Zhou, H., Mai, Y.-W. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2017,
140, 123–133.
[171] Molnár, K., Kostáková, E., Mészáros, L. Express Polym. Lett. 2014, 8, 62–72.
[172] Yang, Y., He, F., Wang, M., Zhang, B. J. Mater. Sci. 1998, 33.
[173] Ratna, D., Kushwaha, R., Dalvi, V., Manoj, N. R., Samui, A. B., Chakraborty, B. C. J. Adhes. Sci.
Technol. 2008, 22(1), 93.
[174] Takahagi, T., Ishitani, A. Molecular Characterization of Composite Interfaces. In: Ishida, H., Kumar,
G. eds. New York, Plenum Press, 1985.
[175] Drzal, L. T., Rich, M., Lloyd, P. J. Adhes. 1983, 16, 1.
[176] Plueddmann, E. A. Silicate Coupling Agents. New York, Plenum Press, 1982.
[177] Chua, P. S. Polym. Compos. 1987, 8, 308.
[178] Shen, C., Liu, L. S., Yeh, J. T. Polym. Polym. Compos. 1999, 21, 21.
[179] Theocaris, P. S., Papanicolaou, G. C. Coll. Poly. Sci. 1980, 258, 1044.
[180] Zhang, H., Zhang, Z., Claudia, B. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2021, 64(2004).
[181] Hook, K. J., Agrawa, R., K., Drzal, L. T. J. Adhes. 1990, 32.
[182] Walter, A. J. Phys. Educ. 1972, 7(8), 491.
[183] Okamoto, M. Rapra. Rev. Rep. 2003, 14, 1–166.
[184] Ashrafi, B., Guan, J., Mirjalili, V., Zhang, Y., Chun, L., Hubert, P., et al. Compos. Sci. Technol., 2011, 71,
1569–1578.
[185] Davis, D. C., Whelan, B. D. Compos. Part B Eng. 2011, 42, 105–116.
[186] Shan, F. L., Gu, Y. Z., Li, M., Liu, Y. N., Zhang, Z. G. Polym. Compos. 2013, 34, 41–50.
[187] Zhang, H., Liu, Y., Kuwata, M., Bilotti, E., T, P. Compos. Part A Appl. Sci. Manuf. 2015, 70, 102–110.
[188] Deng, H., Wang, L., Feng, Y., Chen, M., Jiang, W. Aerosp. Mater. Technol. 2015, 45, 31–35.
References 187[189] Liu, G., Hu, X., Chen, M., Zhang, P., Yu, R., Li, Q., et al. Acta Polym Sin. 2013, 10, 1334–1340.
[190] Borowski, E., Soliman, E., Kandil, U., Taha, M. Polymers. 2015, 7, 1020–1045.
[191] Liu, L., Yang, Q. Chin. J. Solid Mech. 2015, 36, 80–84.
[192] Yu, Y., Zhang, Y., Gao, L., Qu, S., Lyu, W. Acta Aeronaut. Astronaut. Sin. 2019, 40, 307–314.
[193] Abidin, M. S. Z., Herceg, T., Greenhalgh, E. S., Shaffer, M., Bismarck, A. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2019,
170, 85–92.
[194] Khan, S., Bedi, H. S., Agnihotri, P. K. Eng. Fract. Mech. 2018, 204, 211–220.
[195] Shin, Y., Kim, S. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6821.
188 Chapter 3 Thermosetting polymer-based compositesChapter 4
Elastomer-based composites
Description of abbreviations
4.1 Elastomer matrices
The categories of polymers which are soft and cross-linked lightly are in general
termed elastomers. The older term “rubber” was basically used due to the special
property of the elastomers to rub off pencil marks on papers, as was first observed by
a vulcanized natural rubber. Although the natural rubber latex from sap of Hevea
brasiliensis tree was known from ancient time, vulcanization of the sap was done
only in 1839 by Charles Goodyear, although Mesoamericans are believed to be using
Abbreviation Description
CBS N-Cyclohexyl--benzothiazolesulphenamide
IPN Interpenetrating polymer network
MBTS Mercaptobenzothiazyl disulphide
MPa Mega-Pascal
PE Poly(ethylene)
PP Poly(propylene)
phr Parts per hundred rubber (by weight)
SEM Scanning electron microscope
TEM Transmission electron microscope
TMTD Tetramethylthiuram disulphide
NR Natural rubber
PB Polybutadiene rubber
IIR Butyl rubber
BIIR Bromobutyl rubber
CR Neoprene rubber
NBR Nitrile rubber
PUR Polyurethane rubber
GPF General-purpose furnace black
HAF High-abrasion furnace black
ISAF Intermediate SAF
SAF Super-abrasion furnace black
EPC Easy processing channel black
MT Medium thermal black
FT Fine thermal black
CPVC Critical pigment volume concentration
MT-LA Mori-Tanaka and laminated analogy
SBR Styrene-butadiene rubber
TCAT Tyre cord adhesion test
VFT Vogel-Fulcher-Tammann
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110781571-004rubber balls, etc. as early as 1600 BC. Consequent to the invention of natural rubber,
which is a polymeric form of a hydrocarbon known as isoprene, the first synthetic
isoprene was developed in 1909 by Fritz Hofmann. Polybutadiene was synthesized by
Sergei Vasilyevich Lebedev in 1910.
Rapid development in polymer science enabled inventions of many synthetic rub￾bers as homopolymer and copolymers. Some of the rubbers (elastomers) are listed in
Tab. 4.1. In addition, tailoring of properties of the elastomers can be done through con￾trolling the molecular weight, cross-linking chemistry, which is known as vulcanization,
blending and modifications by irradiation, grafting, etc. A large variety of nonpolar and
polar elastomers are developed and being successfully used in industrial and domestic
products according to their suitability in use. Very voluminous use of rubber is defi￾nitely the tyre industry. Among the non-tyre sector, most applications are shoes, rubber
mats, hose pipes, bushes, gaskets, large boats, bellows, packaging, anti-vibration and
shock mounts, etc., and many others.
Since elastomers are lightly cross-linked, they are soft at ambient environment,
and the glass transition temperature of a typical elastomer is below 0 °C. As a conse￾quence of low cross-linking, the free volume of an elastomer at ambient conditions is
quite appreciable, and hence it can take up quite a good amount of filler loading. The
purpose of filler addition is to enhance the mechanical strength, reduce cost, improve
certain other properties like electrical conductivity, microwave attenuation, barrier
property and vibration damping apart from imparting different colours.
Cross-linking (vulcanization) processes for most elastomers are almost similar, by a
combination of sulphur and accelerator such as mercaptobenzothiazyl disulphide (MBTS)
tetramethylthiuram disulphide (TMTD) and N-cyclohexyl-2-benzothiazolesulphenamide
(CBS). Compounding of elastomers is done with processing aids such as stearic acid with
zinc oxide, to reduce shear force requirement while adding other ingredients including
the fillers. Some fillers can interact with the elastomers due to their small size and chemi￾cal structure, resulting in significant enhancement of properties. These fillers are termed
reinforcing fillers, such as carbon black and functionalized carbon nanotubes. Even
many nanoparticles can significantly enhance the properties of elastomers, both polar
and non-polar. Typical examples are fumed/nanosilica, naturally occurring clays such as
montmorillonite, cloisite, bentonite, kaolinite, hectorite, halloysite and their organically
modified versions. Minerals, graphite, mica, etc. are non-reinforcing fillers and are not
preferred for enhancement of mechanical strength, but for some other functional re￾quirements and cost.
Polarity and stereo specific position of the groups/atoms of the rubber play very
important roles in inherent strength, flexibility, compatibility with fillers and, hence,
the properties of the composites. Inherent strength of a polar rubber is obviously higher
than a relatively non-polar rubber, for example, comparing the glass transition of car￾boxylated nitrile rubber with nitrile rubber, or comparing neoprene with natural rub￾ber. Moreover, a 4-carbon atom straight chain diene rubber such as polybutadiene or
butyl rubber is more flexible than polyisoprene, which is a polymeric form of five mem￾190 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesbered isoprene units but with a pendent methyl group at the carbon attached to the
double bond, which hinders axial rotation of the bond. In fluoro-elastomer (Viton), the
fluorine atoms impart not only strong covalent bond, but also very high inter-chain sec￾ondary valence bonds, that results in comparatively higher glass transition than the
parent polyethylene-propylene copolymers. However, every elastomer needs cross￾linking of entangled chains, commonly termed as vulcanization, through initiation by a
peroxide or sulphur to form free radicals and subsequently covalent bond between the
entangled chains.
Another process of tailoring the properties is the formation of compatible
blends with either other one or more elastomers or with engineering plastics. Typi￾cal examples are nitrile-PVC blends, nitrile-phenolic blends and PE/PP-EPDM blends.
For semi-compatible or incompatible polymers, the formation of interpenetrating
polymer network is a very common option, such as urethane-acrylates and nitrile￾alkyl methacrylate. The elastomeric nature of blends and interpenetrating polymer
networks (IPN) is tailored by compositional adjustment and cross-link densities. Fur￾Tab. 4.1: Typical elastomers.
S. no. Name Chemical structure Glass transition
temperature (°C)
 Natural rubber (NR) Poly(cis-isoprene) −
 Polybutadiene (PB) rubber Poly(butadiene) −
 Butyl rubber (IIR) Copoly(butadiene-cis-isoprene) − to −
 Bromobutyl rubber (BIIR) Copoly(bromobutadiene-cis- isoprene) − to −
 Neoprene rubber (CR) Poly(chloro-cis-isoprene) −
 Nitrile rubber (NBR) Copoly(butadiene-acrylonitrile), %
acrylonitrile
−
 Hypalon Chlorosulphonated poly(ethylene) −
 Styrene–butadiene rubber (SBR)
% styrene
Copoly(styrene-butadiene) −
 Viton rubber Copolymers of fluorinated ethylene￾propylene
− to −
 Silicone rubber Poly(di-alkyl/aryl) siloxanes − to −
 Polyurethane rubber (PUR) Polyether or polyester polyurethane − to −
 EPDM rubber Copoly(ethylene-propylene-diene
monomer)
−
 XNBR Carboxylated nitrile rubber −
 HNBR Hydrogenated nitrile rubber −
4.1 Elastomer matrices 191ther, to improve physical and functional properties, appropriate fillers are com￾pounded with the elastomers prior to vulcanization. With the advancement of tech￾nology, a large variety of fillers different shapes and sizes are used with all types of
elastomeric materials.
4.2 Particulate rubber composite
A composite of rubber with small particulate fillers is the most common form of rub￾ber items. Among the fillers, reinforcing types are those which impart synergistic ef￾fect in augmentation of all properties of a vulcanizate. Two main particulate matter
for reinforcement of elastomers are carbon black and graphite, both being allotropes
of elemental carbon. Graphite is the purest form of carbon, as only C=C bonds are
present in the graphite structure.
4.2.1 Carbon black
Carbon black of various sub-micron sizes is the most widely used reinforcing filler be￾cause of many reasons such as its strong secondary valence bond with elastomer mole￾cules, wettability by almost all elastomers, uniform distribution in the matrix, low cost,
high hiding power and a very effective improvement in strength and atmospheric sta￾bility. Three most important features of carbon black are (1) “particle size”: average
diameter of one carbon particle; (2) “structure”: the agglomerated particle formation;
and (3) “chemistry”: the chemical elements and groups chemically bonded to the car￾bon. The reinforcement mechanism of carbon black is a manifestation of these three
characteristics of the black. The reinforcement is mostly by physical adsorption of the
viscoelastic rubber on active sites of the carbon black surface and possible chemical
linkages through some functional groups such as hydroxyl and carboxyl on the carbon
black surface [1–3]. Carbon black can be formed by various methods from various
sources. The reinforcing ability and ultimate properties of a black-filled vulcanized
elastomer depends on the type of carbon black and its source. A neat vulcanizate of
natural rubber might have tensile strength of 1.5–1.75 MPa on vulcanization by 1.5%
sulphur, but on addition of 30% HAF carbon black, the strength could be 9–12 MPa.
Table 4.2 gives various forms and sources of carbon black used for reinforcement [4, 5].
The nomenclature of a carbon black is done according to its source/origin. Apart from
normal strength augmentation, carbon black is also used for making conducting plastic
like electromagnetically absorbing and also reflecting surface, anti-static rubber bands,
floors, UV stabilizer, for example for polypropylene water tanks and also IR reflector
panels.
192 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based composites4.2.2 Graphite
Another allotropic form of carbon is graphite, which is pure carbon, and a plate-type
filler. Graphite is a soft material with a density of about 2.26 g/c.c. and available in
different natural and synthetic varieties:
a) Amorphous graphite
b) Vein or plumbago graphite
c) Flake graphite
d) Synthetic graphite
a) Amorphous graphite
In general graphite is a highly crystalline material. But based on the availability,
for instance, the one found in the metamorphic rock in the form of a slate is not
orderly arranged. They are also termed as “microcrystalline graphite”.
Tab. 4.2: Carbon black: particle size and application.
Designation Particle
size (nm)
Agglomerate
size (nm)
Average N
surface
area (m/g)
Application in rubber industry
General-purpose
furnace black (GPF)
N
– – – General-purpose rubber items and
tyres, low heat build-up.
High-abrasion
furnace black (HAF)
N
– – – Medium-high reinforcement, low
modulus, high elongation, good flex,
tear and fatigue resistance; vibration
damping compositions
Intermediate SAF
(ISAF) N
– – High-strength rubber goods, tyres,
good abrasion resistant rubbers
Super-abrasion
furnace black (SAF)
N
– – – High reinforcement; tyre products of
high abrasion resistance
Easy processing
channel black
(EPC) N
– – – Medium to high modulus, high
reinforcement, tyre, hose, gaskets,
hose
Medium thermal
black
(MT) N
Fine thermal black
(FT) N
–
–
–
–
–
–
Low reinforcement, low modulus,
hardness, hysteresis and tensile
strength, high elongation and
loading capacity, used in mechanical
goods, belts, hose, gaskets and tyre
inner liners
4.2 Particulate rubber composite 193b) Vein graphite
Vein graphite grows naturally from carbon precursor under high temperature
and pressure inside the earth crust from a fluid called “pegmatite”. The graphite
so formed is as pure as 99% carbon with high crystallinity which does not exist in
any other type of graphite. Due to high crystallinity, they are used in thermal and
electrical applications.
c) Flake graphite
They are evolved as flakes or in the form of lamella, hence they are called as
flake graphite. The carbon content in this type of graphite could be about 99%.
Most of the flake graphite is used in manufacturing of pencil leads.
d) Synthetic graphite
Apart from the natural source, synthetic graphite is also very commonly used
in rubber industry. Synthetic graphite is made from the carbon rich precursor
under high temperature which facilitates the conversion of mesophase carbon
in to graphite. The temperature involved in graphitization process is above
2,800 °C and in an inert atmosphere. Many carbon precursor are reported as
the starting materials for graphite synthesis. To name a few cokes, petroleum
products, natural or synthetic organic chemicals.
A typical graphite morphology by scanning electron microscope (SEM) is shown in
Fig. 4.1. The plate-type shape is quite evident from the SEM micrograph. The structure
of graphite is ring of six carbon atoms arranged in layers of sheets with specific spac￾ing, as shown in Fig. 4.2. The inter-layer bonding force is Van der Waal’s, which is
weak secondary valence force. In the axial plane, the rings are connected by C-C and
C=C covalent bonds. Because of weak force among the successive sheets, the graphite
sheets can move relative to each other in shear mode, and this makes the graphite a
soft material. This property is best utilized in various applications such as lubrication,
mechanical vibration damping and tapes for plugging leakages in pipe joints.
Reinforcing efficiency of carbon black is more than graphite, which is a purer
form of carbon, devoid of any organic functional groups, and its specific surface area
and surface energy is far less than carbon black. A typical small size graphite flake
can be 4–25 micron in length [6, 7] and for bigger size, as high as 290 microns [8],
compared to all submicron sizes of carbon black structures.
4.2.3 Mineral particulate fillers
Apart from commonly used carbon black and graphite, many mineral fillers are also
used in elastomer composites such as aluminium flakes, mica, iron oxide, alumina
and silica for tailoring mechanical properties, colour and cost reduction, tribological
and dynamic mechanical properties such as vibration damping, resilience or heat
build-up. Generally, particle size of such micronized fillers is in the range of 1–30 mi￾194 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositescrons, beyond which these are not significantly effective reinforcement, since the
physical forces of attraction with the elastomer molecule reduce with increasing size.
Additionally, reinforcement by a neutral filler is reduced as the filler content in￾creases, since the higher filler content reduces the continuity of the polymer matrix
and hence failure occurs at the poor interfaces of large number of particle-polymer
pairs [9].
Fig. 4.2: Layered structure of graphite.
20µm EHT = 10.00 kV Signal A = SE1
WD = 10.71 mm Mag = 4.11 K X
Fig. 4.1: SEM micrograph of a graphite sample.
4.2 Particulate rubber composite 195In fact, the mechanical properties reduce with such higher particles compared to
the neat elastomer, because the failure takes place at the poor interface of the poly￾mer and filler particle. A study by Thongsang et al. [10] on effect of different silica
particle reinforcement in natural rubber showed that precipitated silica has greater
effect in improvement in mechanical and tribological properties than fly ash silica be￾cause of its higher particle size. At 40 parts per hundred gram of rubber (phr) loading
of 40–74 mm sized fly ash silica, the NR showed a tensile strength of 8.1MPa, while
same loading of a fly ash silica at a particle size of less than 25 mm showed tensile
strength of 10 MPa and precipitated silica of lower size, approximately 15 mm [11],
showed a tensile strength of 24 MPa, which clearly shows the effect of lower particle
size on reinforcement.
Unlike carbon black and organically silanized silica, addition of micronized par￾ticulate minerals may not have any significant reinforcing effect in tensile or flexural
strength, but compression modulus is much enhanced. In tension or bending mode,
the polymer chain-filler interaction governs the reinforcement, and neutral minerals
only contribute to van der Waals forces, while carbon black or silanized silica has
some surface polar groups which contribute to greater interaction with the elastomer.
An interesting aspect of ceramic fillers in polymers is heat shielding effect due to
interaction of the ceramics with the polymer at burning temperature, a series of reac￾tions between the polymer matrix and the added ceramic powder produce a ceramic
protective layer of dense ceramic matrix [12–17]. Ren et al. [12] studied the ablation
and heat shielding property of EPDM rubber-based composites containing various
proportions of ceramic fillers such as zinc borate, zirconium oxide, silicon carbide,
fumed silica and kaolin. The mechanical strength was reduced with increasing filler
content, as expected, but the thermal conductivity reduced drastically and the content
of ceramic fillers improved the thermal stability and ablation properties.
Similarly, the thermo-oxidative stability of silicone rubber can be enhanced by add￾ing ceramic particulate fillers such as ferric oxide, cerium oxide or their mixed oxides
[18, 19], silica, zirconia, ceria [20], carbon nanotube modified iron oxide [21, 22] as re￾ported in literature. The tensile strength or elongation at break does not change much
on addition of the mineral and ceramic particulates of even very small size (crystalline
size of 9–11 nm). However, on addition of only 4 phr of ceria-ferrite in a silicone rubber,
the thermos-oxidative ageing showed that the tensile strength and % elongation was
retained to at least 55–60% of original strength, after ageing at 300 °C for 24 h. The rea￾son for improvement in thermal resistance on addition of metal oxides is trapping of
free radicals generated on thermal excitation of the polymer, more so, when a ceramic
like ceria-ferrite is used, due to synergistic effect of Ce4+ and Fe3+ cations, which was
confirmed by XPS spectra [19]. A transmission electron microscope (TEM) image of the
ceramic particulate of Ce-FeO is shown in Fig. 4.3. The image shows the crystallites of
approximate 5–10 nm size in soft agglomerate form [19].
196 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based composites4.3 Properties of particulate composites
Particulate fillers of micron and lower sizes form an isotropic composite when com￾pounded with the soft elastomer. Due to low modulus of the elastomers (of the order of
106 Pa), the mixing, dispersion and distribution of micronized particles in elastomers are
easy, efficient and less energy consuming than in engineering thermoplastics. It is
known that smaller the particle, more is the tendency of the particle to attain spherical
shape, and subsequently higher surface area per unit volume and hence, better bonding
force with the elastomer. Without any polar interaction, or presence of dipoles or hydro￾gen bonding or chemical reaction, the force of attraction is van der Waals force.
However, for perfect surface interface, sometimes tackifying bonding agents are
used, such as oligomers of hydroxyl terminated resorcinol-formaldehyde and phe￾nol-formaldehyde (resol). All necessary and desired properties of a particulate com￾posite depend on this filler-elastomer interaction. Secondly, the properties also
depend largely on the concentration of the filler in the elastomer. Up to a certain
loading, known as critical pigment volume concentration (CPVC), the “wetting” of
each filler particle by the elastomer will be possible, resulting in optimum prop￾erty, and beyond that CPVC, there can be dry surface of the fillers, resulting in
more filler-filler interaction, thereby reducing the reinforcing efficiency. Fillers are
used mainly to alter important structural properties such as hardness, mechanical
strength, flexibility, modulus of elasticity, tear strength, impact energy, creep com￾pliance, stress relaxation, heat build-up, resilience and dynamic viscoelasticity.
Other properties can be functional such as dielectric strength, thermal stability,
electrical and thermal conductivity, microwave attenuation and acoustic proper￾ties. However, the effect of particulate filler reinforcement on mechanical proper￾ties of elastomer composites is most widely studied and discussed.
Fig. 4.3: TEM image of a Ce-FeO ceramic
particulate filler for silicone rubber.
(taken from fig. 3(a) in Ref. [19], with permission
from M/s De Gruyter).
4.3 Properties of particulate composites 1974.3.1 Hardness
The most common measuring method of hardness of elastomer composites is by the
extent (cm) of indentation into the rubber surface by a rigid metallic of an indentor.
The hardness is then expressed by arbitrary units of Durometer hardness Shore ‘A’
and ‘D’ for softer and harder elastomers respectively. Both scales are calibrated in a
range of 0 to 100. A hardness of 40 in Shore D is approximately equivalent to 90 in
Shore A. The indentation and durometer hardness (Shore A) are related as [23]
H = ΔL
0.025 mm , ΔL = L0 − L (4:1)
where DL is the indentation by the pressing tip into the rubber surface, measured
in mm. L0 and L are initial and final reading of the indentor position. Therefore, for
an indentation of 1.25 mm, the Shore A hardness is 50 and at 2.5 mm indentation, the
hardness reaches 100, which is the maximum in the Shore A scale.
The relation between the force applied and the indentation in measuring durom￾eter hardness is given by [23, 24]:
F = 0.55 + 3ΔL or F = 0.55 + 0.075HA (4:2)
for Shore A, and
F = 17.78ΔL or F = 0.4445HD (4:3)
for Shore D scale. The unit of force is N (Newton).
Therefore, for a Shore A hardness of 50, the corresponding indentation is 1.25 mm
and the force required is 4.3 N, and if the same force is required for a polymer in a
Shore D scale indenter, then the Shore D hardness will be 9.7 and the indentation will
be 0.242 mm.
The hardness is directly a reflection of the modulus of elastic deformation of the
elastomer. As the elastomer is reinforced by the particulate filler, the hardness in￾creases, and mostly monotonically till the critical particle loading is reached, beyond
which the increase could be nonlinear.
A typical mechanical property evaluation was carried out with a blend of nitrile
rubber (33% acrylonitrile content) and polyvinyl chloride in the approximate ratio of
70:30 by weight, reinforced with both HAF carbon black (N330) and graphite of 2 mi￾cron in equivalent diameter. The Durometer hardness (Shore A) of the two types of
composites are shown in Fig. 4.4, both containing 10–45 phr fillers, cured under simi￾lar proportions of sulphur, accelerator and other ingredients, so that the difference of
the composites between them and with the neat vulcanizate can be observed. The ini￾tial effect of graphite and HAF carbon black reinforcement at 10 phr is quite signifi￾cant, and the rate of hardness increment subsequently is almost similar for both the
reinforcements, but the rate of increase is somewhat less with graphite compared to
carbon black at 45 phr. The reason for similarity is simply because the resistance to
198 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesindentation is largely offered by the filler in compression, and is not a reflection of
reinforcing efficiency.
4.3.2 Elastic modulus
The hardness is an indirect indication of Young’s modulus and also related to com￾pressive modulus of filled elastomeric composites. Qi et al. [23] used a non-linear
FEM simulation to correlate Shore A hardness with Shore D and stress-strain behav￾iour of elastomers. The authors experimented with polyurethane rubber (PUR) and
polybutadiene (BR) rubber formulations with varying hardness and arrived at a
semi-empirical model on the relation of hardness and Young’s modulus, as:
log10E = 0.0235SA − 0.6403 (4:4)
for SA = Shore A, 20 < SA < 80, and
SA = Shore D + 50, 80A < SA < 85D
where E is the Young’s modulus, can be taken as initial slope of a stress-strain
curve of an elastomer composite, and SA is durometer hardness (Shore A).
Since the elastomers exhibit non-linear elastic behaviour, it is therefore best to con￾sider the value of Young’s modulus which does not change till an upper limit of strain,
such as up to maximum 1% for nitrile rubber and NBR-PVC 50/50 blends as reported
by Murali et al. [25]. The constants of the above empirical expression derived by the
authors may not be same for all elastomers, since the constant would depend on
some factors such as polarity of the filler and the matrix and filler-filler interaction
0
HAF
Graphite
50
50
70
80
10 20 30 40 50
Shore 'A' Hardness
Fig. 4.4: Durometer hardness of carbon black and graphite composites of an NBR-PVC (70/30) blend
vulcanizate.
4.3 Properties of particulate composites 199due to different extent of agglomeration, etc. Murali et al. found the empirical expres￾sion for nitrile rubber-carbon black as
logðEÞ = 0.0308SA − 1.1653 (4:5)
Gent [26] has proposed a relationship as
E kg=cm2   = 56 + 7.66SA
2.67rð Þ 254 − 2.54SA
(4:6)
where r is the radius of the round tip of the indentor used for measuring Shore A
hardness, which is normally 0.0515 mm. Taking this value and by rearranging the
units of E as MPa (N/mm2), we have a modified expression by Gent Expression as:
E MPa ð Þ = 5.4936 + 0.747852SA
34.92627 − 0.349263SA
(4:7)
The above expression is not in agreement with very soft rubbers, where indentation
is high. BS 903 (British Standard 903) gives the following expression, valid for Shore A
range from 0 to 100, correspondingly elastic modulus of any value [27]:
SIHRD = 100erf 3.186x10−4
E
1
2
  (4:8)
where erf stands for the error function and E is Young’s modulus in Pa (N/m2). IHRD
hardness and Shore hardness are not uniformly related, but differ according to the
sample thickness [28].
In experiments with standard ASTM button sample, the thickness is generally
12 mm and the diameter is about 28–30 mm. For such thickness, the relation is ap￾proximately given as:
SIHRD = SA + 4 (4:9)
Briscoe and Sebastian [29] derived a relation among indenting force, indentation, durom￾eter hardness and Young’s modulus of rubber and arrived at the following equation:
F = 0.55 + 0.075SA (4:10)
F = 2E ✶
tan θ ha tan θ − a2
2
π
2 − arc sin b
a
    +
b
2
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
a2 − b2 p   (4:11)
E ✶ = E
1 − ν2 (4:12)
The relation of Young’s modulus and Shore A hardness was determined with experi￾mental engineering values of a NBR-PVC blend vulcanizate and its HAF carbon black
and graphite composites, with 0, 10, 20, 30 and 45 phr loading. The Young’s modulus
was determined for each sample at 1% strain, since up to 1%, the modulus was al￾most constant for each composition. The experimental values of Shore A hardness
200 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesvs. Young’s modulus was plotted along with the theoretical predictions by Qi, Gent,
BS903 and Briscoe and Sebastian for comparison and extent of agreement at various
hardness levels. The IHRD hardness obtained in BS903 method was converted to
Shore A hardness by using eq. (4.6), since the experimental button for hardness
measurement was 12 mm thick, as suggested by Morgans et al. [28]. The results are
shown in Fig. 4.5.
The relation of Shore A hardness and tensile modulus in this case is best de￾scribed by the following empirical expressions, similar to Qi et al., but with different
coefficients:
HAF reinforced composite: log10ð Þ E = 0.0348SA − 1.778 (4:13)
Graphite reinforced composite: log10ð Þ E = 0.3334SA − 1.6356 (4:14)
The increase in modulus with hardness is almost similar for carbon black and graphite,
but the values for the carbon black composites are higher at the same hardness.
The theoretical models are not exactly in agreement with this particular elastomeric
composite, possibly because the blend is not a perfect elastomer, as PVC is added sub￾stantially. Among the theoretical models, prediction of modulus by Qi et al. is highest
and that by Gent is lowest, rest are in between these two extremes for same hardness
values. For these two particulate elastomeric composites, at low hardness, near about
60 Shore A, prediction by Qi is 57% higher compared to Gent and at high hardness,
near 75–80 Shore A, it is 90% higher. However, at about 75 Shore A, the elastic modu￾lus of HAF and graphite composites are similar to those predicted by Gent, Briscoe
and BS 903.
Qi
Briscoe
BS 903
Gent
HAF : Expt.
Graphite: Expt.
Hardnes, Shore 'A'
55 60 65 70 75 80 85
0.000
0.200
0.400
0.600
0.800
1.000
1.400
1.200
log10(E), MPa
Fig. 4.5: Hardness–elastic modulus relationship of HAF and graphite composites of NBR-PVC blend.
4.3 Properties of particulate composites 2014.3.3 Filler effect on reinforcement
The reinforcement effect in a softer elastomer, such as nitrile rubber is less because the
softer matrix is poorer in transfer of load to the rigid filler compared to a harder ma￾trix. Figure 4.6 shows the dependence of tensile modulus at varied filler content for
NBR-HAF and NBR-graphite composites, and Fig. 4.7 for NBR-PVC blend vulcanizate.
While NBR neat has a modulus of 1.17 MPa at 1% strain, NBR-PVC neat has 2.18 MPa at
the same strain. The slope of the NBR-PVC-HAF plot is 0.28 while that of NBR-HAF is
0.168, and for NBR-PVC-Graphite, the slope is 0.209 compared to 0.095 for NBR-Graphite.
These clearly shows that reinforcement by particulate fillers for softer elastomers are
less effective, and that carbon black has higher reinforcing efficiency than graphite.
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
10 20 30 40 50
1%Tensie Modulus, MPa
HAFblack
Graphite
Fig. 4.6: Filler reinforcing effect in NBR: HAF black and graphite.
0
0
4
8
12
16
20
10 20 30 40 50
1%Tensile Modulus, MPa
HAF Black
Graphite
Fig. 4.7: Filler reinforcing effect in NBR-PVC: HAF black and graphite.
202 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesIn order to determine the quantitative contribution of the particulate filler on
change in elastic modulus of the elastomer particulate composite, many theories are
developed, in which the simple mixing rule is the most fundamental:
EC = VmEm + VpEp (4:15)
However, this does not hold good for particles like carbon, graphite or minerals be￾cause the Young’s modulus of the filler is much higher, generally 1,000 times or more
than all elastomers and hence the transfer of force between the filler to the matrix is
not much effective, thus drastically reducing the reinforcing effect of the filler. There
is an attempt to incorporate the so-called efficiency factor of the filler in the simple
mixing rule to obtain a more appropriate predictive equation:
EC = EpðeffÞVp + EmVm (4:16)
where Ep(eff) is the effective filler modulus, which can be obtained from experimental
data by plotting EC against Vp, provided Vm = (1–Vp), which means that total volume of
other ingredients in the compounding of the rubber are not significant. The effective
fibre modulus is higher for higher modulus of the polymer, due to improvement in
the stress transfer.
In 1945, Guth [30] proposed a non-linear relationship among the composite modu￾lus, matrix modulus and concentration of the filler in the composite, considering the
spherical particles of carbon black and no filler-filler interaction or agglomeration.
The relationship is just analogous to the expression of viscosity of a liquid medium
with suspended spherical particles. In case of elasticity, the suspended particles actu￾ally perturb the elastic stress and strain and hence the modulus increases. However,
beyond a certain concentration of the filler, there will be linear agglomeration and
subsequently, on still higher concentration, formation of cubical blocks of carbon
black was observed, thereby reducing the reinforcing effect.
EC = Em 1 + 2.5c + 14.1c2 
  (4:17)
However, when there is agglomeration of carbon black particles in the elastomer, the
modified expression for the composite modulus is [30]:
EC = Em 1 + 0.67f .c + 1.62f 2
c2 
  (4:18)
where f is the aspect ratio (length/breadth) of the particle agglomerate. Here, c can be
taken as a volume fraction instead of mass concentration.
A typical plot of the NBR/PVC (50/50 blend) – HAF carbon black composite modu￾lus at 1% strain for various volume fractions of the HAF is shown in Fig. 4.8 and com￾pared with eq. (4.17) which is without considering any agglomeration of the filler, and
eq. (4.18) taking the aspect ratio of the carbon black clusters as 6.0 as suggested by
Guth [30] and a fitting aspect ratio of 7.25 to obtain a better agreement with the exper￾4.3 Properties of particulate composites 203imental values (dark circle). It can be seen that the difference in modulus with or
without considering the aspect ratio as a variable, the modulus values are not very
different at low volume fractions, as eq. (4.17) is ideally applicable for no cluster for￾mation, which is partly true for low volume fraction of filler. The lower values ob￾tained using eq. (4.17) and also with eq. (4.18) with f = 6 could be due to the fact that
the clustering do occur, at higher filler concentration and the cluster to matrix inter￾action is more for more clusters or bigger clusters. It is known that carbon black rein￾forces a polymer by van der Waals force as well as though polarity due to presence of
some polar organic groups on the carbon black particles. However, the aspect ratio of
7.25 does not fit perfectly after 100% strain as seen for only 10 phr HAF containing
NBR/PVC vulcanizate, as shown in Fig. 4.9, although the trend in change of modulus
followed the same pattern. At higher strain, the elastic energy required to stretch is
high due to covalent bond stretching of the polymer chain. Therefore, consideration
of the physical elasticity is valid only at low to moderate stretching.
In the above models, the elastic modulus of the reinforcing particles is not considered,
possibly because the modulus of particulate fillers is very high compared to that of the
elastomers. However, some theoretical analyses of the composite modulus were devel￾oped where particle modulus was included. Some such models are described here.
Isostress theory [31] gives the following expression for the particulate composite
modulus:
EC
Em
= 1
Vp Em=Ep − 1   + 1 (4:19)
Measured
Guth: Eq(4.18), f=6.0
Guth: Eq.(4.18), f=7.25
Guth: Eq.(4.17)
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
HAFVf
EC, MPa
Fig. 4.8: Tensile modulus of NBR-PVC (1% strain) with HAF filler: experiment and theory: Guth [30].
204 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesand the Poissons ratio of the composite, νC = νpVp + νm 1 − Vp
 Ep=Em
Vp + 1 − Vp
 Ep=Em
(4:20)
Kerner theory [31, 32] gives the following expression for the particulate composite
modulus:
EC
Em
=
VpEp
ð Þ 7 − 5νm Em + ð Þ 8 − 10νm Ep
+ Vm
15 1ð Þ − νm
VpEm
ð Þ 7 − 5νm Em + ð Þ 8 − 10νm Ep
+ Vm
15 1ð Þ − νm
(4:21)
and shear modulus:
GC
Gm
= ð Þ 7 − 5νm Gm + VpGp − VpGm
  + ð Þ 8 − 10νm Gp
ð Þ 7 − 5νm Gm + ð Þ 8 − 10νm Gp + VpGm − VpGp
  (4:22)
where V, E, G and n represent volume fraction, elastic (tensile) modulus, shear modulus
and Poisson’s ratio respectively and the suffixes C, p and m represent the composite,
particulate reinforcement and the elastomeric matrix respectively. For all practical pur￾pose, Poisson’s ratio of an elastomer can be taken as 0.5 without much error.
A different, simple model was proposed by Ramsteiner and Theysohn [33] as
EC
Em
= 1 +
Vf
1 − Vf
15 1ð Þ − νm
8 − 10νm
    (4:23)
and a similar expression was given by Kerner-Nielsen [33, 34] as
Fig. 4.9: Composite modulus vs. strain of NBR/PVC (50/50)-10 phr HAF: experiment and theory by Guth
[30} with f = 6 and 7.25.
4.3 Properties of particulate composites 205EC
Em
= 1 − V2=3
f +
Vf
Em
Ef − 1
 V2=3
f + V1=3
f
2
6
6
4
3
7
7
5
(4:24)
However, these equations from 4.19 to 4.24 are applicable to the neutral fillers which
do not reinforce by any attraction other than van der Waals. Therefore, reinforce￾ment by carbons is not predicted by the above expressions. Rather a model similar to
Guth [30] is better to describe the reinforcement of elastomers with carbons. Fig￾ure 4.10 clearly shows the large difference in the composite modulus (normalized by
matrix modulus) experimentally found and the theories. The Kerner equation (4.21)
and eq. (4.23) by Ramsteiner and Theysohn gave the same result, hence, only the latter
is taken here.
4.4 Short fibre rubber composites
A very useful reinforcement of elastomers is by short fibres of many materials, such
as glass, aramid (Kevlar), nylon, carbon, polyester, asbestos, cellulose, jute, coir and
wood fibre. The efficacy of the reinforcement depends on several factors, such as
modulus ratio of filler and the elastomer matrix, uniformity in dispersion, filler￾rubber interaction (compatibility), agglomeration of the short fibres, length to diame￾ter ratio (aspect ratio) of the fibre, orientation of the fibre in the elastomer matrix
and retention of the fibre length in the final product. The dispersion is counteracted
by formation of bundles due to filler-filler interaction and poor fibre-matrix interface.
Expt.
Isostress
Ramsteiner
Kerner-Nielson
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
HAFVf
EC/E
m
Fig. 4.10: Experimental and theoretical tensile modulus considering filler effect: NBR-PVC 50/50
vulcanizate filled with HAF black.
206 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesThe poor interface results in fibre pull-out during tensile force as the fibre simply
slips past the matrix due to both low force of attraction and large difference in strain.
In general, hydroxyl terminated low molecular weight phenol-formaldehyde and res￾orcinol-formaldehyde resins are used during rubber compounding for improvement
of bonding the filler to the rubber. However, special fibres of cellulose are pre-treated
with resorcinol-formaldehyde resin such as in a commercial cellulosic fibre “Santo￾floc”. Carbon fibres are better compatible with rubbers than others because of pres￾ence of some organic groups in the fibre, which can provide better bonding and
reinforcement to the elastomeric matrix, which is also basically a carbon-carbon
chain. Non-polar rubbers are difficult to be reinforced by the fibres unless the pheno￾lic bonding agents are used. The ratio of the length to diameter (aspect ratio) of the
fibre is important in reinforcement efficiency. Below an aspect ratio of 40, the filler
behaves as a particulate filler, and beyond 250, it is difficult to incorporate in the rub￾ber matrix. In most cases, the aspect ratio of the fibres is between 40 and 150 before
mixing. Brittle fibres such as glass and carbon are likely to break during rubber com￾pounding and the aspect ratio is drastically reduces thereafter. Murty and De [35]
showed that the original length of 9 mm (diameter 0.33 mm) of a glass fibre has re￾duced below 0.6 mm with diameter reduced to 0.01 to 0.08 mm after mixing with SBR,
whereas for the jute fibre, the aspect ratio was reduced from 150 to 40 (length =
1.5 mm), but the diameter remained unchanged. The study showed best dispersion for
jute fibre length of 1.5–2 mm and 0.2 mm for glass fibre. The tensile strength of glass
fibre-SBR composite was much less, almost half of that for jute fibre-SBR composite at
identical fibre content.
The use of short fibre in enhancing the properties of rubber was known from
early days, when environmentally friendly, fibrous, powdered cellulose, known as
Solka-Floc, derived from purified wood pulp was used in rubber composition [36, 37].
However, the use of short fibre was not explored till seventies. Boustany and cow￾orkers studied various short fibres for reinforcement of different rubbers with regard
to dispersion, fibre length, orientation and properties in early and mid-1970s [38–42].
In a comparative study, Boustany and Arnold [43] reported NR, SBR, NBR, NR/Chloro￾butyl, NR/BR,Neoprene and NR/SBR rubber composites of a commercially available
short fibre of treated unregenerated cellulose, known as “Santoweb” with other short
fibres such as chopped impregnated glass fibre, Solka-Floc (cellulose), nylon floc, as￾bestos and chopped polyester fibre. The study focused on comparison of vulcanization
characteristics and properties such as resistance to swelling in solvents, stiffness, ten￾sile strength, elongation at break, tear strength, creep, flex fatigue life using cyclic
load at various fractions of failure load, etc. Cellulosic natural fibres can have a wide
spectrum of properties and reinforcing efficiency when used in elastomers. The rein￾forcement depends on the original strength and stiffness of the cellulosic source. For
example, the wood fibres from hard wood are having lower diameter and higher stiff￾ness compared to soft wood fibres [44], brown paper pulp fibres are stiffer than filter
paper tissue fibres and cotton fibre [37].
4.4 Short fibre rubber composites 207Geethamma and coworkers developed natural rubber-coir fibre composites and
studied the effects of fibre length, orientation and alkali treatment on mechanical and
dynamic mechanical properties [45, 46]. Varghese et al. [47] studied the effect of bond￾ing on the mechanical properties of natural rubber-sisal fibre (lignocellulosic fibre)
composite, where the fibre was chemically modified by acetylation and a resorcinol￾hexamethylene tetramine (Hexa) combination was used for better adhesion. The
treatment resulted in at least 20–30% increase in tensile strength and modulus com￾pared to the untreated fibre when resorcinol-Hexa was used, and in the absence of
this adhesion promoter, the treated fibre composite had 100% higher strength than
the untreated fibre composite. Treated cellulosic short fibre from hard wood source
can reinforce a rubber much better than nylon, acrylic, rayon, polypropylene and
polyester (PET) short fibres as shown by Coran et al. [40]. Ismail et al. [48] studied
bamboo fibre filled natural rubber composite with and without phenolic resin as
bonding agent and reported 20–30% increase in properties with the bonding agent
compared to the composition without the bonding agent. However, the mechanical
properties of the composite were only 50% of the pristine natural rubber, possibly be￾cause the fibre had a very broad size distribution and irregular in shape, which might
have reduced the load transfer from the fibres to the matrix. However, the hardness
increased from 35 to 70 and the modulus improved from 1.25 MPa to about 4.5 MPa
for 50 phr bamboo fibre loading with phenolic resin as bonding agent. Similar obser￾vation is made by Cracium et al. [49] for fibrous fir wood saw dust filled EPDM com￾posites cured by electron beam and also be peroxide, where the tensile strength of
the composites irrespective of curing system, was less than unfilled EPDM. However,
the report showed that curing by electron beam at low radiation dose (100–200kGy)
yielded better mechanical property than peroxide cured composite.
One important elastomer short fibre composite is in tyre tread application, where
short fibres of aramid [50], carbon [51] and nylon [52] are used in rubber compounds.
The tyre tread rubber composition should have a balance of low heat build-up and
rolling resistance, which are contradicting features since in the first case, the loss en￾ergy should be low, and the second feature needs a higher loss factor. The balancing
is possible by selection of short fibre as a filler to reinforce the dynamic mechanical
properties, apart from Young’s modulus. Mohammed et al. [53] studied aramid fibre
reinforced nitrile rubber for gasket application. The inclusion of the aramid in the
rubber in addition to nanosilica (10 phr fixed) and carbon black (30 phr fixed), greatly
improved with fibre content till 20 phr with respect to several properties desired for
gasket application, such as strength, compression set, load-deflection in compression
and tear strength. However, resorcinol-hexa combination was also used as adhesion
promoter for the fibre with the rubber.
208 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based composites4.4.1 Mathematical predictions
Several mathematical models are developed to predict the fibrous composites of poly￾mers, considering simple mixing rules, modified mixing rules and models by Halpin￾Tsi, Tsai-Pagano and others, taking into account the fibre orientation and aspect ratio
(L/d) of the fibre and empirical efficiency factors of reinforcement. The efficiency fac￾tor comes from consideration of two aspects, one that of randomness of fibre orienta￾tion in a three dimensional composite body and the other for the effectiveness of load
transfer from the fibre to the matrix. The load transfer is more as the elastic modulus
of the polymer matrix is higher. For elastomer-short fibre composites, the efficiency
of load transfer is far less compared to engineering plastics and thermosets.
Coran et al. [40] suggested a simple equation of the rubber-cellulose short fibre
composite relating various parameters of the fibre and matrix rubber as:
EC = Em 1 + KfVf f g 26 + 0.85ðl=dÞ 
  (4:25)
where EC is the Young’s modulus of the elastomer composite, Em is that of the elasto￾mer, Vf is the volume fraction of the short fibre, l/d is the aspect ratio of the fibre, f is
a function of average fibre orientation and K is a constant.
The equation is based on the assumption that the fibres being much stiffer com￾pared to the rubber matrix, the extension of the fibre under tensile force is neglected.
The equation shows that the volume fraction, orientation and aspect ratio of the fibre
play very important roles. In a load bearing application, the fibre orientation must be
as far as possible in the direction of force. This may be possible in tension, but not in
flexure, particularly for thick sections, since the mid plane of a thick specimen would
undergo shear deformation, apart from the compression at the upper (concave) sur￾face and tension of the lower (convex) surface.
It can be seen from eq. (4.25) that the modulus linearly increases with the volume
fraction at a fixed aspect ratio and also linear with aspect ratio at the fixed volume
fraction of the fibre. However, neither case is applicable in practice, since at high as￾pect ratio and also at high volume fraction, the uniformity in mixing and ability to
mix the long fibres in a polymer matrix becomes very difficult and impractical,
thereby reducing the efficiency of reinforcement.
The most used expression is given by Halpin-Tsai equations for the longitudinal
(EL) and transverse (ET) moduli of aligned short-fibre composites:
EL
Em
= 1 + 2ð Þ l=d ηLVf
1 − ηLVf
, ET
Em
= 1 + 2ηTVf
1 − ηTVf
(4:26)
where
4.4 Short fibre rubber composites 209ηL = Ef =Em
  − 1
Ef =Em
  + 2ð Þ l=d (4:27)
and
ηT = Ef =Em
  − 1
Ef =Em
  + 2 (4:28)
Tsai and Pagano (1969, 1994) showed that the modulus for randomly oriented short￾fibre composites can be predicted approximately as:
EC = 3
8
 EL +
5
8
 ET (4:29)
where E denotes the modulus, V is the volume fraction and the subscripts C, m and f
denote composite, matrix and fibre, respectively, l is length, subscripts L and T denote
longitudinal and transverse directions., d is diameter of fibre, hL and hT are the effi￾ciencies of the fibre reinforcement in longitudinal and transverse directions.
Following observations can be made from eqs. (4.26) to (4.29):
a) The longitudinal efficiency factor (hL) reduces on increasing the aspect ratio (l/d)
of the short fibre.
b) The transverse efficiency factor (hT) depends only on elastic moduli of fibre and
polymer matrix.
c) The differences in type of forces of attraction between the fibre and the polymer
such as van der Waals force, polar force, hydrogen bonding, etc. are not reflected
in efficiency factors.
d) The reinforcement asymptotically increases with increase in fibre aspect ratio.
e) After a particular aspect ratio, the reinforcement ceases to improve, irrespective
of the fibre content.
f) With higher fibre to polymer modulus ratio (Ef/Em), the aspect ratio should be
higher for optimum reinforcement.
g) The longitudinal modulus depends both on the volume fraction of the fibre and
the aspect ratio.
h) The transverse modulus depends only on the volume fraction of the fibre.
i) At a very low aspect ratio (~1), when the particle tends to be spherical, the longitu￾dinal and transverse moduli are equal, signifying isotropic composite just like car￾bon black loaded rubber.
210 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based composites4.4.2 Examples
Two fibres of different Young’s moduli are chosen: Polyester short fibre and Aramid
short fibre. Aramid fibre has about 30 times higher Young’s modulus than that of
polyester fibre. Their characteristics are given below.
(1) Polyester: Fibre diameter = 15 mm, l/d = 70, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300, 350, 400 and 500.
Young’s modulus Ef = 920 MPa
Loading: 5, 10, 20 and 30 phr
(2) Aramid: Fibre diameter = 12 mm, l/d = 150, 200, 250, 350, 450 and 550.
Young’s modulus Ef = 2700 MPa
Loading: 1, 1.5, 2 and 3 phr
The polyester short fibre was used in a nitrile rubber (NBR) matrix at 5, 10, 20 and 30 phr.
The NBR was vulcanized with sulphur-accelerator system and loaded with 30 phr HAF
black. The tensile modulus of the NBR vulcanizate without fibre is 7.4 MPa at 1% strain.
The aramid short fibre was incorporated in natural rubber at 1, 1.5, 2 and 3 phr.
The rubber was vulcanized with sulphur-accelerator system and was loaded with 43
phr HAF carbon black. The tensile modulus of the NR vulcanizate without fibre is 12.5
MPa at 100% strain.
The theoretical prediction of the composite modulus of NBR-Polyester short fibre
composite is shown in Fig. 4.11 against the fibre aspect ratio for various fibre content. It
is seen that the increase in predicted modulus ratio (composite to rubber) is not linear
with aspect ratio and the modulus increase attained almost a constant value beyond
l/d = 300. The modulus is enhanced by at least 2 times of original value (without fibre)
at even 5 phr of the short fibre. However, when the modulus ratio is plotted against
volume fraction of the fibre, it showed a linear behaviour, as seen in Fig. 4.12. The mini￾mum fibre volume fraction of 0.034 corresponds to 5phr loading and maximum fibre
volume fraction of 0.174 corresponds to 30 phr loading. The slope of the linear plot in
Fig. 4.12 is seen to be higher for higher aspect ratio, signifying progressively higher re￾inforcement for higher fibre length. For the lowest loading at 0.034 volume fraction
(5phr), the reinforcement efficiency was not much different for all the aspect ratios, as
the ratio of composite to rubber modulus varied from 1.92 to 2.47 at the aspect ratio
from 70 to 500. The predicted modulus of NR- aramid short fibre composite vs. aspect
ratio (l/d) at various loading of fibre is shown in Fig. 4.13. The fibre has a Young’s modu￾lus of 27 GPa, which is typical of aramid, and NR has a very low tensile modulus, about
12.5 MPa at 100% strain. Because of the very high modulus of the fibre, we have taken
very small quantity of fibre for analysis, 1, 1.5, 2 and 3 phr only. It is seen from Fig. 4.13
that the tensile modulus of the composite at 3 phr is quite high, at least 3–4 times the
pristine rubber vulcanizate. The composite modulus is continuously increasing in this
case with increase in aspect ratio, possibly because of very low volume fractions
(0.0047 to 0.0141). At such low loading, the longitudinal and composite moduli were
4.4 Short fibre rubber composites 211compared at the aspect ratio of 250 and also with the transverse modulus, as shown in
Fig. 4.14. The transverse modulus, which depends on ratio of fibre to matrix modulus,
is quite nearly equal to 1, signifying no enhancement due to the fibre. As it is also dis￾cussed, the transverse modulus is not dependent on aspect ratio.
However, in practical experimentation with short fibre, different results are obtained as
reported in literature. Ryu and Lee [54] showed that the theoretical prediction of nylon
short fibre reinforced chloroprene rubber (CR) according to the above equations are not
in agreement with experimental results since the modulus ratio of reinforcing fibre to
the rubber is more than 100. Also, it was seen that the maximum modulus enhancement
was for the aspect ratio (l/d) of 300, beyond which the modulus value decreased, which is
not observed in Fig. 4.11, where the modulus increased asymptotically with aspect ratio
and linearly with fibre volume fraction (Fig. 4.12). In addition, the maximum composite
modulus obtained experimentally was much higher than the theoretical prediction for
identical fibre characteristics and loading, possibly because of higher matrix-fibre interac￾tion due to polarity and presence of bonding agent.
Similarly, Kashani [50] studied NR-aramid short fibre composite and showed that
with a fibre of aspect ratio of 250 and at a 1 phr loading of fibre, the ratio of longitudinal
tensile modulus to that of the rubber vulcanizate is 1.063 only, whereas from Fig. 4.14, the
same aspect ratio and fibre loading showed a modulus ratio of 2.93. For the transverse
modulus, the calculation showed a ratio of 1.014 at 1 phr loading, but Kashani obtained a
ratio of 0.982, which is quite low, in fact this was a deterioration of the original tensile
modulus. In short fibre composite, there is a reason for this variation of composite modu￾lus with fibre length. According to Shear Lag theory by Rosen [55, 56], the stress from the
fibre end is transferred gradually towards the length and attains maximum at a particu￾0 100 200 300 400 500 600
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
EC/Em
5 phr 10 phr 20 phr 30 phr
Fig. 4.11: Variation of elastic modulus of NBR-polyester short fibre composites with fibre aspect ratio:
theoretical prediction.
212 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositeslar length, which is the minimum length of the fibre required to obtain maximum com￾posite modulus. This minimum length of fibre is given by.
l
d = 1
2
Ef
Gm
1 − V1=2
f
V1=2
f
2
4
3
5
1=2
(4:30)
where Gm is the shear modulus of the matrix. Accordingly, taking Fig. 4.11 correspond￾ing to example (1), and assuming the shear modulus of the NBR to be approximately
one-third of the tensile modulus (Poisson’s ratio ≈ 0.5) the minimum l/d required for
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
l/d = 70
l/d = 150
l/d = 300
l/d = 550
EC/Em
Fig. 4.12: Variation of elastic modulus of NBR-polyester short fibre composites with fibre volume fraction:
theoretical prediction.
100 200 300 400 500 600
1
2
3
4
5
6
1 phr
2 phr
3 phr
EC/Em
Fig. 4.13: Tensile modulus vs. aspect ratio for NR-aramid short fibre composite at various loading of the
fibre.
4.4 Short fibre rubber composites 213maximum improvement in modulus is plotted against the fibre volume fraction Vf and
corresponding maximum improvement in the composite elastic modulus (normalized
by matrix modulus) in Fig. 4.15.
From eq. (4.30), it is seen that the aspect ratio required for maximum load transfer
is higher for a higher modulus ratio of fibre to matrix (Ef/Gm). In the example, the ratio
of Ef/Gm was 373 and corresponding fibre length was only 0.6 mm for 1% polyester short
fibre loading, because the optimum aspect ratio was calculated as 40 and the average
fibre diameter was 15 mm. If we consider example(2) with aramid short fibre loading at
1% Vf in NR, then the Ef/Gm is about 6,378 and corresponding optimum fibre aspect ratio
would be 170. The aramid fibre average diameter being 12 mm, the optimum length be￾comes 2.04 mm, which is also quite small. Lower the modulus ratio, lower will be the
0.001 0.01 0.1
0
20
10
30
40
50
60
80
70
Minimum aspect ratio
maximum Modulus ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Fig. 4.15: Minimum fibre aspect ratio for optimum composite modulus at various fibre volume fraction.
0.0025 0.0050 0.0075 0.0100 0.0125 0.0150
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 EL/Em l/d = 250
EC/Em l/d = 250
ET/Em 
E/Em
Fig. 4.14: Variation of composite modulus as ratio with rubber matrix vs. fibre volume fraction.
214 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesoptimum aspect ratio, while higher the fibre loading, lower will be the optimum aspect
ratio. In most cases, it is seen that a fibre aspect ratio of 100 to 200 is optimum. This is, of
course the final average size after the rubber compounding and fabrication is complete,
because stiff fibres are likely to suffer breakage during rubber compounding and vulca￾nization under high shear and compression. Also, too long fibres are difficult to mix in
practice, and hence for a higher average diameter, the optimum length might not be pos￾sible to incorporate, or might reduce in length after elastomer composite processing.
With a generalized expression of the coefficients in eq. (4.29), the composite mod￾ulus can be stated as a general Halpin-Tsai model:
EC = αEL + ð Þ 1 − α ET (4:31)
where a is 3/8 for random 2-D orientation of the short fibre and 0.184 for random 3-D
orientation. In eq. (4.19), a = 3/8 and hence 1 – a = 5/8. However, Shokrieh and Sani [57]
used Mori-Tanaka and laminated analogy (MT-LA) approach coupled together to cal￾culate the short fibre composite with random orientation of the fibre. Mori-Tanaka
method was used to calculate the composite stiffness matrix of aligned fibres and lam￾inated analogy approach was then used to calculate the stiffness of the composite
with randomly oriented fibre. Consequently, they proposed the following empirical
equation for “a” in case of 3-D randomly oriented fibre reinforcement:
α = 0.13 + 0.0815Vf − 1.669 Em
Ef
  (4:32)
Figure 4.16 shows the comparison of the theoretically predicted elastic modulus by Hal￾pin-Tsai eq. (4.29) with eq. (4.31) for the short fibre composite of Example (1), taking the
l/d ratio of the polyester fibre as 250. The coefficient “a” in eq. (4.31) was calculated
taking the data of Vf, Ef and Em from Example (1) and “a” calculated using eq. (4.32).
Obviously, the modified value of “a” gave lower composite modulus than a = 3/8.
The authors [57] used several experimental data on short fibre composites of epoxy￾carbon nanotube and epoxy-graphene and compared the experimentally determined
composite modulus with those calculated using Halpin-Tsai and modified equations. The
authors showed that using the modified a value as in eq. (4.32), the predicted composite
modulus was in much better agreement with experimental values, with average error of
only 2%, and maximum 6.7%, while on using a = 3/8, as in eq. (4.29), the error was quite
high, varying from 2% to even 52%. However, in all the analysis, the necessary assump￾tions are:
(1) The fibres do not interact with each other to form agglomerates
(2) The fibre is uniformly dispersed and distributed in the matrix
(3) There is no residual stress between the fibre and the matrix
(4) There is perfect bond between the matrix and the fibre
(5) The matrix and the fibre are linearly elastic
(6) There is no frictional loss of strain energy (Rayleigh or Coulomb damping) at the
fibre-matrix interface
4.4 Short fibre rubber composites 2154.5 Steel chord reinforced rubber composite
Steel cords are extensively used in rubbers for making high-performance radial tyres
and conveyor belts. In both the applications, the axial strength required to be higher
than bending or shear strength. In a tyre, the circumferential force results in hoop
stress which is many times higher than the radial stress of the tyre. In case of con￾veyor belts, the tension of the belt on tight side can be very high compared to other
stresses. Both the items are subjected to dynamic stress while in use. A simple sketch
of a single ply steel cord-rubber composite is shown in Fig. 4.17. The cord is made of a
number of steel filaments twisted together as shown in Fig. 4.18. The end of the cord
has an equivalent radius calculated from the total area of the circular cross section of
the filaments.
The cords are unidirectionally embedded in the rubber matrix by in situ vulcani￾zation process. The rubber item such as the tyre or the belt experiences tensile force
in the direction of the cord. Needless to say, the contribution of the steel cords in
transverse or other perpendicular direction is not significant.
The strength of the composite in the direction of the cord lay-up is dependent on
the cord parameters, number of plies and adhesion of the steel cord with the rubber.
The cross-sectional diameter of the cord is such that the cord can withstand the ten￾sile force it has to experience in actual application. The number of plies can be two or
more depending on the thickness and force requirements. The adhesion is a more
complicated issue due to the chemistry of both the rubber and the steel cord. It has
been observed that the adhesion of steel to the rubber is not adequate to avoid cata￾strophic failure/tearing of the tyre/belt. The failure can also take place as a result of
fatigue due to constant dynamic loading of the tyre and the belt while in use.
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2
0
2
1
3
4
5
6
8
7
fiber d =15 μm
l/d =250
EC/Em
Eq.(4.29)
Eq.(4.31)
Fig. 4.16: Comparison of the NBR-polyester short fibre composite. Elastic modulus calculated using eqs.
(4.29) and (4.31).
216 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based composites4.5.1 Adhesion of steel cord to rubber
There are many reports on methods of improvement of adhesion between the steel
cord and rubber. Normally, tyres are mostly made of styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR)
and natural rubber (NR), and both are nonpolar. The adhesion with the steel is not
very good for such high-performance application. Most modification of steel cord for
adhesion improvement is brass plating. Adhesion of brass with rubber is being stud￾ied since seventies and Van Ooij [58] published a good review of the subject. In a com￾paratively recent review, the mechanism of adhesion of brass with rubber was
elaborately discussed by Vandou et al. [59]. The technology of brass-coated steel cord￾rubber composite for radial tyre is widely used because the failure of a tyre is mostly
due to rubber degradation rather than loss of adhesion. In fact, the method of making
such composite is quite perfected in the tyre industry and there have been few re￾ports of the mechanism of adhesion of brass with rubber. Brass consists mainly of
copper (about 66%) and Zinc (about 34%), and both react with the sulphur (curative)
used in the rubber compound for vulcanization to form corresponding sulphides,
Cu2S and ZnS, thus bonding the brass with the sulphur linked rubber through the
Cu2S/ZnS-Sx-Rubber bridge [59, 60]. However, copper sulphide is more effective as ad￾hesion promoter. Amorphous precipitated Silica, tackifier such as phenol/resorcinol
formaldehyde and organocobalt compounds together is reported to enhance the adhe￾sion between brass-coated steel cord and NR. For example, Shi et al. [60] used up to 3
phr cobalt decanoate and observed lower hysteresis and improved static and dynamic
(200,000 cycles) adhesion force by about 30% presumably because it suppresses the
Fig. 4.18: Typical steel cords used in rubber-based unidirectional composites in tyres and conveyor belts.
Rubber
Reinforcement
Steel cords in
rubber
2
3
1
Fig. 4.17: A unidirectional steel cord-rubber composite.
4.5 Steel chord reinforced rubber composite 217formation of ZnS. Phenol formaldehyde was reported to be more effective compared
to resorcinol, but the improvement was about 20% in static pull-out force and about
12% in dynamic pull-out force (200,000 cycles).
4.5.2 Mathematical models
The analysis and prediction of a cord-rubber composite is quite challenging. Even for
a unidirectional cord reinforced rubber, the very construction of the cord poses the
difficulty in estimation of stresses and strains in the three directions, because the
cords are not single filament, but a combination of twisted filaments and hence, even
in a unidirectional load situation, there will be bending and twisting of the rubber￾cord composite and analytical methods are only approximation of actual stresses and
fatigue. The cord rubber composite is a highly anisotropic body requiring special con￾sideration of elastic modulus determination/calculation in two axes for plain stresses
(lateral dimensions much higher than thickness). A simple material model of elastic
tensile and shear analysis (plane stress) is represented as
E1 = Ecϕc + Er 1 − ϕc ð Þ (4:33)
ν12 = νcϕc + νr 1 − ϕc ð Þ (4:34)
E2 = Er Ec 1 + ξ1ϕc ð Þ + ξ1Er 1 − ϕc ½  ð Þ = ξ1Er 1 + ϕc=ξ1 ð Þ + Ec 1 − ϕc ½  ð Þ (4:35)
G12 = Gr Gc 1 + ξ2ϕc ð Þ + ξ2Gr 1 − ϕc ½  ð Þ = Gc 1 − ϕc ð Þ + ξ2Gr 1 + ϕ2=ξ2 ½  ð Þ (4:36)
ν21 = ν12E2=E1 (4:37)
where ν represents the Poisson’s Ratio, ξ1 and ξ2 are factors depending on the geome￾try of the cord and the spacing, while ϕc is the volume fraction of the cord in the rub￾ber ply and is given by Walter [61]:
ϕc = πnR2
=t (4:38)
In a planar ply with unidirectional cord alignment, the volume fraction of the cord is
same as the ratio of the cross-sectional area of the cords to the cross-sectional area of
the ply.
For circular cross section of the cords and as the elastic modulus of rubber is
much lesser than that of steel cord, the above equations for E2 and G12 can be approxi￾mated as:
E2 = Er 1 + 2ϕc ð Þ= 1 − ϕc ð Þ (4:39)
G12 = Gr Gc + Gr + ð Þ Gc − Gr ϕc ½ = Gc + Gr − ð Þ Gc − Gr ϕc ½  ½  (4:40)
218 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based composites4.5.3 Examples
Example 1
The tensile data of an experimental elastomer composition of nitrile rubber vulcanized with sulphur accel￾erator and having 45 phr carbon black is listed below.
UTS: 13.7 N/mm2
, elongation at break: 355% and tensile modulus (Er) at 1% strain: 9.15 N/mm2
. The
Poisson’s ratio is assumed as 0.48 a ambient condition. Hence Gr: 3.09 N/mm2
.
Material property of steel cord (neglecting the contribution by a thin layer of brass, as the case may
be) is: shear modulus Gc: 82 × 103 N/mm2
.
The transverse elastic modulus and Shear modulus of the ply material is calculated for various volume
fractions of the cords and shown in Fig. 4.19.
It is observed from Fig. 4.19 that the rate of increase in both moduli is enhanced to great extent be￾yond 0.5 volume fraction of cord. However, ultimate tensile strength of the rubber matrix or the bond
strength between the rubber and the cord has to be taken into account while considering the validity of
such theoretical estimation, and should be verified by an experiment.
Pidaparti [62] studied bending of cord-rubber 2-ply laminate composite using three-dimensional finite
element method for four point bending and compared the results with experimental data and also with
classical mathematical models of simple and cylindrical bending theory. The material model used was origi￾nally by Shield and Costello [63], derived by energy consideration and the elastic moduli are thus given by
E1 = Em + c1Ecϕc 1 − 6c2c3ϕcð Þ 1 + νm
c1 Ah2E + 6c4ϕcð Þ 1 + νm
h i
2
4
3
5 (4:39)
E2 =
4Em½  c1Ecϕc + Em + 24 1ð Þ + νm ϕcEc ½ =Ah2 n o c4Em + CEcϕc ð Þ
4Em + 4 1 − ν2
m
 ϕcc1Ec + 24 1ð Þ + νm ϕc ½ =Ah2E
n o c4Em + CEcϕc 1 − ν2
m
   
(4:40)
G12 = Gm 1 − ϕc ð Þ
ν12 = νm
(4:41)
where Em and Gm are the tensile and shear moduli of the rubber, νm is the Poisson’s ratio of the rubber,
and A = Ac=R2, h = h=R and E = Em=Ec.Ac is the area of the cord, h is the thickness of the ply, R is the outer
radius of the cord and fc is the volume fraction of the cord in the unidirectional ply. The constants c1, c2, c3,
c4 and C = c1c4-c2c3 are used to describe extension-twisting coupling and are determined analytically [63].
To study the mechanical properties of cord reinforced conveyor belt specimen of thickness of 30 mm,
Golovanevskiy and Kondratiev [64] developed a modified tensometer and experimentally found the tensile
strength and in-plane shear strength. The authors used simple rule of mixing to predict the elastic tensile
modulus of a two-ply steel cord-rubber unidirectional composite:
E = E1S1 + E2S2
S (4:42)
where E1 and E2 are elastic moduli of the cord and the rubber, S1, S2 and S are the cross-sectional areas of
the cord, rubber and the ply sample respectively. Here, S2 = S – S1.
The accuracy of the prediction by the above equation was 98% compared to the experimental results,
as reported.
The torsion experiment on bar and a square plate sample was done by fixing one end and twisting the
other end and. The deflection d at the point of force F is determined by the experiment and the in-plane
shear modulus was related to these parameters as:
4.5 Steel chord reinforced rubber composite 219δh3 = 3Fl2
Gxy
(4:43)
where h and l are the thickness and the side of the sample, respectively. The authors used the following
expression as reported by Vasiliev and Morozov [65] for prediction of the in-plane shear modulus for a
unit structural element with dimensions as 2p and 2l and a normalized radius rb:
Gxy = 1 − rb
p + rb
p
k 2k ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
k2 − 1 p arctg
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
k + 1
k
r
− π
2
" # ! Gp (4:44)
where Gp is the in-plane shear modulus of the rubber. Here, k is defined as
k = rb
l 1 − Gp
Gb
    −1
(4:45)
The above expression was fairly accurate with only 13% difference with experimental result as reported [64].
Example 2
Taking the material property data from Example 1, and assuming p = 20 mm and l = 15 mm and various
normalized radii rb, the elastic tensile modulus and in-plane shear modulus of a single ply unidirectional
steel cord-rubber composite is computed and the result shown in Figs. 4.20 and 4.21, respectively.
Figure 4.20 was the plot according to eq. (4.42), which is a simple mixing rule and a straight line relating
volume fraction of cord with the composite tensile modulus. The assumption is that the bond strength be￾tween the cord and the rubber is not a limiting factor, which is not true for a real composite ply, while Fig. 4.21
is based on eqs. (4.44) and (4.45) and shows a non-linear relation between the cord volume fraction and the
in-plane shear modulus of the composite ply.
The failure of such cord-rubber composites is reported in literature using both static and dynamic
tests. Basically, the failure is either for the failure of the rubber matrix as such or failure of adhesion bond
between the cord and the rubber matrix. The strength and elastic tensile and sear modulus of rubber and
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
1.0E+6
2.5E+7
4.9E+7
7.2E+7
9.6E+7
1.2E+8
E2
G12
E2 or G12, N/mm2
Fig. 4.19: Transverse and shear modulus of unidirectional cord-rubber single ply composite vs. volume
fraction of cord in Example 2.
220 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesimprovement of adhesion of steel cord with the rubber matrix is already discussed. The static tests of
adhesion can be using a specific test tyre cord adhesion test (TCAT), which is a modification of original
ASTM D 2229 and further improved by Nicholson et al. [66, 67]. The test specimen is a rubber bar in which
two cords are inserted from two ends as shown in Fig. 4.22. A finite element analysis is done to calculate
stresses at various length of the sample. For low strain, the stress-strain of rubber is modelled as a Hoo￾kean behaviour, while for higher strain, Mooney-Rivlin model was used in the FEM by Ridhi et al. [66].
Obviously, at the rubber-cord interface, the stress is maximum and at the other end of the cord inside the
rubber, the stress is minimum.
0.0000 0.1000 0.2000 0.3000 0.4000 0.5000 0.6000
Volume fraction of cord
0.00
15.00
30.00
45.00
60.00
75.00
90.00
E, GPa
Fig. 4.20: Elastic modulus of steel cord-rubber unidirectional single ply composite as a function of volume
fraction of cord.
0 0.003 0.006 0.009 0.012 0.015
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Normalised radius of cord (rb)
Gxy, MPa
Fig. 4.21: In-plane shear modulus of steel cord-rubber single ply composite as a function of
cross-sectional radius of cord.
4.5 Steel chord reinforced rubber composite 221Frank et al. [68] also used a multiscale FEM modelling to assess the stresses, strains and failure of a
conveyor belt of steel cord rubber unidirectional composite, with a set-up of a conveyor belt loop around
two identical rotating drums and with an applied force. The rubber was modelled as a Mooney-Rivlin solid
and the rule of mixture was used to determine the elastic modulus of the belt. The rotation of the drums
was controlled (velocity nearly 6 m/s) using a special arrangement to avoid vibration of the belt. The ten￾sile and bending stiffness were calculated by 2 scale FEM models of a splice of the belt. The authors re￾ported that the highest stress is observed at the bending point of the belt, in the contact of the drum, and
about 15% higher than flat region. The experimental set up used in this method can be applied to study
dynamic fatigue of the belt on running several cycles.
During the use of conveyor belts and tyres, the rubber cover undergoes wear and tears while the core
steel cord-rubber interface suffers damages and crack development. A conveyor belt cold is as long as
100 km, and also in a mining ore area and might be a part of the underground operation. The damage
identification of the belt is thus a continuous process with time to identify the defects being developed
with time and the extent of damage caused in the belt core. Recently, Blazej and coworkers [69] have
reported a method of damage detection in conveyor belts using digitized magnetic signatures of the belt
sections in 2D view with the help of a software, such as DiagBelt. Damage causes change in magnetic field
around the steel cord and this change is reproduced in a digital data system. It is an improved version of
the older analogue system. The diagnostic bar contains many magnetic sensors to identify the locations
and estimate the extent of damage in the belt sections minutely.
4.6 Elastomer nanocomposite
Nanometric size of a reinforcement material is more effective in enhancing strength and
other properties of elastomers. In fact, carbon black, which is the most common reinforc￾ing filler in rubber industry, is basically a nanoparticle, but remains as agglomerates as
can be seen in Tab. 4.1. Carbon black particles are essentially spherical in shape. There
are nanometric carbons in the shape of tubes, fibres, platelets, etc., which ae very effec￾tive in small quantities and have gained importance as reinforcing fillers apart from con￾ventional carbon black. In addition, there are more types of nanoparticles such as
minerals, ceramics, fumed silica, natural clays, synthetic metal nanoparticles, metal ox￾ides, etc. There has been enormous interest among the scientific community and industry
about the nanocomposites of elastomers for several reasons, such as quantum jump in
some properties, new avenues and opportunities to enhance functional performance of
modern systems. A very important aspect is reduction in weight penalty, which is an ob￾Fig. 4.22: A sketch of sample for modified TCAT test.
222 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesvious advantage allowing light weight construction of all types of vehicles, thus saving on
fuels and pay-loads. Nanosized materials owing to their high surface energy per unit vol￾ume, can reinforce a rubber to much greater extent, not only in respect of strength, but
also in electromagnetic properties, conductivity, barrier property, viscoelastic damping
etc. However, smaller the size, more difficult it is to avoid or break agglomeration, which
reduces the nano-effect to large extent. Secondly, health hazard of handling such small
particles is well known. Nevertheless, elastomer industry has adopted a large-scale appli￾cation of nano-reinforcing fillers other than carbon black. Most common nanocomposite
of elastomers are organically modified clay nanocomposite, functionalized or pure car￾bon nanotube composite and graphene and graphene oxide nanocomposites.
4.6.1 Elastomer /nanoclay composites
Clay is a naturally occurring mineral, consists mainly silicates of aluminium, magne￾sium, potassium, sodium, iron, etc. Nanoclays are nanosized particles of natural clays.
There are classifications of natural clays based on crystal structures and chemical
composition. For example, the following common clays are widely available and used
in synthesis of nanocomposites. Some examples of naturally occurring clays and their
approximate empirical formulas are given below:
Phyllosilicates:
Kaolinite:Al4Si4O10(OH)8
Bentonite (mixture of minerals including smectite),
Chlorite: Al2Mg3Si4O10(OH)8
Talc: Mg3[Si4O10(OH)2],
Mica:KAl2[AlSi3O10(OH)2],
Sepiolite: Mg4[Si6O15](OH)2 4H2O
Smectite: Component of bentonite, known as a 2:1 layered clay,2-dimensional
arrays of silicon-oxygen tetrahedra and 2-dimensional arrays of aluminium- or
magnesium-oxygen-hydroxyl octahedra.
Montmorillonite (di-octahedral): Mg0.33Al1.67[Si4O10(OH)2](Ca, Na) x (H2O)n
Hectorite (tri-octahedral)Na0.3(Mg,Li)3Si4O10(OH)2
Saponite: Ca0.25(Mg,Fe)3((Si,Al)4O10)(OH)2 ·n(H2O),
kaolin & Halloysite: (Al2[Si2O5(OH)4])
Montmorillonite (MMT) is the most abundantly available clay in the earth crust and
hence, very cost-effective. They are preferred also due to simple processability and
can cause significant improvement in performance when a polymeric composite is
formed with even minute (<10%) quantity of the nanoclay. They are layered silicates
containing two coordinated tetrahedral silicon atoms, with a sandwiched octahedral
sheet of mostly aluminium or magnesium oxide [70]. Natural MMTs is hydrophilic
4.6 Elastomer nanocomposite 223due to the presence of inorganic cations on their surface and thereby not compatible
with hydrophobic polymers. Generally, the length of a nano MMT is less than 2 μm,
while width and thickness are approximately 50 nm and 0.96 nm. The layer spacing
of natural MMT is about 1.23–1.54 nm as observed by X-ray diffraction study [71].
In order to compatibilize MMT with elastomers, organic modification is done to
MMT to increase the interlayer spacing, and to create hydrophobic surface, for better in￾teractions with organic polymers. Cloisite series of organically modified MMT are widely
used, with varying hydrophobicity as: Cloisite 15A > 20A > 25A > 10A > 93A > 30B > Cloisite
Na+ (hydrophilic).Therefore, a selection can be made to use various Cloisites in polar and
non-polar elastomers.
Typical chemical structures of the organic modifiers are shown in Fig. 4.23 [72].
The cation of the natural clay (MMT) is exchanged with the quaternary ammonium ion
which is attached to derivatives of the tallow (C18 chain) and thus this long chain moiety
causes an increase in the d-spacing of the silicate layers. The d-spacing can be increased
Methyl, Tallow, bis-2-Hydroxyethyl,
Quaternary Ammonium x
Dimethyl, Hydrogenated tallow,
Benzyl, Quatemary Ammonium X
Methyl, Dehydrogenated tallow,
Ternary Ammonium X
Dimethyl, Hydrogenated tallow, 2-Ethylhexyl,
Quaternary Ammonium X
Dimethyl, di-(hydrogenated) tallow,
Quaternary Ammonium X
Cloisite 15A (125 meq./100g and 20A (95 meq./100g)
Cloisite 10A
Cloisite 30B Cloisite 93A
Cloisite 25A
CH2CH2OH
CH2CH(CH2)3CH3
HOCH2CH2
C18
C18
CH3
C2H5
CH3
CH3
CH3
N +
C18
CH3 N CH3 +
C18
CH3
CH3 N CH2 +
N + H
C18
N +
Fig. 4.23: Chemical structures of organic modifiers for various Cloisite types.
224 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesto 2–3 nm by such organic modification of the clay [73]. There can be different extent of
layer separation, for example intercallation, where the layers are not completely sepa￾rated and still maintain some order, while exfoliation means the layers are completely
separated by the long chain organic compound. The intercallated and exfoliated clays
are compounded with elastomer in the unvulcanized state, when the elastomer is linear
with low molecular weight and further reduced by severe shearing of the elastomer in
rubber processing units such as two roll mill and internal mixer. This process causes
further exfoliation of the clay as the oligomer enters the clay gallery. The similar effect
can also be observed when the elastomer is dissolved in a solvent. However, a good
solvent may not be preferred due to high hydrodynamic volume of the elastomer chain
causing higher viscosity. The second problem of solution process is difficulty in removal
of trace solvent from the clay-rubber mixture. Considering the normal compounding
process of rubber industries, the mixing should be done in an internal mixer or a two￾roll mill at a somewhat elevated temperature, avoiding degradation of the elastomer. A
pictorial representation of the stages of the original clay, intercalated clay and exfoli￾ated clay is shown in Fig. 4.24.
Since the organic modifier and the oligomer (low molecular weight elastomer) can
enter the gallery of the clay, the resulting composite (termed “clay nanocomposite”) is
better reinforced than that by simple mixture of a particulate filler. However, due to
such intercalation/exfoliation, there is a limit of the clay concentration for maximum
effective reinforcement, beyond which the clay behaves as a simple particulate filler.
There are many studies to establish the optimum clay content in rubber, and mostly it
is 2–6% of the rubber. A few are cited in references [73–77].
Nevertheless, the platelet-type structure of the clay can still enhance some
properties beyond optimum level, such as barrier to fluid diffusion, vibration
damping and fire retardancy, to mention a few. The tortuous path offered by the
platelets and the hydrophobic nature of the modified clay offer greater resistance
to diffusion and decrease solubility of small molecules into the composite [78],
while in vibration, the platelets with adjacent rubber chain behave as micro￾constraining layer damper due to mode conversion from longitudinal to shear
strain of the soft rubber in between the of bundles of the stiff clay [79]. In addition,
the clay acts as synergistic additive with fire retardants such as polyphosphate, al￾Fig. 4.24: Clay modification by large organic molecules and oligomers.
4.6 Elastomer nanocomposite 225uminium tri-hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide, etc. [80, 81] and also without
any other fire-retardant additives [82].
4.6.2 Elastomer /carbon nanotube composites
One of the most effective reinforcements of elastomers are done by carbon particles.
The atomic structure of carbon allows it to form very different types of clustering and
chemical association. Apart from spherical shape of carbon black, it can form the shape
of a football with five and six membered rings, known as “Fullerene”, tube shaped par￾ticles called “Carbon nanotube”, both single tube (SWNT) and many concentric tubes
together (MWNT), fibres, and purer forms of clustered plates such as graphite and sin￾gle platelet called graphene. A typical pictorial representation of carbon nanotubes is
shown in Fig. 4.25. The single wall nanotube is actually a cylindrically folded graphene
sheet and multiwall tubes are concentric cylindrical arrangement formed by several
graphene sheets [82].
Single-walled carbon nanotubes have on an average diameter of 0.5–1.5 nm, while
multiwall nanotubes might have as high as 100 nm diameter, length of a nanotube
can be anything from 0.5 nm to several mm. Density of isolated SWNT is 2.1 g/c.c.
and that for MWNT are found to be 2.1 g/c.c. [83]. However, depending on the struc￾tural arrangement and dimensions of the nanotubes, the density, mechanical prop￾erties vary widely. The carbon nanotubes are anisotropic and therefore, the Young’s
modulus and Poisson’s ratio are varying as 1–6 GPa and 0.28–0.36 in three directions
[84]. Qian et al. reported very high Young’s modulus of 1.2 TPa and tensile strength
of 50–200 GPa [85].
Carbon nanotubes are often functionalized in order to enhance compatibility with
the elastomers so that the reinforcing effect is significant at very minute quantity of the
nanotubes. For example, a mixture of nitric and sulphuric acid is used to oxidize the
surface, introducing -COOH group, thus making it compatible with polyurethanes and
polyimides, while grafting of the polybutylene onto the nanotube is done to compatibi￾lize with polybutylene, acid treatment, while organo-silane treatment on CNT is done to
Fig. 4.25: Carbon nanotubes.
226 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositescompatibilize with vulcanized rubber and amine modification is done for compatibilize
with polyamide and epoxy polymers. Dispersion of carbon nanotubes in polymers is
very critical, since the size of the nanotubes is very small, agglomeration is quite high,
particularly polar modified CNTs. However, in maximum cases, it is observed that only
0.1–1% functionalized CNT is effective to significantly improve the Young’s modulus and
electrical conductivity. Even 1% silane-modified CNT can enhance the Young’s modulus
of rubber by 28% and for most polymers, 1% functionalized CNT is enough for achieving
the percolation threshold in electrical conductivity (10−10 to 10−6 S/cm) [86]. Malekie and
Ziaie [87] calculated the electrical percolation threshold as 0.13–0.25% SWCNT compared
to experimental results of 0.13–0.7% depending on the type of polymer, taking the elec￾trical conductivity of the SWCNT as 104
–107 S/m and that of the selected polymers in the
range of 10−16 S/m for polystyrene to 10−12 S/m for Polyethylene terephthalate. Li et al.
grafted polyurethane chain on MWCNT surface and when used in NR vulcanizate at
5 phr, the thermal conductivity increased by 43% [88]. Li and coworkers [89] also modi￾fied MWCNT by grafting butyl acrylate-a-methyl methacrylate glycidyl methacrylate (BA￾MMA-GMA) terpolymer onto the MWCNT surface and the modified MWNCT (OMWCNT)
was used up to 2.5 phr in NR/SBR blend vulcanizate as reinforcement. The mixing of the
OMWCNT and other vulcanizing ingredients with the blend elastomer blend was done
in a conventional two-roll mill. Properties of the reinforced vulcanizate were maximum
at 1.5 phr OMWCNT. The tensile strength improved from 23.7 MPa to 26.6 MPa, elonga￾tion at break improved from 375% to 450% and degradation temperature increased in
thermogravimetric analysis up to 70 °C after the onset. The effect of the OMWCNT rein￾forcement was very obvious in dynamic mechanical analysis, as the reinforcement
caused a decrease in loss factor maximum value from 0.575 to about 0.525, without the
shift of the peak temperature ( broad peak covering −55 °C to −47 °C). This is the result
of reduction in segmental mobility of the reinforced chain.
4.6.3 Elastomer /graphene nanocomposites
Graphene can be defined as a single sheet of graphite structure, and hence much
smaller in layer thickness, and in addition, have quite smaller in lateral dimensions.
The ideal structure of graphene is a single atom thick sp2
-hybridized carbon-carbon
planar sheet. The most common crystalline size of a nanographene particle is 20–200
nm. The thickness of the single layer is about 0.335 nm as seen by X-ray diffraction
[73]. However, due to nanometric size, graphenepractically consists of few sheets and
the thickness of such bundle can be few nanometres. Characteristics of a typical com￾mercial graphene nanoparticle produced by a combination of chemical vapour depo￾sition and chemical method are:
4.6 Elastomer nanocomposite 227Purity >99%, thickness of a 3–6-layer graphene nanoparticle is about 3–8 nm, den￾sity is approximately 2.2 g/cm3
, surface area is about 180 m2
/g, tensile strength is about
130 GPa, thermal conductivity is approximately 5,000 W/m.K and electrical conductiv￾ity is about 108
Siemens/m [90].
Graphene is easy to synthesize from microcrystalline graphite by several methods
such as by ultracentrifuging the graphite particles in an organic solvent to obtain the exfo￾liated single graphene platelets, or by chemical vapour deposition [90], or by the common
“Hummer-Offeman” method [91], using oxidation of graphite by mixture of potassium
permanganate, sodium nitrate and sulphuric acid, to obtain graphene oxide, which is
polar. A modified Hummer method uses a mixture of sulphuric and phosphoric acid with
the permanganate for oxidation reaction [92]. To reduce the polarity, the graphene oxide
is reduced by thermal process to remove some oxygen atom as CO/CO2 in controlled man￾ner to obtain a preferred ratio of C/O in the reduced graphene oxide (rGO). The properties
of the rGO are more like a pure graphene, with some polarity due to presence of oxygen.
Pristine graphene is a honeycomb of carbon rings, without any defect and perfectly
non-polar, which makes it unsuitable for reinforcement of elastomers, due to low inter￾active bond strength with the rubber. Graphene oxide, on the other hand, is somewhat
polar and can reinforce rubbers, especially polar rubbers such as nitrile rubber, carbox￾ylated nitrile rubber, neoprene, acrylic rubber and hypalon. However, reduced gra￾phene oxide and surface modified GO are suitable for reinforcing non polar rubbers
such as natural, butyl and SBR. Figure 4.26 shows a typical grapheme nanosheet image
in TEM and a schematic representation of three grapheme nanosheet layers.
Surface modification of GO can be done by chemical reaction with suitable vinyl rubber.
For example, Tang et al. synthesized SBR/graphene composite by introducing GO into SBR
latex, thereafter reducing the GO by hydrazine hydrate [93]. Esmiazadeh et al. synthesized
silicone rubber-graphene nanosheet composite using a coupling agent 3-aminopropyl trie￾thoxysilane, mixed in a two-roll mill commonly used for rubber compounding, and vulca￾nized by dicumyl peroxide [94]. Berki et al. synthesized GO by modified Hummer method
as aqueous suspension and added to NR latex, and compounded, vulcanized in a conven￾Fig. 4.26: Grapheme (a) TEM image of a commercial grapheme and (b) schematic of a three layer
graphene nanosheets.
228 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositestional process and compared this nanocomposite with block NR-GO suspension mixture,
compounded and vulcanized conventionally and observed that the latex process resulted
in higher reinforcing effect than block NR processing. The authors observed that the dy￾namic modulus at various strains and the ultimate tensile property is better for latex NR￾GO nanocomposite. In fact, the tensile and tear strength reduces on addition of GO in NR
block -GO nanocomposites [95]. Wang et al. used N,N, bis (3-aminopropyl)methylamine for
simultaneously grafting onto the GO and reducing it, and thereafter used NR latex/rGO
nanocomposite. The vulcanization of the rubber/rGO was done by conventional sulphur￾accelerator curing system. The developed composite was compared with a latex rubber/
GO system reduced by hydrazine hydrate and cured similarly [96]. It was observed that
with similar rGO content, the developed process resulted in a more rubbery flexible high￾strength elastomeric composite and hydrazine hydrate rGO reinforcement resulted in
lower-strength, higher modulus elastomeric composite.
4.7 Rheology of elastomer composites
Elastomers are formed as randomly oriented long, entangled and flexible chains,
mainly with low or no order in the chain arrangement, which make them nearly pure
amorphous material. The free volume in an elastomer is quite high compared to engi￾neering plastics and thermosets. Glass transition temperature of elastomers is below
ambient, and therefore, the chain segments are at random motion like repetition, but
without a neat displacement of the bulk. The macro-Brownian motion of the chain
segments is a result of thermal excitation. Due to the thermodynamic state at ambient
conditions, the elastomer shows two deformation phenomenon simultaneously, one
which is like an elastic solid, where the internal stress is instantly developed in the
elastomer when a strain is induced, and secondly, the chains can move like a viscous
fluid under the external force, and the movement is opposed by the entangled chains,
which is defined as viscosity. The strain thus develops with time under the constant
stress and the rate of strain is proportional to the stress in the elastomer. Therefore,
the elastomer is termed as a “viscoelastic” body. Hence, a viscoelastic body is repre￾sented by a combination of an elastic member, such as a spring and a viscous fluid
member, such as a dashpot. The mathematical expression of the viscoelastic phenom￾enon can be either by a series arrangement of these members, which is Maxwell’s
Model or the arrangement can be parallel, which is Kelvin-Voigt (KV) model. How￾ever, a single model cannot describe a real elastomeric material, and less for its com￾posite, where anisotropic behaviour is observed.
4.7 Rheology of elastomer composites 2294.7.1 Viscoelastic properties
Figure 4.27(a) shows a Maxwell model, and Fig. 4.27(b) shows a Kelvin-Voigt model. In
Maxwell’s model, the strain is additive and the spring and dashpot experience the
same force of deformation, while in KV model, the stresses are additive and the same
strain is induced on both the arms. Since the elastomer chains can have viscous be￾haviour, the strain develops with time under constant or variable stress, and stress
reduces due to rearrangement of the chains, if held at constant strain.
The constitutive equations relating the stress, strain and the strain rate in a viscoelas￾tic body is represented as
Maxwell:
dε
dt = 1
E
dσs
dt +
σ
η
(4:46)
Kelvin-Voigt: σ = σs + σd = E.ε + η
dε
dt (4:47)
In treating the above equations, it is assumed that the modulus (E) and the viscosity
(η) are independent of strain and strain rate, respectively, which in other words is an
assumption that the body is a linear viscoelastic body. However, this assumption is
valid for a low strain and strain rate for the elastomers and beyond that limit, the
material shows non linearity. As an example, let us take nitrile rubber vulcanizate
without any filler, the stress-strain relationship and secant elastic modulus is shown
in Fig. 4.28. The relationship is neither a Hookean one, nor a pure Newtonian fluid.
The non-linearity results from the viscous behaviour, i.e., increase in strain rate with
increase in stress. From the figure, it is seen that the stress does not increase at the
same rate after about 10% elongation and the modulus continuously drops on increas￾ing the strain. The rubber chains resist deformation to maximum extent in the onset
of stretching (force application), due to highly coiled and entangled configuration of
the chains, and subsequent drop in modulus is due to relatively low force required by
the uncoiled chains to move past one another showing large viscous strain at much
slower rate of stress, and finally till break due to any defect or ideally due to covalent
bond breaking. It can be better explained by plotting stress rate (dσ/dt) and strain
(a) (b)
σ
σ
σ
σ
ε
ε
ƞ
ƞ
E E
Fig. 4.27: Viscoelastic models: (a) Maxwell and (b) Kelvin￾Voigt.
230 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesrate (dε/dt) as shown in Fig. 4.29. The rate of strain is perfectly linear with time, al￾though the cross-head was made to move at a constant speed during the experiment.
However, the nonlinearity in the stress rate is seen, which is due to the viscous behav￾iour of the rubber along with elastic response. The stress, strain and their rates (time
derivative) were continuously varying in this experiment.
The linear fit of the strain rate vs. time is quite accurate with R2 = 0.9999, and that of
the stress rate is expressed as a third-order polynomial with excellent fit with R2 =
0.9987. The expressions are:
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5 Stress Modulus
Strees, Modulus, MPa
Fig. 4.28: Tensile property of nitrile rubber unfilled vulcanizate.
Fig. 4.29: Stress rate and strain rate of the nitrile rubber during tensile experiment.
4.7 Rheology of elastomer composites 231Stress rate MPa ð Þ =s :
dσ
dt = 8 × 10−5
t
3 − 0.014t
2 + 1.029t (4:48)
Strain rate s−1  :
dε
dt = 0.4508t (4:49)
Such a real rubber shows a complex viscoelastic behaviour which cannot be ex￾plained by either Maxwell’s or KV models, but may be a combination in series or par￾allel. A possible series combination similar to one form of four-element Burger model
was attempted by Alkelani et al. [97]. The authors used stiffness and deformation in￾stead of elastic modulus and strain to describe viscoelastic behaviour of a soft gasket.
Figure 4.30 shows a series arrangement of Maxwell’s and KV and a simple form of the
final expression of such a combination is shown below:
The total strain: ε = ε1 + ε2 + ε3 (4:50)
Here, ε1 is the elastic strain of the Maxwell arm, ε2 is time pendent strain due to vis￾cous flow of the Maxwell arm, and ε3 is a restricted strain of the KV arm, equal for
the elastic and viscous parts. The stress σ is same for the Maxwell elements E1 and η1
and for the KV arm as well. The total strain ε can be expressed as
ε = σ
1
E1
+
t
η1
+
1
E2
− 1
E2
expð−E2 η2 = Þt
" #
(4:51)
The term η/E is a characteristic of the rubber, termed as relaxation time τ, which is
the time required by a rubber to internally reduce the stress to 1/e (e = 2.718) of the
initial stress when the rubber is held at a fixed deformation, causing a stress relaxa￾tion of the elastomer chain segments.
ƞ2, ε3
ƞ1, ε2
E2, ε3
E1, ε1
Fig. 4.30: A series combination of a Maxwell and KV models: four
elements.
232 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesThe above expression may be fairly suitable for creep or relaxation behaviour of
an elastomer, when the strain is not sufficiently large, near to the breaking point. This
is because, for large deformation of the chains, the viscosity may change, and hence
the values of η1 and η2 cannot be taken as constant in simulating large deformation.
There are some semi-empirical expressions defining real rubbers, such as Kohl￾rusch function for creep and relaxation [98]:
Relaxation function: ϕðtÞ = ðG0 − G∞Þe−ðt=τÞn
(4:52)
and creep function: ψðtÞ = ðI∞ − I0Þð1 − e−ðt=λÞ
m
(4:53)
Another semi-empirical set of equations are [98]:
Relaxation function: ϕðtÞ = G0 − G∞
1 + ðt τÞ
a 	 (4:54)
Creep function: ψðtÞ = ðI∞ − I0Þ ðt=λÞ
b
1 + ðt=λÞ
b (4:55)
In the above equations, G denotes shear modulus and I denote compliance, suffix 0
denotes initial value and ∞ denotes value after sufficiently long time.
τ, λ, n, m, a and b are constants. Here, τ is the relaxation time in stress relaxation,
and λ is retardation time, in creep.
The nature of the relaxation and creep are shown in Figs. 4.31 and 4.32, respec￾tively. Equations (4.52) and (4.53) are used to construct the plots. Shear modulus and
compliance values are taken from tests on a nitrile rubber vulcanizate without filler.
The plots are time-dependent values of modulus and compliance. The time-dependent
shear modulus was calculated as:
G tð Þ = G∞ + ϕð Þt (4:56)
and time-dependent compliance was calculated as
I tð Þ = I0 + ψð Þt (4:57)
It is seen from the figures that the change in modulus and compliance initially takes
place at a faster rate, expressed by eqs. (4.52)–(4.55), and tends to attain a constant
value after a considerable time. The final value attains faster if the relaxation/retarda￾tion time is smaller and also depends on the exponents n and m. The finite values of
modulus or compliance indicate that the vulcanized rubber behaves like a viscoelastic
solid body, having a finite elastic energy, whatever small, and the elasticity of the rub￾ber is not purely kinetic. A simple analysis of the Maxwell model reveals that his vis￾coelastic body is a fluid, since the stress becomes zero at infinite time, and hence the
elasticity is more kinetic in nature, whereas the KV model does not predict a relaxa￾tion phenomenon at all, representing an elastic solid, but can predict creep under a
4.7 Rheology of elastomer composites 233constant force, and recovery of strain on withdrawal of external force, and has a lim￾iting strain depending on the inherent elastic part as shown in Fig. 4.27(b).
4.7.2 Dynamic viscoelasticity
Under time-dependent stress, for example a sinusoidal stress, the elastomers show
strong viscoelastic loss due to internal friction of the chain segments, especially near
the glass transition. According to the phenomenological relaxation theory, the segmen￾0 15 30 45 60 75 90
0.300
0.450
0.600
0.750
0.900
1.050
1.200
Compliance(I), mm2/N
I0 = 0.39 mm2/N
Iꝏ = 1.11 mm2/N
m = 0.045
τ = 1.0 s
Fig. 4.32: Time-dependent shear compliance of nitrile rubber due to creep.
Fig. 4.31: Time-dependent shear modulus of nitrile rubber on relaxation.
234 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositestal mobility increases with thermal agitation and freezes below the glass transition
temperature (Tg). Correspondingly, at low frequency of stressing, the smaller segments
relax faster than the time period of oscillation; hence, only bigger segments account
for modulus and loss, both. On increasing the frequency, more and more segments can
participate the relaxation process with the same time period of oscillation. Thus, both
modulus and loss grow, and the loss reaches a maximum at a frequency, which is
termed as α-relaxation frequency. In a temperature scale, the transition temperature
(peak loss modulus or peak loss factor) shifts to higher frequency. This differentiates
glass transition temperature to α-relaxation temperature, which is also known as DMA
Tg. However, at very low frequency, the α-relaxation temperature would almost match
with DSC measured Tg. A mathematical representation of the dynamic properties can
be described reasonably by a three-parameter model of viscoelastic solid, such as Zen￾ner model:
E ✶ = E1 +
ω2
τ2
E2
1 +ω2τ2 +
iωτE2
1 +ω2τ2 (4:58)
∴ E′ = E1 +
ω2
τ2
E2
1 +ω2τ2 (4:59)
E′′ = ωτE2
1 + ω2τ2 (4:60)
tan δ = ωτ
ðE1 E2Þð1 +ω2τ2Þ +ω2τ2 = (4:61)
It can be seen from the above equations, the storage modulus attains a maximum
value at infinitely high frequency, while the loss modulus has a peak value at
ωτ = 1 (4:62)
The energy stored in the viscoelastic body in dynamic strain per cycle is given by:
Estored = ε2
0E′ (4:63)
The loss of mechanical energy per cycle due to the viscoelastic deformation is given by
EL = πE′′ε2
0 (4:64)
The unit of the energy thus expressed here is energy per unit volume per cycle (J/m3
/
cycle), when the modulus is expressed in Pa (N/m2
) and frequency (ω) in rad/s.
The stored (recoverable) energy and loss energy per unit time, are expressed as:
Pstored =ωε2
E′, Ploss =ωπε2
E′′ (4:65)
4.7 Rheology of elastomer composites 235The dynamic resilience can be calculated as the ratio of the stored (and hence re￾covered) energy to the total input energy. The equation thus can be derived from
eqs. (4.63) and (4.64):
RD = E′
ð Þ E′ + πE′′ = 1
ð Þ 1 + π tan δ (4:66)
Consequently, it is seen that the loss of energy (damping) and resilience are depen￾dent on the temperature of the viscoelastic body and the frequency of the external
dynamic force.
It should be noted that for all the above expressions, the elastic modulus is taken
in tension mode in the linear viscoelastic region. The expressions are valid in other
mode of deformations, such as shear mode. Although the shear modulus of an elasto￾mer is about one-third of tensile modulus, the loss factor (tan δ) is same and the relax￾ation temperature (and frequency) is also same in all modes.
The relaxation time (τ) is a characteristic time of a polymer, and changes with
temperature. The temperature dependence of relaxation time can be expressed by
the Arrhenius equation:
τ = τ0 exp
Ea
RT   (4:67)
where Ea is the activation energy of relaxation, τ0 is the relaxation time at infinite
temperature and R is universal gas constant. The equation shows that the relaxation
time decreases with increase in temperature. The assumption of this theory is that the
segmental motion is not hindered by neighbouring segments or chains, which essen￾tially means that the void volume should be more and hence it is not applicable to the
temperatures in the glass transition region. A modification is made in Vogel-Fulcher￾Tammann (VFT) law:
τ = τ0 exp
B
T − T0
  (4:68)
which is actually useful again, at a T > Tg, when the Tg is measured arbitrarily, though,
at 10−2 Hz and the polymer properties measured such as modulus, creep compliance,
viscosity etc., in the frequency range of 10−2 to 1014 Hz satisfy the VFT theory. The
index B is not a fixed value and varies with temperature near the glass transition. The
values of T0 and B are to be determined by experiments.
A theory based on temperature dependence of free volume in a polymer was
used by William, Landel and Ferry to obtain the WLF equation. The theory assumes
that the free volume in a polymer does not change below glass transition tempera￾ture, and increases linearly with a definite coefficient of volume expansion and is
valid only for segmental motion. The WLF equation is
236 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositeslog τ
τ0
= C1 T − Tg
 
C2 + T − Tg
(4:69)
where C1 and C2 are −17.44 and 51.6, respectively, when Tg < T <(Tg + 50). The Tg is deter￾mined by DMA method at 10−2 Hz. The values are 8.86 and 101.6 when the reference tem￾perature is Tg + 50 and (Tg + 50) < T < (Tg + 100). Therefore, the WLF is valid up to Tg + 100.
The constants C1, C2 for above equations are not absolutely fixed and only can be
determined by experiment for specific polymer, under a study from 10−2 Hz onwards
for wide range, both in frequency and temperature.
However, in amorphous polymers, there are β and γ-transitions corresponding to
lower order, non-coordinated motion and corresponding relaxation. For instance, the
side group mobility, or a 4-carbon crank-shaft-type movement for β-transition and de￾fects and end group mobility for γ-transition. Obviously, these transitions take place
below the Tg. The frequency or the relaxation time for these transitions may satisfy Ar￾rhenius temperature dependence:
τβ = τ0 exp
Eβ
RT  , τγ = τ0 exp
Eγ
RT   (4:70)
τ0 is same for expressions of all transitions, α, β and γ. The γ-transition takes place at
lower temperature than β-transition and activation energy of β-transition (Eβ) is greater
than that of γ-transition (Eγ). Consequently, at a fixed temperature, the relaxation times
of these transitions are in the order τγ<τβ<τα. However, the relaxation time for β and γ
are very small in elastomers compared to α-transition, and only a theoretical estimation
can be done, especially for γ- transition, rather than direct experimental measurement.
In case of elastomeric materials, for all application purpose, most relevant is obviously
the α-transition temperature and the corresponding frequency.
4.7.3 Effect of filler inclusion
The effect of fillers on viscoelastic behaviour is more complicated due to several fac￾tors such as polarity of the filler and rubber, filler-rubber interaction, agglomeration
of filler, effective surface area of the filler particle, aspect ratio of the filler, uniformity
of dispersion of the filler, orientation of the filler in the rubber (in case of non￾spherical filler) and filler concentration. From the force transfer point of view, the im￾portant aspect is the difference in stiffnesses (elastic modulus) of the elastomer and
the filler. The fillers are much stiffer than the elastomer matrix; hence, the load cannot
be fully transferred from the matrix to the adhering filler particle. This reduces the
efficiency of the reinforcement by the filler. The higher the modulus of the elastomer,
higher will be the efficiency of reinforcement.
The effect of nanosized filler particle is widely studied now; hence, it is known
that the elastomer nanocomposites have great promise as potential light weight,
4.7 Rheology of elastomer composites 237strong viscoelastic materials. Nanocarbons, nanoclay, nanoceramics, nanoparticles of
metals, titanium dioxide, ferric oxides and ferrites are some examples.
The most common effect of filler inclusion in elastomer viscoelastic property is
change of viscous part and enhancement of modulus. These changes might influence
the dynamic viscoelastic loss by the elastomer composite. For example, as series of
particulate composites of a nitrile-PVC blend was investigated for dynamic mechani￾cal properties under a wide temperature and frequency range. Frequency scale mas￾ter curves were generated by graphical method of time-temperature superposition at
a reference temperature of 30 °C. High-abrasion furnace carbon black (HAF), gra￾phene nanoplates and organically modified montmorillonite (OMMT) nanoclay were
used to observe the effect on dynamic properties due to differences in reinforcement
by these three fillers. All fillers are used at 10 phr for comparison.
Figures 4.33 and 4.34 show storage modulus and loss factor of the composites in
frequency scale. The reinforcement by HAF black is that of a typical of common rub￾bers with almost ideal trend in dynamic properties. The storage modulus of OMMT
filled composite is lowest, the loss factor peak value and also the frequency of peak is
highest among all. The broadness of the loss factor peak is also highest. The behaviour
indicates that the OMMT inclusion results in a more so-called rubbery character of
the blend, whereas graphene inclusion improves the modulus at higher frequency,
but reduces the loss factor peak value and width. The typical behaviour is like a stiff￾ened composite. The rate of increase of storage modulus for graphene composite is
quite significantly high at the transition (near about 50–100 Hz). The transition fre￾quency for HAF composite is 83 Hz, while it reduced to 50 Hz for Graphene and in￾creased to 100 Hz for OMMT composite. This indicates that the OMMT composite is
most flexible and graphene composite is the stiffest.
Under a dynamic stress, despite the increase in the storage modulus, or to be pre￾cise, more elastic in nature, there is a possibility of enhancement of loss of viscoelastic
energy, known as hysteretic damping, due to inclusion of reinforcing fillers, such as
HAF, graphene or OMMT. For example, a dynamic mechanical analysis of a nitrile￾PVC blend vulcanizate with and without carbon black filler is shown in Fig. 4.35. The
loss modulus, which is a representation of hysteretic damping (refer eq. (4.64)), is pro￾gressively higher with higher HAF contents.
Correspondingly under the dynamic strain, the dynamic viscosity (η′ = G″/ω) is
also higher for filled elastomers as can be seen from Fig. 4.36. The filler effect is visi￾ble in increase in dynamic viscosity on increasing filler content signifying more re￾striction on segmental mobility and increase in elastic energy. The viscosity of each
composition reduces with frequency due to high strain rate as is observed in all oscil￾latory viscosity measurements.
The filler effect can be seen in non-ideal behaviour in relaxation under dynamic
strain. Theoretically, the relaxation time is related to the frequency at the peak loss
modulus (E″
max) as ωτ = 1 (eq.4.62).
238 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesThe frequency is termed as α-relaxation frequency and the corresponding tem￾perature at which the frequency is measured, is termed as α-relaxation temperature,
erroneously also referred as glass transition temperature, Tg. However, the loss factor
(tan δ) peak is sometimes taken to define modified glass transition, and the two relax￾ation times are related as [99]
τ1 = τ
G0G∞
G∞ − G0
 1
2
(4:71)
Fig. 4.33: Storage modulus of various particulate composites of NBR/PVC.
Fig. 4.34: Loss factor of various particulate composites of NBR/PVC.
4.7 Rheology of elastomer composites 239where τ is the relaxation time related to G″
max and τ1 is corresponding to tanδmax.
G0 is the rubbery shear modulus (low frequency) and G∞ is the glassy shear modulus
(high frequency).
Ideally, a soft elastomer can be fairly described by the above relationship of the
two relaxation times, and also for spherical, small fillers which influences the modulus
isotropically, but in case of any heterogeneity and anisotropy arising from different
shaped fillers, or their interaction, deviations from experimental findings is observed.
To explain the deviation, a number of NBR-PVC unfilled and filled vulcanizates were
subjected to dynamic mechanical tests with frequency multiplexing. Graphite, graphene
nanoplates and OMMT nanoclay were used for this study. The loss modulus (E″) and
tanδ spectra in frequency scale were obtained at a reference temperature of 30 °C. Fre￾quencies corresponding to E″
max and tanδmax were used to obtain corresponding τ and
τ1 respectively. Taking the rubbery and glassy modulus in frequency scale data, τ1 was
calculated with the index 0.5 as in eq. (4.59), and a fitting index was used to approxi￾mately match that of experimental value. The results are shown in Tab. 4.3. As ex￾pected, the relaxation time by E″
max is about 2–3 orders lower than that by tanδmax,
since the E″ peak appears at higher frequency (20,000–40,000 Hz) than tanδ peak
(75–150 Hz).
The revised matching values of τ1 and the corresponding fitting index are listed
in the last two columns. It is clear that the blend and the filled vulcanizates do not
exactly follow eq. (4.59), as considerable deviations from experimentally obtained val￾ues of τ1 are observed. The blank sample does not follow the ideal behaviour possibly
because of a stiff PVC component in the blend which has a large difference in Tg com￾pared to nitrile rubber. There is no regularity in the trend of indices, signifying non
homogeneity in particle size, their distribution in the matrix and agglomeration.
Fig. 4.35: Loss modulus of NBR-PVC blend vulcanizate unfilled and with carbon black filler.
240 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesAll filled composites show higher modified relaxation time τ1 compared to the
blank sample, as expected, due to greater restriction of segmental mobility in case of
filled compositions. The τ values, corresponding to E”max on the other hand, are not
consistent, as the experimental result shows. It is more useful to consider tanδ peaks
for all relaxation-related calculations. Interestingly, the activation energy of relaxation
is identical, whether one takes loss modulus peak or loss factor peak frequency.
The indices for organically modified montmorillonite nanoclay (OMMT)) filled
composite are 0.45–0.49, which can be closest to eq. (4.59), possibly because OMMT
reinforcement makes the blend more flexible and low modulus composite compared
to carbon black or graphene nanoplates, as already observed (Figs. 4.33 and 4.34).
Considering the filler-matrix interaction in dynamic straining, Ziegel and Roma￾nov [100] suggested a relationship of ratio of dynamic modulus of filled to unfilled
polymer and volume fraction of the filler, where the term interaction parameter is
introduced to differentiate the filler contribution to dynamic properties:
Ec′
E0′
= 1 + 1.5Vf B
1 − Vf B (4:72)
where E′ is dynamic (storage) modulus, subscripts c and 0 represent filled composite
and unfilled rubber, Vf is the volume fraction of the filler and B is the interaction pa￾rameter, defined by:
B = 1 +
ΔR
R
 3
(4:73)
where ΔR/R is the relative change in the diameter of the filler due to interaction with
the matrix rubber [99].
Fig. 4.36: Dynamic viscosity (η′) of NBR-PVC blend vulcanizate unfilled and with carbon black filler.
4.7 Rheology of elastomer composites 241In case of spherical fillers with no agglomeration and with only van der Waals
force of attraction, the interaction parameter linearly varies with a regular trend with
volume loading of the filler. For a representative series of NBR-PVC blend vulcanizate
with two types of filler, spherical carbon black and plate-type nanosized graphene
filler was analysed for interaction parameter using eq. (4.60). Figures 4.37 and 4.38
show the interaction parameters for carbon black filled and graphene nanoparticle
filled NBR-PVC 70/30 blend vulcanizate.
There is uniformity in the trend of the interaction parameter of carbon black at all
volume loading in the elastomer vulcanizate (Fig. 4.37). The loading of HAF black was
up to 45 phr (Vf = 0.19). The parameter reduces with volume loading, and it is expected
because the storage modulus the reinforcing efficiency decreases since agglomeration
increases with loading and the agglomerates cause more filler-filler interaction rather
than filler-matrix interaction. The interaction is not so much different at the wide fre￾quency variation (10 Hz to 1,000 Hz) as seen in Fig. 4.37, for carbon black reinforcement.
On the other hand, the effect of the nanographene plate-type reinforcement is quite dif￾ferent as seen in Fig. 4.38. The inclusion of the graphene nanoplates was only up to 20
phr (Vf = 0.10). There is no uniformity in the trend of interaction parameter with vol￾ume fraction and also with respect to lower frequencies.
However, at low-frequency zone, the trend shows a maximum interaction at about
0.028 volume fraction. It was observed by Dharmaraj et al. [73] that the dispersion and
mechanical property at this volume fraction of graphene nanoplate is most pronounced
in NBR/PVC blend vulcanizate. Thereafter the interaction parameter reduces with the
increase in volume fraction. One reason of lower value of the interaction parameter can
be the formation of agglomeration, thereby increasing filler to filler interaction rather
than filler to matrix. At higher frequencies (500 Hz and 1,000 Hz), the effect is not seen.
However, higher the frequency, higher is the interaction, which is quite unique for the
Tab. 4.3: Relaxation time of elastomeric composites from dynamic mechanical data.
By E”max By tanδmax
Composition τ (s) τ (s) τ (s) by calculation
Expmt. Expmt. Eq. (.) Revised Index
NPC-Blank .E- .E- .E- .E- .
NPC-OMMT .E- .E- .E- .E- .
NPC- OMMT .E- .E- .E- .E- .
NPC- OMMT .E- .E- .E- .E- .
NPC- graphene .E- .E- .E- .E- .
NVC- graphene .E- .E- .E- .E- .
NVC- graphene .E- .E- .E- .E- .
NVC- graphene .E- .E- .E- .E- .
NVC  graphite .E- .E- .E- .E- .
NVC- graphite .E- .E- .E- .E- .
242 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesgraphene nanoplatelets. This explains the sharp rise in storage modulus of graphene
composite as the frequency increases from 50 Hz to 2,000 Hz, as seen in Fig. 4.33.
4.8 Processing of elastomer composites
Elastomer processing is quite well established in the rubber industries for common
raw rubbers, except the ones where a liquid-liquid reaction leads to controlled cross￾linking and vitrification to form an elastomeric object similar to a vulcanized rubber.
Typical examples are polyurethane and flexible epoxy networks.
10Hz
50Hz
100Hz
500Hz
100Hz
0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16 0.2
Interaction Parameter, B
2
4
6
8
Fig. 4.37: Interaction parameters for carbon black (HAF) filled NBR/PVC blend vulcanizates.
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12
1
3
5
7
9
5
13
15
17
19
10 Hz
50 Hz
100 Hz
500 Hz
100 Hz 
Interaction Parameter, B
Fig. 4.38: Interaction parameters for graphene nanoparticle filled NBR/PVC blend vulcanizates.
4.8 Processing of elastomer composites 243The important aspect of the processing is dispersion and distribution of tiny filler
particles in the raw rubber. Dispersion stands for separation of the particles including
breaking of soft agglomerates, while distribution stands for uniformity in concentration
of the filler in any portion of the bulk mixture. In the case of nanoclay and graphene
nanosheets, which have layers of plate-type elements, the extent of intercalation and
exfoliation decide the efficacy of dispersion.
Elastomer composites of carbon black, mineral fillers, metallic powders, graphite,
etc., can be processed in a two-roll mill or an internal mixer. The sequence of adding the
fillers is after the addition of processing aids (stearic acid and zinc oxide), but before the
vulcanization system, such as peroxide curative or sulphur-MBTS-CBS. The mixing pro￾cess of a polymer with any ingredient increases the temperature, hence there has to be a
temperature controlling arrangement. A most useful temperature limit for mixing can be
70 °C to enable good mixing while restricting the scorch as well. The mixing of short fibre
such as chopped glass, carbon, Kevlar, cellulose, jute or nylon is similar to carbon black,
but there could be incompatibility with the rubber, especially for non-polar ones. It is
generally overcome by addition of a phenolic tackifier such as resol (hydroxymethyl
terminated phenol-formaldehyde oligomer) to the extent of only 3–5 parts by weight
per 100 part rubber. The curing of such tackifier takes place by self-condensation simul￾taneously during vulcanization at about 140–170 °C. Gen et al. [101] treated short nylon
fibres by glycidyl 3-pentadecenyl phenyl ether which is a renewable derivative product
from cashew nut industry, and triethylamine in an aqueous medium before processing
in a two-roll mill with sulphur-accelerator system to develop an SBR-C-Black-nylon hy￾brid composite for application in tyre tread. The different processes of treating short
fibres for reinforcement in rubbers is discussed in Section 4.3.
Mixing of nanoparticles is more difficult because of the tiny size and hence, more
clustering. Additionally, nanofillers cannot be uniformly distributed in large quantity
as commonly used micron size fillers. In fact, a small quantity of the nanoparticles
would have same reinforcing effect as large quantity of common fillers. There are sev￾eral processing methods to mix the nanoparticles in an elastomer:
(1) Solution method: The rubber is dissolved in a suitable solvent, but not in a good sol￾vent, so that the viscosity remains lower even at high solid content. Subsequently, the
nanofiller is added slowly under high-speed stirring, generally 3,000–6,000 rpm, for
10–15 min depending on the filler type. The mixture is sonicated thereafter at ultrasonic
bath using approximately 40 kHz sound, for 10–30 min, sometime even much longer pe￾riod for homogenization and breaking soft agglomerates. Stirring can be employed si￾multaneously for better effect. The process of solution mixing is for small batches only
since it is difficult to handle large solution volume, because the concentration of the rub￾ber is to be kept low enough. Secondly, after the process, the rubber solution has to be
dried off the solvent completely, which is again difficult in case of polar solvents.
244 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based composites(2) A common processing is by high temperature internal mixing. In this process, a
temperature of 70–90 °C is enough to have sufficient shear deformation of the rubber
and consequently better filler distribution during the shearing process. The disadvan￾tage is possible breaking of fillers such as plate type (nanoclay, graphene, etc.), carbon
nanotube and nanofibre.
(3) Two roll mills mixing are also employed to some extent nanofillers also [102]. The
advantage is that in terms of mixing sequence, the rolls can be heated and the speed
of the rolls can be controlled as required. It is the most flexible process, but in terms
of shear deformation, less effective than internal mixers. The wastage is also more
than internal mixer process.
(4) Rubber extrusion: rubber extrusion process is used where a definite cross-section
and continuous length has to be maintained. The extruder has two parts, one the heated
screw-barrel system and the dye at the output end which has the desired cross-sectional
shape. The raw stock with all ingredients is fed through a hopper at the rear end of the
screw-barrel and the rotation of the screw pushes the stock helically, shearing the mix
and simultaneously moving towards the dye. A very small annular gap between the
screw and barrel results in greater shear mixing. This process is well suitable for mixing
nanoparticles in rubber. The extruder length of a rubber extruder is much less than
plastic extruders. Therefore, a good mixing requires multiple pass operation. The main
advantage is that the wastage of material is minimum in extrusion process.
(5) For liquid-liquid reaction leading to elastomeric product, the nanoparticles can be
mixed in the base reactant, such as polyol (for polyurethane) or epoxy oligomer, dis￾solved in a small quantity of a solvent. The use of small amount of solvent is possible
since the base reactants are liquid. The solvent reduces the viscosity of the base epoxy/
polyol and the dispersion and distribution of the nanoparticles are facilitated. In such
process, ultrasonication can be gainfully used. However, removal of the solvent is
somewhat difficult because of the polar nature of the base epoxy/polyol, and may re￾quire vacuum application along with heat. The wastage is minimum in this process.
However, solvent usage makes it relatively expensive in large scale operation.
(6) A shear mixing by triple roll mill for viscous base reactants is another option,
where the nanoparticles can be effectively dispersed and distributed uniformly. This
is generally used for processing of viscous liquids such as putty. The gap between the
rolls can be quite narrow to enable good shear deformation and flow on the roll sur￾face to disperse the nanofillers. The rolls can be continuously run to shear the ad￾hered liquid layer on the three rolls and can be discharged afterword. The process
can be repeated to observe a satisfactory smoothness checked by a Hegman Gauge
(0–10 μm). The process is suitable for bulk production of elastomer nanocomposites
in industrial scale. However, there may be some wastage of materials.
4.8 Processing of elastomer composites 2454.9 Application of elastomer composite
Rubber-carbon black composites are known from as early as nineteenth century
(Charles Goodyear, 1844). Since then, innumerable varieties of rubber composites are
developed, studied scientifically and engineered to very useful products for industry,
defence and consumer market. Nanoscience and technology has even widened and
enhanced the scope for more efficient use of rubber composites.
The applications of the rubber composites can be so wide that any general catego￾rization is not appropriate. However, some broad areas can be defined as: (a) transpor￾tation industry, (b) heavy engineering, (c) chemical/petrochemical plants, (d) medical
sector, (e) packaging and (f) civil construction. The unique properties of rubber are
that it is highly flexible in stretching, resilient, can absorb mechanical energy and
can provide a sealing effect. The other advantage is that it has almost similar density
of water, which makes it a relatively light material. Rubber compositions are gener￾ally no conductor of heat and electricity; thus, they can provide good insulation at
ambient and sub-ambient conditions. However, special composites of rubbers can be
electrically semi-conductive, and these conducting elastomeric items have quite good
applications.
The disadvantage of rubber composites is limitation of high temperature application.
Almost all rubber composites can be used continuously up to about 120 °C, with reason￾able detention of properties. Silicone and Viton rubber (fluoropolymer) can be used con￾tinuously up to about 200 °C. Due to the limitation, the study of degradation and life
prediction of rubber composites is so important in product design and application.
Resilience, vibration/shock absorption, flexibility are the manifestation of thermal
motion of the chain segments, causing viscoelastic deformation and absorption of me￾chanical energy. In most application, this becomes the main focus of functional char￾acteristics of the elastomeric composite items. The second most important property is
electrical property, based on which electromagnetic shielding and microwave propa￾gations are effectively used in electronics field. However, both viscoelasticity and elec￾tromagnetic properties are important for defence application too.
4.9.1 Vibration damping
The most common and simple method of damping of structural vibration and making
resilient mount for machines is by a rubber composite. It provides a passive damping
material, by absorbing viscoelastic energy under a dynamic force, such as domestic
kitchen mixer/grinder, hydraulic system, turbine, engine, vehicle, aircraft etc. Under
kinematic motion, each of these generates vibration, and rubbers are known for re￾ducing this vibration. Among the rubbers, those having specific groups which contrib￾ute more for damping are nitrile, butyl and acrylic rubbers. However, not all are
useful as such without special reinforcement and modification. The useful reinforce￾246 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesments are plate-type fillers and modifications are blending, grafting, forming inter￾penetrating network, etc. For example, nitrile-rubber-poly alkyl methacrylate IPNs,
urethane-epoxy IPNs and nitrile-PVC blends are reported to be highly damping elasto￾meric materials.
Among conventional fillers, plate-type particles such as graphite, aluminium flakes,
mica, etc. provide better damping due to conversion of longitudinal strain to shear
strain. Since shear modulus is one third of Young’s modulus of rubbers, shear strain is
more compared to longitudinal strain, and thus strain energy loss is also more. Addi￾tionally, the plate or filament-type material causes a friction damping effect, similar to
Coulomb Dampingor Rayleigh Damping. The theories are based on loss of energy of fric￾tion between two adjoined surfaces by variable clamping force. The damping depends
on the clamping force. In rubber composites with plate or filament-type fillers, the ad￾hering force between the rubber and the filler is equivalent to the clamping force.
It is now quite obvious that use of nanoparticles of non-spherical shapes, even in
small quantity, enhances damping capability to considerable extent compared to con￾ventional reinforcing fillers like carbon, black and minerals. The higher efficiency of
the nanoparticles is obviously due to the tiny size, corresponding to large surface
area, which enhances the interaction with the elastomer many times compared to mi￾cronized particles. For example, consider a spherical particle of carbon, 10 μm in di￾ameter, the specific surface area (surface area per unit volume) is 6 × 103 cm−1
,
whereas, for a 50 nm sphere, the same parameter is 1.2 × 106 cm−1
, which is 3 order
higher. This large difference is reflected in reinforcement properties of the nanopar￾ticles. A disadvantage is, of course, the high association of nanoparticles because of
high surface area, which is practically not possible to break totally and hence the effi￾ciency can never be in proportion to the increase in surface area, be it damping or
elastic modulus.
Few examples of vibration damping and acoustic application of elastomer￾nanocomposites are discussed here. Sasikumar et al. used XNBR-MWCNT nanocom￾posite for study of high and low compression hysteresis for a structural damping
application [103] and also for underwater acoustic sensor application [104]. The
nanocomposite exhibited 300% increase in hysteresis loop area at 5% MWCNT com￾pared to unfilled XNBR vulcanizate, corresponding to more than 200% increase in
damping factor. However, on increasing the CNT content up to 10%, the frequency
of loss peak shifted beyond 10,000 Hz and the loss factor value also reduces by
about 50%. With variation of the composition, it is thus possible to either use for
high structural damping or tuning of the operational frequency range of underwa￾ter sensors. Ratna et al. developed an elastomeric epoxy-clay nanocomposite mastic
with plate-type fillers such as aluminium and mica, for structural vibration damping
[105]. The system loss factor (a measure of damping) was seen to be about 0.1–0.25
in the frequency range of 50–3,000 Hz, when applied on a steel substrate at a thick￾ness ratio of substrate: mastic: 1:2. Gu et al. developed a dual purpose polyurethane
elastomeric nanocomposite coating with MWCNT which is mainly used for underwa￾4.9 Application of elastomer composite 247ter acoustic absorption and anticorrosive protection too [106]. Addition of 0.4% CNT
improved the corrosion resistance significantly in a 3.5% NaCl aq. solution, mea￾sured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy while 1% CNT containing nano￾composite showed enhanced underwater acoustic absorption coefficient from 0.28
to 0.55 for pristine polyurethane, to 0.48–0.60, measured by a water filled imped￾ance tube method in the frequency range of 2,000–6,000 Hz. Praveen et al. [107] ob￾served a synergistic effect of carbon black and anisotropic reinforcing fillers such as
short aramid fibre, organically modified montmorillonite nanoclay and graphite for
vibration damping by a segmented polyurethane elastomer, prepared as hybrid
nanocomposite from millable polyurethane, vulcanized conventionally by sulphur￾accelerator curing system. While carbon black was used at 20 phr in all composi￾tions, graphite was added at 10–20 phr and the other fillers were added at 5–10 phr.
The system loss factor in a constrained layer damping arrangement was measured
and it was observed that the combination of carbon black and any one anisotropic
filler gave better damping than carbon black or other fillers alone. The system loss
factor (damping) by CB-nanoclay combination at 800–2,500 Hz was 0.18–0.10, when
5 phr nanoclay was used.
4.9.2 EMI shielding and absorbing elastomer
Electromagnetic interference shielding is an essential protection of electronic equip￾ment and consoles in a high-power electromagnetic field. The easiest way to shield an
object is to cover it with a material which can simply reflect the EM wave back to the
medium of origin, and not allow to be transmitted through the shield layer. A more
effective way is to attenuate the wave inside the shield layer along with a small re￾flected part. Generally, metals are very good reflectors of EM waves irrespective of
frequency, because of their high electrical conductivity, and copper is the best choice.
In some cases, the reflection causes an increase in EM signature of the body which is
vulnerable to detection by EM sensors. Secondly, metals are heavy and get corroded
in atmosphere. Many defence structures use FRP composites in which the EM waves
are transmitted even through considerable thickness and may affect the interior elec￾tronics of the object. EMI shielding is also required to safeguard the health of person￾nel and environment from the bad effects of the EM radiation. A solution to all these
can be an EM absorbing-type shield, which can reduce the transmission and reflection
simultaneously. The emergence of flexible polymeric EMI shielding has found a wide
application in military and civil industry for electronic consoles. These can be light
weight, durable and quite maintenance-free and cost effective compared to metallic
shields. Carbonyl iron powder, ferrites, especially barium hexagonal ferrites with var￾ious modifications are so long being used as EM absorbing materials as pigment in
elastomer matrix to make a flexible shielding material and also microwave absorbing
coating on metallic substrates. Ferrites strongly show complex permeability and per￾248 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesmittivity in wide band of microwave frequency. However, the density of ferrites is
quite high, resulting in weight penalty. In order to make light weight shields, conduct￾ing polymers are preferred. Subsequently, nanoparticles of carbon in various forms
such as nanotube, nanofibre, graphene nanosheets are more and more being used in
elastomeric flexible matrices which are effective in small quantities and are light
weight. Such nanocarbons have sufficient electrical conductivity, and hence the nano￾composite can be tailored to match the electrical impedance of free space (vacuum)
and also good dielectric loss property for absorbing the EM energy in a wide fre￾quency spectrum. Although the loss is less compared to ferrites, requiring higher
thickness, the overall weight penalty is far less, since the ferrite/iron loading required
for flexible shield/absorber is quite high. In addition to reflection and absorption, the
third mechanism for reduction of EM wave intensity is multiple reflection of the
wave inside the medium (shielding) because, at the interfaces, there is always some
impedance difference to cause some reflection back to the medium in either direction.
A simple diagram as Fig. 4.39 shows the three types of mechanism.
The shielding effect is the fraction of incident energy transmitted to the other
side of the shield. The effectiveness can be measured in terms of voltage in a vector
network analyser (VNA). However, it is customary to convert the voltage intensity to
power and express the power in dB scale, keeping in mind that power is proportional
to square of intensity and dB is 10 times the logarithm (10 base) of power ratio, or 20
times the intensity ratio. The general expression for estimation of EMI shielding effect
(SE) is (referring Fig. 4.39):
SE = 20 log V0
VT
  dB (4:74)
EM wave absorption is expressed as
Absorbed power = incident power − ðreflected power + transmitted powerÞ (4:75)
The absorption takes place in a medium due to dielectric loss for polymer nanocompo￾sites, which are having desired conductivity. The free space (vacuum) impedance is
about 377 Ohms, and if a composite has a volume conductance of about 1 mho/cm, then
V0
VR
VT
VMR
Fig. 4.39: Mechanism of EM wave shielding.
4.9 Application of elastomer composite 249it can be used as a shielding material. The wave, on travelling inside the medium, suffers
loss exponentially with distance travelled. This is expressed as a property called skin
depth of the medium (e.g. a nanocomposite), which is defined as the thickness for which
the incident intensity reduces to (1/e) of original value (e = 2.718) and is related to the
frequency of the EM wave and material parameters by:
Skin depth: δ = 1
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
πf σμ p (4:76)
where f is the EM wave frequency, σ is the electrical conductivity (in Ohm−1
m−1
) of the
shield, μ is the magnetic permeability, of the shield (μ = μ0μr, where μr is the relative
magnetic permeability of the shield and μ0 is permeability of free space (=4π × 10−7 H/m).
From eq. (4.77), it is seen that the skin depth reduces with frequency, permeability and
conductivity. The exponential decay along the shield thickness suggests that smaller con￾ducting particles in the elastomer should be better for shielding effect. The unit dimen￾sion of the filler should be equal or less than the skin depth at the highest frequency in
the desired band. However, the thickness of the composite shield must be more than the
skin depth to ensure high shielding and absorbing effect. In general, EM frequency band
may range from 300 MHz to 110 GHz for most applications from microwave ovens to
high-frequency satellite communication and military radars. However, definite fre￾quency bands are applicable for different purpose, hence such a wide range shielding is
not practically required. In defence application, for example, mostly 1–40 GHz range is
used for surveillance, detection, naval warfare, air defence and fire control. The effect of
thickness of the shielding composite on absorption is given by
SEA = 20log10et=δ (4:77)
The reflection loss is given by
SER = −10log10
σT
16f εrμr
  (4:78)
The multiple reflection loss is given by
SEMR = 20log10 1 − e−2t=δ   (4:79)
In order to design a composite for low-frequency shielding, the skin thickness can be
made lower if the loss parameters μ″, ε″ and the total conductivity σT are higher.
The magnetic permeability and dielectric permittivity are frequency-dependent
complex parameters:
μ = μ′ − jμ′′ (4:80)
250 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesε = ε′ − jε′′ (4:81)
where μ′ is real part of the complex magnetic permeability, μ″ is the imaginary or loss
part and similarly, ε′ is real part of permittivity or dielectric constant and ε″ is the
imaginary part of the permittivity or the dielectric loss. The operator j is the imagi￾nary number = √–1, used to indicate that mathematically, the imaginary or loss part is
90 degree out of phase with the real part in both eqs. (4.80) and (4.81).
Like the permeability, the dielectric constant is also defined as: ε = ε0εr, where ε0
is the dielectric constant of free space = 8.85 × 10−12 F/m.
The velocity of EM wave in a medium is related to the permeability and permit￾tivity of the medium as
c = 1
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
μ0ε0
p = 2.998 × 108 m=s (4:82)
The impedance of the shield is the ratio of the amplitudes of the magnetic to the elec￾tric field and is given by
ZSH =
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
jωμ
σ + jωε s
(4:83)
While the free space impedance is given by (noting that σ=0 for free space):
Z0 =
ffiffiffi
μ
ε
r
= 377Ω (4:84)
The EM shielding and absorbing capability can be theoretically calculated as a coeffi￾cient of absorption (α), mathematically expressed as:
α =
ffiffi
2
p πf
c
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
ð Þ μ′′ε′′ − μ′ε′ +
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
ð Þ μ′′ε′′ − μ′ε′ 2 + ð Þ μ′′ε′′ + μ′ε′ 2
r q
(4:85)
The reflection loss can be estimates by the impedances of free space and the shield:
SER = 20log10
ZSH − Z0
ZSH + Z0
dB (4:86)
The loss can be enhanced if the reflected wave from the air-shield interface and
that reflected back from the conducting backing plate have a phase difference of
180º, thereby creating a destructive interference. This happens when the thickness
of the shielding layer is quarter wavelength (λ/4). For a low-frequency EM wave,
the wavelength is quite large, for example 30 cm for 1 GHz EM wave, hence the
thickness required for quarter wavelength criteria is 7.5 cm, which is quite thick in
many applications. However, the ideal absorber thickness (tm) for excellent ab￾4.9 Application of elastomer composite 251sorption at a matching frequency due to phase cancellation is calculated by the fol￾lowing relation [108]:
tm = nc
4fm
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
j j εr μr j j p (4:87)
where n is an odd number, c is the velocity of light in free space and fm is the match￾ing frequency. Since all the parameters for EM shielding and absorption are directly
related to the basic properties of the composite, viz., total electrical conductivity, com￾plex magnetic permeability and complex dielectric permittivity, and of course, fre￾quency of the EM wave and thickness of the composite shield. Since all parameters
are frequency dependent, it is necessary to measure basic properties in a VNA using a
wave guide with coaxial cables as shown in a schematic diagram as Fig. 4.40.
The VNA measures intensity of EM wave generated by an electrical energy as EM
pulses. The pulse is fed to a wave guide by a coaxial cable and the receiving signal is
collected by another coaxial cable on the opposite end of the guide and returned to
the VNA for analysis. Four signals are measured which are termed as S-parameters
and designated as S11 for forward reflection coefficient, S22 for backward reflection
coefficient, S12 for forward transmission coefficient and S21 for backward transmission
coefficient. These parameters are also expressed in terms of dB [109]:
SET = 10 log 1
j j S12
2
 ! = 10 log 1
S21 j j2
 ! = 10 log 1
T
  (4:88)
SER = 10 log 1
1 − S11 j j2
 ! = 10 log 1
1 − j j S22
2
 ! = 10 log 1
1 − R
  (4:89)
SEA = 10 log 1 − S11 j j2
j j S12
2
 ! = 10 log 1 − j j S22
2
S21 j j2
 ! = 10 log 1 − R
T
  (4:90)
The effective absorbance by an EM shield should be calculated from the basic under￾standing that the summation of the energies of transmission, reflection and absorp￾tion is the total energy input. Therefore, the coefficients R, T and A are summed up to
unit, and the fractional absorbance is the ratio of A to 1–R. Hence, we can write [109]:
Aeff = 1 − R − T
1 − R
  × 100 %ð Þ (4:91)
4.9.3 Examples
Flexible EMI shield and absorbing composites are known to be used extensively for
civil and military installations and equipment. Barium hexagonal ferrites and spinnel
ferrites as such and with other conducting materials such as metallic powders, thin
252 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesmetal-coated fabric, reduced graphene oxide, carbon nanotubes, conducting carbon
black and graphite the most used particles in rubber matrix for making such shield
and absorber. There are a large number of literatures on this type of design and a few
are described here.
Peymanfar and Rahmanisaghieh [108] used a barium ferrite BaFe2O4 pure and
capped (using glucose as organic capping agent), treated at 650 and 850 °C in silicone
rubber and measured basic properties such as complex permeability and permittivity
and calculated the conductivity, impedance and the attenuation constant for 1.5 mm
thick silicone rubber-ferrite composites. The authors reported attenuation constant
(refer eq. (4.85)) about 10–25 in the frequency range of 8–18 GHz.
Kruzelak et al. [109] made a detailed review of various ferrite and conducting nano￾particle filled polymer composites for EMI shielding and MW absorbing application.
Morari et al. [110] used a ferrite and graphite in silicone rubber with a 300 μm thick
polyester fabric having a Fe-Ni thin coating on one side and the 3 mm thick flexible com￾posite was evaluated for EMI shielding effect. The measurement was done by horn an￾tenna in an anechoic chamber for large size samples. The authors reported a negligible
shielding effect in 1–18 GHz for ferrite-graphite fillers, compared to the metal-coated fab￾ric containing rubber sheet, where average of 33 dB shielding effect was observed.
Joseph et al. [111] studied EMI shielding effectiveness of natural rubber and chlor￾obutyl rubber nanocomposite. The authors used carbon nanotube, nanofibre, nano￾clay (Cloisite 10A) and carbon black to tailor the electromagnetic properties of the
nanocomposites and reported about 25 dB shielding for chlorobutyl-CNT nanocompo￾site at a frequency range of 2.7–3.9 GHz.
Sykora et al. [112] used specially prepared Lithium ferrite and used in Nitrile rub￾ber matrix at as high as 600 phr loading and compared the EM shielding property with
NBR at similar loading of a standard manganese-zinc ferrite (H40). The elastic modulus
(at 300% strain) and tensile strength decreased considerably beyond 200 phr loading,
more so for manganese-zinc ferrite, but the flexibility increased considerably (mono￾tonically up to 600 phr). The MW return loss was better at lower frequency for manga￾Shielding Wave guide
composite
Coaxial
cable
Vector Network Analyzer
EMI Shield
Port 2
Port 1
S12
S22
S21
S11
Fig. 4.40: Measurement of shielding parameters by VNA.
4.9 Application of elastomer composite 253nese-zinc-NBR composite (0.1 to 1.1 GHz) with sharp peaks of 30–35 dB. The peaks were
shifted to lower frequency as the loading increased. Similarly, the return loss for Li￾ferrite-NBR composite showed better at 1 to 1.2 GHz with sharp peaks of 30–34 dB. The
peaks shifted to lower frequency as the loading increased.
Ray et al. [113] investigated ethylene-vinyl acetate elastomer–based nanocompo￾sites with various carbon fillers such as carbon black, expanded graphite, carbon
nanofibre and nanotube for EMI shielding effect in 8–12 GHz range. The authors re￾ported that even 4% carbon nanofibre in EVA-CNF composite showed about 15 dB
shielding effect and 16% composite showed 30–33 dB shielding effectiveness, while the
return loss was only about 4–6 dB in his frequency range. Carbon nanotube-EVA com￾posite (16% CNT) showed about 26 dB shielding effectiveness. Expanded graphite or
carbon black was far less effective.
Joseph et al. [114] studied butyl rubber (IIR)-single-walled carbon nanotube
(SWCNT) composite for EMI shielding performance in the frequency range of 8–18
GHz. The authors measured the conductivity and skin depth of the IIR nanocompo￾site samples with 0 to 8 phr SWNT. The conductivity of 8 phr composite was about
0.4 to 1.4 S/m, increasing with frequency, and the skin depth was reported to be
0.01–0.004 m diminishing with frequency. About 9–12 dB total shielding effect for
IIR-8 phr SWCNT composite was observed.
Nguyen et al. [115] developed a flexible shielding composite of PDMS with free
standing graphene foam structure decorated with F3O4 nanoparticle-intercalated
the Ti3C2Tx (T stands for groups like -O, -OH, -F) (MXene). The composite exhibited
very high EMI shielding effect of 80 dB in 8.2–12.4 GHz (X-band) and about 77 dB in
26.5–40 GHz (Ka-band) due to high absorption of EM wave. With only graphene, the
shielding effect was about 19 dB in these two frequency bands. However, the syn￾thesis process of the nanofiller with all the ingredients and composite forming is
quite complicated and intricate.
4.10 Conclusion
Elastomer-based composites are very widely accepted in all fields of application be￾cause of the flexibility, which is quite an advantage since any contour can be covered
without a template and complex moulding. Secondly, elastomers processing is easy,
low in energy consumption and overall cost. Since elastomers contain large free vol￾ume at ambient conditions, they can accommodate large proportion of fillers and ad￾ditives of diverse shapes and this can result in better tailoring of any structural or
functional property such as antistatic, piezoelectric, sound and vibration damping or
EMI shielding. In addition, elastomers are quite stable in various atmospheric condi￾tions, with high humidity and in cold or tropical countries. Most elastomer composites
can be used at sub-zero temperatures, few of them up to −40 °C without developing
brittleness. Recent research on smart materials-based elastomer composites is encour￾254 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based compositesaging in terms of application in large scale even at large volume percent of the active
ingredient. A typical example is 0–3 PZT-Neoprene composite for acoustic transducer
with good flexibility and piezoelectric effect, and smart vibration damper. Acceptable
piezoeffect is realized at a very high concentration of the PZT particle in the matrix
and it is only possible in an elastomer of high flexibility. The piezoelectric property of
the composite is utilized to advantages of sensing and dissipation of the strain energy
to a load. The advantage of such smart damper is that on ageing, the efficiency does
not decrease to the same extent with the deterioration of the viscoelastic damping ef￾fect. A different smart elastomer composite is a self-healing system since the micro￾spherical inclusions in the elastomer is more conveniently done than in structural
thermosets, maintaining the integrity of the item. A modification in the rubber proc￾essing ensures no breakage of the microcapsules containing the healing material,
more convenient in polyurethane or silicone elastomer casting at ambient tempera￾ture. There can be more application of smart elastomer composite items as shape
memory material such as nanocomposites of polyurethane elastomer. The shape
memory effect with appropriate mechanism such as IR or UV irradiation can be very
effectively achieved for cross-linked elastomer nanocomposites containing laser ab￾sorbing dyes, or by heat within the temperature limits of the elastomers.
Commercial acceptance of new elastomer composites will depend on energy sav￾ing, conservation, ecological and personnel safety, which are most priority of the pres￾ent-day global needs.
References
[1] Parkinson, D. The reinforcement of rubber by carbon black. Br. J. Appl. Phys. 1951, 2, 273.
[2] Robertson, C. G., Hardman, N. J. Nature of carbon black reinforcement of rubber: perspective on
the original polymer nanocomposite. Polymers. 2021, 13(4).
[3] Three main Properties of carbon Black. Mitsubishi Carbon Black: Mitsubishi Chemical corporation.
https://www.m-chemical.co.jp/en/products/departments/mcc/carbonblack/product/1201075_7946.
html. Accessed on 03 June 2022.
[4] Carbon Black. IARC Monograph on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Lyon, France,
2010, Vol. 93, 43–49.
[5] Reinforcing Carbon Blacks. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carbon_black. Accessed on 03 June, 2022.
[6] Panda, J. N., Bijwe, J., Pandey, R. K. Variation in size of graphite particles and its cascading effect on
the performance properties of PAEK composites. Compos. Part B Eng. 2020, 182, Article I.D. 107641.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2019.107641.
[7] Shojaeenezhad, S. S., Farbod, M., Kazeminezhad, I. Effects of initial graphite particle size and shape
on oxidation time in graphene oxide prepared by Hummers’ method. J. Sci-Adv. Mater. Dev. 2017,
2(4), 470–475.
[8] Liu, B., Zhang, D., Li, X., He, Z., Guo, X. H., Liu, Z., Guo, Q. Effect of graphite flakes particle sizes on
the microstructure and properties of graphite flakes/copper composites. J. Alloys Compd. 2018, 766,
382–390.
References 255[9] Sombatsompop, N., Thongsang, S., Markpin, T., Wimolmala, E. Fly ash particles and precipitated
silica as fillers in rubbers. I. Untreated fillers in natural rubber and stirene-butadiene rubber
compounds. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2004, 93, 2119–2130.
[10] Thongsang, S., Vorakhan, W., Wimolmala, E., Sombatsompop, N. Dynamic mechanical analysis and
tribological properties of NR vulcanizates with fly ash/precipitated silica hybrid filler. Tribol. Int.
2012, 53, 134–141.
[11] Brochure, “Hi-Sil Reinforcing Fillers”, M/s PPG Silica Products, Monroeville, PA 15146 USA.
https://www.ppgsilica.com/getmedia/3d8b6fdf-df2f-4379-b2da-94c384ea3433/HiSil233Dand233GD
Brochure.pdf.aspx. Accessed on 01 July, 2022.
[12] Ren, J., Qin, Y., Peng, Z., Li, Z. Influence of composite structure design on the ablation performance
of ethylene propylene diene monomer composites. e-Polymers. 2021, 21(1), 151–159.
[13] Song, J. Q., Huang, Z. X., Qin, Y., Wang, H. H., Shi, M. X. Effects of zirconium silicide on the
vulcanization, mechanical and ablation resistance properties of ceramifiable silicone rubber
composites. Polymers. 2020, 12(2), 496. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym12020496.
[14] Ren, J. W., Song, J. Q., Fu, H. D., Peng, Z. W., Qin, Y. Preparation and properties of boron nitride/
silicone rubber ceramizable composites. China Rubber Ind. 2020, 67(3), 163–169.
[15] Yang, D., Zhang, W., Jiang, B. Silicone rubber ablative composites improved with zirconium carbide
or zirconia. Compos. Part A Appl. 2013, 44, 70–77, 16/j.compositesa. 2012.09.002.
[16] Rallini, M., Puri, I., Torre, L., Natali, M. Thermal and ablation properties of EPDM based heat
shielding materials modified with density reducer fillers. Compos.-A: Appl. Sci. Manuf. 2018, 112,
71–80.
[17] Anyszka, R., Bieliński, D. M., Pędzich, Z., Zarzecka-Napierala, M., Imiela, M., Rybinski, P. Processing
and properties of fireresistant EPDM rubber-based ceramifiable composites. High. Temp. Mater.
Proc. 2017, 36(10), 963–969.
[18] Fei, H. F., Han, X. J., Liu, B. Z., Gao, X. Y., Wang, Q., Zhang, Z., Xie, Z. Mechanism of the antioxidation
effect of α-Fe2O3 on silicone rubbers at high temperature. RSC Adv. 2016, 6(10), 7717–7722.
[19] Wu, L., Zhang, Y. Enhanced thermal oxidative stability of silicone rubber by using cerium-ferric
complex oxide as thermal oxidative stabilizer. e-Polymers. 2019, 19, 257–267.
[20] Hayashida, O., Kazuhiro, O., Atsuhito, K. Silicone rubber composition having excellent heat
resistance. 2015, European Patent No. EP2554585 B1, dt. 15-04-2015, assigned to Shin-Etsu Chemical
Co. Ltd. Tokyo, Japan.
[21] Li, H. Y., Tao, S., Huang, Y. H., Su, Z. T., Zheng, J. P. The improved thermal oxidative stability of
silicone rubber by using iron oxide and carbon nanotubes as thermal resistant additives. Compos.
Sci. Technol. 2013, 76, 52–60.
[22] Zhang, X., Zhang, Q., Zheng, J. P. Effect and mechanism of iron oxide modified carbon nanotubes on
thermal oxidative stability of silicone rubber. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2014, 99, 1–7.
[23] Qi, H. J., Joyce, K., Boyce, M. C. Durometer hardness and the stress-strain behaviour of elastomeric
materials. Rubber Chem. Technol. 2002, 7, 419–435.
[24] Standard test method for rubber property – Durometer hardness. ASTM D 2240 – 15.
[25] Murali Manohar, D., Chakraborty, B. C., Begum, S. S. Hardness – Elastic Modulus Relationship for
NitrileRubber and Nitrile Rubber – Polyvinyl Chloride Blends. In: Ganippa, L., Kartikeyan, R.,
Muralidharan, V., eds. Advances in Design and Thermal Systems. Springer, 2021, pp. 301–314.
[26] Gent, A. N. Trans. Inst. Rub. Ind. 1958, 34, 46–57.
[27] BS 903 Methods of testing vulcanised rubber Part 19 (1950) and Part A7, 1957.
[28] Morgans, R., Lackovic, S., Cobbold, P. Understanding the IRHD and Shore Methods used in Rubber
Hardness Testing. Presented at a meeting of the Rubber Division, American Chemical
SocietyOrlando, Florida September 21–24, 1999.
[29] Briscoe, B. J., Sebastian, S. K. Rubber. Chem. Technol. 1993, 66, 827–836.
[30] Guth, E. Theory of filler reinforcement. J. Appl. Phys. 1945, 16, 20–25.
256 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based composites[31] Richard, T. G. The mechanical behaviour of a solid microsphere filled composite. J. Compos. Mater.
1975, 9, 108–113.
[32] Kerner, E. H. The elastic and thermoelectric properties of composite media. Proc. Royal Soc.-
London, 69B, 808 (1956).
[33] Ramsteiner, F., Theysohn, R. On the tensile behaviour of filled composites. Composites. 1984, 15(2),
121–128.
[34] Nielsen, L. E. Mechanical Properties of Polymers. Reinhold Publishing Corporation, Chapman & Hall
Ltd, London, 1962.
[35] Murty, V. M., De, S. K. Short-fiber-reinforced stirene-butadiene rubber composites. J. Appl. Polym.
Sci. 1984, 29, 1355–1368.
[36] Goodloe, P. M., Reiling, T. L., McMutic, D. H. Rubber Age. 1947, 61, 697.
[37] Boustany, K., Coran, A. Y., Discontinuous cellulose reinforced elastomer. U.S. Patent No. 3,697,364,
October 19, 1972.
[38] Boustany, K., Coran, A. Y., U.S. Patent No. 3,709,845, January 9, 1973.
[39] Coran, A. Y., Boustany, K., Hamed, P. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1971, 15, 2471.
[40] Coran, A. Y., Boustany, K., Hamed, P. Short-Fiber-Rubber Composites: The properties of oriented
cellulose-fiber-elastomer composites. Rubber Chem. Technol. 1974, 47, 396–410.
[41] Boustany, K., Hamed, P. Rubber World. 1974, 171(2), 39.
[42] Boustany, K., Yaucher Coran, A., Preparation of discontinuousfiberreenforced elastomer. U.S. patent
No. 3836412, September 17, 1974.
[43] Boustany, K., Arnold, R. L. Short fibers rubber composites: the comparative properties of treatedand
discontinuous cellulose fibers. J. Elastomers Plast. April 1976, 8, l60–176.
[44] Hamed, P., Paul, C. Li, reinforcement of EPDM elastomers through discontinuous unregenerated
wood cellulose fibers. J. Elastomers Plast. 1977, 9(4), 395–415.
[45] Geethamma, V. G., Joseph, R., Thomas, S. Short coir fiber reinforced natural rubber composites:
effects of fiber length, orientation and alkali treatment. J Appl Polym Sci. 1995, 55, 583–594.
[46] Geethamma, V. G., Kalaprasad, G., Groeninckx, G., Thomas, S. Dynamic mechanical behavior of
short coir fiber reinforced natural rubber composites. Compos Part A. 2005, 36, 1499–1506.
[47] Varghese, S., Kuriakose, B., Thomas, S., Koshy, A. T. Mechanical and viscoelastic properties of short
fiber reinforced natural rubber composites: effects of interfacial adhesion, fiber loading, and
orientation. J. Adhesion Sci. Technol. 1994, 8(3), 235–248.
[48] Ismail, H., Edyham, M. R., Wirjosentono, B. Bamboo fibre filled natural rubber composites: the
effect of filler loading and bonding agent. Polym. Testing. 2002, 21, 139–144.
[49] Cracium, G., Manalia, E., Ighigeanu, D., Stelescu, M. D. A method to improve the characteristics of
EPDM rubber based eco-composites with electron beam. Polymers. 2020, 12, 215.
[50] Kashani, M. R. Aramid-short-fiber reinforced rubber as a tire tread composite. J. Appl. Polym. Sci.
2009, 113, 1355–1363.
[51] Sandstrom, P. H., Westgate, W. K., Botts, B. P., Barnette, R. R., Tire with rubber tread composed of a
primary and at least one lateral tread portion containing a dispersion of short carbon fibers. US
patent No. US20070221303A1 (2007), assigned to The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co. Akron USA.
[52] Cen, L., Lv, G., Tan, X., Gong, Z. Short nylon fibers waste modified with glycidyl 3-pentadecenyl
phenyl ether to reinforce stirene butadiene rubber tread compounds. Adv. Polym. Technol. 2019,
Article No. 5847292. https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/5847292.
[53] Mohammed, H. S., Elangovan, K., Subrahmanian, V. Studies on aramid short fibers reinforced
acrylonitrile butadiene rubber composites. Ind. J. Adv. Chem. Sci. 2016, 4(4), 458–463.
[54] Ryu, S. R., Lee, D. J. Effects of fiber aspect ratio, fiber content, and bonding agent on tensile and
tear properties of short-fiber reinforced rubber. KSME Int. J. 2001, 15(1), 35–43.
[55] Rosen, B. W., Dow, N. P. Fracture, Vol. 7. In: Leibowitz, H., ed. Academic press, New York, 1972,
p. 612.
References 257[56] Abrate, S. The mechanics of short-fiber-reinforced composites: A review. Rubber Chem. Technol.
1986, 59, 384–404.
[57] Shokrieh, M. M., Sani, H. M. On the constant parameters of Halpin-Tsai equation. Polymer. 2016,
106, 14–20.
[58] Van Ooij, W. J. Fundamental aspects of rubber adhesion to brass-plated steel tire cords. Rubber
Chem. Technol. 1979, 52, 605.
[59] Vandou, W. J., Harakuni, P. B., Buytaert, G. Adhesion of steel tire cord to rubber. Rubber Chem.
Technol. 2009, 82, 315–339.
[60] Shi, X., Ma, M., Lian, C., Zhu, D. Investigation of the effects of adhesion promoters on the adhesion
properties of rubber/steel cord by a new testing technique. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2013. 10.1002/
APP.39460.
[61] Walter, J. D. Cord-rubber tire composites: Theory and applications. Rubber Chem. Technol. 1978, 51,
524–576.
[62] Pidaparti, R. M. V. Analysis of cord-rubber composite laminates under combined tension and
torsion loading. Compos. Part B. 1997, 28B, 433–438.
[63] Shield, C. K., Costello, G. A. The effect of wire rope mechanics on the mechanical response of cord
composite laminates: An energy approach. J. Appl. Mech. 1994, 61(3), 9–15.
[64] Golovanevskiy, V., Kondratiev, A. Elastic properties of steel-rubber conveyor belt. Exp. Tech. 2021,
45, 217–226.
[65] Vasiliev, V. V., Morozov, E. V. Advanced Mechanics of Composite Materials and Structural Elements,
3rd Edn. Ch.3. Elsevier Science, 2013, 51–132. ISBN:978-0-08-045372-9.
[66] Siddha, R. A., Roach, J. F., Erickson, D. E., Reed, T. F. Stress analysis of cord adhesion tests- a route to
improved tests. Rubber Chem. Technol. 1981, 54(4), 835–856.
[67] Nicholson, D. W., Livingston, D. I., Fielding‐Russell, G. S. A new tire cord adhesion test. Tire Sci.
Technol. 1978, 6(2), 114–124.
[68] Martin Frank, S., Pletz, M., Wondracek, A., Schuecker, C. Assessing failure in steel cable-reinforced
rubber belts using multi-scale FEM modelling. J. Compos. Sci. 2022, 6(34).
[69] Blazej, R., Jurdziak, L., Blazej, A. K., Kozlowski, T. Identification of damage development in the core
of steel cord belts with the diagnostic system. Sci. Rep. 2022, 11, 12349. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-021-9153-z. Source: www.nature.com/scientificreports/.
[70] Montmorillonite -Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montmorillonite. Accessed on 03 Sept,
2022.
[71] Borralleras, P., Segura, I., Aranda, M. A. G., Aguado, A. Influence of experimental procedure on d￾spacing measurement by XRD of montmorillonite clay pastes containing PCE-based superplasticizer.
Cem. Concr. Res. 2019, 116, 266–272.
[72] Kamena, K., Product commercialization: One Nanostep at a time. PPT Presentation in FF
Conference. 1998. Southern Clay Products. Source:https://www.powershow.com/view/3bb1ff￾MDVhM/Product_Commercialization_One_Nanostep_at_a_Time_powerpoint_ppt_presentation.
Accessed on 04 September, 2022.
[73] Dharmaraj, M. M., Chakraborty, B. C., Begum, S. The effect of graphene and nanoclay on properties
of nitrile rubber/polyvinyl chloride blend with a potential approach in shock and vibration damping
applications. Iran. Polym. J. 2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13726-022-01064-6.
[74] Barghamadi, M., Ghoreishy, M. H. R., Karrabi, M., Mohammadian-Gezaz, S. Modeling of non linear
hyper viscoelastic and stress softening behaviors of acrylonitrile butadiene elastomer/polyvinyl
chloride nanocomposites reinforced by nanoclay and graphene. Polym. Compos. 2021, 42, 583–596.
[75] Hanhua, L., Li, W., Guojun, S. Study of NBR/PVC/OMMT nanocomposites Prepared by Mechanical
Blending. Iran. Polym. J. 2010, 19(1), 39–46.
258 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based composites[76] Rajasekar, R., Pal, K., Heinrich, G., Das, A., Das, C. K. Development of nitrile butadiene rubber￾nanoclay composites with epoxidized natural rubber as compatibilizer. Mater. Des. 2009, 30,
3839–3845.
[77] Hussain, F., Hojjati, M., Okamoto, M., Gorga, R. Review article: Polymer-matrix Nanocomposites,
Processing, Manufacturing, and Application: An Overview. J. Compos. Mater. 2006, 40, 1511–1575.
[78] Jia, C., Zhang, L. Q., Zhang, H., Lu, Y. L. Preparation, microstructure, and property of silicon rubber/
organically modified montmorillonite nanocomposites and silicon rubber/OMMT/fumed silica
ternary nanocomposites. Polym. Compos. 2011, 32(8), 1245–1253.
[79] Manohar, D. M., Chakraborty, B. C., Begum, S. S., Natarajan, R., Chandramohan, S. Study on the
effect of nanoclay as reinforcing filler for nitrile rubber – polyvinyl chloride blend: frequency
response of dynamic viscoelasticity and vibration damping. Iran. Polym. J. 2022. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s13726-022-01074-4.
[80] Zhang, J., Hereid, J., Hagen, M., Bakirtzis, D., Delichatsois, M. A., Fin, A., Castrovinci, A., Camino, G.,
Samyn, F., Bourbigot, S. Effects of nanoclay and fire retardants on fire retardancy of a polymer
blend of EVA and LDPE. Fire Saf. J. 2009, 44(4), 504–513.
[81] Liu, Y., Fang, Z. Combination of montmorillonite and a Schiff-base polyphosphate ester to improve
the flame retardancy of ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymer. J. Polym. Eng. 2015, 35(5), 443–449.
[82] Ghazinezami, A., Jabbarnia, A., Asmatulu, R. Fire retardancy of polymeric materials incorporated
with nanoscale inclusions. Proceedings of the ASME 2013 International Mechanical Engineering
Congress and Exposition IMECE2013 November 15–21, 2013, San Diego, California, USA.
[83] Lu, Q., Keskar, G., Ciocan, R., Rao, R., Mathur, R. B., Rao, A. M., Larcom, L. L. Determination of
carbon nanotube density by gradient sedimentation. J. Phys. Chem. B. 2006, 110(48), 24371–24376.
[84] Al Hasan, N. H. J. mechanical and structural properties of carbon nanotubes: a molecular dynamic
study. Int. J. Tech. Phys. Probl. Eng. 2022, 14(2), 380–385.
[85] Qian, D., Wagner, G. J., Liu, W. K., Yu, M. F., Ruoll, R. S. Mechanics of carbon nanotubes. Appl. Mech.
Rev. 2002, 55, 495–533.
[86] Ma, P. C., Siddiqui, N. A., Marom, G., Kim, J. K. Dispersion and functionalization of carbon nanotubes
for polymer-based nanocomposites: A review. Compos. Part A. 2010, 41, 1345–1367.
[87] Malekie, S., Ziaie, F. A two-dimensional simulation to predict the electrical behavior of carbon
nanotube/polymer composites. J. Polym. Eng. 2017, 37(2), 205–210.
[88] Li, M., Jiang, J., Lu, X., Gao, J., Jiang, D., Gao, L. Natural rubber reinforced with super-hydrophobic
multiwall carbon nanotubes: obvious improved abrasive resistance and enhanced thermal
conductivity. J. Polym. Eng. 2022, 42(8), 688–694.
[89] Li, M., Tu, W., Chen, X., Wang, H., Chen, J. NR/SBR composites reinforced with organically
functionalized MWCNTs: simultaneous improvement of tensile strength and elongation and
enhanced thermal stability. J. Polym. Eng. 2016, 36(8), 813–818.
[90] ADL- Graphene Technical Data Sheet. Ad-Nano Technologies Private Limited. Shimoga- 77222,
Karnataka, India. www.ad-nanotech.com. Accessed on 16 Sept 2022.
[91] Hummers, W. S., Offeman, R. E. Preparation of graphitic oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 80(6),
1339–1339.
[92] Marcano, D. C., Kosynkin, D. V., Berlin, J. M., Sinitskii, A., Sun, Z., Slesarev, A., Alemany, L. B., Lu, W.,
Tour, J. M. Improved synthesis of graphene oxide. ACS Nano. 2010, 4(8), 4806–4814.
[93] Tang, Z., Zhang, L., Feng, W., Guo, B., Liu, F., Jia, D. Rational design of graphene surface chemistry
for highperformance rubber/graphene composites. Macromolecules. 2014, 47, 8663–8673.
[94] Esmizadeh, E., Arjmandpour, M., Vahidifar, A., Naderi, G., Dubois, C. Preparation and
characterization of silicone rubber/graphene nanosheets nanocomposites by in-situ loading of the
coupling agent. 2019, 53(24), 3459–3468.
References 259[95] Berki, P., László, K., Tung, N. T., Kocsis, J. K. Natural rubber/graphene oxide nanocomposites via
melt and latex compounding: Comparison at very low graphene oxide content. J. Reif. Plast.
Compos. 2017, 36(11), 808–817.
[96] wang, J., Zhang, K., Hao, S., Xia, H., Lavorgna, M. Simultaneous reduction and surface
functionalization of graphene oxide and the application for rubber composites. J. Appl. Polym. Sci.
2018, 136, 47375.
[97] Alkelani, A. A., Housari, B. A., Nassar, S. A. A proposed model for creep relaxation of soft gaskets in
bolted joints at room temperature. J. Press. Vessel Technol. February, 2008, 130, 011211–1.
[98] Vinogradov, G. V., Malkin, A. Y. Rheology of Polymers –Viscoelasticityand Flow of Polymers. Mir
Publishers, Moscow, 1980.
[99] Perepechko, I. Acoustical Methods of Investigating Polymers. Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1975.
[100] Ziegel, K. D., Romanov, A. Modulus reinforcement in elastomer composites I. Inorganic fillers.
J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1973, 17, 1119–1131.
[101] Gen, L., Lv, G-z, Tan, X.-W., Gong, Z.-L. Short nylon fibers wate modified with glycidyl 3-pentadecenyl
phenyl ether to reinforce styrene butadiene rubber tread compounds. Adv. Polym. Technol. 2019,
Article ID 5847292. https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/5847292.
[102] Hanhua, L., Li, W., Guojun, S. Study of NBR/PVC/OMMT nanocomposites Prepared by Mechanical
Blending. Iran. Polym. J. 2010, 19(1), 39–46.
[103] Sasikumar, K., Manoj, N. R., Mukundan, T., Khastgir, D. Hysteretic damping in XNBR-MWNT
nanocomposites at low and high compressive strains. Compos. Part B. 2016, 92(1), 74–83.
[104] Sasikumar, K., Manoj, N. R., Mukundan, T., Khastgir, D. Design of XNBR nanocomposites for
underwater acoustic sensorapplications: Effect of MWNT on dynamic mechanical properties and
morphology. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2014, 131(18), Article ID. 40752. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.40752.
[105] Ratna, D., Barman, S., Kushwaha, R. K., Chakraborty, B. C. Viscoelastic Mastic for Free Layer
Damping (FLD) of structural vibrations. Patent No. 300740, dt 22/11/2010.
[106] Gu, B.-E., Huang, C.-Y., Shen, T.-H., Lee, Y.-L. Effects of multiwall carbon nanotube addition on the
corrosion resistance and underwater acoustic absorption properties of polyurethane coatings.
Prog. Org. Coatings. 2018, 121, 226–235.
[107] Praveen, S., Bahadur, L., Yadav, R., Billa, S., Patro, T. U., Rath, S. K., Ratna, D., Patri, M. Tunable
viscoelastic and vibration damping properties of a segmented polyurethane synergistically
reinforced with carbon black and anisotropic additives. Appl. Acoust. 2020, 170, Article ID: 107535.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2020.107535.
[108] Peymanfar, R., Rahmanisaghieh, M. Preparation of neat and capped BaFe2O4 nanoparticles and
investigation of morphology, magnetic, and polarization effects on its microwave and optical
performance. Mater. Res. Exp. 2018, 5 (10). https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1591/aadaac.
[109] Kruzelak, J., Kvasnicakova, A., Hlozekova, K., Hudec, I. Progress in polymers and polymer composites
usedas efficient materials for EMI shielding. Nanoscale Adv. 2021, 3, 123–172. https://doi.org/10.
1039/d0na00760a.
[110] Morari, C., Balan, I., Pintea, J., Chitanu, E., Iordache, I. Electrical conductivity and electromagnetic
Shielding effectiveness of silicone Rubber filled with ferrite and graphite powders. Prog.
Electromag. Res. 2011, 21, 93–104.
[111] Joseph, T. M., Mariya, H. J., Haponiuk, J. T., Thomas, S., Esmaeili, A., Sajadi, S. M. Electromagnetic
interference shielding effectiveness of natural and chlorobutyl rubber blend nanocomposite.
J. Compos. Sci. 2022, 6, 240. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcs6080240.
[112] Sýkora, R., Babayan, V., Ušáková, M., Kruželák, J., Hudec, I. Rubber composite materials with the
effects of electromagnetic shielding. Polym. Compos. 2016, 37(10), 2933–2939.
260 Chapter 4 Elastomer-based composites[113] Ray, M., George, J. J., Chakraborty, A., Bhowmick, A. K. An investigation of the electromagnetic
shielding effectiveness of ethylene vinyl acetate elastomer reinforced with carbon nanofillers.
Polym. Compos. 2010, 18(2), 59–65.
[114] Joseph, N., Janardhanan, C., Sebastian, M. T. Electromagnetic interference shielding properties of
butyl rubber-single walled carbon nanotube composites. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2014, 101, 139–144.
[115] Nguyen, V. T., Min, B. K., Yi, Y., Kim, S. J., Choi, C. G. MXene(Ti3C2TX)/graphene/ PDMS composites
for multifunctional broadband electromagnetic interference shielding skins. Chem. Eng. J. 2020,
393, Article ID: 124608. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.124608.
References 261Chapter 5
Smart composites
Description of abbreviations
Abbreviation Description
DGEBA Diglycidyl ether of bisphenol-A
CFRP Carbon fibre-reinforced plastic
GFRP Glass fibre-reinforced plastic
FRP Fibre-reinforced plastic
PU Polyurethane
PTMG Poly(tetramethylene) glycol
PCLD Passive constrained layer damping
VEM Visco-elastic material
CLD Constrained-layer damping
APCLD Active-passive constrained layer damping
PVDF Poly(vinylidene fluoride)
PZT Lead zirconate titanate
PLZT Lead lanthanum titanate zirconate
BIIR Bromobutyl rubber
NBR Nitrile rubber
SHM Structural health monitoring
CSA Camphor sulphonic acid
PLA Poly(lactic acid)
ESD Electrostatic discharge
PPS Polyphenylene sulphide
PP Polypropylene
ABS Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene
SWCBNT Single-walled carbon nanotubes
MWCNT Multiwall carbon nanotube
FIT Functionalized interleaf technology
GNP Graphene nanoplates
PLA Polylactic acid
EM Electromagnetic
SE Shielding effectiveness
RRCS Radar reflecting composite structure
RACS Radar-absorbing composite structure
RSC Radar cross section
VNA Vector network analyser
SWCNT Single-walled carbon nanotubes
CB Carbon black
WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization
SHEs Self-healing elastomers
SHDC Self-healing dental composite
CBNCs Conducting polymer bio-nanocomposites
PTFE Polytetrafluoroethylene
EMC Electromagnetic compatibility
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110781571-0055.1 Self-healing Composites
Damage of composites during service and the consequent failure is very common, but
undesirable. In a catastrophic failure, the event might turn fatal to human users and
also to the machine/system as such. It is well established that failure by structural disin￾tegration occurs due to the presence of microdefects or cracks that subsequently grow
very fast due to extremely high stress intensity at the crack tip, resulting in a cata￾strophic failure. In many applications, it becomes almost impossible to handle cracks
that appeared on a composite’s surface due to difficulty in access or conditions that can￾not be attended to, such as a flying or underwater object or a large ship structure.
A possible solution to such problems could be the use of so called ‘Smart Compos￾ite’, which can heal automatically by some mechanism as soon as a crack forms. The
idea of self-healing has originated from healing of a wound on a human skin. However,
it takes several days to heal even a small cut on the skin. A more interesting example
is the regeneration/re-growing of the tail of a lizard. In order to accomplish healing in
a reasonable time and to maintain structural integrity after a healing process, self￾healing smart composite must have a few important characteristics such as fast curing,
identical or nearly same properties in the cured state as in the parent matrix and
should have sufficient storage life in the uncured condition, embedded in the host
composite. For an underwater object, an additional requirement could be the capabil￾ity to cure in the presence of water.
The most common self-healing process is to incorporate microcapsules as hollow
spherical beads, containing the healing oligomer that would cure on exposure to atmo￾sphere as the capsule breaks on cracking of the composite. Therefore, the liquid oligomer
must be capable of flow and should fill up the crack. Subsequently, a chemical reaction
of the oligomer with a second reactant or a curing agent is to be fast and might be cata￾lysed by atmospheric moisture or oxygen or in combination. In a different mechanism,
the oligomer might contain a catalyst, and on exposure to atmosphere, the oligomer
could be cured in the presence of oxygen, moisture and the catalyst. There can be a num￾ber of reaction systems such as isocyanate-terminated polyurethane pre-polymer, which
is cured by moisture, alkyd resin, cured by catalysts such as cobalt octoate, moisture￾curable epoxy-urethane pre-polymer, etc. A different self-healing composite may contain
vascular tubes running the healing fluids inside and perform the same healing process
as the capsule, on exposure due to cracking. A second mechanism is the intrinsic healing,
where a reversible chemical or a physical bond formation of a polymer takes place, ei￾ther by a sharp increase in viscosity of the pH-sensitive micro-gels, or by swelling of the
shape memory polymers or by the melting and solidification of thermoplastic materials
[1]. Intrinsic healing has the advantage of repeated cycles of healing at the same place of
occurrence, which is not possible by capsule or vascular healing methods [2].
There were attempts to develop self-healing fibre-reinforced composites using hol￾low glass fibres [3] but with very low efficiency (5%) due to the extensive damage of
fibres when the healed composite was again tested for impact strength. Some research￾5.1 Self-healing Composites 263ers developed combined solid and hollow glass fibre-reinforced composite with epoxy
and hardener separately in hollow fibres, with a higher healing efficiency of 73–87% [4,
5]. A different approach was to incorporate a healing ply in the FRP laminate [6] where
the healing ply contained the epoxy-/mercaptan-filled hollow polypropylene tubes. The
FRP was made by hand layup. The healing efficiency was determined by comparing the
flexural strength of the original and the healed composite. A 62% healing efficiency was
achieved by heating the laminate at 70 °C during the healing process. The gas evolved
during the reaction of epoxy and mercaptan on healing exerted pressure to fill up the
cracked FRP by the healing fluid quite effectively. The incorporation of epoxy (DGEBA)
and amine hardeners and catalysts separately in different microcapsules and using
them for healing in FRP laminates was studied by some researchers with very high effi￾ciency (>100%) [7, 8].
Jhanji and co-workers [9] developed self-healing FRP composites using microcap￾sules containing an epoxy and a hardener in separate capsules. Two types of self￾healing composites were made, one with carbon fibre (CFRP) and the other with glass
fibre (GFRP), both containing hollow glass fibre with healing agents. The fabrication of
the composites was by simple hand lay-up, without any compression force. Only 2.5%
(by weight) hollow fibres were used in the matrix resin. The flexural strength therefore
was not compromised to any significant extent. The authors described the steps in mak￾ing the microcapsules and the self-healing FRP composites. The time taken for healing
(complete curing of the healing agents (epoxy and amine hardener) was 24 h. The re￾sults showed very high healing efficiency (>100%) after a 35% loss of flexural strength
that occurred due to the damage. The synthesis of microcapsules is generally done by
forming cross-linked rigid thermoset hollow capsules in situ in the presence of the heal￾ing resin in a liquid form, separately for the epoxy solution and the hardener. A typical
microcapsule material is melamine-formaldehyde/ urea-formaldehyde or resorcinol￾formaldehyde thermoset resins.
The process of healing by the epoxy-hardener healing reactants, either in tubes
or in microcapsules, often require heating after filling up the cracked FRP so that the
curing is proper, and the strength and impact energy are comparable to the undam￾aged pristine FRP (without the healing system). This process is external healing pro￾cess. The determination of strength after the healing is mostly done by flexural tests
through three-point or four-point bending. The creation of crack or damage on the
FRP laminate is generally by low impact in the range of 1–5 Joules, or by an indenta￾tion force of 1–2 kN. However, healing efficiency is always low (below 60%) when the
impact force/energy for damage is high [8].
The efficiency of the healing process is measured by the ratio (in %) of the flexural
strength of the healed composite and the original composite without the healing com￾pounds. This is because in most application of FRP panels, the composites experience
flexural force and, consequently, the possibility of damage of the capsules in use. Sec￾ondly, the flexure mode evaluation can predict the difference in interlaminar shear
strength due to the incorporation of the healing capsules/tubes. As such, after the in￾264 Chapter 5 Smart compositescorporation of the healing capsule or tubes, the strength and/or toughness is compro￾mised to some extent, unless the proportion of the healing capsules/tubes is small [9].
The design of structural elements with FRPs decides the minimum strength and
modulus of elasticity in tension, bending and shear required, according to the applica￾tion. Addition of such microcapsules in the composite poses two difficulties. The first,
during the processing, there is a possibility of breaking the rigid but brittle thin cap￾sules/tubes, particularly for mixing with the resin matrix of the composite for a uni￾form distribution in the matrix, and the second is the fabrication by pressure- or
shear-intensive moulding method such as compression moulding. Therefore, the
tubes or the capsules are required to be strong enough to withstand the forces during
the above processing. A typical example is shown in a report on a self-healing coating
development [10] where the authors determined the mechanical stability in terms of
percentage of the capsules (by weight) ruptured during mixing of two different solu￾tions, with variation in the rpm of the stirrer, viscosity of the mixing solution and the
duration of mixing. Heating during the healing process is sometimes undesirable, es￾pecially when the structure is airborne or under water or is an unattended large sur￾face like the superstructure of a ship. Special epoxy system of low viscosity and faster
reaction rate should be used in such cases so that the process need not be monitored
or assisted. The most disadvantage of external healing is that the process is not re￾peatable at the same site of damage because once the healing reaction is complete;
there would not be any healing ingredient as capsule or tubes at that site.
Another consideration of healing by two different reactant-filled capsules is the ade￾quate mixing on release of these reactants when a crack or damage in the composite
occurs. For example, the epoxy and the amine hardener are encapsulated separately so
that, on cracking, these are released and supposed to be mixed automatically so that the
curing reaction can take place. Heating the composite after damage can help in reducing
the viscosity of the epoxy resin and hardener for better mixing and a faster reaction, but
thorough mixing of these two components is not ensured in all cases. This might explain
the large differences in the healing efficiency reported in various literatures where such
dual capsules are used for external healing process in self-healing FRPs.
Internal healing process offers repeatable healing at the same site in the case of re￾peated damage. Reversible bond formation is such an example. A typical reversible cova￾lent bond formation was reported by Lin and co-workers [11]. The method was a thermo￾reversible Diels-Alder reaction for a recyclable polyurethane-Halloysite nanocomposite.
A nanocomposite with furan pendent polyurethane and a maleimide-terminated cross￾linker was prepared with 0–2% halloysite content. The healing conditions are heating at
90 °C for 5 min, followed by 48 h at 65 °C, resulting in 93% healing (recovery of tensile
strength compared to the original composite). Three cycles of healing were carried out,
following the Diels-Alder reaction. The nanocomposite with 1% halloysite was best in me￾chanical properties as well as in self-healing efficiency. Jia and Gu [12] developed a car￾bon nanotube composite with flexible polyurethane (PU), with a random copolymer
(polyol) of ε-caprolactone and D,L-lactide, hexamethylene diisocyanate, along with the
5.1 Self-healing Composites 265chain extenders butane diol and poly(tetramethylene) glycol (PTMG). The PU was an iso￾cyanate-terminated product. The self-healing polyurethane was made by reacting this PU
with 2,2-dithiodiethanol. The resulting PU undergoes disulphide bond exchange revers￾ibly on heating, and reverted back to the original structure on cooling. The advantage is
that it can heal repeatedly during use.
5.2 Smart structural composites
One of the most important requirements of a structural composite is smart vibration
damping. The term smart used in this special application indicates a process of en￾hancement of vibration attenuation, irrespective of the frequency of vibration. In a
passive vibration damping, the viscoelastic loss of the damping material (a polymeric
composition, in general) is highly dependent on the frequency range of vibration and
temperature of the application.
In order to have a smart response, irrespective of such imposing conditions, the
damping can be made active using a reverse bias of vibration – attenuated by con￾verting the vibration acceleration to electric current, or by a shunt without electrical
biasing voltage, or using a magnetic panel and electromagnet, or by a damper with an
electrorheological or magnetorheological fluid, or a shear-thinning fluid. Principles of
some active and active-passive damping are discussed here in brief.
5.2.1 Passive constrained layer damping (PCLD)
Passive constrained layer damping (PCLD) is quite common in industrial, automotive,
defence and aerospace applications. In this method, a viscoelastic core material
(VEM) is sandwiched between the stiff vibrating substrate and the constraining layer
that is equally stiff. The VEM undergoes shear deformation under vibrating force be￾cause its elastic modulus is far less than the substrate or the constraining layer. A typ￾ical example is a vulcanized rubber strip (VEM) sandwiched between two metallic
strips. The damping is dependent on many parameters such as the geometry of the
CLD construction, temperature and frequency range, dynamic viscoelastic properties
of the VEM, fraction of the area covered, etc. [13–19].
5.2.1.1 Active control system
An active control uses an electrical system that senses the vibration intensity and phase,
and by either feed-forward or feed-back method supplies the vibration (acceleration or
dynamic displacement) with an identical intensity with 180°reverse phase for a complete
destructive interference. The resulting intensity would be nil in ideal condition. Figures 5.1
and 5.2 show typical feed-back and feed-forward control systems.
266 Chapter 5 Smart composites5.2.1.2 Active-passive constrained layer damping (APCLD)
In the construction of the active-passive CLD arrangement, a viscoelastic material
(VEM) that is normally a composite of an elastomer is used as the passive damping ele￾ment, and a stiff constraining panel is used on top of it, just as a normal CLD construc￾tion. The signal from the vibrating substrate is picked up by a piezoelectric transducer
(accelerometer) and an electrical controller feeds a reverse signal to the substrate
through a piezoactuator. The feed-forward system feeds a secondary force to the sub￾strate on analysing the primary force signal in a feed-forward electrical controller. The
response is measured by an accelerometer attached to the constraining layer of the
damping CLD construction. The signals are amplified by an amplifier, which is part of
the controller system. The gain of the amplifier is fixed according to the signal received,
which is dependent on the vibration intensity at different frequencies.
There are many designs of this hybrid damping CLD, with variations in the place￾ment of the sensor and actuator in the substrate-VEM-constrained layer construction.
Figure 5.3 shows one such arrangement of a combined active-passive CLD. The con￾straining layer is fitted with the piezoelectric actuator for damping the low-frequency
vibration that is transmitted through the VEM with more or less undamped intensity.
Actuator
Vibrating panel
F(t)˜
Electrical
Feedback
Controller
Signal
from
sensor
Fig. 5.1: Feed-back control system for vibration damping.
Fig. 5.2: Feed forward control system.
5.2 Smart structural composites 267The piezo-sensor layer is just above the vibrating panel to pick up the vibration signal
constantly for analysis of magnitudes and phases corresponding to the dominant
frequencies.
The advantage of the active control is that damping at very low frequency is very
effectively accomplished and, in fact, lower the frequency, better the efficiency. Also,
low bandwidth of vibration frequency can be better controlled. Secondly, active con￾trol practically eliminates the vibration at a narrow band of frequency, even at reso￾nance. The active mode has a greater advantage for very minute vibration intensities,
even at the nanometric scale at low frequency, which is required for some optical ap￾plications such as holographic recording. A more practical advantage is that in the
case of an electrical system failure, vibration damping is still taken care of by the
VEM, although sacrificing the lower frequency damping.
The disadvantages are that the reverse dynamic force is very critical in terms of
phase angle because in some discrete frequencies, it might amplify the vibration in￾tensity due to constructive interference rather than attenuate it. Secondly, active con￾trol is not effective in higher frequencies due to the very minute time lag and
complexity of the large number of frequencies to be controlled. The use of passive
VEM is therefore required to accomplish a wide-band vibration damping. The third
disadvantage is that the active control cannot be employed in large vibrating systems
like the engine room on the deck of a ship or a large turbine base in hydroelectric
plants because the energy required for feeding back to the substrate is very high,
requiring a large controller and actuator. The most important disadvantage in com￾mercial applications is the complexity of construction and the associated cost. Pas￾sive CLD is very cost effective and is still preferred over this combination of active
and passive damping. However, where low-frequency vibration is very critical and
for relatively small structural elements, active-passive CLD is very useful. A typical
comparison of the transmissibility plots of a passive (viscoelastic) damping and ac￾tive damping at low frequency is shown in Fig. 5.4 below (values taken arbitrarily for
the purpose of illustration only).
Base
VEM
Piezo actuator
layer
Piezo sensor
layer
Amplifier
Controller
Fig. 5.3: A typical active-passive CLD arrangement with a piezo-layer as the constraining layer.
268 Chapter 5 Smart compositesIn active control, the amplification of vibration acceleration intensity is not ob￾served because of the fully destructive interference of waves, but in the passive damp￾ing, the amplification at resonance (natural frequency) occurs, irrespective of the
material damping factor; only the extent of transmissibility will reduce more at reso￾nance as the damping factor increases. The other modes, particularly beyond a cer￾tain frequency (generally below 1,000 Hz), are partly damped by passive CLD, since
the active control is difficult to achieve at higher frequencies.
Plump and Hubbard Jr. [20] introduced this active constrained layer in a ACLD
system and, at present, large number of research articles are published on this subject
due to the growing interest of industrial applications. For example, Lam et al. [21] and
Shen [22] designed simultaneous damping system by a passive viscoelastic core and
an active control system. To make a relatively robust system, brittleness of ceramic
piezoelectric materials can be replaced by polymeric, flexible sensors. Baz [23] used a
thin piezoelectric polymer sensor (PVDF) between the VEM and the substrate.
The subject of polymeric composite for such passive-active combined damping has
many interdisciplinary aspects such as quantification of electromechanical parameters
of piezoelectric sensors and actuators, dynamic viscoelasticity of polymer composites
(both frequency- and temperature-dependent loss properties) and an electrical unit
with a control algorithm. Finite element methods are used by many researchers, for
example by Trindade et al. [24], van Nostrand et al. [25] and Varadan and co-workers
[26]. Valey and Rao [27] made a comparison among active, passive and combined ac￾tive-passive damping systems, while Trindade and Benjeddou [28] made a comprehen￾sive review of the active-passive CLD system. The authors highlighted that a passive
damping system with a damping factor of 2–3% can be coupled with an active control
system to enhance it even up to 15–20%, but at a maximum 400 Hz.
A modification of the above passive-active CLD can be used as a viscoelastic mate￾rial that can accommodate a high concentration of piezoelectric ceramic powders, for
instance, lead zirconate titanate (PZT), lead lanthanum titanate zirconate (PLZT) or
0.3 3
Transmissibility (eT)
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
Passi
ve
Fig. 5.4: Vibration transmissibility of a typical passive viscoelastic damper and an active damper.
5.2 Smart structural composites 269lead magnesium niobate – lead titanate (PMN-PT) to make a 0–3 composite as VEM
damping layer, and a piezoceramic constraining layer for enhanced active control. In
a 0–3 composite, however, the solid ceramic filler loading has to be quite high for
achieving adequate piezoelectric properties and this can possibly be done with bro￾mobutyl rubber (BIIR), which has inherently high structural damping capability.
5.2.2 Magnetic CLD
Another modification of the smart CLD could be a magnetic VEM for a steel base and
constraining layer. The VEM would be an elastomeric composite filled with fine par￾ticles of a permanent magnet (consisting of neodymium, iron and boron, for example)
and magnetized to make a magnetic VEM. In an alternate construction, the VEM could
be a metamaterial having short, thin strips of the polled permanent magnet embedded
in it. The advantage of such a VEM is that there is no need to have any adhesive for
bonding. Secondly, if there is an active control by an electromagnetic system, then the
magnetic attraction can increase the shear deformation of the VEM, thus enhancing the
shear–strain energy (loss) and reduce longitudinal strain (reduction of vibration ampli￾tude). The electromagnet with an electrical control can be placed laterally in a non￾contact arrangement so that the polarity of the electromagnet changes with the dy￾namic strain as conceptualized, calculated and experimented by Zheng et al. [29]. The
authors could achieve very good agreement on their theoretical estimation of mode
shapes (17–85 Hz) and system loss factors (0.04–0.12), with experimental findings. The
achieved system loss factors for a CLD at such a low frequency are a definite indication
of the effect of frictional damping due to electromagnetic force control. A typical pas￾sive magnetic CLD and active-passive magnetic CLD construction is shown as Fig. 5.5.
This arrangement is also applicable up to a frequency level, beyond which the
passive damping is dominant. This magnetic CLD has two major disadvantages, one,
the substrate must be a magnetic material like steel (baring austenitic stainless steel),
and the arrangement of a non-contact electromagnet and control system is a little
complicated. Loading of ferrite in the VEM is possible if the VEM is quite flexible, such
as a soft rubber. The magnetic powder can be a ferrite-type material, including bar￾ium hexagonal ferrite or strontium-substituted barium ferrite, or a similar permanent
magnet material. The rare-earth-type magnetic powder could be samarium cobalt ma￾terial or powder of neodymium-iron-boron-type material.
The VEM can be selected from those that are known to damp vibration in the
practical temperature and frequency range. For example, nitrile rubber (NBR), ethyl￾ene vinyl acetate copolymer (EVA), butyl and halo butyl rubbers, polyurethane rub￾bers, nitrile-PVC blends, carboxylated nitrile rubber, etc., which are useful for mid- to
high-frequency, or from thermoplastic elastomers such as thermoplastic polyurethane
elastomer, etc. – those that can damp at low-frequency vibrations.
270 Chapter 5 Smart compositesHansaka and co-workers [30, 31] developed a series of magnetic VEM composites
using a permanent magnetic powder, magnetized to have a residual magnetic flux den￾sity of about 25 gausses to about 15,000 gausses. The constraining layer is preferably an
engineering plastic, including nylon (polyamide resin), polycarbonate, polyacetal, poly￾ethylenepolypropylene, ABS resin, etc. or a thermoset composite such as epoxy-FRP
with a Young’s modulus of 3GPa, which can be bent as per the rail surface contour. The
substrate is a steel rail. Because of the magnetic attraction, the damping layer does not
require an adhesive and the damping is also enhanced by the lateral sliding friction
damping along with the viscoelastic damping. The passive magnetic CLD construction
has some major advantages as the magnetic flux density does not change significantly
with temperature (except if heated to Curie temperature, which is generally very high),
and is independent of the frequency of the vibration. There is no active electromagnetic
control system; therefore, the construction is simple and can be applied to actual large
systems such as rail lines.
5.2.3 Structural health monitoring (SHM)
An active vibration control by piezoelectric sensors and actuators has an offshoot –
monitoring vibration (dynamic strain or sudden change in strain) of a composite
panel in applications where the panels are subjected to continuous vibration, such as
the wings of an aircraft made of FRP composites. Under constant vibration, the ampli￾tude vs. frequency has a particular signature (finger print) when the panel has no de￾fects. A series of piezo sensors attached to the different parts of the panel transmit the
Magnetic
material CL
Base (Steel)
Ferrite-VEM
Composite
Hard plastic/
Composite/metal
CL
Ferrite-VEM
Composite
Base (Steel) (b)
(a)
Magnet or
Electromagnetic coil
Fig. 5.5: (a) Passive magnetic CLD and (b) passive/active magnetic CLD.
5.2 Smart structural composites 271vibration strain and they are recorded in a multichannel analyser. Each plot of fre￾quency-dependent amplitude is monitored continuously to observe any change in the
pattern of vibration amplitude. Any defect, in terms of a crack or added mass or even
a sudden impact on the panel would get reflected in the vibration signature at the
neighbourhood of the defect, which can be captured by the nearby sensor. The com￾mon defects of interlaminar shear failure, internal crack in a thick panel section, etc.
are very precisely detected by such health monitoring system. A typical such vibration
signature with and without defect is shown in Fig. 5.6. The data are arbitrarily chosen
as an example only. The distortion of the wave is near the first natural frequency of
the aluminium FRP sandwich beam as shown here. The defect size decides the fre￾quency range at which the deviation would be prominent. In this case, a sharp cut
was deliberately made to cause a prominent change in the 10–50 Hz frequency zone.
The SHM technology of composites is widely used with sonic and ultrasonic waves for
primary aircraft structures [32], large bridges [33], etc. Montalvão et al. [34] and Singh
and Sehegal [35] reviewed the SHM of composites for various special applications.
5.3 Electrically conducting composites
Polymeric composites can be tailored to have sufficient, or even high electrical con￾ductivity. Polymers are, in general, insulating materials, both electrically and ther￾mally. However, some polymers having conjugated double bonds in the polymer
chain show electronic conductivity, which is a result of inter-chain hopping of elec￾trons of the pi bonds. The hopping is further facilitated by a dopant, mostly anionic,
for example, simple HCl doping in polyaniline (PANI).
0
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
5
Vibration power, dB
1510 20 25
Frequency, Hz
Normal Defective
30 35 40 45 50 55
Fig. 5.6: Vibration signature of a panel with and without a defect.
272 Chapter 5 Smart compositesFor a polymeric composite to conduct electricity, there has to be a continuous
connected path of electron flow that requires a minimum content of the conducting
component, termed as the percolation threshold concentration. It is determined by
the abrupt increase in conductivity with a small change in concentration. As an exam￾ple, aneoprene rubber (CR)-PANI composite with various loadings of PANI doped with
camphor sulphonic acid (CSA) developed for microwave-absorbing flexible sheets was
studied for in-plane conductivity and plotted as in Fig. 5.7. The percolation threshold
concentration is about 15% PANI, doped with CSA, since the conductivity is changed
from about 10–11 S/cm to about 10–7 S/cm at that concentration.
Percolation theory predicts the relationship between the resistivities of the composite
and the conductive filler volume as [36]:
ρ = ρ0ð Þ v − vc t
for v > vc (5:1)
where ρ is the resistivity of the composite, ρ0 is the resistivity of conductive filler, v
and vc are filler volume and the percolation threshold, respectively, and t is a critical
exponent. The critical exponent, t, based on theoretical prediction, varies from 1.6 to
2.0, while for CNT-filled nanocomposites, the value is between 0.7 and 3.1 [36].
The advantages of electrically conducting composites are many, for example, a
wide range of conductivities, flexibility to accommodate any contour, light weight,
biocompatibility for medical applications, ease of manufacturing, cost effectiveness, etc.
The conducting composites can be made with a choice of matrix polymer, which can be
conducting like ionically doped polyaniline, poly (alkyl thiophenes), polypyrrole, etc. or
using a common polymer such as rubber or plastic. Electrically, the doped conducting
polymers resemble a semiconductor and the incorporation of these organic materials
in an insulating polymer matrix can be of use in many critical applications such as in
lightning arresters, sensors, detectors, etc. For example, 30% PANI (by volume) in epoxy
0
1.0E-13
1.0E-11
1.0E-09
1.0E-07
1.0E-05
1.0E-03
1.0E-01
10
PANI, phr
20 30 40
In-plane conductivity, S/cm
Fig. 5.7: Percolation threshold in electrical conductivity of NBR-PANI composites.
5.3 Electrically conducting composites 273resin was used in an epoxy-carbon fibre FRP to make a lightweight conducting compos￾ite for lightning arresters. The conducting polymer was doped by camphor sulfonic acid
to enhance the conductivity to few S/cm levels [37]. However, most conducting polymers
are not film-forming and are used as conducting fillers in common rubbers and plastics.
Chavan et al. [38] developed an electrically conducting composite polyaniline and an
epoxy resin cured with maleic anhydride, and Jain et al. used FEP-polyaniline conduct￾ing composite for chlorine gas sensing [39] and humidity sensing [40]. Shukla et al. [41]
reported a nanocomposite of polyaniline matrix loaded with crystalline tin oxide nano
particles for humidity sensing. Sivaraman et al. [42] developed an all-solid supercapaci￾tor using a sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone)-poly(3-methyl thiophene) conducting
composite. While sulphonated PEEK is electrolytically conducing, poly(thiophene) with
anionic doping is an electronically conducting material.
Dubey and co-workers [43] made a comprehensive review of electrically conduct￾ing polymer bio-nanocomposites for biomedical and other applications where various
biopolymers and biodegradable polymers like PLA, polylactides, polycaprolactone,
poly(lactide-co-glycoside), chitosan, cellulosic materials, gelatin, collagen, heparin, etc.
are used with conducting polymers, fibres, carbon nanotubes, graphene and metal fill￾ers for a wide range of applications such as humidity sensing, vapour sensing, water
purification, chemical analysis, enzyme-sensing, agriculture, drug delivery, tissue engi￾neering, etc. Other types of electrically conducting composites are made of common
elastomers, engineering plastics and also thermosets that are normally insulators with
conducting fillers such as carbonyl iron, copper, gold, silver, nickel and many alloys in
micron size as well as with nanoparticles, graphene nanosheets, graphite particles, fi￾bres and fabrics, various forms of nano carbons, carbon fibres, fabrics, etc.
The most common electrically conducting composites are rubber-filled with con￾ducting particles such as conducing carbon to tailor the resistance from 104 to 109 Ω
for electrostatic discharge (ESD) and antistatic mats, wrist bands, floorings, etc. Con￾ducting carbon black generally has electrical volume resistivity in the range of 10−1
–
102 Ω cm. These composites are made with any commercial rubber, for example, neo￾prene, nitrile, SBR, PU NR, EPDM, etc. Polar rubbers have a definite advantage of bet￾ter compatibility with metallic particles. Antistatic mats help to protect static-sensitive
components from electrostatic discharge. They are engineered to drain static dis￾charge from items placed on their surface. A secondary benefit of mats is that they
serve to protect the surface of the ESD-sensitive devices from wear and tear. In appli￾cations on board aircrafts and vehicles, these elastomeric sheets also help in damping
undue surface vibrations. ESD flooring or ESD table top mats have a low upper limit
for electrical resistance, between 105 and 108 Ω. The composite mat prevents the
build-up of electrostatic charge in the body through a safe and very controlled dis￾charge of static electric charge. They also suppress sudden electrical discharge be￾tween electrically charged objects, on contact. Anti-static mats have a low electrical
resistance, between 105 and 109 Ω. The use of anti-static matting prevents the build￾274 Chapter 5 Smart compositesup of electrostatic charge in the body by dissipating this charge and thus prevents a
sudden discharge between electrically charged objects, on contact.
Highly conducting thermoplastic composites are made of engineering plastics with
very high loading of conducting metal particles. These composites are very special be￾cause of the high degree of filling by conducting metal powders, even up to 50 volume
%, still retaining the flexibility of a typical engineering plastic. A wide range of plastics,
such as Nylon 6, Nylon 66, polypropylene (PP), polyphenylene sulphide (PPS), acryloni￾trile-butadiene-styrene (ABS), etc., and thermoplastic elastomers can also be used to
make such a high-conducting composite. Conducting fillers can be metallic powders or
molten metals processed into the molten plastic by extrusion, followed by injection
moulding or thermoforming. Depending on the plastic, the composites can also be ma￾chined. The laminate form of the composites can be used in calendaring process as an
intermediate layer in a functionally graded laminate, where electrical and thermal con￾ductivities are graded layer-wise. The surface conductivity may be as high as 103 S/cm.
Depending on the plastic and the conducting filler loading, the conducting plastic com￾posites can be co-extruded as cable sheathing for EMI-EMC qualification.
The highly-filled conducting composites (except carbon fibre composites) are infe￾rior to common structural composites in terms of flexibility and weight penalty, and
also suffer from low fracture toughness. Graphite flakes offer very good composite con￾ductivity, but suffer from weak interface with most polymers. Recent developments on
single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNT), multi-wall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) and gra￾phene platelets have opened opportunities to solve these problems. Carbon nanotube is
a graphite sheet rolled into a cylindrical shape, either as single roll or multiple concen￾tric rolls, and has high electrical conductivity due to the large number of free electrons
on the surface due to the many Π bonds. The electrical conductivity of single-walled
CNTs (SWCNT) has been reported to be on the order of 102 to 106 S/cm and that of
multi-walled CNTs (MWCNT) as 103 to 105 S/cm [44]; CNT fibres have conductivities that
could vary in orders of magnitude, ranging from 10 to 67,000 S/cm [45].
Earp and others [46] reported enhancement of the electrical conductivity of CNT
using copper and observed that 10% addition to CNT sheets had a good dispersion and
enhanced the conductivity by four times, while 90% copper by weight (by chemical
vapour deposition method) enhanced the conductivity by 560 times compared to pris￾tine CNT. Graphene is made of either a single layer or few layers of graphite sheets,
and has electrical conductivity of about 1.22 × 105 S/cm for nine layers (3 nm thickness)
and 7.14 × 105 S/cm for single layer (0.33 nm thickness), while graphene nanosheets,
consisting of about 300 layers (100 nm thickness), have conductivity of about 7 × 103 S/cm,
as calculated by Fang et al. [47] and the values are in good agreement with literature
data. These nano carbons have other advantages such as high mechanical reinforcing ef￾fect on the polymer matrix due to their large surface area to efficiently increase the dis￾persive force as well as due to the functional groups present on their surface by chemical
modification or by a manufacturing process to increase the polar attraction.
5.3 Electrically conducting composites 275Hu et al. [48] used CFRP laminates with functionalized interleaf technology (FIT).
The electro-less copper-nickel-plated polyester veils were used as the interleaves in
high conducting interlayers. The in-plane and through-thickness conductivities im￾proved from 74 S/cm to about 1,080 S/cm and 1.5 × 10−3 S/cm to 5.3 S/cm, respectively.
In addition, the authors claimed significant improvement in fracture toughness as a
result of this interleaf arrangement in the laminate. Ma and co-workers [49] devel￾oped hybrid carbon fibre/carbon nanotube (2%)–epoxy composite for enhanced light￾ning strike protection and achieved a surface conductivity of about 234 S/cm.
Kim and co-workers [50] demonstrated 3D printing by a conductive composite of
polylactic acid (PLA) and graphene nanoplates (GNP). The PLA solution was mixed
with the exfoliated GNP suspension in an alcohol and extruded as filament, which
was utilised for 3D printing. The authors reported that the conductivity of a composite
with threshold concentration of 1.49% GNP (by volume) was about 1 mS/cm. Park
et al. [51] modelled the electrical resistivity of polymer composites with segregated
structures. The authors used silica particles in micron size and also nanoparticles in a
carbon nanotube-filled polymer composite and carried out numerical characteriza￾tions by Monte Carlo simulation for the prediction of percolation behaviour.
Microwave propagation characteristics of conducting composites are very special
due to the diverse requirements in the ever expanding commercial markets of elec￾tronic gadgets and also in defence. In common electronic gadgets and power systems,
EMI-EMC qualification is very important to avoid accidents and malfunctioning of
equipment. Microwave propagation through materials is very important for the devel￾opment of radar stealth technology of defence targets. Brief discussions are included
here on the type of composites used in these areas.
5.3.1 EMI shielding
Electromagnetic (EM) waves of wide frequency ranges are generated due to the cur￾rent flow (electron flow) through a conductor and electrical circuits, which may be in
multiple phases and intensities. These EM waves are conducted and radiated from
electrical gadgets, power circuits, high power cables, communication devices, etc. and
interfere with the other electronic or conducting objects. In addition, the interference
of EM wave adversely affects human health. Therefore, to protect the electronic items
from such EM waves, the item is covered with an EM shield, which could simply be a
reflecting surface. It is well known that metallic objects perfectly shield these waves
by almost total reflection. Some shields are also made to absorb the EM waves by di￾electric, magnetic or combined loss, but these are for selected frequency bands only
and are not frequency-independent.
Despite good shielding effect, there are few disadvantages such as high weight of
the shield, manufacturing difficulties, non-flexibility, etc. The development of electri￾cally conducting polymers and EM-absorbing dielectrically and magnetically lossy ma￾276 Chapter 5 Smart compositesterials like conducting polymers, CNT, graphene, carbon fibres, barium hexagonal fer￾rites, etc., it is possible to use polymer matrix composites for EMI shielding to obtain
an almost similar efficiency. The advantages are that these composites can be de￾signed with a lower weight penalty, can be easily manufactured, can have flexible
sheet form and can offer maximum shielding by EM wave absorption, so that the EM
waves are reflected back less to the environment. A wide choice of electrically con￾ducting and EM-absorbing materials as well as the type of polymer makes it a very
attractive subject for lightweight EMI shields.
For a metallic reflecting shield, the reflection takes place due to the interaction
with innumerable free electrons on the surface of the metal. For an absorbing shield,
the EM wave needs to enter the shield material and it can then be attenuated by di￾electric or magnetic or combined-loss mechanism. Therefore, the EM impedance of
the shield material should be as close as possible to the free-space EM impedance of
377 ohms. All polymers have complex dielectric properties (complex permittivity) in
EM frequency ranges and hence the dielectric loss occurs in a polymer upon interac￾tion with an incoming EM wave. The loss is inversely proportional to the frequency.
Some materials such as ferrites show complex permittivity as well as complex perme￾ability (magnetic property), both depending on the EM frequency.
The EMI shielding effect is primarily quantified by the loss in EM wave transmis￾sion through a medium, and is termed as Insertion Loss (IL) or Transmission Loss
(TL). The propagation of EM wave in a medium can have three types of consequences,
transmission through the medium, reflection from the surface of the medium and ab￾sorption in the medium. The transmittance, reflectance and absorbance in terms of
power are given by
T = ðVT=VIÞ2 (5:2)
R = ðVR=VIÞ2 (5:3)
A = 1 − T − R (5:4)
where V represents voltage and I, T, R and A represent incident, transmission, reflec￾tion and absorption.
EM shielding effectiveness is the transmission loss (the energy not transmitted
through the shield) due to the insertion of the shield. If the transmitted signal is VT and
the incident signal is V0, then the signal loss is V0–VT. Therefore, the SE in EM propaga￾tion is given by
SE = 20 log ½VT = ðV0 − VTÞ (5:5)
In a situation of measured reflection and transmission, the SE can have three compo￾nents, the reflection loss (SER), the absorption loss (SEA) and any loss due to multiple
reflections (SEM) between the back surface and the front. Hence, SE can be given by
5.3 Electrically conducting composites 277SE = SER + SEA + SEM (5:6)
As is obvious, while the transmitted and the reflected signals can be experimentally
measured, the absorption term (second in the right-hand of eq. (5.4)) can only be cal￾culated, and not measured. The equation is valid for a semi-infinite medium having a
large lateral dimension that is enough to neglect the diffracted/scattered waves (not
measurable), and an infinite thickness.
To calculate the shielding effectiveness (SE) by measuring the transmission and
reflection signals, we need to use the eqs. (5.2)–(5.4) and take the power ratio in terms
of decibels (dB) as follows [52]:
Transmitted power dB ð Þ = 10 logð Þ T (5:7)
Reflected power dB ð Þ = 10 logð Þ R (5:8)
SE = 10 log½ð  T= ð Þ 1 − R (5:9)
As example, a carbon fibre-epoxy CFRP is made as a flat panel of 1 m × 1 m × 6 mm
thickness for a radar-reflecting composite structure (RRCS). The panel was evaluated
for EM shielding efficiency in the frequency range of 2–20 GHz, covering the S-band,
the X-band, the Ku-band and partly the K-band. The frequency-dependent transmis￾sion loss is shown in Fig. 5.8.
The transmission loss presented in the figure is the EMI shielding efficiency, ex￾pressed as the ratio of the incident to the transmitted power in dB. Since the panel is
a reflecting type, the EM shielding is the same as the loss in transmission since the
absorbed power is negligible.
A second example is a panel made of a hexagonal barium ferrite and fine nickel
powder in a glass fibre-reinforced FRP backed by a thin CFRP layer (reflecting back￾ing) as a radar-absorbing composite structure (RACS) and was evaluated for radar
0
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
f, GHz
Transmission Loss, dB
10 15 20 25
Fig. 5.8: EMI shielding by a radar-reflecting CFRP panel in the wide-frequency band.
278 Chapter 5 Smart compositestransmission, reflection and absorption to account for shielding efficacy in the S-band
and X-band (2–12 GHz). In this example, all the transmitted and reflected voltage ra￾tios are arbitrarily selected, and do not represent actual data. Figure 5.9 shows the
transmittance and reflectance as voltage ratios for the composite in the L-band and
the X-band. Figure 5.10 shows the transmitted power and shielding effectiveness in
the L- and X-bands by the same composite, calculated using eqs. (5.7) and (5.9). The
negative sign indicates reduction in power (dB). The reflectance is also small and the
reflected power (not shown in Fig. 5.10) would have similar reduction, as can be easily
calculated using eq. (5.8).
In any conductor, the EM wave attenuates progressively as it travels in the medium,
and the thickness at which the wave intensity is reduced by a factor of 1/e (=0.368) is
called the “skin-depth” of that medium. Consequently, at the skin depth, the attenua￾0
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
3
Frequency, dB
Intensity ratio
6
Reflectance
Transmittance
9 12 15
Fig. 5.9: Transmittance and reflectance of an absorbing composite.
0
–20
–21
–19
–18
3 6
Frequency, GHz
Power (dB)
Shielding Effeciveness
Transmitted Power
9 12 15
Fig. 5.10: Transmission and shielding effectiveness of a composite-based EMI shielding material.
5.3 Electrically conducting composites 279tion of power will be −20 [log (0.368)] = 8.68 dB. Skin depth is an absorption compo￾nent and is given by [53]
δ = 1
ω
με
2
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
1 +
σ
εω
 2 r
− 1
" # ! −1 2=
(5:10)
where σ is the conductivity of the material, μ and ε are the permeability and permit￾tivity, respectively, and ω is the angular frequency (rad/s) of the EM wave. Using these
properties, it can be shown that metals have very low skin depth, for example for cop￾per, δ = 0.634 μm (microns) [53]. Therefore, a 300 μm thin copper sheet or leaf or even
a fine mesh is enough to provide good EMI shielding.
The skin depth varies with frequency as given in the equation and the loss prop￾erties also vary with frequency. Therefore, to predict the absorption of EM wave in a
composite EMI shield, the basic complex properties are to be investigated in terms of
dependence in the desired range of frequency to find out the minimum thickness re￾quired for the desired attenuation.
The permeability and the permittivity is complex for lossy materials such as fer￾rites, and conducting polymers and alike, and hence for polymer matrix composites.
These complex permeability and permittivity are represented by the real part and the
loss part, which contains the i-operators:
μ✶ = μ′ + iμ′′ (5:11)
ε✶ = ε′ + iε′′ (5:12)
where the μ′ and ε′ are the real part, while μ″ and ε″ are the imaginary part, accounting
for the energy loss. The ratio of the imaginary part to the real part is the characteristic
loss factor in the complex magnetic and dielectric constants. In purely dielectric materi￾als like polymers, magnetic loss is not applicable, therefore, the shielding effect with
only dielectric absorbers are not as effective as with ferrites, which provide both types
of loss in the EM field.
There are innumerable possibilities of using EMI shields with a wide range of elec￾tromagnetic shielding effectiveness (SE) at various frequency bands, from MHz to GHz
levels, as reported in various literatures [54, 55]. The flexible rubbery composites for EMI
shielding [56, 57] is very attractive because of ease of manufacturing, application by adhe￾sive bonding in difficult contours and maintenance/replacement, which are not so easy
for hard engineering plastics, thermoset composites and FRPs. As the industry of elec￾tronic gadgets is fast growing, flexible sheets for EMI shielding are more in demand. The
advantage of rubber is the large void volume to accommodate the high filler loading as
against graphite and other conducting fillers, which are in micron size. However, recent
developments on nano-metallic fillers, carbon nano particles and graphene nanosheets
resulted in more efficient conducting composites and EMI shields at very low loading in
polymers. In this respect, graphene nanosheets, which are basically few layers of reduced
280 Chapter 5 Smart compositesgraphene oxide (rGO), have proven to be the most promising conducting fillers for light￾weight, flexible composites. They require quite a small proportion of the rubber matrix
but the conductivity and the shielding effectiveness are very encouraging. Pure form of
graphene (without any oxide) shows very good results in this respect. For example, Lu
et al. made an EMI shield with flexible EPDM-graphene nanoplate composite using a cost
effective method of mixing, ultrasonication and compression, wherein 8% GNP by weight
was used and the EMI SE was 33–35 dB, covering a wide frequency range of 8–18 GHz.
The shield was a 0.3 mm thick sheet and the percolation threshold for electrical conduc￾tivity was seen to be near 7% GNP loading and relatively constant beyond that. The me￾chanical strength also enhanced by five times on the addition of 8% GNP.
Conducting polymers are also potential materials for the development of EMI
shields, but have to be augmented for the required conductivity and microwave re￾flectivity/absorption. Various conducting materials have been used with conducting
polymers, especially PANI and PPy, for example, rGO, MWCNT, Fe3O4, barium ferrite,
nanosilver, etc. [58]. The nanocomposites of conducting polymers with these particles are
mostly synthesized or mixed in situ so that different specific morphologies are obtained,
like the core-shell morphology with ferrite-SiO2-PPy nanocomposite [59], MWCNT/PANI/
graphene yields composite nanotubes by ball-milling [60] and epoxy/Fe3O4/PPy as river￾like morphology by chemical polymerization [61].
All the above EMI shield materials mostly showed good shielding effect at X
(8–12 GHz) and Ku bands (12–18 GHz) and very few are useful for low frequencies such
as L-band (1–2 GHz) and S band (2–4 GHz); the corresponding wavelength ranges are
15–30 cm and 8–15 cm, respectively. Even for a quarter-wavelength cancellation method
(destructive interference), the thickness of the panel required is quite high, minimum
2 cm (20 mm), which is considered as a very high thickness for a shield. In addition,
even for an electromagnetically active composite, it can be appreciated following the
eq. (5.10) on skin depth; the skin depth is inversely proportional to the frequency. How￾ever, among various developments, Sun et al. [62] have reported a PANI/CuS composite
synthesized by the in situ polymerization method, which resulted in a flower-like mor￾phology. The CuS particles were observed to be coated with PANI. The composite
showed excellent EMI shielding properties below −18 dB in the range of 300 kHz to
3 GHz and at a thickness of only 3 mm. The authors claimed to obtain an EMI shielding
of −45 dB at 2.78 GHz. This type of composites can be practically applied as a wide-band
shield, especially the high shielding effectiveness at the low thickness of only 3 mm for
such low frequency is remarkable.
In many cases of stationary objects, multilayer panels of conducting/absorbing /di￾electric sheets of polymeric composites are used where the multiple reflections within
the different layers due to large variation in electrical conductivity aids in high EM SE.
This is particularly important where a structural element has to be made to replace
the metallic structure, for example, an FRP structural unit with considerable thickness.
Typical example is the large radar installations. A typical layered FRP composite con￾sists of alternate CFRP and GRP, arranged in 3 or more layers, and a sketch of 4-layer
5.3 Electrically conducting composites 281shield is shown as Fig. 5.11, for which the estimated EM SE is about 17–24 dB in X-Band.
Microwave propagation through the layers is adjusted by the complex permeability
and permittivity of the basic constituent materials, layer thicknesses, type of chopped
carbon fibres, and their weight fraction in the vinyl ester resin.
In a similar principle, but different design, Liang et al. [63] developed an anisotropic
FRP shielding panel, fabricated as flat, corrugated and corrugated sandwich chopped
short carbon fibre (SCF) felt in epoxy resin. The shielding effectiveness changes signif￾icantly (38 dB to17 dB) with the polarization of the field as well as by the angle of the
corrugated felt. Corrugated sandwich SCF felt composite consisting of two flat and
one corrugated felt has excellent EMI SE (>70 dB) in X band, which results from multi￾ple reflection in corrugated core.
Maiti and others [64] developed a novel technique that involves in situ polymeriza￾tion of styrene/multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) in the presence of suspension
polymerized polystyrene (PS)/graphite nanoplate (GNP) microbeads. The composite
with only 1.5–2% MWCNT and GNP was capable of shielding effectivity of −20 dB in the
X-Band (8.2–12.4 GHz). The nano size of the MWCNT/GNP may provide a larger interfa￾cial area; therefore, the number of conductive interconnected network structures of
CNT-GNP increases. Also, the high aspect ratio (L/D) of CNTs and GNP helps to create
extensively continuous network structures that facilitate electron transport in the nano￾composites with very low fillers loading, maximum 2%. Investigation of the microwave
properties of composites for EMI shielding is very important as the same principle,
with the exception of reflection type shield, is used for radar stealth material develop￾ment. All the fundamental properties such as complex permeability, permittivity, skin
depth, etc. are the basis for the development of radar stealth materials.
CFRP GRP
Fig. 5.11: A typical multilayer EMI shielding made up of vinyl ester thermoset
composite.
282 Chapter 5 Smart composites5.3.2 Microwave-absorbing composites
Absorption of microwaves in the defence radar frequency bands is very important for
providing stealth feature for defence targets, stationary or moving. Radar pulses are
used to detect even a very small object, depending on the frequency of the radar wave.
Pulses are used to isolate the incident and the reflected signals (volts, in terms of elec￾tric field), else, with continuous waves as the incident and the reflected, there will be a
standing wave and will result in a complicated method of isolating the individual sig￾nal strengths. The radar reflections are captured either by monostatic or bi-static ra￾dars. Radar detection is thus always an active method, and this requires certain
measures to reduce the reflection by add-on absorbers, shaping the surface, scattering
of the wave by special design or by creating an envelope of a plasma to change the
frequency band of the incoming wave. Out of these, the shaping of the surface is the
most effective, but cannot be practically used in many situations. Add-on coatings are
the next best solution. During the period immediately after the World War II, a large
number of research articles were published on magnetic resonance of the different
materials such as magnetic oxides, spinel (soft) and hard ferrites, alloys of metals such
as iron, zinc, nickel, cobalt, strontium, manganese, etc. and the barium hexagonal fer￾rites with substitution of iron by these metals. Polymer-based composites came into
real application in the early 1980s when special characterisation of small particles,
cluster science, new polymer processing methods involving nano technology started
gaining interest. The replacement of heavier fillers, particularly iron and ferrites, were
effectively done by nano particles of carbon and single nanosheet of graphite, known
as graphene. The result of using such tiny particles were dramatic improvement in
electromagnetic, mechanical, thermal and fracture toughness properties, together with
substantial weight and cost reduction. The quantity requirement of such nano fillers
are so low that it is now possible to develop a small, stealth unmanned aircraft with
acceptable weight penalty and almost similar strength as unfilled FRP. However, the
stealth feature is specific to one or maximum two frequency bands, and cannot be for
a wide band of an entire radar range (2–40 GHz). The problem of lower frequency ab￾sorption is the high thickness requirement, which cannot be accommodated in the
case of criticality in dimension and mass.
Electromagnetic energy attenuates in a medium due to loss by both magnetic and
dielectric losses, and numerically determined from complex permeability and com￾plex permittivity. Moreover, the wave intensity reduces in the path of propagation in
a medium due to multiple reflection and scattering. The attenuation of a wave in a
medium while propagating inside it is defined by the attenuation constant (α), which
determines the dissipation properties of materials, and can be expressed by
α =
ffiffi
2
p πf
c
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
ð Þ μ′′ε′′ − μ′ε′ +
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
ð Þ μ′′ε′′ − μ′ε′ 2
+ ð Þ ε′μ′′ − ε′′μ′ 2
r q
(5:13)
5.3 Electrically conducting composites 283The dielectric and magnetic complex properties are frequency-dependent terms. The
MW energy loss is the highest at the corresponding resonance frequency. The magnetic
resonance frequency of a material depends on the saturation magnetization (numerical
value). By suitable tailoring of the magnetic molecule, for example by substitution of
iron with some transition metals in a barium hexagonal ferrite, and also by changing
the particle size, the resonance frequency can be tailored to the selected electromag￾netic wave frequency. Consequently, the material would show maximum magnetic loss
in that region of frequency. In a dielectric medium, the dipole relaxation causes the
loss, and here too, the complex dielectric permittivity depends on the applied electric
filed. The dielectric loss attains a maximum when the relaxation time coincides with
the time period of the applied EM field. Therefore, a dielectric or magnetic material
would show lossy property during the propagation of an electromagnetic wave through
the material. The free-space impedance is 377 ohms, and the material must have similar
impedance for the wave to propagate through the medium. Higher the difference, more
will be the reflection and lesser will be transmission. This is the reason why metals and
highly conducting composites provide EMI shielding only by reflection, as their imped￾ance is much lower than that of the space.
The detectability of a target is measured in terms of the radar cross section (RSC).
The RCS is a property of the target’s size, shape and the material, and is a ratio of the
incident and the reflected power. The equation for the reflection power ratio (with
incident power) at the receiver (which is also the MW transmitter) is given by [65]
PR
PT
= GTGRλ2
σ
ð Þ 4π 3
R2
RR2
TL
(5:14)
where PR is the received power in watts, PT is the peak transmit power in watts, GT is
the transmitter gain in decibels, GR is the receiver gain in decibels, λ is the radar￾operating frequency wavelength in meters, σ is target’s non-fluctuating radar cross
section in square meters, L is the general loss factor in decibels that accounts for both
system and propagation loss, RT is the range from the transmitter to the target and RR
is the range from the receiver to the target; if the radar is monostatic, the transmitter
and receiver ranges are identical.
when RT = RR, then PR
PT
= C σ
R
 4
(5:15)
The radar cross section (σ) of a flat panel with perfect reflection in perpendicular inci￾dence is given by
σ = 4Π A2=λ2 (5:16)
where λ is the wavelength of the MW and A is the area of the panel. For 1 m2 panel
area, the RCS of a reflector is 139.62 m2 at 10 GHz.
284 Chapter 5 Smart compositesA plot of the fractional range vs the reflection power loss in dB is shown as
Fig. 5.12. The plot is useful to predict the possible range reduction of the radar￾absorbing composites from a lab evaluation of reflection data.
From the figure, it can be seen that the detection range is reduced to 56% of the original
range when the reflection loss is 10 dB. A simple calculation reveals that a 10 dB return
loss corresponds to a 70% reduction in the reflection coefficient (intensity ratio) and a
reduction of power by 90%. Intensity and power are taken in volt and watt, respec￾tively. Therefore, the absorber reduces the detection range of the detection radar ac￾cording to the reflected intensity.
In the case of polymeric and carbon-loaded dielectric lossy composites, the thick￾ness of the composite can be determined by the following equation:
tcomp = λ0
4 ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
ε′
filler p (5:17)
The composite RAS should be backed by a perfect reflector (metal or CFRP) having a
thickness more than its skin depth. For example, the skin depth of aluminium is 0.85
microns and the backing sheet made out of aluminium should be several multiples of
the skin depth, say 100 microns.
The reflection and transmission parameters are determined by the S-parameters
calculated from the voltage signals of the vector network analyser (VNA) in MW
frequencies: Power loss (dB)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Fig. 5.12: Fractional detection range and the corresponding reflection power loss (dB) of the radar￾absorber type target (refer eq. (5.14)).
5.3 Electrically conducting composites 285Sij = V −
i
V +
j



V +
k =0 for k≠j
(5:18)
Here, j is the input port of the wave and i is the port of the return wave. Therefore,
there are four S-parameters, which are fractions (dimensionless) calculated from the
VNA signals of port 1 and port 2 as S11, S12, S21 and S22 so that:
S11: Reflection loss (fraction) out of port 1
S12: Insertion loss (transmission loss) from port 2 to port 1
S21 Insertion loss from port 1 to port 2; for uniform transmission line in VNA, S21 = S12
S22 = S11 for uniform transmission line in VNA
Consequently, the reflection loss as a power ratio, expressed in dB (numerical value),
is calculated as
RL = 20 logð Þ S11 dB (5:19)
The absorbance is calculated as
Aα = 1 − 10RL=10   × 100% (5:20)
To design an efficient radar-absorbing composite, both the magnetic and dielectric
losses should be provided by a magnetic and a dielectric material. A very common ex￾ample of magnetic lossy material is barium hexagonal ferrite and its many substituted
versions, where strontium, cobalt, nickel, etc. can be used to tailor the saturation mag￾netization value in such a way as to result in a magnetic resonance in the desired range
of radar frequency. The dielectric loss is offered by carbon particles, nano carbons,
graphite, graphene, conducting metal powders, conducting polymers (PANI, PPy), etc.
The process of making the composite RASH sheet is usual rubber processing as
shown in Fig. 5.13 by a block diagram. The mastication of rubber and mixing of the
ingredients are done either by two-roll mill or an internal mixer, in a controlled tem￾perature of maximum70 °C, followed by sheeting out as a thin compounded sheet and
vulcanization in a mould using high pressure and about 150 –170 °C temperature.
RASH
Sheets
stacked
Hot Press
Sheeting
out
Mastication &
Compounding
Internal
Mixer
or
2-Roll Mill
Fig. 5.13: Flexible RASH preparation using the rubber processing method.
286 Chapter 5 Smart compositesThe flow diagram for the fabrication of RACS is shown as Fig. 5.14 (a). The liquid
resin (oligomer such as epoxy resin, unsaturated polyester, vinyl ester, polyol of poly￾urethane, etc.) are mixed with the microwave active particle fillers in a high-speed
mixer as a pre-mix, followed by high shearing in a triple-roll mill, with a very narrow
gap between the feeding roll and the adjacent roll; the mixing is continued till a ho￾mogeneous mass is obtained with the desired fineness (mark 7 in Hegman Gauge).
For nano particles, the concentrations are very low, but the particles form agglomer￾ates, which are difficult to break. Ultrasonication is one way, but requires a solvent
because the resins are quite viscous. In a different method, the solvent-suspended nano
particles are sprayed on the pre-forms (reinforcing fibre) as shown in Fig. 5.14 (b)
and subsequently dried, followed by vacuum-assisted liquid resin infusion and high￾pressure autoclave moulding.
Metal Sieve
Fiber preform Spray
Autoclave
RACS
Triple Roll
Mill
High Speed Mixer
Resin Fillers
Hand lay up
Vacuum
(b)
(a)
Vacuum
Platform
Fig. 5.14: Flow diagram of the fabrication of RACS: (a) pre-mixing method and (b) spray of nanoparticle
suspension on fibre pre-forms.
5.3 Electrically conducting composites 287Triple-roll milling is the next alternative, especially for large operations, since re￾moval of the solvent is expensive and never perfect.
The processes described here can be scaled up from the lab process to a typical
medium-to-large-scale process, where the manufacturing in bulk has to be efficient,
without significant material loss and should also be cost effective with the desired ho￾mogeneity, optimum structural strength and functional properties. In the case of
nano particles, the pre-mixing is done in a special machine, employing ultrasonic vi￾bration with high-speed stirring. The operation has to be in a closed vessel with a
closed batch feed and has to be isolated from the subsequent line of equipment. Pro￾tective gears for personnel are also recommended for handling nano fillers.
A typical barium hexaferrite powder of 2–8 μm size with a ferromagnetic resonance
in the radar-frequency rang was used along with a very fine metal powder (1–5 μm size)
to make radar-absorbing FRP structures and flexible sheets for different frequency
bands, only to demonstrate that the same lossy material can be used for various bands
by changing the thickness. Lower frequencies require higher thicknesses as also seen
from eq. (5.10) of skin depth. The RASH sheets are of homogeneous composition without
reflecting backing since these are applied on steel and aluminium structures. The FRP
RACS composites are made of a layered structure of the composite with a special se￾quence of magnetic and dielectric layers. The composites are structural elements and
are therefore backed by a CFRP layer of 1 mm, which is a perfect MW reflector. The
thickness of the RASH for a minimum 10 dB return loss was determined from series of
experiments, and it was observed that 6.5 mm thickness was required for 2–4 GHz,
while 1.5 mm thickness was required for 12–18 GHz. For the RACS composite, for 2–4
GHz, the thickness required was 7 mm, for 8–12 GHz, 3 mm and for 12–18 GHz, 2.4 mm.
The thicknesses do not suggest destructive interference due to quarter-wavelength (μ/4)
since the quarter-wavelength at say, 4 GHz is 18.75 mm, which is quite different. The
velocity of the MW reduces as a result of the loss components of the magnetic and di￾electric complex parameters and hence, the wavelength inside the lossy composite re￾duces, since the frequency remains unaltered.
The radar wave attenuation due to the absorption of microwaves by lossy materi￾als is highly frequency dependent, with narrow bandwidth. In order to design a wide￾band absorber, graded layers of dielectric and lossy materials are used, but with
higher thickness if the frequency band has to extend to lower frequencies (<4 GHz).
The various parameters that are required to be optimized for the development of
broad-band absorber are the number of layers, the thickness of each layer and the
loading of active material in each layer. The conducting backing of such flexible
radar-absorbing sheet is not required since these are to be used as add-on absorbers
on metallic structures. However, such RASHs because of their high density are most
suitable for ground installation or ship superstructure but not suitable for most parts
of an aircraft.
Atay [66] developed a microwave-absorbing composite with polyurethane resin
filled with different contents of barium hexaferrite (BaFe12O19) and copper powder to
288 Chapter 5 Smart compositesobserve the effect of filler on microwave properties. The ferrite was made by the
sol–gel method. The particle sizes of both the fillers were few microns. The absorber
sheet was 3 mm thick. The MW absorbance was determined in X-band (8–12 GHz)
using a vector network analyser. The author reported % absorbance varying from 11%
to about 17%, depending on the filler composition and the loading in the PU matrix.
Zhang et al. [67] designed a hybrid system of a frequency-selective surface
(FSS) made of aluminium square sheets and hole perforation embedding in mag￾netic absorbing sheets to obtain a broad-band magnetic radar-absorbing polymer
composite. The magnetic particles are Fe Co alloy filled in the polymer matrix. The
magnetic composite layer was about 2.4 mm thick. The authors evaluated the mi￾crowave properties and the reflection loss in relation to the size of the hole, the
position of the FSS layer and the width of the FSS. The result showed that all these
parameters substantially change the reflection coefficient (in dB) in the frequency
range of 2–18 GHz and an optimized design could offer a reflection loss of 10 dB or
more in a wide range in this frequency scale.
Kim and Kim [68] designed a two-layer absorber composite using carbon fibre in
epoxy resin for the CFRP and carbon black-filled silicone rubber as RASH. The carbon
black-filled silicone rubber sheet was the front absorber layer, backed by the conduct￾ing reflector layer of CFRP composite. The complex permeability and permittivity of
the layers were determined using a vector network analyser in the 4–12 GHz range.
The authors observed that the performance of the absorber layer was influenced by
the backing conducting layer. With increase in carbon black loading, the loss part of
the permittivity of the rubber absorber increased, as expected. The MW reflection
loss was distinctly varied with the thickness of the rubber-absorbing layer and as
usual, the peak loss shifts to higher frequency for lower thicknesses. Considering all
variables, a 2 mm thick absorber layer was almost the optimum one, with > 5 dB atten￾uation in the entire frequency range studied.
FRP composites with hard ferrites and metal powders have a distinct structural
disadvantage of reduced fracture toughness and impact energy due to heavy loading
of the filler to provide desired MW absorption. Table 5.1 shows typical flexural and
impact properties of an unfilled FRP and a RACS using epoxy with E-glass or Kevlar
and carbon fibre reinforcements, which were made as a multilayer panel with alter￾nate layers of a dielectric and magnetic compositions. A 300-micron CFRP layer was
used only as conducting backing. The flexural modulus increased since the hard par￾ticles impart rigidness, while the impact energy reduced by almost 40%. Kevlar fibre￾based FRPs showed about 1.6 times higher impact strength compared to glass fibre
FRP, and Kartal and Demirer [69] reported the same to be 1.75 times.
The effect of lower impact strength due to high loading of hard fillers is to reduce
the damage tolerance in case of impact or shock, which is considered a very impor￾tant aspect of transportation, airborne and military objects. The externally impacted
force can change the MW absorption properties of an RACS.
5.3 Electrically conducting composites 289Go et al. [70] had studied the damage tolerance of an RACS made of epoxy glass FRP
with periodic pattern surface (PPS) using the low velocity impact test instrument and
correlated the extent of damage with change in MW absorption. The PPS is electronically
printed pattern on a polyimide film. The material of printing had specific inductance
and capacitance to ultimately provide MW absorption depending on the thickness and
complex permittivity of the spacer material. The reduction in MW reflection loss was
approximately 18% on an impact of 45 J and the dent created on the RACS was about
0.15 mm.
Lighter absorbers are made with composites of conducting polymers with rub￾bers for flexible RASH or other thermosets with fibre reinforcements as RACS. MW
performance of a flexible composite of polyurethane-PANI doped with phosphoric
acid was determined at various loading. The best was a 2-mm-thick sheet with 65%
(by weight) loading of the doped PANI as a pigment in PU. Figure 5.15 shows the reflec￾tion loss in X-band when the PU composite is backed by a 3-mm-thick mild steel panel.
Peymanfar and co-workers [71] developed a lightweight polyurethane foam-doped
PANI composite for radar absorption in X- and Ku-Band. The authors prepared nano￾Tab. 5.1: Mechanical properties of an FRP and its absorber version.
Composite Thickness,
mm
Density,
kg/m
Flexural
strength,
MPa
Flexural
modulus,
GPa
Izod impact
energy, J/m
GFRP front with CFRP backing  ,–, – – ,–,
RACS with GFRPCFRP backing . ,–, – – –
RACS with Kevlar and CFRP backing . ,–, – .– ,–, Ref lection loss, dB
8 9 10 11 12
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
Fig. 5.15: MW reflection loss of a PU-conducing polymer composite flexible sheet.
290 Chapter 5 Smart compositesstructured doped PANI by sonochemical method. The PANI nanoparticles were mixed
with the polyol and the PUF was made. The authors claimed as high as 85 dB attenua￾tion at 10.2 GHz for a 4 mm-thick foam absorber and 56 dB at 13.8 GHz for a 2.8-mm
thickness. Overall, the absorber showed >10 dB at 8–18 GHz for 3–5 mm thickness. The
high attenuation by this absorber was attributed to the method of synthesizing the
PUF-PANI nanocomposite.
Oyharcabal et al. [72] studied the effect of morphology of PANI on microwave absorp￾tion efficiency of epoxy-PANI composites. Three types of PANI were synthesized: globular
(300-nm diameter), nanofibers and flakes type, having diameter/thickness in 150–300
nanometres and length of a few microns. The epoxy composite was prepared using an
anhydride hardener for epoxy curing. Electrical conductivity was maximum (few S/cm)
for the globular-shaped PANI. However, the percolation threshold was lowest for PANI
flakes, slightly higher for the nanofibres, but the globular PANI showed a threshold at
double the vol% compared to the nanofibres. Maximum reflection loss was shown by the
epoxy-PANI flakes (by weight) at 8.8 GHz as 37 dB, whereas, the peak values for globular
and fibre-based composites with identical loading of PANI were much lower, 7 and 8 dB,
respectively, at the same MW frequency. The thickness requirement was also lowest for
the flake-type PANI (<3 mm compared to about 3.2–3.3 mm for the other two types.
Jang et al. [73] evaluated a semi-cylindrical shaped epoxy-glass fibre FRP ab￾sorber, where a conducting polymer was used as an absorbing material. In order to
avoid difficulties in handling and processing nanoparticles in RAS, the authors used
circuit analogue (CA) sheet using conducting polymer materials to develop an easier
method of applicability and also to establish absorbing efficiency in X-band at a thick￾ness of about 3 mm total. The MW absorption was measured in terms of radar cross
section in dBsm in comparison to a 500-micron-thick reflecting panel of carbon fibre￾epoxy composite. It was shown that the radar cross section reduced significantly due
to the special design of the CA in the FRP composite by a thin sheet of the conducting
polymer (conductivity: 1,300 S/m). The corresponding reflection loss was minimum
65% (9 dB) and maximum 98.8% (20 dB).
Thinner absorbers made of polymer-based nanocomposites as flexible radar￾absorbing sheets (RASHs) and radar-absorbing composite structures (RACSs) with
nanofillers in the matrix are being studied extensively. The nanoparticles of different
types of conducting carbons are multiwall and single wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNT
and MWCNT), nanofibres and nanorods of carbon, exfoliated graphite, and reduced
graphene oxide (rGO), which is as good as pristine graphene nanosheet. Apart from
these, nanoparticles of some highly conducting metals like nanosilver are also useful
since these are required in small quantities. A hybrid dielectric lossy material could
be made with a conducting polymer synthesized in presence of a nanosilver or carbon
nanotube. The other advantage of the nanoparticles is retention of mechanical prop￾erty to almost unfilled material, and in case of reinforcing nanoparticles, the mechan￾ical strength and gas barrier properties are also substantially enhanced without
significant weight penalty. In printing of the conducting / dielectric lossy layer in cir￾5.3 Electrically conducting composites 291cuit analogue and FSS technology, these nanoparticles are very appropriate as filled
polymer ink, and can be tailored to very high MW absorption. There are, however,
some disadvantages such as health hazard on handling in large quantity, difficulty in
accuracy of measuring the quantity, loss of materials, particularly carbon-based nano
particles and relatively high cost compared to micron size particles. Shivaraman and
co-workers used exfoliated MWCNT and polymerized aniline [74] in its presence to
obtain an MWCNT-PANI conducting nanocomposite material, and similarly, polymer￾ised 3-methyl thiophene on MWCNT [75].
Hu et al. [76] prepared a simple hot pressed polycaprolactam (Nylon 6) with carbon
black and glass fibre. The microwave absorption and mechanical properties of the com￾posites were investigated. 8 wt% CB/GF/PA6 composite had a minimum reflection loss
(RL) of 40.05 dB and the bandwidth of RL about 10 dB is 4.6 GHz. The microstructure of
the composites was tailored by disc granulation method to obtain reticular microstruc￾ture composed of different particle sizes to improve the microwave absorption and me￾chanical properties of the composites. RL of 7 wt% granulated CB/GF/PA6 composite
was increased to about −56 dB.
Choi et al. [77] studied E-glass/epoxy nanocomposites dispersed with carbona￾ceous conductive nanoparticles such as 3% carbon black (CB) and 0.3%, 2.5% and 3%
carbon nanotubes (CNT) to develop an optimum absorbing composition. The authors
measured the dielectric properties in the X-band(8.2 to 12.4 GHz) and the optimum
design method was applied to select the nanocomposite candidates with high EM
wave absorption, taking maxima at the centre frequency (10 GHz) of the X-band. The
process of manufacturing the FRP RAS was by high-speed mixing, followed by triple
roll mill operation to form thick paste-like consistency and subsequently vacuum bag￾ging and compression moulding in an autoclave under a predetermined temperature
programme for curing cycle. The absorbance in X-band was above 90% for all compo￾sitions, with maximum of 98% at the centre frequency (about 10 GHz).
Graphene nanosheets are potential microwave lossy material used in polymer ma￾trix. The introduction of graphene in MW absorber laminate design is relatively new,
and the research accelerated only after 2010. FRP-based RACS with graphene-loaded res￾ins are the addition in radar stealth technology. The advantages of structure of graphene
and residual groups present in rGO facilitate MW absorption capability of graphene bet￾ter than carbon nanotubes. The residual groups in reduced graphene nanoplatelets en￾hance the polymer-filler interface and relaxational energy loss more than other forms of
carbon nanoparticles. Moreover, plate-type morphology of graphene imparts some more
advantages such as better dissipation of heat, mechanical strength and better thermal
stability. Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanocomposites of PEO [78] and PVA [79]
showed very high MW due to the better interface, and hence better distribution, which
led to high complex permittivity and consequently high MW absorption due to high di￾electric loss. MW absorption of graphene/polymer composites is due to the combined ef￾fects of conductive loss, polarization, interfacial scattering and multiple scattering.
292 Chapter 5 Smart compositesMeng et al. [80] reviewed the MW-absorbing composites with graphene nano￾plates. The authors discussed the mechanism of electrical and dielectric properties of
graphene nanocomposites in relation to the molecular structure, presence of residual
groups such as oxygen in rGO, energy levels and morphology. It has been shown that
a 2.1 mm-thick composite containing only 7 wt% ultrathin graphene nanosheets can
show 35 dB reflection loss at 12 GHz frequency, and for the entire X-band, the composite
showed >7 dB reflection loss, measured at 140 °C. Moreover, the graphene composite
showed quite high reflection loss (>24 dB) for a wide temperature range of 50–200 °C,
having maximum loss at 140 °C. The authors discussed various combinations of gra￾phene with conducting polymer (PANI), magnetic iron oxides, graphene-Ni nanocom￾posites, and combinations with alloys FeCo and NiCo, which have large saturation
magnetization, high conductivity and high Curie temperature reported by various re￾searchers, which all show high MW absorption properties as polymer-based compo￾sites/nanocomposites.
Pisu et al. developed broadband radar-absorbing polymeric composite laminate for
aircraft application using graphene nanoplates, as described in a WIPO patent [81]. The
inventors described the method of manufacturing the multilayer laminate composite
using graphene-containing conducting layers alternately with non-conducting layers.
The laminates are prepared by infusion of liquid resin (resin transfer moulding) tech￾nique containing graphene in a mould of vacuum bag system, where fibre preforms
(plies) are kept stacked. Due to the pressure difference, the resin with graphene is
forced through the plies and excess resin is removed. Alternately, the resin is injected
by pressure. Finally, the laminate is formed by heat and pressure. The layered laminate
basically is a backing of reflecting composite (CFRP) followed by a middle absorber
layer containing graphene-loaded GFRP and front face of a non-conducting layer of a
simple GFRP. The MW absorption in 6–17 GHz was >5 dB, with two distinct peak losses
near 9.1 GHz (33 dB) and 13 GHz (34 dB), which is to some extent broad band absorber.
The challenges in development of MW-absorbing composite are extension of
band width, reduction of thickness as well as weight penalty. In airborne structures,
due to the restriction of weight, many high-absorbing magnetic particles cannot be
used, because of reasons such as high density and high loading required in the poly￾mer matrix for satisfactory RCS reduction; and consequent to high loading, these com￾posites show lower toughness and mechanical properties compared to the pristine
FRPs. A worse complication is that composite aircrafts are better made by carbon
fibre-epoxy composites (CFRP) because of lighter weight and very high strength com￾pared to glass-epoxy, but in case of RACS, carbon fibre can only be used as the back￾ing, and not in the absorbing layers. This increases weight and decreases strength.
The pay load management is better done by carbon nanoparticles like graphene
or CNT, since the density of any form of carbon is not more than 2.3 g/cc, almost one￾third of iron, and small quantities are sufficient for desired RCS reduction, and due to
much less loading, the mechanical property of the composite is not compromised,
rather these fillers act as reinforcement for the resin even at very low concentrations.
5.3 Electrically conducting composites 293The absorbing layers and the non-conducting front layer have to be with glass or
glass/Kevlar hybrid fibre. A multilayer laminate having a thick CFRP backing with op￾timum thicknesses of absorbing and front dielectric layers, which are much less than
the backing thickness, can be designed to achieve as close strength as possible com￾pared to a pristine CFRP laminate. Another consideration is that radar frequencies
are from 1–40 GHz for all military applications. High absorption in this wide band of
frequency is difficult to realise, since apart from complex permittivity and permeabil￾ity, the MW loss also depends on internal scattering and multiple reflections as well
as phase cancellation and these are not basic properties of the composite. The losses
due to scattering, multiple reflection and phase cancellation are dependent on the re￾lation between MW wavelength and thickness of the absorbing-dielectric part of the
composite. For a stealth aircraft, the design of the different portions can be done with
variation of such composite layers. However, in ground objects and ships, the RACS
structural requirements are easily met with even ferrites and combination of conduct￾ing composites, nanocarbons and ferrites. The superstructure of a ship with such RACS
can have a thickness of even 20 mm for a wide band absorbing capability (2–40 GHz).
Several layers of alternate lossy and non-conducting (pristine FRP) with graded conduc￾tivity of the lossy layers can be designed with a CFRP backing in such applications.
There is very limited scope for radar absorbing flexible sheet in aircraft applica￾tion, but it has very good potential for ships and ground installations. The best advan￾tages of such sheets are wide choice of dielectric and magnetic lossy fillers, easy
application and installation when needed, using a pressure-sensitive adhesive on an
MW-reflecting surface. The sheets can be applied on any contours. The weight penalty
for ships and ground objects are not so critical and moving targets may not experi￾ence significant increase in energy requirement (fuel consumption, for example) due
to add-on absorber sheets. For a ground object or ship, the design of multilayer ab￾sorber with wide band width covering 2–40 GHz, is more viable, even with hybrid
MW active materials such as combination of graphene and ferrites, conducting poly￾mer- ferrite, CNT-ferrite and many possible combinations. An additional advantage of
the flexible sheets is reduction of structural vibration for moving objects. The reduc￾tion of vibration intensity is of higher importance for ship superstructures as im￾provement of acoustic stealth measure, since the vibrations are transmitted to the
water through the hull and can be detected by passive acoustic sensors, especially un￾derwater mines.
5.4 Application of smart composites
Smart composites based on polymer as matrix are being used in many areas in civil
sectors such as construction industries, electronics, medical field, packaging, transpor￾tation and in defence sectors. The smart composites are meant to enhance safety and
294 Chapter 5 Smart compositesreliability. The smart response of the composites can be categorized into two func￾tions, viz. (i) sensing a change in the environment in which it is deployed and (ii) spe￾cific and quantitative response to manage/mitigate the change caused by an external
stimulation.
An example of the first kind is an electrically conducting composite that can detect
humidity or presence of a gas in the atmosphere. The usefulness of a smart composite
sensor depends on several characteristics such as limits of sensing, for example, lower
and upper limit of humidity, secondly, accuracy in sensing and thirdly, repeatability in
use. All these factors add to ensure quality of an environment. A smart sensor not only
detects a parameter but should also accurately and repeatedly sense the change in the
parameter. A minute change in gas concentration is sometimes very critical, for exam￾ple, a toxic gas contamination in a chemical plant, or in the case of chemical warfare.
Likewise, in maintaining a dehumidified room, smart humidity sensors are required to
perform with accuracy. A smart composite is needed to be designed for very minute
changes in such critical applications.
A similar serious situation can be structural health monitoring by smart compos￾ite sensors. A very minute crack should be reflected in the vibration signature to
avoid a catastrophic failure of the structure, for example a wing of an aircraft. Repeat￾ability is another important, though not essential requirement. The sensors can be re￾peatedly used, where the physical properties are changed, so that the change is
reversible. Secondly, the repeated sensing has to be at the same quantitative value
with same accuracy after every cycle of sensing and recovery. In many smart sensing
scenarios where absorption/adsorption is involved, the sensor response changes for
the first few cycles because forward and reverse isotherms are not the same, and the
residual concentration after a few cycles attains an equilibrium point, after which the
sensing might be reliably repeatable. However, in some cases, the sensing is by an
irreversible chemical reaction and hence, the repeatability is not applicable, for ex￾ample, a corrosion-sensing composite coating on steel surface. The change in colour
in the smart coating is an irreversible chemical reaction due to corrosion of the steel
is and hence the coating cannot be used again for sensing the corrosion.
The second category of smart composites used for mitigating a change due to ex￾ternal stimulation should be either passive or active in response to the stimulation. In
both cases, the mitigation of the change is without human intervention and fully auto￾matic. In passive response, the composite has its own internal mechanism for mitiga￾tion, for example, a passive vibration damping, where the composite can damp a
vibration with internal viscoelastic loss as well as by frictional damping by aniso￾tropic filler loaded in it. In an active mitigation, a quantitative response is provided
by a sensing-actuating system. For example, in an active-passive CLD damping, the
vibration amplitude and phase are sensed to activate an equal but reverse signal
using a piezoelectric or magnetic cum viscoelastic composite damping arrangement.
In the case of such smart composites, the sensing and actuating both are required to
be accurate and repeatable. The smart damping is perfectly repeatable as there is no
5.4 Application of smart composites 295physical or chemical change in the composite is involved, even in the case of magnetic
CLD. EMI shielding and MW absorbers act due to their intrinsic MW properties and
configuration, similar to what is adopted or mechanical vibration damping by CLD.
However, in case of some smart composites in this category, the process of mitigation
may be due to chemical reaction, which could be irreversible. For example, in the
case of a self-healing composite, which works on release of resin and hardener from
capsules, the healing is due to irreversible curing reaction of these two reactants.
Therefore, the next crack appearance on that location cannot be healed. However, re￾peatable self-healing composites are possible, if the reaction is reversible like revers￾ible covalent bond formation and bond exchange-type self-healing composites. Other
types of physical changes to mitigate an external stress are phase change composites,
which are used to control temperature by absorbing large heat of melting/phase
change at a set temperature, thermochromic composite coating and textile, which
changes colour due to change in temperature and likewise, electrochromic composite
coating, which changes colour due to change in electric field.
Some special applications of smart composites described so far are discussed below.
5.4.1 Biomedical application
The field of biomedical science is the fastest growing field for novel technological inno￾vation and commercial deployment. There are a number of smart technologies required
for surgical treatment, organ replacement, repair and implants in human body. The
most important requirement for a smart composite to be used in the medical field is
biocompatibility and secondly, degradation in human body and useful life as replaced/
repaired or implanted composite. As a common example, self-healing implants are used
in bone repair and tissue engineering, where a self-healing composite is fixed in a
human body. The matrix polymer, all additives including healing components and prod￾uct after healing reaction should be compatible with the human body. A typical example
is the development of self-healing polyurethane elastomer for multiple biomedical appli￾cations by Jiang et al. [82]. The authors developed a series of biodegradable and biocom￾patible self-healing polyurethane elastomers (SHEs) with tunable mechanical properties
and applied them to various disease models in vivo and tested their reparative potential
in multiple tissues and at physiological conditions. They also validated the effectiveness
of SHEs as promising therapies for aortic aneurysm, nerve coaptation and bone immobi￾lization in animal models. In a survey, it was observed that globally, the market share of
biomedical applications of self-healing materials is the highest among all areas of appli￾cation, followed by construction industry [83].
One common self-healing material is dental composite [84–86]. In dental compo￾sites, the fracture toughness and fatigue crack growth resistance are very important
for durability and self-healing efficiency. Huyang et al. [84] addressed the problem of
crack development in artificial dental parts using conventional resin, by developing a
296 Chapter 5 Smart compositesself-healing dental composite (SHDC), which uses a healing powder (HP, strontium flu￾oroaluminosilicate particles) and a healing liquid (HL, aqueous polyacrylic acid) en￾closed in silica microcapsules. On release due to a crack, the HP reacts with HL to
form an insoluble solid product as the healing material filling the cracks. This devel￾oped dental composite can provide a longer service life compared to conventional
resin based dental restoration. Yahyazadehfar et al. [85] studied similar healing cap￾sules in a dental composite (the matrix resin being a mixture of two methacrylate
monomers) for their performance in fracture toughness and fatigue crack growth re￾sistance under monotonic and dynamic loading using single V notch specimen and
compact tension samples. The authors used 1–5N for cyclic load, depending on compo￾sitions, with the stress ratio R = Pmin/Pmax = 0.5 for the initiation of the crack, and
thereafter, a dynamic load (1–5N) was applied at 5 Hz frequency using R = 0.1. The cy￾clic loading was conducted in increments of 20,000 cycles. One particular result
showed that the critical stress intensity factor (Kic) for crack initiation and after heal￾ing were 0.91 and 0.22 for a typical healing composite with 5 wt% of microcapsules in
the composite, and the healing efficiency was average 24%. Ning and co-workers [86]
used a poly(urea-formaldehyde) microcapsule and a healing liquid as a mixture of
triethyleneglycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA) and N,N-dimethyl-p-toluidine (DMPT).
The composite resin was a commercially available flowable monomer, polymerized
using varying initiator concentrations to observe the effect of initiator and the size of
microcapsules on fracture toughness (Kic) and healing efficiency. It was observed that
higher concentration of the initiator and larger microcapsules had higher fracture
toughness after healing. However, the healing period was 72 h at room temperature.
Electrically conducting polymer bio-nanocomposites (CBNCs) are being used in tis￾sue engineering, organ transplant and drug delivery. Conducting polymers such as pol￾yaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (Ppy) and polythiophene (PTH) are synthesized as nano￾sized particles and this results in a very high conductivity, which cannot be achieved
by micron size particles of these polymers. These conducting polymers are not biode￾gradable and have some toxic effects too. These difficulties are solved by adding small
quantities (up to 5%) of the nanoparticles of these polymers in some biodegradable
and biocompatible polymers such as polycaprolactone, polylactide, polylactic acid,
poly (lactide-co-glycolide), chitosan, gelatin, collagen, poly(lactide co-polycaprolactone),
etc. Flexible polymeric bio-nanocomposites such as polyurethane-Ppy composite and
poly (glycerol sebcate)/PANI composite can be used for regeneration of skin, soft skele￾tal muscle and blood vessels [43].
5.4.2 Industrial application
Self-healing composites are being used as immediate repairable structure, which pre￾vents catastrophic failure resulting from propagation of a crack due to high stress, for
example, in interlaminar shear. The large structures remain unattended and such auto￾5.4 Application of smart composites 297matic repair of a minute crack is essential. Self-healing concrete structure may contain
a large variety of healing microcapsules and healing agents in a polymeric resin. One
important feature of the healing is that the presence of water during healing is manda￾tory. Typical examples are urea-formaldehyde resin capsule containing epoxy resin and
a diamine as healing agents, silica microcapsule containing methyl methacrylate as
healing agent, poly (styrene-divinyl benzene) microcapsules with epoxy resin as healing
agent, and many such polymer-based self-healing composites are reported. Considering
the different polymerization or curing rates at conditions of initial curing and curing at
the healing stage, the performance of the self-healing system varies [87]. Self-healing
composite coatings are used as paints on concrete buildings for crack repair due to
damage by mechanical impact or climatic causes. Thakur et al. reviewed the various
self-healing coatings where nanoparticles are used in coatings [88]. The authors dis￾cussed the nanocontainers used to manufacture self-healing anticorrosive coatings with
the self-healing mechanism. The method of making nanocontainers such as layer-by￾layer assembly of layered double hydroxide has been discussed. The review deals with
manufacture of nanocontainer-facilitated self-healing corrosion coatings used in differ￾ent construction industries.
Conducting composites, especially flexible PVC-based carbon composites of various
carbon and conducting fillers, as flooring sheets and similar rubber-based composites are
widely used as anti-static floor cover and wrist bands. Industries manufacturing various
electronic/electrical gadgets using electrical/electronic power sources essentially use such
floor mats of the lab and wrist bands for technical personnel handling even small power
circuits, which are connected to main electrical lines of 220/440 volts. Static dissipative
mats can be found in many places, such as: computer repair shops, assembly lines, health￾care offices, computer server rooms, auto shops and any place where flammable materi￾als are used like chemical laboratories or manufacturing facilities. Such mats are termed
as ESD (electrostatic discharge) mats and it is well established that ESD has proven to be
the best method of protection against accidents caused by electrostatic discharge.
Conducting composites are now being used for lightning strike protection (LSP) of
passenger aircrafts for prevention of damage due to possible lightning. Till recent
times, carbon fibre-reinforced epoxy composite (CFRP) was used in conjunction with
thin metallic foils. The performance of such LSP was best, comparing the low weight
penalty and protection efficiency, and was definitely better than CFRP without a foil
attached [89]. However, the manufacturing difficulties, improper metal-to-CFRP adhe￾sion and associated cost of manufacturing are some disadvantages [90]. To overcome
these problems, new LSPs are being made with inclusion of conducting nanoparticles
in the resin matrix to manufacture the CFRP lightning arrestor. The epoxy matrix was
mixed with 30% doped PANI, as described by Katunin et al. [37] or carbon nanofibre
as described by Gou et al. [91] or nanotubes as described by Han et al. [92].
Another important application of smart composites in the electrical/electronic indus￾try is EMI shielding of equipment to protect damage due to electromagnetic conduction/
radiation. Industrially, the best EMI shields are definitely metal sheets because of their
298 Chapter 5 Smart compositeshighest conductivity and hence, near-perfect reflectivity of EM wave. However, metals
suffer from the possibility of corrosion, high weight penalty and cost of manufacturing
in different shapes. Domestic, consumer markets of electrical and electronic consoles
and gadgets require the traits of being light, durable, fashionable and competitive in
manufacturing cost. Typical examples are laptop, PC tablets and mobile phones. Poly￾meric conducting nanocomposites are the most promising materials for EMI shielding at
present and have replaced almost all metallic versions due to all advantages that metals
do not offer. Among the polymer matrices, epoxy resin is most preferred, followed by
polyurethane (PU), polyethylene (PE), polycarbonate (PC) and polytetrafluoroethylene
(PTFE). Carbon nanotubes, graphene, exfoliated graphite and nanocarbon powders are
used to make conducting composites with the polymer matrix [93, 94]. The balance be￾tween conductivity and complex permittivity of such polymer nanocomposites make
them efficient absorber-type shields. On the other hand, epoxy-carbon fibre composite
(CFRP) is another conducting FRP composite used in EMI shielding very effectively, since
the conductivity of CFRP is very high, and hence it is a reflecting type of shield. CFRP is
used as such [95] or with conducting nanoparticles such as carbon nanotube and contin￾uous graphene oxide fibre [96]. As a new field of implementation, these modified epoxy
composites with a high strength-to-weight ratio are gaining considerable interest as elec￾tromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding materials, primarily in consumer electronics,
aircraft and automobiles.
5.4.3 Application in defence
All types of smart composites are used in many critical and general areas of defence
vehicles, aircrafts, ships, submarines and installations. Self-healing composites have
good potential to be used on FRP superstructure of ships, since large areas of the su￾perstructure cannot be monitored for minute crack development on small impacts
and self-healing process at initial crack generation can prevent sudden structural fail￾ure. Moreover, self-healing corrosion-resistant underwater paint would be another
advantage, since the crack generated can lead to very severe corrosion of the under￾water hull in the sea water. Similarly, a smart composite coating with microcapsule
resin and/or bond exchange-type elastomeric smart cover mats can be used in battery
pit of submarines. The cracks can be filled immediately to prevent corrosion of the
steel pit surface by dilute sulphuric acid (battery acid).
Smart damping composites are potential acoustic stealth items. Vibration of ship
structures due to rotating machines and the propeller results in hull vibration and
the same is transferred to seawater as radiated underwater noise. The u/w acoustic
signal is thus of low frequency, since the revolution frequencies of the machines and
the propeller are quite low, typically 2–120 Hz, with some harmonics and higher
modes extending up to 2 kHz. The intensity of the vibrations is typically in the range
of 65–125 dB depending on machine power and mounting system of machines. The
5.4 Application of smart composites 299radiated u/w noise can be picked up by a small acoustic sensor embedded in a u/w mine.
Additionally, the low frequency noise can travel longer distances in the sea and can be
detected by a passive SONAR. Thus, the vibrations are needed to be damped at the base
frame of the large machines such as engine, pumps, etc. apart from the elastomeric
shock mounts. A simple passive CLD can reduce vibrations to the extent of 10–15 dB in
mid frequency range (100–3,000 Hz) only, and lower frequencies are not damped signifi￾cantly. Smart CLDs would very effectively minimize low frequency (5–100 Hz) vibration
intensity by active electrical control or magnetic force control. In electrical control, the
damping is independent of VEM damping mechanism, but augments the viscoelastic
damping only in low frequency range and is not effective beyond 400 Hz. In a passive
VEM-piezoelectric system, the vibration acceleration drives the piezo-effect and the trans￾formation from dynamic strain to electric charge is proportional to the strain rate. In
case of magnetic CLD, the shear strain of the VEM is controlled (increased) by the mag￾netic force and hence the damping is enhanced since shear strain energy loss would be
higher. Therefore, the magnetic force is an augmentation of viscoelastic damping. The
magnetic force and its effect are independent of frequency since there is no active con￾trol. However, active control by electrical sensor (actuator) cannot be installed in large
areas such as base frame of engines, internal hull structures near vibrating machines,
etc. To date, due to large areas to be covered, passive CLDs are being used in ship struc￾tures. Active control is possible in places like helicopter rotor assembly [97, 98] and mili￾tary ground vehicles [99].
EMI shielding of equipment in defence is compulsorily required for safety of the
electrical systems and personnel. Apart from EMI, the equipment also needs to com￾ply with electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) with the electromagnetic environment
in which it is to be used. Each equipment to be installed on board any vehicle, ground,
sea or air, has to qualify the EMI-EMC limits specified in MIL standard MIL-STD 461,
by the Department of Defence, USA. The standard describes the EMI requirements for
a wide range of applications, from ground vehicles and ships to aircraft and ground
installations, as well as the various requirements within an application (e.g. SONAR
room and engine room on a naval ship). There is also scope to tailor the requirements
to particular applications. The tests are for conducted and radiated emissions and sus￾ceptibility of the equipment. In a document, EMI prediction and protective margin
calculations are given in details in published literature [100, 101] for naval equipment.
A quantitative example is a composite element of a ship that may need EMI shielding
of minimum 25 dB in the frequency range of 1 GHz to 40 GHz. The actual limits of the
EMI/EMC are critical for most defence systems and cannot be generalised.
Radar-absorbing composites (RACS) and elastomeric flexible composites (RASH)
as stealth materials, the performance and efficacy in reduction of RCS of a defence
target, and a general attenuation characteristic as research documents are available
in open literature in abundance as already discussed in Section 5.3.2. However, broad
band radar flexible composite sheets are required to be used on superstructures and
for X- and Ku-band for specific areas such as radar mast, and also in some portions of
300 Chapter 5 Smart compositessubmarines. The attenuation of a surface depends on detection range. A 10-dB lossy
RACS would reduce the distance of detection to 56% of uncoated metal target. There￾fore, when a 2-GHz radar frequency is used, the detection distance of metal target is
more, assuming 100 km for an aircraft. A 10-dB attenuation means the target can be
detected only at 56 km; whereas, when the same target at a distance of 50 km (at￾tained by it within 30 s), is being tracked by 10 GHz (X-band) for exact coordinates to
activate fire control system, the same 10-dB lossy RACS would reduce the range to
28 km. Now, at the same speed, the effective time to react is just half with identical
attenuation in high frequency than at low frequency. This indicates that at high fre￾quency, the attenuation must be higher. However, the same logic does not apply to
slower vehicles such as ship, battle tank, truck, etc. In this case, the speed of the vehi￾cle is almost immaterial compared to the reaction time available. For ships, the choice
of RASH and RACS are much wider than aircrafts. For aircrafts, use of RACS as the
main skin, leading edges, air intake and other places need different specific proper￾ties. For example, thermal and structural stability requirement in air intake is 350 °C,
while for the leading edge (wing tip, etc.), the requirement is a thermal and structural
stability in several thermal cycles of −40 to +150 °C. However, known stealth aircrafts
of all developed and developing countries such as F117A, F-22 raptor or B-2 of US Air￾force, Sukhoi-57 of Russia, F-35B Lightning of UK Royal Airforce and J-20A of China, do
not reveal the radar stealth materials used on these aircrafts.
For a ship, the requirement of chemical stability in the presence of marine envi￾ronment at ambient temperature is most important. Several metal nanopowders
being reported now are not suitable in this case because of corrosion in marine con￾ditions, and nanocarbons are a better solution. Conducting polymers also suffer from
de-doping in such atmosphere and the effective conductivity drastically reduces. As a
general observation, a water barrier coating containing a polymeric resin-clay nano￾composite as matrix with neutral pigments (for Admiralty grey or light grey colour
requirement) provides a very effective protection against corrosion or degradation of
radar stealth items for naval ships. Polyurethane resins with low isocyanate contents
(<3.5%) and Cloisite 30B clay are most suitable for such clay nanocomposites for long￾life protective coating. The coating being purely dielectric, transmission of MW is al￾most 100% through the coating. Examples of stealth ships are the famous La Fayette
class French Frigate, destroyer of US Navy USS Zumwalt (which is an RCS similar to a
fishing boat, despite large size) and Shivalik class Frigates of Indian Navy. However,
the radar stealth materials used in these strategic ships are closely guarded secret.
5.5 Conclusions
Research on smart polymeric composites has gained momentum with the demand of
high-performing and energy-efficient systems. Lighter and robust materials with de￾sired performance are aimed for the development of smart materials. Application of
5.5 Conclusions 301smart composites is rapidly increasing compared to homogeneous smart polymers,
because of the many advantages that a composite provides. For example, in a compos￾ite, the physical and chemical nature of the individual components is retained, and
some properties could be synergistically enhanced, such as strength and vibration
damping of rubber by carbon nanotubes. Secondly, a component in a composite can
enhance structural integrity far more than a simple smart polymer. Thirdly, a compo￾nent might be providing the functional property while the polymer is only a binder
for developing a shaped item with structural integrity. Moreover, smart composites
are the preferred choice for lighter weight at competitive cost of production. Inven￾tion of different nanoparticles and the technologies to integrate them in polymeric
materials have increased the use of polymer nanocomposites in almost all fields from
automobile to biomedical engineering. Nanotechnology also allows developing lighter
composites than conventional polymer matrix composites and the nano-effect in￾creases the functional properties to great extent. The only disadvantage of nanopar￾ticles is handling hazard, both in terms of possibility of material loss and human
health. In modern industrial and laboratory practices, particularly automation with
robotic operation and clean room system, these problems can be eliminated with a
hygienic environment and better quality of smart composites.
References
[1] Wang, Y., Pham, D. T., Ji, C. Cogent Eng. 2015, 2, 1075686.
[2] Islam, S., Bhat, G. Mater. Adv. 2021, 2, 1896–1926.
[3] Bleay, S. M., Loader, C. B., Hawyes, V. J., Humberstone, L., Curtis, P. T. Compos. Part A. 2001, 32,
1767–1776.
[4] Pang, J. W. C., Bond, I. P. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2005, 65, 1791–1799.
[5] Trask, R. S., Bond, I. P. Smart Mater. Struct. 2006, 15, 704–710.
[6] Zhu, Y., Ye, X. J., Rong, M. Z., Zhang, M. Q. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2016, 135, 135146–135152.
[7] Lee, J., Bhattacharya, D., Zhang, M. Q., Yuan, Y. C. Compos. Part B Eng. 2015, 78, 515–519.
[8] Yuan, Y. C., Ye, Y., Rong, M. Z., Chen, H., Wu, J., Zhang, M. Q., Qin, S. X., Yang, G. C. Smart Mater.
Struct. 2010, 20, 1–11.
[9] Jhanji, K. P., Asokan, R., Kumar, R. A., Sarkar, S. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2020, 912, 1–8.
[10] Suryanarayana, C., Rao, K. C., Kumar, D. ProgOrgCoat. 2008, 63, 72–78.
[11] Lin, C., Ge, H, Wang, T., Huang, M., Ying, P., Zhang, P., Wu, J., Ren, S., Levchenko, V. A. Polymer.
2020, 206, 122894.
[12] Jia, H., Gu, S. Y. J. Polym. Res. 2020, 27, 298.
[13] Nokes, D. S., Nelson, F. C. Shock Vib. Bull. 1968, 38, 5–12.
[14] Mead, D. J., Markus, S. J. Sound Vib. 1969, 10, 163–175.
[15] Plunkett, R., Lee, C. T. JASA. 1970, 48, 150–161.
[16] Rao, Y. V. K. S., Nakra, B. C. J. Sound Vib. 1974, 34, 309–326.
[17] Rao, D. K. J. Mech. Eng. Sci. 1978, 20, 271–282.
[18] Torvik, P. J. Analysis and Design of Constrained Layer Damping Treatments. Report AFIT VR 80-4,
Airforce Institute of Technology, Ohio, USA, July 1980.
302 Chapter 5 Smart composites[19] Murali, D. M., Chakraborty, B. C., Begum, S. S., Natarajan, R., Chandramohan, S. Polym. J. 2022, 31,
1247–1261.
[20] Plump, J. M., Hubbard Jr., J. E. Modeling of an Active Constrained Layer Damper, In 12th
International Congress on Acoustics. Toronto, Canada, 1986, #D4–1.
[21] Lam, M. J., Inman, D. J., Saunders, W. R. J. Intel. Mat. Syst. Str. 1997, 8, 663–677.
[22] Shen, I. Y. J. Vib. Acoust. 1994, 116, 341–349.
[23] Ba, A. J. Sound Vib. 1998, 211, 467–489.
[24] Trindade, M. A., Benjeddou, A., Ohayon, R. Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 2001, 51, 835–864.
[25] Van Nostrand, W. C., Inman, D. J. Finite Element Model for Active Constrained Layer Damping. In:
Anderson, G. L., Lagoudas, D. C., eds. Active Materials & Smart Structures, Vol. 2427. SPIE,
Bellingham, WA,USA, 1995, 124–139.
[26] Varadan, V. V., Lim, Y.-H., Varadan, V. K. SmartMaterStruct. 1996, 5, 685–694.
[27] Veley, D. E., Rao, S. S. Smart Mater. Struct. 1996, 5, 660–671.
[28] Trindade, M. A., Benjeddou, A. J. Vib. Control. 2002, 8, 699–745.
[29] Zheng, H., Li, M., He, Z. Int. J. Solids Struct. 2003, 40, 6767–6779.
[30] Hansaka, M., Mifune, N., Sato, H., Takinosawa, H., Nishimoto, K. Magnetic-vibration-damper of
composite type and damping construction method. European Patent No. EP 0849495A2,
dt.24 June 1998, assigned to CJ Kasei Co. (Ltd), Chou-ku, Tokyo, JP, Nichias Corporation, Tokyo JP,
Railway Technical Research Institute, Kkubunji-shi, Tokyo JP.
[31] Hansaka, M., Hayashi, I., Iwatsuki, N., Mifune, N., Morikawa, K., Kagawa, Y. Jpn. Soc. Mech. Eng. C
Part C. 2022, 68, 374–382.
[32] Ochôa, P. A., Groves, R. M., Benedictus, R. J. Sound Vib. 2020, 475, 115289.
[33] Ko, J. M., Ni, Y. Q. J. Eng. Struct. 2005, 27, 1715–1725.
[34] Montalvão, D., Maia, N. M. M., Ribeiro, A. M. R. Shock Vib. Dig. 2006, 38, 295–324.
[35] Singh, T., Sehgal, S. Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 2022, 29, 1997–2017.
[36] Mansor, M. R., Fadzullah, S. H. S. M., Masripan, N. A. B., Omar, G., Akop, M. Z. Synthesis, Processing
and Applications. Elsevier Inc, Vol. 9, 2019, 177–204.
[37] Katunin, A., Krukiewicz, K., Turczyn, R., Sul, P., Bilewicz, M., Conf, I. O. P. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng.2017,
201, 012008.
[38] Chavan, J. G., Chandrasekhar, L., Samui, A. B., Chakraborty, B. C. Polym. Mat. 2004, 21, 293–304.
[39] Jain, S., Samui, A. B., Patri, M., Hande, V. R., Bhoraskar., S. V. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 2005, 106,
609–613.
[40] Jain, S., Chakane, S., Samui, A. B., Krishnamurthy, V. N., Bhoraskar, S. V. Sens. Actuators B Chem.
2003, 96, 124–129.
[41] Shukla, S. K., Govender, P. P., Agoru, E. S. Microchim. Acta. 2016, 183, 573–580.
[42] Sivaraman, P., Kushwaha, R. K., Shashidhara, K., Hande, V. R., Thakur, A. P., Samui, A. B.,
Khandpekar, M. M. Electrochim. Acta. 2010, 55, 2451–2456.
[43] Dubey, N., Kushwaha, C. S., Shukla, S. K. Int. J. Polym. Mater. Polym. Biomat. 2020, 69, 709–727.
[44] Cao, Q., Yu, Q., Connell, D. W., Yu., G. Clean Technol. Environ. Pol. 2013, 15, 871–880.
[45] Lekawa-Raus, A., Patmore, J., Kurzepa, L., Bulmer, J., Koziol, K. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2014, 24,
3661–3682.
[46] Earp, B., Dunn, D., Phillips, J., Agrawal, R., Ansella, T. Aceves, P., Igor De Rosa, I. D., Xin, W., Luhrs,
C. Mater. Res. Bull. 2020, 131, 110969.
[47] Fang, X.-Y., Yu, X.-X., Zheng, H.-M., Jin, H.-B., Wang, L. Phys. Lett A. 2015, 379, 2245–2251.
[48] Hu, D., Yi, X., Jiang, M., Li, G., Cong, X., Liu, X., Rudd, C. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2020, 98, 105669.
[49] Ma, X., Scarpa, F., Peng, H., Allgeri, G., Yuan, J., Ciobanu, R. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2015, 47, 367–377.
[50] Kim, M., Jeong, J. H., Lee, J. Y., Capasso, A., Bonaccoroso, F., Kang, S. H., Lee, Y. K., Lee, G. H. ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 2019, 11, 11841–11848.
References 303[51] Park, S. H., Hwang, J., Park, G. S., Ha, J. H., Zhang, M., Kim, D., Yun, D. J., Lee, S., Lee, S. H. Nat.
Commun. 2019, 10, 2537.
[52] Kondawar, S. B., Modak, P. R. Theory of EMI Shielding. In: Kurivilla, J., Wilson, R., George, G., eds.
Materials for Potential EMI Shielding Applications -Processing, Properties and Current Trends.
Elsevier Inc, Vol. Chapter-2, 2020, 9–25.
[53] Skin depth of electromagnetic waves in conductors. Physics Page, http://physicspages.com/pdf/
Electrodynamics/Skin%20depth%20of%20electromagnetic%20waves%20in%20conductors.pdf.
(accessed on 02 May, 2023)
[54] Kurivilla, J., Wilson, R., George, G. Materials for Potential EMI Shielding Applications -Processing,
Properties and Current Trends. Elsevier Inc, 2020.
[55] Dhawan, S. K., Singh, A. P., Anil Ohlan, A., Kakran, K. S., Sambyal, P. Smart Materials Design for
Electromagnetic Interference Shielding Applications. Bentham Science Publishers, Sharjah, 2022.
[56] Saritha, A., Thomas, B., George, G., Wilson, R., Kuruvilla, J. Elastomer-Based Materials for EMI
Shielding Applications. In: Joseph, K., Wilson, R., George, G., eds. Materials for Potential EMI
Shielding Applications. Elsevier, Vol. Chapter 8, 2020, 121–143.
[57] Lu, S., Bai, Y., Wang, J., Chen, D. Flexible GnPs/EPDM with excellent thermal conductivity and
electromagnetic interference shielding properties. Nano Brief Rep. Rev. 2019, 14(6), 1950075.
10.1142/S1793292019500759.
[58] Iqbal, S., Ahmad, S. Conducting Polymer Composites: An efficient EMI Shielding Material. In:
Kurivilla, J., Wilson, R., George, G., eds. Materials for Potential EMI Shielding Applications -
Processing, Properties and Current Trends. Elsevier Inc, Vol. Chapter-16, 2020, 257–266.
[59] Sun, X., Lv, X., Li, X., Yuan, X., Li, L., Gu, G. Mater. Lett. 2018, 221, 93–96.
[60] Gupta, T. K., Singh, B. P., Mathur, R. B., Dhakate, S. R. Nanoscale. 2014, 6, 842–851.
[61] Guo, J., Song, H., Liu, H., Luo, C., Ren, Y., Ding, T., Khan, M. A., Young, D. P., Liu, X., Zhang, X., Kong,
J., Guo, Z. J. Mater. Chem. C. 2017, 5, 5334–5344.
[62] Sun, J., Shen, Y., Hu, X. S. Polym. Bull. 2018, 75, 653–667.
[63] Liang, J., Bai, M., Gu, Y., Wang, S., Li, M., Zhang, Z. Compos. Part A Appl. Sci. Manuf. 2021, 149,
106481.
[64] Maiti, S., Shrivastava, N. K., Suin, S., Khatua, B. B. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 2013, 5, 4712–4724.
[65] Skolnik, M. I. Radar. In: Middleton, W. M., Van, V. M. E., eds. Reference Data for Engineers-radio,
Electronics, Computer, and Communications. Elsevier Inc, 2002, 1–22, Chapter 36.
[66] Atay, H. Y. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2022, 2413, 012005.
[67] Zhang, L., Zhou, P., Zhang, H., Lu, L., Zhang, G., Chen, H., Lu, H., Xie, J., Deng, L. IEEE Trans. Magn.
2014, 50, 1–5.
[68] Kim, S. Y., Kim, S. S. PolymPolymCompos. 2018, 26, 106–110.
[69] Kartal, I., Demirer, H. Acta Phys. Pol. 2017, 131, 559–561.
[70] Go, J.-I., Lee, W.-J., Kim, S.-Y., Baek, S.-M., Choi, W.-H. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2020, 199, 108366.
[71] Peymanfar, R., Javanshir, S., Naimi-Jamal, M. R., Cheldavi, A. Mater. Res. Exp. 2019, 6, 0850–9.
[72] Oyharcabal, M., Olinga, T., Foulc, M.-P., Lacomme, S., Gontier, E., Vigneras, V. Compos. Sci. Technol.
2013, 74, 107–112.
[73] Jang, H. K., Shin, J.-H., Kim, C.-G., Shin, S.-H., Kim, J. B. Adv. Compos. Mater. 2011, 20, 215–229.
[74] Potphode, D. D., Sivaraman, P., Mishra, S. P., Patri, M. Electrochim. Acta. 2015, 155, 402–410.
[75] Sivaraman, P., Bhattacharrya, A. R., Mishra, S. P., Thakur, A. P., Shashidhara, K., Samui,
A. B. Electrochim. Acta. 2013, 94, 182–191.
[76] Hu, W., Yin, H., Yuan, H., Tang, Y., Ren, X., Wei, Y. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2023, 233, 109927.
[77] Choi, I., Lee, D., Lee, D. G. Compos. Struct. 2015, 122, 23–30.
[78] Bai, X., Zhai, Y., Zhang, Y. J. Phys. Chem. C. 2011, 115, 11673–11677.
[79] Wang, T. H., Li, Y. F., Geng, S., Zhou, C., Kia, X. L., Yang, F., et al. RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 88958–88964.
304 Chapter 5 Smart composites[80] Meng, F., Wang, H., Huang, F., Guo, Y., Wang, Z., Hui, D., Zhou, Z. Compos. Part B Eng. 2018, 137,
260–277.
[81] Pisu, L., Iagulli, G., Sarto, M. S., Fabrizio, M., Lecini, J., Tamburrano, A. Multilayer radar-absorbing
laminate for aircraft made of polymer matrix composite material with graphene nanoplates, and
method of manufacturing same. Patent WO2019/167009 A1, assigned to Leonardo SPA, Piaza Monte
Grappa 4, Roma (Italy) dated 06 September, 2019.
[82] Jiang, C., Zhang, L., Yang, Q., Huang, S., Shi, H., Long, Q., Qian, B., Liu, Z., Guan, Q., Liu, M., Yang, R.,
Zhao, Q., You, Z., Ye, X. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 4395.
[83] Idumah, C. I. PolymPolymCompos. 2021, 29, 246–258.
[84] Huyang, G., Debertin, A. E., Sun, J. Mater. Des. 2016, 94, 295–302.
[85] Yahyazadehfar, M., Huyang, G., Wang, X., Fan, Y., Arola, D., Sun, J. Mater. Sci. Eng. C. 2018, 93,
1020–1026.
[86] Ning, K., Loomans, B., Yeung, C., Li, J., Yang, F., Leeuwenburgh, S. Dent. Mater. 2021, 37, 403–412.
[87] Zhang, W., Zheng, Q., Ashour, A., Han, B. Compos. Part B. 2020, 189, 107892.
[88] Thakur, A., Savas, K., Kumar, A. CurrNanosci. 2022, 18, 203–216.
[89] Feraboli, P., Miller, M. Compos. Part A. 2009, 40, 954–967.
[90] Gagne, M., Therriault, D. Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 2014, 64, 1–16.
[91] Gou, J., Tang, Y., Liang, F., Zhao, Z., Firsich, D., Fielding, J. Compos B. 2010, 41, 192–198.
[92] Han, J. H., Zhang, H., Chen, M. J., Wang, D., Liu, Q., Wu, Q. L., Zhang, Z. Carbon. 2015, 94, 101–113.
[93] Banerjee, P., Bhattacharjee, Y., Bose S, J. Electron. Mater. 2020, 49, 1702–1720.
[94] Aal, N. A., El‐Tantawy, F., Al‐Hajry, A., Bououdina, M. Polym. Compos. 2008, 29, 125–132.
[95] Ramadin, Y., Jawad, S. A., Musameh, S. M., Ahmad, M., Zihlif, A. M., Paesano, A., Martuscelli, E.,
Ragosta, G. Polym. Int. 1994, 34, 145–150.
[96] Ucar, N., Kayaoglu, B. K., Bilge, A., Gurel, G., Sencandan, P., Paker, S. J. Compos. Mater. 2018, 52,
3341–3350.
[97] Shevtsov, S., Soloviev, A., Acopyan, V., Samochenko, I. PHYSCON 2009, Catania, Italy, September, 1–4.
[98] Konstanzer, P., Enenkl, B., Aubourg, P.-A., Cranga,, P. Recent advances in Eurocopter’s passive and
active vibration control. Presented at the American Helicopter Society 64th Annual Forum, Montréal,
Canada, April 29 – May 1, 2008.
[99] Miller, L. R., Nobles, C. M. The design and development of a semi-active suspension for military
tank, SAE, 1988, Paper No. 881133.
[100] Dixon, D. S., Sniegoski, R. J. Low frequency EM1 modeling and EMC prediction program for
shipboard electrical/electronic equipments. IEEE International Symposium on EMC. 1982.
[101] Kowalczyk, K. R., Schlachter, F. An EMC prediction and protective margin calculation program for
the Dec Vax computer series. IEEE 1988 International Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility
2–4 Aug. 1988. 10.1109/isemc.1988
References 305Chapter 6
Experimental techniques
Description of abbreviations
Abbreviation Description
FTIR Fourier-transform infrared
ESR Electron spin resonance
FMR Ferromagnetic resonance
SEM Scanning electron microscop
TEM Transmission electron microscopy
XRD X-ray diffractometry
AFM Atomic force microscopy
EMC Electromagnetic compatibility
UAV Unmanned aerial vehicle
UUVs Unmanned underwater vehicles
UTM Universal testing machine
RTM Tesin transfer moulding
DMA Dynamic mechanical analyser
DTA Differential thermal analysis
TGA Thermogravimetric analysis
TMA Thermomechanical analysis
DSC Differential scanning calorimetry
DEA Dielectric analysis
DC Dielectric constant
DF Dissipation factor
LM Light microscope
PEO Poly(ethylene oxide)
EDS Energy-dispersive spectrometer
CBS N-Cyclohexyl--benzothiazolesulphenamide
IPN Interpenetrating polymer network
MBTS Mercaptobenzothiazyl disulphide
MPa Mega-Pascal
PE Poly(ethylene)
PP Poly(propylene)
phr Parts per hundred rubber (by weight)
SEM Scanning electron microscope
TEM Transmission electron microscope
TMTD Tetramethylthiuram disulphide
FRP Fibre-reinforced plastic
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110781571-0066.1 Introduction
The development and Manufacturing of polymer composite items need reproducible
and accurate evaluation of relevant properties. The relevance is dependent on condi￾tions of use of the composite item. An underwater fibre-reinforced plastic (FRP) pipe￾line needs more attention on creep, vibration and effect of interaction with seawater,
biocorrosion and biofouling, rather than fire rating and electrical property. Likewise,
a cooling tower requires evaluation of stresses and strains due to static and dynamic
loads and UV/ozone ageing effects rather than dielectric strength or fire rating. Since
there are a large number of properties that are required to understand a material, it
becomes difficult and impractical to study all properties elaborately. The identifica￾tion of the properties relevant to the application is of foremost importance. Subse￾quently, the evaluation is to be divided in three distinct categories, stage-wise as
follows:
Stage 1: Tests for quality building of polymer-reinforcement combination: molecu￾lar level, in the context of physical blending or chemical kinetics, structure and
morphology of final form. This includes physical homogeneity, reaction data,
identification of chemical structure, etc. by Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR),
NMR, electron spin resonance (ESR), ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) spectros￾copy, morphology by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffractometry (XRD) especially for nanocomposites, sur￾face properties by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and any other basic character￾istics, if required.
Stage 2: Macroscopic properties to characterize the formed material. This includes
mechanical, dynamic mechanical, thermal and electrical property evaluation,
which is restricted to the material behaviour. However, thermal and dielectric
studies are also very useful to determine some molecular level properties and re￾action dynamics. These studies would reveal the nature of polymer-reinforcement
interaction, efficacy of the reinforcement, failure process of the composite, degra￾dation, estimation of service life, etc. The evaluation results would provide input
parameters to design an item using the composite so developed.
Stage 3: Functional and structural evaluation of the fabricated item and proto￾types. This involves acoustic, electromagnetic, electrical, i.e. electromagnetic in￾duction (EMI) and electromagnetic compatibility (EMC), vibration, hydrostatic,
fire rating, load bearing properties for systems such as machinery base frame,
hydraulic piping, valve, storage vessels, reactor, cooling tower, wind mill, furni￾ture, home appliances, electronic gadgets, printed circuit boards, building con￾struction elements, automobile parts, unmanned under water vehicles (UUVs),
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAVs), and others according to the need in specific
application.
6.1 Introduction 307The experimental techniques of all the above are adequately sited in literature and
various standards. However, there are many salient features of common experimental
techniques which are discussed here, without elaborating the complete test procedure.
Brief description of the machines with some criticalities in experiments is also in￾cluded. The laboratory evaluation as in stage 2 are discussed here, because stage 1 eval￾uations come under analytical methods, and stage 3 is very wide in spectrum, since
there are enormous types of application. Stage 2 tests are mostly required for physical
and mathematical modelling and design of components or subsystems and systems.
One of the main aspects of experimental techniques in the laboratory is the sample
preparation of composites and conditioning of the samples prior to test. As far as possi￾ble, moulding of the thermoplastic polymer composites should be thermoformed in a
mould in case of intricate or no uniform shapes. Extrusion process is suitable for uni￾form cross section. However, where a fabricated sheet is provided, sample has to be cut
out. The dimensions are to be uniform and be measured accurately since the modulus
value much depends on original dimensions. A micrometre with 0.01 mm accuracy will
be adequate for thickness measurement, while a slide calliper with accuracy of 0.1 mm
will be good for lateral dimensions. In order to avoid human error, repeated measure￾ments should be done. For FRP composites, forming in a mould will be difficult with
fibre, etc. In such case, samples may be cut out from sheets by a high-speed machine and
the cut surfaces should be polished by surface grinder and polishing machine. There is
possibility of fibre-polymer separation at the cut edges, which can be covered by the
thermoset resin as a fine coating of 50–70 μm. For elastomeric composites with particu￾late and nanomaterials, standard sample cutters of dumbbell shapes according to ASTM
standards can be used. For each type of composites, the sample sizes are precisely de￾scribed in standards such as ASTM, ISO, BS, DIN and BIS. However, the researcher can
use other sizes not described in these standards, if the entire study and repetition, if any,
are done using same dimensions. In addition, in situations where samples are to be cut
from an existing item, there could be a sample dimension which might not be as per the
standards. That might be an exception, but at least a comparative assessment can be
done with similar composition made in the lab under ideal condition and dimension.
Conditioning of the samples is another important part of testing. Conditioning is
required to allow the samples to be in exactly similar conditions prior to test. Compo￾sites, in general, are bad conductors of heat, and requires prolong time to equilibrate
at the room temperature. Secondly, composites may absorb moisture to different ex￾tent if not kept in a constant humidity environment. Polar polymers absorb more
moisture than nonpolar ones. For example, polycarbonate absorbs about 0.2% mois￾ture and needs to be dried in oven for 24 h at 100° to remove moisture before melt
processing, while polypropylene does not need such elaborate drying. The moisture
acts as a plasticizer at a low concentration and may reduce the mechanical properties
and also lower the glass transition temperature of polar thermosets and their compo￾sites, depending on extent of moisture absorbed. Therefore, composite samples are to
be conditioned. For example, all samples are to be kept in a room with less than 45%
308 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesrelative humidity and temperature of 25 ± 1 °C for 48 h before test. Some standards
specify 24 h of conditioning. In tropical countries, the humidity in most places is
higher than temperate climates. It is recommended that the duration of conditioning
the samples should be decided considering ambient atmospheric temperature and hu￾midity of the place of study.
Sampling is the other important aspect of testing in a regular production unit, but
not so in research, since during a development of composite, every experimental
batch has to be evaluated completely. The intension to test all the batches and the
variants is to investigate the causes of possible quality variation and attempt to re￾duce the variations as far as possible in the development stage.
Instruments for any test should be well calibrated. Measuring instruments of high
accuracy and high precision are to be used. Internationally reputed manufacturers gen￾erally make instruments which are suitable for measurements according to interna￾tional standards such as ASTM or ISO. The accuracy depends on the allowable tolerance
at the minimum value to be measured. Precision depends on the variation in repetitive
measured results. Sometimes dimensional tolerances are very critical such as for high
modulus FRPs.
Different methods are applicable for different type of samples depending on rigidity,
plastic flow, thermodynamic state, type of reinforcements, extent of non-linearity, etc.
6.2 Mechanical testing
A fundamental property of a real solid body is Young’s modulus, which is measured
in tension. Ideally, it should be same as compression and flexure too. But in practice,
the real solids do not follow ideal elastic behaviour, and there are considerable differ￾ences. However, there is a well-established relationship of Young’s modulus and
shear modulus through Poisson’s ratio. Subsequent paragraphs give brief descriptions
of some of these mechanical properties and impact strength with type of instruments,
methods and international standards.
Various types of mechanical testing depending on the mode of force application,
such as tension, compression, shear or bending. The corresponding properties are de￾fined by modulus of elasticity, ultimate strength and ultimate strain. All static me￾chanical properties can be evaluated using a universal testing machine (UTM).
6.2.1 Universal testing machine (UTM)
The UTM has a rigid base and a top head, fixed in a frame supported by two rigid
columns, acting as guide for moving a cross-head. The daylight of a standard UTM is
about 1 metre and the movement of the cross-head is controlled by a hydraulic or
pneumatic system. A typical UTM is shown in Fig. 6.1. The movement is sensed by cali￾6.2 Mechanical testing 309brated sensors, either laser or other non-contact extensometer. Since most composites
are low strain, high modulus materials, except elastomeric composites, the movement
measurement has to be very precise. The upper cross-head houses the load cell,
which measures the force of deformation. The brief specification of an UTM machine
is given as Tab. 6.1, where only main functional parameters are listed.
Fig. 6.1: A sketch of functional pats of a UTM machine.
Tab. 6.1: A brief specification of a universal testing machine (UTM).
Parameter Specification
Load ranges . N to  kN with different load cells. Load accuracy: better than ±.% of
reading from % to % of full-scale load. Load cells: ,  and  kN
Maximum cross-head
travel
, mm
Testing speed range .– mm/min speed setting increments of . mm/min
Accuracy of test
speed
.% of set speed
Sample grips Tensile, compression, shear and flexure in three-point bending and four-point
bending. Flat specimen width up to  mm and thickness up to  mm. Circular
specimen up to  mm diameter. Three-point bending fixture typically for
specimen span length from  to  mm and optionally up to  mm span.
Compression test platens of top and bottom plate diameter  mm for width of
specimens up to  mm
Drive system Electromechanical/pneumatic/servo-hydraulic
310 Chapter 6 Experimental techniques6.2.2 Tensile test
Tensile strength of common FRP composites are generally very high compared to rub￾ber based composites, and some thermoplastic composites have intermediate strengths.
Therefore, tensile test of such variety of composites requires samples of different size
and configuration according to the stiffness and ultimate elongation. The standards of
the tensile test of various composites are listed in Tab. 6.2.
The criticality in the test of high strength composites such as FRPs is the grip of the
samples. Irrespective of the type, all grips are self-tightening, which means that the grip￾ping is maintained even as the force of deformation increases. All grips should have
serrated faces for proper gripping of the sample and to avoid slippage during the test.
Dimension of FRP samples recommended are 250 mm in length, 25 mm in width and
about 2 mm thickness. Pneumatic grips for soft samples such as elastomers and thermo￾plastic elastomers are good enough. Dumbbell-shaped specimens are used for such soft
samples. The cross-head speed is another important test parameter. In case of FRPs,
since the ultimate elongation is generally very low (<10%), the cross-head speed recom￾mended in ASTM standard is 2 mm/min, while for an elastomer composite, the user can
select from 50 to 500 mm/min. For composites of engineering plastics, 5–500 mm/min
Tab. 6.1 (continued)
Parameter Specification
Data sampling rate  kHz or better
Post-processing
functions
Young’s, secant and shear modulus, stiffness, Poisson’s ratio proportional limit,
yield stress and strain, breaking stress/strain/force/deflection, ultimate stress/
strain/force/deflection, work to break and/or total work. Modulus, creep, stress
relaxation and hysteresis
Computer Programming of runs, data storage, processing, and output display as tables and
graphs
Safety No release of load under power failure, emergency stop control and mechanical
limit switches, automatic stop or return following sample break, automatic return
of cross-head
Tab. 6.2: Standards for tensile testing of composites based on matrix polymer.
Composite types ASTM standard ISO standard
Elastomers and thermoplastic elastomers D type C :
Thermoplastics D -:
Thermoset D -:
6.2 Mechanical testing 311can be selected depending on the stiffness. To avoid tear at the grips, aluminium tabs
can be boned at both ends of the sample. Sensing the deformation is very critical for
high modulus composites, and may be very accurately measured by universal video ex￾tensometer or a laser extensometer. Clip-on extensometers previously used for rubber
samples are not recommended now.
A typical tensile test result in terms of stress-strain plot of an unfilled elastomer
and 20 phr graphene containing elastomer nanocomposite is shown in Fig. 6.2. The
test result shows uniformity of the behaviour of the elastomers and their nanocompo￾site with progressive stretching. The ultimate strength is almost same for both, about
18 MPa, while the ultimate elongation is reduced from 690% to 580%, but the Young’s
modulus (at ≈ 1% elongation) is much enhanced from 3.5 to 11.5 MPa, upon formation
of graphene nanocomposite. The test result depicts a typically strong elastomer com￾posite behaviour. The difference in the rate of increase in stress due to initial stretch￾ing shows the importance of the stress-strain study to understand the reinforcing
efficacy of a nanofiller. There is a significant improvement in initial stiffness without
much reduction of rubbery flexibility.
6.2.3 Flexure test
FRP composites and high modulus plastics are better studied in bending mode rather
than tensile mode. The bending experiment, also known a flexure experiment, is easier
to perform, require no rigid gripping and less force compared to pulling apart. The
bending or flexural test can be done using a three-point bending or a four-point bend￾ing method. Figures 6.3 and 6.4 show these two typical arrangements. The test can be
performed in UTM using appropriate fixtures. The moving cross-head is moved down￾wards in this experiment to cause a bending deformation. Depending on the geometri￾Fig. 6.2: Result of a tensile experiment of an elastomer and its graphene nanocomposite.
312 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquescal configuration and support, different mathematical expressions for stress, strain and
flexural modulus are used.
Commonly, three-point bending test is done for FRP and other high modulus compo￾sites. The span length between two supports can be a short span of 60 mm with 10%
overhang (the length beyond the support) or a long span of maximum 100 mm with
16–20% percent overhang. Long span is required for very high modulus composites
such as carbon fibre-epoxy composites.
6.2.3.1 Stress and strain in a three-point bending test
Typical short span flexure parameters are described:
Width: 12 mm, thickness (depth: 2.5 mm, span length: 40 mm)
Overhang: 4 mm each side
Total sample length: 48 mm
Bending strain: εf = 6dD
L2 (6:1)
L/2 L/2
F
d
b D
Fig. 6.3: Three-point bending test arrangement.
b
Li
L
F/2 F/2
d
Fig. 6.4: Four-point bending test arrangement.
6.2 Mechanical testing 313where D is the vertical deflection of the outer surface (convex) of the beam at the cen￾tre, L is the span length and d is the depth of the beam:
Corresponding stress: σf = 3FL
2bd2 (6:2)
where F is the force applied, b is the width of the beam. The flexural modulus is the
ratio of the stress to strain and is given by
Es = Stress
Strain = FL3
4bDd3 (6:3)
In case of large span test, typical parameters are described as follows:
Width: 12.5 mm, depth: 3 mm and span length: 100 mm.
Overhang: 16 mm each side.
Total sample length: 132 mm.
If deflections in excess of 10% of the support span occur, the stress in the outer sur￾face of the specimen for a simple beam can be approximately given by
σf = 3FL
2bd2 1 + 6 D
L
 2
− 4 d
L
  D
L
" #   (6:4)
Strain is given by the same expression as short span and the flexural modulus is
given by
EL = FL3
4bDd3 1 + 6 D
L
 2
− 4 d
L
  D
L
" #   (6:5)
6.2.3.2 Stress and strain in four-point bending test
For the four-point bend setup, as in Fig. 6.4, if the loading span is 1/2 of the support
span (i.e. Li = 1/2 L), the stress is
σ = 3FL
4bd2 (6:6)
If the loading span is neither 1/3 nor 1/2, the support span for the four-point bend set￾up, the stress is
σ = 3FðL − LiÞ
2bd2 (6:7)
Methods of measurement in flexure mode are described in detail in many standards,
and a few important methods are given from ASTM and ISO in Tab. 6.3.
314 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesFlexure test is not suitable for soft materials with large extensional strain such as
composites of elastomers and thermoplastic elastomers. For these soft materials, ten￾sile test is appropriate. On the other hand, tensile test for very high modulus compos￾ite is not suitable, and flexure test is more preferable. As a thumb rule, any composite
having more than 30% elongation at break, can be tested by tensile method.
Thickness of flexure test is important and should be restricted to 1/16 of span
length in case of short span and 1/40 to maximum 1/32 of span length for large span.
The high thickness leads to shear strain in between the outer/inner surface compared
to the neutral axis of the beam, and large difference in strain and stress across the
thickness, causing considerable error in calculation of modulus.
A three-point bending flexural test of carbon fibre reinforced epoxy composite
(45 mm x 12.5 mm × 2.5 mm) is taken here as an example from ref [1]. The load￾deflection data extracted from a figure in the reference was used to calculate strain,
stress and secant modulus at various strains.
The ultimate bending strength is 190 MPa and % strain at break is 10%. The calcu￾lated stress and secant Flexural modulus are plotted against strain as shown in Fig. 6.5
Tab. 6.3: Standards of flexural tests for polymeric composites.
Standard Description
ASTM D- Standard Test Methods for Flexural Properties of Unreinforced and Reinforced
Plastics and Electrical Insulating Materials – Procedure A: Material that breaks at
relatively low deformation and Procedure B: Material that Fails at relatively large
deformation
ASTM D /
D  M-
Standard Test Method for Flexural Properties of Polymer Matrix Composite Materials
DIN EN ISO
:
FRP Composite – Determination of Flexural Properties
ISO 
(Method B)
FRP Composites – Determination of Flexural Properties – Measurements in
four-point bending.
DIN EN ISO
:
Plastics – Determination of Flexural Properties
ISO -: Fibre-reinforced plastic composites— Determination of laminate through-thickness
properties — Part : Determination of the elastic modulus, the strength and the
Weibull size effects by flexural test of unidirectional laminate, for carbon-fibre based
systems.
ASTM D Flexural Properties Testing of Fiber Reinforced Pultruded Plastic Rods
ASTM D Flexural Properties Testing of Unreinforced and Reinforced Plastics by Four-Point
Bending
6.2 Mechanical testing 315to show that the composite has decreasing modulus from 14.6 GPa at 0.15% strain to 2
GPa at 9% strain, typical of a viscoelastic material, despite 60% carbon fibre loading by
volume.
6.2.4 Compression test
Compression properties are used for structural components of composites in most
load-bearing application such as machinery foundation, vibration mounts and col￾umns. Compression experiment of high strength composite is difficult due to three
reasons [2, 3] such as end splitting of the surface of the sample, possibility of buckling
of sample under force and perfect alignment along the axis of force without slippage
of the sample. A careful arrangement can eliminate these problems to large extent.
All standards suggest some suitable fixtures and gripping arrangement to avoid non￾alignment, slippage and buckling. Table 6.4 lists the standards of compression test
where anti-buckling guides are provided for correctness of compression strength.
Fig. 6.5: A typical flexural test result for a CFRP composite using three-point bending method (reprinted
with permission from Ben Wang [1]. © 2020, De Gruyter, Publisher Publishing Company).
Tab. 6.4: Standards for compression test of polymer matrix composites.
Standard Description
ASTM D- Standard Test Method for Compressive Properties of Rigid Plastics
ASTM D/DM
or D/DM
For compressive properties of resin-matrix, composites reinforced with
oriented continuous, discontinuous, or cross-ply reinforcements
DIN EN ISO : Fibre-reinforced plastic composites – determination of compressive
properties in the in-plane direction
ISO : Plastics — determination of compressive properties
316 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesCompressive properties can be measured for laminates using through the thick￾ness mode where the force is applied transverse to the fibre lay-up. It has been ob￾served [4] that the cross-ply arrangement (0°/90°) of fibre has higher compressive
modulus compared to the unidirectional orientation. Compressive strength of cylin￾drical samples of FRPs are reported to be lower than their tensile strength because of
the fact that in tension, failure took place by fibre rupture while in compression, the
failure was by separation of longitudinally aligned fibres because of matrix rupture,
rather than buckling [5]. Effect of buckling, however, has also been reported by Deitz
et al. [6] while measuring compression properties of FRP bars of 15 mm diameter and
210 mm buckling length in the direction of fibre orientation.
The UTM can be used for measurement of compression properties with special
arrangements to prevent buckling. Both ASTM and ISO standards recommend anti￾buckling fixtures for compressive properties. Figure 6.6 shows one typical arrange￾ment of sample holder for a cylindrical sample for compression test and one for pris￾matic sample for through the thickness measurement.
Figure 6.7 shows a compression test result as dependence of stress and Compressive
modulus on compressive strain for a sample of carbon fabric-vinyl ester-epoxy hybrid
resin system intended for use in making a high-pressure ball valve body for naval ap￾plication. The sample was prismatic in shape with 10 mm × 10 mm cross section and
15 mm height, tested in through the thickness mode as shown in Fig. 6.6(B). The maxi￾mum strength is seen to be about 1.5 GPa, and the yielding starts at 18% strain. Maxi￾mum compressive modulus was 8.3 GPa at 16% strain. The stress and modulus range
were important to decide its suitability.
Fig. 6.6: Compression specimen arrangement: (A) cylindrical sample and (B) prismatic sample.
6.2 Mechanical testing 3176.2.5 Shear test
Shear test is somewhat more complicated since there should be a force couple acting
on two surfaces to shear a solid. The sample is to be held between two jigs in a UTM
and the force is applied to one fixer jig to shear the specimen. This is difficult for high
modulus composites, but simple for elastomeric composites. However, using some ap￾propriate fixing method and using two strain gauges, one for in-axis and the other for
transverse strain, and the shear stress and modulus is calculated from the strain
gauge readings. A simple method almost similar to three-point bending is also done
for shear properties of composites. The standards for shear tests are given in Tab. 6.5,
and different methods are also described in brief.
Tab. 6.5: Standards of shear test for polymer matrix composites.
Standards Description
ASTM D- Short beam shear testing for interlaminar parallel fibers
ASTM C  Standard test method for shear properties of sandwich core materials
ISO : Fibre-reinforced plastic composites. Determination of apparent interlaminar shear strength
by short-beam method. Applicable also for reinforced pultruded thermoset products
ASTM D-
()
Standard test method for in-plane shear strength of reinforced plastics in-plane shear
strength of reinforced thermosetting plastics in flat sheet form in thicknesses ranging
from . to . mm
ASTM D- Standard test method for shear strength of plastics by punch tool
ISO :  Fibre-reinforced plastic composites — shear test method using a shear frame for the
determination of the in-plane shear stress/shear strain response and shear modulus
Fig. 6.7: Compression test result of a CFRP in through the thickness test of a prismatic sample.
318 Chapter 6 Experimental techniques6.2.5.1 The short beam shear test for composite material
Different standards (e.g. ASTM D2344 and BS EN ISO 14130:1998) describe slightly dif￾ferent versions of the short beam shear test. However, the underlying principles are
the same. A specimen with a rectangular cross-section is placed upon two lower sup￾ports that are a fixed distance apart (the “span”). A central load is then applied to the
specimen from above. The geometry of the specimen is such that its span-to-thickness
ratio is relatively low. This ensures that the specimen is predominantly loaded in
shear. Figure 6.8 shows a typical short beam shear test arrangement with the semi￾circular supports and the ram with semi-circular tip for force application.
6.2.5.2 In-plane shear testing of FRP composites
In-plane shear properties of composites are measured by a tensile test of +45/−45 ply
in resin matrix with a notch at the middle of the FRP with two strain gauges. It is
known that shear at 45° is uncoupled from axial stress in tension. Hence, in-plane
shear modulus can be determined by a simple tensile test by monitoring strains in
±45° ply oriented FRP. Figure 6.9 shows a typical sample of FRP with 45° cross-ply pre￾pared for in-plane shear test, with two orthogonal (0°/90°) degree strain gauges fixed
onto the sample beam.
6.2.5.3 Shear and bond strength test for plastics and rubber composites
For particulate and nanocomposites of plastics and rubber, two types of shear test are
dual shear arrangement as shown in Fig. 6.10 which is especially applicable for softer
plastics such as polyethylene and polypropylenes and rubbers. The downward push
of the two samples also gives the adhesion bond strength with the two metal fixers as
seen in the figure. For exclusively rubber-based composites, a quadruple sample ar￾rangement with two rigid end plates adhered by a strong glue is used for shear test as
shown in Fig. 6.11. This test is also used to determine the strength of the adhesive
bond between the polymer and metal.
Tab. 6.5 (continued)
Standards Description
ISO : For rubber, vulcanized or thermoplastic – determination of shear modulus and
adhesion to rigid plates – quadruple-shear methods
DIN EN  Carbon fibre reinforced plastics – unidirectional laminates. Determination of the
apparent interlaminar shear strength (aerospace)
DIN  Fibre-reinforced plastics – determination of interlaminar shear strength by tensile test
DIN  Testing of sandwiches – shear test
6.2 Mechanical testing 319Fig. 6.8: Short beam shear test set-up.
Fig. 6.9: In-plane shear test sample of FRP.
Fig. 6.10: Dual shear test for plastic- and rubber-based composites.
320 Chapter 6 Experimental techniques6.2.6 Stress, strain and modulus in shear
(1) Short beam test
This is not a test for determination of fundamental properties such as shear modulus
and its variation with strain, etc., but to qualify a material for a shear application to
decide the ultimate shear strength of a composite. The ultimate “short beam strength”
(ASTM D2344) is calculated from the test parameters as
Shear strength: σs = 0.75
Fs
bh (6:8)
where b and h are width and depth of the specimen and Fs is the force applied to the
specimen at the centre to rupture.
(2) In-plane shear
The details of the mathematical equations for this type of in-plane test are described
in reference [7]. According to the sample arrangement in Fig. 6.9,
σ1 = Bσxx
σ2 = ð1 − BÞσxx
(6:9)
where σxx is the axial stress along the sample axis and σ1 and σ2 are the stresses at
normal to the ply orientation as shown in Fig. 6.9, and B is given by
B =
m2ð2m2 − 1Þ + 4m2n2 G12
E2
E2
E1
ν12 + 1
 
4m2n2 G12
E2
E2
E1 + 2 E2
E1
ν12 + 1
  + m2 − n2 ð Þð2m2 − 1Þ
2
4
3
5 (6:10)
and the in-plane shear stress is given by
Fig. 6.11: Set-up for quadruple shear test for rubber composites.
6.2 Mechanical testing 321τ12 = −1
2mn
B 1 − 2m2   + m2 
 σxx (6:11)
For element orientation is 45° with the applied force axis, as in Fig. 6.9, the in-plane
shear stress is simplified as
τ12 = ∓
σxx
2 (6:12)
The shear strain in the principal material direction is
γ12 = − εxx − εyy   (6:13)
where ɛxx and ɛyy are strains in the orthogonal directions of the element.
The shear modulus is given by
G12 = σxx
2 εxx − εyy   (6:14)
(3) Dual shear test
According to Fig. 6.10, the shear stress is given by
σs = F
πDdiet (6:15)
where F is the force applied to the punch, t and Ddie are the thickness of the test speci￾men and diameter of the die punch. Shear strain is given by
γ = h
ðRdie − RsampleÞ (6:16)
where h is the deformation of the sample as shown in Fig. 6.10.
Therefore, the shear modulus is
G = σs Rdie − Rsample  
h (6:17)
6.3 Impact testing
6.3.1 Izod and Charpy tests
Polymeric materials are sometimes subjected to rapid stress loading or impact loads.
A number of test methods are available for assessing impact strength of hard materi￾als and most used methods are so-called Izod and Charpy (pendulum) impact tests. The
Izod test is the more popular method for plastics and composite materials, whereas
322 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesCharpy is very common for metals. Table 6.6 lists the standards for Izod pendulum
impact energy measurement.
A sketch of a pendulum Izod impact tester is shown in Fig. 6.12. A proper sample prep￾aration with the precise notch and repeated measurements using 5–10 samples is rec￾ommended for a good average data. The total impact energy depends on both the size
of the test specimen and the notch shape and length. A standard specimen is usually
used to allow comparison between different materials.
The pendulum impact test involves the measurement of the energy required to
break a test specimen that is clamped at the ends and then struck in the centre by a
pendulum weight. The energy required to break the specimen is obtained from the
loss in energy of the pendulum. This energy is simply the difference in potential en￾ergy of the hammer before and after the impact and given by
Efr = mg hð Þ S − hE (6:18)
where m is the mass of the hammer, g is the gravitational acceleration (9.81 m/s2
), h is
its height, while the suffixes S and E denote start and end.
The values are reported in terms of absorbed energy per unit of thickness at the
notch (such as J/m or ft.lb/in). Alternatively, the results may be reported as absorbed
energy per unit cross-sectional area at the notch (J/m2 or ft.lb/in2
). The dimensions of
an ASTM D256 standard specimen are 63.5 × 12.7 × 3.2 mm (2.5 × 0.5 × 0.125 in), with a
45° (angle) notch with a depth of 2.5 mm and slightly round at the wedge end of radius
0.25 mm. Due to the intricate shape and small dimensions of the notch, it is best to
mould the sample in a polished metallic die rather than cutting from a sheet. Particu￾larly, fibre reinforced composites are difficult to cut to such dimensions, since there
Tab. 6.6: Izod impact test standards.
Standard Description
ASTM D Standard test method for determining the Izod pendulum impact resistance of plastics.
The test requires specimens to be made with a milled notch
ISO :  Plastics – determination of Izod impact strength
Fig. 6.12: (A) Sketch of an Izod impact tester and
(B) sample with notch.
6.3 Impact testing 323can be fibre pull out at the cutting edge. Injection moulded samples for thermoplastic￾based particulate and short fibre composites would be good for this test.
6.3.2 Drop weight impact test
In drop weight impact test, a dart is allowed to fall on the sample and impact energy
along with failure characteristics is evaluated. The test is carried out as per ASTM
D7136. A photograph of an instrumented drop weight impact tester used by Çallioğlu
and Ergun [8], i.e. Instron-Dynatup 9250 HV model is shown in Fig. 6.13. The instru￾mented drop weight impact tester comprises a dropping crosshead with its accessories,
a pneumatic clamping fixture, a pneumatic rebound brake, and Dynatup 930-I impulse
data acquisition system. Testing machine can apply an impact energy ranging from 2.6
to 826 J, with the support of a spring without adding an extra weight to the weight box.
Maximum physical drop height at which weight can be dropped is 1.25 m. Similarly,
the maximum impact velocity is 5 m/s. The top of the impactor has a 12.5 mm diameter
hemispherical tip and pneumatic rebound brake system which prevents the repeated
impact on specimens. Impulse data acquisition system records the electronic signals
and converts them into the impact parameters, such velocity, and energy. The speci￾mens are clamped with the pneumatic fixture with an impact window of 30 mm diam￾eter and the desired impact energy is applied. A schematic diagram of standard test
piece size and impact position is presented [8] in Fig. 6.14. A typical load vs. deforma￾tion plot of 12-layer glass/epoxy composite is shown [8] in Fig. 6.15.
Fig. 6.13: Test equipment: (A) Dynatup 9250 HV impact test (B) Instron 8801 compression test (reprinted
with permission from Hasan Çallioğlu [8]. © 2014, De Gruyter Publishing Company).
324 Chapter 6 Experimental techniques100
150
impact position
Fig. 6.14: Schematic diagram of standard test piece size and impact position (Reprinted with permission
from Kang Yang [9]. © 2022, De Gruyter Publishing Company).
Fig. 6.15: Impact load-deflection curve for 12 layers (reprinted with permission from Hasan Çallioğlu [8].
© 2020, De Gruyter Publishing Company).
6.3 Impact testing 3256.3.3 Post-impact testing
6.3.3.1 Compression test
Unlike Izod or Charpy test, in drop weight impact test, complete failure may not
take place. Therefore post impact analysis and testing is very important. Yang et al.
[9] carried out detail post impact testing of three types of carbon fibre composite lami￾nate prepared by resin transfer moulding (RTM) technique with different types of fi￾bres: unidirectional carbon fibre prepreg (UIN23100), carbon fibre woven fabric (W￾3021FF) and carbon fibre-aramid fibre-blended fabric (W-38211). They have studied
Fig. 6.16: Test equipment: (a) the ultrasonic C-scan, (b) the post impact compression test fixture and
(c) the static universal testing machine (reprinted with permission from Kang Kang Yang [9].
© 2022, De Gruyter Publishing Company).
326 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesthe compression and ultrasonic C-scan tests. The photographs of the ultrasonic C-scan,
the post impact compression test fixture and the static universal testing machine are
shown in Fig. 6.16. The impact generated dents on the front side of the laminate as we
can see the typical impact damage indentation in Fig. 6.17. After the impact test, the
three-material composite laminates were visually inspected, and no visible damage
was found on the reverse side of the impact. Then, the laminates were subjected to
ultrasonic C-scan to detect the damage of the specimen under the same impact condi￾tion. Figure 6.18 shows the typical results of ultrasonic C-scan after the impact. It can
be seen that the image after the impact shows failure morphology similar to the “top
hat shape”. Similar results were reported by Talreja et al. [10].
In addition, the dent depth of the UIN23100/9314 specimen is smaller than that of the
woven fabric specimen; therefore, the ability of UIN23100/9314 specimen to absorb
and transfer impact energy is greater than that of woven fabric specimen. According
to the ultrasonic C-scan results of the woven fabric specimen (Fig. 6.17b and c) the
dent diameter of the W-38211 specimen is larger and the ability of absorbing and
transferring impact energy is improved compared to that of the W-3021FF specimen.
The load-bearing compressive strength values of UIN23100, UIN23100 and W-3021FF
laminates are 147, 175 and 191 MPa, respectively. The results show that the compres￾sion bearing capacity of the woven fabric specimen after impact is higher than that of
the carbon fibre unidirectional prepreg specimen, while for the resin-based woven
fabric material; the compression bearing capacity of the W-38211 laminate is higher
than that of the W-3021FF laminate. Failure of cracks of three kinds of materials ex￾tends along the width direction, but not along the length direction. Because the impact
on the carbon fibre unidirectional prepreg specimen caused less damage, the damage
modes of the front and back of the impact are consistent, and the damage of the speci￾Fig. 6.17: Typical impact damage indentation (reprinted with permission from Kang Yang [9].
© 2022, De Gruyter Publishing Company).
6.3 Impact testing 327men is caused mainly by the shear failure between the fibres. In the woven fabric
laminates, the front of the impact presents a failure morphology characterized by
shear failure, with less delamination failure. On the back of the impact, a large num￾ber of spalling occurred, and the local deformation presented a “C”-shaped bulge in
the same direction as the dent.
6.3.3.2 Buckling tests
Ergun and coworkers [8] investigated the buckling behaviours of impacted and non
impacted specimens at different impact points and energy levels, and having different
thicknesses using a universal testing machine (UTM) of 50 kN loading capacity. Both
the ends of the specimen are clamped into the machine’s jaws, one of which is mov￾able toward and away from the other. Axial Servo hydraulic testing machine has an
adjustable crosswise head and its maximum hydraulic pressure is 207 bars. The axial
compression tests are performed using displacement control with a speed of 0.3 mm/
Area: 99.60%
Area: 99.60% 10 mm
10 mm
10 mm Area: 99.60%
(a)
(c)
(b)
0 μ 0 μ
0 μ
Fig. 6.18: Typical results of ultrasonic C-scan after impact: (a) UIN23100/9314, (b) W-3021FF/285/287 and
(c) W-38211/285/287 (reprinted with permission from Kang Yang [9]. © 2022, De Gruyter Publishing
Company).
328 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesmin. During the test, the load versus displacement (contraction) curve is measured
and recorded automatically by test machine. The hydraulic pressure in the head of
machine during buckling tests was almost 40 bars. It was concluded from the above
mentioned study that when a thin laminate is impacted at the centre the buckling
loads are dramatically decreased for lower energy level. On the other hand a gradual
decrease in buckling load is observed for a thicker composite. The change in the criti￾cal buckling loads decreases with increasing energy levels. As the distance between
the point of impact and the centre of the specimen increases, the change in the critical
buckling load values tend to reduce rapidly.
6.4 Dynamic mechanical analysis
Dynamic mechanical analysis is done to study the viscoelastic properties and fatigue of
composite materials under time-varying force. In order to calculate the properties in
time domain and frequency domain, the dynamic part is a pure sign wave so that mathe￾matical equations can be used without complications. Secondly, the frequency of force
cycle is very limited, so that the data acquisition is accurate enough to capture the locus
of force and deformation (stress and strain) and also, to precisely measure the difference
in phase angle between the stress and strain. The test is done as a temperature sweep or
isothermal, at fixed frequencies and not in a frequency sweep method. The fundamental
properties revealed by this analysis are viscoelastic parameters, mechanical energy loss,
several transitions of a polymer such as a-, b- and g-transition temperatures, composition
of a polymer mix, process and kinetics of curing, effect of moisture and plasticizer on
modulus of elasticity, creep, relaxation and temperature limits of practical application
for a structural material, such as a composite. The elastic modulus can be measured in
all modes such as tension, compression, bending and shear. Table 6.7 lists the standards
of measurement procedures. The standards elaborately describe the sample preparation,
and testing methods by all modes of operation in DMA.
The machine, commonly known as dynamic mechanical analyser (DMA), has also
some synonyms such as DMTA and DMS. The machine uses the basic principle of
UTM, but with very low force because the moving ram has to oscillate quite fast even
at 10 Hz (cycle time = 0.1 s), without much inertial resistance. The brief functional
specification of a typical DMA is listed in Tab. 6.8.
Tab. 6.7: Standards for analysis of dynamic mechanical properties.
Standard Description
ASTM D, D, D Dynamic mechanical analysis
ISO  (Parts  to ) Plastics – determination of dynamic mechanical property
6.4 Dynamic mechanical analysis 329Details of criticalities in measurement regarding preferred frequency limit, sam￾ple dimensions and data analysis including time-temperature transformation are
given in ref. [11]. A typical result of variation of dynamic (storage) modulus with tem￾perature of an elastomer-graphene nanocomposite is shown in Fig. 6.19 at various
fixed frequencies and subsequent frequency scale master curve at a reference tem￾perature of 30 °C is shown in Fig. 6.20.
Tab. 6.8: Brief functional specification of a DMA.
Parameters Typical specification
Elastic modulus range 
– N/m (precision: ±%)
Temperature range and accuracy − °C to +  °C (controllable using liquid nitrogen and heater)
±. °C
Temperature ramp . °C/min to  °C/min
Fixed frequencies ., ., ., ., ., ., , , , , , , , .
Maximum force  N (static maximum  N)
Deformation precision . micron
Deformation range(amplitude) . micron to  mm
Loss factor range and accuracy .–. Accuracy: ±.
Modes of measurement (i) Tension, (ii) Single and double shear, (iii) single cantilever,
(iv) dual cantilever, (v) three-point bending
(vi) Compression
Programs (i) Isothermal run, at one or several fixed frequencies
(ii) Temperature sweep at a fixed frequency
(iii) Creep and stress relaxation
Type of samples Soft and hard composites including FRP
Sample geometry Should be defined by manufacturer of the DMA
Software (i) For all operations, data analysis, graphical and tabular
representation of storage modulus, loss modulus, complex
modulus, loss factor, complex viscosity
(ii) Arrhenius and WLF software for master curve and activation
energy determination
All data should be available in Excel spreadsheet.
330 Chapter 6 Experimental techniques6.5 Thermal analysis
Physical and chemical changes in a polymer due to heat are studied for several investiga￾tive and application-oriented requirements. Behaviour of a polymer from cryogenic tem￾perature to its decomposition temperature reveals very important information about the
polymer. At extremely low temperature, the oscillatory motion and relaxation of even
the smallest group or molecules attached in a polymer remains frozen. On increasing the
temperature gradually, the γ-relaxation of an end group or defect is observed, followed
by onset of movement by side groups and a crank-shaft-type motion by 4 carbon atoms
in the chain, resulting in β-relaxation and finally, segmental motion, as α-relaxation, sets
in, which is a glass to rubber transition. The segments of a linear polymer chain can be
made of minimum 8 carbon atoms to maximum about 50 carbon atoms. At this point, the
Fig. 6.19: Storage modulus of a rubber-graphene nanocomposite converted in frequency scale at 30 °C
reference temperature.
Fig. 6.20: Frequency-scale master curve at a reference temperature of 30 °C.
6.5 Thermal analysis 331free volume increase, the specific heat changes to a higher value and the coefficient of
thermal expansion also increases. However, the phenomenon of glass to rubber transi￾tion only exhibited by amorphous phase in the polymer. Further heating results in melt￾ing of the crystalline phase in the polymer to a flowable consistency. However, for fully
amorphous polymers and cross-linked polymers, the fluidity is not observed. On further
heating, the decomposition takes place, rather than volatilization, since the secondary va￾lence forces are much stronger than primary bonds in polymers. The decomposition can
be due to chain scission, fragmentation, oxidation, release of side groups, etc., and finally
charring. Heat can also be used to study volatile matter content such as moisture, or, crys￾talline melting point and heat of melting, and also to study reactions such as curing of
resins. For composites, all the thermal behaviours are similar to their parent matrix, with
change in the intensity of the properties. Therefore, the study of change in the thermal
properties and of reaction dynamics with variation of the content of reinforcements is
important to design appropriate composite material.
Various thermal analysis instruments are used to study different types of thermal
effects on polymers and composites. Some of the important instruments and method
of thermal analysis with few relevant international standards are described below.
6.5.1 Differential thermal analysis (DTA)
In this analytical method, the polymer sample in a metallic/ceramic pan is heated at a
constant heating rate along with another blank pan as reference. Both the sample and
the reference are heated by the same heat source and the difference in temperature
ΔT between the two is recorded. The plot of ΔT vs. temperature will be a straight line
with a steady slope, if the heat capacity is independent of temperature. When a transi￾tion occurs in a sample, a temperature difference will show as endothermic or exo￾thermic depending on the transition. Therefore, the DTA can reveal a phase change or
decomposition, which is either exothermic or endothermic, with a peak which is in￾dicative of the temperature of the phase change or maximum decomposition tempera￾ture. Table 6.9 lists the standards for measurement procedures by DTA.
Tab. 6.9: Standards for measurement of thermal property by DTA.
Standard Description
ASTM E-() Standard test method for melting and crystallization temperatures by thermal
analysis
DIN  Thermal analysis; determination of melting temperatures of crystalline
materials by differential thermal analysis
DIN  Thermal analysis – differential thermal analysis (DTA) and differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC) – general principles
332 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesThe analyser consists of two sample holders fitted with two thermocouples for
temperature measurement of sample and reference, while another thermocouple is
used controlling the heating rate by adjustment of the current flow through the heat￾ers of the furnace. The sample and reference pan with the base holder is enclosed in
a furnace which can be cooled or heated by programmable rate using liquid nitrogen
and electric heaters. Nitrogen gas flow at a rate not more than 50 mL/min is used to
provide inert atmosphere to avoid oxidation. A typical sketch of the functional part of
a DTA is shown in Fig. 6.21.
A schematic plot in Fig. 6.22 shows the nature of the plot of a polymer showing Tg,
Crystallization, crystalline melting, oxidation/decomposition. During crystallization or
melting, the temperature of the sample remains constant, but the reference tempera￾ture changes, hence ΔT changes, and on completion of the event, the base line again
shows a linear nature, till oxidation. Oxidation is associated with exothermic heat,
therefore the positive peak in y-axis (ΔT) indicates oxidation. However, if the mea￾surement is done in inert atmosphere, then the dotted line shows linear change in
temperature instead of the peak. Decomposition, at inert atmosphere, for a polymer is
endothermic.
6.5.2 Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)
A polymer composite, on heating, may release volatile substances physically mixed in it,
and/or decompose to produce volatile molecules and oxidized gases and finally, the resi￾due may be the charred carbon and metal oxides and silica (if any). Each step of mass
loss occurring at specific temperature zones is recorded by the TGA instrument. The
mass of the polymer composite sample is continuously recorded against temperature in
either isothermal mode or under constant hating rate. The mass loss upon heating, gives
the valuable information on the initial volatile (such as moisture) content, decomposition
Fig. 6.21: Sketch of a DTA functional part only.
6.5 Thermal analysis 333stages, and thermal stability of a material. On coupling with a gas chromatograph-mass
spectrometer (GC-MS) or Fourier-transform infrared spectrophotometer (FTIR), composi￾tion of the evolved gases can be analysed, which is used in composition analysis of a
sample. Additionally, the first derivative of the weight loss (dw/dt), commonly known as
DTG, gives the maximum decomposition rate and temperature at which it occurred. The
residue helps in analysis of the mineral/silica content. Hence, the TGA allows one to
study the composition of the material. Table 6.10 lists the standards for measuring such
properties and analysis by TGA. Generally, a TGA for polymeric materials operate in
the temperature range of cryogenic to maximum 1,000 °C and heating rate can be
0.1–100 °C/min, with flexible options of start and end temperatures, isothermal, dy￾namic run, and also different programmed zones in a single run. For low temperature,
liquid nitrogen envelop is used with special flow control system. Figure 6.23 shows a
functional part of a typical TGA instrument.
Present-day TGA uses a modulated temperature scan, where, the steady state constant
heating ram is continuously superimposed by a dynamic sinusoidal heating power,
which is very effective in enhancing the minute event, e.g. small rate of mass change.
Modulated TGA is now mostly used for thermal analysis of all critical materials in￾Tab. 6.10: Standards for analysis by TGA.
Standard Description
ASTM E A method of measuring volatile components, combustible matter, and ash
content by TGA
ISO -: Thermogravimetry (TG) of polymers – Part : general principles
ISO -: Thermogravimetry (TG) of polymers – Part : determination of activation energy
DIN  Thermal analysis (TA) – thermogravimetry (TG) – principles
Fig. 6.22: A typical DSC plot showing Tg, Tm and Tc of a polymer sample.
334 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquescluding nanocomposites. TGA study can be done under a selected environment such
as blanket of nitrogen/air/helium/argon. In certain cases, oxygen or nitrogen addition
increases the weight, hence weight gain in such study is used to analyse the formation
of nitride or oxide in a composite sample. A good example is microwave absorbing
composite with nanoiron particles, where weight gain is observed in the residue com￾pared to added weight of the iron in the initial composite. For a polymer, the decom￾position under inert atmosphere shows the inherent stability of the polymer, while
under air, it shows actual stability in most application. TGA is also a powerful tool to
study Kinetics of decomposition of composites, accelerated thermal ageing and subse￾quent life time estimation at service conditions. A typical TGA-DTG (dw/dt) plot for an
epoxy thermoset is shown in Fig. 6.24.
Fig. 6.23: Sketch of functional parts of a TGA instrument.
Fig. 6.24: A typical TGA-DTG plot of an epoxy thermoset.
6.5 Thermal analysis 3356.5.3 Thermomechanical analysis (TMA)
Polymers exhibit different rates of dimensional and volume change with change in
temperature. Below the glass transition, the expansion coefficient is lower than that
at above the transition, due to increase in free volume as a result of onset of segmen￾tal mobility beyond the glass transition. In addition, the transition is characterized by
drastic reduction in hardness, which can be observed as an increase in indentation of
a probe onto the surface of a polymer sample. The behaviour of the composites is no
exception. Therefore, the linear and volume expansion coefficients, glass transition
and heat deflection temperature of a composite can be measured with change in tem￾perature using appropriate probes, dilatometer and indentation. Table 6.11 lists the
various standards related to different modes of TMA measurement procedures.
TMA is used to study these characteristics of polymers and composites. The instrument
consists of a sample holder, where quartz vials containing the sample is placed in case
of volume expansion measurement. The vial, fitted with a quartz rod probe is actually
a dilatometer. The other end of the probe is attached to a system of non-contact motor
for force application to the probe. Initial force can be adjusted so that the probe end in
the dilatometer is in good contact with the sample. For volume expansion, the polymer
should be powder or small granules to fill up the vial properly. For linear expansion,
the regular shaped sample can be placed on a flat base of the sample holder and a
quartz probe tip rests on the sample. A small initial force can be applied for firm con￾Tab. 6.11: Standards for measurement procedures by TMA.
Standard Description
ASTM E-( Standard test method for assignment of the glass transition temperature by
thermomechanical analysis
ASTM E  Standard test method for indentation softening temperature by
thermomechanical analysis
ASTM E  Standard test method for distortion temperature in three-point bending by
thermomechanical analysis
ISO -: General conditions for the thermomechanical analysis of thermoplastics and
thermosetting materials, filled or unfilled, in the form of sheet or moulded parts
ISO -: Thermomechanical analysis (TMA) – Part : determination of coefficient of linear
thermal expansion and glass transition temperature
DIN  Testing of plastics; determination of the coefficient of linear thermal expansion
coefficient
DIN  Testing of rubber – determination of low-temperature behaviour of
elastomers – principles and test methods
336 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquestact of the probe tip to the surface of the sample. Present day TMA can apply a wide
range of force, from 0.001 to 2 N and samples of 25 mm length can be accommodated
with a measuring range of ±2.5 mm. The movement of the probe is measured by an
LVDT with an accuracy of about 20 nm. Samples of elastomeric to stiff composites can
be used for TMA study. The furnace, housing the sample holder and temperature sen￾sor, is fitted with both controlled heating and cryogenic cooling by liquid nitrogen. The
measurements are done in nitrogen blanket to avoid oxidation. A sketch of functional
parts of the TMA and some probes are shown in Fig. 6.25.
A linear expansion study of a cured phenolic resin was done in a TMA to determine
the glass transition temperature. Figure 6.26 shows the linear expansion curve with re￾spect to rise in temperature. The thermal expansion curve showed two distinct regions,
below and above the glass transition (Tg = 150 °C), characterized by a sudden increase in
the slope.
Fig. 6.25: (A) Sketch of functional parts of a TMA and (B) different probes.
Fig. 6.26: Thermomechanical analysis of a cured phenolic resin: linear expansion mode.
6.5 Thermal analysis 3376.5.4 Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
The name implies that it is basically a calorimeter, which measures heat as a function
of temperature and time. When a certain mass of a polymer is heated from below its
glass transition temperature, it absorbs heat and the temperature increases according
to its heat capacity. The enthalpy will be linearly varying with temperature due to the
constant heat capacity. At the glass transition, the mobility of the chain segments set
in, thereby causing an increase in the heat capacity, and hence, there will be a change
in the base line of the enthalpy vs temperature plot. Similarly, during a crystalline
melting, there will be an endothermic peak as the material will absorb energy without
change in temperature. Hence, crystallization phenomenon is characterized by an
exothermic peak when the molten mass is cooled down. In a chemical reaction such
as curing of thermoset, the reaction is indicated by an exothermic peak. The physical
and chemical changes including reactions of a polymeric composite takes place within
about 350 °C, beyond which, most polymers decompose. There can be quite large num￾ber of parameters and study by DSC. However, some standard methods of measure￾ment are listed in Tab. 6.12.
These phenomena are studied using a Differential Scanning Calorimeter (DSC) which
compares the change in enthalpy (endo or exo) of two identical metallic/ceramic
pans, one blank as reference and the other with the polymeric sample. Generally, a
DSC works on either temperature compensation mode or power compensation mode,
to compare the difference in consumed power between reference and sample. Any
change from the base line during the run is due to the thermal effect on the polymer,
since the metallic or ceramic pan do not show any physical or chemical change in the
DSC temperature range (cryogenic to 600 °C) under inert gas blanket. A sketch of func￾tional parts of a DSC instrument is shown in Fig. 6.27.
Tab. 6.12: Standards for some measurements by DSC.
Standard Description
ASTM D- and E Heat of fusion, crystallization, melting point and glass transition by DSC
ISO  General DSC principles, method of determination of temperature and
enthalpy of melting and crystallization, and determination of glass
transition temperature
DIN  Testing of plastics and elastomers; thermal analysis; DSC-method
DIN  Aerospace Testing of thermosetting resin systems with and without
reinforcement – DSC method
338 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesIt is known that thermosets do not have crystalline phase, hence on heating, they
exhibit glass transition and on further heating, decompose. Similarly, all amorphous
polymers and their composites do not exhibit melting phenomenon.
Crystalline melting is only shown by thermoplastics with crystalline phase. Exam￾ples of glass transition and crystal melting can be seen for a thermoplastic material as
shown in Fig. 6.28. The forward run (solid line) shows the Glass transition tempera￾ture at about 117 °C, indicated by a change in the base line, followed by an endother￾mic peak for melting at 162 °C. Upon cooling (dotted line), crystallization takes place,
indicated by an exothermic peak (heat is released upon crystallization) at 115 °C.
The crystallization temperature is the temperature where the molecules rearrange
into ordered formation (crystallize, and an exothermic process). The melting tempera￾ture is where the polymer chains can freely move and ordered arrangements are dis￾rupted (this annihilates any prior crystallization; an endothermic process). This
explains the reason for different temperatures for melting and crystallization.
The heat flow in the Y-axis is actually the rate of flow of heat (dH/dt), either in
mW or in W/g, if the mass of the polymer sample is known. Therefore, the area under
the curve of melting or crystallization peak (in dH/dt vs time) would give enthalpy of
melting or crystallization in J/g. The enthalpy of melting is additive for polymer
blends and DSC study can be useful to find a blend composition, if the pure compo￾nents are both crystalline/semi-crystalline and individual melting values are known
or measured by DSC. Similarly, polymer content in an unknown composition of a
composite can also be determined, if cry thermoplastic semi-crystalline polymer is
identified.
DSC is also used to study reaction kinetics and very widely used for quantitative
studies on enthalpy of reaction in vulcanization of elastomer composites, curing of
thermoset composites including epoxy, phenolic, polyurethanes, etc. Various kinetic
expressions are derived using the heat flow rate (dH/dt) vs time and temperature
data, and this is discussed in detail in Chapter 3 under Curing of Thermoset-Based
Composites. A typical curing plot of an epoxy resin with an amine hardener is shown
Fig. 6.27: Sketch of functional parts of a DSC instrument.
6.5 Thermal analysis 339in Fig. 6.29. The area under the curve gives the enthalpy of reaction in J/g. The peak of
the curve shows maximum rate of the curve, and the corresponding temperature
from the figure is 157.4 °C.
6.5.5 Dielectric analysis (DEA)
Dielectric properties of composites are very important for application in electrical gadg￾ets, casings, printed circuit boards, etc. Most thermosets are polar in nature, and so are
their composites. Dielectric strength (permittivity) of a polar polymer undergoes drastic
change in frequency and temperature domain with loss of the property due to relaxation
of the dipoles. In addition, ionic translations towards opposite electrodes also changes in
similar manner. Therefore, like dynamic mechanical properties, dielectric properties are
characterized by relaxation and are complex like the complex elastic modulus. The com￾plex dielectric permittivity (e
✶
) has, therefore, a real part (ε′) and an imaginary or loss
Fig. 6.29: A typical curing curve of an epoxy resin cured by a polyetheramine.
Fig. 6.28: DSC plot of a semi-crystalline thermoplastic: heating and cooling runs.
340 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquespart (ε"), widely varying with temperature and frequency. The dielectric relaxation time
is the inverse of the angular frequency at which the loss (ε") attains a peak value, just as
loss modulus peak.
There is no specific standard for complex permittivity measurement below 0.50 GHz.
Only, ASTM D150 and IEC 60250 are the standards for measurement of dielectric constant
(DC) and dissipation factor (DF) in the general frequency range of 10 Hz to 2 MHz. How￾ever, these standards do not specify temperature sweep, nor mentions the necessity to
use the DEA instrument. ASTM D2520–21 is the relevant standard of test method for
Complex Permittivity of Solid Electrical Insulating Materials at Microwave Frequencies
(0.5–50 GHz) and Temperatures up to 1,650 °C. The test methods cover the determina￾tion of relative complex permittivity (dielectric constant and dissipation factor) of non￾magnetic solid dielectric materials.
Dielectric analysis provides the most sensitive method to study local motions along
the chains of polar polymers, since polar bonds (such as >C=OH, -COOH, -C ≡ N and
>N–H) are directly affected by the electric stimulus. Therefore, DEA can be used to
study complex permittivity even beyond GHz range, and there are different instru￾ments for such high frequency ranges, such as vector network analyser. The GHz range
is very useful in strategic defence subjects such as radar stealth coatings and compo￾sites. Details of dielectric analysis are described in ref. [12].
A sketch of the functional parts of a typical DEA is shown in Fig. 6.30. The in￾strument houses a source of alternating electric field applied through gold coated
electrodes across the thin disc type sample. The field can have sweep of frequency
and fixed as well, at fixed temperatures and temperature sweep at fixed frequen￾cies. The DEA cell is housed in a furnace with controlled electrical heating arrange￾ments and also cooling by liquid nitrogen and a system of purging inert gas such as
nitrogen to avoid oxidation of the test sample. Common DEA instruments are very
widely used in study of curing thermosets in research and production as well. As
the curing proceeds, the loss part reduces due to the reduction of mobility of the
dipoles while the real part of complex permittivity (ɛ′) and ion viscosity rises
sharply at gel point.
An epoxy thermoset was studied for complex dielectric property in temperature
scale at fixed frequencies of 103
, 104 and 106 Hz. The real part of permittivity (ɛ′) and
the tanδ is shown in Fig. 6.31. At higher frequency, the peak loss shifts towards higher
temperature, indicating faster relaxation, which is the general behaviour of a poly￾mer. Also, the value of tanδ is progressively higher for higher frequency, which is a
typical property of dielectrics.
6.5 Thermal analysis 3416.6 Morphological study
6.6.1 Light microscopy
Light microscope (LM) is utilized to generate magnified image of an object by using of
a series of glass lenses so that one can visualize a fine details of the same. In LM a
beam of light is focused onto or through an object, and the image formed is enlarged
by using convex objective lenses. In most of the commercially available LM, the image
is observed directly through a binocular eyepiece, which acts as a secondary lens in
the form of a magnifying glass in order to observe the projected image. These are
known as ‘compound microscopes,’ in which the total magnification is calculated
from the sum of the objective magnification and the eyepiece magnification. The mag￾nification range varies from ×10 to ×1,000, with a resolving power of the order of
0.2 μm which again depends on the type and numerical aperture of the objective
lenses. Light microscope is an extremely versatile instrument and allows to examine
specimens of any size, whole or sectioned, wet or dry, hot or cold, and static or fast￾Fig. 6.31: A DEA experiment of an engineering plastic sample at fixed frequencies.
Furnace
V, I to Electrodes
Guard Ring
Electrode
Temperature
Sensor
Sample
Fig. 6.30: A sketch of a DEA instrument and the electrode design.
342 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesmoving. When in LM heating arrangement for analysing the sample at a temperature
higher than room temperature is available then it is called hot-stage microscope. In
order to produce better resolution polarized light microscopy is used. In a polarized
light microscope, a polarizer is placed in between the light source and the sample,
which converts the polarized light into plane-polarized light before it hits the sample.
The basic difference between unpolarized light and plane-polarized light is that
plane-polarized light vibrate in in a single direction whereas normal light vibrate in
two mutually perpendicular directions. This polarized light falls on a doubly refract￾ing specimen which generates two wave components that are at right angles to each
other. The waves pass through the sample in different phases. An analyser is used in
polarized light microscopy, which combines the polarized light using constructive and
destructive interference leading to generation of high-contrast image.
LM with is widely used to study the crystallization behaviour of semi-crystalline poly￾mer based composites. It is observed that the incorporation of nanoparticles in a semi￾crystalline polymer matrix affect significantly the crystallization behaviour of the poly￾mer. Depending on the polymer/filler interactions, three different types of behaviour are
expected during the crystallization process such as (i) development of new crystal struc￾tures, (ii) heterogeneous nucleation by fillers and (iii) polymer amorphization by filler
[13]. The author has investigated [14] the crystallization behaviour of nanocomposites of
poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and organoclay using polarized light microscopy. Figure 6.32
compares the POM images of PEO and PEOCN3 (nanocomposite of PEO containing 3 wt%
clay) (which were isothermally crystallized at 40 °C. The morphology of the crystals is
shown at the beginning and at the final stage of crystallization. For the PEO alone, it can
be clearly seen that the spherulites are similar in size. Before impinging upon one an￾other, they appear circular, suggesting a spherical shape. For the intercalated system, the
spherulite formation varies considerably. The spherulites are typically much smaller
than those seen in the virgin PEO. A similar behaviour was reported by Strawhecker and
Manias [15] and also by Ratna et al. [16] for solution intercalated PEOCN systems. It is
clear from Fig. 6.32 that the clay particle acts as a nucleating agent and the PEO crystal￾lized in the heterogeneous nucleation mode. As the number of nucleation sites increased
the number of the spherulites also increased leading to the formation of more number of
smaller spherulite.
It has also been utilized to study [17] the reaction-induced phase separation of a
toughened epoxy resin (modified with epoxy-functionalized hyperbranched poly￾mer) for application as a matrix for fibre-reinforced composites. A mixture epoxy
and hyperbranched polymer (HBP) is heated from room temperature to 100 C and
kept at constant temperature. At various times, photographs were taken on hot￾stage optical microscopy and presented in Fig. 6.33. We can see that the HBP is not
miscible with epoxy at room temperature. As the temperature increases the HBP
gets miscible with epoxy making the mixture homogeneous functionalized HBP is
not miscible with epoxy at room temperature but becomes miscible at higher tem￾peratures (100 °C). With the advancement of curing reaction, the HBP undergoes
6.6 Morphological study 343phase separation and as a result a two-phase microstructure is formed. The reason
for phase separation is the decrease in combinatorial entropy due to formation of
network. Note that mixing of epoxy with HBP is favoured by the increase in combi￾natorial entropy of the mixture.
6.6.2 Scanning electron microscopy
Electron Microscopes are capable of much higher magnifications and have a greater re￾solving power than a light microscope. This is because the wavelength of electron is
much smaller than light and resolution is directly proportional to the wave length. In
fact electron microscopy like scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission elec￾tron microscopy (TEM) are able to image much smaller objects at sub cellular, molecular
level. Another difference is that LM reveals only in-plain details of morphology whereas
SEM image is able to provide some kind of 3-D appearance of the surface under investi￾gation. That is why SEM is widely used to characterize the phase morphology and failure
behaviour of FRP composites, i.e. to understand whether the fracture is brittle or ductile
one. The working principle of SEM is that a beam of electrons is formed by an electron
source and accelerated toward the specimen using a positive electrical potential. The
electron beam is confined and focused using metal apertures and magnetic lenses into a
thin, focused, monochromatic beam. Electrons in the beam interact with the atoms of
Fig. 6.32: Cross-polarization optical microscope images of (a) PEO at the beginning of crystallization,
(b) PEO after the crystallization and (c) PEOCN3 after the crystallization (reprinted with permission from
T.N. Abraham [17]. © 2008 Society of Plastics Engineers Publishing Company).
344 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesthe specimen, producing signals that contain information about its surface topography,
composition and other electrical properties. These interactions and effects are detected
and transformed into an image. Images are formed by rastering the electron beam
across the specimen using deflection coils inside the objective lens. The electron beam
should have a circular cross section when it strikes the specimen.
An SEM machine comprises various components like electron gun which is used as
a source of electron in tungsten single crystal, lanthanum hexaboride, zirconium oxide,
etc. The electron column is where the electron beam is generated under vacuum, fo￾cused to a small diameter, and scanned across the surface of a specimen by electromag￾netic deflection coils. After the beam passes the anode it is influenced by two condenser
lenses that cause the beam to converge and pass through a focal point. In conjunction
with the selected accelerating voltage, the condenser lenses are primarily responsible
for determining the intensity of the electron beam when it strikes the specimen. After
the beam passes the anode it is influenced by two condenser lenses that cause the beam
to converge and pass through a focal point. In conjunction with the selected accelerating
Fig. 6.33: Optical micrographs of epoxy/HBP/DETDA mixture: (a) at room temperature, (b) heating,
(c) at 120 °C in zero time, (d) at 120 °C after 20 min and (e) at 120 °C after 30 min (reprinted with
permission from Debdatta Ratna [17]. © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.).
6.6 Morphological study 345voltage, the condenser lenses are primarily responsible for determining the intensity of
the electron beam when it strikes the specimen. When the primary electron beam inter￾acts with the sample, the energy exchange between the electron beam and the sample
results in the reflection of high-energy back scattered electrons by elastic scattering,
emission of low energy secondary, auger electrons by inelastic scattering and the emis￾sion of electromagnetic radiation (X-rays and cathodoluminescence), each of which can
be detected by respective detectors. Various detectors are used for example Everhart￾Thornley detector for secondary electron, solid-state detector for backscattered electrons
and energy-dispersive spectrometer (EDS) detector for the produced X-ray.
Generally polymer composite samples are cryogenically fractured and the fracture
surface is coated with a gold or carbon to make the surface conducting so that any
charging problem does not arise as discussed above, SEM can provide resolution up to
1 nm and as a result widely used for characterization of nanofillers and polymer nano￾composites. For example, Ratna and coworkers [18] studied the morphology of unmod￾ified and a modified MWCNT (with half-neutralized salt of adipic acid) which is widely
used as a nanofiller for making polymer nanocomposites. The results are shown in
Fig. 6.34. We can clearly see that in the unmodified sample, the nanotubes are highly
agglomerated and bundled. On the other hand in the modified MWCNT sample, the
tubes are debundled and individual tubes can be seen. Thus the effect of modifier can
be clearly established using SEM. It is also used to analyse the FRP composite after sub￾jecting to mechanical test. For example, Wan et al. [19] investigated the fracture behav￾iour of composite sample after conducting fatigue test at frequencies of 5 Hz for
fatigue stresses ranging from 55 to 620 MPa using SEM. The SEM microphotograph is
presented in Fig. 6.35. The micrograph shows typical fatigue cracks of a composite oc￾curred under tension-tension loading, in which one can obviously see the crack dam￾age zone. The crack seems to be somewhat blunt, beyond which only little damage is
observed. The voids are localized beyond the crack and along the crack lips. This indi￾cates the suitability of SEM for fracture characterization of polymer composites.
Fig. 6.34: SEM photographs of (a) unmodified and (b) HNSA-modified MWCNT. The nanotubes were
dispersed in ethyl alcohol by sonication and cast onto the stub directly and inspected after providing a
gold coating (reprinted with permission from Debdatta Ratna [18]. © 2009 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Publishing Company).
346 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesSEM is also used to characterize the two-phase morphology of a toughened polymer
system. As it is discussed in previous sections, in order to toughen a brittle polymer sys￾tem a rubbery modifier is incorporated as a separate phase. The dispersed two-phase
morphology can be characterized by SEM. Ratna et al. [20, 21] developed toughened
epoxy systems using acrylate based elastomer. In fact in case of rubber-toughened
epoxy, the liquid rubber initially remains miscible with the epoxy resin and in the course
of cure reaction undergo phase separation generating a two-phase morphology with uni￾formly dispersed rubber particles. The morphology depends on molecular weight of the
liquid rubber. An increase in molecular weight of liquid rubber favours phase separa￾tion. Hence to ensure complete phase separation it is necessary to use liquid rubber with
sufficiently high molecular weight. However, beyond a certain molecular weight, the liq￾uid rubber undergoes phase separation at a very early stage leading to agglomeration
and macrophase separation. The SEM photographs of fracture surfaces of toughened
epoxy systems modified with CTPEHA of two different molecular weights, e.g. 3,600 and
9,500 g/mol are shown in Fig. 6.36. The fracture surface of modified epoxy with CTPEHA
having molecular weight 3,600 g/mol shows uniform distribution of globular rubber par￾ticles whereas the same modified with CTPEHA having molecular weight 9,500 g/mol
shows agglomerated particles having a size greater than 10 microns.
6.6.3 Transmission electron microscope
In addition to SEM discussed above, transmission electron microscope (TEM) is an￾other electron microscopic technique which is extensively utilized to characterize
polymer composite in general and polymer nanocomposite in particular, which in￾volves nanoscale dispersion of inorganic fillers or other polymeric components in a
polymeric matrix. Similar to SEM, a TEM equipment consists of an electron Gun
which produces the electron beam, Electromagnetic Lenses, which focuses the beam
Fig. 6.35: SEM micrograph of the interior of braided
composites (reprinted with permission from Zhenkai
Wan [19]. © 2017, De Gruyter Publishing Company).
6.6 Morphological study 347onto the object, specimen stage and the image-producing system, consisting of the ob￾jective lens. The electron gun has to be placed in a vacuum system which can produce
and maintain a pressure as low as 10–8 Pa. In SEM the specimens are placed on a stab
whereas in TEM, they are placed on a mesh or grid (made of copper, molybdenum,
gold, or platinum) having a diameter of about 2.5 mm and is held by a specimen
holder. The specimen stage is associated with airlocks to allow for the insertion of the
specimen holder into the vacuum so that there is no significant increase in pressure
in other areas of the microscope.
Unlike in SEM where image is generated from secondary or backscattered elec￾tron, and the transmitted electrons provide the information about the inner micro- or
nano-structure, which is captured to produce an image. Therefore, TEM images are
produced by focusing a beam of electrons onto a very thin specimen having thickness
less than 80 nm. It may be noted that the preparation of samples having such a low
thickness is a cumbersome process and is practically difficult for highly flexible poly￾mers. The second issue is related to the poor contrast observed during TEM analysis
of many polymer samples due to a weak interaction of electrons with the sample. As a
solution to this problem, various heavy metal compound based stains are used which
enhances the contrast due to interaction of electron beam with the dense electron
clouds of the heavy metal atoms. Third issue is the possibility decomposition of poly￾mers due to exposure of electron beam as a result of increase in temperature. This
can be avoided by using cryogenic microscopy (cryo-TEM), which keeps the sample in
liquid nitrogen. The modern high-resolution (HR) TEM can provide resolution up to
0.1 nm. Therefore, it can be utilized for characterization of both the microstructure
and nanostructure of composite materials.
Figure 6.37 shows TEM images of nanocomposite samples prepared [22] using
poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO) as a matrix and modified graphene as nanofiller in which
two different concentrations of graphene, i.e. 0.75 wt% and 1.25 wt% were used. We
can see that 0.75 wt% containing composite exhibits the exfoliation of graphene into a
Fig. 6.36: SEM microphotographs of fracture surfaces of (a) LR-4 (Mn = 3,600) modified epoxy and (b) LR-1
(Mn = 9,500) modified epoxy network (reprinted with permission from, D. Ratna [20]. © 2000 John Wiley &
Sons, Inc Publishing Company).
348 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquessingle sheet. On the other hand, the morphology obtained for 1.25 wt% graphene con￾taining composite, exhibits the presence of agglomeration. This clearly indicates that
at a higher concentration of graphene, it is difficult to prevent the agglomeration.
Therefore, all nanofillers have to be used in a very low concentration to realize the
nano effect. The require concentration has to be optimized for a particular system de￾pending on the nature polymer and nanofiller. TEM analysis is extremely useful for
such optimization and successful development of a useful polymer nanocomposite.
6.6.4 X-ray diffraction analysis
Apart from the microscopic techniques discussed above, another versatile non￾destructive analytical technique used to characterize polymer composite materials
in terms of crystal structure and phase composition is X-ray diffraction (XRD). A typical
X-ray diffractometer comprises three main parts: an X-ray source, a sample holder and
a detection system. The sample to be analysed is illuminated by the X-rays produced by
the source. The X-ray is then diffracted by the sample phase and enters the detection
system. The diffraction angle (2θ) can be varied by rotating the tube or sample and de￾tector and accurately measured by using a goniometer. The intensity as a function of
diffraction angle is then recorded. The wavelength of the X-rays is in the same order of
magnitude of the distance between the atoms in a crystalline lattice. Therefore, the dif￾fraction resulted in constructive interference between X-rays and a crystalline speci￾men. The diffraction pattern produced during the analysis can be analysed in various
ways and the most popular is to apply Bragg’s law, which is widely used in the mea￾surement of crystals and their phases present in the composite material. The Bragg’s
relation is given as follows:
Fig. 6.37: TEM images of (a) PEO/graphene (0.75 wt%)/MC-2 and (b) PEO/graphene (1.25 wt%)/MC-2
nanocomposites.
6.6 Morphological study 349λ = 2d sin θ (5:1)
where λ is the wavelength of the X-ray used, d is the spacing between specific diffrac￾tion lattice planes and θ is the measured diffraction angle. Since the value of λ is
known (λ = 1.5405 Å), by measuring the value of θ we can determine the value of d. As
the value of θ decreases, the value of sinθ decreases, since λ is constant, the value of d
increases.
The author has used XRD analysis for characterization of polymer nanocomposite
material. In the previous sections different types of nanocomosites have been elabo￾rated. The XRD patterns for organically modified clay (MMT-30) and PEOCN6 (nano￾composite containing 6 wt% of clay in PEO) is shown [23] in Fig. 6.38. The clay shows
the d100 peak at 2θ = 4.04, which corresponds to a d-spacing of 2.18 nm. This indicates
that modification of clay with organic ions not only makes the clay surface hydropho￾bic but also resulted in a 1.18 nm increase in d-spacing (as the d-spacing for untreated
clay is about 1 nm). This facilitates the penetration of PEO into the interlayer galleries
[24, 25]. In case of the composite sample, the basal spacing of clay is increased to
4.32 nm as the diffraction angle shifts from 2θ = 4.04 to 2θ = 2.06 for the d001 peak.
Hence, the polymer layer in between the two silicate layers is 3.14 nm. The result is
consistent with the other studies in the literature [26–28] on the adsorption of PEO
chains onto the clay platelets at low polymer and the clay concentrations using con￾trast variation methods to separate the contribution from the bulk and adsorbed poly￾mer chain.
20
Intensity, a.u
Intercalated Tactoids
4
2θ, deg
6 8 10
Fig. 6.38: XRD patterns for PEOCN6 (–■–) and Cloisite 30B (–o–) (reprinted with permission from
T.N. Abraham [20]. © 2008 Society of Plastics Engineers Publishing Company).
350 Chapter 6 Experimental techniques6.7 Conclusion
Mechanical, dynamic viscoelastic and complex dielectric properties are commonly
used for design of most composite items in structural elements, electrical application,
processing conditions and for determination of optimum reinforcement and very im￾portantly, the thermal and temporal stability. These macroscopic properties of com￾posite material, brief methods of evaluation of polymeric matrix composites are
briefly described in this chapter. In each test method, international standards (ASTM,
ISO and, in some cases, DIN) are listed. The graphical examples are given only to
show how the properties depend on some external stimuli like force, heat and fre￾quency. Basic functional details of the instruments are discussed to introduce the
techniques for composite characterization. The instruments are commercially avail￾able from very reputed industries in the field of analytical instrumentation, and most
of the instruments are designed to perform tests as per international standards. Due
to the difference in design by different companies, the operational methods would
vary, but the tests must be within the specified domain of parameters prescribed in
international standards.
Functional evaluation such as structural stability, dynamic behaviour, fatigue life
and environmental degradation of items built with such composites is deliberately
avoided, because of the large diversity in application.
The mechanical and thermal properties of the composites at the material level
forms the basis of design of components/systems and also used in basic engineering
study to develop physical and mathematical models for prediction of functional be￾haviour as a component. The predictive mathematical models are subsequently vali￾dated by experimental evaluation of the fabricated components/systems. Thus, the
accuracy and correctness of basic property evaluation is most important step in a sys￾tem development.
It is a common experience that incorrect analysis of properties leads to very wide
differences between predicted and practical result. To eliminate errors in instrumen￾tal analysis, few basic steps may be very useful, such as regular calibration of the in￾strument, uniformity in sample size and shape in repeated experiments, maintaining
identical accuracy in dimensional measurements and identical conditioning. It is also
suggested that each experiment should be performed following one standard only,
such as ASTM or ISO, for consistency in experiments, using same instrument, so that
the results of different batches in development and production stage can be com￾pared. In many applications, catastrophic failures of composite items are considered
dangerous to human life. In such cases, the test results are more critical requiring in￾struments of higher quality, consistency and accuracy in addition to consistence in
measurement.
6.7 Conclusion 351References
[1] Wang, B., Yang, B., Wang, M., Zheng, Y., Hong, X., Zhang, F. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2019, 26,
394–401.
[2] Hofer, K. E., Rao, P. N. J. Test. Eval. 1977, 5, 278–283.
[3] Harper, J. F., Miller, N. A., Yap, S. C. Polym. Test. 1993, 12, 15–29.
[4] Zhang, C., Ganesan, R., Hoa, S. V. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2000, 9, 163–176.
[5] Bakker, A. A., Jones, R., Callinan, R. J. Compos. Struct. 1985, 15, 154.
[6] Deitz, D. H., Harik, I. E., Gesund, H. J. Compos. Constr. 2003, 7, 363–366.
[7] Jang, B. Z. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 1991, 2(1), 29.
[8] Çallioğlu, H., Emin, E. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2014, 21, 463–470.
[9] Yang, K., Yang, L., Gong, P., Zhang, L., Yue, Y., Li, Q. e-Polymers. 2022, 22, 309–317.
[10] Talreja, R., Phan, N. Compos. Struct. 2019, 219, 1–7.
[11] Chakraborty, B. C., Ratna, D. Polymers for Vibration Damping Applications. Elsevier, 2020, 121–125.
[12] Vassilikou-Dova, A., Kalogeras, I. M. Dielectric Analysis. In: Menczel, J. D., Prime, R. B., eds. Thermal
Analysis of Polymers: Fundamentals and Applications, 1st ed. Wiley, NY,USA, 2008, 497–613.
[13] Ratna, D., Abraham, T., Karger-Kocsis, J. Macromol. Chem. Phys. 2008, 209, 723–733.
[14] Abraham, T., Siengchin, S., Ratna, D., Karger-Kocsis, J. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2010, 118, 1297–1305.
[15] Strawhecker, K. E., Manias, E. Chem. Mater. 2003, 15, 844.
[16] Ratna, D., Abraham, T. Polym. Compos. 2011, 32, 1210–1217.
[17] Ratna, D., Simon, G. P. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2010, 117, 557–564.
[18] Ratna, D., Abraham, T., Siengchin, S., Karger-Kocsis, J. J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Phys. 2009, 47, 1156–1165.
[19] Wan, Z., Guo, J., Jia, M. Sci. Eng. Compos. Mater. 2017, 24, 213–220.
[20] Ratna, D., Banthia, A. K., Deb, P. C. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2000, 78, 716–723.
[21] Ratna, D. 2001, 50, 179–184.
[22] Jagtap, S. B., Khushwaha, R., Ratna, D. RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 30555–30563.
[23] Abraham, T. N., Ratna, D., Siengchin, S., Karger-Kocsis, J. Polym. Eng. Sci. 2009, 49, 379–390.
[24] Okamoto, M. Rapra Rev. Rep. 2003, 14, 1.
[25] Nguyen, Q. T., Baird, D. G. Adv. Polym. Technol. 2006, 25, 270.
[26] Malwitz, N. M., Dundigalla, A., Ferreiro, V., Butler, P. D., Henk, M. C., Schmidt, G. Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 2004, 42, 3102.
[27] Stefanescu, E. A., Dundigalla, A., Ferreiro, V., Loizou, E., Porcar, L., Negulescu, I., Garnoa, J., Schmidt,
G. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2006, 8, 1739.
[28] Loizou, E., Butler, P., Porcar, L., Schmidt, G. Macromolecules. 2005, 38, 2047.
352 Chapter 6 Experimental techniquesChapter 7
Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix composite
Description of abbreviations
7.1 Introduction
Ageing is an obvious process for any mater and living beings. This terminology in￾volves three main mechanisms, namely physical ageing, chemical ageing and biologi￾cal ageing. To distinguish these three processes, we can take example of a slow
change in density of a plastic for a long storage time, several years as a physical pro￾Abbreviation Description Unit
ATM Accelerated testing method
CFRP Carbon fibre-reinforced plastic
CNT Carbon nanotube
CRTA Controlled rate thermal analysis
DMA Dynamic mechanical analysis
DSC Differential scanning calorimetry
EM Electromagnetic
EMI Electromagnetic interference Volt
FRP Fibre-reinforced plastic
FTIR Fourier-transform infrared spectrophotometry
GC-MS Gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy –
GPa Giga Pascal  N/m
HDPE High-density poly(ethylene)
Hz Hertz Cycle/s
J/mol K Joule per mole per Kelvin
kJ/mol Kilo-Joule per mole
MMF Micromechanics of failure
MPa Mega Pascal  N/m
NMR Nuclear magnetic resonance
NR-CB-VR Natural rubber-carbon black-Vermiculite
phr Parts per hundred (part) rubber
PMC Polymer matrix composite
PMMA Poly(methyl methacrylate)
PVC Poly(vinyl chloride)
RH Relative humidity %
SCTA Sample-controlled thermal analysis
TGA Thermogravimetric analysis
UTS Ultimate tensile strength N/m
UV Ultraviolet
VFT Vogel-Fulcher–Tammann
WLF Williams Landel Ferry
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110781571-007cess, while corrosion of a steel structure exposed in sunlight or due to humidity is an
example of chemical ageing and decay of a processed food item due to bacteria is a
biological process. However, chemical and biological ageing are much faster than
physical ageing.
The ageing of polymeric composites is no exception and in fact, polymeric compo￾sites are quite vulnerable to temperature, ultraviolet ray, ozone, saline atmosphere
and a lot of chemical gases and fluids, just like any other organic molecule. In addi￾tion, the polymers undergo physical ageing which is measurable within a reasonable
experimental time frame, which is not possible for metallic or ceramic items. Since
the process of ageing is natural, it is really difficult to exactly develop a logical method
to predict the extent of ageing as several stimuli simultaneously act causing the total
ageing. In a typical example of a rubber gasket, let us consider that the service condi￾tion of the gasket is 2.0 MPa initial tightening stress in compression at 60 °C, the age￾ing depends on stress relaxation at that temperature, causing decrease in tightening
force, chemical degradation due to heat, thereby reducing inherent strength of the
material, and ultimately a combined effect on corresponding gradual loss of effective￾ness in sealing by the gasket as it ages.
The life of a material is decided by the desired usefulness in service. Since ageing
is a natural process, the lifetime is different in storage than in service. For example, a
rubber gasket when stored a controlled temperature at 22 °C and 45% relative humid￾ity, might have 15–20 years life, which indicates that its functional properties are
within the limits of the specification for use, while in a service at 60 °C and 65–80%
RH and 2 MPa initial tightening stress, the life might be only 5 years. In this case, the
ageing might be faster for stress relaxation than thermal degradation, and that de￾cides the useful life of the gasket. While in storage, except heat ageing, there is no
other factor for deciding the life of the gasket.
The property which deteriorates at the fastest rate to a limiting value, should be
taken to study and consequently, to decide the life. If the design of an item is done con￾sidering lowest tensile strength as 75% of initial (unaged) value, and 85% of unaged EMI
shielding value, then the ageing mechanism which causes fastest deterioration of both
the strength and the EM property should be considered for life estimation. The lower
value of these life estimations should be considered as the useful life of the item. There￾fore, no common strategy can be applied to decide the life of differently used composite
items, rather different methods should be adopted for accelerated ageing study. In gen￾eral, following steps may be considered for a comprehensive lifetime prediction of a
polymeric composite:
1. Define the most important functional property which will be studied for arriving
at life of the material under aging.
2. Define at what temperature and environment it has to perform or to be stored.
3. Define the physical or chemical phenomenon like creep, stress relaxation, water
ingress, evaporation of small molecules, thermal decomposition, UV or ozone ef￾fects which causes degradation of the desired property.
354 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix composite4. Mechanism of degradation to be established from pyrolytic GC-MS, FTIR and
NMR in case of chemical change – mechanism must not be different in the test
envelop.
5. Study the functional property which will be required to predict the life.
6. Define the lowest acceptable numerical value of the desired property upon aging,
for example, Young’s modulus minimum 80% of initial value.
7. Resort to time–temperature relation, such as Arrhenius or WLF or graphical su￾perposition where change in mechanical, viscoelastic or other properties are
studied in accelerated mode. For thermal degradation study, kinetics of degrada￾tion with Arrhenius function is to be used.
8. Extrapolate for storage/service temperature/condition
9. Check the theoretical estimation and experimental results.
10. Ageing temperature selection should be as nearer to service temperature as prac￾tically possible to obtain a reasonably correct result.
7.2 Physical ageing and life estimation
Physical ageing means that the ageing takes place due to change in bulk or molecular
level properties with storage time, under no influence of stress or any other external
factors. The properties can be many like enthalpy, specific volume, mechanical or di￾electric response as bulk properties and microstructural properties which can be deter￾mined by spectroscopy, light scattering, atomic force microscopy, scanning electron
microscopy or transmission electron microscopy.
Amorphous polymers are defined as supercooled liquids, wherein the mobility of
the randomly oriented chain segments reduce as the polymer is cooled down. Initially,
above the glass to rubber transition temperature (Tg), the packing of the chains increase
slowly on cooling, but it becomes rapid near the glass transition. Below the transition,
the packing again increases slowly. Physical ageing of a polymer is the increase in pack￾ing or decrease in free volume on observation at a fixed temperature, with time, below
the glass transition, but above the secondary relaxation (β-transition). This is shown in
Fig. 7.1. A polymer is in equilibrium state above the Tg because the segments can rear￾range themselves to an equilibrium conformation very fast, as their relaxation time (τ)
is about 10–2 to 10−4s. The equilibrium line is shown above Tg. However, below the Tg,
the segmental motion is highly restricted and the time required to attain the equilib￾rium becomes large. The volume change curve has lower slope as shown in the figure.
Whereas the polymer continuously tends to reach equilibrium (dotted line extended
from above Tg). This means that an amorphous polymer below the Tg has a volume
which is greater than what it should have in equilibrium state. The dotted line below Tg
shows what the volume should have been at equilibrium, and the firm line shows the
volume actually occupied instantaneously quenched below Tg. The effect of ageing at
7.2 Physical ageing and life estimation 355that temperature is reduction of the free volume (increase in viscosity and relaxation
time) along the vertical line towards the equilibrium point.
7.2.1 Basic features
There are some important features of the concept of physical ageing:
(1) Physical ageing occurs for amorphous polymers at any temperature below the
glass transition (Tg), but above the β-transition (Tβ).
(2) There is no chemical reaction due to environment or chemical degradation of the
polymer during physical ageing process and also during experimental determina￾tion of the effect of physical ageing, such as creep experiment.
(3) Physical ageing process is reversible in the sense that if the polymer is heated
above Tg again, all the previous history of relative changes in free volume and
related properties would be removed and the polymer would again be in equilib￾rium state.
(4) Physical ageing of amorphous materials is universal. All amorphous polymers age
similarly. For temperatures in the ageing range (Tg to Tβ), time dependence of the
low strain mechanical properties of glassy materials was found to be similar and
independent of their chemical structure. Thus, poly (vinyl chloride) will age simi￾larly as PMMA or polystyrene at ambient conditions since their Tgs are far above
ambient. This is important in mechanical behaviour of the engineering plastics,
thermosets and composites since conventional evaluation can lead to errors.
(5) Normally elastomers are all at equilibrium state at ambient temperature, since
their glass transitions take place at sub-ambient temperatures, and physical age￾ing is not applicable to them.
(6) In physical ageing, since the relaxation time is large below Tg, there will be con￾siderable effect due to the phenomenon of Boltzmann superposition principle
on repeated creep experiment, if the repeating interval is near about the relax￾ation time. The change in properties strongly depends on ageing time at ageing
temperatures.
(7) In the ageing range (Tβ to Tg), the ageing time is the most important material pa￾rameter. It means that the creep rate of a polymer is faster after a particular age￾ing duration below Tg than the creep rate at a higher temperature (but below Tg)
aged for more duration.
(8) In most cases, the physical ageing can be studied quantitatively by simple experi￾ments of creep, relaxation, enthalpy change, dilatometry and microlevel tests
such as atomic force microscopy and positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy.
356 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeIf a creep experiment is performed on a polymer which has been brought to a
temperature Te below Tg immediately after quenching, then the creep curve will have
a particular creep function ψ(t) corresponding to the relaxation time (τ). In this case,
the creep is a momentary creep. After a time te of ageing at the temperature (Te), the
relaxation time increases as the polymer approaches equilibrium, and the polymer
hardens. Now, if the creep experiment is performed, the creep curve deviates from
the momentary curve, since relaxation time continuously changes, irrespective of the
experiment. Hence, the creep after long ageing must be mapped with the momentary
creep as described above. To study the effect of physical ageing, the creep experiment
has to be performed at a fixed temperature Te, after several ageing times te (1 to n)
and a master curve can be made with respect to a reference ageing time ter with the
definition of a simple horizontal shift factor for both momentary creep and long time
creep after ageing time te.
7.2.2 Example of creep
To demonstrate the difference of experimental creep study for one year and predic￾tive equation fitting for a short duration, and extrapolated for one year without con￾sidering physical ageing for an epoxy thermoset is shown here as an example for
importance of study of physical ageing.
The epoxy thermoset had a DMA Tg at 79 °C (temperature of E″max taken at 0.2 Hz
frequency), and the activation energy of α-relaxation was 343 kJ/mol., determined
form the loss modulus peak temperatures (considering ω τ = 1 at E″max) at different
frequencies (0.2–5 Hz) using the Arrhenius equation:
τ = τ0 exp
E
RT   or lnðτ1Þ − lnðτ2Þ = E
R
1
T1
− 1
T2
  (7:1)
Equilibrium
line
∆V
te
t
Fig. 7.1: Physical ageing of a polymer: a schematic representation of approach towards equilibrium by
segmental relaxation below glass transition.
7.2 Physical ageing and life estimation 357Corresponding relaxation time was 0.0133 min at 79 °C, and the relaxation time at
60 °C was calculated as 3.83 min. The cured epoxy thermoset was heated to 90 °C for
30 min and brought down to 60 C, and immediately loaded under a tensile creep,
keeping the temperature constant in an oven fitted Creep machine in load control
mode. The study is termed as momentary creep study to distinguish from the creep
studies after ageing. The momentary creep study was done for a year continuously.
The data up to 316 min (5.27 h) was fitted fairly with the following model of usual
form [1] such as Findlay’s power law model with the regression coefficient R2 = 0.976.
Fig. 7.2 shows the short-term data and predictive fit.
Predictive model (0–316 min):
εðtÞ = 0.0148 + 0.0081t
0.29 (7:2)
where 0.0148 was the initial strain, ε(0).
The same equation was used to predict the long-term creep experimental data (1 year)
and found to show large variation. eq. (7.2) predicted much higher strain, compared
to experimental data simply because the thermoset aged physically through the ex￾perimental time resulting in its considerable increase in relaxation time or decrease
in segmental mobility as it approached equilibrium. Fig. 7.3 shows the long-term
creep strain experimental data and also by eq. (7.2). A best fit equation with R2 = 0.998
was also obtained for the long-term creep, which is not valid for zero time since it is
in logarithmic form with time. The best fit equation is given by
εðtÞ = 0.0081 lnðtÞ + 0.0111 for t > 0 (7:3)
and ε(t) = 0.0148 for t = 0.
Considering the best fit eq. (7.3), the dependence of creep strain with logarithmic
time suggest the delayed creep with progressive lapse of the time of creep experiment.
Experiment
Prediction model
ε(t) = 0.0148+0.0081✶t0.29
R2 = 0.98
0
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Time (t), min
Creep strain, ε(t) 
Fig. 7.2: Short-term creep test on an epoxy thermoset at 60 °C.
358 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeThe relaxation times calculated from the DMA data and using eq. (7.1) resulted in the
approximate shift factor aM = 18 for momentary creep study for every 5 °C decrease in
temperature, which means that the time required to attain a strain at reference temper￾ature 60 °C is 18 times higher than the time required to attain same strain at 65 °C, and
1/18 times to that at 55 °C. The α-relaxation times at 55, 60 and 65 °C are 1,520, 230, and
37 s, respectively and the mobility of the segments (relaxation time) changes the creep
time accordingly. Similar effects are expected due to physical ageing at a constant tem￾perature, as the change in mobility due to both temperature and time of ageing are ba￾sically due to change in thermal excitation. Only, the log(ageing time) replaces the
temperature, in a reverse order.
7.2.3 Relaxation spectra
Suppose an instant tensile load is applied on an amorphous polymer sample at a tem￾perature Te which is less than Tg of that polymer. The instantaneous strain is low
enough to satisfy linear viscoelasticity. The creep compliance and creep strain are
being monitored with time from a zero time immediately after the polymer sample is
brought to Te. The time dependent compliance is
JðtÞ = J0 +
ð
∞
0
ψðτÞ½1 − e−t=τ
dτ (7:4)
where ψ(τ) is the relaxation spectra of the polymer at zero ageing time, J0 is the creep
compliance at zero time, τ is the relaxation time and t is the creep time.
For example, considering the experimental creep data in Fig. 7.3, it is possible to
select various relaxation time and sum up the creep strains due to the individual re￾Experiment
Predictive, Eq.7.2
1.00E+00 1.00E+02 1.00E+04
Creep strain ε(t)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
1.00E+06
ε(t) = 0.0081✶ln(t)+0.0111
Fig. 7.3: Long-term creep test on an epoxy thermoset at 60 °C.
7.2 Physical ageing and life estimation 359laxation to obtain the curve of experimental data. The simplest Kelvin-Voigt model as
below was used for all creep strain calculation:
ϕ τð Þ = Δε½1 − exp−ðt=τÞ
 (7:5)
and finally,
εð Þt = εð Þ 0 +
X
4
i=1
ϕðτÞi (7:6)
In an attempt to do that, several iterations were carried out to finally selecting four
relaxation times such as 12, 25, 450 and 1,000 min (across three decades of time) and
the integration by simple summing up gave a very accurate fit for the experimental
data with regression coefficient R2 = 0.991. Figure 7.4 shows the result.
7.2.4 Theory of physical ageing
If the polymer sample is aged for a time te at the temperature Te and the creep study
is done, then the time-dependent creep compliance will be [2]
JeðtÞ = Jeð0Þ +
ð
∞
0
ψeðτÞ½1 − e−t=τ
 (7:7)
where the subscript e denotes properties after ageing for te duration hence the time t
is the creep time measured after the ageing time te.
Equations (7.4) and (7.7) are distinguishable since the initial value of compliance
after the ageing period (te) is different from zero ageing period and also the relaxation
spectra are different after ageing. In addition, the actual time elapsed after the polymer
Experiment
Simulation
R2= =0.991
Time, min
Creep Strain
0
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
300 600 900 1200 1500
Fig. 7.4: Creep data simulation using four different relaxation experimental data taken from Fig. 7.3.
360 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeis brought to Te is te + t. Hence, if one can map the instantaneous or momentary creep
onto the aged creep, one needs to validate the following creep compliance with experi￾mental result:
Jeð Þ te + t = Jð0Þ +
ð
∞
0
ψ τð Þ 1 − e−ð Þ t+te =τ h idτ (7:8)
In a simpler term, considering a change in relaxation time due to ageing for a dura￾tion te at a temperature Te, the relaxation time for an ith molecular process can be
expressed as
τð Þi ð Þ te + t = τ
ð Þi
0 ϕð Þ te + t (7:9)
Here, the relaxation time is continuous from te = 0 and also applicable to any te.
If the creep study is carried out after different ageing periods te, te′, etc., then a
master curve of the creep compliance can be constructed with a horizontal shift fac￾tor as
Je′ðtÞ = Jeð Þ at (7:10)
ψe′ðτÞ = aψeðaτÞ (7:11)
The shift factor (a) changes due to ageing and log(a) is linear with log (te). The rate of
change of log (a) with respect to log(te) is designated as double-logarithmic shift-rate
(μ), which signifies the intensity of ageing:
μ = d logðaÞ
d logðteÞ (7:12)
Above the glass transition, there is no physical ageing, hence, μ = 0. On the other
hand, in the ageing range (Tβ to Tg), the mobility of the segments depends on the age￾ing time (at a fixed temperature), because the ageing increases the relaxation time as
the molecule tends to attain equilibrium. The ageing is, therefore, a self-delaying pro￾cess. The mobility is inversely proportional to the ageing time:
M ≈ k
te
(7:13)
Therefore, the above equation suggests that the ratio of log(M) and log(te) must be
unity, and therefore,
μ = d logðaÞ
d logðteÞ = − d logðMÞ
d logðteÞ ≈ 1 (7:14)
7.2 Physical ageing and life estimation 361The negative sign for the double logarithm of M rate is due to the fact that the slope is
reverse in this case compared to that of log(a) vs log(te). This has been reported by
Struik [2] and many others for a large number of polymers.
However, the long-term test of creep (or any time-dependent mechanical re￾sponse) does not follow the short time creep curve. The long and short terminology is
expressed in terms of the comparison between the ageing time and creep study dura￾tion. For example, a short duration creep is where ageing time is 3,000 s and creep
tests are done for 100 s, while long-term is where test time is 1 year for 3,000 s ageing
time. In a comparison of short-term and long-term tests, Struik [3] observed that the
long-term creep curve is not concave at long-time, but approximately a straight line,
while the short-term creep curves are concave upwards, and similar at all tempera￾tures of experiment. To map the momentary creep on all the aged creep curves (done
after different ageing times, e.g. te = 1, 3, 10, 30, 100 h), Zheng and Weng [4] used eq.
(7.9) to calculate the relaxation time during the creep experiment after an ageing time
of te at a constant sub-Tg temperature. The authors used effective time λ which is zero
at the start of the creep experiment after an ageing time te. The effective time is calcu￾lated as
λ =
ðt
0
dτ
ϕð Þ te + τ
(7:15)
The authors stated that the function ϕ for a chrono-rheologically simple polymer
must be linear with (te + t), and suggested a dimensionless form:
ϕð Þ te + t = 1 + ð Þ te + t
b (7:16)
where b is a material property and has a unit of time. If b tends to infinity, then the
material undergoes viscoelastic deformation with time and there is no effect of the
physical ageing, and when b=0, then the material undergoes only elastic deforma￾tion. The value of b is finite positive between zero to infinity.
The effective time λ becomes (from eq. (7.15))
λ = b. ln 1 +
t
b + te
  (7:17)
With the above equation, long-term creep compliance at different ageing time can be
horizontally shifted to a reference ageing time curve and it was established by the
authors that the master curve would exactly the momentary creep compliance curve
(te = 0) and it is the creep curve with no ageing effect (λ = t, ϕ = 1).
For horizontal shifting of the long-term creep curves of different ageing time (tes),
following equation must be valid with a reference ageing time t
ref
e :
362 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeb. ln 1 +
aLt
b + t
ref
e
 ! = b. ln 1 +
t
b + te
  (7:18)
where aL is the shift factor for the long-term creep experiment for shifting one ageing
time curve to the reference ageing time curve (t
ref
e ), and the double–logarithmic shift
rate (μL) is also defined as in eq. (7.14):
μL = d logð Þ aL
d logð Þ te
(7:19)
Therefore,
aL = b + t
ref
e
b + te
(7:20)
μL = te=b
1 + te=b (7:21)
From eq. (7.20), it is seen that the shift factor for long-term creep is simply the ratio of
reference (t
ref
e ) to any ageing time (te), when the ageing time is much larger than the
material constant b. From eq. (7.21), it is observed that at very long ageing time (te),
the shift rate tends to be unity.
Further, on mapping the momentary creep at the reference (t
ref
e )and the momen￾tary creep at any ageing time (te), it is shown that the shift factor aM is also same as
the shift factor for long-term creep:
aM = b + t
ref
e
b + te
= aL (7:22)
These two shift factors are identical, independent of loading time (t) (in the creep ex￾periment) but depends on the ageing time (te) if the material property (b) is constant.
There are a considerable number of different studies on physical ageing alone
and combined effect of physical and chemical ageing reported by many researchers,
and few are listed discussed here[2–20].
Struik [3] studied creep of PVC on physical ageing at sub-Tg temperature with dif￾ferent ageing time spanning from 0.03 days to 1,000 days, and it is seen that the time
required to attain a creep compliance for a 0.03 days aged sample is a thousandth
fraction of the time taken for a 300 days aged sample. The creep curves are all almost
parallel, shifts in time scale as the samples are aged for more time. Hence the shift of
the curves to a master curve at a reference ageing time was very accurate indicating
that the behaviour of the viscoelastic change is uniform. In addition, a different mate￾rial showed exactly same creep performance as PVC sample when these two are aged
for the same period.
7.2 Physical ageing and life estimation 363Lai [5], studied physical ageing of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) by free vol￾ume change using length contraction method, and observed that the major length
contraction occurred in the vicinity of glass transition temperature of PMMA. The au￾thor studied the relaxation rate by a thermomechanical experiment of contraction of
PMMA under a constant load at various isothermal ageing for PMMA. The relaxation
rate is expressed by
−r = 1
2.303   3
LZ
  dLZ
d lnðtaÞ
  (7:23)
and also, can be expressed using modified Doolittle equation:
−r = Δf
τg
exp
1
fg
− 1
f
  (7:24)
Relaxation rate was drastically higher at higher ageing temperature, indicating faster
physical ageing as the ageing temperature approaches the α-transition (Tg) of the poly￾mer, and beyond Tg, the rate is about 170 times faster than at 60 °C below Tg indicating
that at lower ageing temperature, the ageing is slowed down significantly. The DMTA
study showed secondary β–relaxation peak temperature and below this temperature,
there was no significant physical ageing of PMMA, which confirmed that physical age￾ing takes place only between Tg and Tβ of a polymer. The author calculated the relaxa￾tion time and activation energy of relaxation by following equations:
τ = τg exp
1
f − 1
fg
  (7:25)
ln τðTaÞ
τg
  = − Ea
R
1 − 1
f
 −1 1
Ta
.
1
f
  +
Ea
RTeq
1 − 1
f
 −1
(7:26)
The relaxation time at 40 °C was found to be 10203 times higher than at 140 °C, corre￾spondingly, the time to reach equilibrium at 40 °C was almost infinite. The activation
energy of ageing (Ea) in the range of 40 ºC to Tg was quite high (200–1,200 kJ/mol) sig￾nifying the relaxation of the main chain segmental mobility.
The findings on PMMA by the author [5] suggests that a product moulded from
PMMA based composite when used at ambient temperature, would change in me￾chanical and viscoelastic property with time at a very slow rate, as its relaxation time
would be almost infinite years. The high activation energy also suggests almost negli￾gible change in relaxation, even when the ambient temperature is enhanced by 10 °C,
like in summer of a tropical country. In this case, the life assessment is not dependent
on physical ageing, since chemical ageing due to other factors such as heat, pollutant
gases, presence of moisture, ozone and UV might be much faster.
Minguez et al. [6] studied polylactide, which is a semi-crystalline polymer, having
a Tg = 55 °C for isothermal physical ageing by monitoring the enthalpy change using
364 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositedifferential scanning calorimetry (DSC). Polylactide is an important polymer for food
packaging, as it is biodegradable and environmentally safe material. The authors sug￾gested that the physical ageing near the Tg is essentially due to a-relaxation (main￾chain segmental mobility), but below the Tg, it is β-relaxation due to side group move￾ments. In their experiment, the enthalpy of the β-relaxation was used to quantify the
ageing. Upon physical ageing at 50 °C, the endothermic enthalpy associated with
change in Tg was increasing with ageing time. The Tg was seen to be progressively
increasing with ageing and was about 2–3 °C higher than quenched (unaged) sample
after 300 min of ageing. The βH enthalpy relaxation rate was thus defined as:
βH = ∂δH
∂ð Þ log ta
 
q1,q2,Ta
(7:27)
where q1 and q2 are heating and cooling rates at the ageing time ta and isothermal
ageing temperature Ta.
The βH is an indication of bulk relaxation rate, which is related to ageing rate,
and a higher value indicates faster ageing in approaching towards the equilibrium
state. Measurement of fractional free volume could be another method to study the
physical ageing as it is expected that with progress of the ageing, the fractional free
volume reduces while the relaxation time increases.
The study of β-relaxation and associated structural relaxation has a quite practi￾cal significance in terms of cross-linked flexible thermoset epoxy resins where the re￾laxational characteristics are designed by changing chain length of the epoxy resin or
the hardener amine. Patil et al. [7] studied β–relaxation phenomenon of a series of
flexible and rigid epoxy resins and determined fractional free volume by positron an￾nihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS).The authors found that the β-relaxation oc￾curred in the range of −56 °C to −80 °C depending on network cross-link density. The
fractional free volume ranged from 2.18% to 2.51% for highest cross-linked to least
cross-linked epoxy network. Periodic measurement of the fractional free volume at
an isothermal ageing study would throw light on the change in loss compliance of the
network and corresponding change in damping properties of a structural damping
coating.
There is a very comprehensive but tedious method of calculation of loss compli￾ance and storage compliance from creep compliance experiment, as reported by
Schwarzl [8]. The simplest equation for calculation of J’(ω) and J”(ω) are suggested as
J′ðωÞ ⁓ JðtÞ − 0.86½  Jð2tÞ − JðtÞ = 1.86JðtÞ − 0.86Jð2tÞ (7:28)
and,
J′′ðωÞ = J′ðωÞ. tan δ (7:29)
7.2 Physical ageing and life estimation 365where
t = 1
ω = 1
2πf (7:30)
J(t) and J(2t) are creep compliances at t and 2t s, while t is determined from equation
(7.30), considering the angular frequency ω is in rad/s.
The above simplistic calculation is not very accurate for high loss factor (tanδ),
but reasonable with maximum 8% error, when the tanδ is about 0.6. However, the
accuracy is best (upper bound of relative error = 0.8%) for much higher tanδ range
(0.10–10) corresponding to the most complicated formula for J’(ω) as:
J′ð Þ ω ⁓ J tð Þ + 0.0007½  Jð Þ 32t − Jð Þ 16t − 0.0185½  Jð Þ 16t − Jð Þ 8t
+ 0.197½  Jð Þ 8t − Jð Þ 4t − 0.778½  Jð Þ 4t − Jð Þ 2t − 0.181 J tð Þ − J tð½ =2Þ − 0.049 J t=4Þ − J t=8Þðð½
(7:31)
Eftekhari and Fatemi [1, 9] studied short-term creep of a number of engineering plas￾tics such as polypropylene (PP), PP/elastomer blend, polyamide 66, polystyrene and
polyphenylene ether and their composites with glass fibre and talc and high-density
polyethylene (HDPE) and used time temperature superposition principle to predict
long-term creep. The authors showed that the experimentally determined long-term
creep and predicted long-term creep by TTS based on short-term data were in good
agreement.
Chang and Brittain [10] showed that the tensile yield strength of epoxy thermoset
increases with ageing time, at temperature below Tg of the epoxy network, while Kong
[11] showed that the density, elastic modulus, hardness, damping, moisture absorption
capacity and thermal expansion coefficient of neat epoxy and epoxy-carbon fibre compo￾sites increases with ageing time, as he studied the properties up to 105 min after anneal￾ing at isothermal ageing temperatures 140, 110 and 80 °C. Le´veˆque et al. [12] studied a
carbon fibre reinforced epoxy composite for both physical and chemical ageing. The au￾thors observed the Tg of the resin and the composite increases upon physical ageing for
5,000 h at an isothermal temperature below Tg of the unaged sample, and large decrease
in creep strain during the physical ageing. However, no significant change in elastic
properties was noticed. The interesting part of the study was a multiscale model to calcu￾late the Tg over ageing time in a combined physical and chemical ageing effects, using a
normalized cross-link density τR:
Tgð Þ τR = Tg∞ − cT2
g∞ð Þ 1 − τR (7:32)
following the reaction schemes of structure consolidation and degradation:
A + B !
k1 X (7:33)
366 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeX !
k2 C + D (7:34)
and the rate of reaction was defined as
d½X
dt = k1½A0
k1 ð Þ ½A0tv + 1 2 − k2½X (7:35)
where c is a constant, and τR = 1 at the full consolidation, when Tg attains a final
value, designated as Tg∞.
The consolidation (physical ageing) and degradation are simultaneous process in
ageing, and the consolidation is accelerated at elevated temperature, just below Tg of a
typical thermoset composite such as CFRP. However, the convex shape of the plot of Tg
vs ageing time clearly distinguishes the physical ageing stage (consolidation) in the rising
portion and chemical ageing (degradation) as the diminishing portion. The reason for
higher ageing time required for significant decrease in Tg is because of the very low rate
of degradation of any thermoset, compared to that for physical ageing near Tg. The effect
of chemical ageing is more than that of the physical ageing in the long term at that iso￾thermal condition. The unique feature of this theoretical approach of combined ageing
using eqs. (7.32)–(7.35) is that the glass transition and related viscoelastic properties can
be calculated for any composite, approximately mapping with experimental data.
Frigione et al investigated changes glass transition and relaxation behaviour [13]
and mechanical properties [14] of a cold cure epoxy adhesive due to physical ageing for
a long period of time. In order to avoid environmental effect (chemical reaction due to
UV, moisture, etc.) the epoxy adhesive was studied in dark and dry atmosphere. The
authors observed that the Tg of the cold cured epoxy (around 46 °C) did not change sig￾nificantly in pure physical ageing conditions [13] and behave similarly in physical age￾ing as conventional heat cured epoxy thermoset reported in literature. The changes due
to environmental exposure can be an effect of both physical and chemical ageing, since
it was observed that on de–ageing at 50 °C for some period and quenched back to the
original ageing temperature, the change in Tg is very small compared to original unaged
Tg. However, the mechanical properties such as flexural modulus and strength in￾creased and the strain at break decreased due to pure physical ageing [14], which is in
line with other literature reports. The authors distinguished the effect of natural weath￾ering and physical ageing by reporting the properties under both conditions, and
shown that the effect of environmental ageing is to degrade all mechanical properties
with time. The overall effect of ageing is, however, a combined physical and chemical
ageing, notwithstanding the fact that chemical processes results in larger change in
properties at isothermal ageing below the glass transition.
The effect of nanoparticles in polymers show remarkable change in glass transi￾tion [21–27], which ultimately affects the ageing process. In some cases, the Tg in￾creases due to nanoaddition, while there are reports that the Tg decreases with
increase in nanoparticle content. Lee and Lichtenhan [21] showed an 8 °C increase in
7.2 Physical ageing and life estimation 367the mid-point of Tg of epoxy with 10 wt% polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes
(POSS) nanoparticle. Consequently, the physical ageing was slowed down compared to
the pristine polymer.
The authors stated the reason for increased Tg as the molecular level reinforce￾ment provided by the POSS cages to the epoxy network junctions, slowing down the
segmental mobility and hence, the relaxation process. Similar effects are reported by
Lu and Nutt [22] for epoxy-10% clay nanocomposite and by Rittigstein and Torkelson
[23] for 10% nanoalumina added poly(2-vinylpyridine).
On the other hand, Cangialosi et al. [24] showed that the Tg of Boucher et al
showed that a salinized nanosilica composite of PMMA decreased by 3 °C at the maxi￾mum content of the silica. The authors explained that the silanized surface of the sil￾ica prevented formation of hydrogen bond at the PMMA/silica interface. Similar
result was observed for Poly(vinyl acetate)-salinized nanosilica composite by the
same author group [25]. Consequently, the physical ageing process is accelerated com￾pared to the pristine polymer.
7.2.5 Example
To observe the nature of the physical ageing, a theoretical exercise was done. An FRP
composite of epoxy thermoset reinforced by E-glass fibre was studied for dynamic
mechanical properties. Fixed frequencies of 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2 and 5 Hz covering a tempera￾ture range of 35–215 °C was used for DMA measurement. The strain was kept at about
0.5% to ensure linear viscoelastic response. The storage (dynamic) flexural modulus
was calculated according to the following equations:
EL = FL3
4bDd3 1 + 6 D
L
 2
− 4 d
L
  D
L
" #   (7:36)
The initial glass transition temperature was about 87.6 °C taken at the lowest frequency
(0.2 Hz). This DMA Tg increased by 6.33 °C at 5 Hz. The initial dynamic flexural modulus
for creep study was measured at 65 °C. The loss factor was very low (<0.1) and Tg being
quite high compared to experimental isothermal temperature, the relaxation was very
slow. Hence, the storage (dynamic) modulus was approximately same as static modulus.
Subsequently, a hypothetical physical ageing data was generated. Storage modulus
was determined by the equivalence of time and temperature since each 5 °C decrease
resulted in 1 decade increase (10 times) in time. Accordingly, the relaxation time at 65 °C
was about 7,159 s taken for 0.3 days ageing and the relaxation times at various ageing
times were calculated by a linear relation of log of ageing time (te) vs. relaxation time
(τte).The storage compliance was calculated as inverse of storage modulus. The momen￾tary creep compliance was calculated using constant relaxation time at each ageing pe￾riod, assuming no physical ageing effect during the creep experiment. The relaxation
368 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositetimes at the beginning of each creep study (zero time after each ageing) is shown in Tab.
7.1. The momentary creep compliance at the four ageing period is plotted in Fig. 7.5. The
points are generated by a theoretical model of compliance creep as
JðtnÞ = Jð0Þ + f g J∞ − Jð0Þ 1 − eð−tn=τÞ h i (7:37)
It can be seen from Fig. 7.5 that the creep compliance tends to attain a maxima, which
is a property of viscoelastic solid, defined by Kelvin-Voigt model such as eq. (7.37). The
maximum compliance, corresponds to a constant minimum elastic modulus is the
purely elastic response.
Creep data of continued ageing during the creep study was calculated by a simple
consideration of progressive shift factor in horizontal (aL = te1/te2, etc.) shift as in eq.
(7.10), and also considering vertical shift factor (bL = J1/J2, etc.). Tab. 7.1 shows the ageing
time, corresponding relaxation time, horizontal and vertical shift factors and the storage
compliance for momentary events. This resulted in creep curves with delay due to con￾tinued physical ageing during the experiment as shown in Fig. 7.6.
Tab. 7.1: Parameters on ageing for creep study.
te, days aL J(), GPa− bL τte, s
. .  .E + 
 . . . .E + 
  . . .E + 
 . . . .E + 
1.0E+00
te=0.3 days
te=1 day
te=3 days
te=10 days
Compliance J(t), (GPa)–1
0.08
0.12
0.16
0.20
0.24
0.28
1.0E+02
Creep time, sec
1.0E+04 1.0E+06 1.0E+08
Fig. 7.5: Momentary creep compliance of epoxy thermoset/E-glass composite after various isothermal
ageing periods at 65 °C. No delayed creep considered during creep experiment.
7.2 Physical ageing and life estimation 369For the first ageing time of 0.3 days, the relaxation time at each creep time is cal￾culated as
τn = τn−1 1 + log tn
tn−1
  (7:38)
Also, eq. (7.37) is modified by taking progressive difference of compliance from the
maximum value (0.2436 GPa−1
):
JðtnÞ = Jð0Þ + f g J∞ − Jðtn−1Þ 1 − eð−tn=τnÞ h i (7:39)
The nature of the delayed creep curve is not the same as the momentary creep curve
for some obvious reasons. Firstly, the data is generated by the model of creep as de￾scribed by eq. (7.37). The equation clearly states that there would be a maximum
value of the compliance at t≫τ, when exp(–t/τ)→ 0. Secondly, the relaxation time con￾tinuously changes during the creep study, and simultaneously, the factor {J∞–J(tn–1)}
continuously reduces with time. Therefore, it can be seen from eq. (7.39) that the
creep compliance does not attain the maxima at the instant as in momentary creep,
and is delayed progressively with time. Hence, there is progressive delay in attaining
structural equilibrium for the polymer (Fig. 7.1). Needless to say, that the delay is
much reduced, or the time to attain equilibrium is less if the isothermal ageing is
near the Tg, and very slow, when far away from Tg. At the Tg or above, there is no
physical ageing since the polymer is already in equilibrium as the segmental motion
sets in.
Creep time, sec
Compliance J(t), (GPa)–1
1.00E+01
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16 te=0.3 days
te=1 day
te=3 days
te=10 days
1.00E+03 1.00E+05 1.00E+07
Fig. 7.6: Compliance creep on physical ageing: delayed creep due to continuous ageing during creep
experiment.
370 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeIt may be noted that since this example is shown purely as a hypothetical exercise,
the real experimental data may not follow the above equations at all, since relaxation
in polymer composites are much more complicated and may need semi-empirical equa￾tions to fit the experimental data. Secondly, the life prediction after a period of 10 days
ageing at the isothermal temperature is simply the curve for 10 days creep data, since
in this example, the shift factors were used to generate the data for all the three ageing
(1-, 3- and 10 days ageing) form initial 0.3 days data. If the life prediction is to be done at
a different isothermal temperature, then we need to calculate the relaxation time from
DMA data for that temperature using 1/T vs. ln(τ) relationship according to the Arrhe￾nius expression or other time–temperature superposition equation such as WLF or
VFT.
7.2.6 Conclusion
It can be concluded that purely physical ageing in a practical operating situation is very
rare, unless the use of the polymer composite is in absence of light and atmospheric
pollutants, including ozone, humidity, oxides of carbon and nitrogen, etc. However, as
the studies reveal, there is a need to systematically study pure physical ageing of com￾posites which are relatively inert to moisture and air pollutants (at minute concentra￾tion), since the oxidative degradation of many thermosets are very slow process at
ambient, or even 20–30 °C below the glass transition, where the physical ageing could
be significant.
7.3 Chemical ageing
The process through which the polymer molecular weight reduces is called degrada￾tion of the polymer. Thermal degradation takes place when the vibrational energy of
the molecule exceeds the primary bond energy among the atoms. The degradation
can be by depolymerization or random chain scission. Influencing factors for degra￾dation can be heat, light, oxygen, ozone, mechanical force, chemical reagents, ultra￾sonic waves and microorganisms. Since chemical structure of a material decides all
the properties, destruction of the structure must be the most important aspect of
study for estimation of life of a polymer under storage or service.
Chemical ageing of polymer matrix composites (PMC) essentially means degradation
of the basic molecular structure of the polymer and associated reduction of composite
properties. The rate at which the chemical ageing takes place, depend on temperature of
use and certainly on concentration of the reagent causing degradation. The rate in fact,
decides the useful life of the composite. However, composites are of enormous variety
and their application is ever increasing in all fields. Therefore, the useful life is to be
determined by the deterioration of the functional property of the composite. The life es￾7.3 Chemical ageing 371timation mainly requires studies of thermal and thermo-oxidative degradation and dete￾rioration of important properties. There can be combination of applicable degradation
parameters, and it is important to determine the most degrading parameter to decide
the useful life. Thermal degradation and corresponding deterioration of other proper￾ties can be mapped to determine the acceptable degradation that leads to the mini￾mum acceptable value for deciding the lifetime. Kinetics of thermal and thermo￾oxidative degradation is therefore a most basic study. For example, if for an FRP, 5%
weight loss corresponds to maximum allowable 10% reduction in Young’s modulus
compared to unaged state, then taking 5% weight loss as the basis of study, a detailed
TGA kinetic analysis can be done to determine the time required to attain 5% weight
loss by a time–temperature transformation method.
7.3.1 Thermal degradation kinetics
There are many thermal degradation studies of polymers and composites with kinetic
analysis from late fifties onward [28–30] and only few of them, mostly recent reports,
are briefly described here. Nikolaidis and Achilias [31] studied thermal composite deg￾radation kinetics of PMMA-organo-montmorillonite clay nanocomposite. Vyazovkin
et al. [32] studied kinetics of the thermal and thermo-oxidative degradation of a poly￾styrene–clay nanocomposite, Menezes et al. [33] carried out TGA kinetic modelling of
semi-interpenetrating polymer network protonic conductive membranes. Qiu et al.
[34] studied thermal degradation kinetics of a flame-retardant polyester-glass fibre
composite. Raveshtian and co-workers [35] studied thermal degradation kinetics of
nanoalumina-natural rubber composite. Zhang and Huang [36] studied thermal degra￾dation kinetics of basal fibre-HDPE composite. Yousef and co-workers [37] studied
thermal degradation using TG-FTIR, Py-GC/MS, applied to linear and nonlinear isocon￾versional models of glass fibre reinforced thermoplastic PMMA. Tranchard et al. [38]
studied the degradation kinetics using TGA for carbon fibre reinforced epoxy compo￾sites. Narayanankutty [39] reported first-order thermal degradation of thermoplastic
polyurethane-kevlar short fibre composite using TGA and DSC.
Kinetics of thermal degradation and estimation of life from kinetic parameters
are best done by thermogravimetric method using a TGA instrument, while the en￾thalpy of the decomposition can be directly determined by differential scanning calo￾rimetry. TGA studies can be done using temperature programming with time to
navigate a thermal run. In an isothermal study, the temperature of the sample cell is
brought to the desired temperature at a very high heating rate, and brought quickly
to stabilize at the isothermal temperature of study, followed by carrying out the run
for a preset time period. For kinetic analysis, several isothermal runs are taken with
fresh samples at various isothermal temperatures. In a non-isothermal study, the tem￾perature is increased at a steady heating rate up to a final temperature. To study at
different heating rates, same experiments are repeated with fresh samples. It should
372 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositebe noted that the sample size, shape and other relevant conditions must be uniform
for all runs, to avoid errors in experimental results.
The fractional weight loss with time is used as conversion. Mathematical expres￾sions on TGA kinetics and lifetime estimation using the kinetic data are given below.
A general decomposition reaction of a solid, such as a PMC, can be written as
− dC
dt = kðTÞfðCÞ (7:40)
Introducing Arrhenius expression of dependence on temperature, eq. (7.1) becomes
− dC
dt = A exp − E
RT  fðCÞ (7:41)
where C is the fractional weight remaining at any instant t during decomposition, and
hence (1 – C) represents faction decomposed, which is fractional weight loss or, more
appropriately, the fractional conversion “α”, and is calculated as
C = w
w0
and α = ð Þ 1 − C = w0 − w
w0
(7:42)
For convenience, we shall use the following form of eq. (7.41) with fractional conver￾sion α using eq. (7.42):
dα
dt = A exp − E
RT  fð Þ α (7:43)
Figure 7.7 shows an example of TGA thermogram with multiple heating rates of a
thermoplastic nanocomposite. The horizontal solid straight line in Y-axis shows the
80% weight line and the four vertical lines are corresponding temperatures at four
heating rates. The char yield is very low about 0.24% which could be remains of the
organically modified nanoclay (originally 0.5% of the thermoplastic). Figure 7.8
shows the calculated fractional conversion (fractional weight loss) “α” against tem￾perature, T ºC for all heating rates: 2.5, 5, 10 and 20 °C/min. The solid line at α= 0.2
in Fig. 7.8 corresponds to 20% degradation corresponding to 80% weight in Fig. 7.7.
The experiment was done in nitrogen atmosphere to show the inherent thermal
stability.
It may be noted that the onset of decomposition is progressively delayed for
higher heating rates, as shown in Fig. 7.7. Therefore, one important assumption in
using the uniform equations of decomposition is that the mechanism of degradation
does not change, or any new reaction does not become dominant at the highest tem￾perature for the same extent of conversion (α).
7.3 Chemical ageing 3737.3.2 Isoconversion kinetics
For a thermal degradation reaction which may be complex and may have a multi-step
mechanism, the activation energy (E), Arrhenius pre-exponent (A) and the conversion
model f(α) are not independent of each other and are conversion-dependent. There￾fore, a single data of E and A throughout the reaction would not correctly describe
the kinetics. It is better to study isoconversion kinetics, where the values of E and A
are determined as a function of conversion and does not need a model f(α) to estimate
E and A. In such model-free kinetics, a more realistic estimation of lifetime at differ￾ent extent of conversion based on the corresponding E value can be done. The deriva￾tion of a model-free kinetic expression is quite simple and effective. This method is
described here briefly. There are many attempts to form the equation of model-free
expression, both in differential and integral forms.
7.3.3 Differential form of isoconversion kinetics
7.3.3.1 Friedman method
Friedman [40] used the simplest differential method for determination of activation
energy. Let a constant extent of degradation α is chosen at temperatures T1, T2, T3, etc.
at heating rates β1, β2, β3, etc. for a non-isothermal TGA scan. We can then write from
eq. (7.43) after introducing heating rate (β) as
Temperature, ºC
25 deg C/min
25 deg C/min
10 deg C/min
20 deg C/min
450
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Weight (%)
150 200 250 300 350 400
Fig. 7.7: TGA thermogram of a thermoplastic nanocomposite showing weight loss at four heating rates.
374 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositedα
dT   dT
dt   = A exp − Eα
RTα
 fð Þ α (7:44)
Taking logarithm and noting that β = dT
dt (constant heating rate), we get:
ln dα
dT  
α,i
= ln A
β fð Þ α
  − Eα
RTα,i
(7:45)
The subscript i denotes various thermal runs with different heating rates (i = 1,2,3,
etc.). The activation energy is calculated from the slope of the plot ln(dα/dT) vs 1/T.
Since the data of (dα/dT) and (1/T) are taken at same conversion (α) from various
heating rates, the activation energy thus obtained is conversion dependent. This
method of estimating the activation energy is independent of the reaction model f(α).
At a particular conversion, the first term of the right-hand side is constant. The plot is
essentially a straight line, with a negative slope if (1/T) is taken and positive slope
if (−1/T) is taken in X-axis. In any case, the activation energy is calculated from the
slope as
Eα = slope × R (7:46)
where R is a universal gas constant (R = 8.314 J/mol K). The activation energy can be
found out at any conversion and while estimating lifetime, the activation energy cor￾responding to the conversion should be used.
The advantage of this method is that if a different mechanism of degradation be￾comes prominent at a temperature which may be within T1 to Ti (corresponding to
heating rates β1 to βi) at the selected conversion α, then it will reflect in the ln(dα/dT)
data and a scatter in the kinetic plot will result. Therefore, activation energy at a se￾0
Temperature, C
25 deg C/min
25 deg C/min
10 deg C/min
20 deg C/min
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
100
120
Conversion (a)
100 200 300 400
Fig. 7.8: Plot of conversion, a, vs temperature from Fig. 7.7.
7.3 Chemical ageing 375ries of conversion can be tested by this method to ascertain the validity of the degra￾dation study by kinetics.
The differential method by Friedman does not need any assumption; hence, the
activation energy obtained by this method is quite reliable for all conversions.
7.3.3.2 Freeman-Carroll method
Freeman and Carroll [41] used a modification of the Friedman method that it assumed
an nth order kinetics of degradation:
dα
dt = A exp − E
RT  ð Þ 1 − α n (7:47)
If the logarithmic form of the eq. (7.47) is differentiated and again integrated with re￾spect to T, the following equation is obtained:
Δ lnðdα=dtÞ
Δ ln 1ð Þ − α = n − Eα
R
Δð1=TαÞ
Δ lnð1 − αÞ
  (7:48)
The plot between the left-hand side and Δ(1/Ta)/Δln(1–a) would give a straight line
with slope of Ea/R and intercept n (order of reaction).
This method is, of course, not a model-free method, since it assumes an nth-order
model.
7.3.4 Peak rate method
7.3.4.1 Kissinger method
Considering eq. (7.44), Kissinger [28] used the condition of the conversion rate max￾ima by taking derivative of the rate and equating to zero:
d
dt
dα
dt   = 0 = d
dt Ae−E=RT fð Þ α 
  (7:49)
Hence,
Eβ
RT2
p
= A d
dt fðαÞ
 
p
exp − E
RTP
  (7:50)
The Arrhenius pre-exponent A and the derivative of f(α) at peak are constant due to
the fixed conversion at the peak, Therefore, taking logarithm of eq. (7.50), we get:
ln β
T2
p
 ! = ln A d
dt fðαÞ
 
p
 ! − ln Ep
R
  − Ep
RTp
(7:51)
376 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeA plot of the left-hand side against 1/Tp would result in a straight line and the activa￾tion energy can be calculated from the slope of the line.
Since the activation energy is calculated without f(α), it is also a model-free
method. Generally, if the mechanism of degradation is same for the envelop of the
temperature considered, then it has been observed that the peak rate corresponds to
a particular conversion irrespective of heating rate (β). However, the activation en￾ergy thus calculated is not applicable to conversions other than at peak rate. Other￾wise, being a differential method, it should yield same value of activation energy as
Friedman method at the conversion corresponding to the peak rate.
7.3.4.2 Kim and Park method
Kim and Park [42] used a differential form of kinetic expression for peak decomposi￾tion rate. The general kinetic equation of nth order using heating rate (β) is given by
dα
dT = A
β exp − E
RT  ð Þ 1 − α n (7:52)
Differentiation with respect to T and equating to zero for peak rate temperature
yields:
E
nRT2
p 1 − αp
 n−1 = A
β exp − E
RTp
  (7:53)
The peak rate temperature and height can be utilized to estimate the activation en￾ergy and pre-exponential factor of a reaction. Substituting eq. (7.53) into eq. (7.52)
yields the expression for the activation energy:
E = nRT2
pHp
1 − αp
  (7:54)
where Hp denotes the peak height. Subsequently, the pre-exponential factor is given
by
A =
Hpβ exp
E
RTp
 
1 − αp
 n (7:55)
The activation energy can also be calculated from comparison of two peak rate tem￾peratures (two thermograms), considering that the peak rate is almost same irrespec￾tive of heating rates.
E = R
Tp1Tp2
Tp1 − Tp2
  ln β1
β2
  Tp2
Tp1
 2 " # (7:56)
7.3 Chemical ageing 377The pre-exponential factor A can be derived from any peak rate temperature as
A = Eβ
nR   ð Þ 1 − α 1−n
T2
p exp −E RTp
 	  (7:57)
Again, this method is not a model-free method as it assumes an nth-order decomposi￾tion reaction. The integrated form of Kim and Park [42,43] is given by
lnð Þ β = lnð Þ A + ln Ea
R
  + ln 1 − n +
n
0.994
h i − 5.3305 − 1.0516 Ea
RTp
  (7:56)
where
n = 1 − αp
RT2
p dα=dtÞð (7:57)
7.3.5 Integral form of isoconversion model-free kinetics
The model-free kinetics of isoconversion can be in the integrated form of eq. (7.4). The
integration of eq. (7.43) gives
gðαÞ =
ð
α
0
dα
fðαÞ
= A
β
ð
T
T0
exp − Eα
RT  dT (7:58)
or
gðαÞ = AEα
βR
 p
Eα
RT   = AEα
βR
 pðxÞ (7:59)
where x = E
RT
and p(x) is the integral defined as
pðxÞ = e−E=RT
E=RT
+
ð −E=RT
−∞
e−x ð Þ =x dx
2
4
3
5 (7:60)
The integral in eq. (7.58) cannot be analytically solved. However, there can be either a
numerical integration or an approximate value of the integral may be used. Doyle
[44], Murray and White [45] gave approximate values. A rational approximation up to
four degrees of x is also used which is given in the literature [46,47]. Various solutions
to eq. (7.58) based on approximations give minor variations in the value of activation
energy.
378 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeFrom eq. (7.59), taking logarithm,
log½gðαÞ = logð Þ AE=R − log β + log p x½  (7:61)
A table of x (=E/RT) and corresponding –log p(x) is given by Toop [48] for a first ap￾proximate value. With Doyle’s approximation [44] for the value of log p(x):
log p
E
RTi
  ffi − 2.315 − 0.457
E
RTi
(7:62)
and value of g(α):
gð Þ α = 7.03 AEα
βR ð10−3
Þ expð−1.052xÞ (7:63)
7.3.5.1 Flynn-Wall-Ozawa method
Flynn-Wall-Ozawa (FWO) method [49, 50] is based on Doyle’s approximation as shown in
eqs. (7.62) and (7.63). Taking logarithm of eq. (7.63), we have:
lnðβÞ = ln AEα
R
  − ln½  gð Þ α − 4.9575 − 1.052 Eα
RT (7:64)
At a constant conversion α, the function g(α), A, and Eα are constant. Therefore, eq.
(7.64) can be written as
lnðβÞ = Cons. − 1.052 Eα
RT (7:65)
Therefore, when a particular extent of decomposition is to be taken for lifetime assess￾ment, the TGA runs for several heating rates β1, β2, etc. should be taken and correspond￾ing temperatures T1, T2, etc. should be noted at that constant extent of conversion
(weight loss). Subsequently, a plot of log (β) vs 1/T should yield activation energy Ea
from the slope of the curve. If more than one weight loss is taken, then we should ide￾ally have parallel lines for each weight loss otherwise the data scattering will be too
high to determine a reliable activation of energy at various conversions.
FWO method is not so accurate because of the Doyle’s approximation. However,
it gives a comparatively acceptable result.
7.3.5.2 Kissinger-Akahira-Sunose (KAS) method
Integral form of KAS method [51] uses the approximate integral value of p(x) from
Murray and White [45] as
pðxÞ ffi e−x
x2 (7:66)
7.3 Chemical ageing 379The KAS equation is supposed to give more accurate estimation of activation energy:
ln β
T2
  = ln AR
Eα
  − ln½  gð Þ α − Eα
RT (7:67)
ln β
T2
  = Cons. − Eα
RT (7:68)
A plot of left side of the equation against 1/T will be a straight line with a slope Eα/R
and the value of Eα is calculated therefrom.
7.3.5.3 Starink method
A comparison of all approximation of p(x) was done by Starink [52], where it is seen
that all the approximations are derived from the series expansion of p(x) by different
researchers. The following approximation given by Starink for p(x) is supposed to be
more accurate:
pðxÞ ffi expð Þ −1.0008x − 0.312
x1.92 (7:69)
and corresponding expression for estimation of activation energy:
ln β
T1.92   = Cons. − 1.0008 Eα
RT (7:70)
The plot of the left side against (1/T) would give a straight line with the slope (1.008Eα/R).
It is seen that the Starink method is almost similar to KAS method, with a small differ￾ence in the index of T on the left side expression and also a minute difference for the
slope.
7.3.5.4 Coats and Redfern method
Coats and Redfern [53] derived an expression of integral form of kinetic equation tak￾ing an nth-order simple model:
gðαÞ =
ð
α
0
dα
ð Þ 1 − α n = 1 − ð1 − aÞ
1−n
1 − n
(7:71)
and g(α) was substituted in the basic eq. (7.58) to obtain following expression for a
non-isothermal TGA:
ln gðαÞ
T2
  = ln AR
βE
1 − 2RT
E
    − E
RT (7:72)
where ln AR
βE
1 − 2RT
E
    is constant at the same conversion.
380 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeTherefore, the authors suggested that for most values of E and the temperature
range of usual reactions, the value of the left side in eq. (7.72) against (1/T) would give
the activation energy E. However, the Arrhenius pre-factor can be calculated once the
activation energy is known. The assumption of the model f(α) is then verified with the
theoretical calculation of α vs. T compared to the experimental thermogram.
7.3.5.5 Phadnis-Deshpande method
Phadnis and Deshpande [54] used a combination of f(α) and g(α) to obtain the follow￾ing expression, which do not require the evaluation of p(x):
fðαÞgðαÞ = RT2
E
1 − 2RT
E
  dα
dT (7:73)
Neglecting the small term (2R2
T3
/E2
), eq. (7.73) becomes
fðαÞgðαÞ = RT2
E
dα
dT (7:74)
The products f(α) and g(α) have to be tried out from generally used solid-state reaction
models. The left side, when plotted against T2 (dα/dT) should yield the activation en￾ergy from the slope. The method is not a model-free method and may require multiple
iterations from the large number of possible f(α) from the literature.
7.3.6 Advanced isoconversion kinetics
In all the above integral methods, one common problem is integration over a large
range of temperature (or time), which results in so-called undue “averaging” and
thus, with progressive integration (for example, α=0 to 0.2, 0 to 0.4), the discrete errors
are added up, resulting in large errors. To circumvent this problem of most integral
methods, an advanced nonlinear integral isoconversional method has been proposed
by Vyazovkin [55,56].
7.3.6.1 Vyazovkin method
According to this method, for two experiments carried out at two constant heating
rates of β1 and β2, the Eα value is determined as a value that minimizes the function
ϕ(Eα)
ϕðEαÞ = I Eð Þ α, Tα,1 β2
I Eð Þ α, Tα,2 β1
+
I Eð Þ α, Tα,2
I Eð Þ α, Tα,1 β2
(7:75)
7.3 Chemical ageing 381where
I Eð Þ α, Tα,i =
ð
Tα,i
Tα−Δα,i
exp − Eα
RT  dT, i = 1, 2 (7:76)
In the above equations, Tα1 and Tα2 are the temperatures corresponding to heating
rates β1 and β2 for the identical conversion α, while I(Eα, Tα.i) is the temperature inte￾gral which can be numerically calculated for the small interval of Δα. In general, a set
of n heating programs are carried out (mostly n = 4 or 5) for one reaction analysis and
the activation energy at a particular conversion (α) is found by fitting a value of Eα
which minimizes the function [57]:
ϕð Þ Eα =
Xn
i=1
Xn
j≠1
J E½  α, Tið Þ tα
J Eα, Tjð Þ tα

  (7:77)
where the integral J is given by
J E½  α, Tið Þ tα =
t
ðα
tα−Δα
exp
Eα
RTiðtÞ
 dt (7:78)
The process, is therefore, iterative, and proceeds with assuming a value of Eα to begin
with. The initial value can be taken from a previously determined activation energy
of the same study calculated by any other method, either differential or integral. For
better accuracy, Δα should be chosen as a small value, for example 0.01 as used by
Vafayan et al. [58].
7.3.6.2 Cai and Chen method
Cai and Chen [59] developed a new iterative linear integral isoconversion method and
claimed that the new method is less complicated than the Vyazovkin method and re￾quires lesser number of iterations. The method is based on the integration of the kinetic
equation over a small range of conversion, a similar consideration as Vyazovkin. The
integral function g(α, α − Δα) is given by the following equation:
gð Þ α, α − Δα = Aα−Δα=2
β
T
ðα
Tα−Δα
exp½−Eα−Δα=2=RTdT
= Aα−Δα=2
β
T
ðα
0
expð−Eα−Δα=2=RTÞdT −
ð
Tα−Δα=2
0
expð−Eα−Δα=2=RTÞdT
2
4
3
5
(7:79)
382 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeThe authors used an integral h(x), which is given by
h xð Þ = x2
ex
ð
∞
0
e−x
x2 dx (7:80)
to solve the integration I (E,T) as
I Eð Þ , T =
ð
T
0
eð−E=RTÞ
dT = RT2
E
eð−E=RTÞ
hðxÞ (7:81)
Finally, the equation for determination of activation energy is
ln β
T2
α h xð Þα − x2
αexα
x2
α−Δαexα−Δαh xð Þ α−Δα
 
8
>>><
>>>:
9
>>>=
>>>;
= ln
Aα−Δα=2R
Eα−Δα=2gð Þ α, α − Δα
  − Eα−Δα=2
RTα
(7:82)
where
xα = Eα−Δα=2
RTα
, xα−Δα = Eα−Δα=2
RTα−Δα
(7:83)
In the above expression, h(x) does not have a numerical solution, and approximate
value of h(x) can be taken from various approaches of the integral, and the following
polynomial rational gives quite accurate value as shown by Senum and Yang [46]:
h xð Þ = x4 + 18x3 + 86x2 + 96x
x4 + 20x3 + 120x2 + 240x + 120 (7:84)
Observation of eq. (7.82) reveals that the equation is almost similar to KAS [51] with a
modification that the term T2 has a coefficient here which is dependent on activation
energy. Since the right-hand side has Eα−Δα∕2 in both the terms, there should be an
iterative calculation until two successive values of Eα are almost same, and the Cai
and Chen [59] have suggested that the two successive values of Eα should not have
difference more than 0.001 kJ/mol.
To determine the activation energy at a particular conversion, following steps are
to be performed using the above equations:
1. Select a conversion α and α − Δα and α − Δα∕2 in a thermogram of heating rate β1.
The value of Δα should ideally be 0.01, so that Δα∕2 = 0.005.
2. Assume any value of Eα−Δα∕2α to start with. The best assumption could be such
that E/RT should be more than 10, so that the error in estimation of h(x) is less
than 0.1% [46].
3. Calculate x for conversions α and α − Δα∕2 corresponding to Tα and Tα−Δα.
4. Subsequently, calculate h(xα) and h(xα−Δα) using eq. (7.84).
7.3 Chemical ageing 3835. Similarly, calculate these terms for other heating rates β2, β3, β4, etc. at the same
conversions α and α−Δα∕2. Minimum four heating rates should be used, like other
methods.
6. Calculate the left-hand term of eq. (7.82) and plot against 1/Tα for all heating rates
to obtain a straight line, with the negative slope as Eα−Δα∕2/R.
7. Repeat this iteration with all the calculation using the Eα−Δα∕2 obtained in step 6.
8. Find the next Eα−Δα∕2.
9. Continue till the last two successive values of Eα−Δα∕2 are either equal or with a
maximum difference of 0.001 kJ/mol. The authors have shown that maximum
three to four iterations are enough to achieve this accuracy.
Vafayan et al. [59] showed that the relative error of activation energy by this method
is less than −0.02% at low conversion, and maximum −0.3% at α = 0.90. The relative
errors of FWO [49,50], KAS [51], Vyazovkin-Dollimore [55] methods increased with
conversion and is more than +30% beyond a conversion α = 0.80, while the relative
error of Vyazovkin method [56,57] was less than +1% up to α = 0.80, but the error
sharply increased to +3% at α = 0.90.
Selection of Δα is important since if it is 0.01, the relative error in calculation of
activation energy is below 0.1%, but with 0.02, the error may be higher (≈1%) at higher
conversion (α > 0.90). However, up to 50% conversion (α = 0.50), there is very little
error even with Δα = 0.05.
7.3.6.3 Budrugeac method
Budrugeac [60] also suggested an iterative isoconversion method instead of model
freeway (MFW) method. His method is almost similar to Vyazovkin [57] and Cai and
Chen [59] as he suggested following equations for small Δα values to estimate the acti￾vation energy:
gð Þ α2 − gð Þ α1 = A
β
ð
T2
T1
exp − E
RT     dT (7:85)
where the integral is given by
I E, T1 ð Þ , T2 =
ð
T2
0
exp − E
RT     dT −
ð
T1
0
exp − E
RT     dT
= E
R p xð Þ2 − p xð Þ1 ½ 
(7:86)
Therefore,
384 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositegð Þ α2 − gð Þ α1 = AE
Rβ ð Þ T2 − T1 exp − E
RT2
    pðx2Þ − pðx1Þ
ð Þ T2 − T1 exp − E
RT2
    (7:87)
which is rearranged after taking logarithm as
ln β
T2 − T1
= ln A
gð Þ α2 − gð Þ α1
+ ln Rl − E
RT2
(7:88)
where
Rl =
Ð T2
T1 ½expð−E RT = ÞdT
ðT2 − T1Þ½expð−E RT = 2Þ = E
R
p xð Þ2 − p xð Þ1
ð Þ T2 − T1 expð Þ −E=RT2 ½  (7:89)
Plotting the right-hand side of eq. (7.88) against (1/T2), one should get first value of E
and since Rl consists of E, iterative process is applied until the two successive activa￾tion energies are equal or have a maximum difference of 0.1 kJ/mol, as suggested by
the author. This method also suggests the integral p(x) as a fourth-order polynomial
rational as given by Senum and Yang [46].
7.3.7 Accuracy of kinetics analysis
The various methods of estimation of activation energy using thermogravimetric
analysis should ideally yield same value at a constant conversion, since the reaction
as such and the thermogram are same, only the theoretical methods are different.
The difference in numerical values is due to the assumptions, if any, thermal pro￾gramming and data processing.
Flynn [61] opined that in the present world of high computational capacity, accu￾rate integral can be used instead of approximate integral. In fact, Dubaj et al. [62]
used a very accurate method for incremental isoconversional method for kinetic anal￾ysis based on the orthogonal distance regression.
Vyazovkin and co-workers [63] reviewed the thermal methods of kinetics analysis
and raised several important points on methods of analysis of reaction parameters,
and made recommendations to Kinetics Committee of the International Confederation
for Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry (ICTAC) for performing kinetic computations
on thermal analysis data. A major assumption in the most used kinetics of thermal
degradation is that the f(α) is considered to be a single reaction step, which may not
be true. In case of multi-step degradation, however, the slowest step can be taken as
the rate controlling one, and the analysis is considered for the slowest function f(α),
although it is incorrect. Similarly, the activation energy is actually a composite activa￾tion energy, consisting of several discrete activation energy barriers for several steps
of degradation reactions. Also, the error in temperature measurement leads to inaccu￾7.3 Chemical ageing 385racy in determination of the kinetic parameters E and A, particularly when the error
is not uniform throughout the measuring range. A systematic error of only 1–2 °C in
measurement at different heating rates may result in quite significant error in the
values of E and A. If the kinetics analysis is used for prediction of a physical quantity
such as mass loss beyond the experimental temperature measuring range, the error
can be very high, rendering the prediction absurd.
Simon and co-workers [64] stated that most serious error takes place due to high
heating rate in experimentation with thermally poor conductors, as there would be a
temperature gradient in the sample resulting in a combination of different process rates
and different heat transfer rates within the sample, causing faulty measurements. The
authors suggested a maximum of 10 °C/min heating rate for such insulating materials.
Maqueda and others [65] discussed the problems of evaluation of a reaction by
different thermal programs -isothermal, non-isothermal, and newer methods of sam￾ple-controlled thermal analysis (SCTA) and constant rate thermal analysis (CRTA),
modulated TGA and the application of a generalized time (θ) for generating master
plots that can be used simultaneously for any experimental data independent of the
heating schedule. For a single heating program, it is known that more than one con￾version function can define the reaction rate with high accuracy, but not so with mul￾tiple thermal schedules. The authors proposed a combined kinetic analysis of a series
of experiments performed under different heating schedule for a wide range of con￾version. This suggestion seems to be correct, since a reaction should be unique irre￾spective of a selection of heating program, since a reaction rate is only governed by
temperature and concentration (effect of pressure is neglected here). There can be a
unique model f(α), which would satisfactorily be used to describe the reaction carried
out irrespective of different heating schedule – isothermal, non-isothermal with var￾ied heating rates, CRTA, etc. To substantiate this postulate, the authors examined a
decomposition kinetics using thermal analysis and used are arranged logarithmic
form of eq. (7.43):
ln dα=dt
fð Þ α
  = lnð Þ A − E
RT (7:90)
Subsequently, a combined plot (left-hand side vs 1/T) of all different heating schedules
using a few f(α) models were examined. Only one of the models yielded combined
plot as a straight line with uniform slope, rather than non-linear curves by all others.
Budrugeac [66] suggested that the kinetic parameters obtained by model-free way
can determine the conversion function, which is proportional to the experimentally
obtained one, but cannot be unambiguously taken as the correct function, and pro￾posed the relation between activation energy (Eα) and Arrhenius pre–exponent (Aα)
(compensation effect) as polynomial instead of linear, and claimed to find a more ac￾curate conversion function. The author suggested that this method could lead to real
values of the conversion function even if its algebraic expression is not part of their
known theoretical set.
386 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeThe most important part in the analysis of a kinetics of degradation of solid poly￾meric composite is accuracy of calculated activation energy and other kinetic parame￾ters for lower range of conversion (fractional degradation), mostly 0.02–0.20, since the
life estimation of a composite is decided by maximum 20% molecular degradation, in
all structural and functional applications. Therefore, the thermogravimetric analysis
should be carried out for a perfectly dry sample, devoid of any other small molecule,
completely cured and polymerized, and should have known history of mechanism of
degradation up to the maximum temperature, for example temperature at 20% degra￾dation using the selected maximum heating rate. If the chemical degradation mecha￾nism changes within the desired conversion limit, then the same kinetic analysis will
not be applicable.
7.3.8 Estimation of lifetime
A very comprehensive review of accelerated ageing and lifetime prediction techni￾ques for polymer materials in general and thermoset composites was discussed by
Maxwell et al. [67]. The authors discussed ageing mechanisms of composites, change
of glass transition due to moisture absorption, degradation of fibre due to harsh envi￾ronment, stress corrosion, reduction in mechanical strength and overall thermal
degradation.
For ageing of a polymer at a particular temperature, for example the storage or
service temperature of a composite, g(a) is given by
gð Þ α = kti (7:91)
and
k = A exp − Eα
RT   (7:92)
Therefore, at identical conditions, for the same g(α), the conversion (α) will be the
same for both isothermal ageing and also at a constant heating rate in TGA. At the
isothermal ageing time ti at the TGA temperature Ti for same conversion (α), following
expression can be written from rearrangement of the integral form:
kti = AαE
βR p xð Þi (7:93)
Substituting eq. (7.87) into eq. (7.88), we get
ti = Eα
βR
eEα=RTip xð Þi (7:94)
where Ti is the ageing temperature (absolute scale), for example, storage or service
temperature for the polymer composite. The value of log p(xi) can be found out from
7.3 Chemical ageing 387the approximations used by different researchers and also from the table by Toop [48].
However, the following “rational” approximation as a fourth-order polynomial by
Senum and Yang [46,47] is the best as shown by Starink. The approximation by Starink
as in eq. (7.69) gives the same result for x > 20 and up to 100:
pðxÞ ffi expð−xÞ
x2
x4 + 18x3 + 86x2 + 96x
x4 + 20x3 + 120x2 + 240x + 120 (7:95)
Hence ti gives the life of the polymer composite corresponding to a minimum accept￾able value of a functional property at any storage or service temperature (Ti).
A more convenient form of eq. (7.94) is given by Toop [48]:
log ti = Eα
2.303RTi
+ log Eα
βi
R
  + log p xð Þi ½  (7:96)
where Eα is the activation energy of degradation at the selected conversion “α”; Tα is
the temperature in Kelvin at a conversion =α, taken from the thermogram at a heating
rate βi. It is advisable to take the slowest heating rate thermogram to take the value of
Tα, and Eα/RTα is calculated using this temperature. log p(xi) is calculated from eq.
(7.95) and directly used in eq. (7.96). Ti is the temperature at which lifetime is to be
calculated (storage or service temperature for the polymer or its composite). The term
Eα/(2.303RTi) is calculated accordingly.
The maximum allowable service temperature for a selected service life can also
be determined by rearranging eq. (7.96):
Ti = Eα=2.303R
log ti − log Eα
βi
R
  − log½  pðxiÞ
(7:97)
7.3.9 Example
A polyimide thermoset composite is to be used as a high-temperature lamination in￾side an aircraft. The composite is not subjected to any significant stress other than
heat during use. The material is to be qualified on the basis of life due to possible
thermal degradation. Maximum 5% degradation is allowed since this is linked to the
minimum acceptable structural integrity. The user wants to ascertain the service life
at continuous 325 °C and occasional spike up to 350 °C, for maximum 10–20 min.
388 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeSolution
A typical TGA kinetics and life estimation is done to ascertain the service life at 325 °C and up to 400 °C.
Figure 7.9 shows the TGA thermogram of the polyimide thermoset–carbon nanotube composite carried
out in air atmosphere using four heating rates 2.5, 5, 10 and 20 °C/min. The thermogram is shown here
up to a weight loss of about 23% to observe that the shape of the curves is uniform, and hence can be
assumed that the mechanism of degradation is uniform at least up to 23% weight loss. The aromatic poly￾imides are generally thermally stable up to minimum 550 °C under nitrogen with uniform degradation
pattern and a char yield of about 52–55% [68]. The dashed horizontal line is drawn for constant ordinate
at 95% weight (5% weight loss) and vertical dashed lines are drawn to indicate four temperatures at
which 5% weight loss takes place for four selected heating rates. With increase in heating rate, the loss of
5% progressively occurs at higher temperature. It is assumed that the mechanism of degradation/decom￾position of the composite is same until at least 20% degradation.
The conversion (fractional weight loss) is plotted against absolute temperature in
Fig. 7.10. From Figs. 7.9 and 7.10, the kinetic data listed in Tab. 7.2 are obtained for
estimation of activation energy by different methods. Conversion is in fractions and
heating rate is expressed in K/s. Subsequently, the activation energies are calculated
by the methods of Friedman, FWO and Starink using eqs. (7.45), (7.65) and (7.70), re￾spectively, and also by Cai and Chen method using eqs. (7.82)–(7.84). Temperature and
time data were taken for each heating schedule at the conversion of 0.05 and the cal￾culated data for first three methods are listed in Tab. 7.2. The kinetic plot for each of
these methods is shown in Fig. 7.11(a)–(c). The iterative values of Cai and Chen method
is shown in Tab. 7.3.
It is seen from Tab. 7.3 that three iterations are sufficient to obtain a constant
value of activation energy according to Cai and Chen method. The initial value is
taken from both Friedman method and FWO method, and the final consistent value is
same, irrespective of the initial values. The values of Eα calculated from the slopes of
the respective plots are listed in Tab. 7.4.
700
Temperature, K
25ºC/min
5ºC/min
10ºC/min
20ºC/min
900
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
Wt%
750 800 850
Fig. 7.9: TGA thermogram of the polyimide thermoset-CNT nanocomposite in air at 4 heating rates.
7.3 Chemical ageing 389It is seen from Tab. 7.4 that the activation energies by different methods are differ￾ent. Particularly, the value for Cai and Chen and Friedman methods are higher than
FWO and Starink methods. Further, FWO method yielded almost same value as Starink
method. Since KAS method is almost similar to Starink, it is not calculated for this ex￾ample. The values are higher than that obtained by Ahmad et al. [68], as they reported
about 258 kJ/mol at 5% degradation for one aromatic polyimide–SiO2 nanocomposite.
Saha and Bhowmick [69] studied thermal degradation of nanosilica and Cloisite 30B
nanoclay filled hydrogenated nitrile rubber and observed that the activation energy of
degradation (5%) increased significantly from 218 kJ/mol for HNBR to about 270 kJ/mol
for both the nanofiller added composite and the degradation temperature was in￾creased and the rate decreased, consequently the predicted life was increased by 6–7
folds. The authors stated that the degradation resistance enhanced because the nano￾fillers provide tortuous path for the degraded species of the polymer and shields the
underlying polymer. Also, the nanofillers enhanced thermal conductivity of the rubber
as measured by the authors, and hence, the heat dissipation is better, and as a result,
the degradation was reduced.
In order to calculate the lifetime at a lower temperature than the TGA degrada￾tion temperature, it is best to take the slowest heating rate. In this example, we need
to predict life at 325 °C, whereas at 5% decomposition, the minimum TGA temperature
700
Temperature, K
25ºC/min
5ºC/min
10ºC/min
20ºC/min
900
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Wt%
750 800 850
Fig. 7.10: Conversion (weight loss) of polyimide-CNT composite at four heating rates.
Tab. 7.2: TGA data at 5% degradation and calculated values of different kinetic parameters.
β, K/s T, K /T, K− ln(β dα/dT) ln(β) ln(β/T.)
. . . −. −. −.
.  . −. −. −.
. . . −. −. −.
.  . −. −. −.
390 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeis 506.5 °C (from Table 7.2) at 2.5 °C/min heating rate. Hence, the calculations are car￾ried out accordingly.
The value of log p(xi
) is first calculated using eq. (7.95) by Senum and Yang in refer￾ences [46,47]. The values thus obtained were checked from the table by Toop [48] and
was found to be equal, hence the subsequent calculations are done using eq. (7.95).
0.00122
ln(β)
–3.5
–3.5
–2.5
–2
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0
0.00124 0.00126
R2 = 0.9999
FWO: α = 0.05
1/T, K–1
0.00128 0.0013
0.00122
–16.5
–16
–15.5
–15
–14.5
–14
–13.5
(c)
(a) (b)
0.00124
ln(β/T1.92)
R2
 = 0.9999
Starink: α = 0.05
0.00126
1/T, K–1
0.00128 0.0013
Friedman :α = 0.05
R2 = 0.9982
0.00122
–9.50
–9.00
–8.50
–8.00
–7.50
–7.00
–6.50
–6.00
0.00124 0.00126 0.00128 0.0013
1/T, K–1
ln(β[dα/dT])
Fig. 7.11: (a) Kinetic plot according to the Friedman method; (b) kinetic plot according to the Flynn-Wall -
Ozawa (FWO) method; and (c) kinetic plot according to the Starink method.
Tab. 7.3: Iterations in Cai and Chen method.
Activation energy, Ea at % degradation, kJ/mol
Initial value Iteration  Iteration  Iteration 
.
(R = .)
.
(R = .)
.
(R = .)
.
(R = .)
.
(R = .)
.
(R = .)
.
(R = .)
.
(R = .)
7.3 Chemical ageing 391Using the relevant parameters and the vales of p(x), the lifetime was calculated
for each isothermal ageing temperatures 325, 350, 375 and 400 °C.
Table 7.5 shows the calculated parameters of eq. (7.96) and estimated lifetime at
the above isothermal ageing temperatures taking all activation energies from Tab. 7.4.
The lifetime estimated by the methods listed in Tab. 7.5 is shown in Fig. 7.12. It is
seen from Tab. 7.5 and Fig. 7.12 that at lower ageing temperature, the difference in pre￾dicted life is more when activation energies are different, i.e. when the ageing tempera￾ture is far below the TGA temperature of degradation. For example, at 325 °C, the lifetime
estimated by the activation energy by Cai and Chen method, (Ea = 297 kJ/mol) is about
4.28 × 108 s (about 14 years) compared to 2.81 × 108 s (9 years) taking activation energy by
Starink (Ea = 287 kJ/mol), while at 375 °C, the respective predicted lifetimes are about
4.26 × 106 s (49 days) compared to 3.24 × 106 s (38 days). From Thermogram of 2.5 °C/min,
the degradation temperature at 5% conversion (weight loss) is 506.5 °C and the time
taken to the 5% weight loss is only 80 min, starting from room temperature of 30 °C.
Tab. 7.4: Activation energy determined at constant degradation (0.05).
Method Degradation or
conversion (α)
Activation energy (Eα),
kJ/mol
Friedman . .
Flynn-Wall-Ozawa (FWO) . .
Starink . .
Cai and Chen . .
Tab. 7.5: Lifetime estimation of the polyimide composite by isoconversion kinetics.
Method Ti, ºC Eα/.RTi xi = Eα/RT log p(xi) log(Eα/I) ti, s
Friedman  . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
FWO  . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
Starink  . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
392 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeAs shown in Fig. 7.12, the time logarithmically varies with temperature, as is
known for all time-temperature transformations. Also, the lifetime at lower tempera￾tures is widely different for differences in activation energy and the difference re￾duces as the lifetime is predicted for higher temperature. The estimation of life is
closer for all methods as the isothermal aging temperature is chosen closer to TGA
degradation temperature. This indicates that for reliable results by interpolation to
low temperature, the activation energy must be accurately determined. If, by this
method, one has to determine the service life of this composite sample at ambient
temperature (25–35 °C), there will be large variation in time determined by different
methods, particularly by Friedman or Cai and Chen compared to other integral meth￾ods. Generally, experimental data from TGA is the source of error, as there can be
many errors in the experiments especially inconsistency in errors of the balance and
heating. The other type of error can be in data sampling. It is desired that very small
and constant interval of time should be used for data sampling since the first deriva￾tive dα/dt is calculated by numerical method. Cai and Chen method suggests that time
and temperature should be sampled corresponding to half the conversion interval
(Δα∕2) and should beat the most 0.005 for consistent kinetic parameters.
Friedman
FWO
Starink
Cai & Chen
300
1
10
100
1,000
10,000
325
Life time, days
350 375 400 425
Fig. 7.12: Life prediction by different activation energies on various isothermal ageing temperatures.
Tab. 7.5 (continued)
Method Ti, ºC Eα/.RTi xi = Eα/RT log p(xi) log(Eα/I) ti, s
Cai & Chen  . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
 . . −. . .E + 
7.3 Chemical ageing 3937.3.10 Conclusion on predictive Lifetime
The models of thermal degradation kinetics are to be applied to any life prediction
where only thermal stress is dominant. In case of composites having quite high degra￾dation temperature than application temperature, the predictive life is infinitely high
for prediction at much lower temperature, and is not useful otherwise. This is seen
with all the kinetic models considered here. Secondly, the variation from one model
to the other is mainly due to considering approximations of the integral value of p(x).
The first one can be eliminated by conducting at least two types of heating schedules,
one non-isothermal with four or five heating rates and constant conversion decompo￾sition [65]. The integral value is most accurate if it can be computed by any advanced
mathematical program as mentioned by Flynn [61]. In addition, the heating rate in
non-isothermal study must not exceed 10 °C/min for polymeric composites as sug￾gested by Simon et al [64].
7.4 Lifetime estimation by creep and relaxation
Elastomeric composites do not undergo physical ageing at room temperature because
their glass transition is generally much below ambient temperature. This is because the
molecular segments of an elastomer are at random motion above glass transition, and
hence, the molecules are in equilibrium. Therefore, when an elastomer composite is
subjected to constant force or constant deformation, the creep and stress relaxation
with time will follow so-called “momentary” creep or relaxation as described in physi￾cal ageing. Therefore, to study the long-term effect of creep, etc. and to decide the ser￾vice life based on limits of strain or stress, accelerated ageing at elevated temperatures
can be done and creep or relaxation study can be done immediately after attaining the
experimental temperature. However, the experimental elevated temperature should
not exceed to such extent that the thermal decomposition becomes prominent. As usual
a time-temperature superposition can be applied to extrapolate the life at any isother￾mal ageing temperature. The reason for using higher temperatures is to accelerate the
process, since relaxation time decreases with increasing temperature following an Ar￾rhenius, or WLF or other relationship.
In the case of life of elastomer composite as a structural element under stress, the
deterioration in the long time needs to be determined by a minimum elastic modulus
or compliance that is a limiting quantity for fail-safe design, and in some cases, the
compliance or stress at break of the element is also considered. The time-dependent
reduction of mechanical property is either due to stress relaxation or due to creep de￾pending on loading condition. There are studies on life prediction by time-temperature
superposition, such as, strength of a polymer melt [70], dynamic modulus and compli￾ance of polymer composites [71], CRPF structures by MMF/ATM method [72], flexural
fatigue strength of honeycomb composite structure [73], mechanical properties of rub￾394 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeber O-rings in hydraulic oil [74], creep rupture and life prediction of composites [75],
creep failure and life prediction of polymers and composites [76] etc.
A brief description of stress relaxation and creep with the method of life predic￾tion is discussed in this section. It is assumed here that no other external stimuli are
prominent for ageing of the elastomeric composite and also the mechanism of chemi￾cal degradation reaction is same in the band of test temperature.
7.4.1 Stress relaxation and creep
A structural element under stress experiences either stress relaxation or creep during a
long service period. Stress relaxation occurs when the element is subjected to a definite,
constant strain in the direction of applied force. The relaxation of the molecules under
a constant strain is well known and polymers exhibit strong relaxation phenomenon
around their glass transition temperature, since they are basically viscoelastic materi￾als. A simple relaxation function of a polymer can be written mathematically as
σð Þt
γ0
= φð Þt + G∞ (7:93)
where φ(t) is the relaxation function (modulus) which is changing with time due to
change in stress σ(t), and G∞ is the modulus after an infinite time of stress application.
The relaxation function can have any mathematical form such as a two-parameter
model for viscoelastic liquid by Maxwell, a three-parameter model for viscoelastic
solid or liquid by Zenner or Anti-Zenner, a four-parameter model by Burger or semi￾empirical models such as Kolrusch function. A simple model of stress relaxation can
be used in eq. (7.93) to define stress relaxation of a viscoelastic material:
σðtÞ = ð Þ σ0 − σ∞ e−t=τ (7:94)
The time τ is relaxation time, which is numerically equal to the time at which the stress
reduces to (1/e) or 37% of the initial stress. Putting σ∞ = 0, we get Maxwell’s equation of
a two-parameter viscoelastic liquid.
Creep occurs when the element is under a constant load in a particular direction.
Creep can be mathematically expressed by a simple two parameter Kelvin-Voigt
model or Zenner or Burger model or also by semi–empirical model such as Kolrusch
function. A simple creep function can be defined as
γð Þt
σ0
= J0 + ψð Þt (7:95)
where ψ(t) is the creep function (compliance) changing with time as the strain γ (t)
changes under constant stress σ0. The initial compliance is J0. A simple creep strain
can be written as
7.4 Lifetime estimation by creep and relaxation 395γð Þt = γ0 + γ∞ − γ0 ð Þ 1 − e −t=λ h i (7:96)
where λ is the retardation time, similar to relaxation time, but applicable for creep
phenomenon.
Retardation time is defined as the time at which the strain becomes (1–1/e) times
(63%) the difference of final to initial strain. This difference is ideally the recovery
strain when the load is withdrawn. However, theoretically it should take infinite time
for complete recovery.
7.4.2 Time-temperature superposition models
The relaxation time is a property of a polymer, which is a result of thermal motion of
the chain segments. Thus, relaxation can only take place when the segments are able
to move. This condition is the glass transition temperature, above which the segmen￾tal motion sets in. Therefore, relaxation time is dependent on temperature of the vis￾coelastic body. The Arrhenius expression is
τ = τ0eEa=RT (7:97)
where τ0 is the relaxation time at infinite temperature, Ea is activation energy of relaxa￾tion process, R is universal gas constant and T is the absolute temperature. The expres￾sion is based on the assumption that the motion of a segment is independent of the
neighbouring segments. This assumption may not be very relevant near the glass tran￾sition temperature. A slightly different expression is the Vogel–Fulcher-Tammann (VFT)
law [77], which is somewhat valid even below glass transition:
τ = Ae B
T−T0 (7:98)
where A, B and T0 are constants which can be experimentally determined. T0 is so￾called Vogel divergence temperature (T0 < Tg and T > Tg), Tg being the glass transition
temperature. Their values would change as the temperature is lowered near Tg when
more densification of the molecules would take place.
Equations (7.97) and (7.98) suggest that any viscoelastic property, say, elastic mod￾ulus at one temperature for a particular time during relaxation, is same at a different
time at a reference temperature. Therefore, there can be a shift factor for shifting the
time against change in temperature. For eq. (7.97), let the reference temperature be Tg
at which the relaxation time is to be calculated when the value is known at a tempera￾ture T. The shift factor is defined as
logð Þ aT = log τ
τg
= E
2.303R
1
T − 1
Tg
  (7:99)
396 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeAccording to eq. (7.98), the shift factor will be given by
logðaT Þ = log τ
τg
  = B
2.303
Tg − T
ð Þ T − T0 Tg − T0
  " # (7:100)
The temperature dependency of relaxation process can also be expressed by WLF
(Williams-Landel-Ferry) equation based on free volume change:
log aT = log τ
τg
  = −C1 T − Tg
 
C2 + T − Tg
  (7:101)
where C1 and C2 are constants, and for most polymers the values when reference tem￾perature is Tg are 17.44 and 51.6, respectively, and valid through T=Tg + 50. Modified
values of C1 and C2 are 8.86 and 101.6 respectively at a reference temperature = Tg + 50,
valid up to Tg + 100. If the reference temperature is different, then modified values of
the constants as C’1 and C’2 can be either calculated from graphical shift or by follow￾ing equations given by Ferry [78]:
C′
1 = C1C2
C2 − Ts − T′ ð Þs ½  , C′
2 = C2 − Ts − T′ ð Þs ½  (7:102)
where T’
s = Tg + 50, at which C1 = 8.86 and C2 = 101.6 and Ts is the desired reference
temperature.
The WLF equation is based on the assumption that the free volume of the poly￾mer does not change below glass transition. Therefore, the constants are not valid
below Tg.
For any practical purpose, it is better to use graphical method for better accuracy,
since in this method, the experimental data are manually shifted to align with the ref￾erence temperature line and there is no mathematical assumption for the shift.
7.4.3 Time-temperature-stress superposition
To accommodate the variation of stress in addition to the temperature for creep or
relaxation behaviour of an elastomer composite, there should be a time equivalent of
stress to make a master curve, which would include temperature and stress effects.
The free volume depends on the combined effect of stress and the temperature as
given below [79]:
f = f0 + αT ð Þ T − T0 + ασð Þ σ − σ0 (7:103)
where αT is the thermal expansion coefficient of free volume fraction, ασ the stress
expansion coefficient of free volume fraction, f0 is the free volume fraction at a refer￾7.4 Lifetime estimation by creep and relaxation 397ence temperature of T0 and reference stress σ0. There should be a combined shift fac￾tor aTσ for both temperature and stress, defined as
ηð Þ T, σ = η0ð Þ T0, σ0 aTσ (7:104)
according to the DoLittle relationship
η = a expð Þ b=f (7:105)
where a and b are constants.
Consequently, the shift factor is given by [79]
log aTσ = −b
2.303f0
αT ð Þ T − T0 + ασð Þ σ − σ0
f0 + αT ð Þ T − T0 + ασð Þ σ − σ0
  (7:106)
= − C1
C3ð Þ T − T0 + C2ð Þ σ − σ0
C2C3 + C3ð Þ T − T0 + C2ð Þ σ − σ0
  (7:107)
where C1 = b
2.303 f0
, C2 = f0
αT
, C3 = f0
ασ
It follows from eq. (7.107) that if there is no change in the stress, σ = σ0, the equation re￾duces to WLF equation, eq. (7.101). Also, if there is no change in the temperature, then
log aTσ = −C1
ð Þ σ − σ0
C3 + ð Þ σ − σ0
  (7:108)
Pap et al. [80], Emara et al. [81] and Li et al [82] studied creep of epoxy-based adhe￾sive with time–temperature-stress superposition and generated combined master
curves, while Jiang et al. [83] applied the combined shift for polycarbonate.
7.4.4 Time-temperature superposition in stress relaxation
Let us consider a stress relaxation phenomenon of a thermoset epoxy-5% Cloisite B
clay nanocomposite, examined at temperatures 115, 120, 125, 130, 135 and 140 °C, and
at a set of time from (i) 0.1–0.5 min by step of 0.1 min, (ii) 0.5–5 min by step of 1.5 min,
(iii) followed by 10 and 20 min at each selected temperature. The relaxation experi￾ment is done above glass transition, and hence, physical ageing is not applicable here.
The stress at 1% strain is measured for the study with time. The Young’s modulus at
ambient conditions is 2.0 GPa. The modulus at this strain is to be predicted at 115 °C
after 360 min.
The stress isotherms of above temperatures are plotted against time in Fig. 7.13.
The reference temperature is 115 °C. The points of other isotherms are horizontally
shifted to align with the line of 115 °C. A few arrows are shown in the plot as shifting
of points at various isotherms.
398 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix composite7.4.5 Shift factor
The shift factor is the calculated from the graph as
logð Þ aT = log X − axis value of time at the end of the arrow
X − axis value of time at the begining of the arrow   (7:109)
It may be noted that the shift factor aT is always a positive value, greater than zero. It
can be a fraction, when the shifting is done from a lower temperature to the reference
temperature and it is greater than 1, when the temperature for shifting is higher than
the reference temperature. The shift factors thus calculated from Fig. 7.13 and also
from WLF equation (eq. (7.101)), with coefficients calculated according to the graphi￾cal shift factor values are listed in Tab. 7.6.
7.4.6 Master curve
The shifted master curve of the stress relaxation is shown in Fig. 7.14. It may be noted
that the curve represents the stress values at progressive time at 115 °C when the com￾posite is held at 1% strain, which is a long-time relaxation or the ageing effect of the
composite at 115 °C, when it has to perform under a strain of 1% in service. The elastic
modulus at ambient is about 2 GPa, which reduces due to relaxation of the stress with
time.
Hence it is seen from Fig. 7.8 that at a desired time of 360 min, the stress is about
5100 Pa, and corresponding elastic modulus is about 2.04 MPa. Therefore, the modulus
has reduced by three decades of value at this temperature after 360 min.
According to the Arrhenius equation on shift factor obtained from graphical su￾perposition method, a plot of log(aT) against 1/T should result in a straight line. To
examine the validity, Fig. 7.15 was drawn. The linear fit is excellent with r
2 = 0.99. The
activation energy is calculated from the slopes as
E = 2.303 × R × Slope = 271.5 kJ=mol
Tab. 7.6: Shift factors calculated from Fig. 7.13 for test temperatures.
Temperature, ºC log(aT): graphical log(aT): WLF
C = ., C = .
  
 . .
 . .
 . .
 . .
 . .
7.4 Lifetime estimation by creep and relaxation 399Following the Arrhenius equation (7.99) and using the activation energy thus cal￾culated, the shift factor for any temperature can be calculated more or less accurately
provided the thermoset does not degrade by some other mechanism. For example, if
the time required for the modulus to reduce to 2.04 MPa is to be found out at any
ageing temperature, then shift factor at that temperature can be calculated directly
from the straight-line equation of Fig. 7.15:
logð Þ aT = 14180 1
T
  − 36.674 (7:110)
Fig. 7.13: Stress isotherms: graphical shifting of data for time-temperature superposition.
Time, min
Stress, s(t),Pa
0
1.0E+3
1.0E+4
1.0E+5
1.0E+6
1.0E+7
100 200 300 400
Ref: 115ºC
Fig. 7.14: Master curve of stress relaxation at a reference temperature: 115 °C.
400 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix composite7.4.7 Lifetime prediction
Subsequently, the shift factors thus obtained are used to calculate the time required
to reduce the modulus to the target limit by the following equation:
logð Þ tnew = log tð Þ ref + logðaT Þ (7:111)
where tnew is the shifted time (or reduced time) corresponding to Ti which is any test
temperature and tref is the time at reference temperature.
As an example, from Tab. 7.6, the log(aT) for 120 °C is −0.6989. Hence, the time at
115 °C (reference) corresponding to 1 min at 120 °C is calculated as
log(tnew) = log(1) + 0.6989 = 0 + 0.6989 = 0.6989
Therefore tnew = 100.6989 = 5 min.
This implies that the stress value after 1 min of loading at 120 °C is same after 5 min of
loading at 115 °C. For time shift in case of stress relaxation, it takes lesser time to at￾tain a particular value of stress at a higher temperature, and the reverse is also true.
Using eqs. (7.110) and (7.111), the time required at various temperatures (30–100 °C)
is calculated and plotted in Fig. 7.16. The log(time) is perfectly linear with tempera￾ture as seen in the figure. The plot can be used as a calibration curve for an approx￾imate prediction of lifetime at any service temperature at the stress condition
defined in the problem. As an example, the lifetime is about 2 years at 80 °C and
about 32 years at 70 °C, but the life in the said service stress condition is about
2 months at 90 °C.
7.4.8 Critical considerations
Here also, like TGA method of prediction, the accuracy depends on how close to the
ageing temperature is selected for the accelerated study. The time required to arrive
at the numerical value of the desired property (stress, strain, modulus or compliance)
to the set limit, is longer when the accelerated study is closer to the ageing tempera￾ture. Practically, it may not be possible to carry out experiment for such a long period.
Therefore, the method of time-temperature superposition is employed for an approxi￾mate life prediction. The approximation arises due to many reasons such as (1) possi￾ble error in experimental determination of the temperature and property, (2) any
difference in the sample of different batches and (3) correctness of graphical shift.
Further, any other environmental or external factors influencing the property during
long-term use is also neglected here.
7.4 Lifetime estimation by creep and relaxation 4017.4.9 Creep strain
In a similar manner, creep strain can be studied at various temperature keeping the
constant load applied to a sample in any appropriate mode, e.g., tensile, flexure, com￾pression or shear.
The creep is very common for supported beams, cantilevers, ropes, gaskets, ma￾chinery base supports, etc. Thermosets and their composites used in such structural
elements would experience creep and excessive creep may result in failure of an
element or may reduce performance below an acceptable limit. For example, a
creep compliance may increase to such an extent that the strength, measured by
Young’s modulus, may become lower than design value.
Graphical
WLF
–3
–2.5
–2
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
R2 = 0.99
0.0024 0.00244 0.0026
log(aT)
0.00248 0.00252 0.00256
Fig. 7.15: Shift factor vs temperature for the t-T superposition.
Fig. 7.16: Service life estimation based on stress relaxation.
402 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix composite7.4.10 Creep study: master curve
A natural rubber–based hybrid composite using 20 phr carbon black (N330) and 125
phr vermiculite designated NR-CB-VR vulcanized with sulphur-MBTS was made for
load bearing application. The composite had a glass transition temperature of −40 °C
and Shore “A” hardness was 75, tensile strength 8.8 MPa and % elongation at break
was 275%. The compression creep of the NR-CB–VR at 3.2 MPa was measured up to
4,300 min (almost 3 days) in steps. Fig. 7.17 shows the isothermal creep strain values
at 25, 30, 35 and 40 °C in time scale. There was some scatter in the data and therefore,
the creep data were fitted by a similar relationship as in eq. (7.2) with good accuracy
(R2 = 0.99). It is decided to predict long time creep at a reference temperature of 30 °C
by graphical method similar to stress relaxation example. The shift factors calculated
are plotted against 1/T as Arrhenius plot, to obtain a perfect straight line with R2 =
0.988. The Arrhenius plot is shown as Fig. 7.18. The equation of the Arrhenius relation￾ship is given by
logð Þ aT = log t
tref   = − Eλ
2.303R
1
T − 1
Tref   (7:112)
From the plot, the equation becomes
logð Þ aT = 35.809 − 10, 815 1
T
  (7:113)
The activation energy calculated as Eλ = 207.07 kJ/mol.
The agreement of the Arrhenius relationship of shift factor and temperature, it is
confirmed that the horizontal shifting by graphical method was nearly perfect. The
equation (7.113) can be used to calculate shit factor at any temperature Tn to find out
the strain at a reference temperature (Tref) from the value at Tn.
Figure 7.19 shows the master curve of creep strain after the graphical shifting tak￾ing reference temperature as 30 °C. The creep strain is thus predicted up to about
77,000 min, or, approximately 54 days. From the figure, it is seen that the strain in￾creased from 0.04 to 0.08 after 2,000 min, but after 50,000 min, the increase was only
by 0.02, which suggests that the creep becomes almost negligible after 50,000 min
(35 days). The compression modulus reduces from initial 82 MPa to 31 MPa finally
after 54 days of creep.
The predicted long-term creep strain as shown in Fig. 7.19 follows a perfect log
(time) vs. strain relationship:
εcð Þt = 0.0064 lnð Þt + 0.0322 (7:114)
7.4 Lifetime estimation by creep and relaxation 4037.4.11 Life estimation from creep
In this example, the NR composite was supposed to be used as a soft capping on hard
wooden blocks for drydocking of ships. The composite is designed as a load bearing
material under a constant dead weight for a long time, about 2 months, and hence it
undergoes creep. It is to be seen that how long the composite can be used under the
constant stress of 3.2 MPa so that the deflection is not more than 12% (which is not
very high for this example) at most possible coastal temperatures of 30, 35 and 40 °C.
To find the various durations at 30, 35 and 40 °C, the corresponding shift factors
are required to be calculated using eq. (7.113):
y = –10815x + 35.80
R2 = 0.988
0.00316 0.00324 0.00332 0.0034
2
1
0
–1
log(aT)
1/T, K–1
Fig. 7.18: Arrhenius plot of shift factor: creep experiment.
0 900 1800 2700 3600 4500
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
25ºC 30ºC 35ºC 40ºC
Creep Strain
Time, min
Fig. 7.17: Isothermal compression creep strain of NR-CB-VR composite at various temperatures.
404 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositelog(a30) = 0, being the present reference temperature,
log(a35) = 35.809–10815/(273 + 35) = 0.695364,
log(a40) = 35.809–10815/(273 + 40) = 1.256284.
Now, we need to calculate the time required at 30 °C, using eq. (7.114):
ε (30) = 0.12 = 0.0064✶
ln(t) + 0.0322 = 907773 min = 630 days.
Hence, the time to attain this strain at 35 °C = (630/a35) days = 121 days,
and the time to attain this strain at 40 °C = (630/a40) days = 35 days.
The time limits thus calculated are accurate to the extent the constitutive equation of
long-term creep is accurate. This largely depends on strain measurement in the creep
machine with accurate time and on the best fit creep equations for all data, if used for
master curve generation. Since the time of usage or the lifetime is logarithmic with
strain, the deviation from observed strain in the field of use may be quite significant if
there is error in basic data and low accuracy in subsequent predictive equations.
7.4.12 Ageing study under stress
The time-temperature-stress transformation method is described in para 7.4.3 with a
set of eqs. (7.103)–(7.108), where the dependence on stress is accommodated using
modified coefficients for calculation of combined shift factors. It would be more con￾venient to use a concept of effect of stress on the activation energy of durability fol￾lowing an Arrhenius-type expression.
The effect of stress on the life depends on mode of load application. For example,
when the temperature causes a chain scission in a polymer and produce radicals, a
tensile stretch can pull the radicals apart and hinder the recombination, thus increas￾Time, min
1.0E+0 1.0E+1 1.0E+2 1.0E+3 1.0E+4 1.0E+5
Creep strain
y = 0.006ln(x) + 0.032
R2 = 0.998
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.03
0.1
0.12
Fig. 7.19: Creep master curve at 30 °C reference temperature.
7.4 Lifetime estimation by creep and relaxation 405ing generation of more new radicals and increase the degradation rate. Compression
would bring radicals closer to facilitate the recombination, and discourage new chain
reactions, thus delaying the degradation. Stress may have effect on diffusion of reac￾tants such as acid, gas and sea water and subsequent degradation which depends on
the diffusion process. The dependence of temperature and stress on failure life of pol￾ymers, metals and other solids is expressed by a modified Arrhenius equation known
as Boltzmann-Arrhenius–Zhurkov (BAZ) expression [84–86] which includes stress:
τ σð Þ ð Þt = τ0 exp
U0 − γσ
kT   (7:115)
In this equation, τ is the time to failure, τ0 is the time constant, σ is the stress per unit
volume and γ is the coefficient of stress, sometimes referred to as activation volume of
bond rupture, and has the unit of volume. The terms k and T are Boltzmann constant
and absolute temperature respectively and (U0-γ σ) is the activation energy of rupture
of interatomic bond due to thermal fluctuation. Arrhenius pre-exponent τ0 is the pe￾riod of sub-molecular oscillation at T→∞, typically about 10−13 s. In absence of any me￾chanical stress (σ), the equation simplifies to classical Arrhenius expression for time
to failure. The failure is due to the thermo-fluctuations, which degrades a material
even in absence of stress. The stress only changes the potential barrier E by a quantity
γ✶
σ in the stress direction and therefore changes the thermo-fluctuations.
This equation is widely used for prediction of lifetime of polymers under isother￾mal condition (T) and under a constant stress σ [87,88].
However, for elastomers, time to fracture is given by another expression claimed
[89] to be more appropriate:
τ = τ0
σ✶
σ
 m
exp
U0
kT   (7:116)
For elastomers,
m = U0
3kTg
(7:117)
where Tg is the glass transition temperature of the polymer.
7.4.13 Bailey Criteria
When the durability (or lifetime) is to be determined for a polymer under time￾dependent simple loading conditions and under isothermal ageing, it is possible to
use the Bailey criterion of durability [89,90]:
406 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositet
ð
✶
0
dt
τ σð Þ ð Þt = 1 (7:118)
Here τ (σ(t)) is the durability function determined experimentally under constant
stress σ and t
✶ is the durability under a stress σ(t). However, the above equation is
valid for temperatures below glass transition, and it is assumed that there is negligi￾ble Boltzmann superposition effect of stresses.
The above criteria were applied to polyethylene, polyamides, polyoxymethylene,
polyethylene terephthalate, polyvinylidene fluoride, copper and aluminium by Vetteg￾ren et al. [89].
As an example, a case of any thermoset based composite can be considered, as￾suming that relaxation time of the thermoset polymer is almost infinity at ambient
temperature and the glass transition temperature is very high compared to experi￾mental temperatures. Equation (7.115) is rewritten as:
τ = τ0 exp
U0
kT   exp − γσ
kT
h i (7:119)
or,
τ = τ0 exp
U0
kT   exp½  −aσ , where, a = γ
kT (7:120)
or,
τ = B exp½  −aσ (7:121)
where
B = τ0 exp
U0
kT   (7:122)
The following expression can be assumed with slight approximation:
e−aσ = bσ−κ (7:123)
or
aσ = lnð Þb + κ lnðσÞ (7:124)
Introducing eq. (97.124) into eq. (7.121):
τ σð Þ ð Þt = ð Þ Bb σ−κ (7:125)
Or,
τ σð Þ ð Þt = Cσ−κ (7:126)
7.4 Lifetime estimation by creep and relaxation 407where C = Bb, a constant at a constant temperature. In addition, the quantity γ in eq.
(7.119) is also constant since there is no significant volume change for the segments of
the polymer at a constant temperature.
Introducing eq. (7.126) in Baily criteria described by eq. (7.118), we get,
t
ð
✶
0
dt
Cσ −κ = 1 (7:127)
Let tr be the time to failure at a stress σr. By denoting σr = wrtr, where wr is the stretch￾ing rate (MPa/min) for σr and substituting it in eq. (7.127), we obtain, after integration:
Therefore,
ðτ
0
dt
Cσ−κ =
ðtr
0
dt
CðwtÞ
−κ = ðwrtrÞ
κ+1
Cwrðκ + 1Þ = 1 (7:128)
Rearranging and taking logarithm, we get the workable expression as
log σr = 1
κ + 1
ð Þ log C + logðκ + 1Þ +
1
κ + 1
log wr (7:129)
Equation (7.129) represents a straight line when log(σr) is plotted against log(wr).
These values can be obtained from a series of experiments of tensile/compression of
the composite.
7.4.14 Lifetime estimation
In order to determine the lifetime, the polymer composite sample should be tested for
tensile/compression property at various (at least four) stretching rates (wr) and the
failure stresses (σr) should be recorded. In case of thermoplastic polymer composites,
sometimes yield stress is taken. Time to break tr (failure) is also recorded for each
experiment. The same sets of experiments are to be done with isothermal ageing at
various temperatures to use in eq. (7.120).
Experimental data obtained from the above procedure are plotted according to
eq. (7.129), and from the slope and intercept, C and κ are calculated. However, to find
out lifetime at some other stress, eq. (7.129) as such is used with the slope and the
intercept. From the relation σr = wr.tr, the time to fail (tr) is calculated.
7.4.15 Example
Consider a composite consisting of epoxy resin, modified with 10% by weight of a
chemically bonded liquid rubber and cured by a diamine to make a strong and tough
408 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositecured thermoset filled with 10% chopped glass fibre. The uncured resin-fibre mixture
is a dough moulding compound (DMC). It is to be found out if the material as such is
suitable for making a 6″ industrial FRP ball valve. The valve has to continuously work
under 10 bar hydrostatic pressure and the corresponding Hoop stress on the ball is 8
MPa. The service life of the ball valve has to be determined using the data from tensile
measurement. Further, the total strain after 10 years should be found out.
The dimensions of the item are fixed as per design. Hence, the durability has to
be determined only on the basis of continuous constant stress.
7.4.16 Solution
The tensile test of the cured samples was done with a universal testing machine (UTM)
using 45 mm gauge length of the samples, using four cross-head speeds, e.g. 1, 2, 5 and
10 mm/min. It was ensured that there was no slip at the grips during any experiment,
which means that the cross-head travel is the elongation of the sample due to tension.
In a DMA experiment with a fixed frequency of 1 Hz, the temperature at which the
storage modulus dropped from a constant value, was recorded as a maximum useable
temperature.
Table 7.7 shows the tensile test data. The yield stress, corresponding strain and the
time to reach yield point is taken here since the toughened epoxy shows a slight plastic
deformation after stress maxima. The rate of stress (wr) as MPa/min is calculated from
the time to reach yield point.
Figure 7.20 shows the plot of log(σr) against log(wr) according to eq. (7.129). The
data has some scatters, but with fairly good linear fit (r
2 = 0.926) and the equation is
logð Þ σr = 0.0929 logð Þ wr + 1.4984 (7:130)
The above equation can be used to determine wr for various stress (σr) levels.
According to the above relationship, the stretching rate wr at 8MPa stress is calcu￾lated as wr = 3.91E-07 MPa/min, and correspondingly, the time to reach yield stress of
8MPa is:
tr = σr/wr = 77.9 years.
At 8 MPa, the initial strain of the material in tension is found out from stress–strain
plot as ε = 0.45%.
Neglecting the physical ageing effect, additional strain after 10 years of use (due
to creep) will be
δε = (4.8 – 0.45) × 10/78 = 0.5584%, assuming a linear variation with time.
Hence, total strain will be = ε + δ ε = 1.0084%.
However, since the composite is used at ambient temperature of about 20–30 °C,
far below the DMA Tg (70 °C), the strain after 10 years will be somewhat less than the
7.4 Lifetime estimation by creep and relaxation 409Tab. 7.7: Tensile test data for toughened epoxy-glass composite.
Gauge length Yield stress Cross–head speed Yield strain and
time
Stress rate Plot
parameters
L, mm σr, MPa mm/min %dL tr, min wr, MPa/min log(wr) log(σr)
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
 .  . . . . .
log(wr
)
log(σr
)
1 2.52.2521.751.51.25
1.75
1.7
1.65
1.6
1.55
y = 0.092x + 1.498
R2 = 0.926
Fig. 7.20: Plot of UTS vs stretching rate according to eq. (7.129) and data of Tab. 7.7.
410 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeabove estimation due to physical ageing, but not significantly since the relaxation
time as such is very high and will continuously be delayed. Further, since the DMA Tg
of this material is 70 °C, it can be said that the material can be used as load bearing
item at ambient condition. Therefore, the material as such with all dimensions as per
design can be used safely for a long service life based on yield stress only.
Using eq. (7.130) and the above procedure, durability of the toughened epoxy￾chopped glass fibre composite is determined for various Hoop stress levels and plot￾ted in Fig. 7.21. The plot can be used as a calibration curve and also as a first-hand
information to decide on suitability for any application of this composite under ten￾sile stress.
Similarly, under the constant Hoop stress, the strain will increase with time.
Hence the approximate strain (% elongation) at initial stress and at various lapse of
time is shown in Fig. 7.22. It is seen that the strain is 1% at 10 years and hence it is
desirable to define the service life of maximum 10 years so that the dimensional toler￾ances are mostly satisfied.
7.4.17 Conclusion
All the methods of life estimation discussed above have one aspect in common. The
calculated life is never accurate due to inaccuracy in interpolation to applicable envi￾ronmental conditions and effect of various other factors which are not considered in
the studies. The prediction is more accurate, when the temperature of laboratory ex￾periment is nearer to the actual application temperature. This condition cannot be
easily satisfied, because in that case the study would take very long time, especially
for rigid thermosets. However, the superimposition of more than one stimulant for
ageing is possible, but the life estimation would then be completely empirical, and ap￾plicable to that particular case only. This type of study with combined effects are
done in many critical items such as rocket propellants, load bearing structures made
of FRP composites, high temperature insulation by thermoset coatings, electrical insu￾lators, etc. where serious accidents can take place due to degradation.
Apart from the factors considered in this chapter, there are many functional fac￾tors due to which the composite may become unsuitable for use after a certain period.
Simple examples are structural damping composites, adhesive joints under fluctuat￾ing/dynamic force, low cycle fatigue of an FRP beam and dielectric failure of a com￾posite insulator.
Additives play a very important role in ageing process. In composites, interaction
of the reinforcing material with its own molecules (Filler-Filler) and with the host poly￾mer (Filler-Matrix) is of prime importance. The second most effective parameter is as￾pect ratio of the filler. The third important parameter is the size of the filler, since the
relative surface area decides the extent of secondary valence bond of the filler with
the polymer, such as hydrogen bonding, polar interaction and van der Waals and also
7.4 Lifetime estimation by creep and relaxation 411the extent of agglomeration (clustering). In addition, the additives which are suscepti￾ble to strong interaction with the prepolymer or curing agent or any other ingredient
may cause the deviation in rate of change of properties when compared to the ageing
process of the polymer alone. Nanoparticles provide more complicated scenario due to
extremely small size and corresponding high surface energy. The complications are
the difficulty in modelling the ageing behaviour taking into account the microme￾chanics of stress-strain and other physical characteristics such as diffusional con￾straints, threshold limit for thermal and electrical conduction, frictional contribution
to dynamic property and changes in α-relaxation rate due to change in thermo￾fluctuation below the glass transition. However, the normal bulk behaviour in thermal
analysis of degradation kinetics, physical ageing and dynamic viscoelastic properties
can be fairly mapped with time to decide service and storage life.
Working Stress, MPa
Service Life, days
0 5 10 15 20 25
1.0E+6
1.0E+4
1.0E+2
1.0E+0
Fig. 7.21: Plot of service life at various stresses for the toughened epoxy-glass composite for use in the
ball valve in example 7.4.15.
service ime, yrs
% Strain
0 8 70605040302010 0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
Fig. 7.22: Increase in % strain with service time under a reference constant stress of 8 MPa.
412 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeReferences
[1] Eftekhari, M., Fatemi, A. Creep behavior and modeling of neat, talc-filled, and short glass fiber
reinforced thermoplastics. Compos. B: Eng. 2016, 97, 68–83.
[2] Struik, L. C. E. Physical Aging in Amorphous Polymersand other Materials. Amsterdam, Elsevier, 1978.
[3] Struik, L. C. E. Physical aging in plastics and other glassy materials. Polym. Eng. Sci. 1977,
17(3),165–173.
[4] Zheng, S. F., Weng, G. J. A new constitutive equation for the long-term creep of polymersbased on
physical aging. Eur. J. Mech. A: Solids. 2002, 21, 411–421.
[5] Lai, C. H. Physical ageing and dimensional changes in acrylic polymers. Ph.D. Thesis. Dept. of Chem
Engg. And Physical and inorganic chemistry, The university of Adelaide, USA, 1992.
[6] Minguez, R., Barrenetxea, L., Solaberrieta, E., Lizundia, E. A simple approach to understand the
physical aging in polymers. Eur. J. Phys. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6404/aaf244
[7] Patil, P. N., Rath, S. K., Sharma, S. K., Sudarshan, K., Maheshwari, P., Patri, M., Praveen, S.,
Khandelwal, P., Pujari, P. K. Free volumes and structural relaxations in diglycidyl ether of bisphenol￾A based epoxy–polyether amine networks. Soft. Matter., 2013, 9, 3589–3599.
[8] Schwarzl, F. R. The numerical calculation of storage and loss compliance from creep data for linear
viscoelastic materials. Rheol Acta. 1969, 8(I), 6–17.
[9] Eftekhari, M., Fatemi, A. Creep behavior and modeling of high-density polyethylene (HDPE). Polym.
Test. 2021, 94, Article No. 107031. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymertesting.2020.107031
[10] Chang, T. D., Brittain, J. O. Studies of epoxy resin systems: Part C: Effect of sub-Tg aging on the
physical properties of a fully cured epoxy resin. Polym. Eng. Sci. 1982, 22, 1221–1227.
[11] Kong, E. S. W. Physical ageing in epoxy matrices and composites. Adv. Polym. Sci. 1986, 80, 125–171.
[12] Le´veˆque, D., Schieffer, A., Mavel, A., Maire, J.-F. Analysis of how thermal aging affects the long￾term mechanical behavior and strength of polymer–matrix composites. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2005,
65, 395–401.
[13] Frigione, Μ., Naddeo, C., Acierno, D. Cold-curing epoxy resins: aging and Environmental effects. I –
thermal properties. J. Polym. Eng. 2001, 21(1), 23–51.
[14] Frigione, Μ., Naddeo, C., Acierno, D. Cold-curing epoxy resins: aging and Environmental effects. II –
mechanical properties. J. Polym. Eng. 2001, 21(4), 349–367.
[15] Lizundia, E., Sarasua, J. R. Physical Aging in Poly(L-lactide) and its Multi-Wall Carbon Nanotube
Nanocomposites. Macromol. Symp. 2012, 118(23),321–322.
[16] McKenna, G. B. On the Physics Required for the Prediction of Long Term Performance of Polymers
and Their Composites. J. Res. NIST, 1994, 99, 169–189.
[17] McKenna, G. B. Physical aging in glasses and composites. In: Pochiraju, K. V., Tandon, G. P.,
Schoeppner, G. A. eds. Long-term durability of polymeric matrix composites. Springer, Boston, MA,
2012, pp. 237–309.
[18] Lu, H., Nutt, S. Enthalpy relaxation of layered silicate-epoxy nanocomposites. Macromol. Chem.
Phys., 2003, 204, 1832–1841.
[19] Hu, H., Sun, C. T. The characterization of physical aging in polymeric composites. Compos. Sci.
Technol. 2000, 60, 2693–2698.
[20] Odegard, G. M., Bandyopadhyay, A. Physical Aging of Epoxy Polymers and Their Composites.
J. Polym. Sci. Part B: Polym. Phys. 2011, 49, 1695–1716.
[21] Bradshaw, R. D., Brinson, L. C. “Physical Aging in Polymers and Polymer Composites: AnAnalysis and
Method for Time-Aging Time Superposition,” Polym. Eng. Sci., 37, 31–44 (1997).
[22] Lee, A., Lichtenhan, J. D. Viscoelastic Responses of Polyhedral Oligosilsesquioxane Reinforced Epoxy
Systems. Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 4970–4974.
[23] Lu, H. B., Nutt, S. Enthalpy Relaxation in Layered Silicate-Epoxy nanocomposites, Macromol. Chem.
Phys. 2003, 204, 1832–1841.
References 413[24] Rittigstein, P., Torkelson, J. M. Polymer–nanoparticle interfacial interactions in polymer
nanocomposites: confinement effects on glass transition temperature and suppression of physical
aging. J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 2006, 44, 2935–2943.
[25] Cangialosi, D., Boucher, V. M., Alegrıa, A., Colmenero, J. Enhanced physical aging of polymer nano
composites: The key role of the area to volume ratio. Polymer. 2012, 53 (6), 1362–1372.
[26] Boucher, V. M., Cangialosi, D., Alegrıa, A., Colmenero, J., Rev, E.: Stat., Nonlinear. Soft. Matter. Phys.,
2012, 86, 041501.
[27] Gates, T. S., Veazie, D. R., Brinson, L. C. Creep and physical aging in a polymericcomposite:
comparison of tension and compression. J. Comp. Matls., 1997, 31, 2478–2505.
[28] Hu, H. W. Physical aging in long term creep of polymeric composite laminates. J. Mechanics, 2007,
23, 245–252.
[29] Kissinger, H. E. Reaction kinetics in differential thermal analysis. Anal. Chem. 1957, 29, 11, 1702–1706.
[30] Doyle, C. D. Kinetic analysis of thermogravimetric data, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1961, V (15), 285–292.
[31] Coats, A. W., Redfern, J. P. Kinetics parameters from thermogravimetric data. Nature, 1964, 201,
68–69.
[32] Nikolaidis, A. K., Achilias, D. S. Thermal degradation kinetics and viscoelastic behavior of poly(methyl
methacrylate)/organomodified montmorillonite nanocomposites prepared via in situ bulk radical
polymerization. Polymers 2018, 10, 491; doi:10.3390/polym10050491
[33] Vyazovkin, S., Dranca, I., Fan, X., Advincula, R. Kinetics of the thermal and thermo-oxidative
degradation of a polystyrene–clay nanocomposite. Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2004, 25, 498–503.
[34] Menezes, J., Loureiro, D. S., Calado, F. A. M., V.m., D. A., Maria, A. Thermogravimetric study and
kinetic modeling of semi-interpenetrating polymer network protonic conductive membranes to
PEMFC. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2022, 147, 9469–9486.
[35] Qui, T., Ge, F., Li, C., Lu, S. Study of the thermal degradation of flame retardant polyester GRPF using
TGA and TG-FTIR-GC/MS. J. Therm. Anal. Calom. 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10973-021-10895-z.
[36] Raveshtian, A., Fasihi, M., Norouzbeigi, R., Rasouli, S. Curing and thermal degradation reactions of
Nano-Alumina filled natural rubber latex foams. Thermochim. Acta. 2022, 707, 179108.
[37] Zhang, X., Huang, R. Thermal decomposition kinetics of basalt fiber-reinforced wood polymer
composites. Polymers, 2020, 12(10), Article No. 2283. doi: 10.3390/polym12102283.
[38] Yousef, S., Eimontas, J., Striūgas, N., Subadra, S. P., Abdelnaby, M. A. Thermal degradation and
pyrolysis kinetic behaviour of glass fibre-reinforced thermoplastic resin by TG-FTIR, Py-GC/MS, linear
and nonlinear isoconversional models. J. Mater. Res. Technol. 2021, 15, 5360–5374.
[39] Tranchard, P., Duquesne, S., Samyn, F., Estèbe, B., Bourbigo, S. Kinetic analysis of the thermal
decomposition of a carbon fibre-reinforced epoxy resin laminate. J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis. 2017,
126, 14–21.
[40] Narayanankutty, S. K. Thermal degradation of short kevlarfibre thermoplastic polyurethane
composite. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 1992, 38, 187–192.
[41] Friedman, H. L. New methods for evaluating kinetic parameters from thermal analysis data.
J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Lett. 1969, 7, 41–46.
[42] Freeman, E. S., Carroll, B. The application of thermoanalytical techniques to reaction kinetics- the
thermogravimetric evaluation of the kinetics of the decomposition of calcium oxalate monohydrate.
J. Phys. Chem. 1958, 62, 394–397.
[43] Kim, S., Park, J. K. Characterization of thermal reaction by peak temperature and height of DTG
curves. Thermochim. Acta 1995, 264, 137–156.
[44] Madhu, G., Mandal, D. K., Bhunia, H., Bajpai, P. K. Thermal degradation kinetics and lifetime of
HDPE/PLLA/pro-oxidant blends. J. Polym. Eng. 2016. doi: 10.1515/polyeng-2015-2019.
[45] Doyle, C. D. Estimating Isothermal Life from Thermogravimetric Data. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1962,
6(24),639–642.
414 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix composite[46] Murray, P., White, J. Kinetics of the thermal dehydration of clays. Part IV. Interpretation of the
differential thermal analysis of the clay minerals. Trans. Brit. Ceram. Soc. 54 (1955d), 204–238.
[47] Senum, G. I., Yang, R. T. Rational approximations of integral of Aarrhenius function. J. Therm. Anal.
1977, 11, 445–449.
[48] Perez-Maqueda, L. A., Criado, J. M. The accuracy of senum and yang’s approximations to the
Arrhenius integral. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2000, 60, 909–915.
[49] Toop, D. J. Theory of Life Testing and Use of Thermogravimetric Analysis to Predict the Thermal Life
of Wire Enamels. IEEE Trans. Electr. Insul, 1971, EI-6(1), 2–14.
[50] Flynn, J. H., Wall, L. A. A quick, direct method for the determination of activation energy from
thermogravimetric data, Polym. Lett., 1966, 4, 323–328.
[51] Ozawa, T. A new method of analyzing thermogravimetric data. Bull. Chem. Soc. Japn. 1965, 38, 1881.
[52] Kissinger, H. E. Reaction kinetics in differential thermal analysis. Anal. Chem. 1957, 29, 1702–1706.
[53] Starink, M. J. The determination of activation energy from linear heating rate experiments: A
comparison of the accuracy of isoconversion methods. Thermochim. Acta. 2003, 404, 163–176.
[54] Coats, A., Redfern, J. Kinetic Parameters from Thermogravimetric Data. Nature, 1964, 201, 68–69.
[55] Phadnis, A. B., Deshpande, V. V. Determination of the kinetics and mechanism of a solid-state
reaction. A simple approach. Thermochim. Acta. 1983, 62, 361–367.
[56] Vyazovkin, S., Dollimore, D. Linear and nonlinear procedures in isoconversional computations of the
activation energy on non-isothermal reactions in solids. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 1996, 36, 42–45.
[57] Vyazovkin, S. Evaluation of activation energy of thermally stimulated solid state reactions under
arbitrary variation of temperature, J. Comput. Chem. 1997, 18, 393–402.
[58] Vyazovkin, S. Model-free kinetics: staying free of multiplying entities without necessity. J. Therm.
Anal. Calorim. 2006, 83, 45–51.
[59] Vafayan, M., Beheshty, M. H., Ghoreishy, M. H. R., Abedini, H. Advanced integral isoconversional
analysis for evaluating and predicting the kinetic parameters of the curing reaction of epoxy
prepreg. Thermochim. Acta. 2013, 557, 37–43.
[60] Cai, J., Chen, S. A New iterative linear integral isoconversional method for the determination of the
activation energy varying with the conversion degree. J. Comput. Chem. 2009, 30, 1986–1991.
[61] Budrugeac, P. An iterative model-free method to determine the activation energy of non-isothermal
heterogeneous processes. Thermochim. Acta. 2010, 511, 8–16.
[62] Flynn, J. H. The “temperature integral” – its use and abuse. Thermochim. Acta. 1997, 300, 83–92.
[63] Dubaj, T., Cibulkova, Z., Šimon, P. An incremental isoconversional method for kinetic analysis based
on the orthogonal distance regression. J. Comput. Chem. 2015, 36, 392–398.
[64] Vyazovkin, S., Burnham, A. K., Criado, J. M., Pérez-Maqueda, L. A., Popescu, C., Sbirrazzuoli, N.,
Kinetics, I. C. T. A. C. Committee recommendations for performing kinetic computations on thermal
analysis data. Thermochim. Acta. 2011, 520, 1–19.
[65] Šimon, P., Dubaj, T., Cibulková, Z. Frequent flaws encountered in the manuscripts of kinetic papers.
J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2022, 147, 10083–10088.
[66] Pe´rez-maqueda, L. A., Criado, J. M., Gotor, F. J., Ma´lek, J. Advantages of combined kinetic analysis of
experimental data obtained under any heating profile. J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 2862–2868.
[67] Budrugeac, P. On the use of the model-free way method for kinetic analysis of thermoanalytical
data – advantages and limitations. Article 179063 Thermochim. Acta, Volume 706, 2022. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tca.2021.179063
[68] Maxwell, A. S., Broughton, W. R., Dean, G., Sims, G. D. Review of accelerated ageing methods and
lifetime prediction techniques for polymeric materials, NPL Report DEPC MPR 016, 2005.
[69] Ahmad, M. B., Gharayebi, Y., Salit, M. S., Hussein, M. Z., Ebrahimiasl, S., Dehzangi, A. Preparation,
characterization and thermal degradation of polyimide (4-APS/BTDA)/SiO2 composite films. Int.
J. Mol. Sci. 2012, 13, 4860–4872.
References 415[70] Saha, T., Bhowmick, A. K. Influence of nanofiller on thermal degradation resistance of hydrogenated
nitrile butadiene rubber, Rubber Chem. Technol. 2019, 92 (2), 263–285.
[71] Malkin, A. Y., Petrie, C. J. S. Some conditions for rupture of polymer liquids in extension. J. Rheol.
1997, 41(1),1–26.
[72] Fukushima, K., Cai, H., Nakada, M., Miyano, Y. Determination of time-temperature shift factor for
long-term life prediction of polymer composites, ICCM International Conferences on Composite
Materials, 2009.
[73] Miyano, Y., Nakada, M., Cai, H. Long-Term Life Prediction of CRPF Structures Based on MMF/ATM
Method. In: Conf. Proceed. Society for Experimental Mechanics Series, 2011, 3, 257–265.
[74] Cai, H., Miyano, Y., Nakada, M. Prediction of long-term flexural fatigue strength of honeycomb
sandwich composites. J. Reinf. Plast. Compos. 2010, 29(2),266–277.
[75] Pazur, R. J., Cormier, J. G., Taymaz, K. K. Service life determination of nitrile O-rings in hydraulic fluid.
Rubber Chem. Technol. 2014, 87(2),239–249.
[76] Batra, S. Creep rupture and life prediction of polymer composites, Graduate Theses, Dissertations,
and Problem Reports. West Virginia University, College of Engineering and Mineral Resources, 2009.
https://researchrepository.wvu.edu/etd/2035.
[77] Spathis, G., Kontou, E. Creep failure time prediction of polymers and polymer composites. Compos.
Sci. Technol. 2012, 72, 959–964.
[78] Trachenko, K. The Vogel–Fulcher–Tammann law in the elastic theory of glass transition, J. Non￾Cryst. Solids 2008, 354, 3903–3906.
[79] Ferry, J. D. Viscoelastic Properties of Polymers, 3rd ed. New York, John Wiley, 1980, 276.
[80] Luo, W. B., Wang, C., Hu, X. Long-term creep assessment of viscoelastic polymer by time￾temperature-stress superposition, Acta Mech. Sol. Sinica 25 (2012) 571–578.
[81] Pap, J. S., Kästner, M., Muller, S., Jansen, I. Experimental characterization and simulation of the
mechanical behavior of an epoxy adhesive. Proc. Mater. Sci. 2013, 78, 234–242.
[82] Emara, M., Torres, L., Baena, M., Barris, C., Moawad, M. Effect of sustained loading and
environmental conditions on the creep behavior of an epoxy adhesive for concrete structures
strengthened with CFRP laminates, Compos. B. 2017, 129, 88–96.
[83] Li, H., Luo, Y., Hu, D. Long Term Creep Assessment of Room-temperature Cured Epoxy Adhesive by
Time-stress Superposition and Fractional Rheological Model. Appl. Rheology, 2018, 28(6),
201864796. https://doi.org/10.3933/applrheol-28-64796
[84] Jiang, C., Jiang, H., Zhu, Z., Zhang, J. Application of time–temperature–stress superposition principle
on the accelerated physical aging test of polycarbonate, Polym. Eng. Sci. 2015, 55, 2215–2221.
[85] Suhir, E. Boltzmann-Arrhenius-zhurkov equation and its application in aerospace electronics and
photonics reliability physics problems: review. Int. J. Aeronaut. Aerosp. Res. 2020, 7(1),210–223.
[86] Zhurkov, S. N. The Problem of the Strength of Solids. Bull. USSR Acad. Sci. 1957, 11, 78–82.
[87] Zhurkov, S. N. Kinetic concept of the strength of solids. Int. J. Fract. Mech. 1965, 1, 311–323.
[88] Sirota, D., Ivanov, V. The Determination and Practical Application the Kinetic Constants of
Destruction of Rocks with Modified Zhurkov’s Formula. In: E3S Web of Conferences. IIIrd
International Innovative Mining Symposium. 2018, 41, 01030.
[89] Wineman, A., Shaw, J. Combined deformation- and temperature-induced scission in a rubber
cylinder in torsion. Int. J. Non-Linear Mech. 2007, 42, 330–335.
[90] Vettegren, V. I., Kulik, V. B., Bronnikov, S. V. Temperature dependence of the tensile strength of
polymers and metals at elevated temperatures. Tech. phys. lett., 2005, 31(11),969–972.
[91] Bailey, J. An attempt to correlate some tensile strength measurements on glass: III. Glass. Ind.
1939, 20, 95–99.
[92] Leonov, A. I., Basov, N. I., Kazanko, V., Yu, V. Fundamentals of Injection Molding of Thermosets and
Rubbers. (In Russian), Moscow, Chimiya, 1977, pp. 56–59.
416 Chapter 7 Lifetime estimation of polymer matrix compositeIndex
2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate 6
3D fabric 177
4, 4ʹ- dithiodibutyric acid 22
4,4ʹ-bismaleimidodiphenylmethane 142
accuracy 308–309, 330, 337, 351
acrylic acid 16, 30
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) 47
acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) 275
activation energy 357, 364, 374–375, 377, 379,
381–387, 389–390, 392–393, 405–406
active constrained layer 269
active-passive constrained layer damping 262, 267
ageing 353, 355, 360, 371, 405
agglomerated 346–347
agglomeration 75, 78–79, 87, 98–99, 200, 203, 206,
223, 227, 237, 240, 242
aminopropyltriethoxysilane 41
amorphous 110, 355–356, 359
angular 113
application 193, 246, 371, 386, 394–395, 403,
405, 411
aramid fibre 95
aspect ratio 75, 78, 86, 89–90, 93, 98–99, 102, 112,
115–116, 203, 206, 209–212, 214, 237
atmospheric 192, 254
attraction 98, 103, 115
autoclave moulding 173
automated fibre placement process (AFP), 41
benzoxazine resin 138
Bingham Model 106
bio-based phloretic acid 138
biocompatible 96–97, 128
bis(2-benzothiazole)disulfide 15
bis(4-maleimidophenyl) methane (BDM) 142
black filler 85
blending 104–105, 127
carbon black 75, 77–78, 83, 85, 87, 92–93, 120,
123, 192
carbon fabric 177, 179, 182
carbon fiber reinforced epoxy composite
(CFRP) 298
carbon fiber-epoxy composites (CFRP) 293
carbon nanotube composites 226
carboxyl terminated polyethylene glycol
adipate 57
carboxylated nitrile butadiene ionic elastomer 16
carboxylated nitrile rubber (XNBR) 9
carboxyl-terminated poly(2-ethyl hexyl acrylate) 57
Casson Model 107
Cellulose 96
cellulosein 73
CFRP 262, 353, 367
chopped 86
chopped fibre 86
chord reinforced rubber composite 216
clay 223–225, 247
CNT 102–103, 120
Coats and Redfern 380
coefficient 73, 78, 83, 85, 87, 95, 108–109, 113
combination 84, 97
complex 74, 86, 105, 113–115
compliance 359–363, 365, 368–370, 394–395, 402
compliance calibration 53
composite 2–3, 4, 5, 12, 17, 23–24, 26, 37–47,
49–50, 53–55, 58–59, 63–67, 75–88, 90,
92–99, 101–104, 112–113, 115–120, 123–124,
190, 194, 197–202, 207–210, 215, 220, 238, 241,
244, 246–248, 252–255
composites 196, 229, 242–243, 308, 310–313,
315–316, 318–319, 323, 330, 332, 335–336,
339–341, 343–344, 346, 351, 354, 356, 366,
371–372, 387, 394, 402, 408, 411
compression test 310, 316, 326
computational 385
concentration 73, 75, 83–84, 87, 109–110, 113, 197,
203–204, 225, 237, 244, 255
conducting polymer bio-nanocomposites
(CBNCs) 297
conducting polymers 82
conductivity 76–77, 80–85, 124
conventional 95
core shell rubber (CSR) 178
covalent adaptable networks 18
covalently crossinked elastomer 14
crack opening displacement (COD) 53
creep 354, 356–363, 365–366, 368–371, 394–398,
402–405, 409
critical length 86–87, 99
critical pigment volume concentration (CPVC) 197
critical strain energy factor 176–177
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110781571-008cross-link density 365–366
crosslinking 6, 8, 11–12, 14, 16, 18
CRTM 167–168
CTPEHA 347
curves 362–363, 369, 386, 389, 398
cyanate ester 11
cyanate ester resin 144
damage tolerance 176
damping 86, 108, 365–366, 411
decomposition 333
deformation 105, 116, 121, 362, 394, 409
degradation 354–356, 366–367, 371–377, 385,
387–395, 406, 411–412
deterioration 354, 371, 394
dicyanate ester 11
dielectric analysis 306, 340
differential scanning calorimetry 306, 338
diffractometry 306–307
diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA) 22
diglycidylether of bisphenol-A (DGEBA) 134
diisocyanate 85
dipentamethylene thiuram tetrasulfide 15
discontinuous 83, 89
displacementof 53
distribution 74, 80, 84, 87–88, 98, 114
DMA 353, 357, 359, 368, 371, 409
DMTA 364
double cantilever beam 53
drop weight impact test 324
dual shear test 322
dynamic 86, 102–103, 105, 109, 113–114
dynamic mechanical analyser 306, 329
dynamic mechanical analysis 329
dynamic viscoelasticity 234
E-glass 368
Einstein, Mooney, Graham and Frankel &
Activos 112
elastic modulus 199, 366, 369, 394, 399
elastomer /nanoclay composites 223
elastomer blend 366
elastomer matrices 189
elastomer nanocomposite 222
elastomeric 192, 199, 201, 205, 207, 229, 237,
242–243, 245–247, 249
elastomer-nanocomposites 247
electrical properties 81
electrically conducting composites 272
electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) 300, 307
electromagnetic (EM) 276
electromagnetic induction 307
EMI shielding 82, 85, 248–249, 253–254, 354
energy-dispersive spectrometer 346
engineering thermoplastic 104
enthalpy 355–356, 364, 372
environmental exposure 367
environmental stress cracking (ESC) 63
environmental stress cracking resistance (ESCR). 66
epichlorohydrin 134
epoxy 357–358, 365–368, 372, 398, 408–411
epoxy resins 134
equation 357–358, 361–362, 364–366, 370–371,
374, 376–377, 380, 382–383, 395, 397–401,
403, 405–407, 409
equilibrium 355–358, 361, 364–365, 370, 394
ESR 306–307
ethylene vinyl acetate copolymer (EVA), 270
ethylene-vinyl acetate 83
exothermic 332–333, 338–339
expansion 332, 336–337
experiments 200, 236
extruder 74, 95, 98, 101, 105, 109–110, 116–118,
120, 122
extrusion 86, 95, 97, 101, 105, 109, 116–117,
121–123, 128
ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) 307
ferulic acid 139
fiber 366, 368, 372, 409
fibre 387
fibre-reinforced plastic 164
fibre-reinforced plastic (FRP) 307
fibres 5, 23–24, 26, 31, 86–87, 91, 94–97, 101,
122–124, 128
filament winding 170
filaments 216, 218
filler 77, 80, 202
flexibility 85, 94, 104, 127
flexure test 312
fluid 105–109, 111, 118
fluids 105, 108
fluorinated ethynyl-terminated imide (FETI) 11
Flynn-Wall-Ozawa 379
fracture mechanics 49
fracture toughness 50, 54
fragmentation 332
free volume 355–356, 364–365, 397
418 Indexfrequency selective surface (FSS) 289
Friedman’s method 150
FTIR 306–307, 334
functional 307, 351
functionalized interleaf technology (FIT) 276
glass fibre 93–95, 115, 120
glass fibre, carbon fibre 95
glass transition temperature, Tg. 239
glycidoxy- propyltriethoxysilane 41
GNP 73, 102–103, 111–113
gradient boosting regression 164
graphene 215, 223, 226–228, 238, 240–242,
244–245, 249, 253–254
graphene nanoplates (GNP) 276
graphene oxide (GO) 179
graphite 73, 76, 80–81, 83–85, 90, 92–93, 120, 190,
192–194, 198, 200–203, 226–228, 240, 242,
244, 247–248, 253–254
halloysite nanotubes (HNT) 62
Halpin Tsai 97
hardness 193, 197–201, 208, 366, 403
HDPE 353, 366, 372
hexamethylene tetramine 137, 161
high density polyethylene (HDPE) 76, 123
high-resolution (HR) 348
homopolymers 74
hoop stress 42
hydrodynamic 111
hydrogen bonding 74, 91, 115
hydrothermal 94
impact strength 143, 176–178
important 76, 81, 84, 86, 98, 108, 110, 116, 122, 127
improvement 76–77, 85–86, 94, 96, 113, 192,
196, 203, 207, 214, 217, 221, 223
ingredients 96
injection molding 74, 86, 94, 96–97, 105, 116
Injection Stretch Blow Moulding 120
in-plane shear 318, 321
interaction 75, 78–79, 84, 86, 88, 91, 93, 98,
105, 116
interface 86, 89, 91, 96, 119
interfacial 77, 88
interlaminar shear failure 272
interlaminar stresses 40
interleaving 176–177, 180
intermolecular 93
interparticle 87, 99
interpenetrating polymer network 6
interpolation 393, 411
investigated 328, 343, 346
ionic elastomer 16
isoconversional 372, 381, 385
isothermal 364–368, 370–372, 374, 380, 386–387,
392–394, 403, 406, 408
Izod and Charpy tests 322
Kelvin-Voigt 360, 369, 395
kernel ridge regression 164
kinetics 355, 372–374, 376, 378, 381, 385–387, 389,
392, 394, 412
Kissinger-Akahira-Sunose (KAS) method 152
KV model 230, 233
laminar shear strength 24
lead zirconate titanate 269
life estimation 354, 372, 387, 389, 411
light microscopy 342
lightning strike protection (LSP) 298
linear elastic fracture mechanics 39
liquid composite moulding 165, 172
liquid composites moulding 177
load 79, 87–90, 95, 98–99, 101
loss factor 366, 368
manufacturing 307
mapping 363, 367
master curve 357, 361–363, 397, 399, 403, 405
mathematical 209, 218
Maxwell model 230
measurement 365
mechanical 190, 193–194, 196–198, 208, 219,
226–227, 235, 238, 240, 242, 246
mechanical properties 75, 85, 94, 96, 103, 114, 116
mechanical property 77
mechanical testing 309
mechanism 354–355, 373–375, 377, 387, 389,
395, 400
melt flow index (MFI) 80
membranes 372
methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane 41
methyl ethyl ketone peroxide 133
methyl methacrylate 6
methyl methacrylate (MMA) 11
microcapsules 264–265, 297–298
micrograph 76, 115
Index 419microhetergeneous 9
micromechanics of failure 46
microspheres 99
mineral particulate fillers 194
model 78–82, 87, 90, 93–94, 97, 106–107, 113–114
Modulus 81, 90, 357, 367–368, 394–395, 398–400,
402–403
molecular weight 74, 105, 108
montmorillonite clay 372
montmorillonite nanoclay (OMMT)) 241
morphology 307, 327–328, 343–344, 346–347, 349
multilayer graphene 63
multiwall 226
multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) 275
MWCNT 346
N,N-dimethyl-p-toluidine (DMPT) 297
Nanocomposite 98, 103, 265, 274, 281, 291, 297,
301, 368, 372–373, 390, 398
nanocomposites 4, 44, 46, 61–63, 98, 104–105, 113,
123, 127, 307, 319, 335, 343, 346
nanofibers 291
nanofiller 254
nanoparticles 367
nanoplates 73, 85, 102, 111, 113, 123
natural fibre 96–97
natural rubber 1, 14, 57, 66–67
network 365–366, 368, 372
Newtonian 106–107, 109–110, 113, 118
nitrile butadiene rubber (NBR) 16
nitrile rubber (NBR), 270
of polylactic acid (PLA) 276
OMMT 73, 113–115
optical microscopy 40
optimization 349
orientation 87, 93–94, 100–101, 108, 123
PA6 115, 117
packaging 74, 97, 127
packing factor 84
paint 82, 108
parameters 76, 105–106, 109–111, 116–117, 122
particulate composites 197
particulate rubber composite 192
passive constrained layer damping 266
PEEK) 74–75, 95
PEEK, PEKK, PC, ABS 127
percolation 76–77, 80, 83–85
performance 216–217, 222–223, 254
periodic pattern surface (PPS) 290
permeability 83
permittivity 83
phenol formaldehyde 137
phenolic resin 137
phenomena 108
phenyl-ethynyl-terminated imide (PETI) 11
phthalonitrile resins 145
phthalonitriles 145
PMR resin 142
Poisson’s 78–79, 81, 89–90
poly (vinyl chloride) 356
polyamide 76, 85, 93, 115, 366
polycaprolactone 97
poly(ethyl methacrylate) (PEMA) 9
polyethylene, 98
poly(ethylene oxide) 6
polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA), 128
polyimides 140
poly(lactic acid) 31, 97
polylactic acid (PLA) 128
polylactide 365
polymer composite See
polymer matrices 6
poly(methyl methacrylate) 353, 364
polyphenylene sulfide (PPS) 47, 275
polypropylene 73–75, 78, 117
polypropylene (PP) 31, 275
polystyrene 76, 83, 356, 366, 372
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). 299
poly(thiophene) 274
polyurethane 11, 57
polyurethanes 82
positron annihilation life time spectroscopy
356, 365
positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy
(PALS) 12
POSS 368
post-impact testing 326
Power Law 105, 107
prediction 354, 371, 386–387, 394–395, 401,
406, 411
predictive 97, 106
predominantly 319
prepreg 17, 38, 40, 165, 174–175
pressure 74, 108, 110, 117–118, 120
process technology 74
processing 189, 193, 243
420 Indexpseudoplastic, 105, 107
pultrusion 168–169
radar absorbing sheets (RASHs) 291
radar reflecting composite structure (RRCS) 278
radar-absorbing composite structure (RACS) 278
radar-absorbing composite structures (RACSs) 291
random orientation 215
reduced graphene oxide (rGO) 281
reinforced 366, 368, 372
reinforcement 3–4, 5, 24, 44, 75–77, 81, 83–84,
86–87, 91, 93, 96, 98–99, 101, 103, 115, 128
reinforcements 309, 316, 332
reinforcing 194
relation 118
relatively 190, 230, 245–246
relaxation time 355–359, 361–362, 364–365,
368–371, 394, 396, 407, 411
resin film infusion bolding 172
resin film infusion (RFI), 172
resin transfer moulding 131, 165–167, 178
resistivity 76, 82–83, 85
resonance 306–307
reversible 91, 108
review 97, 104
rheological 105, 110
Rheometer 108
Rheopectic 108
ring-opening metathesis polymerization
(ROMP) 18
rubber 189–190, 192–194, 196, 198–200, 202–203,
206–212, 215–220, 222, 225, 227–228, 230,
232–233, 237, 240–241, 243–247, 253–255,
353–355, 372, 390, 395, 403, 408
scanning electron microscope 344
scanning electron microscopy 344, 355
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 7, 31
screw 95, 98, 105, 116–118
segmental 331, 336
segmental mobility 358, 364–365, 368
self-healing 16, 20
self-healing composites 263
self-healing polyurethane elastomers (SHEs) 296
SEM 76, 90, 115
semiconductors 82
semicrystalline 339, 364
semi-IPN 6
separation 308, 317, 343, 347
sequential method 8–9, 12
sewage sludge ash (SSA), 59
shear strain 315, 318, 322
shear test 318–319
shift factor 357, 361, 363, 369, 396–400, 403
shift factors 363, 369, 371, 399, 401, 403–405
short beam test 321
short carbon fiber (SCF) 282
short fiber 324
short fiber rubber composites 206
short fibre 96
silicon carbide (SiC) 59
single end notch bend test (SENB) 59
single wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) 275
single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT), 179
sisal fibre 96
spherulites 343
spinneret 123
Starink method 153, 157
static 105
stearic acid (SA) 16
stimuli 354, 395
stitching 176–177
strain 356, 358–360, 366–368, 394–396, 398–399,
402–403, 405, 409–412
strength 307, 309, 311–312, 315–319, 321–323, 327,
340, 354, 366–367, 387, 394, 402–403
Stress Intensity Factor 1, 50–51
stress relaxation 354, 394–395, 398–399,
401, 403
structural health monitoring(SHM) 271
styrene-butadiene rubber 13, 15
subsequently 191, 197–198, 203
superposition 355–356, 366, 371, 394, 398–399,
401, 407
surface 75, 85, 87–88, 96, 98–99, 103, 115, 119, 124
suspension 110–111
synthesized 190, 228
temperature 73–74, 85, 94, 105, 109–110, 113,
116–117, 119–120, 122
tensile behavior 79
tensile cracking 37
tetramethyl thiuram monosulfide 15
theoretical model 369
thermal analysis 306, 331–332
thermal conductivity 80
thermoforming 74, 105, 116, 128
thermomechanical analysis 306, 333, 336
Index 421thermoplastic 73–78, 80–82, 85–87, 90, 93, 96–98,
104–106, 109, 113, 115–116, 122–124, 127
thermoplastic composite 75–76, 87, 105, 115–116
Thermoplastic elastomers (TPE) 103
Thermoplastic polyurethane 73, 85, 372
thermoplastics 74–75, 78, 82, 85–86, 98, 103, 105,
119, 127
thermo-reversible Diels-Alder reaction 265
thermoset 357–358, 365–368, 387–389, 398, 400,
407, 409, 411
thermoset composites 132, 164, 176
thermoset matrix 132
thermoset nanocomposites 178
thermosets 356, 371, 411
thioetherdiphthalic anhydride 140
Thixotropic 108
three-point bending test 313
Time 353, 366, 387, 394–397, 401, 408
toughened thermoset composites 176
toughening methods 56
toughness 5, 10–11, 30, 37–38, 43, 50, 52, 54,
56–59, 61–63, 66–67
TPU 73–74, 85–86, 104, 127
transformation 372, 405
transition temperature 355, 364, 368, 395–396,
406–407
transmission electron microscope 306, 347
transmission electron microscopy 344, 355
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), 307
transverse 88, 90, 92, 108
treatment 94, 96
triazabicyclodecene (TBD) 21
triazobicyclodecene (TBD) 22
tribological 95
triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDM) 6
triethyleneglycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA) 297
underwater noise 4
universal testing machine (UTM) 309–310
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAVs) 307
unsaturated polyester 132–133, 161, 168
unsaturated polyester resin 133
vacuum bagging 165, 173, 176
van der Waals 17, 63
variation 309, 321, 330, 332, 350
vector network analyser (VNA) 285
vector network analyzer (VNA) 252
VFT 353, 371, 396
vibration damping 193, 246
vinyl ester 10, 58
vinyl ester resin 136
viscoelastic 6, 43–44, 50, 55, 62, 85–87, 266–269,
271, 295, 300, 316, 329, 351
viscoelasticity 359
viscosity 87, 98, 104–111, 113–120, 122
vitrimer 21–22
Vogel-Fulcher-Tammann (VFT) 236
Volume 112
volume fraction 76–78, 81, 83–85, 88, 94–95,
99–103, 110, 113, 115
vulcanization 15, 189–192, 207, 215–217, 229, 244
vulcanized 189, 192, 211, 219, 227–228, 233,
243, 248
vulcanized rubber strip 266
Vyazovkin 372, 381–382, 384–385
wet lay-up moulding 165
William, Landel and Ferry 236
WLF 2, 49, 353, 355, 371, 394, 397–399
X-ray computed tomography 39
X-ray diffraction analysis 349
α-relaxation 412
α-relaxation 357, 359
α-relaxation temperature 235, 239
(β–transition) 355
422 Index
