Let's Start With a Secret!
Use the decoder key on this page to unlock this message.
(Then use the decoder key to create your own!)TABLE OF
INTRODUCTION
chapter 1
WILD ADVENTURE
chapter 2
INCREDIBLE BUILDS
chapter 3
UNLOCK YOUR SUPERPOWERS
chapter 4
ART ATTACK
chapter 5
FOR THE WIN
chapter 6
MAD SCIENCE
INDEXWARNING:
By opening this book, you will never be bored again. After you
read the exciting pages that follow, you will actually lose the
ability to yawn. We’re serious.
Okay, we’re not serious. It would be physically impossible to stop
someone from yawning. And what’s so bad about yawning anyway?
Yawning puppies are, like, the cutest things ever, right?
Sorry, where were we? Oh, right. This book not being boring. That
part is 100 percent true!
This super-cool handbook filled with fun projects, wildly weird facts
and helpful how-tos is sure to entertain you no matter what you’re
into. Love running around and exploring outside? You’re in luck!
There’s a whole chapter devoted to outdoor adventure. Are you
really into art projects? Good news, there’s a whole chapter on that,
too! Enjoy staring at walls for hours and hours watching paint dry?
Uh, sorry, you’re going to have to buy a different book. We don’t
cover that at all.
The following pages will fill your head with wacky knowledge, like
how to safely enter a black hole (this page) and which mythological
monster you definitely don’t want to invite to your next pool party
(this page). Plus, we’ve talked to experts who will teach you how to
do everything from shooting a basketball (this page) to performing
magic tricks (this page) to writing a story that scares the pants off
everyone (this page). Don’t worry, it is impossible to get nightmares
from your own story.You’re also going to learn how to build some super-cool stuff! For
years and years, the editors of Popular Mechanics have shared
amazing project ideas, and we’ve compiled the best of the best for
creative kids like you, including a floating ping-pong table (this page),
a bicycle pump-powered rocket (this page) and a science project you
can eat (this page)!
A lot of this stuff you can do on your own, and some of the bigger
projects will require help from adults. But no matter what you do,
everything in here is certified 100 percent fun. And while we give you
step-by-step directions, the best part is that you can adapt and
modify each project to make it your own. Swap materials, change
sizes, try different designs — there are no rules when it comes to the
The Big Little Book of Awesome Stuff! (Well, except that “no being
bored” one we started with.)
PROJECT DIFFICULTY LEVELS
These handy-dandy hand symbols will let you know how simple or
complicated each project is. High-five!
GET SOME HELP
EASY-PEASY
ADULT NEEDEDREADY TO LEARN, CREATE
STUFF, AND HAVE A TON OF
FUN?Usually, that’s a pretty rude thing to tell someone, but we’re being
nice in this case. Because in the following chapter, you will discover
amazing facts, cool projects, and totally weird creatures that are best
seen and enjoyed in the great outdoors. We’ve got something fun for
every season, so whether it is sunny or snowing outside, good times
are guaranteed!*
*legal note This guarantee does not apply if it is raining. No one has
a good time in soggy socks.
Terms You Should Know
• HEMISPHERE The top or bottom half of the earth, divided by
the equator. (this page)
• GRAVITY The force that pulls things toward the center of Earth.
(this page)
• PROTRACTOR A plastic tool that is a half-circle and used to
measure angles. (this page)
• MICROBES Teeny tiny living things that can be the size of a
single cell. (this page)
• HYPOTHERMIA A medical emergency where a person’s body
loses heat faster than it can produce heat. (this page)
• GPS The Global Positioning System, which uses satellites to
determine your exact location. (this page)• LATITUDE A coordinate that pinpoints where you are on the
globe, north or south of the equator. (this page)OUT-OF-THIS-WORLD THINGS
TO KNOW ABOUT EARTH
A user’s guide to your home planet!
1
Don’t dig that hole in the sand too deep — the temperature of the
Earth’s core is nearly 10,000 degrees. That’s the same temperature
as the surface of the sun!
2
While we won’t likely be visiting it anytime soon, the distance to the
center of the Earth is actually pretty drivable. It’s only 1,864 miles,which is like cruising from New York to Colorado (only with no rest
stops).
3
If every cloud in the sky rained at once, all of the land on Earth would
get covered in water. But don’t worry, you won’t need a boat — the
layer would be the thickness of a single strand of human hair.
4
The Earth is 4.5 billion years old. People (Homo sapiens) have been
around for about 450,000 years. So, if the life of Earth were a two￾hour-long movie, we humans would be in it for .72 seconds. Blink
and you might miss us.
5
Wondering who named Earth “Earth?” Good question — historians
have no clue!
6
Earthquakes are measured in magnitude. The biggest on record was
a 9.5. Scientists say that a magnitude of 12 would split the Earth in
half!
7
The number of microbes living in a teaspoon of soil is equal to the
number of humans currently living in Africa (1 billion!).8
Earth isn’t exactly round. It is technically an “oblate spheroid,” which
is like a smushed ball that is sort of flat on top and bottom and
bulging in the middle. Lay off the snacks, Earth.
9
The moon’s gravitation affects ocean tides — and also the length of
days. Earth’s rotation is slowed down by the tides, which makes
days longer over time. Does that mean that school will be 14 hours
in the near future? Nah. NASA says this tidal effect only adds 1.7
milliseconds every century.
10
The Earth’s continents ride on giant tectonic plates that are
constantly in motion. Hundreds of millions of years ago, all seven
continents were smashed together to form a supercontinent called
Pangaea, surrounded by one worldwide ocean. (And one really big
beach!)11
Trees should get more birthday presents than any living thing on
earth. Lots of them live for more than 100 years, but the oldest tree
on record was a Great Basin Bristlecone Pine that scientists say was
more than 5,000 years old!
12
It is hard to get lost when you stand at the North Pole — every
direction you turn is South.
13
Deserts are places that have less than 10 inches of rain or snow per
year. And they don’t have to be hot! Antarctica is actually the largest
desert on the planet.
14
Since rivers don’t have perfect start and endpoints, scientists debate
whether the Nile or the Amazon is the longest river. But the Amazon
is definitely the world’s largest river by volume and holds about 20
percent of all the freshwater on Earth!
15
Ninety-four percent of living creatures call the ocean their home,
including the Blue Whale, the biggest on the planet. They weigh
400,000 pounds, which is about the same as 33 elephants!HOW TO IDENTIFY
Next time you’re hiking, look down to see who trotted by
before you.
DOG
Pooch paw prints have an oval shape (as opposed to a more
circular one from cats) and have a triangular hind mark with four
toes and distinct claw marks.
TURKEY
These are easy to spot as they can be up to five inches wide. Look
for three long front toe marks. (And a side of stuffing if it isThanksgiving season.)
DEER
This drawing shows a walking deer. A running deer will spread its
toes, and the print will look more like a V.
BLACK BEAR
Smaller than a grizzly bear, but just as scary! If you see a bear in
front of you, calmly walk backward in the other direction, keeping
an eye on your furry friend.SKUNK
A skunk’s hind feet leave prints that look like a human’s (but are,
like, 10,000 times more smelly!).
TRAIN
They might look cute, but our expert advice: Never try to pet a
train.DON’T SMELL THESE ROSES!
Plants you definitely want to avoid in the
woods.
LOOKS LIKE
There’s a saying, “Leaves of three, let it be.” Poison ivy grows in leaf
clutters of three, and the leaflet in the middle usually has a longer
stem. The leaves can be green or red, and either shiny or dull.
Tricky!
WHY TO AVOID IT
Causes super-itchy skin rashes and blisters.LOOKS LIKE
Poison hemlock stems can grow very high, are hollow and typically
have purplish-red splotching or streaks on them. The flowers are
white and come in round clusters; each flower has five petals.
WHY TO AVOID IT
Eating it is extremely hazardous and can cause death. Don’t eat!
LOOKS LIKE
Poison sumac has leaves made up of five to 13 smooth-edged
leaflets (always an odd number). They have red stems, and in
spring, summer and fall, they have clusters of small berries.WHY TO AVOID IT
Has the same effects as poison ivy, only worse. (Yes, that is
possible.)
DID YOU KNOW?
People can get a poison ivy rash, but your pets can’t. (Lucky dogs!)
GIMME SHELTER
Build yourself a cool place to hang out whether it is
warm or freezing outside.
Build a Teepee
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
GET SOME HELP
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• Nine poles (Depending on how big you want it, 6’ to 10’ long
will work)• Some rope
• 12’ x 15’ canvas drop cloth (or an old bed sheet)
BUILD A TRIPOD
Put three poles together, and wrap the rope around them about
18 inches from one end. Tie off snugly.
FILL IN SUPPORT POLES
Stand up the three poles and spread them out so they stand
like a tripod, then lay the six remaining poles in the gaps.
COVER IT UP
Drape the canvas cloth over the frame. (You might need a chair
or ladder.) Tie the corners for a tight fit up top.
TRIM TO FIT
Use scissors to cut off the excess canvas at the bottom.
MOVE IN!
Add a blanket for the floor and any comfy pillows and you’re
good to go!
DID YOU KNOW?
Teepees were used by Native American tribes like the Apaches
and Comanches because they were easy to pickup and move
while following migrating herds of buffalo on the Great Plains.
Build an IglooDIFFICULTY LEVEL
GET SOME HELP
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• Lots of snow!
• Snow shovel
• Saw (or something you can use to cut snow blocks)
• A stick
• 6’ to 10’ of string
• A shoeboxCREATE BUILDING BLOCKS (TWO WAYS!)
• Option One: Use the shovel to dig a long trench in packed
down snow and the saw to cut blocks (12 inches wide, 24
inches long and 18 inches deep).
• Option Two: Use the shoe box as a mold to make your blocks.
CIRCLE UP
Mark the center of where the igloo will stand with a stick. Tie the
string and use it to trace a circle.
START TO STACK
Lay the first level of blocks along the circle. Use the saw to cut
in a ramp up that extends halfway around the row.
LEVEL UP
Lay on the next layers, going up the ramp so that the blocks are
coiling upward. Cut a slight incline into the top of each brick.
GET SMALLER
Keep layering up, using slightly smaller blocks as you go up
until you have a roof.
PACK IT IN
Shovel snow onto the outer walls to fill in any gaps.
TIME TO CHILL!
Carve in a front door and some side holes for ventilation. Time
to chill in your new snow home!I
MAROONED IN THE ARCTIC
(WITH POLAR BEARS!)
The incredible survival story of a helicopter pilot who
crashed in the icy waters of the Arctic Circle.
n 2015, russian adventurer sergey ananov tried to become the
first person to circle the globe in a personal helicopter — and he
wound up having a lot more excitement than he bargained for.
While flying over the Davis Strait, a frigid finger of ocean separating
Canada and Greenland, his trusty Robinson R22 helicopter had a
severe engine malfunction and started to fall out of the sky like a
rock.
The expert pilot tried to land the plummeting aircraft on an ice floe
that was about the size of a basketball court, but soon realized it was
too far away to reach. So, he glided the helicopter into the water,
tilting it to the side so the whirling blades would hit the waves and
smash off, making it safer for him to escape.
Sergey had to think fast. He was wearing a thick survival suit
designed to keep people alive if they fall in freezing water, but it
wasn’t zipped up all the way and water was flooding in.
As the helicopter sunk into the murky water, he had time only to grab
one thing. His choices were a satellite phone, a distress beacon, a
GPS tracker, or a life raft. All were super-valuable, but he realized
that if he couldn’t float in this water, he was doomed. So, he went forthe life raft. Problem: it was stuck under his seat! He tried and tried
to pull it out with no luck. With moments to spare, he swam out of the
helicopter door to the surface, took a deep breath, then plunged
back into the black, salty water, slipped into the sinking helicopter,
and finally freed the raft.
Sergey paddled himself over to the ice floe and pulled himself up. He
was terrified but made himself calm down and think. His next few
decisions could mean life or death. First, he took off his soaked
survival suit, emptied and wrung it out the best he could, then
climbed back in before hypothermia hit. He flipped over the raft and
laid under it, using it as a kind of tent to protect him from the high
winds. To make sure it didn’t blow away, he tied it to his foot.
Things were bad, but they were about to get worse. A few hours
later, Sergey realized that he was not alone on the ice floe. From
underneath the raft, he heard heavy breathing and crunching snow.
Peeking out, he saw what he feared — a monster-sized polar bear!
He was beyond scared and knew there was no way he could win a
fight with this visitor. So, with no other options, Sergey went wild. He
jumped up and ran straight at the polar bear, yelling and waving his
arms, with the raft that was tied to his foot bouncing behind him. It
worked! The bear was confused and wandered off, leaving Sergey
alone again.
But he wouldn’t be alone for long. Over the course of the next few
hours, he was visited by a total of three bears, all of which he was
able to scare off in the same way. He knew his luck wouldn’t last for
long, and he also knew that he will soon get dehydrated. (One of the
most terrible parts of being stranded at sea is being surrounded by
water that you cannot drink — salt water will only speed up your
demise.) It was hard to stay hopeful.What Sergey didn’t know, however, was that his friend, Andrey
Kaplan, was back home tracking his journey online. And he noticed
that the GPS signal from Sergey’s helicopter went dead. Leaping
into action, he made some phone calls and soon a rescue squad
from Halifax, Nova Scotia was on the hunt for the lost adventurer.
Sergey had some signal flares in his raft supplies, but unfortunately,
there was incredibly thick fog in the area and the flares had little
chance of being seen. He could hear planes and helicopters, but
they had no chance of seeing him or his signals. Then, miraculously,
with just one hour of daylight left, the fog lifted and rescuers saw the
final glint of light from Sergey’s last flare. A helicopter flew to the ice
floe where one more time Sergey was running around, screaming his
head off and wildly flapping his arms. Luckily, this time he wasn’t
doing it to scare away bears — it was out of joy. Thirty-six hours after
being marooned on a slab of ice, he was rescued!
THINGS YOU DIDN’T KNOW ABOUT POLAR BEARS
FURRY FACTS FROM THE WWF
• Their fur is actually clear, but the sun’s reflection makes it
looks white.
• Underneath that fur, they have thick black skin and layers
of blubber that help keep them warm.
• They typically weigh between 800 and 1,330 pounds.• Polar bears spend 50 percent of their day looking for food.
• They can smell seals hiding under three feet of snow.
• They can swim 6 MPH.
• You won’t see them on the South Pole looking for penguin
snacks — wild polar bears live only in the north.HERE COME THE
WATERWORKS!
Two wet ways to beat the heat.
Water Balloon Launcher—Attack!
Your next water balloon fight is going to be epic.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• 2 strong friends• 2 baseball bats or lacrosse sticks
• 1 plastic funnel, 6” diameter
• 4’ of surgical tubing
• Lots of balloons
DRILL
Cut hole on opposites sides of the funnel, about one inch from
the lip.
SNIP AND TIE
Cut the surgical tubing in half. Tie one end through a funnel
hole and the other end to a bat. Do the same on the other hole.
READY, AIM, FIRE!
Have your helpers hold each bat upright, pull back the funnel,
load in a water balloon and drench your enemies!Drive-Thru Bike Wash
Clean your ride and cool down at the same time!
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
ADULT NEEDED
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• 22 ½’ of ¾” PVC
• One ¾” screw-on hose connector
• Two PVC tee connectors
• Two 90-degree elbows
• Three end caps
• PVC cement
• Hacksaw
• Drill
You can order all of this online from any major home improvement
store.MAKE THE FEET
Connect two 20-inch pieces of PVC with a tee. One foot should
be closed off with two end caps. The other needs an end cap
on one side and a hose connector on the other (to connect the
hose from the house).
START THE TOP
Insert 70-inch pieces of PVC in the open ends of the tees and
place a 90-degree elbow on the ends.
DRILL TIME
Take a 48-inch piece of PVC and drill ¼-inch holes evenly
spaced across, about one every two inches.
ATTACH THE TOP
Place the drilled piece (with holes down) into the ends of the
elbows. At this point, you’ll have what looks like a doorway.
LET ‘ER RIP!
If it all fits properly, glue each connection with the PVC cement
following direction on the packaging. Once fully dry, connect a
garden hose, turn on the valve and you’re open for business!SPOT THE COOL CONSTELLATIONS
How to connect the dots in the sky.
A constellation is a group of stars whose shape looks like something
— an animal, an object, or sometimes an ancient god. There are 88
official constellations, and these five are some of the easier ones to
spot in the northern hemisphere sky. Can you find them?
orion
The Hunter
To find Orion, look for his belt, which is formed by three stars that
form a line across his waist.ursa major
The Great Bear
Look north above the horizon for the Big Dipper, a pattern that
resembles a kitchen ladle. The handle of the Big Dipper makes up
Ursa Major’s head (or tail, whichever way you imagine the bear
facing!)
taurus
The Bull
This bull is easy to find because one of the main stars, Aldebaran,
is helpfully one of the brightest in the night sky. And Orion’s belt
points right at it to the northeast!ursa minor
The Little Bear
If you spotted the Big Dipper, the two outer stars of its bowl point
right to the North Star, which is the end of the Dipper Jr.’s handle.
gemini
The Twins
Above and to the left of Orion, this constellation’s two brightest
stars, Castor and Pollux, represent the heads of the twin brothers.Find Your Latitude with the Sky!
Build a simple version of a tool called a sextant that
explorers have used throughout history to find out
where in the world they are!
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A straw
• A protractor
• String
• Washer (or Life Savers candy)
• TapeTAPE IT UP
Tape the straw to the straight part of the protractor.
TIE TIME
Tie one end of the string to the center hole on the protractor
and the other end to the washer or candy.
TAKE A LOOK
Find the North Star (it is the last star on the handle of the Little
Dipper) and look at it through the straw. Have a friend write
down the angle number on the protractor that the string lines up
with. Subtract that number from 90 and that’s your latitude.
Check your math out by using a globe. Are you where you think
you are?A FIELD GUIDE TO MYTHICAL CREATURES
Everything you need to know about Bigfoot, the Loch
Ness Monster and their creepiest friends!BIGFOOT
Origin: Unknown
Bigfoot (also known as Sasquatch) is thought to be the missing link
between humans and apes. There are people who have dedicated
their lives to finding Bigfoot — he even has his very own official FBI
file! But sadly, Bigfoot is as shy as he is hairy. No one has been able
to find proof that he actually exists.
MEDUSA
Origin: Greek
If you see Medusa, look away fast! She had the power to turn a
person into stone with a single glance. If that isn’t bad enough,
Medusa has snakes for hair. Wonder what kind of shampoo she
uses?
KRAKEN
Origin: Nordic Folklore
The mythical Kraken is a giant squid-like creature. When it gets
hungry, it likes to come to the surface and eat entire ships, crew
members and all. Hey Kraken, maybe try snacking on Goldfish?
They’re much tastier and way easier to digest than a ship anchor.VAMPIRES
Origin: Eastern Europe
The world’s most famous vampire is Dracula. A few things to know:
They suck blood to live, never age, can turn into bats, and hate
garlic. If you ever face one, offer it a slice of Pizza Hut and watch
him dissolve.
LOCH NESS MONSTER
Origin: Nordic Scottish
The Loch Ness Monster is believed to be a dinosaur (a plesiosaur, to
be exact) that managed to escape extinction by living in the deep
Scottish Loch Ness Lake. The first written account of the beast
appeared in 565 A.D., so after over a thousand years of swimming
around, Nessie is probably very, very, very good at doing the
backstroke.SIRENS
Origin: Greek
Sirens are a mythological species that hang out on rock
outcroppings by the sea and use their beautiful and enchanted
singing voices to make sailors steer too close and crash. We wonder
what their favorite karaoke song is.
ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN
Origin: Asian
You might know the Abominable Snowman by another name, Yeti.
But no matter what you call it, all the stories tend to be the same:
Somewhere in the mountains, this humanoid creature wanders
around the snow. No one knows exactly why. Maybe he can’t
remember where he left his snowboard?
JERSEY DEVIL
Origin: American
The Jersey Devil haunts New Jersey’s Pine Barrens and has
reportedly been around since 1735. This creature has a horse-like
head with horns and walks on its two hind legs. He’d probably be
very popular at petting zoos.MINOTAUR
Origin: Greek
The Minotaur is half-man, half-bull. In order to stop him from trying to
eat people, he got locked inside a giant maze to run around in.
Doesn’t sound like the worst time out to us!
CHIMERA
Origin: Greek
There is a lot going on with the Chimera: It has a fire-breathing lion’s
head, a goat’s body, and a serpent tail. According to Greek
mythology, the Chimera’s dad is a monster named Typhon, and its
mom is a half-woman, half-snake named Echidna. Our suggestion:
Avoid hanging out at Chimera’s house after school.DIRTY JOB: GROW AN INDOOR HERB
GARDEN
A science project you can eat!
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
GET SOME HELP
These three herbs are very easy to grow — and very delicious to
eat. You’ll need to find a spot near a window that gets at least six
hours of sunlight every day to get good results. You can begin by
growing seeds in an empty egg carton packed with soil, but as they
start to sprout, you’ll eventually need to move to them to bigger pots
you can find at any gardening store. Ready to get dirty?
BASILGROWING TIP
Basil likes lots of sun and water — try to keep the soil moist, but not
drenched. And this is weird: Pinching the top of the plant encourages
it to grow. Sorry basil!
TASTES GREAT ON
English muffin pizzas
MINT
GROWING TIP
They prefer a cool, shady spot, but can also grow in the sun. They
spread fast, so you’ll have a bunch before you know it! And bonus,
they are perennials, which means they grow back year after year.
TASTES GREAT IN
Iced tea or even plain waterCHIVES
GROWING TIP
Super-easy to grow, and they get this cool purple flower on the end
that is totally edible. Wait till they’re about six inches long before you
start to harvest their oniony-tasting leaves. Snip low and they’ll grow
back!
TASTES GREAT ON
Baked potatoes and nachos
If you buy plants from a gardening center, the roots will be super￾packed in a ball when you take them out of their container. Break
up the root ball by squeezing it gently to loosen and separate the
roots before you plant in the pots. This allows the roots to spread
out into the soil to make it more stable and find more water.MAKE A RECYCLED BOTTLE BIRD FEEDER
Reduce waste and fill some tweeters’ tummies at the
same time.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• An empty plastic bottle
• Sticks or pencils, about 8” to 10” long
• Metal screw hook
• String
• BirdseedCLEAN IT UP
Clean the bottle thoroughly, removing any labels or glue.
THE TOPPER
Screw the metal hook screw into the bottle cap.
MAKE PERCHES
Poke very small holes about two inches from the bottom on
opposite sides of the bottle. Push a stick or pencil through it. It
should fit snugly. This will be a bird perch. Move up two or three
inches and make another set of holes on the other side of the
bottle. Repeat depending on how big your bottle allows. Stop
when you’re about three inches from the cap.
DINNER DOORS
About one to two inches above each perch, use a knife to cut a
small ⅛-inch opening. These will be little windows for the birds
to get the grub. (Don’t make them too big or else the bird seed
will pour out.)
CHOW TIME
Fill with birdseed. If the windows are too big, you can use a little
tape to narrow the gaps.(AND EASY)
Whether you have a new puppy or an older dog, here are
a few simple tricks.
TRAINER TIP
As your pooch is starting to learn, it is very important to repeat the
trick’s command after they do it and right before you give them the
treat. This helps their doggy brain connect the words with the
action that gets the yummy prize!HIGH-FIVE
Hold a treat in your fist. Say “High-five!” while tapping one of your
dog’s front paws with your other hand. Your dog will likely raise the
paw you are tapping to knock the treat out of your fist. Say “High￾five!” again and reward with the treat.
TWIRL
Hold a treat up to your doggy’s schnoz, then circle it around their
head slow enough so they turn to follow it. Once you make a
complete spin, repeat the command “Twirl!” and then give them the
prize.
KISS
Some think this is cute, some think it is gross. But if your like dog
lickies, hold a treat up to your cheek and say “Kiss!” When your dogmoves in, sneak the treat away. When they make contact with your
cheek, say “Kiss” and then give them the reward.
CRAWL
When your dog is in a belly-down position, hold a treat a few inches
out of their reach. Slowly move it back as they scooch forward to get
a nibble. Reward with a little piece every couple of inches, repeating
the command “Crawl!” every time.
SLALOM
This is a more involved trick but a ton of fun. Set up a few evenly
spaced flexible poles that you can buy from a pet store. (You can
use soccer cones if you have them.) Hold a treat in your hand and
lead your athlete zigging in and out of the course. Reward at the end
and, as always, repeat the command. As your superstar catches on,
add more poles or cones to make it a challenge.
NO TOWEL? NO PROBLEM!THE SCIENCE OF HOW DOGS SHAKE THEMSELVES
DRY
With just a few shakes, wet dogs can remove about 70 percent of
the water from their fur!
How fast a dog must shake to become dry depends on the radius
of its tummy. The bigger their abdomen, the lower the frequency at
which the pooch has to shake. That means that a labrador
retriever doesn’t have to shake nearly as quickly as a soggy
chihuahua.
Dogs rotate their spines about 30 degrees with each twist. But
their loose skin continues to move way past that. In fact, their skin
can go a total of 100 degrees in either direction.
Scientists have studied dogs’ shaking abilities and used what they
learned to make better clothes washing machines. Wait. Dogs help
keep things clean?!How can you tell if a carpenter is nervous?
They bite their nails.
Okay, that was terrible, but don’t worry, we won’t make any more bad
woodworking puns — we wouldn’t want to screw up this introduction.
Okay, okay, now we’re really done. In the following pages, you will
find plans for super-cool builds and learn about some of the most
amazing things ever created. See? We said no more construction
puns and we kept our promise. Why wood you doubt us?
Terms You Should Know
• " Symbol used for inches in measurements. (this page)
• BIPEDAL An animal that uses two legs for walking. (this page)
• CROSSCUT Cutting across the wood grain. (this page)
• PHYSICS The science of motion. (this page)
• PVC A type of plastic that usually comes as white pipes. (this
page)
• RAFTER SQUARE A tool that is shaped like a triangle that can
be used for many things, like marking a right angle. (this page)
• SCALING LAWS A relationship between two objects that make
them get bigger or smaller. (this page)
• SUSTAINABLE A way of doing things that supports the
environment and human health. (this page)• WHOOPS A common expression said when you cut something
before double-checking that your measurements are correct.MIND-BLOWING FACTS ABOUT
BUILDING
12 fascinating tidbits about tools, materials
and the most amazing things ever made.
1
The first tools invented by humans were sharpened stones used for
cutting, chopping, and scraping. The oldest remains of a tool were
found in Africa — made 2.6 million years ago!
2
The largest log cabin in the world is called Granot Loma — it has 27
fireplaces, 23 bedrooms and 13 bathrooms. People who live there
must have to pee a lot.
3
Balsa wood is one of the lightest on earth. That makes it great for
building model airplanes. (And terrible at surviving encounters withcurious pets.)
4
The opposite of balsa is ebony, a kind of hardwood that is so dense
that it sinks in water. Note: Don’t make your canoe out of ebony.
5
The world’s biggest construction project is the Great Wall of China. It
is 13,170.7 miles long and, in some spots, is 40 feet tall. How
annoying would it be if you accidentally kicked a ball over it?
6
Bamboo is a great building material for two reasons: It is the fastest
growing land plant in the world (It has been recorded growing three
feet in just 24 hours.) which makes it super-sustainable. And it’s also
incredibly strong — even stronger than steel!7
How’s this for a house? In the 13th Century, Italian explorer Marco
Polo described the amazing palace of Kublai Khan in the Mongol
empire: It was covered with gold and silver and had a dining room
big enough to seat 6,000 people. And here’s the unbelievable part:
The palace was built out of bamboo sections that could be taken
apart and reassembled wherever Khan wanted to go.
8
In the 1800s, German company C&E Fein invented the first power
tool: a combination of an electric motor and a hand drill. Hole-y cow,
that makes drilling easier!
9
One of the most common types of lumber is the 2x4. And it’s got a
secret: The measurements of a 2x4 is actually 1.5 inches by 3.5
inches! It starts out at two inches by four inches, but the wood gets
shaved down to create smooth edges and sometimes shrinks a bit
while drying.10
Timber is a tree grown specifically to provide wood for carpentry and
construction. If you hear someone yell, “Timber!” look out — that’s
what lumberjacks shout right before they cut down a tree!
11
Humans aren’t the only ones who use tools: Chimpanzees make
spear-like weapons for hunting, and sea otters use rocks to crack
open shellfish. Sure hope they wear safety glasses.
12
Talk about an out-of-this-world project: The International Space
Station was put together in space piece by piece. It took 18 launches
between 1998 and 2011 to get everything up there. You definitelywant to check twice that you have everything before you go up—the
nearest hardware store is 250 miles away on Earth.1. When using power tools (or standing near someone using
them), which protective equipment should you wear?
A. Safety goggles
B. Kneepads and shin guards
C. Helmet
D. Safety goggles, gloves and ear protection
2. When using a level, how do you know your surface is
straight?
A. When the level can be pressed flat against the surface
B. When the level is against the surface, and the air bubble is
between the two lines
C. When the air bubble reaches the top of the tube
D. When the air bubble pops
3. What is a washer?
A. A machine that washes your dirty clothes
B. A screw with a wide flat head
C. A long tube used to connect two objects
D. A thin donut-shaped plate that sits under a bolt or screw
4. What is a stripped screw?
A. A screw that has no packaging
B. A screw with a damaged head that is difficult to turn
C. A headless screw
D. A screw that forgot to get dressed
5. If you need to tighten a bolt, which tool would you use?
A. WrenchB. Screwdriver
C. Hammer
D. Roll of duct tape
6. What is a hammer not good for?
A. Hitting in nails
B. Gently tapping wood pieces into place
C. Yanking out bent nails
D. Flipping pancakes
ANSWER KEYTHE BASICS OF BASIC TOOLS
Quick tips for budding woodworkers.
HAMMER
Grip a hammer as if you’re shaking hands with somebody. When
you need more control (like if you’re starting a nail into a board)
hold it closer to the hammer’s head. When you need power, grip
the hammer near the bottom of the handle. (See this page for
more hammer how-tos.)
SANDPAPER
It comes in three grades: coarse, medium, and fine. Coarse is
used to take away very rough edges, medium will help takeaway
imperfections like dents and fine will make things super-smooth.
Wrap the paper around a small wood block and use that block to
do your sanding. Always sand with the grain. Going across it will
create scratches.
SCREWDRIVER
Make a small hole (with a drill or a hole punch) where you want
the screw to go. Then, holding the screw and tip of the screwdriver
with one hand, guide the screw tip into the hole and apply slight
pressure as you turn the screwdriver. Once the screw starts to dig
into the wood, you can put more muscle into it.Make Your Own Glue
A simple recipe perfect for any paper project.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• 1 cup of flour
• ⅓ cup of sugar
• 1-½ cups of water
• 1 tsp. of vinegar
Add all of the ingredients into a saucepan. (Use about one cup
of water to start and add as needed.)
Warm the mixture with medium heat, stirring until it thickens up
to a nice goopy consistency.
Let the mixture cool and get gluing!STICKY SUPERHERO: DUCT TAPE
We could write an entire book about all the uses for this
glorious stuff.
Super-strong and waterproof duct tape (originally called “duck tape”)
was invented during World War II to seal up and then quickly open
ammunition boxes. Since then, people have found hundreds (maybe
even thousands) of uses. Here are 10 surprising things duct tape
can do:
Repair a rip in a tent ceiling. Pull the edges of the tear so that they
slightly overlap. This will form a waterproof seal with one piece of
tape.
Remove splinters. Place the sticky part over the splinter and peel it
back.
Catch flies. Hang a length of tape off the ceiling and flies won’t be
able to resist tasting its sticky sweetness — or get unstuck.Fix a hole in a toothpaste tube. Toothpaste squirting out the wrong
end? A well-placed piece will seal it right up. Fix the mess and your
smile!
Open a tight jar. Wrap a length around the lid and pull the end like
the ripcord of a lawnmower.
Save a tree. A tree branch that has been damaged in a storm but not
fully broken off can be healed over time by tightly wrapping it up like
a cast.
Help with blisters. If you don’t have a Band-Aid handy, place a
small piece of tissue paper over your blister, then use a small piece
of duct tape to hold it in place.
Make a portable dog bowl. Wrap duct tape around a bowl (sticky
side out) to get the shape, then add another layer (sticky side in).
You have a light, collapsible bowl.
Build a canoe. This involves using a ton of tape! But if you build a
frame out of wood or PVC, it is possible to make a watertight
watercraft.
Make a super Wiffle Ball bat. Wrapping a Wiffle Ball bat in duct
tape will give it added weight to send home run balls flying.
How to Hammer a Nail
Popular Mechanics’ woodworking wiz Roy Berendsohn
shares hard-hitting advice.DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
LOSE YOUR FEAR
Lose your fear of hitting your fingers. You will. It’s going to hurt.
Get over it.
GET IN POSITION
If you’re right-handed, place your left foot slightly in front of your
right. Spread your feet shoulder-width apart. Bend your knees.
GET A GRIP
When you need to swing with more force, grip the handle as
close to the end as possible. For less force, choke up on the
handle. Don’t use more force to drive a nail than you have to.
You’re trying to drive the nail, not kill it. And establish a rhythm.
Rhythm is what makes the work happen.
KEEP GOING
If you bend a nail, start another one nearby and keep going.
Later, go back and pull the one you bent. It’s less disheartening
to fix a mistake when you can look at all the work you’ve done
well.Make a Ball Toss Carnival Game
Step right up and try your luck!
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
ADULT NEEDED
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• 4 1” round-head wood screws
• 1 ¼ sheet of ¼” plywood
• 6 ¼” x 3” x 2’ poplar boards
• 1 piece of 2’x4’ (at least 30” long)
• 6 balls (1 ½” tennis, practice golf, or Nerf-gun balls)
• Saw
• Drill
• Hole saw bit
• Wood glue
• Tape measure
• Rafter squareUse a table saw to rip the plywood to 16 inches wide, then
crosscut it into two pieces. One piece (which will become the
target board) should be 21 inches long. The other (which will be
the back) should be 24 inches.
Cut five 24-inch-long strips from the ¼-inch poplar boards.
These will become spacer-strips that separate the balls inside
the ball toss. Cut the sixth poplar to 16 inches.
Mark the spacer-strip locations on the target board side and the
backside of the ball toss using a pencil, tape measure, and
rafter square. The space between each strip should be about 3
11
/16 inches, but there’s no need to get fussy. As long as you
mark both boards with identical spacing, everything will line up.
Use a drill and the hole saw to bore holes in the target board,
making sure the holes are centered between the lines. Do three
sizes of holes: big, medium and small. (Make sure small is still
big enough to fit a ball into.) Glue the spacer strips to the target
board and let the glue dry for an hour.Apply a band of glue on top of each spacer strip and press the
backboard into position. Place a weighted object on the board
to hold it down while the glue dries.
Glue the 16-inch poplar board to the bottom of the spacer strips
and let the glue dry for 15 minutes.
Cut two 15-inch-long 2x4 pieces, then cut a 56-degree angle on
the end of each piece to create the legs.Attach the game board to the legs with the round-head wood
screws.
Work time is over. Let’s play!
THE RULES OF BALL TOSS
Stand four feet from the board and try to bounce a ball into the
holes.
The biggest holes are worth one point. Medium holes, three. Small
holes, five.
Alternate turns, first player to reach 21 wins!I
WANT A 60-FOOT ROBOT TO WALK? BEND
THE LAWS OF PHYSICS.
f you visit yamashita pier in japan, you can expect to see cargo
ships, tugboats — oh, and also the world’s largest humanoid
robot.
Modeled after the RX-782-2 Gundam fictional robot that has
appeared in TV shows and manga comics, this metal monster
stands nearly 60 feet tall on two feet!
We know what you’re thinking: What if the big guy decides he’s
bored standing on the pier and decides to rampage through the
nearby town? Well, anyone worried that the bipedal bot will get a
mind of its own and go bonkers can relax: While Gundam can move
in many directions, its designers are having some trouble getting it to
walk.The problem is its size. If you want something huge to move, you
need powerful motors and a super-strong frame to keep it together.
But here’s where it gets tricky: All of the big motors and steel framing
inside Gundam make it even heavier and therefore harder to move.
This is something called scaling laws in physics, and engineers are
challenged to find new technology and different uses of materials to
get around the pesky rules of the universe.
So, while Gundam can’t walk right now, it can give a friendly wave
hello to people visiting him in Japan. And we’ve seen enough crazy
sci-fi movies about technology that tries to wipe out humanity to
know that maybe that is the best thing for all of us!
ROBOTS AT WORK
THEY’RE SUPER-HELPFUL – AND NEVER NEED A
LUNCH BREAK!
BURGER FLIPPERS
Flippy the robot cooks fast-food burgers. Want fries with that?
Flippy makes those too!
POLICE DOGS
Several cities are experimenting with dog-like bots that can help
first responders avoid dangerous situations.
FACTORY WORKERS
Robots can build anything from washing machines to Tesla cars
and can help move heavy boxes around warehouses.CLEANERS
There’s a good chance that a robot cleaned up the Cheerios you
spilled this morning — more than 30 million Roomba vacuums
have been sold around the world.Totally Sweet Project
Make a candy delivery chute.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• 36" cardboard mailing tube
• Paint (whichever color or colors you like)
• Masking tape or painter’s tape
• String of holiday lights
You can use this for Halloween or delivering goodie bags at
parties. Paint the tube whichever color you like. (Orange for
Halloween, your favorite sports teams’ colors — anything!)
Attach the tube to the banister of a staircase. Try to avoid duct
tape, as it might do some damage after peeling it off.
String the lights around the tube and banister.
Yell “Wee!” as you send candy down the slide to all your hungry
friends.
FUN-SIZE CANDY FACTS• No wonder we need such big Trick or Treat bags: About 600
million pounds of candy are given out every Halloween.
• During World War II, American soldiers were given Tootsie Rolls
because they provided quick bursts of energy and didn’t melt or
spoil in the heat.
• The world’s largest lollipop would take a long time to eat — it
weighed over 7,000 pounds!
• The name Snickers comes from inventor Frank Mars’ favorite
horse named Snickers.
• Skittles are the most popular non-chocolate candy, and to keep
up with demand they make 200,000,000 Skittle candies every
day!
• The inventor of peanut M&Ms never tried his own creation —
he was allergic to peanuts.BUILD YOUR OWN ROLLER COASTER
How amazing would it be to have a roller coaster in your backyard?
Very. How dangerous would that be? Extremely. A long time ago,
someone thought this would be a fun (and safe) thing for kids to
build. No thanks, we’ll stick with trips to Disney World.Ultimate Pool Battle
How to build a floating ping-pong table.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
GET SOME HELP
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• 3 Pool noodles
• Corrugated plastic sheet ¼” x 24” x 48”
• Two 10” x 1” stainless steel pan-head screws
• 1 ½” x 2’ PVC pipe
• One roll of 5 ½” black mesh ribbon
• Plastic ping-pong paddles and ballsCut two lengths of pool noodle to 24 inches and two to 48
inches.
Find the centerline of the plastic sheet by measuring 24 inches
in from the long end. Mark a point one inch in from either side
on this line. With a cordless drill and a 9
/
64-inch twist bit, drill
pilot holes in the two marks.
Use the same bit to drill holes in the base of each end cap.
Place construction adhesive on the playing surface around the
pilot holes and press each end cap in position. Drive a screw
through the end cap and into the pilot hole.To form the net posts, measure and mark two pieces of PVC
pipe to three inches long and cut. Press each one into an end
cap mounted to the table.
Cut a piece of black mesh ribbon to 27 inches long and three
inches wide. Wind a little ribbon around one of the net posts,
then use a hot-glue gun to attach the ribbon to the post. Extend
the ribbon to the other side of the table. Wind the ribbon around
the opposite post, and glue it in place. Press another end cap
on top of each post.
[Note: You can also buy a ping-pong net online if you’d like to
skip this part.]Test-fit the pool noodles to the edges of the game board. Once
you’re sure they fit, glue each one to the board with
construction adhesive. Drill ¼-inch-diameter drain holes near
each corner of the playing surface.
Time to play! Serve to your opponent.
OFFICIAL RULES OF PING-PONG
• Games are to 11 points
• Players get two serves each, then switch
• You don’t have to be the server to win a point. Any mess-up
earns a point for the opposite player.• If a game ties at 10-10, you go into extra time and must win by
two points. Each player takes turns with one serve until
someone wins.
• In official competition, games are played best of five (first to win
three games) or best of seven (first to win four games.)
Build a Handheld Water Cannon
Make a splash with this beast.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
GET SOME HELP
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• 1 1” PVC pipe, 20” long
• 1 11
/4” PVC pipe, 20” long
• 1 1” PVC end cap
• 1 11
/4
 PVC end cap
• 1 ¾” PVC plug
• PVC primer and cement
•
3
/16” drill bit
• 3 No. 15 o-rings (1” outside diameter x ¾” inside diameter
x 1 8” thick)
• Lubricant such as WD-40 or VaselineUse a 3
/16-inch bit to drill a hole in the 11
/4
-inch end cap. Run
the bit through the hole in the opposite direction to remove any
burrs.
Apply pipe cement primer to the inside of the 11
/4
-inch end cap
and the last inch of the 11
/4
-inch barrel, followed by a thin film of
cement.
Push the parts together and twist slightly to distribute the pipe
cement evenly. Repeat step 2 and 3 for the end cap on the one￾inch piston pipe.
On the other end of the piston pipe, use sandpaper or an
abrasive sanding drum attached to your drill, until you’ve made
enough room to fit the ¾-inch pipe plug into the pipe. About ¼
inch of the plug’s stem should stick out.
Roll two o-rings onto the exposed part of the plug to form a
base. Then roll the third ring on top of those. This will create a
barrier that allows you to force water out the other end.
Apply a little lubricant to the o-rings. Pump the squirter gently a
few times in a bucket of water to ensure that the rings are
seated correctly. Let the soaking begin!
Make a Sword Bookmark
Save your spot with a totally sweet saber.DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• Craft sticks
• Colored glitter
• Glue
• Black paint
Paint the bottom of the stick black. This will be the sword’s
handle.
Put a thin coat of glue on the unpainted section of the stick.
Sprinkle the glitter over the glue. (If you want to mimic a
lightsaber, you can use green or blue for a Jedi, red if Darth
Vader is your fave.)
Let dry and go to battle with your next book!Create Your Own Tie-Dye T-Shirt
You won’t need any tools, but you will need a workspace
that can stand getting pretty messy.
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• Tie-dye kit (Buying a kit is cheaper than buying all of the dyes
separately.)
• A white T-shirt
• Rubber bands
If you are going to be dying a brand-new t-shirt, make sure you
wash it in a washing machine first.
Prepare the area you’ll be working on with waterproof drop
clothes. (Warning: The dyes will easily stain wood and
countertops.)
Soak the shirt in water and wring it out a bit.There are many different patterns you can experiment with, but
for your first one, pinch the middle of the shirt, and then twirl it
around so it is shaped like a long roll of dough.
Starting at the top, wrap a rubber band around the roll. Repeat
this, creating 5-6 sections.
Apply a different color to each section. Don’t worry about
coloring inside the lines — you’ll get amazing results when the
colors bleed.Put the shirt in a plastic bag and let it soak. Follow the die kit
directions, but the longer you leave it, the more intense the
colors will be.
After the wait time is over, take the shirt to a sink or a hose
outside. Rinse it until the water runs clear, then undo the rubber
bands and marvel at your wearable work of art!
HOW TO SEW SOMETHING
KNOW THESE BASICS TO SEW ON A PATCH OR FIX A
RIP
THREAD A NEEDLE
Measure the length of the area you want to sew, double it, and
then add a few inches. Snip the thread to that length, then thread it
through the eye (the hole) of the needle. Pull your thread through
the needle until you have equal lengths on each side, then tie off
the ends together. The knot will stop the thread from slipping
through the fabric as you sew.LEARN THE RUNNING STITCH
Poke the needle through both pieces of fabric, then push it back
through the fabric a quarter-inch over. This creates one stitch.
Continue to the end of the seam. To close the stitches, push the
needle through the fabric without pulling the thread all the way
through to create a loop. Run the needle back through the fabric
and loop to create a knot. Repeat two to four times.
DID YOU KNOW?
Navy SEALs are elite warriors in America’s military force who have
to master an incredible number of skills to do what they do, and
guess what? Learning how to sew is one of them!INTRODUCING
Every superhero has an origin story explaining how they got their
powers. For example, Spider-Man was bitten by a radioactive spider,
and the Hulk got blown up by a gamma bomb. The good news for
you is that your superpower origin story will be a lot less painful — all
it involves is reading this chapter! You are about to learn secrets to
help you do things faster, incredible tricks to mesmerize your friends,
and even some ideas to start making you some money! (Sorry, not
billions of dollars like Iron Man has — you’re going to have to read a
much longer book to get that superpower.)
Terms You Should Know
• ARTERY Like a vein, except it carries blood away from your
heart to other parts of your body. (this page)
• ENTREPRENEUR Someone who starts or runs a business.
They can also be the founder. (see below) (this page)
• FOUNDER Someone who starts a company, like Steve Jobs at
Apple, or Mr. Krabs, inventor of the Krabby Patty. (this page)
• LITHIUM-ION A type of rechargeable battery. (this page)
• NEURON Cells that send and receive signals from your brain.
(this page)
• WRITER’S BLOCK When you are staring at a blank page and
can’t think of a single thing to write. (this page)• X-RAY VISION A superpower that you absolutely will not have
after you read this chapter.MIND-BLOWING FACTS ABOUT
YOUR BRAIN
The inside secrets of how your noggin
works.
1
The brain has three major parts, and they all have jobs:
• The cerebrum is the largest part, and it controls speech, learning,
and motion.
• The cerebellum controls muscle movement and balance.• The brainstem connects to your spinal cord and controls
automatic things like your body temperature, your heart rate, and
even sneezing. (So your cerebrum says, “Bless you!” when your
brainstem sneezes!)
2
The cerebrum has two distinct halves, and oddly enough, the left
side controls the right side of your body, and the right side controls
the left.
3
To remember where the brain parts are located:
• cereBellum is on the bottom
• cerebRum is on the roof
4
Doing crossword puzzles or similar games is proven to help increase
your memory. That’s right, playing Sudoku is like doing sit-ups for
your noggin.
5
Snacking can help you get good grades! Foods like blueberries,
nuts, oranges and pumpkin seeds have nutrients that help your brain
remember things better.6
Bigger isn’t always better: An adult human brain weighs three
pounds. A sperm whale’s brain weighs about 20 pounds. But who do
you think is better at multiplying fractions?
7
Unlike your phone, your brain’s storage capacity is basically
unlimited. Billions of neurons work together to hold memories —
scientists say it’s about the equivalent of a million gigabytes. By
comparison, the most powerful iPhone holds 1,000 gigabytes. And
bonus: Your brain’s screen never cracks.
8
Information travels in your brain at 268 MPH. Careful, remembering
the answer on a history test can get you a speeding ticket!
9
Brain freeze is actually a type of headache. There is an artery
junction at the back of your throat that pumps blood to your brain,
and when it gets cold, it sends a pain signal to your brain. To help it
pass quicker, press your tongue to the roof of your mouth to help
warm it back up.
10
Your brain never gets a nap — it is always working even when you
are asleep. (Sometimes they are working a lot more than we’d like
when they create super-scary dreams!)11
The brain is powerful — literally. It can generate enough to light up a
lightbulb.
12
Having trouble concentrating? Drink some water. Even slight
dehydration can make you feel foggy.
13
Don’t ask an ancient Egyptian mummy for help with your math
homework. Before they were placed in tombs, they had their brains
removed through their noses.ABRACADABRA!
Learn these easy-to-master magic tricks.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
Pick a Card, Any Card Trick
Correctly guess which card your audience member
picked from the deck.
1. Shuffle the cards, proving you haven’t set anything up.
2. With the cards facing away from you, fan them out and tell your
audience member to pick a card and to keep it hidden from you.
3. Shuffle the cards again, and then split them, holding one half in
each hand. Tell your audience member to place their card on
top of the bottom half. Make a big show of you not looking at
their card as they place it down, but while you’re doing that,
steal a glance at the bottom card of the top half.
4. Close the top half on the deck and be sure to remember that
card!5. Flip the deck over and fan it out smoothly on the table. Pick out
the card directly to the right of the one you glanced at and ask,
“Is this your card?”
6. Patiently wait for them to stop applauding.
The Levitating Card Trick
For a more amazing reveal, try this variation.
1. After you fan out the cards, split the fan in the middle between
the card you peeked at and the card you know is their card.
Collect the cards into two piles, keeping the audience member’s
card at the bottom of the pile on your right.
2. Place the pile to your left on top, making one pile again. Their
card should be at the top of the deck now. Hold the deck up
with the face of the bottom card facing your audience member.
3. Extend the index finger of your free hand over the deck, and
twirl it around and say, “Rise, card! Rise!”
4. Place your index finger on top of the deck, and secretly extend
your pinky to touch the back card. Move your hand up slowly,
pushing the last card up with your pinky while making “Whoo!”
noises.
5. Have a glass of water ready to splash on their face after they
faint with astonishment!
Stretching Rainbows Illusion
They won’t believe their eyes.STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A piece of cardboard or oak tag
• 1 large dinner plate
• 1 smaller dinner plate
• Markers
• ScissorsMAKE YOUR RAINBOWS
1. Trace a circle from the larger plate. Place the smaller plate
inside the circle lining up the middle and trace the smaller plate.
2. Cut out the ring you’ve drawn and cut it into two exactly equal
halves. Stack the halves on top of each other and cut a slight
angle at each end.
3. You should now have two identical arches. Use the markers to
color them as rainbows.
THE TRICK
4. Have your audience member stand next to you in front of a
table. Let them examine the two rainbows, stacking them on topof each other to show they are the same exact size.
5. Place one down on the table, and then holding each end of the
other one, pretend to strain as you pull and stretch it. (Note:
Don’t actually pull on it, or you’ll rip it!)
6. Place the “stretched” one on the table below the other one
(closer to the edge of the table you’re standing behind). It will
miraculously appear bigger than the other one.
7. Now pick up the “smaller” rainbow and repeat the fake
stretching process. Place it below the other rainbow, and it will
look bigger!
8. Pick up the “bigger” one, pretend to squeeze it back, and place
it on top of the other rainbow, showing your audience that they
are the same size again.
9. Feel like we forgot to tell you how to “do” the trick? Well, the
truth is that you don’t have to do anything! What’s happening is
an optical illusion. Your eye and your brain perceive the top
arch as smaller, even though they are identical. Magic!
Math Mind Game
Correctly guess anyone’s age and house address.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASYSTUFF YOU’LL NEED
• Paper
• Pencil
• CalculatorTell your audience member to write their house number on a
piece of paper that you can’t see. Then give them a calculator
and tell them to follow your commands.
Double the house number.
Add five.
Multiply that number by 50.
Add their age.
Add the number of days in a year, then subtract 615.
Command them to show you the resulting number. Declare with
confidence their age and address: the last two figures of the
number will be their age, and the remaining numbers will be
their house address.Easy Bet: I Can Stick a Piece of Paper to the
Wall Without Tape
No glue, no tape, no problem!
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A pencil
• A sheet of paperFind a sucker — er, friend — who will accept a bet that you can
stick a piece of paper to the wall with no adhesive.
Place the pencil on the sheet of paper, and holding one end,
quickly wiggle it back and forth several times.
Slap the paper on the wall and watch it stick! The trick? The
pencil is causing static electricity (the same thing that gives you
a shock when you shuffle across a rug and touch a doorknob),
which makes the paper cling to the wall.Y
SCIENTISTS JUST FIGURED OUT HOW TO
TURN YOUR BODY INTO A BATTERY
Imagine charging your phone — with yourself!
ou know that your body needs to maintain a constant
temperature of about 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit to stay
healthy and functioning, right? Well to do that, it needs to
regulate a balance between heat gain and heat loss. And in that
process, scientists have measured that you lose a ton of energy.
That’s where a tiny new wearable gadget called a thermoelectric
generator (TEG) comes in. It can turn that lost body heat into
electrical energy. TEGs use a difference in temperature—like your
body’s temperature compared to the temperature of the surrounding
air—to turn that energy into power.
You won’t be a human light switch just yet though. Researchers say
that these wearables can generate only about one volt of energy for
every square centimeter of skin space (That is less than the power of
a AA or AAA battery.), but the possibilities are incredible. Imagine
one day wearing an Apple Watch that charges itself?
Besides being super-convenient, not needing batteries is good news
for the environment. Batteries use rare-earth metals and corrosive
materials, and when batteries break down in landfills, the chemicalsinside leach into the soil, contaminating ground and surface water.
Lithium-ion batteries, common in many wearables, frequently
explode and catch fire in landfills, releasing harmful greenhouse
gases.
As the technology is studied and advanced, we can expect huge
increases in power.
But scientists predict that we could see these body-powered
wearables in stores in the next five to 10 years, so don’t toss those
charging chords just yet.
HUMAN POWERHOUSES
THESE FOLKS HAVE ENERGY TO SPARE!WHEELED WONDER
Aaron James Fotheringham holds multiple records for wheelchair
stunts, including the longest wheelchair ramp jump of 70 feet!
SPEEDSTER
Sprinter Usain Bolt is the world’s fastest man who once ran 100
meters in 9.58 seconds. He hit 27.33 mph during his record-setting
run! That’s faster than a pig, a squirrel and even some dogs.
STRONGMAN
Zydrunas “The Big Z” Savickas has more than 20 world records for
strength. Think you could beat his 1,155-pound deadlift?
UNSTOPPABLE
Keira D’Amato holds the American women’s marathon record,
running 26.2 miles in just over 2 hours and 19 minutes. That’s an
average of 5.3 minutes per mile.MOTORCYCLE-POWERED PADDLE BOAT
Normally a paddle boat is powered by your legs and feet, but
someone thought attaching a motorcycle would be even better. Sure,
that would stop you from getting tired, but this idea seems a little
overboard to us.BUILD CONFIDENCE
Jonathan George, the founder of Rock My
Campus, shares simple things you can do
right now to be more confident.
Write down 5-10 clear goals you want to accomplish
this year.
Start small. It can be something as simple as: make two close
friends. Then ask yourself, how do I make those friends?
Perhaps the steps would be to join a couple groups, classes, or
clubs that interest you.
Think about how you affect others.
Have you ever tasted something that left a bad taste in your
mouth? We can have the same effect on people — good or
bad. Describe exactly how you want people to feel when they
meet you. Then make sure you keep yourself accountable for
how you interact with those around you.
For example: If I want people to feel seen, valued, loved, happy,
and supported, I can’t show up being rude and having a bad
attitude.Be thoughtful about social media.
Social media can have a bad effect on your mental health. Here
is a formula to help you keep it as a positive and fun part of
your life:
“I am on [social media platform] because I love to [your
favorite thing to do on it] so that I can [your best reaction.]”
For example: “I am on [TikTok] because I love to [watch funny
cat videos] so that I can [share and laugh with my friends].”
A NAVY SEAL’S ADVICE FOR KEEPING CALM IN
STRESSFUL SITUATIONS
FORMER ELITE U.S. MILITARY SNIPER BRANDON
WEBB SHARES HIS TIPS FOR DEALING WITH
PRESSUREUSE YOUR IMAGINATION
“When we are training for missions, we visualize it step by step in
our minds. We rehearse what we are going to say, imagine what
could go wrong and what we’d do about it. We do this so many
times that if something does happen in real life, we’re ready
because it’s like we’ve already done it.”
BELIEVE IN YOUR ABILITIES
“Push through problems, don’t ever give up. When Michael Phelps
competed at the Beijing Summer Olympics, he dove into the pool
and his goggles flooded with water. He was essentially swimming
blind, but he trusted his training and swam on and won the race.”
BE YOUR BIGGEST CHEERLEADER
“Positive self-talk — telling yourself you can do this — is
something that really works. When I trained snipers in the Navy
SEALs, we saw that trainees performed much better during target
practice when they told themselves they were getting better, rather
than concentrating on their misses.”Start Your Own Business
Marc Randolph, the co-founder of Netflix, helps you
begin your life as an entrepreneur — make money and
be your own boss!
THERE IS NO SUCH THING AS A GOOD IDEA
“Despite what anyone will tell you, there is no such thing as a good
idea — they’re all bad ideas. Netflix was a bad idea! The thing that is
important is that whatever your business idea might be, you try it.
And after you try it, you see what is working, not working, learn and
adjust. Every single person that you’ve ever read about who has a
successful company didn’t spend all this time dreaming about their
great idea. They figured out a way to test it today.”
START WITH SOMETHING YOU
UNDERSTAND
“I get a lot of people who come to me and say, ‘Marc, I’ve got this
great idea. It’s going to be this box that you get into, and it instantly
transports you across the country.’ Well, that’s a great idea, but
unless you have some special expertise in teleportation, I’m not surehow you’re going to be able to pull that off. So, if you love dogs and
have experience with them, a dog walking business makes a lot of
sense. But if you don’t have any experience with dogs, you might
want to try something else.”
LOOK FOR PROBLEMS
“Rather than trying to convince someone that they need something,
it’s so much better to find someone who needs something and
convince them that you are the person to help. Part of that is just
listening and looking for a pain point, something that makes people
frustrated. If you’re hanging out at a barbecue, and you overhear an
adult say, ‘Oh man, one of the things I hate most is having to bring
my garbage cans out to the end of the driveway every Tuesday
night.’ Your ears should perk up. Maybe there’s an opportunity to
start a business hauling people’s garbage cans out for them. Same
goes for raking leaves or anything people don’t like to do.”
SPREAD THE WORD
“Once you have your business idea, tell as many people as possible.
Even someone who doesn’t have garbage cans or a lawn to rake.
Chances are they know someone who could use your services.”
DON’T BE AFRAID TO ASK FOR HELP
“The most powerful thing you can ever do is admit you don’t know
something. It’s like magic. People want to help you, I promise. If you
say, ‘I don’t understand,’ people will explain. If someone doesn’t buy
from you, ask, ‘What could I have done differently next time?’ People
want to help you succeed.”GREAT BUSINESS IDEAS FOR KIDS
Kim Perell, founder of the Side Hustle Accelerator,
shares her picks for businesses you can launch.
Car washingPet watching, walking and washing (we love pets!)
BabysittingMaking and selling crafts, candles and cards
Yard cleanupWHERE DO GREAT IDEAS
COME FROM?
Artists and innovators share the secrets of
creativity.
“You don’t need directions, just point yourself to the top and go!”
DWAYNE “THE ROCK” JOHNSON, Actor, wrestler, business
owner
“The only advice anybody can give is if you want to be a writer,
keep writing. And read all you can, read everything.”
STAN LEE, Marvel Comics legend
“My mother instilled in me the idea that creativity starts with taking
a leap of faith — telling your fears they are not allowed where you
are headed.”
BEYONCE, Musician
“…be creative without worrying about being perfect.”
DAV PILKEY, Author of Captain Underpants“I don’t believe in writer’s block. There are good days when you’re
writing and less good days. I’ve learned that if it’s not happening to
walk away and return later. I doodle a lot and often get my best
ideas with a pencil in my hand while I’m doodling. The problem is,
sometimes I lose my doodles and that’s bad!”
JUDY BLUME, Author of Tales of a Fourth Grade Nothing and
many others
“You can’t use up creativity. The more you use, the more you
have.”
MAYA ANGELOU, Award-winning poet
“I think it is possible for ordinary people to choose to be
extraordinary.”
ELON MUSK, Head of Tesla and SpaceX
“The most important thing about creativity is that you honor your
creativity, and you don’t ever ignore it or go against what that
creative image is telling you.”
LADY GAGA, Musician
“Imagination is more important than knowledge. Knowledge is
limited. Imagination encircles the world.”
ALBERT EINSTEIN, Scientist“The one thing that you have that nobody else has is you. Your
voice, your mind, your story, your vision. So, write and draw and
build and play and dance and live only as you can.”
NEIL GAIMAN, Author of Coraline and many others
“The best tip I could give you is to be active. So many people talk
about what they want to do, and they just love words. Put actions
behind your words. Don’t be a talker, be a doer.”
KEVIN HART, Actor and comedian
HOW TO MEDITATE
Many great artists and innovators say that meditation is a
wonderful way to clear your mind of clutter so you can find great
ideas. There are tons of great apps that instruct you on meditating,
but here is a simple way from Brigham and Women’s Hospital in
Boston to get started:
• Find a quiet place and sit in a comfortable chair or on the floor.
• Set a gentle sound timer on your phone for one minute. (You
can increase the time as you get in the swing of things.)
• Close your eyes and begin breathing in through your nostrils
and out through your mouth. Concentrate on your breath, feel
your belly rise and fall.
• Try to clear your mind, but when thoughts come up, don’t fight
them. Simply note that these thoughts came in, then watch
them drift away and return to your breathing.• When the timer buzzes, get up slowly.
As weird as it sounds, it is hard to sit there and think about
nothing. Start with just three minutes, and build up the amount of
time slowly.CHECK OUT THESE
SUPERHEROES IN ACTION!
You don’t have to wear a cape to save the day.
DINER DISASTER AVERTED
While eating in a restaurant with his girlfriend one typical Friday
night, 16-year-old Chase Eller saw something that was anything but
typical: a baby choking on their food. The baby’s mother was
panicking, so without thinking twice, Chase jumped into action. He
ran to the baby and performed the Heimlich Maneuver (abdominal
thrusts that help clear a blocked airway) which he learned in his
health class. The move worked and saved the baby’s life. Afterward,
Chase told a reporter he was happy he was there to help, adding,
“The baby was smiling at me.” The baby was happy too!
SUPER KITTY!
Police officers see a lot of crazy things, but this has to be at the top
of the list for officer Patrick Daugherty. After a 911 call was made topolice dispatch and no one was heard on the line, officer Daugherty
was sent to the home of Gary Rosheisen in Ohio. The officer found
Gary sprawled on the ground, next to his wheelchair, and Gary’s cat,
Tommy, next to the phone! After receiving medical care, Gary
explained that he tried teaching Tommy how to hit the speed dial
button for 911 in case of an emergency but had no idea if the cat
understood. Well, Tommy sure did! “He’s my hero,” Gary told
reporters after the incident.
A WHALE-Y GOOD FRIEND
It was a sad and frustrating situation when a sperm whale and her
calf got stuck on a sandbar off the coast of New Zealand. People
could not figure out how to help the poor animals get free, but luckily
a bottlenose dolphin nicknamed Moko swam by and saved the day.
Moko zipped over to the whales and onlookers watched him guide
them through a channel that led out to the deeper water. Best swim
buddy ever!
QUICK-THINKING LIFESAVERS
After hearing a big crash in the dining kitchen, three children ran in to
find their mother, Ashley Eggleston, lying on the floor and
unresponsive. The kids heard a car passing by and ran outside
screaming for help. The car stopped and friends Emilee Tikka, 16,
Eva Sarkinen, 16 and Kate Nylund, 15, jumped out to help. They
called 911 and the dispatcher explained how to perform CPR. Evadid CPR for about four minutes until first responders arrived and
were able to get Ashley safely to the hospital. The group of kids and
the thankful mom say that they have become like one big family from
that day on.
TODDLER TO THE RESCUE
When Aaron Haynes had a terrible accident with a wood chisel, he
was in real danger of dying. The chisel hit an artery in his arm, and
he was losing blood fast. Lucky, his 3-year-old son AJ quickly picked
up a phone and dialed 911. His quick action saved his dad’s life and
earned him a place in the Guinness Book of World Records as the
youngest person to make a lifesaving phone call.
MINI BATMAN
Five-year-old Caleb Bale’s nickname is Caleb Batman, and wow did
he earn it. While his mother was driving, she experienced a terrible
seizure. Caleb, who was napping in the back seat, woke up,
unbuckled his belt, climbed up into the driver’s seat, and steered the
car to safety! He flagged down a passing car, whose driver called
911 and got his mom the help she needed. Get this kid a Batmobile!
GET YOUR HOMEWORK DONE FASTER
Elizabeth Fraley, is an expert teacher who runs Kinder
Ready and Elementary Wise. Here are her helpful tips to
make homework easier.MAKE YOURSELF A SCHEDULE
Think about a horror movie — someone is walking down a dark
hallway and suddenly a monster pops up around the corner. Freaky,
right? When we don’t know what is coming, it can be scary and
stressful. That’s why one of Elizabeth’s top pieces of advice is
making a weekly or monthly schedule so you know what is coming
up (i.e., a math test on Friday.) With it written down, you are less
likely to wake up in the middle of the night on Thursday screaming, “I
forgot to study!”
PICK YOUR SPOT
Speaking of horror, famous author Stephen King, who has written
more than 60 spooky novels, says one of the keys to cranking out
book after book is that he has a specific room that he only uses to
write in. He doesn’t play video games or read the newspaper there
— when he sits in that chair, it tells his brain that it is time to work.
Pick a homework spot for yourself. Maybe it is a desk, maybe it is
your kitchen table. Wherever is comfortable to sit and spread out
your books and papers, do your work in that same spot every day
and it will help get you in the “get work done” mindset quicker.
TAKE BREAKS
You might not realize this, but you have completed a marathon.
That’s right, 26.2 miles. Congrats! Here’s the thing: you didn’t do it allat once. Maybe you cruised a mile in gym class one day, maybe you
traveled another mile in the mall another day — that big 26.2 mile
number was broken into pieces, making it more doable. Elizabeth
says that if it is hard to sit at your desk for an hour or more doing
homework, try this method: Use your phone’s timer to help you track
25 minutes of work and five minutes of breaktime. Repeat the on and
off time until you get your workload done.
MAKE A TO-DO LIST
Make a list of things you need to do: study for a math test, write a
book report, things like that. Some days the list will look a little bigger
than others, but one thing is true: There is nothing more satisfying
than crossing something out once it is finished. In your face,
geometry quiz!
START WITH THE EASY STUFF
Ever hear the expression “low-hanging fruit?” The idea is that fruit on
the low branches is easier to pick and eat than fruit on branches that
require a ladder to reach. So, look at your to-do list. Is there anything
you can bang out super-fast and easy? Do those first. Once you get
some momentum, you’ll be like a boulder picking up speed as it rolls
down a hill. Look out!
NO BANGING YOUR HEAD AGAINST THE DESK ALLOWED
No matter how smart you are or how well you pay attention in
school, there will be assignments that are tough. Frustration is a
natural reaction, but rather than driving yourself nuts trying to figure it
out, Elizabeth suggests that you write down everything you do know
and leave a note for your teacher: “I am stuck on what to do next.”
This way your teacher knows that you put in real effort, and also lets
them know the specific part you need help with. “I can’t do this mathproblem” is a lot harder to help someone with than “I don’t
understand how to multiply these two fractions.”
SLEEP!
No, not while you are doing homework. But all kinds of scientific
studies show that a big key to focusing and problem-solving is rest.
Ideally, you should be getting eight to 12 hours of sleep a night. (And
no, games or watching TikTok on your phone until two in the morning
in bed does not count as sleep!)
BIG BRAINS = BIG MONEY
The record holder for highest winnings during a regular season
Jeopardy! game is Ken Jennings, who raked in $2,520,700 after
winning 74 games! Ken was such a popular player that he is now
one of the two hosts of the show. Amy Schneider is the second￾place record holder for the most wins — 40!MEMORIZATION SECRETS
Use these tricks to train your brain to remember better.
CONNECT THE DOTS
Remembering a fact like water freezes at 32 degrees Fahrenheit
might be tough, but connecting it to something you know, like
Shaquille O’Neal’s jersey number was 32, could help. Imagine Shaq
shivering in his number 32 jersey, and you’ll never forget that
freezing number! And the connection could be anything: your friend’s
birthday, your grandma’s house number, digits in a phone number,
etc.
STUDY AND THEN SNORE
Scientific studies show that your brain remains hard at work while
you are sleeping, so it is a good idea to review any info you are
trying to memorize right before you hit the pillow.SPEAK AND SPELL
Another way to further embed info in your noggin is to write things
out. And even better, say them out loud as you write. Science shows
that when your brain is thinking about something, and also
commanding your hand to spell it out and your mouth to say it, it can
be a triple-whammy of a memory trick.
THE POWER OF FIRST LETTERS
Something called “mnemonics” (pronounced new-monicks) are tricks
to help you remember a series of words in order. For example, if you
are trying to remember the names of the Great Lakes, in order, think
of this phrase: SuperMan Helps EveryOne. From west to east, the
five lakes are: Superior, Michigan, Huron, Erie and Ontario.
BUILD A MEMORY PALACE
This is a weird one, but people who compete in memory
competitions swear it works. The idea is that you picture a structure
you are very familiar with, like the inside of your house or school.
Then in your head, you place the things you are trying to remember
in it. The weirder, the better. So, if you are trying to remember the
first presidents of the United States, put them in your kitchen.
George Washington is sitting at the table, John Adams is raiding the
fridge, Thomas Jefferson is making scrambled eggs at the stove.
Memory experts say it is easier to recall visual images than facts that
are just floating around your head.
Top Mnemonic Devices
The order of the colors of the rainbowRoy G. Biv
Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo, Violet
The order of the planets
My Very Excellent Mom Just Served Us Nachos
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune
The names of the five oceans
APples In Apple Sauce
Atlantic, Pacific, Indian, Arctic, Southern
The names of the continents
Eat An Apple As A Nice Snack
Europe, Antarctica, Australia, Asia, Africa, North America, South
America
HOW TO GET ON TEEN JEOPARDY!
Wanna put your smarts to the ultimate TV test and make tons
of dough?
Here’s everything you need to know about getting famous and rich
on one of the most popular game shows of all time.
AGE You need to be 13-17 years old to be eligible to apply for
Teen Jeopardy!REGISTER Set up a MyJeopardy! Account and complete the
contestant registration.
TEST TIME Pass a 50-question online test and you will move past
the first round. You can take it once a year in one of two ways: The
first is called the Jeopardy! Test, which happens at a specific time
that you get alerted to via email. The other is the Anytime Test,
which, just like it sounds, allows you to log in and take it whenever
is convenient.
WAITING GAME You get confirmation that your test has been
submitted within 24 hours of taking it. Unlike school, you don’t get
alerted if you fail. But if you pass and meet all requirements, the
Jeopardy! Contestant department will contact you for an audition.
AUDITION There are two parts to this. In the first round, you will
take another 50-question online test in real-time via video
conference. In the second part, you will play a mock version of the
game against other hopeful contestants. At the end of the mock
game, you will be asked to tell a little bit about yourself: things you
like, don’t like, your hobbies, funny family stories, etc.
WAIT AGAIN If you pass the test and do well at your audition, you
will be placed in a pool of potential contestants for 18 months after
your audition date. If you get picked, the show will reach out to you
and tell you when to head out to California to compete on TV!BRUSH UP ON YOUR CREATIVE SKILLS!
They say that humans have been making art since the dawn of
history. (We don’t know about you, but at dawn we’re usually still
sleeping!) Anyway, the point is that people — and even some
animals — have an incredibly strong desire to make art. Why?
Because it is fun, sometimes you get to make a mess, and you wind
up with something that looks cool! Whether paint, video, music or
writing is your thing, we hope you will find a project in this chapter
that inspires you to let out your inner creative genius. (But just make
sure your inner creative genius comes home in time for dinner — it’s
pizza night!)
Terms You Should Know
• CELEBRITY What you’re destined to become once you
unleash your art on the world.
• ESPORTS Short for electronic sports, they are organized
gaming competitions. (this page)
• GLYCERIN A colorless, odorless, thick liquid that is sweet. (this
page)
• SELF-PUBLISH When an author publishes their own book
rather than having a big company doing it.THINGS YOU DIDN’T KNOW
ABOUT MOVIES, MUSIC,
BOOKS AND GAMING
1
To infinity and beyond a bad mess up: Toy Story 2 almost didn’t get
released. Not because the folks at Pixar didn’t like it — because an
animator accidentally deleted most of it! Luckily, the movie’s
technical director had a backup on her computer at home.2
In Jurassic Park, when confronted by a very hungry T. Rex, Dr. Grant
advises, “Don’t move! He can’t see us if we don’t move.” It worked in
the movie, but in real life, most paleontologists believe T. Rex had
great vision and would gobble you up whether you ran or sat there
like a screaming snack.
3
In an early version of Star Wars: A New Hope, R2-D2 spoke English
instead of in beeps and bloops. And apparently, was kind of a jerk
and bully to poor C-3PO!
4
When J.K. Rowling was in the middle of writing Harry Potter, she
often had ideas pop into her head at random moments and would
scramble to find something to write them down on. Her most
unusual? She tweeted: “The best thing I ever wrote on was an
aeroplane sick bag. Came up with the Hogwarts houses on it.”
5
Minecraft was almost called “Cave Game” before its creator changed
his mind. Hard to imagine over 130 million people playing “Cave
Game” each month.
6
Esports is not only fun, but it also makes a ton of money. In 2021,
esports generated over $1 billion! Next time you get in trouble forplaying too many video games, simply explain that you are training
to be a billionaire.
7
Taylor Swift holds the current record for the most No.1 hits on the
U.S. Digital Song Sales chart. As of January 2022, she had 23
singles reach the top spot!
8
Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson doesn’t just make great art by way of
his movies, he is art. He has a tattoo that stretches across his chest,
back and left arm. Given how big his muscles are, it took 60 hours to
complete the tat!
9
You might have noticed that Dav Pilkey, creator of Captain
Underpants, has a unique spelling for his first name. He revealed in
an interview that when he was working at a Pizza Hut, his manager
made him a name tag. The “e” on the label maker was broken and
so, he explained, “My name tag said D-A-V, and it’s just stuck.”
10
In The Avengers, Bruce Banner has to get really angry to turn into
the big green Hulk. But in the very first Incredible Hulk comic book,
the thing that transformed him was the glow of moonlight. And he
turned gray, not green!11
The popularity of The Avengers is too big to be contained on Earth
— NASA sent a digital version to the International Space Station for
astronauts and space engineers to watch.
12
Kidz Bop has been around for more than 20 years, and the group’s
most famous member was singer-actress Zendaya.
13
Imagine if LeBron James’ teammate in Space Jam 2 was named
“Happy Rabbit.” That was Bugs Bunny’s original name, until
animators started calling him as “Bugs’ Bunny,” after Ben “Bugs”
Hardaway who was the first person to direct a “Happy Rabbit”
cartoon.
14
For a quick minute, the president of Nintendo wanted cute little
Pikachu to have big muscles and be totally buff! The thinking was
that this would make him more appealing to U.S. gamers. Bench
press, I choose you!
15
Humans aren’t the only animals who like to create art. Elephants in
Thailand have been trained to paint pictures on canvases, and some
of their work has sold for thousands of dollars! Guess these artists
don’t work for peanuts.16
The world’s oldest known cave painting was recently discovered in
Indonesia: a life-sized picture of a pig that was made at least 45,500
years ago! That is some old bacon.How to Make an Animated Movie
(with the Corner of Your Notebook)
Before there were Pixar movies, there were flipbooks.
Here are the simple steps to doodle your own motion
picture.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A notebook or notepad
• A dark pen or pencilThe key to animation is tricking your brain with an optical illusion. If
your eye sees a series of drawings that change slightly in quick
succession, your brain interprets them as a moving image. Here is a
super-simple way to get the concept and once you nail it, you can
expand to create all kinds of cool adventures with multiple moving
objects, people and monsters.
On the last page of your notebook, draw a stick figure with its
arms pointing down.
Put the next blank page down, and trace over your stick figure,
but draw one of the arms sticking out slightly higher.
Continue to draw 10-15 more pages, each time raising the arm
until it is over its head.
Now draw five or so more pages, with the upright arm moving
slightly to the right and slightly to the left.
Pinching the pages between your forefinger and thumb, flip
through the pages and look down. Your stick figure is waving
hello!
DID YOU KNOW?
Before computers, animated movies were drawn and painted by
hand. It takes 12 drawings for just one second of film. So, a two￾hour movie needs 86,000 drawings! Is anyone’s hand cramping up
just thinking about that?Design Your Own Car Cartoon Character
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
Inventing your own cartoon characters is super-fun. Speech
bubbles are a great way to reveal your character’s attitude (“Time to
go fast!”), and there are little things you can do with your drawing
that help show its emotions. Take a look at these examples and try
working them into your own creations!
SHY GUY
Got a quiet, nervous character in mind? Make their eyes look up and
inward and the hood bow down (like a puppy dog who is afraid they
are in trouble.) Also try having the wheels go in slightly different
directions, like someone whose legs are nervously shaking.MAD DOG
Want to invent a villain (or a car that’s just in a bad mood)? Draw
crinkled down eyebrows, like a hungry animal searching for prey.
Add big, sharp teeth and rugged tires leaning out like they just ran
over something. Get outta the way, this monster doesn’t have
brakes!
SPEED DEMON
If your character loves to drive fast, here’s how to make them look
super-speedy and excited. Give them a big grill smile, make theireyes wide open (like someone excited to open a present), and give
them big ol’ tires that are ready to rip!
Swinging Sand Art
Use physics to make a wild design.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• 1 empty 20 oz. plastic bottle
• 2 pounds of colored sand
• String
• Masking tape
• Construction paper
• Spray adhesiveLissajous figures are patterns that occur when something like a
pendulum swings and then starts to spiral as it slows down.Cut off the bottom of the plastic bottle, then poke three holes
around the bottom of the bottle and one in the bottle cap.
Tie a six-inch piece of string in each hole, and then tie those to
the main pendulum string. The main string should allow the
bottle to hang an inch or so off the ground.
Cover the ground beneath the setup with construction paper.
Spray the paper with adhesive if you want to keep your
creation.
Using something sturdy above the paper, tie both ends of a
string to end up with a hanging U shape. Tie the end of the
pendulum string to the midpoint of the U.
Put a piece of masking tape over the hole in the cap, then fill
most of the bottle with sand. Remove the tape and quickly put
your finger over the hole.
Hold the bottle near the edge of the paper, then push it in a
circular direction as you let go.
Watch amazing patterns form as the bottle swings and spins.
Allow the adhesive to dry then brush off the excess sand.
Physics art!Lights, Camera, Flip Upside Down!
How to build a pinhole camera.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• An empty shoebox and its lid
• A thumbtack
• Tape
• Wax paper or tracing paperMeasure the center of the short side of the box and poke a hole
in it.
On the opposite short side, find the center and measure a 2-
foot x 2-inch box. Use scissors or a hobby knife to carefully cut
it out.
Tape down the tracing or wax paper inside the box to cover the
box hole.
Take your pinhole camera into a dark room and turn on a single
lamp. Point the pinhole at the lamp and look at the wax paper
box. You’ll see an image of the lamp, upside down!
Why did it flip? Because light travels in a straight line. When the
light from the top of the lamp passes through the pinhole, it
continues in a straight line and ends up at the bottom of the
paper.Turn Your Backyard Into a
The gadgets you need — and the perfect spot to place
them for the ideal outdoor cinematic experience.
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A digital projector
• A laptop or tablet you can connect with a HDMI cord
• A Bluetooth speaker
• A sheet or blank wall
• A subscription to a streaming service like Netflix or
Disney+THE SCENE Whether you’re sitting on a blanket on a warm summer
night, or snuggled beneath a pile of blankets on a chilly fall evening,
there’s nothing like watching a favorite movie in the great outdoors.
And you only need a couple of key gadgets to start your own fresh
air film festival. If you don’t have time to build your own super screen
(see at right) the side of your house or a hung white sheet will do the
trick.
Follow these pointers to create the perfect cinema under the stars.
(Sorry, there’s no gadget to make the sun set so you can start the
movie faster!)
A Unless you’re using a rear projector, it’s best to screen at dusk, or
if you’re screening at sunset, set up so the sun sets behind thescreen to avoid glare.
B Set speakers in front of the screen or right beside it, so the voices
feel as if they are coming from the characters, not the woods around
them.
C Where there’s light, there are bugs. Make sure you put citronella
candles or zappers (quiet ones) near your projector and screen to
keep the picture free of flappy shadows. You can spritz equipment
with bug spray.
D When it’s dark and there’s a movie playing the last place people
are looking is down at their feet. Prevent trips and falls by taping
down and tucking in wires.
Make a Super Screen
A sheet or wall will work fine, but a wrinkle-free surface
will really make movie night pop.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
ADULT NEEDED
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• One 33’ length of ¾” PVC pipe
• Four ¾” PVC elbows
• Two ¾” PVC tee fittings
• Two 2” stainless-steel screw eyes
• One 57” X 101” white stretch fabric• Thin ropeSew four pockets into the stretchable fabric (see diagram).
Notice that a 2-inch-wide unsewn gap is centered in the fabric’s
long edges. You’ll need this gap to insert a PVC tee fitting.
Cut three pieces of PVC to 60 ⅜ inches and four to 52 inches.
With a ⅛-inch drill bit, have your adult helper drill a pilot hole at
the corner point of the two PVC elbows for the screw eyes.
Slide the four 52-inch pieces of pipe into the fabric pockets.
Insert a tee into the unsewn gap at the top and bottom of the
frame and push each pipe into the horizontal socket of each
tee.
Insert a 60-inch piece of pipe into the vertical socket of the top
and bottom tee.
Slide four elbows onto the ends of the 52-inch-long pieces. The
two elbows with screw eyes are positioned at the frame’s top.
Insert the remaining two 60-inch pieces of pipe into the elbow
sockets to complete the frame.
Attach the rope to the elbow screws and hang it up.
MOVIES MADE FOR THE GREAT OUTDOORS
A playlist to get your backyard movie marathon started.
• Avatar
• The Goonies
• Jumanji
• Over the Hedge• Paddington 2
• Raiders of the Lost Ark
• The Wizard of OzI
HOW A SUPER FAN BUILT A CUSTOM-MADE
5-FOOT-LONG STAR DESTROYER
t’s hard to say if charles anderson is a bigger fan of Star Wars or
of LEGOs. The professional animator spent more than 500 hours
building a 44-pound, five-foot-long LEGO version of the Imperial
Star Destroyer that is made up of nearly 20,000 bricks. Can you
imagine the size of the box it came in?
Well, keep imagining because the box doesn’t actually exist. See,
not only did Charles build this amazing plastic creation, he designed
the one-of-a-kind model himself!
Charles used a computer program called Studio 2.0 that allowed him
to model out the entire ship on screen before he snapped a single
brick together.
As a collector and maker of homemade Star Wars props (he also
made a life-size replica of Han Solo trapped in carbonite), Charles
was obsessive about making sure his LEGO Star Destroyer would
be as close to the one in the film as possible. The ship has a unique
shape (like an acute triangle), so precision with the structure’s
angles was super-important. “I decided at the beginning I wanted the
whole thing to be five feet long,” says Charles. “That triggered a lot
of the other choices I had to make about proportions.”He started with a 3D scan of the A New Hope Imperial Star
Destroyer and overlaid it into Studio 2.0 to design the skeleton of his
build.
Once he had the hull mapped out, he moved on to the specifics. “Of
the 15 months I spent designing and building this thing, most were
spent in this software,” he says. He jumped back and forth a lot
between making the cool-looking parts of the model — like the
cannons — and making the superstructure underlying it all. “Every
time I designed something, I had to find places to hook it together,”
he explains. “I just hoped it would stick without breaking apart.”
After 11 months, Charles’s design was finished, and Studio 2.0 gave
him list of almost 20,000 individual bricks that he would need to build
the structure. He then used another program called BrickStock,
which is connected to a database of every type of individual brick the
LEGO Group has ever produced. (LEGO has more than 3,400
unique plastic pieces in over 60 colors on record—that’s a lot of
bricks!)Using BrickStock, Charles found he already had about 8,500 of the
20,000 required destroyer pieces from various LEGO sets and lots
he’d collected at garage sales and online marketplaces. He
purchased some remaining parts from online sellers.
As Charles’s bricks poured in, he started assembling his destroyer
using the massive 3,300-page custom instruction book provided by
Studio 2.0. But by page 200, he says, “things started to fall apart.”
The engine end broke apart multiple times, and he explains that, “I
had all these sharp angles that worked perfectly in my computer
model, but refused to stick together in reality, and the tip of the
model sagged at the bottom.”
But like Luke Skywalker storming the Death Star in his X-Wing
fighter, Charles refused to give up despite all of the problems. And
15 months later, he finally finished his five-foot-long LEGO
masterpiece.
While his model isn’t for sale, you can purchase his gargantuan
instruction booklet, plus a list of the LEGOs you need. If you are up
for the challenge (and have access to 20,000 LEGO bricks), may the
force be with you!
GET INTO THE SPOOKY ZONE
Whether it’s for Halloween or your latest scary TikTok,
here are three easy — and freaky — decoration projects.
Homemade Zombie PitDIFFICULTY LEVEL
GET SOME HELP
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A wooden pallet
• Some chains
• Arms, hands and heads from the Halloween store
• Cardboard and paint1. Place the pallet where you want your pit to be.
2. Wrap the chains around it, like you are locking down a hatch
door.
3. Position the arms, hands and faces to make it look like they are
trying to escape.
4. Add a hand-painted sign: “Zombie Pit — Stay Away!” (or
depending on your mood, “Zombie Pit — Come In and Play!”)DIY Fog Machine
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A gallon of distilled water
• A bottle of Glycerin (you can find at most drug stores)
• The top of a two-liter plastic soda bottle
• An aluminum pie plate
• One large candle, preferably with multiple wicks
1. Make your “fog juice” by mixing a solution of one part glycerin
to three parts distilled water. The “fog” is created when the
solution is heated and starts to evaporate.
2. Cut the top off a two-liter soda bottle. Center the aluminum pie
plate on the bottle spout and use tape to secure it.
3. Get some help lighting the candle and carefully place the bottle￾plate contraption over it.
4. Add a teaspoon or so of fog juice. That should produce enough
fog to fill a good-sized room. To replenish the fog, just pour
additional teaspoons of fog juice into the fog machine as
needed. Keep an eye on your device — never leave a lit candle
unattended.Create a Self-Carving Jack-o-Lantern
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
GET SOME HELP
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A pumpkin
• A drill or a screwdriver
• A jar of peanut butter1. Draw your jack-o-lantern design on the pumpkin, then use the
drill or screwdriver to poke holes along the lines of your design,
almost like connect-the-dots.
2. Squish gobs of peanut butter into all of the holes.
3. Leave it outside and let the neighborhood squirrels gnaw away
at its face. In a few days, you’ll have a carved jack-o-lantern!Make a Fantastical Beast Shadow Puppet
Artist Richela Fabian Morgan shares one of her favorite
projects that lets your imagination run wild.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• Scissors
• Thin cardboard or sturdy junk mail card mailers
• Brass fasteners or pipe cleaner
• Chopsticks or pencils
• Tape
• A lampThink about an animal you’d like your beast to mimic: a tiger, a
monkey, a dragon, anything.
Time to draw with scissors! The cool thing about shadow
puppets is that little imperfections can create super-dramatic
results. Without even sketching, start to cut out shapes for your
beast’s head and body (give it legs, wings, a tail or anything you
want).
Poke holes in the body and the head where you want them to
connect, then use the brass fasteners or pipe cleaners to attach
them.
Tape the chopsticks or pencils to the back of the body and the
head. Now you can make your beast begin to move.
Showtime! In a darkened room, you can cast a shadow of your
beast on a wall using the lamp. Or see the next steps to build a
simple shadow puppet theater.
MAKE A SHADOW PUPPET THEATER
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A large cardboard box
• Scissors
• Large piece of white paper
• Tape
1. Cut a rectangle on the front of the box.2. Cut a big hole on the back of the box. This is where the lamp
light will shine in.
3. Cut a hole in the side of the box big enough for you to get your
hands and the puppet in.
4. From the inside, cover the front rectangle hole with a piece of
white paper and tape it in place.
5. Darken the room, position a lamp behind the hole in the back of
the box, then bring your beast into the side hole and let the
story begin. Narrate your story and be sure to add lots of
roaring!RAT TRAP TOY CATAPULT
We’re not making this up: Someone thought it’d be a good idea to
make a toy out of something designed to squish rodents. Nasty!Get Started on Your
Singer and songwriter Mike Errico says a great way for
future guitar gods and goddesses to begin making
music is with the mighty ukulele!
WHAT IS A UKULELE?
A ukulele (pronounced yoo-kuh-lay-lee) looks like a small acoustic
guitar, but it is much easier to play since it only has four strings
(instead of six), and the strings are made of nylon instead of steel,
which is much more comfortable on your fingertips.
HOW MUCH DO THEY COST?
Like any instrument, the price can vary a lot, but you can find a
decent beginner one online or at a music store for around $30.
HOW DO I READ A CHORD CHART?
There are five simple chords to learn, and once you know those,
you’ll soon be able to play dozens of songs.
On a ukulele chord chart, the vertical lines are the strings and the
horizontal lines are the fret bars that go across the neck of theukulele. The strings, from left to right, are G, C, E and A. G is the
thickest and lowest sounding string. They are often numbered on
charts: 4 is the G, 3 is C, 2 is E and 1 is A.
The top line of the chart is the end of the ukulele neck. The next line
down is the first fret, second fret, and so on.
The dots and numbers you see on the chart represent where you
should press down on the fretboard, and which finger to use—1 is
your index finger, 2 is your middle finger, 3 is your ring finger and 4 is
your pinky.
Place your fingers in the positions on the chart and strum. Congrats,
you’re making music!
Practice each chord to get your hand comfortable, then practice
switching between chords. It can be hard at first, but like riding a
bike, once your fingers start to get the muscle memory of their
positions, it gets easier.HOW DO I TUNE MY UKULELE?
You can use a keyboard or even your phone to play a note and then
gently twist the tuning knob until the sound matches. There are also
lots of free tuning apps you can download.
HOW DO I LEARN SONGS?
There are tons of books and apps that have something called tabs,
which write out songs with the basic chords and finger numbers,
making them super-easy to play.
OKAY, NOW I CAN PLAY. WHAT’S NEXT?
Get creative! The fun thing, says Mike, is that once you know the
basic chords, you can keep your hands in the same shape, and
move that shape up and down the fretboard. You will hear all kinds of
cool new sounds and maybe get inspired to write your own song!
“There’s a reason why you see people like Taylor Swift smiling when
they play music,” says Mike. “It’s really fun!”
PLAY HAPPY BIRTHDAY!
See the finger positions for each chord on the opposite page,
then strum and sing along!
D A
Happy birthday to you
D A
Happy birthday to you
D G
Happy birthday dear *NAME*
D A-DHappy birthday to you
START YOUR OWN YOUTUBE CHANNEL
Teen YouTube megastar Tiko (whose real name is
Jayden) has over 6 million followers and makes more
money than most adults do in a year. Here he tells you
how he did it — and how you can too.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
START BY HAVING FUN
“I started by making Fortnite montages, which are just little clips from
the game with music over it. It was fun but wasn’t getting a ton of
views. Then I started using a voice changer that makes me sound
like a little kid and that changed everything. I’ll play Fortnite games
where I get teamed up with strangers, and I say all of this weird stuff
and get their reactions. I thought it was pretty funny, and I noticed
that a lot of people liked it, so I switched over to that format and my
following started to take off.”FIND YOUR OWN THING
“Experiment and try different stuff. You can go to Trending on
YouTube gaming to see what is trending as a starting point, and then
try to think of a way to put your own little spin on it.”
HAVE A GOAL
“I started when I was in sixth grade. It took a little while to catch on.
Honestly, I didn’t think I’d ever get to 100,000 followers, but I just
kept at it. And then the day I hit 100,000, I realized, wow, I can have
fun and make money doing this.”
DON’T RUSH
“Generally speaking, the more time you put into these videos, the
better the quality. And higher quality videos tend to perform better.
You can make something quick and just throw it out there, but the
performance isn’t great. I think that every video I do has the potential
to go viral, so I try to put out the best stuff I can in a reasonable
amount of time.”
YOU DON’T NEED FANCY EQUIPMENT
“I got to 100,000 followers just using my computer and a $40
microphone. The equipment does not really matter as long as you’re
putting out something that people enjoy.”
BE CONSISTENT
“Posting regularly helps build your audience because they know to
come back for more. I post every day, but you should do it at a pace
that works for you.”AND TAKE BREAKS
“If it ever gets too much — like you are stressed about what to put
out next, or your last few videos didn’t do well — take a break. Take
a day, week, month off if you need a mental health break. I always
feel better and excited to start again when I come back from a trip.”
HAVE FUN – REALLY!
“I would not be doing this if I was not enjoying it. I’m my own boss,
so why would I make myself miserable?!”
YOUTUBE IDEA FACTORY
SOME OF THE MOST COMMON TYPES OF VIDEOS ON
YOUTUBE
Know how to do something really well? Make a series of videos
showing off your expertise — anything from gaming to cooking to
sports.
Are you really into gadgets, toys or collectibles? Buy them and
open them up on camera, narrating the entire process while
sharing how excited you are.Like Tiko, use a software program that captures video of your
screen and webcam (or just your audio). Be instructional or be a
pest — just have fun!WRITE A SCARY STORY
Andrew Nance, author of horror and mystery books like
Daemon Hall and Odd Occurrences explains how to tell a
terrifying tale.
PUT YOUR EXTRAORDINARY STORY IN AN ORDINARY WORLD
“You want your reader to be able to imagine themselves standing in
the shoes of your characters. It makes it scarier for them if it feels
like this could really happen!”
GET TO THE GOOD STUFF FAST
“Don’t keep your readers waiting; you want to get to the weird stuff
quickly to grab their attention.”
THINK ABOUT THE ENDING FIRST
“Twist endings are great for scary stories. Like just when your
character thinks they’re safe inside the house, they turn around and
realize they’ve locked themselves inside the basement with the
monster. Sometimes it is good to start with the idea of the ending —
turns out Dad is really a vampire that has been terrorizing the town
— and work your way back to get to that moment.”
LOOK AT OLD MYTHS AND LEGENDS TO SPARK IDEAS
“There are a lot of ancient Greek myths, Native American legends
and many other cultures that have characters you can get inspired
by. Like Loki, the ancient god of mischief. You imagine him in the
modern world and see what happens.”BASE YOUR CHARACTERS ON PEOPLE YOU KNOW
“It is easier to write realistic dialogue when you can base on things
you’ve heard people say in real life. And you want to have a nice
variety of characters, like a guy who is into music and a girl who is
into sports and a super-smart kid who loves math. It makes it
interesting to see these different kinds of characters come together
and use their special talents to fight an evil monster.”
WRITE YOUR STORY – THEN FORGET IT.
“Revising is key to great writing. So after you are finished, put it
away for a few days or a week, then go back and re-read it and see
where you can make the sentences flow better.”
PAY ATTENTION WHEN YOU ARE READING.
“A great thing to do when you are reading something you’re enjoying,
stop and ask yourself, ‘Why am I scared now?’ or ‘Why am I
laughing?’ Re-read those pages and see what the writer did to make
you feel a certain way.”
ENTERTAINING PEOPLE IS FUN!
“There is nothing like getting a big reaction from your readers. I
remember in grade school I brought in a scary story from an AlfredHitchcock magazine. My teacher was reading it out loud and the bell
rang, but no one in the class moved until she finished the story.
That’s when I knew I wanted to be a writer.”
FIVE FREAKY READS
Here is a reading list for anyone who loves a good scare.
1. Coraline by Neil Gaiman
2. Fear Street series by R.L. Stine
3. Odd Occurrences by Andrew Nance
4. Scary Stories to Tell in the Dark by Alvin Schwartz
5. Something Wicked This Way Comes by Ray BradburyThis chapter is very competitive. It believes it is the best chapter in
this book and it will, it will rock you! You’re about to learn how to build
your own games, how to get better at sports and beat everyone you
play in Scrabble. See? It’s the best! Is there a first-place trophy for
book chapters?
Terms You Should Know
• BREAKING BALL A type of pitch in baseball where the ball
doesn’t move in a straight line. (this page)
• CENTRIPETAL FORCE A force that keeps things moving in a
circular motion, pushing inward. (this page)
• FOLLOW-THROUGH Continuing your motion smoothly after
you release a ball. (this page)
• KINETICS The science of motion. (this page)
• SWEAT That yucky stuff that drips down your face when you
exercise a lot. (this page)
• TRIATHLON A race that combines swimming, biking, and
running. (this page)SUPER
Put your knowledge of wacky sports facts to the test.
1. What is the average lifespan of a baseball in Major League
Baseball?
A. 5 games
B. 7 innings
C. 6 pitches
2. Why is a football nicknamed a “pigskin?”
A. They look like piggies in the mud when they get dirty
B. The first balls were made with an inflated pig bladder
C. Tom Brady really loves bacon
3. Babe Ruth used to do this to stay cool while playing
games:
A. Wore a cabbage leaf under his cap
B. Sat on an ice block in the dugout
C. Asked kids in the stands for a lick of their ice cream cones
4. Which one of these sports was not an Olympic sport at one
point?
A. Tug of warB. Bowling
C. Tag
5. True or False: During World War II, so many players for the
Pittsburgh Steelers and Philadelphia Eagles were in the
service that they combined into one team called the
Steagles.
A. True
B. False
6. Which sport do the most people in the world participate in?
A. Baseball
B. Fishing
C. Bowling
7. Which sport did astronauts play on the moon in 1971?
A. Touch football
B. The high jump
C. Golf
8. Which of these “facts” about the original game of
basketball is not true?
A. Players shot the ball into a peach basket, and the ref had to
remove it after every score
B. Players were not allowed to dribble — they could only pass
and shoot
C. Players had to be a minimum height of six feet to play
9. Why do fans at hockey games sometimes throw their hats
onto the ice in unison?
A. They are annoyed by bad play from their team
B. Someone on the team scored three goals, called a “hat trick”
C. Whoever gets their hat closest to the center ice faceoff circle
gets a free hotdog10. Why has Rufus the Hawk, a real bird, become famous at
the Wimbeldon tennis tournament?
A. He once attacked Serena Williams
B. He grabbed a served ball out of the air
C. He scares away pigeons and keeps the courts clear of
pigeon poop
SCORE
ROOKIE
Keep practicing; you’ll get better and better.
RISING STAR
Whoa, this kid could go pro!
WORLD CHAMPION
Get ready for your Gatorade bath!
ANSWER KEYUP YOUR BASEBALL GAME ON BOTH
SIDES OF THE PLATE
HOW TO
MLB pitcher Corey Kluber tells you how.
A curveball is a pitch that drops and moves to the side
as it approaches home plate, making it tough to hit.
GET A GRIP
“I hold my curveball almost the exact same way that I hold my
fastball—with my index and middle fingers just along the narrow part
of the seam.”
CREATE SPIN
“With my fastball, I’m trying to keep my two fingers behind the ball as
long as I can to pull down on it and create as much backspin as
possible. With the curve, instead of trying to stay behind, it’s almost
the opposite. At the very end of the release, you try to get your hand
in front of the ball to create that topspin, which makes it break. You’rerolling your hand forward and down off the side of the ball as you
snap your wrist.”
TRY IT WITH A WIFFLE BALL
Do the same motions described above and keep the holes on the
Wiffle Balls to the outside of your grip. Snap your wrist as you throw
and watch that ball move like crazy as it nears the plate.HOW TO
Increase your chances of getting on base (or hitting a
home run) with these pointers.
ELBOWS UP
You want to hold the bat over your back shoulder at about a 45-
degree angle to the ground. Keep your back elbow up, parallel to the
ground. This will help you have a level swing.
THINK ABOUT YOUR STANCE
Keep your feet about shoulder-width apart and have your knees
slightly bent. Line yourself up with the plate by extending the bat and
putting the sweet spot over the middle of the plate.LOAD YOUR SWING
As you wait for the pitch, keep your bat up and shift your weight to
your back foot.
STEPAND SWING
Keeping your eyes on the ball, take a step forward and shift your
weight to the foot as you swing. Rotate your hips as you swing to get
more power.
STAY LEVEL AND FOLLOW-THROUGH
Keep your swing level so you are not chopping down, which creates
easy grounders, or swinging up, which results in pop-ups. And follow
through to get your full power. Practice that swing on a tee as much
as you can. Final tip: Work on your home run celebration high-five.HOOP CENTRAL
Shoot Three-Pointers Like an All-Star
You might not be tall enough to dunk yet, but with
practice, you can become a lights-out three-point
shooter.
YOUR POSITIONING
Point your toes at the rim and keep your feet about shoulder-width
apart with your shooting side foot slightly forward. Square your
shoulders to the rim (meaning that both of your shoulders should be
directly facing it.)YOUR LEGS
This is where the power for your shot comes from. Really put “the
jump” in your jump shot as you shoot the ball.
YOUR HANDS
Hold the ball with the lines parallel to the floor. Put the index finger of
your shooting hand on the air valve of the ball to find its center. Have
some space between your palm and the ball.
EYES
Aim for the rim’s net hooks that are nearest to you and think about
dropping the ball just over them.
ARMS AND WRIST
When taking your shot, keep your elbow and wrist in line with each
other. Push up as you jump and release the ball at a high point. Flick
your wrist forward as you release and follow through with your hand
facing down, so it looks like you are making a swan shape. Now,
stick up three fingers as you run back to play defense.
Perfect Crossover Dribble
This trick is known as the “ankle breaker” because if
done correctly, it leaves defenders tripping over
themselves.Practice dribbling with your right and left hand — you will need
both to be able to do this move.
If you’re starting with the ball in your right hand, step forward
with your right foot and lean your body in that direction. Keep
an eye on the defender’s hips — if they turn in the direction that
you’re stepping, that means you’ve fooled them.
As the defender moves in that direction, shift back and bounce
the ball to your other hand. (That’s the “cross-over” part.) The
defender will likely keep going in the wrong direction, while you
shift and drive to the net in the other. If they try to shift back,
there’s a good chance they will fall. Now that you’re open, take
a shot, make a pass or dunk!
DID YOU KNOW?LeBron James was a star wide receiver on his high school football
team. But after he broke his wrist, he decided to stop playing
football so that he could heal in time for his senior basketball
season. Imagine if Tom Brady was throwing touchdown passes to
LeBron? We wonder how high football scoreboards can go!ARE YOU READY FOR SOME FOOTBALL?
HOW TO
Make more accurate passes and hit your receiver right in
the numbers. Touchdown!
Grab the ball with your ring and pinky fingers in between the
laces, and your thumb and index finger just below the white line
(if your ball has it).
Hold the ball with your fingertip pads. There should be a little
space between your palm and the ball.Stand sideways with your feet shoulder-width apart. Put your
weight back, then step forward as you release. Stay on the
balls of your feet — throwing while flatfooted really zaps your
power.
Your arm should move almost like you are making a chopping
motion. Use your fingers to get the ball spinning in a spiral as
you step forward and release it.
Make sure you follow through — your throwing hand thumb
should wind up near your opposite thigh. Making a herky-jerky
motion will make your pass wobbly.
WHY ARE SPIRALS BETTER?
As explained by physics experts at the Children’s Museum in
Indianapolis, the spinning helps fight the forces of gravity pulling
the ball down and keeps it moving along its intended path. Thatmakes it easier for a quarterback to aim and for a receiver to know
where the ball is going — and for your team to win!
WHAT SIZE BALL SHOULD YOU USE?
It all depends on the size of your hands, but here is a guide to get
your started.
SIZE 9 Official size for NFL, college, and players ages 14+
SIZE 8 Players ages 12-14
SIZES 6 AND 7 Pee-wee football and grade-schoolersREC ROOM SCHOOL
How to Aim in Pool
Nail your next shot.
Use your pool cue to make a line from the ball you want to sink
to the pocket you want it to go. This is your “target line.”
Remember the exact spot where it starts on the ball.
Aim the cue ball for the target line spot on the ball you are
trying to sink. This is the “aim line.” Ready, aim, fire!Get a Killer Shot in Ping-Pong
Make topspin your friend (and your opponent’s worst
enemy).
You hit a ball and off it goes. But did you know that a ball flying
through the air is moving in two ways? There’s straight velocity, the
motion of the ball directly toward or away from you. And then there’s
spin — the ball rotating over itself. Spin causes the ball to do spooky,
spectacular things, like ricochet off the table, over your opponent,
and under a chair in the corner of the room.Topspin is where the ball rotates over itself, bottom over top, as it’s
moving toward the other player. This causes the ball to speed up
after it bounces on the table.
It’s tough to return but easy to do. Here’s how, according to Jim
Butler, three-time U.S. men’s singles table-tennis champion: Push up
and over the ball as you hit it to create the spin. To make it extra
hard to hit, try to aim it to bounce into the middle of your opponent’s
chest. Experts say that is the most difficult shot to return. (See how
to make a floating ping-pong table on this page!)A
WHAT’S IT LIKE TO COMPETE
IN ONE OF THE WEIRDEST
RACES IN THE WORLD?
Writer James Vlahos explains his adventure
competing in the cool and kooky Kinetic
Grand Championship.
12-foot-long picnic basket. A giant silver lobster on wheels.
Such are the sights you see at the Kinetic Grand
Championship, a 50-mile, three-day long race over land,
sand, water and mud that features some truly incredible works of art
that move.
While it is amazing to look at for spectators, this annual event is not
a parade; it is a contest. “Kinetics is about art, speed, and
engineering,” says Monica Topping, former president of the
organization that puts on the race. “It’s the triathlon of the art world.”
The contest was started in 1969 by artists Hobart Brown and Jack
Mays. The first race was won by a turtle that belched smoke and laideggs. I came to the event to compete in a putrid-green, three￾wheeled dune buggy called Visualize Whirled Peas, or VWP for
short. Decorated with dangling tennis balls and spinning pinwheels, it
has one tire up front and two in the back, and there’s a similar
configuration of seats for the trio of pilots to get situated.
VWP’s inventor is Mike Ransom, who built the contraption from
donated dirt track tires, abandoned bikes, and other dumpster-diving
finds. Whether they are anti-car environmentalists or monster-truck
fans, most racers, like Ransom, relish the challenge of turning trash
into rolling treasure.
“How many bikes died to make that float?” a man on the street asks.
“Probably about six or seven,” Ransom says.
After our vehicle passes inspection (all vehicles must be certified as
human-powered), we line up, and at noon a siren cuts through the
air. Pedaling furiously and jockeying for position, Team VWP makes
three laps around the square, then heads west out of town. The race
is on.
As we pedaled, we passed a rickety white taco truck. Papier-mâché
skeletons, one dressed as a bride and the other as a groom, sit in
the front seats and grin toothily. “Newlydeads,” reads the sign over
their heads.
A couple of hours later, after driving down a long stretch of beach
with waves sliding up beneath the tires, we turn inland and face a
steep set of dunes. VWP makes it up the first one but stalls midway
up the second. No matter how much we strain against the pedals,
the machine won’t move forward. The front wheel starts lifting up off
the steep slope, and the whole contraption tilts dangerously
backward. “Okay, that’s it!” Ransom calls, signaling for everyone to
jump off. “We’re pushing.”After we reboard at the top of the hill, which is called Dead Man’s
Drop, a judge asks if we want to scout the steep descent on foot.
“Nope, we’ll be fine,” Ransom replies as we wheel over the sandy lip.
And he’s right.
Our vehicle makes it across a mile-long section through Humboldt
Bay, Styrofoam pontoons on each side of the craft keep us afloat.
Paddle blades made from cut-up paint buckets and temporarily
mounted on the wheels supply the propulsion.
At this point we realized we weren’t going to come in first place. But
in keeping with this crazy event, the ultimate prize at the race is not
to come in first, but to come in exactly in the middle, which earns you
the Medio-CAR Award. Sadly, we don’t get that either, but our team
is happy, especially Ransom, who is thrilled his machine stayed
together. “Blood, sweat and gears,” he says victoriously.
THE THRILLING THREE
REAL RACES FOR DIY-ERS
BARSTOOL RACES
Wisconsin
Racers speed down snow-covered slopes sitting on stools with
skis attached to them.
POWER-TOOL DRAG RACES
Minnesota
Racers turn electric saws, angle grinders, and other tools into
makeshift motors that power skateboards, scooters, bikes, and go-karts.
KRISPY KREME CHALLENGE
North Carolina
2400 calories, 12 donuts, five miles, one hour. Contestants run 2.5
miles to a Krispy Kreme, eat a dozen donuts, then run back 2.5
miles to the finish line.
ROLLA PERFECT HOOK SHOT
Rule your next bowling birthday bash.
Mike Fagan, a winner of the Professional Bowlers
Association World Championship, explains how to roll a bowl
so it hits the sweet spot between the first and second row of
pins to get a strike.
Start your swing.
Start your swing, letting the weight of the ball carry your arm
backward.
Don’t rush.Don’t rush. Use the momentary pause at the top of your backswing
to make sure your hand is positioned underneath and to the inside of
the ball as much as possible. This allows for maximum rotation.
Create spin.
As you release the ball, you want to rotate your wrist, not your elbow,
to create spin. Your hand should follow all the way through the
outside of the ball and be almost vertical on the follow-through.
Practice.
As you get better, you can try rotating your wrist faster, which
increases revolutions and power.
THROW A BULLSEYE
LEARN THESE DARTBOARD POINTERS
• Darts are like really sharp, slow-moving bullets: Their path
arches up and then down.• The harder you throw, the straighter the dart will fly, but you’ll
have less control.
• Point the toe of your throwing side toward the board and open
your other leg to the side.
• Limit your movement to the elbow and wrist. Extend your arm
about three-quarters of the way and release the dart.
• Follow through until your finger is pointing at the board.
• To keep a shot straight, find the dart’s center of gravity and
balance it on your thumb, letting your fingers gently hold it in
place.
• Unless you’re playing some weird game, always aim for the
triple 20. It’s worth 10 points more than the bull’s-eye, and it’s
bigger.A DINING ROOM CHAIR SLED
Here’s another wacky (but true) project from the Popular Mechanics
archives: If riding on this contraption doesn’t result in you getting
injured, taking your family’s furniture into the snow will definitely
result in you getting grounded!Make a Basketball Catapult Game
Play one-on-one basketball no matter what the weather is like
outside.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
GET SOME HELP
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• 1” x 6” x 12” white pine board
• ⅜” x 48” round wood dowel
• Wire coat hanger
• 2” pan-head wood screws
• Optix 0.08” x 8” x 10” clear acrylic sheet
• Nerf Rival refill-pack foam balls
• 10 golf tees (two colors)
• SandpaperCut the 1- x 6- x 12-inch board into lengths of 4½ inches, 4
inches, and 1½ inches. Knock off any rough edges with
sandpaper.
The 4 ½-inch section forms the base. Two inches in from one of
the cut sides, drill a ⅜-inch hole in the center to hold the post.
Use a tape measure and a pencil to lightly draw two parallel
lines one inch in from the finished sides. Starting an inch from
the front of the base, mark off five ½-inch increments on each
line for the scoring tees. Drill holes at those marks with a 3
/16-
inch bit, then erase the line.
The four-inch section will be the backboard. On one of the cut
edges, drill a hole in the center with a ⅜-inch bit for the post.
On the face of the backboard, measure up ½ inch from the
bottom and drill two holes, one inch apart and centered over the
post, with a 1
/16-inch bit.
Use a saw to cut the dowel to length (see diagram). Spread
some glue on its ends and insert one end in the base and the
other in the backboard. Align the backboard so its face is
parallel with the front edge of the base.
Cut a piece of wire coat hanger to about five inches. Bend the
wire so it forms a circle. Grip each end with pliers to make a 90-
degree bend. Insert the ends into the holes you drilled in the
backboard.
Use a marker to indicate the cut line on the acrylic sheet (see
diagram) and cut the catapult arm to size using a jigsaw and a
fine cutting blade.Mark the location of the basketball holder on the acrylic
according to the diagram, then bore the hole using a ¾-inch
spade bit. Drill slowly to avoid cracking the plastic. Use a ¼-
inch drill bit to bore the pilot holes for the mounting screws
through the other end of the acrylic and into the wedge.
The remaining scrap of pine will form the wedge. With one
corner as your starting point, measure one inch along one side
and three inches along the other. Mark both points and cut a
straight line between them with the jigsaw. Apply a drop of glue
to the wedge’s back and glue it to the 1½-inch block from step
1. Fasten the catapult to the wedge with two screws.
RULES
Competitors take turns shooting from a set distance. (You can vary
where you shoot from for each shot to keep things interesting.)
Take a golf tee for every shot you make. The person with the most
tees is declared the new King!SUPER-FUN CARD GAMES
The rules to three simple and totally fun games to play
(and win, of course).
See cool card tricks on this page
Crazy Eights
players needed
Two or more
the goal
Get rid of all your cards first!
1. Every player gets dealt five cards, face down.
2. The rest of the deck goes into the middle, and the first card at
the top of the deck gets flipped over. (If you draw an eight,
place it back into the middle of the deck and flip another card.)
3. Starting to the dealer’s left, each player tries to get rid of a card
by placing it face up on top of the flipped over card. It must
match either the card’s suit (heart, diamond, spade or club) or
the card’s denomination (its number, type of face card or ace).
4. All eights are wild, meaning it can be used to cover any card.
After placing it, the player declares what suit it is, and the nextplayer has to match it.
5. Keep going around until a player can’t match a card. That
player then takes cards from the top of the pile until they get
one they can play.
6. If the pile runs out, the player must pass to the next player to
the left. Then, keep the left card facing up, and shuffle the rest
and turn it over face down for a new pile.
7. The first player to get rid of all their cards wins!
HOW TO SHUFFLE A DECK
Instructions from the makers of Bicycle playing cards.
1. Half the deck into two neat piles that are roughly the same
size.
2. Position them side by side with the long side facing you.
3. Put your thumbs on the two inside corners at the top of each
deck, and your index fingers on the opposite corners. Your
other fingers can help keep the piles in place.
4. Use your thumbs to push the top corners up, push the two
halves toward each other, then let the cards fall. The corners
of the decks should be shuffled.
5. Push the connected piles into one, then repeat a few times to
ensure a good mix.Go Fish
players needed
2-5
the goal
Get the most “books” of cards, which are four-of-a-kind
1. For two or three players, the dealer deals out seven cards to
everyone. For four or five, each gets five cards. The pack is
placed face down in the middle.
2. The player to the left of the dealer starts. They look at their
hand and decide which they want to try to get four of. For
example, you might have already have two 10s, so that seems
easier.
3. Time to fish! They choose any other player and say, “Give me
your 10s.” Note: The fisher must have at least one of the cards
they are asking for.
4. The player who is asked for the cards must hand over all the
cards the fisher asked for. (If they asked for kings and you have
three of them, you hand them all over.) Getting a match is
called a “catch.”
5. If the fisher makes a catch, they get to go again and can ask
the same player or a different one for a card. They keep going
as long as they are making catches. If the asked player doesn’t
have what the fisher wants, they say, “Go fish!”6. The fisher then takes a card from the top of the pile in the
middle, and the next player goes. When a player gets four of a
kind (like four Jacks, four 10s, etc.) that is called a book. They
place them on the table face up and go again.
7. If a player runs out of cards, they can pick from the middle pile
and fish for a matching card. If there are no cards left in the
middle, the player is out. The game ends when all thirteen
books are made. The winner is the player with the most books.
Acey Deucy
players needed
Two (but preferably more)
the goal
Correctly guess a card’s ranking
1. Players get pretzels or something fun to bet with. Each player
puts five pieces in the middle. This collective pile is called the
pot.
2. The first player is dealt two cards face up then bets anywhere
from nothing to the amount in the pot that the third card they
are dealt will fall in between the two cards they have. For
example, if you have a three and a 10, you are betting that the
next card will be anything from four to nine. So an Ace and a
two (called a deuce) is your strongest hand.
3. If the third card does fall in between, the player takes what they
bet out of the pot.4. If the third card is outside the two cards, they add the amount
they bet to the pot. If not, you have to put double what you bet
into the pot.
5. If the pot is won, all players “ante up” (meaning, they put in a
fresh batch of whatever you are betting), and you play on until
you don’t want to bet and would prefer eating your winnings!Make a Cornhole Set Out of a Single Piece of
Plywood
Fun to build, even more fun to play!
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
GET SOME HELP
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• 1 sheet of ¾” sanded plywood
• 18 1½” No. 6 wood screws
• Drill
• A compass
• Pencil
• Sandpaper
• Cornhole bagsCut the plywood into four 24-inch x 48-inch sheets.
On one quarter-sheet, mark a spot nine inches down from the
top and 12 inches in from one side. Use a compass to draw a
six-inch-diameter circle around the point. Drill a starter hole just
inside the circle, then use a jigsaw to cut out the hole. Repeat
on another quarter-sheet. Smooth the inside edges of the holes
with sandpaper.
Cut a 12¾-inch length from one of the remaining two quarter￾sheets. Measure 1½ inches in on the top and 11¼ inches in on
the bottom and draw a diagonal line between the two points.
Cut along this line, then cut 11
/16 inches off of the short end of
the triangles you just made.
Crosscut the remaining 11¼ by 48–inch piece of plywood into
two 22½-inch lengths, then rip one down to a width of 1¼
inches. These pieces form the front and back of the base.
Shave down the tops of the front and back pieces to
approximately match the slope of the triangles.
Assemble the pieces and screw together (making sure the
heads of the screws are sunk and not sticking out where they
can snag the bag). Who wants to play first?THE RULES OF CORNHOLE
Set up the two boards 21 feet from each other. Two players, one
from each team, stand at each board. (You can also play with just
two players and go back and forth.)
The two players begin with four bean bags and alternate tosses to
the opposite board. A bag that goes in the hole is worth three
points. If it stays on the board, it is worth one point.
Teams’ scores cancel each other out. So if you score seven and
your opponent gets four, you get three points for that round.
The first team to 21 wins.
Make a Giant Jenga Tower
All you need is wood, a saw, and some stacking ability.DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• Eight 96” 2 x 4s
• SandpaperMeasure and cut nine 10 ½” sections on each 2 x 4.
Sandpaper off the rough edges.
Stack them up in the Jenga configuration. Three blocks make
one level, then the next level’s blocks should be set rotated 90-
degrees, and so on. (This will give you 24 levels. Store-bought
Jenga games have 18.)
Time to play! The winner is the last player to remove and stack
a block on top of the tower before it collapses.Be a Scrabble Master
Top tips from professional Scrabble Players. (Yes, that’s
a real thing.)
THE POWER OF TWO
Acquaint yourself with the over 100 two-letter words that are
acceptable. These include AA, AB, EW, AH, XI, XU, YA, and ZA.
(The great part is you don’t have to know what they mean!)
HUNT FOR OPPORTUNITIES
We tend to focus on words on the board that we put down but look to
ones your opponent played and look for chances to build on them.
Add an S to the end of their CAR and you just scored easy points.
HAVE BOARD VISION
Pros don’t just think about where they can make words on the board
— they make sure that they aren’t creating an easy opportunity for
their opponent to use a double or triple letter square.
THINK ABOUT YOUR LEFTOVERS
Putting out a great big word with lots of points is sweet, but it can put
you in a jam for your next turn if you use up all of your vowels and
only have hard-to-use letters like W and V.
DON’T FEAR THE QTry to memorize a bunch of Q words so you don’t get stuck. “quadi,”
“qaid,” and “faqir” are just a few.
BIG WORDS, BIG SCORES
SOME LEGAL (AND TOTALLY WEIRD) PLAYABLE
WORDS AND THEIR MEANINGS
HAECCEITY
The essence of individuality.
SYZYGY
The perfect alignment of three celestial bodies.
TSUTSUGAMUSHI
A type of bacteria.
BRRR
The sound you make when you are cold.
CRWTHS
An ancient musical instrument.THE SCIENCE OF GETTING BIG
AIR IN THE HALF-PIPE
Olympic gold medal winner Kelly Clark explains how she
gets way, way, way up there.
1. APPROACH
In the pipe, riders can travel up to 40 mph, but they have to fight the
forces that sap speed. As Clark transitions from flat bottom to vertical
wall, centripetal force pushes her down. She pumps her legs, which
stiffens her body and causes her to exert more force on the ground.
According to Newton’s third law of motion, that force pushes back
and boosts her speed.
2. LAUNCH AND FLIGHT
If snowboarders jumped like basketball players, they’d fly away from
the wall and toward the center of the pipe, instead of up above thelip. Clark generates height by rotating her body as she reaches the
lip to create vertical velocity. Once in the air, she pulls her arms close
to her body to increase rotation and spin. “The more compact I am,”
she says, “the faster I spin.”
3. LANDING
Clark spots her landing two-thirds through a trick. When landing, she
must “ ‘pull the chute’—you make yourself as big as you can to slow
your rotation,” she says. To maintain speed into the next trick, she
reenters the pipe as high on the wall as possible. When she lands,
Clark must keep her body rigid; flexing her knees would absorb
energy and zap her speed.
DID YOU KNOW?
At the Beijing 2022 Olympic Winter Games, Japanese
snowboarder Kaishu Hirano didn’t get a medal, but he did set a
record for the biggest air in snowboarding. During his final run, he
soared 24 feet and 4 inches above the half pipe!Grab a white lab coat and practice your best maniacal laugh — by
the end of this chapter, you will be a certified mad scientist. (Or a
happy scientist, depending on what kind of mood you’re in.) We’re
going to be looking up at black holes millions of light-years away and
down at dinosaur fossils millions of years old. We’ll be performing
mind-bending physics experiments and peering inside a 200-foot-tall,
fire-breathing lizard. If all that sounds a little freaky, don’t worry, we’re
also going to make a pretty sweet paper airplane. Because, hey,
even hardworking mad scientists like you need to have fun
sometimes.
Terms You Should Know
• ANTIBIOTIC Medicine that fights infections caused by bacteria.
(this page)
• ELEMENT A pure substance. (this page)
• EON A unit of time equal to about one billion years. (this page)
• EXOPLANETS Planets that orbit stars other than our Sun. (this
page)
• HUBBLE TELESCOPE A space telescope that orbits the Earth.
(this page)
• METER A metric unit of length, equal to about three feet. (this
page)• NOBEL PRIZE A very prestigious prize given to people whose
work helps humanity. (this page)
• POTENTIAL ENERGY Energy that is stored in an object. (this
page)
• RADIOACTIVE Material that decays, releasing energy that is
harmful to living things. (this page)
• WORLD DOMINATION That’s the goal of every mad scientist,
right?TOTALLY TRUE, SUPER-WEIRD
AND SOMETIMES GROSS
You won’t forget these tidbits, no matter how hard you
try!
1
The average cumulus cloud (the big puffy cotton ball-looking ones)
weighs about 1 million pounds.2
Researchers learned that rats laugh when they get tickled.
3
The atmospheres in Neptune, Uranus and Saturn are truly bizarre —
scientists believe that the conditions cause it to rain diamonds.
4
Marie Curie won the Nobel Prize for discovering and studying
radium, a radioactive element. Her notebooks were so contaminated
with radium that they are kept in lead-lined boxes to prevent them
from making people sick.
5
If you want to see a living dinosaur, just look up in a tree. Birds are
dinosaurs and are classified in the same group as a T. Rex!
6
You can’t burp in space. Gravity is required to separate gas, liquids
and solid food in our tummies.
7
Penicillin, the first antibiotic drug, was discovered after a scientist left
a mess in his lab. After returning from summer vacation, Dr.
Alexander Fleming found mold — and it was killing harmful bacteriahe was studying. Who knows, your messy room could lead to a
scientific breakthrough!
8
On average, a person walks the equivalent of five times around the
world over the course of their lifetime — that’s 124,505 miles!
9
A blood cell takes about 60 seconds to make a roundtrip around your
body back to your heart.
10
Bad morning breath happens because your mouth dries out when
you sleep, and a lack of saliva allows more smelly bacteria to
multiply. Get out that toothbrush!
11
Your nose produces about 30 cups of snot a week.
12
Farts exit the body at seven miles per hour. (Whose job was it to
measure that?)
13
You shed the entire outer layer of your skin every two to four weeks.
(A rattlesnake sheds its skin three to four times a year.)14
Close the lid before you flush — germs can spray as far as six feet
away!
15
If you aren’t afraid of tarantulas yet, this might help: They inject their
prey with a poison that turns their insides into a liquid that the spider
then drinks.
16
Lobsters pee out of their faces.
17
Cockroaches can live for a week after their head gets cut off.
18
A year is the amount of time it takes the Earth to make a full
revolution around the sun. If you are 12 years old here on Earth,
you’d be only 6 on Mars because it takes about twice as long for
Mars to make the trip.
19
Dragonflies can see in every direction at once. Good luck sneaking
up on one!20
Astronauts stretch up to three inches taller in outer space due to the
lack of gravity.
Incredible Center of Gravity Experiment
Be amazed by the physics concept of changing the
center of gravity.DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• String
• A filled water bottle
• 3 toothpicks
• Something heavy (like a stack of books and a milk jug)
WHAT’S GOING ON?
By constructing the bridge, you change the center of gravity from
being over the table to being even with the table. That’s a little
hard to understand, so just say this if anyone asks how you did it:
magic!
Tie the string around the water bottle opening and create a loop
about a foot or two long.
Place a toothpick on the edge of a table, partly sticking out.
Place the heavy object on the end.
Hang the water bottle from the toothpick.Use one toothpick to form a little bridge with the string loop.
Take the third toothpick and connect the edge of the table
toothpick to the bridge toothpick.Remove the heavy object and see that the bottle remains
hanging!Measure the Speed of Light With Chocolate
A science experiment with yummy results.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A full-size chocolate bar (Hershey’s works great)
• A microwave oven
• A calculator
• A rulerRemove the rotating plate in your microwave if it has one.
Put the chocolate bar on a paper plate with the smooth side
facing up.
Microwave it on high for about 15 seconds, until you start to see
two melted spots forming.
Measure the distance between the closest edges of the melted
spots in centimeters. This distance shows where the light wave
went in and came out of the chocolate. That number equals half
a microwave wavelength.
Use your calculator to divide that number by 100. This gives
you the distance in meters. Multiply that number by two to get
the full wavelength distance.
Look inside the door of your microwave (or behind it) to find a
sticker that has information about the machine. Look for the
frequency number. Most will have a frequency of 2450 MHz,
which equals 2,450,000,000 waves per second.
Multiply the wavelength distance number you got in step 5 by
the frequency number in step 6. You get a number close to
300,000,000? Well, 299,792,458 meters/second is the speed of
light! Now it’s time to figure out how to turn your microwave into
a time machine. (Or to eat your experiment.)A SPEEDY HISTORY OF
ROLLER COASTERS
Harnessing the laws of physics has never
been more fun.
1600s
Long before roller coasters and the “you must be this tall to ride”
sign, Russian daredevils slid down 70-foot man-made hills of ice.1817
The French get the ice-slide idea on track in Paris to create the
first roller coaster.
1873
A coal-mine railroad in Pennsylvania is converted into a passenger
ride. Ulysses S. Grant, Thomas Edison, and many others pay five
cents each to ride.
1884
U.S. inventor LaMarcus Adna Thompson designs the first Coney
Island coaster in Brooklyn, NY; Switchback Railway involves
coasting down 600 feet of wooden track at a breathtaking six mph.
1927
The 2640-foot Coney Island Cyclone causes a sensation when it
opens with speeds of 60 mph and an 85-foot plunge. (It is still in
operation today!)1959
Disneyland’s Matterhorn in Anaheim, California is the first tubular￾steel-track roller coaster in the world.
1992
Design firm Bolliger & Mabillard builds the first inverted coaster,
Batman: The Ride, for Six Flags Great America in Illinois. Cars run
on the underside of the tracks, with riders’ legs dangling.
2010
Ferrari World in Abu Dhabi unveils Formula Rossa; it goes from 0
to 150 mph in 4.9 seconds, the fastest in the world.
2013
Six Flags Magic Mountain in California unveils plans for Full
Throttle, a roller coaster with the tallest loop in the world—160 feet
in the sky.2022
SeaWorld Orlando opens the Ice Breaker roller coaster. The ride
features a reverse launch that flies along a 93-foot-tall spike with a
100-degree angle, the steepest vertical drop in Florida.
DID YOU KNOW?
Roller coasters don’t have engines because they rely on gravity to
propel them. As a coaster is pulled up a hill, its potential energy
increases. Then that energy is released as kinetic energy as the
coaster makes it over the hill and gravity takes over (and you start
screaming your head off).build an air pump
WATER BOTTLE ROCKET
Get pumped up for this high-flying vehicle.
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
ADULT NEEDED
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• Electric drill with 1
/16, 
5
/32”, and ¼” bits
• One No. 4 size rubber stopper (1” long, 1” diameter at the fat
end)
• One 8” length of 3
/16” (outside diameter) copper tubing
• Bicycle pump with inflation needle
• Heavy card stock
• One two-liter plastic bottle
• Duct tape
• One drinking straw
• Four 1” square wood blocks
• One ½” plywood board, 12” to 16” square• One ¼” threaded steel rod, 18” long
• Four ¼” nuts
• Two washers, ¼” hole, 1” diameterMAKE THE STOPPER ASSEMBLY
Drill a 1
/16-inch hole through the middle of the stopper.
Widen the hole by drilling the 5
/32-inch bit about ½ inch into the
top (wider part) of the stopper.
Insert the copper tubing into the 5
/32-inch hole.
Push the inflation needle into the hole in the bottom of the
stopper so that it feeds into the copper tube.BUILD THE ROCKET
Make fins from card stock; attach to the bottle with duct tape.
Tape the eight-inch drinking straw to the side of the bottle
(oriented from top to bottom).
BUILD THE LAUNCHPAD
Attach square blocks to the corners of the launch platform
(plywood), using quick-setting glue or 1¼-inch wood screws.
Place the rocket in the center of the launch platform and mark
the spot directly below the plastic straw.
Drill a ¼-inch hole through the mark; insert the steel rod into the
hole and fix in place with nuts and washers.
Prepare the hydro-pump rocket for launch.
Attach the bicycle pump to the inflation needle.
Fill the bottle one-third full with water, below the top of the
copper tube.
Push the stopper assembly firmly into the bottle’s mouth.
Invert the rocket and slide the soda straw onto the rod.
TIME FOR LAUNCH!Pump air into the rocket. The amount of pressure required to
fire the rocket will vary, depending on how clean the seal
between the rubber stopper and the rocket is and how firmly the
stopper is placed.
After several pumps, the pressure inside the rocket will be great
enough to overcome the friction holding the stopper in place.
Now comes the cool part as the stopper releases from the
rocket. The rocket launches high into the air, shooting a trail of
water behind it. Zoom!LET’S GO STROLLING
IN OUTER SPACE
A history of spacewalks. (Do not read if you are afraid of
heights!)
March 18, 1965
ALEXEI LEONOV’S FIRST SPACE WALK
Alexei Leonov became the first man to perform an EVA (extra￾vehicular activity) in space, exiting his Voskhod 2 capsule for 12
minutes. The vacuum of space caused Leonov’s spacesuit to inflate
more than was anticipated. He had to force air out of his spacesuit to
re-enter the airlock of the craft.
June 3, 1965
EDWARD WHITE BECOMES THE FIRST AMERICAN
SPACEWALKER
Astronaut Edward White, who took America’s first spacewalk,
described ending his 36-minute spacewalk and going back into the
Gemini 4 spacecraft as the “saddest moment of my life.”
November 12-14, 1966
BUZZ ALDRIN ON THE GEMINI 12
Buzz Aldrin spent three days in 1966 making spacewalks, the
longest at 2 hours and 18 minutes, during which he installed a series
of cameras on the craft. The next day, he completed the first
successful complex spacewalk and proved a number of technologies
to be used in the Apollo missions.January 16, 1969
FIRST TWO-PERSON SPACEWALK
Yevgeni Khrunov and Aleksei Yeliseyev became the team behind the
first two-person EVA when the Soyuz 4 docked with the Soyuz 5
capsule. The two transferred between modules to ensure a
successful docking.
July 20, 1969
HUMANS WALK ON THE MOON
Neil Armstrong and Aldrin became the first men to walk on the moon
after landing on the surface during the Apollo 11 mission. The
descent of the Eagle hit trouble when the craft almost ran out of fuel,
but the two landed, marking the first of five moon visits and making
history.
May 25, 1973
SKYLAB REPAIRS
To get America’s first space station to work correctly in space,
astronaut Paul Weitz made a spacewalk to repair the solar array (a
collection of solar panels) so it could deploy properly, saving the
mission and marking the first space station EVA.
April 7, 1983
FIRST SPACE SHUTTLE EVA
Story Musgrave and Donald Peterson were the first astronauts to
perform an EVA from the new Space Shuttle program during missionSTS-6, where they performed tests in the cargo bay of the
Challenger.
February 7, 1984
FIRST UNTETHERED SPACEWALK
Using a pack called the Manned Maneuvering Unit, astronaut Bruce
McCandless became the first spacewalker to float freely,
unconnected to a spacecraft.
July 25, 1984
FIRST WOMAN TO WALK IN SPACE
Russian cosmonaut Svetlana Savitskaya becomes the first woman
to successfully perform an EVA during 1984’s Salyut 7 VE-4 mission.
NASA astronaut Kathryn Sullivan performed an EVA in October
1984, becoming the first American woman to do so.
December 6-9, 1993
FIRST HUBBLE SERVICING
The Hubble Space Telescope is located 347 miles above the Earth.
That’s low Earth orbit, but it’s far from most shuttle missions. (The
ISS orbits 249 miles above the Earth.) Repairing Hubble was risky,
but a series of four EVAs over the course of four days in 1993
corrected imaging problems with the telescope and enabled the
breathtaking views we’ve seen over the last two decades.
October 18, 2019
FIRST ALL-WOMAN TEAM IN SPACE
Astronauts Christina Koch and Jessica Meir’s spacewalk outside the
International Space Station makes history as the first female team.DID YOU KNOW?
In America, we call them “astronauts.” In Russia, they are called
“cosmonauts.” In China, they’re known as “taikonauts.”LET’S GO FIND SOME FOSSILS
Dinosaur expert “Dino” Don Lessem worked
on Jurassic Park and builds incredible life￾sized robot dinosaurs for museums. He has
also hunted for fossils all around the world.
Here are his tips for finding one of your own.
YOU HAVE A PRETTY GOOD CHANCE
“Eight out of 10 dinosaurs are discovered by people who are not
professionals, and many of them are found by kids. That’s because
we really don’t have an idea where they are. We know a general
region where dinosaurs lived, but the tricky thing is the land has to
be the exact opposite of how it was millions of years ago. Fossils got
preserved when dinosaurs died in a wet area and were covered by
mud. So, you need an area that was wet then, but now is dry.
Otherwise, they’ll still be underwater.”TELL-TALE SIGNS OF FOSSILS
“Fossils have lots of tiny holes. That’s where minerals got into the
bone and made them very hard, like rocks. But remember, fossils
aren’t just bones. Eggs and footprints can get fossilized too. For
bones, you want to not just look for little holes, but also pay attention
to the shape. Bone fossils have rounded ends, or are curved like one
of your ribs, but only much bigger.”
DINO TEETH ARE A COMMON FIND
“You can find a lot of dinosaur teeth because when they were alive,
dinosaurs would break off a lot of teeth when they were killing and
eating other dinosaurs. They didn’t care because another set of teeth
would grow back in. Teeth fossils are pretty easy to recognize, meat
eaters had serrated teeth where the edge kind of looks like a steak
knife.”
HOW TO REMOVE A FOSSIL
“If you find something you think is a fossil, you want to dig around a
wide area to remove it from the ground or rock. Then you use tools
like a toothbrush or screwdriver to gently remove the surrounding
material. If you dig right into the bone, there’s a good chance you’ll
break it.”
ALWAYS LOOK DOWN
“A meat-eating dinosaur related to the Allosaurus was discovered on
the coast of Portugal by a little girl. She was out walking around with
her brother, who was a paleontologist, and had to go to the
bathroom. She went behind something to get some privacy and she
looked down and realized she was looking at dinosaur bones.”DINOSAURS HAD ACNE
“The first fossil I found was in Eastern Montana. I found a huge lump
that was rounded on one end and had tiny holes in it. I brought it to
an expert, and he said, ‘Eh, that’s a bony pimple from the head of a
triceratops. We got a million of those. You can keep it.’ So, it is sitting
in my living room right now.
I think it is very cool. To be the first person to touch something that
was a living animal 65 million years ago? That’s a great feeling.”
PRACTICE DIGGING UP FOSSILS IN YOUR KITCHEN
Dino Don says a good way to practice gently removing a fossil is
with a chocolate chip cookie. “Use a toothpick and see if you can
remove a full chip without breaking the cookie.” Or eating it.
VACATION BACK IN TIME
Here are some great places to see fossils in person.
• Badlands National Park, South Dakota
• Big Bend National Park, Texas
• Dinosaur National Park, Colorado and Utah• Grand Teton National Park, Wyoming
• Glacier National Park, Montana
DID YOU KNOW?
The most complete skeleton of a T. Rex ever found is nicknamed
“Sue,” after the paleontologist Sue Hendrickson who found it.THE KING OF SCI-FI
MONSTERS
Thankfully, Godzilla doesn’t exist in real life.
But if he did, here are some things his vet
should know.
Since his first awakening, the radioactive, fire-spewing kaiju (a
Japanese monster) has grown 200 feet and put on more than
150,000 tons. Godzilla is now 30 stories tall and weighs as much as
a cruise ship. No actual animal could take the pressure of being so
massive: It would overheat, its organs would implode, and it would
need to mainline butter to get enough calories. For fun, we surveyed
scientists to help us break down the beast’s biology. If Godzilla were
real, he would be an incredible specimen.WEIGHT PROBLEMS
Given his height of 200 feet, Godzilla would weigh 164,000 tons. The
heaviest creature to ever walk the earth in real life was the 100-ton
dinosaur Argentinosaurus, which stood 70 feet tall, was 115 feet
long, and had four limbs to distribute its enormous heft.BAD TO THE BONE
The force on Godzilla’s bones is roughly 20 times greater than the
force on a T. Rex’s, so his bones would need to be phenomenally
strong—about twice as tough as some titanium alloys. Godzilla’s
cartilage would be about 12 times stronger than a human’s,
preventing his knees from exploding like overripe tomatoes—and
making him the envy of basketball players everywhere.
THICK SKIN
Godzilla’s exterior is tough. (Soldiers trying to kill him with puny
rifles, really?) His crocodile-like hide would be embedded bony
deposits that are like chain mail.
BAD BREATH
Godzilla is able to shoot atomic breath out of his mouth. So, if we
were G’s vet, we’d avoid telling them to open up and say “Aaaah.”
DID YOU KNOW?
Paleontologist Kenneth Carpenter named a dinosaur he
discovered after Godzilla, using his Japanese name Gojira.
Carpenter says the Gojirasaurus was a meat eater that lived 210
million years ago.O
WHAT’S UP WITH
For decades, conspiracy theorists say this
secret military base in the Nevada desert has
aliens behind its closed doors. Are they
right?
n early mornings, eagle-eyed visitors in the Las Vegas
desert can spot strange lights in the sky moving up and
down. No, it’s not a UFO. It’s actually the semisecret
commuter airline using the call-sign “Janet” that transports workers
from Las Vegas’s McCarran Airport to Area 51, just north.
Since the base opened in the 1950s, “alien” aircraft have been
reported. Though unlikely, the base’s secretive history has invited
conspiracies to run wild about what is truly concealed in the southern
Nevada desert. But if not aliens, what is hiding behind the walls of
Area 51?When the Soviet Union lowered the Iron Curtain and attempted to
block itself from contact with its allies and the Western world in the
late 1940s, there was a near-total intelligence blackout to the rest of
the world. Worried about the USSR’s potential technology and
intentions, President Eisenhower approved the secret development
of a high-altitude spy plane called the U-2 in November 1954. The
test site for the secret plane? The southern Nevada desert.
At the time, commercial airlines were flying at altitudes between
10,000 and 20,000 feet, compared to up to 38,000 feet today. Aircraft
in the U-2 program could reach 60,000 feet. So, in 1944, seeing a
plane at this seemingly unreachable height looked completely
otherworldly to anyone below.
Commercial pilots started reporting the peculiarities right away. The
base couldn’t just announce that it was working on a spy plane, so
“natural phenomena” or “high-altitude weather research” became the
government’s go-to explanations for the “UFO” sightings.
For decades, that answer worked. But then, in 1989, conspiracy
theorist Bob Lazar went on Las Vegas local news and said that he’d
seen aliens and had helped build alien spacecrafts while working at
the base.
Without confirmation about what truly existed inside the base, wild
speculation reigned for decades. Most theories pertained to galactic
visitors tucked away somewhere, but other rumors were just as—if
not more—sensational.
One of the more colorful rumors insists that the infamous 1947
Roswell crash was actually a Soviet aircraft piloted by mutated little
people and the wreckage remains on the grounds of Area 51.
Another is that the U.S. government filmed the 1969 moon landing in
one of the base’s hangars.The CIA declassified parts of a report about the truth of the U-2
program that explained details of many of the early sightings by
commercial pilots. But the lore of Area 51 remains strong.
Fact or fiction, people still gawk to see what lies beyond those chain
link fences. And if anything is true about extraterrestrial beings, it’s
that they attract a lot of tourists.
In 1996, the state of Nevada renamed Route 375 — the highway
closest to Area 51 — as the “Extraterrestrial Highway,” and along the
road visitors will also see places like the Alien Research Center and
the Little A’Le’Inn. (Say it out loud to get it.)
While tourists are not permitted inside the base, it is legal to drive up
to its front and back gates. Just remember, it is in the middle of the
desert. So forget about E.T. wanting to phone home — E.T. wants a
Gatorade and some sunscreen!
HOW TO TALK TO ALIENS
Douglas Vakoch, founder of Messaging Extraterrestrial
Intelligence (METI), explains how his company is reaching
out.
For decades we’ve listened for messages from intelligent life
without success. “But what if other civilizations are also simply
listening and not transmitting?” asks Vakoch, who founded METI in
2015 and is the former director of Interstellar Message
Composition for the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence.
METI targets stars that are only 10 to 20 light-years away in hopes
of establishing dialogue that can take place over mere decades,
and not thousands of years. Using optical and radio transmitters, itsends pulses that convey basic math and physics. “We’re likely to
have those in common with extraterrestrials able to exchange
radio signals,” he says.
They’ve yet to make contact, but the recent increase in discoveries
of potentially habitable exoplanets, such as the TRAPPIST-1
system, announced in February, gives METI 52 planets to focus
on amid a galaxy of 100 billion options.
So, when are we going to hear back? “If we are incredibly lucky,
we could potentially receive a reply within a lifetime,” Vakoch says.
More realistically, he admits, it could take thousands of years.HOW TO SAFELY JUMP INTO A
BLACK HOLE
What would it be like to visit—and even enter
—a black hole? We asked the experts.
KNOW WHAT YOU’RE GETTING INTO
Black holes form when matter condenses into a tiny amount of
space, like when a massive star collapses in on itself. This creates a
point of infinitely strong gravity — a singularity — and a surrounding
region that traps anything that gets too close, called the event
horizon. Not even light can escape, which explains why it is called a
black hole.DON’T TURN INTO DINNER
Gravity is so intense that as you approach the event horizon you’d
get stretched from head to toe in a process called spaghettification.
(Yes, that means you’d get stretched out like a strand of spaghetti!)
BIGGER IS BETTER
To survive long enough to explore a black hole, you must find a big
one, says Janna Levin, Ph.D., an astrophysicist at Barnard College
of Columbia University. A supermassive black hole, like the one
within M87, is over 3 million times wider than Earth. This gives you
plenty of room to look around before you cross the event horizon—
about 12 billion miles.
You would simply float across, and keep floating, for a while. In the
biggest black holes, Levin says, “you might be able to make it for a
year before you are ultimately demolished in the center.”
LOOK OUT FOR THE RINGS!
Avoid black holes with accretion disks, which are fast-spinning rings
of matter. They can heat up to millions of degrees and create “some
of the largest magnetic fields that we’ve measured,” says Leo
Rodriguez, Ph.D., a theoretical physicist at Grinnell College in Iowa.
Magnetic fields this strong would shut down your nervous system
and stretch your atoms into skinny rods until you dissolve.THE VIEW WILL BE AMAZING
If you purposely or accidentally cross the event horizon, you’re in for
a spectacular show. As you approach the black hole, you’ll see the
light of the universe warped by the black hole’s intense gravity. “It will
be like crossing into a funhouse mirror,” Levin says. The light from
stars will smear across the sky and you’ll be given a window to the
universe that contains eons of trapped light. “You would be able to
see an entire history of the black hole since it was formed,”
Rodriguez says.
WANNA GO BACK HOME?
There is one potential exit, but you shouldn’t count on it. Your black
hole could double as a wormhole, which would transport you to
another part of the universe. That sounds fun, unless you considerthe fact that at that point, you would be pulled apart into your most
basic particles. Ouch!Make the Best Paper Airplane Ever
Barnaby Wainfan has worked on dozens of innovative
aircraft. So, you can bet his paper airplane design is
pretty good!
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A sheet of paper
• Pen or pencil
• Scotch tape
• A paperclipDraw this airplane shape in the middle of a sheet of paper.
Fold the paper in half down the center of the plane. Cut along
the perimeter to get a perfectly symmetrical aircraft.
Now fold: first, the wings, down along line No. 1. Then grab the
tail in the center and fold it in the opposite direction along the
same line, so it extends above the wings. Next, fold down along
line No. 2.
At the seam where the wings meet, use a piece of Scotch tape
to hold them together.
Add a standard paper clip beside the nose to balance the
weight of the thinner nose with the plane’s wide wings. Last,
fold the flaps up along line No. 3.
After a test flight, troubleshoot by adjusting those folds. If the
plane nosedives, bend the rear flaps to make them more
vertical. If it swoops up and then dives straight down, flatten
them.Sweet Science: How to Make Ice Cream With
a Bag
DIFFICULTY LEVEL
EASY-PEASY
STUFF YOU’LL NEED
• A resealable plastic bag
• 1 cup half-and-half
• 2 tablespoons granulated sugar
• ½ teaspoon pure vanilla extract
• 3 cups ice
• ⅓ cup kosher salt
• Toppings of your choiceIn a small resealable plastic bag, combine half-and-half, sugar,
and vanilla. Push out excess air and seal.
Into a large resealable plastic bag, combine ice and salt. Place
a small bag inside the bigger bag and shake vigorously, seven
to 10 minutes, until ice cream has hardened.
Remove from the bag and enjoy with your favorite ice cream
toppings.ICE CREAM FUN FACTS
TRY NOT TO GET BRAIN FREEZE AS YOU READ!
• The earliest version of ice cream was made in ancient China
around 3,000 BC. It was crushed ice combined with fruit juices.
No sprinkles?!
• Twelve gallons of milk are needed to make just one gallon of
ice cream. Thanks, cows!
• The third Sunday of July is National Ice Cream Day. How will
you celebrate?INDEX
NOTE: Page numbers in italics indicate projects.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W
X Y Z
A
Abominable Snowman, 23
airplane, best paper, 138–139
Aliens, 134–135
Ananov, Sergey, 16–17
Anderson, Charles, 80–81
animal tracks, identifying, 12
antibiotics, 119, 120–121
Arctic, marooned with polar bears in, 16–17
Area 51, UFOs, 134–135
art and entertainment, 71–91. See also movies
about
creativity and, 71
terms to know, 71
build pinhole camera, 77
create self-carving jack-o-lantern, 83
creativity secrets and, 62–63
DIY fog machine, 83
far out facts about movies, music, books, and gaming, 72–73
freaky reads, 91
homemade zombie pit, 82
make fantastical beast puppet show, 84–85
play the ukulele, 86–87start your rock star journey, 86–87
swinging sand art, 76
writing scary story, 90–91
artery, defined, 49
B
bad idea files (do not try at home)
building roller coaster, 41
dining room chair sled, 107
motorcycle powered paddle boat, 57
rat trap toy catapult, 85
ball toss carnival game, 36–37
balloon (water) launcher, 18
barstool races, 105
baseball, 96–97
basil growing, 24
basketball, 98–99, 108–109
Batman, mini, 65
beast puppet show, making, 84–85
bet, easy, 55
Bigfoot, 22
bike wash, drive-thru, 19
bipedal, defined, 29
bird feeder, from recycled bottle, 25
black hole, jumping into, 136–137
boat, motorcycle-powered, 57
Bolt, Usain, 57
bookmark (sword), making, 45
books, scary reads, 91
bowling, perfect hook shot, 106
brain
big, big money on “Jeopardy!,” 67
far out facts about, 50–51neurons, 49, 50–51
parts and their functions, 50, 51
brain freeze, 51
breaking ball, defined, 93
builds, incredible, 29–47. See also tools
about
overview of, 29
terms to know, 29
ball toss carnival game, 36–37
building materials examples, 30, 31
candy delivery chute, 40
create tie-dye shirt, 46–47
duct tape uses and, 34
far out facts about, 30–31
floating “pool” table, 42–43
handheld water cannon, 44
make glue, 33
make sword bookmark, 45
robots, robotics and, 38–39
roller coasters and, 41
shelters (teepee or igloo), 14–15
business, starting your own, 60–61
C
camera, pin-hole, building, 77
candy, fun-size, facts, 40
candy delivery chute, making, 40
car cartoon character, designing, 75
card games, 110–111
card tricks, 52
cat, dialing 911, 64
catapult, rat trap toy, 85
catapult game, basketball, 108–109celebrity, defined, 71
centripetal force, 93, 116
Chimera, 23
chives, growing, 24
chocolate, measuring speed of light with, 123
clothes, sewing, 47
confidence, building, 58–59
constellations, spotting, 20
cornhole set, making, 112–113
creativity, secrets of, 62–63
crosscut, defined, 29
cubism, defined, 71
curve ball, throwing, 96
D
D’Amato, Keira, 57
dartboard pointers, 107
decoder, puzzle for using, 1
decoder key, 141
difficulty levels of projects, 6
diner disaster, avoidance of, 64
dog, tricks to teach, 26–27
dogs, shaking dry, 27
duct tape uses, 34
E
Earth
far out facts about, 10–11
find your latitude on, 21
electricity
static, project using, 56
thermoelectric generator (TEG) for, 57
turning body into a battery, 56element, defined, 119
entrepreneur, defined, 49. See also business, starting your own
eon, defined, 119
esports, 71, 72
exoplanets, 119, 135
F
far out facts, 10–11, 30–31, 50–51, 72–73, 94–95, 120–121
fastest man, 57
feet (12 inches), symbol for, 29
fog machine, DIY, 83
follow-through, 93, 97, 98, 100, 106, 107
football, 100–101
fossils, finding, 130–131
Fotheringham, Aaron James, 57
founder, defined, 49
G
games. See also sports
be Scrabble master, 115
build floating “pool” table, 42–43
card games (Crazy Eights, Go Fish, Acey Deucy), 110–111
make ball toss carnival game, 36–37
make cornhole set, 112–113
make giant Jenga tower, 114
math mind game, 54
rules of ping-pong, 43
garden, herb, growing indoors, 24
generator, thermoelectric (TEG), 56
glue, making, 33
glycerin, 71, 83
goals, setting, confidence and, 58
Godzilla, 132–133GPS, defined, 9
gravity, center of, experiment, 122
gravity, defined, 9
H
half-pipe, science of getting big air, 116–117
Halloween/spooky projects, 82–85. See also scary story, writing
hammer, using, 33, 35
handheld water cannon, 44
hemisphere, defined, 9
herb garden, growing indoors, 24
homework, tips for faster completion, 66–67
Hubble Space Telescope, 119, 129
hypothermia, defined, 9
I
ice cream, making with a bag, 140
icons, project difficulty, 6
ideas, secrets of creativity for, 62–63
igloo, building, 15
inches, symbol for, 29
J
jack-o-lantern, creating self-carving, 83
Jenga tower, making, 114
Jennings, Ken, 67
“Jeopardy!” (TV show), 67, 69
Jersey Devil, 23
K
Kinetic Grand Championship, 104–105
kinetics, 93, 104Kraken, 22, 23
Krispy Kreme Challenge, 105
L
latitude, defined, 9
latitude, finding, 21
Legos, custom Star Destroyer from, 80–81
lithium-ion, defined, 49
Loch Ness Monster, 22, 23
M
magic tricks, 52–53
marathon record, for women, 57
marooned in Arctic, with polar bears, 16–17
meditation, starting, 63
Medusa, 22
memorization secrets, 68–69
meter, defined, 119
microbes, 9, 10
Minotaur, 23
mint, growing, 24
mnemonic devices, 68–69
motorcycle-powered paddle boat, 57
movies. See also art and entertainment
animated, making, 74
design car cartoon character, 75
far out facts about music, books, gaming and, 72–73
how super fan built custom Star Destroyer, 80–81
start your own YouTube channel, 88–89
turn backyard into theater for, 78–79
mythical creatures field guide, 22–23N
nails, hammering, 33, 35
needle, threading, 47
neuron, defined, 49
911, true stories, 64, 65
Nobel Prize, 119, 120
O
oceans
names of, 69
percent of living creatures in, 11
tides, gravitation and, 11
outdoor projects and facts, 9–27
about
overview of, 9
terms to know, 9
build a teepee, 14
build an igloo, 15
drive-thru bike wash, 19
far out facts about Earth, 10–11
find your latitude using the sky, 21
grow indoor herb garden, 24
identifying animal tracks, 12
make recycled bottle bird feeder, 25
marooned in Arctic with polar bears, 16–17
mythical creatures field guide, 22–23
pet tricks, 26–27
plants to avoid in the woods, 13
spotting constellations, 20
water balloon launcher, 18P
paper, sticking to wall without tape, 55
pet tricks, 26–27
physics
about
term defined, 29
bending laws of, 38–39
center of gravity experiment, 122
make wild design using, 76
roller coaster history and, 124–125
ping-pong, killer shot, 103
plants, poisonous, to avoid, 13
poison plants (ivy, hemlock, sumac), 13
polar bears, 16–17
pool (game), aiming shot in, 102
pool (swimming), building floating table, 42–43
potential energy, 119, 125
power-tool drag races, 105
prodigy, defined, 71
project difficulty levels, 6
projects, adult needed
about
icon indicating, 6
build air pump water bottle rocket, 126–127
drive-thru bike wash, 19
make ball toss carnival game, 36–37
make super movie screen, 78–79
projects, easy peasy
about
icon indicating, 6
build pinhole camera, 77
candy delivery chute, 40
card tricks, stretching rainbows illusion, 52–53center of gravity experiment, 122
create tie-dye shirt, 46–47
design car cartoon character, 75
DIY fog machine, 83
find your latitude using the sky, 21
hammering nails, 35
make animated movie, 74
make beast puppet show, 84–85
make giant Jenga tower, 114
make glue, 33
make ice cream with a bag, 140
make recycled bottle bird feeder, 25
make sword bookmark, 45
making best paper airplane, 138–139
math mind game, 54
measure speed of light with chocolate, 123
start your own YouTube channel, 88–89
sticking paper to wall without tape, 55
swinging sand art, 76
water balloon launcher, 18
projects, get some help
about
icon indicating, 6
build a teepee, 14
build an igloo, 15
build floating “pool” table, 42–43
build handheld water cannon, 44
create self-carving jack-o-lantern, 83
grow indoor herb garden, 24
homemade zombie pit, 82
make basketball catapult game, 108–109
make cornhole set, 112–113
prototype, defined, 29protractor, 9, 21
puppet, beast shadow, 84–85
PVC, defined, 29
R
radioactivity, 119, 120, 132
rafter square, defined, 29
rainbows, stretching, illusion, 53
rat trap toy catapult, 85
real life adventures
marooned in Arctic with polar bears, 16–17
space walks in history, 128–129
superheroes in action, 64–65
ripcut, defined, 29
robots, 38–39, 130
rock star journey, starting, 86–87
rocket, water bottle, building, 126–127
rocket hall of fame, 129
roller coasters, 41, 124–125
running stitch, learning, 47
S
sandpaper, using, 33
Savickas, Zydrunas “The Big Z,” 57
scaling laws, defined, 29
scary story, writing, 90–91
science. See also physics
about
overview of, 119
terms to know, 119
American rocket hall of fame, 129
Area 51, UFOs and aliens, 134–135
astronauts, cosmonauts, taikonauts, 129build air pump water bottle rocket, 126–127
center of gravity experiment, 122
far out facts, 120–121
find fossils, 130–131
Godzilla facts and, 132–133
of half-pipe (getting big air), 116–117
jumping into black hole, 136–137
make ice cream with a bag, 140
making best paper airplane, 138–139
measure speed of light with chocolate, 123
space walks in history, 128–129
sci-fi monsters, 132–133
Scrabble, playing, 115
screen (movie), making, 79
screwdriver, using, 33
self-publish, defined, 71
sewing things, 47
shelter, building, 14–15
Sirens, 23
sled, dining room chair as, 107
social media, mental health and, 59
space walks in history, 128–129
speed of light, measuring, 123
sports, 93–117. See also games
about
overview of, 93
terms to know, 93
aiming in pool, 102
barstool races, 105
baseball, 96–97
basketball, 98–99, 108–109
bowling, perfect hook shot, 106
crossover dribbling, 99dartboard pointers, 107
football, 100–101
getting killer ping-pong shot, 103
hitting baseball, 97
Kinetic Grand Championship, 104–105
Krispy Kreme Challenge, 105
make basketball catapult game, 108–109
power-tool drag races, 105
science of half-pipe (getting big air), 116–117
shooting 3-pointers, 98
strange races, 105
throwing curve balls, 96
throwing football spirals, 100–101
trivia, far out facts, 94–95
Star Destroyer, built from Legos, 80–81
static electricity, project using, 55
stress, calmness amid, 59
strongman, 57
superheroes in action, 64–65
superpowers, unlocking, 49–69
about
overview of, 49
terms to know, 49
building confidence, 58–59
calmness in stressful situations, 59
creativity secrets, 62–63
far out facts about your brain, 50–51 (See also brain)
getting homework done faster, 66–67
getting on “Jeopardy!” Teen Tournament, 69
human powerhouses and their feats, 57
magic tricks/illusions (card tricks, stretching rainbows), 52–53
math mind game, 54
meditation and, 63memorization secrets, 68–69
starting your own business, 60–61
sticking paper to wall without tape, 55
turning body into a battery, 56
sustainable, defined, 29
sweat, defined, 93
sword bookmark, making, 45
symbols for inches and feet, 29
T
teepee, building, 14
terms to know, 9, 29, 49, 71, 93, 119
thermoelectric generator (TEG), 56
threading needle, 47
tie-dye shirt, creating, 46–47
tools
basics of basic tools, 33
duct tape uses, 34
hammer use, 33, 35
power-tool drag races, 105
sandpaper use, 33
screwdriver use, 33
test about, 32
tracks (animal), identifying, 12
triathlon, defined, 93
U
ukulele, playing, 86–87
V
vampires, 22, 23W
water balloon launcher, 18
water cannon, handheld, 44
whale, dolphin helping, 65
wheelchair records, 57
whoops, defined, 29
women’s marathon record, 57
world domination, 119
writer’s block, 49, 62
writing scary story, 90–91
X
X-ray vision, defined, 49
Y
YouTube channel, starting, 88–89
YouTube Idea Factory, 89
Z
zombie pit, making, 82
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W
X Y Z
DECODER KEY
A ✕
B ◆
C ❙
D ★
E ✳F ■
G ➔
H |||
I ∆
J
K
L
M
N
O ☺
P
Q
R +
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z ||Copyright © 2023 by Hearst Magazine Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
The written instructions in this volume are intended for the personal use of the reader and
may be reproduced for that purpose only. Any other use, especially commercial use, is
forbidden under law without the written permission of the copyright holder.
The book’s mention of products made by various companies does not imply that those
companies endorse the book. The brand-name products mentioned in the book are
trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective companies.
All activities in this book should be performed with adult supervision. The publisher and
authors do not assume any responsibility for damages or injuries results from any activities.
Cover, book design, and illustrations by Russell Shaw Library of Congress Cataloging-in￾Publication Data Available on request Published by Hearst Home, an imprint of Hearst
Books/
Hearst Communications, Inc.
300 W 57th Street
New York, NY 10019
Popular Mechanics, Hearst Home, the Hearst Home logo, and Hearst Books are registered
trademarks of Hearst Communications, Inc.
For information about custom editions, special sales, premium and corporate purchases:
hearst.com/magazines/hearst-books
ISBN 9781950785773Ebook ISBN 9781950785698
a_prh_6.0_142850156_c1_r0ANSWER KEY (for The Tool Test)
1. D
2. B
3. D
4. B
5. A
6. D
ANSWER KEY (for Super Sports Trivia)
1. C
2. B
3. A
4. C
5. A
6. B
7. C
8. C
9. B
10. C
