PragmatismThe MIT Press Essential Knowledge Series
A complete list of books in this series can be found online at
https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/series/mit-press-essential-knowledge-series.Pragmatism
John R. Shook
The MIT Press | Cambridge, Massachusetts | London, England© 2023 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval)
without permission in writing from the publisher.
The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided comments on
drafts of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential for establishing the
authority and quality of our publications. We acknowledge with gratitude the contributions of these
otherwise uncredited readers.
This book was set in Chaparral Pro by New Best-set Typesetters Ltd.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Shook, John R., author.
Title: Pragmatism / John R. Shook.
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, 2023 | Series: MIT Press essential
knowledge series | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2021057612 | ISBN 9780262544610 (paperback)
Subjects: LCSH: Pragmatism.
Classification: LCC B8332 .S48 2023 | DDC 144/.3—dc23/eng/20211202
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021057612
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
d_r0Contents
Series Foreword
Preface
1 Pragmatism: An Old Name for Newly Confirmed Ideas
2 Principles of Pragmatism
3 Permanence and Impermanence
4 Context and Reality
5 Truth in Consequences
6 Being and Thinking
7 Pragmatism versus Epistemology
8 Transactional Knowledge
9 Ecological Mentality
10 Society, Self, and Mind
11 Culture and Person
Acknowledgments
Glossary
Notes
Further ReadingIndexSeries Foreword
The MIT Press Essential Knowledge series offers accessible, concise,
beautifully produced pocket-size books on topics of current interest. Written
by leading thinkers, the books in this series deliver expert overviews of
subjects that range from the cultural and the historical to the scientific and
the technical.
In today’s era of instant information gratification, we have ready access
to opinions, rationalizations, and superficial descriptions. Much harder to
come by is the foundational knowledge that informs a principled
understanding of the world. Essential Knowledge books fill that need.
Synthesizing specialized subject matter for nonspecialists and engaging
critical topics through fundamentals, each of these compact volumes offers
readers a point of access to complex ideas.Preface
REALITY, VERITY, MENTALITY
Any book about an intellectual movement, limited to 50,000 words and
denied a subtitle, couldn’t cover everything implied by its title. A humble
preface leading with the fitting subtitle can apologize for what was not
written, as well as what was. Much about pragmatism is regrettably absent.
To speak in its defense, this book is neither a survey nor a summary. When
did pragmatism reach a finality, that it might be stated summarily?
To keep pragmatism useful, its key philosophical proposals can be
inventoried in preparation for further application. Chapters explain how
pragmatism thinks about what is real, what can be known, and what minds
are doing. This book seeks a wider audience than just philosophers, since
pragmatism was designed for impacts well beyond philosophy. Every
academic discipline has been influenced by pragmatism, and many rely on
its continued relevance. Having this book’s lessons in hand while looking
into principles of various fields can guide the non-philosopher through
philosophical foundations as they come into view.
As for philosophers, dense and direct chapters may seem more polemical
than practical. No apology seems necessary there. Clarity through contrast
with rival positions has philosophical merit. Charity has merit too.
Pragmatism has earned its reputation as a conciliator among “isms” to
negotiate bridgings and blendings.
All the same, pragmatism insists on revising or replacing rigid tenets that
have dominated Western thought. Intellectual confrontations, especially
when civilizations reach historical junctures, are unavoidable. At such
times, disciplinary cohesiveness is paramount, and supportive alliances
among philosophies have their place. Putting on record what pragmatism
distinctively offers could not be out of place either.
Far too many academic debts among pragmatist colleagues have
accumulated to be listed here. Let a dedication stand: To the memory ofJoseph Margolis (1924–2021), whose death dimmed, but could not
extinguish, the leading light of Columbia pragmatic naturalism.
Alexandria, Virginia
Summer 20221
Pragmatism
An Old Name for Newly Confirmed Ideas
“Pragmatism” names an intellectual movement with American origins, but
its ideas travel everywhere. Rarely does a philosophy join the great systems
of thought while securing a place in the popular imagination. Stoicism
illustrates that combination from antiquity, and humanism is the
Renaissance contribution, with liberalism, existentialism, and pragmatism
serving as modern examples.
While appealing to the modern mind’s wide curiosity and appetite for
exploration, pragmatist thinking is far older than its apt name. Precursors
and partners can be found in Western philosophies, Eastern thought, and
Indigenous wisdom traditions.
Perennial systems of thought ponder what it means to be human while
speculating about mind’s essence, life’s nature, and the cosmos’s origins.
Pragmatism finds our common humanity in the intelligent pursuit of earthly
opportunities and worthy aspirations.
No honest appreciation of what we accomplish as a species, from art and
ritual to technology and science, has yet disagreed. Disparaging our
practical intelligence and doubting human ideals is the occupation of
philosophies preferring unearthly pursuits and otherworldly ends. Pointedly
non-dualistic and humanistic, pragmatists offer integrations of mentality
and biological vitality within a dynamic cosmology. Life is not only worth
living, it is worth living better.
Pragmatism, a System
This book explains core views of pragmatism about reality, truth,
knowledge, science, mind, society, and culture. Along the way, contrasts aredrawn with tenets of rival worldviews. It culminates with pragmatism’s
theories of social psychology, ecological mentality, and philosophical
anthropology. There we must halt. However, this groundwork can guide the
reader’s further explorations of pragmatist approaches to normative areas
such as aesthetics, ethics, politics, law, technology, education, and religion.
Pragmatism’s primary exponents receive the most attention: Charles
Sanders Peirce (1839–1914), William James (1842–1910), John Dewey
(1859–1952), and George Herbert Mead (1863–1931). It would be
unpragmatic to expect good pragmatism only from its original thinkers.
Contemporary pragmatism is featured in many chapters. Key principles
from founders remain consistent with, and confirmed by, subsequent
scientific and scholarly advances.
Generations after the founders down to the present have reinvigorated
pragmatism with refined versions. Some have been called “neo￾pragmatism” or “new pragmatism.” Just a few years after Peirce’s death in
1914, Charles Morris, who was Mead’s colleague at the University of
Chicago, announced his “Neo-Pragmatism” with due genuflection towards
James and Dewey as well as Peirce. There have been “new” pragmatisms
ever since, in spirit if not in name.1
Many thinkers have effectively rediscovered pragmatism, while
unacquainted with its heritage. Some disavow “pragmatism” due to half￾remembered distortions of its founders kept in circulation by opposed
philosophies. Pragmatism carries on as a perennial philosophy based on
principles, not personalities. That openness is characteristic of pragmatism.
There is no esoteric discourse, obscure doctrine, or devout discipleship.
Whenever philosophical thought appreciates life’s historical contingencies
and intelligence’s productive capacities, it becomes more like pragmatism
in practice.
Pragmatism is unlike other “-isms” labelling specific theses or
ideologies, such as “socialism” and “capitalism” in economics, or
“conservativism” in politics. The “ism” of pragmatism denotes a systemic
worldview: cohesive principles and tenets for philosophy’s primary
domains. Pragmatist views on reality, truth, knowledge, and cognition
(topics for metaphysics, logic, epistemology, and philosophy of mind) are
coordinated with its approaches to morality, justice, beauty, and value
generally (treated in ethics, politics, aesthetics, and axiology).Pragmatism can therefore advise and critique theories about humanity,
language, culture, the arts, social organization, religion, government, law,
education, mathematics, science, technology, and any of life’s endeavors.
Unlike most philosophical schools of thought, pragmatism is applicable in
every humanistic and academic field, and many disciplinary advances have
contributed to pragmatism in return. Limited space prevents any survey of
pragmatic theories in aesthetics, ethics, politics, culture studies, philosophy
of science and technology, and philosophy of religion, although the last
chapters outline principled bases to those contributions.
Pragmatism has a system, it must be reiterated. This book is not yet
another exegetical survey of major pragmatists, one by one. Nor shall
pragmatism be treated as a cluster of renegade ideas sharing only a family
resemblance. Each pragmatist is worthy of close study, without question.
Contrasts among them are just as important as agreements. Many books
already explore divergences among their distinctive views.2 Commentaries
have attempted to discover two, three, four, or more pragmatisms, and even
within a single pragmatist’s writings!
If pragmatism could stand for almost anything, its intellectual value
would fall to practically nothing. After pragmatism has been reduced to
subjectivism or relativism, or linked to hedonism or utilitarianism, or
classed as yet another anti-foundationalism or post-modernism, little
meaning for pragmatism is left. As this book explains, pragmatism is not
divided or directionless. “Pragmatic” sounds contrary to “principled”—but
pragmatism offers principled stands about philosophy’s main areas and
perennial issues. This book explains why there is one philosophical
worldview, rightly called pragmatism, and upheld by pragmatists as they
enlarge its applicability to life.
Initial chapters of this book explain the foundations to pragmatism. It
was never just a theory of mind, knowledge, or truth, although those topics
earned pragmatism the most attention, and the most scorn. Only a complete
philosophical worldview could suffice to attain the goal of surmounting all
previous philosophies and achieving a reconciliation of the humanities with
the sciences.
Peirce led the way with the most original system since Baruch Spinoza,
Kant, and G. W. F. Hegel, uniting metaphysics, semiotics, and logic to
account for the growth of mind within the development of the cosmos. Histheories about truth and knowledge assisted James with his own empiricist
and pluralistic philosophy. Dewey in turn assembled his own version of
empirical naturalism to match his philosophy of culture. Contacts and
overlaps with the social and natural sciences are welcomed by such all￾encompassing philosophies.
Present-day social and behavioral sciences are reconfirming pragmatist
views. Contemporary pragmatism is allied with theories of developmental
psychology, the unconscious, reason–emotion–volition integration,
neuroplasticity, embodied cognition, and extended mentality. These theories
had prototypes in the writings of Classical pragmatists. Combating any
philosophy depicting the mind as basically passive, impressionable,
intuitive, reflective, representational, or mechanistic, the classical
pragmatists sought to understand mentality within its biological and social
environs.
Pragmatists refused to bifurcate what is natural apart from what is
cultural, lending philosophical support for scientific inquiries into the
origins of humanity’s distinctive proclivities for art, language, community,
and myth. Pragmatism is skeptical towards claims that rationalistic,
metaphysical, or theological frameworks are necessary for explaining
human creativity, reason, or personhood. In social theory and politics,
pragmatism emphasizes historicism, cultural diversity, social justice, and
liberal democracy.
Pragmatism would not have joined the great systems of philosophy, and
antagonized venerable worldviews, unless it offered novel and penetrating
views on fundamental matters about reality and our place in it. Pragmatism
is among a handful of movements which prioritizes change and
impermanence over form and permanence, deprioritizes necessity and
certainty for knowledge and truth, and depicts individuality and sociality as
codependently interfused.
Pragmatism is further distinguished by appealing to continuities,
contexts, and potentialities to overcome dualities; understanding everything
about mind and cognition in evolutionary, developmental, and practical
terms; and by studying manifestations of human conduct and life’s activity
in interrelated and ecological ways.Pragmatism, in Conception
Harvard psychologist and philosopher William James brought widespread
attention to the nascent pragmatist movement with his 1907 book
Pragmatism, composed from talks given in academic and public lecture
halls. Its subtitle was A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking. Gazing
back in time across a plethora of abstraction-ridden rationalisms and
scholasticisms, all entranced by otherworldly ends, James embraced the
minority opposition focused on worldly matters of actual experience.
His opening dedication page reads as follows: “To the Memory of John
Stuart Mill, from whom I first learned the pragmatic openness of mind and
whom my fancy likes to picture as our leader were he alive to-day.” Mill
had died thirty-four years earlier, in 1873, when James was just 31, during
an era when empirical science had few philosophical allies. James himself
would die just three years after Pragmatism as philosophical hostilities
towards science were reaching a crescendo. Theologies, idealisms,
dualisms, and phenomenologies outbid each other to prove science’s
incompetence to fully know reality. Positivism and materialism were
deemed unphilosophical, while tolerable realisms must pair the objective
world with subjective minds knowing it. Empiricism was yet again in a
precarious condition.
James boldly called for allies to rally under this new banner of
pragmatism. He declared,
Pragmatism represents a perfectly familiar attitude in philosophy, the
empiricist attitude, but it represents it, as it seems to me, both in a
more radical and in a less objectionable form than it has ever yet
assumed. A pragmatist turns his back resolutely and once for all upon a
lot of inveterate habits dear to professional philosophers. He turns
away from abstraction and insufficiency, from verbal solutions, from
bad a priori reasons, from fixed principles, closed systems, and
pretended absolutes and origins. He turns towards concreteness and
adequacy, towards facts, towards action, and towards power. That
means the empiricist temper regnant, and the rationalist temper
sincerely given up. It means the open air and possibilities of nature, as
against dogma, artificiality and the pretence of finality in truth.3James profited from rebellious alliances, going back to the days of his
apprenticeship in philosophy. Mill’s empiricism, along with Kant’s
transcendentalism and Darwinian evolution, was hotly debated by the
young Harvard companions forming the Metaphysical Club in Cambridge
during the 1870s.
Chauncey Wright had received Darwin’s encouragement to address
evolution’s implications for psychology and mental philosophy. Nicholas
St. John Green and Charles Peirce were impressed by Alexander Bain,
another British philosopher and psychologist, who declared that belief is
“that upon which a man is prepared to act.”4 Peirce went on to conduct
psychological experiments at Johns Hopkins University. John Dewey took
courses on logic and scientific method from Peirce and learned psychology
from G. Stanley Hall, the next Johns Hopkins psychologist, who had been
James’s student at Harvard. James himself, of course, was well known for
psychology as much as philosophy while he was composing Pragmatism.
Attention to experiencing was paramount for the empiricist agenda. Yet
James also depicted pragmatism as a way of thinking about thinking: what
thinking actually is and what it is for, to understand how thinking goes
right. James championed the empirical-minded type of philosopher who
constantly contends with rationalism. Pairing a better theory of perceptual
learning with an outdated rationalist view of thinking just obscures
empiricism’s strengths and exposes it to rationalist refutation.
Empiricism’s strengths lay in its receptivity to novelty and creativity.
When compared to rationalism’s fixation on conceptual deduction,
empiricism’s inductions from phenomena seem fickle and fragmentary.
Truth itself was at stake. Shall truth only amount to beliefs already familiar
and undeniable? There is no place for genuine discovery within an intellect
that is deductively closed. New and unsettling truths are always
inconceivable to incurious minds clinging to ideas of the past. All the while,
improved knowledge, vast knowledge, lies in the future.
Pragmatism is truly about the future. No truth is too good for testing its
worth in that future. James announced, “The true is the name of whatever
proves itself to be good in the way of belief, and good, too, for definite,
assignable reasons.”5 What makes any truth true is neither its easy
conceivability nor its past popularity, but only its ongoing reliability.Pragmatism . . . asks its usual question. “Grant an idea or belief to be
true,” it says, “what concrete difference will its being true make in
anyone’s actual life? How will the truth be realized? What experiences
will be different from those which would obtain if the belief were
false? What, in short, is the truth’s cash-value in experiential
terms?” . . . The truth of an idea is not a stagnant property inherent in
it. Truth happens to an idea. It becomes true, is made true by events. Its
verity is in fact an event, a process: the process namely of its verifying
itself, its veri-fication. Its validity is the process of its valid-ation.
6
With these incendiary words, the revolution had its declaration of
independence from rationalism. The contested territory of reality was not
forgotten by either camp in this war of words. Doesn’t the way that reality
actually is make truths about the world true? A real thing can truly be,
today, without waiting for verification tomorrow. Rationalism has its own
allies, such as this commonsense realism. Creating truth by human
verification sounds like creating the realities to be known.
“The truth of an idea is not a stagnant property inherent in it.
Truth happens to an idea. It becomes true, is made true by
events.”—William James
Even James’s first pragmatist ally, Peirce, scorned that anti-realism:
“there are certain mummified pedants who have never waked to the truth
that the act of knowing a real object alters it . . . I am one of them.”7
However, like Peirce’s dictums about truth, James was not asking for
anyone’s knowing the truth to create the object of knowledge. For the
pragmatists, verification creates knowledge, and all they demand is the real
object’s participation in that verification. James was perpetually dismayed
by critics who had to complain that this requirement sounds like an
unrealistic burden on realities.
This pragmatic demand, for any real thing to matter somewhere, is no
less realistic than any rationalism’s realism, since verification could not be a
threat to anything real. Only unreal things, after all, would fail their
verifications. Why shouldn’t truth be rooted in the way that things get
known as real? Reality should not resist its own realization. Does commonsense realism think that just any idea is true, before any verification?
Verified knowledge is labeled as “truth” after verification, not before.
Before any verification, ideas are just ideas, without anyone possibly
knowing if reality backs them up.
A philosophy that allows reality to be just as one thinks would be anti￾realism, not pragmatism, as James kept insisting in his subsequent books
The Meaning of Truth (1909) and A Pluralistic Universe (1909). Self￾proclaimed defenders of realism were just as insistent that knowing is a
mental activity, but mentality must not affect reality just by knowing it.
Assigning to mentality the task of creating true realities agrees with
idealism. The realists of James’s day were trying to put a century of
idealism’s domination over philosophy to an end. The reign of theology
over collegiate education was ending, and the realist camp wanted just one
paradigm for professionalized university philosophy. Neither idealism nor
pragmatism was deemed compatible with its strict realism.
James was well aware of the high stakes for professional philosophers,
but academic philosophy was not his only audience. Changing the whole
intellectual world along with the minds of the masses required a masterful
stroke. Artful language had to be employed with rhetorical and dialectical
skill. The popular imagination can be captured, but radical-sounding words
become stale slogans as the fervor fades.
Detractors have no lack of straw-man statements about what pragmatism
means. Is truth only what is useful to believe? Do truths multiply with
profitable opinions? Must knowledge bend to power? Is reason just desire’s
servant? Pragmatism stood accused of disintegrating the harmonious
cosmos into the playground of willful egos and degrading humanity’s proud
intellect down to the level of plodding animals.
James was undaunted. After publishing his book Pragmatism, James
wrote to his brother Henry about pragmatism’s impact: “of the definitive
triumph of that general way of thinking I can entertain no doubt whatever—
I believe it to be something quite like the protestant reformation.”8
Like religious reformations, philosophical revolutions are never brief and
decisive. Over the past hundred years, pragmatism’s dramatic rise,
prolonged diffusion across the humanities and social sciences, and its recent
reinvigoration, fulfills his prediction about the intellectual world needing
ample time to debate, digest, and incorporate radical ideas. Philosophyresisted integration the longest, while caricaturing pragmatism as a nest of
fallacies. Having purged history, anthropology, sociology, and psychology,
rationalisms kept on debating how to dissect reasoning by no one in
particular about nothing in particular.
Pragmatism, in Context
Competing movements in English-language philosophy and continental
European philosophy could agree on accusing pragmatism of subjectivism,
psychologism, relativism, and irrealism. Pragmatism emerged and matured
during a period when most every philosophical system had advocates and
active schools of thought.
From 1860 to 1940, the variety was bewildering: many varieties of
idealism and transcendentalism flourished and jostled with versions of
phenomenalism and phenomenology; realisms ranged broadly from
dualistic empiricism to scholasticism; and naturalistic options debated
positivism, materialism, epiphenomenalism, and scientism. Stoicisms,
existentialisms, nihilisms, vitalisms, panpsychisms, spiritualisms,
theodicies, and mysticisms were also promoted and pondered.9
That profusion of philosophical speculation had dramatically subsided
for post-WWII philosophy. Academic philosophy weeded out most of the
wildness and narrowed the focus of surviving analytic and
phenomenological alternatives. In the process, according to an oft-told tale,
pragmatism suffered a long “eclipse” during the second half of the
twentieth century.
This myth was itself a myth. Pragmatism was never eclipsed, although it
was marginalized within academic philosophy by the 1930s. A handful of
pragmatist professors such as Dewey at Columbia, and Mead and Morris at
Chicago, had encouraged many students to go into psychology, linguistics,
sociology, anthropology, education, economics, law, and political theory.
Additional social thinkers such as W. E. B. DuBois, Horace Kallen,
Randolph Bourne, Walter Lippmann, Alain LeRoy Locke, C. Wright Mills,
and Richard Rorty sustained pragmatism’s momentum on addressing social
and political issues.10 That combined infusion of progressivism withpragmatism strongly influenced many disciplines from the 1940s to the
1990s and beyond.
Even in philosophy, departments at Harvard, Chicago, and Columbia
remained hospitable to pragmatism, and several of America’s prominent
philosophers favored pragmatist themes. C. I. Lewis at Harvard taught
pragmatism to two generations of students who went on to teach at many
top universities. W. V. Quine stayed at Harvard, soon joined by Hilary
Putnam, and some of their students have defended pragmatist ideas, such as
Donald Davidson. Renegade analytic philosophers, among them Richard
Rorty, Daniel Dennett, and Paul Churchland, also ensured that pragmatism
remained a potent influence.
Led by this revived pragmatism, philosophy became more receptive to
interdisciplinarity with the humanities and social sciences during the 1990s.
Even core “analytic” areas such as philosophy of language, epistemology,
philosophy of mind, and philosophy of science were impacted. Invigorating
encounters with the fields of intellectual history, anthropology, linguistics,
behavioral psychology, and cognitive science (just to name a few), brought
academic philosophy back into contact with flourishing pragmatist views.
As philosophy was figuring out how to be relevant, it was returning to
pragmatism.
Within academic philosophy, pragmatism’s renaissance has only gained
momentum since the 1980s when Putman and Rorty incited fresh debates
over the nature of language, knowledge, truth, and the mind–world
relationship. Functional psychology, initiated by James and Dewey (who
also discovered holistic experience before Gestalt psychology), was revived
in a variety of forms, whether labeled as enactive, embodied, extended, or
ecological (and so on) to exemplify contextualism and dynamism.
During the 1990s and early 2000s, much of experimental psychology,
cognitive science, and neuroscience took pragmatist turns away from
lingering dualisms, rationalisms, and representationalisms. Social sciences
from psychology to anthropology have been reconfirming the foundations
of pragmatism with fresh non-dualistic approaches to cognition and culture.
Semiotics, which had largely sprung from pragmatism, is presently
supportive of pragmatism’s fast-growing movement.
In Europe, pragmatism has been highly regarded by a few
phenomenologists (such as Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Alfred Schütz) andsome critical theorists (notably Jürgen Habermas), along with
discriminating postmodernists (in deconstruction and hermeneutics, for
example).11
In the humanities, pragmatist revivals did not wait for science’s
confirmations, plunging ahead with departures from modernism, formalism,
and structuralism in order to cultivate respect for history, diversity, and
pluralism. Pragmatists have collaborated with religious naturalism and
liberal theology, and especially process philosophy and panentheism.
Pragmatists are also contributing to political theory, applied ethics,
environmental ethics, and philosophy of technology.
Summary
By the 2010s, revolts from mechanistic and reductionist paradigms were
gaining momentum, flourishing under unfamiliar labels but recognizably
pragmatic nonetheless. Their common pragmatist spirit investigates how
thinking and knowing undergo modifications and develop over time
through their application, so that growth can characterize how we know,
along with the growth of what we know.
For pragmatism old and new, there is nothing about mentality or
rationality entirely aloof from biological development, cultural practice, or
intellectual refinement. Experimentally improving ways of knowing is the
characteristic work of practiced intelligence, culminating in pedagogical
and philosophical reflections on refining the best intellectual methods.
Pragmatism not only thinks but works. All aspects of life are actually or
potentially responsive to intelligence’s attention and reconstruction,
including values, norms, and morals. There is nothing about humanity—
from the affective and aesthetic to the ethical and political—that is
irredeemably irrational or immune from improvement.2
Principles of Pragmatism
Perennial pragmatism attends to wisdom gathered and preserved about this
worldly life. Modern pragmatism incorporates scientific knowledge with
that wisdom for lasting philosophical insight. An identification of
pragmatism with natural science alone would be unwise. Pragmatism is
about culture as much as nature. No divorce between humanistic and
scientific outlooks is possible with pragmatism. Science is a thoroughly
human endeavor, and nothing human stays inscrutable to science.
New human sciences from 1860 to the early 1900s were inspirational for
pragmatism. Biology became evolutionary; neurology mapped brain
functionality; psychology revealed thinking’s practicality; sociology
observed mind’s communality; and anthropology explored culture’s
adaptivity. Pragmatists promptly recognized their overlaps, with each field
reinforcing the next. The expectation for each field of knowledge to be
organized by distinctive first principles, a widespread supposition since
Immanuel Kant, had no place in pragmatism.
Pragmatism, in Theory
Distinguishing natural sciences from human sciences according to their
respective methodological principles could ensure that both of their
ontologies are equally real. This was an urgent philosophical issue by the
mid- to late-1800s.
John Stuart Mill assigned the “moral sciences” in his A System of Logic
(1843) to the study of mental, social, cultural, and ethical matters in
empirically rigorous ways. Separating the Nomothetic (natural) and
Idiographic (social) sciences was proposed by Neo-Kantian philosopher
Wilhelm Windelband. Wilhelm Dilthey widened this categorization,
speaking of the Naturwissenschaften (natural sciences) and theGeisteswissenschaften (human or cultural sciences).1 Separating ontologies
from direct conflict halted materialism’s advance. However, philosophy lost
interest in tracking where sciences were converging, especially theorizing
that violated Kantian strictures about lawful necessity and anti-telic
naturality.
The pragmatists rebelled against Kantian dualisms and instead looked to
supportive precursors in philosophy and science. Earlier German
philosophers, particularly Johann Gottfried von Herder, Friedrich Wilhelm
Joseph Schelling, and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, had argued that
nature’s ways are hospitable to life’s ends. Sciences from physics and
chemistry to biology and physiology were postulating a far more dynamic
and purposive kind of natural world than Newtonian mechanics could
license.2
Nature is replete with vitality in fundamental and ineliminable ways, due
to molecular polarities and affinities, and chemical receptivities, syntheses,
and cyclicities. The rule that only mechanical forces are real in the world,
while hints of design and purpose are illusions in the mind, did not comport
with most sciences. Everything at and above the molecular level appeared
to be busily engaging with select matters around it, acquiring complex
patterns that tend towards coordination, harmonization, and perpetuation.
Life cannot just be insensate matter in linear motion. Selectivity and
striving are built into the organic world, from the level of organic chemistry
all the way up to multicellularity, animality, and large-population sociality.
Evolutionary biology showed how the developmental history of any form of
life or human way of life is far more explanatory than causal forces. Even
relationships between the physical and mental, such as Hermann von
Helmholtz’s discovery that the perceived intensity of sound or color is
proportional to the logarithm of the stimulus intensity, showed how mind is
transformative with nature rather than derivative from nature.
Systemic ecological activity occurs at every scale. Ecology, in other
words, begins inside cells, not outside in habitats. Goal-seeking activity is
no less real than pointless reactivity; life and its pursuits are embedded
within nature and are no less natural than atoms.
By the 1880s and ’90s, many scientific-minded thinkers realized how
Newtonian mechanics must be the artificial mental construct, rather than the
empirical observations of organic ends. There was no need to assigndifferent first principles to the natural sciences, life sciences, and human
sciences. They all studied the one realm of nature, but at different scopes,
scales, and timelines of natural activity.
Strands of this historicism, romanticism, organicism, and voluntarism
impacted each of the original pragmatists during their formative stages.
Peirce admitted that his system was closest to Schelling’s; James’s main
influences were Wilhelm Wundt (a Schellingian) and Hermann Lotze (a
voluntarist); Dewey’s early idealism was more Aristotelian and organicist
than Hegelian; and Mead was a rapt student of James and Wundt.3 None of
them were materialists, because they respected the sciences for their
combined results.
Their pragmatism was uninterested in distinguishing scientific fields
according to first principles, especially after sciences began sharing
theoretical entities and laboratory results. If chemical affinities account for
molecular enchainings, in turn explaining cellular metabolisms that
modulate tissue activation and regeneration for organ functioning, all of
which provides for an organism’s ability to coordinate behaviors conducive
to reliable nutrition acquisition and useful habitat modification, where are
the wide ontological gaps supposedly dividing mere matter from mentality?
If there are such metaphysical chasms, they are not visible to ordinary
observation or theoretical science.
Only philosophy persists in that quest for pure ideality untainted by
materiality, a quest marked more by theology than anything scientific. That
“ghost-like soul entity,” as James mocked in The Principles of Psychology,
was still haunting philosophy, whether it was supposedly marked by
substantial consciousness, clear certainty, or transcendent egoism. The
pragmatists advanced social psychology over Cartesian individualism, and
they were uninterested in elevating humans above animals just to feel closer
to angels.
The way that philosophy’s idealism still aspired to scientia status as
knowledge alongside genuine sciences only made the quest more pathetic
for the pragmatists. For them, the philosophical ban on teleological
explanation, liberating early science from God’s grand plan, had to be only
a temporary strategy. So long as maturing physical sciences, life sciences,
and behavioral sciences were told that they could not believe their own
theoretical eyes, they would remain splintered and incomplete, doomed tobe incommensurable among each other and incommensurate with the
unified Nature in front of them.
This scientific puzzle was extraordinarily convenient for idealizing
philosophy and its zealous mission to dictate methodologies and
distributing ontological responsibilities to the sciences. Together with
spiritualizing theology, philosophy continually denigrated science for
failing to explain the mind, and hence the soul. From Descartes to Kant and
thereafter, only necessity seemed truly scientific, as lawful as a divine
command. The empirical and contingent stayed stubbornly irrational, as
distant from God’s mind as anything material could be.
Pragmatism, in Process
Resistance against a division of all things rationally necessary from all
things irrationally chancy amounts to a rebellion against dualisms of every
sort. During the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the physical
and life sciences from quantum physics and population genetics were
discovering how nature operates in patterned probabilities. Reality is far
more statistical than categorical.4
Mainstream Anglo-European philosophy and theology largely ignored
the sciences for decade after decade during the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, crafting dualism after dualism on an industrial scale. Their
dichotomous terminologies were all-pervasive:
subjective/objective, internal/external, intrinsic/extrinsic,
essential/accidental, contingent/necessary, a priori/a posteriori,
analytic/synthetic, chaotic/lawful, meaningless/meaningful,
unfree/free, means/ends, valueless/valuable, fact/value, is/ought,
individual/social.
No philosophical or theological issue could be discussed without first
classifying matters according to exclusive compartments.
In its rebellion, pragmatism ignored artificed divisions, blended what
seemed dichotomous, and synthesized dualities into harmonies and unities.Whatever may be distinguishable in analytic conceptualization may or may
not be truly dividable in real actualization. Conceiving two things as
separate proves nothing about whether they could persist apart. Only
empirical inquiry could be decisive.
Pragmatism sought the eradication of dualism in a naturalism of
scientific harmonization by attaining the fulfillment of empiricism in an
experimentalism of exploration. A worldview entirely different from
dualism is thereby discovered, where the static and separable is replaced by
activity and relationality.
Pragmatism, like any worldview philosophy, offers a metaphysics.
Rationalism views pragmatism as anti-metaphysical for rejecting their
preferred systems. Pragmatism is metaphysical all the same, since
displacing poor metaphysics requires good metaphysics. A “non￾metaphysical” philosophy lets its own ontological priorities go
unquestioned and reinstalls some metaphysics anyways.
A few general tenets can characterize pragmatist metaphysics:
Reality is holistic. Continuities are pervasive throughout all reality.
Sharp discontinuity indicates unreality.
Ontology is dynamic. Whatever has actuality is always changing
and interactive. Strict fixity marks ideality.
Explanation is contextual. Co-responsive conditions account for
the course of processes. Singular causes give approximations.
Learning is creative. New information arises from imaginative and
inventive explorations. Assured contentment preserves ignorance.
Knowledge is communal. Improving knowledge requires
collaborative experimentation. Subjective certainty protects
dogma.
Continuity, Change, Context, Creativity, Community. Substances become
situations. Existents become events. Processes are explanatory, in the same
way laws are. Organisms are immersed in meaningful values, in the world.
Everything known must be learned, not intuited. Cognition is collective, not
subjective. Individuality is a learned mode of sociality. Society is
constituently codependent, not compounded from independent units. Inshort, all reality and anything knowable is fundamentally ecological, not
atomic or mechanic.
It was Newtonian mechanics and its linear equations that turned out to be
the temporary account of the world. Peirce denied the necessary so-called
law of mechanics that “every fact in the universe is precisely determined by
law” and he doubted that the alleged “law” of conservation of energy is
fundamental for cosmology. He sought a “genuine evolutionary philosophy,
that is, one that makes the principle of growth a primordial element of the
universe.”5 James and Dewey agreed about cosmic growth, and similarly
treated mechanistic laws as instrumental conveniences for experimental
calculation, not as fundamental forces that precisely dictate a unique future.
Materialism’s dim image of dead nature was destined to be just as
ghostly as theology’s divine creation. That stone-dead materialism, outdated
after Maxwell’s unification of electricity and magnetism, Darwin’s theory
of evolution, and the rise of neurological psychology, could no longer stand
as the only type of naturalism.
A “genuine evolutionary philosophy, that is, one that makes the
principle of growth a primordial element of the universe.”—
Charles Sanders Peirce
Unfortunately, philosophy and theology maintained their staunch
adherence to that Newtonian dogma denying efficacious causation to
purpose. Pragmatism decided that Kant was wrong to legislate Newton into
God’s role: necessary law does not dictate all of nature any more than
divine command. Naturalism awaited liberation from divinity in order to do
justice to life. Pragmatism completed that liberation, freeing humanity’s
intelligence to enlarge and enrich this world’s opportunities.
Reality is holistic, dynamic, and meaningful, rather than discrete,
passive, and valueless. Every academic field and intellectual endeavor must
be profoundly affected by that metaphysical reorientation. Peirce, James,
and Dewey did not endorse this kind of worldview in order to ground
philosophy in science, and they persistently criticized materialism.
Pragmatism would not assign ontology to natural science alone, yet it
does align with naturalism in a broad sense, while staying averse tomonism, metaphysical dualism, and supernaturalism. A singular ontology,
or paired static ontologies, unduly constrain what can and what cannot be
developmentally explained. Pragmatism’s pluralistic naturalism encourages
multiple ontogenies, all engendered within one cosmos. Humanity could not
be left incomprehensible within that cosmos. Nothing scientific, for
pragmatism, is incompatible with understanding human culture and the
human condition.
The pragmatists never imagined that science could, or should, replace
philosophy or finally decide answers to central philosophical matters.
Philosophy is irreplaceable because a comprehensive worldview integrating
all knowledge, a consistent worldview accounting for knowledge of it, and
a compelling worldview motivating our participation within it, are perennial
projects beyond the competence of the sciences. Philosophy is particularly
essential for finding a single worldview satisfying all three projects.
Our knowledge of the world should not displace us from that world or
discourage us from caring for that world. The universe depicted by
cosmology is coldly indifferent, reducing life to a thin film of seething
chemistry coating random planets. Worldviews picturing a quite different
cosmos, designed for us and our ambitions, take issue with inconvenient
theories such as evolution. Pragmatism sees only unnecessary conflict,
faulting both sides for simplifications. Yet simplicities abound.
Philosophical rationalism urges a false dilemma of “scientific truth or no
truth.” Comforting spiritualism counsels a false dilemma of “human value
or no value.”
Pragmatism steps in here, offering the third option of “scientific
knowledge for our values.” Knowledge worth pursuing won’t be alien to
our aspirational goals, and “pure” research today will be essential for
technology and society tomorrow. Insulating our values from empirical
science is counterproductive; infusing our practices with the experimental
attitude brings bountiful results.
Pragmatism, in Practice
Pragmatism is designed to be put into practice across our cultural activities
and social institutions. Collaboration with disciplinary knowledge istherefore essential to pragmatist philosophy. Psychology, sociology,
anthropology, communications, and education are closely intertwined with
pragmatism’s development, while those fields have confirmed theories
supportive of pragmatist principles. Pragmatism was America’s first
cognitive science, grounded in evolutionary biology and functionalist
neurology. The idea that natural beings are embodying significance and
intelligence to some degree or another was a view that came naturally to
pragmatists.
A survey of pragmatism’s debts to, and influences in, numerous fields of
science could begin with logic and computing, such as the invention of the
electronic logic machine. Peirce first discovered, in 1880, how Boolean
algebra could be expressed via one binary operation, either NAND—not(A
and B)—or NOR—not(A or B). Realizing how these basic logical
operations could be conducted by electrical switching circuits, he inspired
his student Allan Marquand to design the first electronic logic computer in
1886. Since any logical function can be conducted by some sequence of
NAND gates, they constitute all digital control systems, including
computers.
During the 1880s, Peirce published his work on quantifiers for the
algebra of logic. These ideas were promptly borrowed by Ernst Schröder in
his own treatise on the algebra of logic, and then adapted by Giuseppe
Peano from Schröder. Peirce also invented three-valued logic, and he was
the first to explore the logic of hypothesis or “abduction” to join deduction
and induction.6
Peirce’s establishment of semiotics, or the science of signs,7
took a
further step towards theorizing about the sociality of mentality and the
distributed character of information. Norbert Wiener, who studied with
William James and John Dewey, inaugurated the field of cybernetics to
study dynamical purposive systems.8 Later pragmatists, such as Hilary
Putnam, took close interest in computationalism and its view of brain
functioning as information processing.
Regrettably, the key question, about the nature of information for a living
organism, was answered most unpragmatically by syntactics and semantic
representationalism during the second half of the twentieth century,
depicting the human cortex as prefabricated for thinking about beliefs in
sentential form. Linguistics proved to be another battleground betweenpragmatism and the rationalisms of such thinkers as Noam Chomsky and
Jerry Fodor, in which language rules are innate and concepts mainly relate
to other concepts rather than actions.9 The original question—how language
is about the world—is left a mystery, and the biological evolution of
language is rendered inexplicable.
Humans invented speech using a brain already evolving for intense social
interaction. Hence, pragmatists sought the basis for communication in the
coordination of joint attention during cooperative practices involving
material matters. There are numerous broad continuities between animal
and human cognition, as would be expected from evolution. Still, human
cognition displays some notable discontinuities from animal minds because
we evolved further to use both learning and teaching to perpetuate practices
as encultured animals. Pragmatism is aligned with theories of the social
mind, symbolic interactionism, developmental consciousness, and
biosemiotics.10 It was the primary philosophical foundation for
evolutionary theories of “4E Cognition” as embodied, embedded, enactive,
and extended. Aspects of connectionism and dynamic systems theory
contribute to synthesizing these theoretical standpoints, so long as
representationalism is avoided.11
The legacy of William James’s philosophical psychology enriched many
of those later scientific developments. His view of the stream of
consciousness, enfolding both internal subject and external object,
compelled theories of mind to find confirmations within lived experience.
The “self” consists of attachment relations, beyond the body, to one’s
possessions, shared intimacies with others, and social relationships.12
Dewey and Mead elaborated on this relational and behavioral self. They
argued that the self is originally social, and an individual self emerges from
coordinating social roles as personal responsibility emerges later in
childhood.
Another line of psychological inspiration from James goes through
Edwin B. Holt to James J. Gibson’s ecological psychology, explaining how
an organism’s cognitive abilities are explicable in terms of how that
organism exploits environing opportunities.13 Jakob Johann von Uexküll
used the term “Umwelt” for the “life-world” that a species can perceptively
engage. Dewey’s conception of “experience” as doing–undergoing, Richard
Lewontin’s environmental constructivism, and Gregory Bateson’secological cybernetics similarly point to this conception of the available
life-world where mentality does its work.14
Pragmatism makes a bold stand on a psychological thesis: all thinking
functions in an experimental manner, including logicality itself. Psychology
and logic can no longer be treated as though they mustn’t have anything to
do with each other. Logic without relevance is meaningless; thinking
without inference is valueless. Pragmatism advocates the experimental
method, where social psychology and abductive logic harmonize to attain
knowledge.
Experiment, for pragmatism, is no mere intellectual exercise in
abstraction detached from concrete existence. Life itself is a grand
experiment. A nervous system, in general, continually tries to coordinate
sensations with actions for anticipatable results, and a brain continually
readjusts activities while monitoring varying conditions in the pursuit of
valued goals.
Human brains, while amazingly complex, are no exception. We manage
innumerable thoughts by putting them to practical work. Dewey wrote,
“Ideas are not then genuine ideas unless they are tools in a reflective
examination which tends to solve a problem.”15 Pragmatism is at work
within theories of active perception, enactive and extended mind, ecological
cybernetics, cognitive anthropology, neurosociology, neurophenomenology,
neuropragmatism, and radical embodied cognitive science.16
Summary
Today, pragmatism is no longer new, but its characteristic views are getting
amply reconfirmed by novel discoveries and rising theories across
numerous academic disciplines and scientific fields. Far from an intellectual
fad or contemporary fashion, the need for pragmatism will only expand.
The greatest age for pragmatism lies more in the future, as its proponents
herald revolutionary paradigms for transforming our self-understanding and
maximizing humanity’s collective potential.
Philosophy itself should be tested by broadening horizons and surprising
challenges. Pragmatism expects success with that test, not due to just itsown design, but mainly from advising redesigns of many ideas for better
serving life. Continually upgrading its application to humanity’s concerns,
pragmatism offers its practical approach to any area of life.3
Permanence and Impermanence
Pragmatism opposes any worldview presuming that what changes less has
to be more real. For those worldviews, what is most real cannot
fundamentally change. That priority of permanence over impermanence sets
philosophical agendas for accounts of explanation and knowledge. Having
ontological and causal priority, the changeless is necessary to fully explain
change, but what changes cannot account for permanence. Pragmatism
reverses these priorities, yielding a sounder account of knowledge.
Pragmatism is a philosophy of impermanence. Anything real is
intrinsically changing—not simply in relations externally, but constituently.
What changes less may not be more real, and there is knowledge of reality
through change, not despite change. Knowers are dynamic, taking
advantage of change within and without to acquire knowledge.
Impermanence does not rule out uniformity; acknowledging some
instability inherent to any regularity is far from seeing chaos everywhere.
Pragmatism replaces essences with processes and appeals to regular
generalities rather than strict necessities. In consequence, natural
knowledge discovers how complexities gradually develop from simplicities.
The best explanation for something is an account about the processes of its
growth.
Being and Plurality
For a philosophy of permanence, knowledge seeks the best explanations,
which must refer to what is unchanging. The ultimate goal for knowledge
must similarly seek final rest. If the permanent sets the ideal standard for
reality, and reality is knowable, then knowledge of reality cannot change.
Real knowledge must therefore be invariant; only invariant knowledge is
of something real. Reality is unknowable without any invariant knowledge,so the quest for invariant knowledge is paramount. Knowledge resides with
a knower, so the quest seeks knowers of invariant knowledge. People
lacking anything invariant about them would not be knowers of invariant
knowledge and cannot know reality. A philosophy of permanence is thereby
established: the changeless supplies the standard for reality, knowledge, and
the knower.
As a philosophy of impermanence, pragmatism embraces novelty,
temporality, contingency, fluctuation, originality, individuality,
development, variety, and plurality. Charles Peirce expresses this
affirmation of impermanence as follows:
Uniformities are precisely the sort of facts that need to be accounted
for . . . Now the only possible way of accounting for the laws of nature
and for uniformity in general is to suppose them results of evolution.
This supposes them not to be absolute, not to be obeyed precisely. It
makes an element of indeterminacy, spontaneity, or absolute chance in
nature.1
Pragmatism, liberated from reality conceived as strictly uniform and
invariant, embraces reality perceived as discrete, fragmentary, and
heterogeneous. William James labeled the prioritization of permanence as
“monism” to contrast it with “pluralism”:
The One and All, first in the order of being and of knowing, logically
necessary itself, and uniting all lesser things in the bonds of mutual
necessity, how could it allow of any mitigation of its inner rigidity?
The slightest suspicion of pluralism, the minutest wiggle of
independence of any one of its parts from the control of the totality,
would ruin it . . . Pluralism on the other hand has no need of this
dogmatic rigoristic temper. Provided you grant some separation among
things, some tremor of independence, some free play of parts on one
another, some real novelty or chance, however minute, she is amply
satisfied, and will allow you any amount, however great, of real union.
How much of union there may be is a question that she thinks can only
be decided empirically . . . Pragmatism, pending the final empiricalascertainment of just what the balance of union and disunion among
things may be, must obviously range herself upon the pluralistic side.2
Pragmatism cannot see why a degree of indeterminacy in all things must
prevent knowledge. Strict invariance, the correlate of permanence, is not
needed for comprehending the ways of nature, life, or humanity. Both
scientific theorizing and human living embody variance and variety. The
exemplification of novelty yields individuality, as John Dewey asserts:
Individuality conceived as a temporal development involves
uncertainty, indeterminacy, or contingency. Individuality is the source
of whatever is unpredictable in the world. The indeterminate is not
change in the sense of violation of law, for laws state probable
correlations of change and these probabilities exist no matter what the
source of change may be.3
Several post-Kantian philosophies of impermanence—notably
Naturphilosophie, life-philosophy, vitalism, existentialism, phenomenology,
and process philosophy—have these commonalities with pragmatism. They
also prefer concepts and categories acquired from lived experience, as
pragmatism does. However, that fidelity to experience displayed by F. W. J.
Schelling, Josiah Royce, Martin Heidegger, Alfred North Whitehead, and
George Santayana does not suffice for pragmatism. Can mind ever find its
rest unless an all-encompassing reality enfolds everything? A reliance on an
absolute being, a necessary existence, or an illuminating essence,
readymade to forestall reality’s dissolution, amounts to a comforting
rationalization unconfirmable by experimental inquiries.4
Typical allies in impermanence take the world to be a self-sustaining and
dynamic realm of ceaseless activity, yet the philosophies of such thinkers as
Friedrich Nietzsche, Henri Bergson, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Gilles Deleuze
left them short of pragmatism. Philosophies of impermanence are
comfortable with partial and perspectival knowledge, yet a disdain for
necessities and a prioris is not sufficient. Can the intellect be content with a
boundless plurality of independent realms? An embrace of radicalmultiplicity could not look like the organized cosmos that is known
realistically through experimental inquiries.5
Recognition for the full reality of diversity, possibility, and
individuality is fairly rare across the history of Western thought.
Pragmatism specifically holds that procedures of experimental learning
are constructively engaged with dynamic realities in order to establish
valuable objectives of knowledge in the service of successful living. Ideas
have no other origin or purpose, and inferences arose from those
experimental endeavors too. All the tools and techniques of thinking have
themselves developed through past efforts to improve mental attention and
control over productive practices.
A pragmatist critique of one of its allies in impermanence would point
out how that non-pragmatist philosophy either (a) retains some analog of
permanency in its account of reality, knowledge, or value; or (b) refuses to
entirely embed cognition and reasoning within normative practices of value.
The seductions of permanence and certainty are as perennial as
pragmatism’s resolute resistance.
Allies are always welcome in a rebellion, but pragmatism directs its
efforts towards resisting rationalisms and dualisms due to permanency. A
philosophy of permanence requires the objective of knowledge to be static
and the means of knowing to be fixed. That pairing of static objects of
knowledge with fixed means of knowing makes sense upon prioritizing the
permanent. Since the real is invariant, knowing the real cannot alter the
real; changing the real cannot be among the capacities of knowing. As for
knowledge, knowing cannot alter the means of knowing either. Searching
for the invariant around us, and discerning the invariant within us, are the
main agendas of philosophies of permanence.
To fulfill those two agendas together, philosophies of permanence
diverge into three main strategies: (1) selecting a real invariant first and
then finding a means of knowing to match it; (2) selecting an invariant
means of knowing first and then defining reality to suit it; or (3) selecting a
schema of pure invariance first, and then ensuring that reality and knowing
both fit this schema so that reality and knowledge conform to each other.In the West since ancient Greek philosophy, what is stably real has Being
(ontology); knowing rises above change (epistemology); and Reason is the
schema for Truth (rationalism). Strategy 1 defines Being first and then
designs truthful knowing for discerning the ways of Being. Strategy 2
settles on certain modes of knowing first and then declares that what is
known has Being. Strategy 3 sets up Reason as the arbiter of both the
modes of knowing and the ways of Being so their matching yields Truth.
Pragmatism draws attention to ways that these strategies—of ontological,
epistemological, and rationalist permanence—have perennially contended
against each other since the Pre-Socratics. Each one can expose weaknesses
inherent to the others, with none gaining advantage over the rest. Their
common quest for permanence, and their fixation on knowledge with
indubitable certainty, obstructs their aim to explain how human knowledge
is possible. Pragmatism gives up that quest for permanence and certainty,
showing the way forward towards knowledge without fears of skepticism.
Knowledge and Objectivity
The strategy of ontological permanence strives to ensure that the means of
knowing can be adequate to the task of discerning Being. What is truly
known must be as static as Being, however Being is preconceived to be.
Because Being is settled, two knowers cannot disagree about it, and
knowledge must be statically unitary. Any disagreement unsettles a prior
preconception of Being, allowing a plurality of conceptions of Being that
ontological permanence is supposed to discourage. Questions therefore
ensue about how authentic Being should best be conceived.
Such questions may have answers. Before philosophy arose anywhere,
mystical, religious, astrological, and cosmological speculation in many
civilizations inspired worldviews offering insights into supreme or ultimate
reality. Wisdom traditions upholding and teaching those insights about
reality offer guidance for properly apprehending it, effectively yielding
answers about best conceiving Being. Being remains foundational, so
effective insight is oriented towards it. Oriented knowledge is essential to
discerning Being.Explaining the discernment of Being is just a step away from
philosophically accounting for knowledge of Being. Going just a single step
further, a justification offered for rightly conceiving Being amounts to a
selection of a means for knowing Being. The strategy of ontological
permanence, asked to justify a foundational conception of Being, easily
transitions into the strategy of epistemological permanence.
By proceeding from a means of knowing, the strategy of epistemological
permanence would preempt questions about discerning Being. Being is
fundamentally what is known, and how it is known. Disagreement is just a
departure from the right means of knowing. Descriptions of matters beheld
by alternative means, even if useful or insightful, fail to apprehend full
Being.
Discrepancies among conceptions of Being are understandable, as
alternative worldviews sustain their traditional commitments. Yet the right
means of knowing never changes. So long as those worldviews remain
fixated on their distinctive ontologies, they lack philosophical justification,
from an epistemological standpoint. Ontological strategies and their
oriented knowledge are weak competition as well, so long as they lack
epistemic justifications. Since epistemological strategies can and do
develop, only one can be correct (so they all presume), so a rivalry among
them is inevitable.
Epistemological permanence now takes precedence over ontological
puzzles. Each epistemological strategy disdains the others, faulting them for
failing to apply the right means for correctly apprehending Being. Nothing
can supplement or replace right knowledge: knowledge is as permanent as
Being, and there is no multiplicity for types of Being, unlike the plurality of
things less real than Being. Each of these strategies finds that other
strategies have the wrong means of knowing since their objective is not
apprehension of real Being, compared to the authentic Being discerned by
its own means of knowing. An epistemological strategy thus expects that
only its own means of knowledge is objective, for having its correct
objective in Being. Although each strategy takes its own knowledge to be
uniquely objective, its justification is circular: this is the right means of
knowing since it discerns real Being, and that really is Being because this
means of knowing apprehends it.Ontological permanence yields fundamental ontology linked to oriented
knowledge, while epistemological permanence offers fundamental ontology
and objective knowledge grounded in circular justification. Both strategies
require changeless and unitary Being along with rigidly unique knowing. In
modern philosophy, this stance received the label of foundationalism.
Pragmatism, as a philosophy of impermanence, attributes change and
plurality to reality while respecting multiple and modifiable ways of
knowing. Permanence philosophies classify pragmatism as “non￾foundational” for failing to acknowledge a unitary real Being or a singular
way of knowing. Permanence philosophies hence accuse pragmatism of
abandoning authentic Being, knowledge, objectivity, and truth. Pragmatism
therefore seems adrift amidst a chaos of appearances, wish-fulfillments, and
illusions, while endorsing subjectivity and opinion.
The third strategy of rationalist permanence concurs with that negative
assessment of pragmatism, but it is no more impressed by ontological or
epistemological permanence. Neither ontological nor epistemological
permanence satisfactorily adjudicates among rival ontologies and divergent
ways of knowing.
The ontological strategy cannot forestall a multiplicity of conceptions of
Being and mutates into the epistemological strategy if it tries, while the
epistemological strategy cannot uniquely justify a way of knowing without
fallacious circularity. Real Being cannot guarantee its reliable apprehension,
while justifiable knowledge cannot guarantee its unique objectivity. The
strategy of rationalist permanence accordingly attempts to guarantee the
universally objective apprehension of authentic Being through a formal
schema (usually adapted from dialectical, logical, mathematical,
geometrical, or scientific thinking) to mediate between Being and knowing.
The purpose of a formal schema—and attendant forms, essences,
necessities, a prioris, and the like—is to align what Being is like with how
Being is known, so that humanity apprehends their correspondence in truth.
As a strategy of permanence, rationalism appeals to a rigidly formal schema
which would not change while directing the acquisition of knowledge.
Rationalist permanence does not have to support its formal schema with
another epistemological justification, so no circularity ensues. However, the
design of the formal schema must fulfill its purpose of aligning Being and
knowing despite the ultimacy of Being and the humanity of knowers.Formal schemas vary in this respect concerning alignment in order to
handle possible causes of misalignment and ignorance. Perhaps Being
seems less than amenable to apprehension, or humanity seems more
interested in distractions than knowledge. What all permanence schemas
have in common is a strict invariance for all knowers so they apprehend
unitary Being.
In the West, philosophies of ontological and epistemological permanence
characterized the Pre-Socratic period, with rationalist permanence
flourishing in Plato, Aristotle, and many subsequent philosophies. Dewey
laments their denigration of practical know-how:
If one looks at the foundations of the philosophies of Plato and
Aristotle . . . it is clear that these philosophies were systematizations in
rational form of the content of Greek religious and artistic beliefs. The
systematization involved a purification. Logic provided the patterns to
which ultimately real objects had to conform, while physical science
was possible in the degree in which the natural world, even in its
mutabilities, exhibited exemplification of ultimate immutable rational
objects . . . they brought with them the idea of a higher realm of fixed
reality of which alone true science is possible and of an inferior world
of changing things with which experience and practical matters are
concerned. They glorified the invariant at the expense of change, it
being evident that all practical activity falls within the realm of
change. It bequeathed the notion, which has ruled philosophy ever
since the time of the Greeks, that the office of knowledge is to uncover
the antecedently real . . . As a form of knowledge it is concerned with
the disclosure of the Real in itself, of Being in and of itself. It is
differentiated from other modes of knowing by its preoccupation with
a higher and more ultimate form of Being than that with which the
sciences of nature are concerned.6
Practical activity, for pragmatism, can be no less rationally justifiable
than any speculative passivity. Pragmatism also endorses schemas, more
empirical and modifiable than formal and invariant, that function to mediate
between reality and knowers.Although pragmatism respects reliable reasoning, invariant reason is
problematic. Any schema must be applicable by humans to regulate their
means of knowing, including an invariant schema. What, if anything, is
invariant about human beings as naturally changing and perishing
biological creatures?
A difficult dilemma for a rationalist philosophy looms here, and both
options result in unnatural permanence. Either the invariant schema is
something unnatural within humanity, or the invariant schema is
unnaturally separate from humanity. If the former, explaining how humans
manage their dual natures is as challenging as explaining knowledge in the
first place. If the latter, then the relationship between a natural human and a
transcendent schema becomes a mystery.
Rationalist permanence promised objectivity about this world, but it
generated invariances beyond this world. Ensuring that knowledge schemas
remain as natural as their objects of knowledge provides the better
guarantee that knowledge is humanly attainable. Pragmatism proposes that
mediating schemas are created and improved by humanity while exploring
and transforming the world, so schemas would not be unnaturally internal
or external to the human enterprise. Philosophies of permanence are never
impressed by this naturalization of knowledge, complaining that Being and
truth are deformed by pragmatism down to a relative dependency upon
humanity.
Rationalist philosophies disparage pragmatism for failing to reach the
sort of authentic Being and valid truth set up by that preoccupation with
permanence. Pragmatism responds with the same complaint against
rationalism: Being’s permanency separates it from humanity’s
impermanence, leaving an ontological and epistemological gap
unbridgeable by humans.
Pragmatism and rationalism always accuse the other of failing to attain
objectivity and truth. Yet they do not mean the same thing by “objectivity”
or “truth.” For rationalism, objectivity primarily involves an independence
from knowers, the aloofness of Being. For pragmatism, objectivity
primarily involves a practical achievement of knowers, the accomplishment
of knowledge.
That difference in emphasis for objectivity affects what “truth”
specifically means. Pragmatism ascribes truth to achievable knowledge ofcapable knowers. Rationalism attaches truth to infallible knowledge of
immutable Being. If rationalism’s meaning for truth is pressed upon
pragmatists, they abandon that view of truth—along with purified ideas of
representation and correspondence—as irrelevant to knowers. If
pragmatism’s meaning for truth is offered to rationalists, they dismiss that
notion of truth—along with practical ideas of experiment and confirmation
—as inadequate to reality.
Both pragmatism and rationalism lay claim to objectivity. The amount of
human involvement, in comparison to Being’s independent contribution,
would appear to be the contentious question. But that manner of
partitioning responsibility for knowledge between humanity and reality is
rationalism’s craftwork. What is so divided cannot be easily reunited. For
rationalism, the basis to objectivity lies in what is ideally rational, as it
mediates between knowers and reality—the real is the rational while the
rational sets the ideal standard for what is knowable. Yet rationalism must
say whether knowledge of everything real is possible. The affirmative and
negative answers both lead to problematic positions.
First, suppose that what is real must be what is ideally knowable. Reality
is what exists according to ideal knowledge and nothing real could stay
separate from knowers. This supposition is the foundation for metaphysical
idealism: reality stably consists of what is ideally knowable, so all
knowledge is perfectly concordant through a formal schema.
Although this foundation satisfies the requirement of permanence for
reality, metaphysical idealism betrays rationalism’s promise to deliver
objectivity through reality’s independent contribution. Nothing real can
make any truly independent contribution, for nothing is real outside of ideal
knowing. However, from the perspective of an individual knower, that
idealized reality would play an objective role in knowledge, as the
absolutely final reality towards which an individual’s relatively partial
knowing should be aimed. Nevertheless, for this “objective idealism,”
reality consists only of the ideally knowable.
Second, suppose that what is real can lie beyond what is ideally
knowable. But anything so separate from knowledge is intrinsically
unknowable and unavailable for contributing to an explanation of how
knowledge is attained. Metaphysical realism is the position that reality is
independent from knowing it. Yet any knowing only knows what is known:what is known by knowing exists there for knowledge, not somewhere
beyond knowledge. Whether what is known also exists beyond the scope of
knowing is a further question, a question that cannot be answered by
knowledge. Metaphysical realism therefore demands a non-rational act of
faith, the faith that a reality stays identical and unchanged regardless of
whether it happens to be accessible for knowing, or inaccessible to
knowing.
As a philosophy of permanence, metaphysical realism requires invariant
realities to be unaffected by entering into, or passing out of, a relationship
with knowing and knowers. With that expectation in place, unalterable
reality itself somehow guarantees that all knowledge is perfectly concordant
with reality’s own structure. However, metaphysical realism provides no
way of knowing that reality satisfies that mere expectation beyond the reach
of knowledge. As unknown and unknowable, anything beyond knowledge
cannot help explain how knowledge is possible, leaving only what exists for
knowing.
Although it claims to avoid metaphysical idealism’s fate of collapsing
reality down to the knowable, metaphysical realism may amount to
“subjective” realism: reality is only how it is knowable for knowers. Indeed,
subjective realism, in the absence of a guarantee of any knowing￾independent reality, collapses further into subjective idealism: the only
reality is what is knowable by individual knowers.
Despite pragmatism’s reputation for disinterest in realism, realism’s
rescue proved to lie with the abdication of rationalism and the ascension of
pragmatism.
Rationalism and Dualism
From pragmatism’s viewpoint, the way that rationalism partitions
responsibility for objective knowing between reality and humanity only
leads to the abandonment of realism. Metaphysical idealism and
metaphysical realism agree that knowledge is attainable, invariant, and
concordant. Their disagreement erupts where metaphysical idealism refuses
to take it on faith that the real can be thought to transcend knowledge.
Metaphysical realism guarantees reality without means to know it;metaphysical idealism guarantees knowledge without a reality to know.
What sensible realism is left?
There is a third metaphysical possibility: no reality is knowable, since
whatever is accessible to knowers is inconstant, relative, and discordant.
This position is occupied by modern skepticism. Unlike ancient skepticism,
modern skepticism is metaphysical and rationalistic because it is based on
presumptions about what reality would be (permanent, absolute) and what
knowledge should be (unchanging, concordant). Although affinities
between pragmatism and ancient skepticism can be identified, pragmatism
does not recommend contentment with conventional or subjective belief, so
hereafter “skepticism” refers only to its modern and metaphysical form. The
accusation of skepticism directed at pragmatism by modern competitors
usually amounted to a worry over epistemic relativism.7
These three rationalisms—objective idealism, subjective realism, and
modern skepticism—struggle to classify pragmatism. Pragmatism seems
too realistic to idealism, and too idealistic to realism.
Objective idealism worries that pragmatism’s disinterest in the absolutely
ideally real prevents efforts knowing any unique objective, leaving only
ignorant discord, relativism, and perhaps subjectivism. Metaphysical
realism cannot respect pragmatism’s disinterest in realities transcending all
knowing, so subjective idealism appears to be pragmatism’s home.
Furthermore, pragmatism’s high tolerance for knowledge’s mutability
seems like relativism and skepticism to both idealism and realism. For its
part, metaphysical skepticism could not adopt pragmatism, since
pragmatism disdains rigidly ideal standards for knowledge upon which
skepticism relies. Rationalisms are incredulous towards pragmatism’s
avowal to uphold a reasonable realism, so they typically regard pragmatism
as a resignation to relativism, subjectivism, and skepticism.
Pragmatism arose during the late nineteenth century, after rationalism
took modernist forms. Modern rationalism adapts features of idealism and
realism, while continuing to struggle with that dualistic partitioning of
responsibility between knowers and reality. To ensure that the unique reality
is correctly recognized by all humanity, the same generic schema of
reasoning structures each knower’s cognition in the manner needed for
acquiring knowledge of reality’s structure. Individuals may deviate from
that strict cognitive path due to less intellectual distractions, allowing theirunderstanding of the world to follow conventional notions perpetuated by
social habits—primarily language, ritual, belief customs, and practical ways
of life.
Rationalisms since Descartes go by various labels, but the dominant
types have been empiricism, transcendentalism, and materialism.
Pragmatism was inaugurated and developed during the second half of the
nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth century, a period
roughly bracketed by the strong influence of Kant’s transcendentalism and
Quine’s physicalism, with Hegel’s absolutism and Mill’s empiricism
situated in between. From the perspective of pragmatism, all four
philosophies are rationalist in form and function. For example, compare
Kant and Quine. A singular rational structuring (Kant’s categories and
schemas, Quine’s unity of science program) uniquely organizes the
invariant knowledge of the real world (Kant’s empirical realism, Quine’s
reductive physicalism).8
Absolute idealism’s confidence that the structuring of (dialectical) reason
constitutes the essence for the objective world, and empiricism’s confidence
that the world of perceptual phenomena constitutes the essence of
objectivity for the structuring of (inductive) reason, are no less rationalist in
spirit. For rationalistic empiricism, clear perceptions caused by the world
are combined through conscious rational inferences (refined by logical
philosophy) to yield objective knowledge of the world. For
transcendentalism, chaotic sensations get structured by preconscious
rational schemas, and further reliance on those hidden schemas (discerned
by transcendental philosophy) yields knowledge of the objective world. For
materialism, objective observations of the world’s ways inspire hypothetical
reasoning (guided by scientific philosophy) to yield rational knowledge of
the world’s hidden structure.
Each modern rationalism struggles to explain the basis for its preferred
rational schema, beyond taking the characteristic rationalist view that a
rigid schema is necessary for objective knowledge.
Rationalist empiricism is hospitable to whatever commonly appears in
experience, only asking logical thinking to filter out confusing, biased, and
illusory irrelevancies from our attention. Empiricism’s traditional weakness
was its inability to explain how logic itself is known, since no amount of
contingent perception would assemble into logical necessities. (Pragmatistempiricism overcomes that limitation through the pragmatic principle of
clear conception and abductive inference.) This incapacity leads to a formal
dualism between worldly perception and unworldly logicality, which
weakens rationalist empiricism’s claim to be the most realistic philosophy.
That presumption of human logicality is transcendentalism’s opportunity
to refute empiricism and locate logicality in humanity’s unworldly reason.
However, transcendentalism’s weakness is its inability to explain how
perception arises, since anything responsible for perceptual appearances
must lie beyond the reach of reason and all knowledge. This weakness leads
to an ontological dualism between the phenomenal and the transcendental,
which weakens transcendentalism’s claim to guarantee knowledge of a
singular world.9
Overcoming that dualism opens the opportunity for objective idealism,
which credits a real schema of reason with providing both worldly
perception and its organization into knowledge. With absolute reality
identified with this rational schema, objective idealism’s weakness lies in its
difficulties explaining why that absolute final reality would manifest in
finite fallible knowers. This weakness leads to a personal dualism
compelling a knower to simultaneously and self-contradictorily participate
in perfect and imperfect experience.
Admitting that all experience is fallible is the starting place for
materialism. Materialism privileges scientific methodology over ordinary
perception so that provisional yet confirmable hypotheses permit realistic
knowledge about underlying physical reality. The tension between the two
worlds that knowers must navigate—one austerely quantitative and the
other richly qualitative—is a weakness that leads to a value dualism
between a meaningless world and a meaningful world. To overcome that
dualism, the common lived world can be restored to its rightful priority over
science’s dead abstractions, leading to a commonsense empiricism.
And so, this metaphysical cycle returns to rationalist empiricism, without
guaranteeing objectivity or preventing dualisms anywhere around the
circular track.
SummaryPragmatists, and philosophies of impermanence generally, share a
pessimistic analysis of rationalism and all philosophies of permanence,
faulting their obsession with invariance. Pragmatism’s ontology respects
impermanence, pragmatism is suspicious towards epistemology, and
pragmatism rejects rationalism.
Pragmatism distinguishes itself among philosophies of impermanence
with a defining set of agendas:
Deprioritizing permanence for reality, knowledge, and human
nature.
Denying that simplicity is unable to explain complexity.
Deterring dualisms with continuities, contexts, and potentialities.
Deferring to construction rather than correspondence on knowledge
and truth.
Demoting necessities and essences to roles within processes of
acquiring knowledge.
Depending on dynamic, systemic, and social relations to explain
mentality, learning, and knowing.
Defining all types of meanings in functional and practical ways.
Discerning the purposive and normative in reality.4
Context and Reality
Pragmatism has criticized rationalism and the quest for permanence for
falling short of objectivity while fostering dualisms, and failing to account
for any knowledge worth having. Rationalism in turn accuses pragmatism
of avoiding reality and ending up with relativism and irrealism. Relating
knowledge’s truth to knower’s trials accordingly looks like subjectivism
and skepticism.
In Pragmatism, William James said that a hypothesis is true if it “works
satisfactorily in the widest sense of word.”1 Bertrand Russell, who
exemplified rationalistic empiricism, summarized its verdict:
James’s doctrine is an attempt to build a superstructure of belief upon a
foundation of scepticism, and like all such attempts it is dependent on
fallacies. In his case the fallacies spring from an attempt to ignore all
extra-human facts . . . this is only a form of the subjectivistic madness
which is characteristic of most modern philosophy.
2
That unfair interpretation had already been anticipated and countered by
James in The Meaning of Truth. The widest sense of “works satisfactorily”
is far more than “has worked well for me personally so far” or “benefits my
group more than anyone else.” What works well with whatever else is
known for anyone and everyone could not be an idea disconnected from
hard realities. Science knows of no other meaning for truth. As Albert
Einstein said, “Truth is what stands the test of experience.”3
Knowledge is ConstructivePragmatism is interested in fruitful engagements with reality, not
absorptions into reality or certainties about reality. Like experimental
science before it, pragmatism finds enough reality where it can be
encountered, explored, and transformed. Pragmatism is a philosophical
project of wider scope than scientific investigation, but it has that same
spirit of tentative and revisable learning.
In the words of James,
As I understand the pragmatist way of seeing things, it owes its being
to the break-down which the last fifty years have brought about in the
older notions of scientific truth. ‘God geometrizes,’ it used to be said;
and it was believed that Euclid’s elements literally reproduced his
geometrizing. There is an eternal and unchangeable ‘reason’; and its
voice was supposed to reverberate in Barbara and Celarent. So also of
the ‘laws of nature,’ physical and chemical, so of natural history
classifications—all were supposed to be exact and exclusive duplicates
of pre-human archetypes buried in the structure of things, to which the
spark of divinity hidden in our intellect enables us to penetrate. The
anatomy of the world is logical, and its logic is that of a university
professor, it was thought. Up to about 1850 almost every one believed
that sciences expressed truths that were exact copies of a definite code
of non-human realities. But the enormously rapid multiplication of
theories in these latter days has well-nigh upset the notion of any one
of them being a more literally objective kind of thing than another.
There are so many geometries, so many logics, so many physical and
chemical hypotheses, so many classifications, each one of them good
for so much and yet not good for everything, that the notion that even
the truest formula may be a human device and not a literal transcript
has dawned upon us. We hear scientific laws now treated as so much
‘conceptual shorthand,’ true so far as they are useful but no farther.
Our mind has become tolerant of symbol instead of reproduction, of
approximation instead of exactness, of plasticity instead of rigor . . .
which at any rate makes our whole notion of scientific truth more
flexible and genial than it used to be.4After theology proved unable to justify its faith in an ideally providential
order of creation, and science abandoned its parallel search for a perfectly
rational order to nature, philosophy began to realize that unitary and static
permanence is an inappropriate objective for knowledge of reality. Even
mathematical and logical systems no longer pointed to one platonic realm,
so postulating an additional formal reality besides natural reality seemed
pointless. Any reality for knowing, and worth knowing, actively undergoes
modifications and responds to alterations.
Pragmatism agrees with rationalism that knowledge involves mediation
between known reality and the knower. However, nothing invariant
characterizes these three factors, and no dualistic separation divides them.
For pragmatism, knowing is a dynamic coordination between reality’s
processes and human endeavors within reality. Knowledge is something
that develops within that broad field of human–reality interaction, where
controlled explorations—called “inquiries” by pragmatism—are
undertaken.
Pragmatism rejects any ontological or epistemic division between what is
external and what is internal, a divide elevated into a metaphysical
dichotomy by much of modern Western philosophy. Knowers do not have
to first ascertain where external reality has to be. The reality amenable for
coordination is the environing world in which inquiring knowers are
already actively living.
Knowers do not have to predetermine what internal knowing has to be,
either. The knowledge achievable through coordination is the result of
activity conducted in the environing world by knowers undertaking
inquiries. The activities of inquirers occur in congruence with the world’s
activities, and this common arena of activity situates the capacity for
knowing and the enlargement of knowledge.
According to rationalism, the capacity for knowing depends on a fairly
stable schema quite unlike the shifting scene of worldly events or the
transitory stream of mental thoughts. Rationalism must account for a
schema’s relationship with the world on the one side and with the mind on
the other. When rationalism asserts a correspondence between schema and
world, so that there is knowledge in the external sense, it does not have to
follow that any human mind is self-aware of this knowledge. An individual
could know something without a personal understanding that it is known.For example, a person believing a proposition P that happens to be made
true by the world could be said by rationalism to “know P” without
appreciating that P is known.
Similarly, when rationalism asserts a correspondence between schema
and mind, so that there is knowledge in the internal sense, it does not have
to follow that any worldly reality exists in accord with this knowledge. An
individual could know something while nothing guarantees that it is real.
For example, a person knowing a proposition P that happens to perfectly
cohere with other propositions could be said by rationalism to “know P”
without any confirmation that any of those propositions are about actual
realities.
Some rationalisms admit to skeptical consequences following from these
limitations, while other rationalisms instead additionally argue that a
knower’s adherence to the formal schema ensures that both the state of
knowing and the state of reality is appreciated by the knower.
Pragmatism’s view of knowledge never requires such extra assurances.
Knowers must appreciate their possession of knowledge since their
inquisitive efforts construct it, and knowers must appreciate the reality
known because their inquiries engage with it. No veridical knowledge is
first required for the knower to encounter reality and constructively engage
with it.
Inquiry’s methods of exploration are sophisticated and thoughtful
versions of ongoing habitual activities already embedded within reality,
where knowers are engaging with the world. Most of what is encountered is
never known, and there is more to knowable reality than what gets
encountered. Inquiries only directly deal with what is encountered (whether
as known or not known) yet inquiries indirectly deal with what is not
encountered (which may become known).
Pragmatism insists that what becomes knowable beyond the familiar
arena of worldly engagement, such as unobservably past events, invisibly
tiny entities, and cosmically vast forces, must have dynamic relations with
matters occurring within the encounterable arena.
Reality is EffectivePragmatism’s commitments to holism, dynamism, and contextualism help
to explicate its approach to knowable realities. This philosophy of
impermanence prioritizes interdependency and functionality, rather than
substantiality or inherency, for all ontologies. Existing beings have no
essence, no rigid character, defining what they must be.
An “essence” as a permanent nature assigning a thing to a kind
necessarily, once and forever, is only an imaginative postulation, unable to
ontologically refer to anything exemplified in reality. Conceiving an
essence relies on the predication of static attribute(s)—qualities, properties,
traits, and so on—to an entity unable to exist without them or to modify
them. Static attributes for fixed entities have no place in pragmatist
ontology.
Sciences do utilize formulas expressing necessary relations among
theoretical matters (such as “mass” and “energy”), and pragmatism admits
their candidacy for ontological existence as powers and forces so long as
necessary relations do not exhaust conceptions of them. An item of pure
theory entirely defined by necessary relations (such as mathematized
formulas or equations) represents a preliminary stage of inquiry at most,
awaiting a clearer conception about effects and consequences per the
pragmatic maxim.5
The notion of essence is replaceable by “process” without any detriment
or deficit to knowing natural entities. The proposition “S is P” hides a
metaphysics of permanence in its grammar; “This Process has Attribute” is
preferrable, or “This P has A” for brevity. In order to “predicate” an
attribute functionally, rather than substantially, a selected stability (not a
fixity) about an ongoing process is picked out for its connectivity with some
other stability to yield further processes.
Attribution is a triadic relation of context, involving a process, an
attribute, and its capacity. To say that “a rose has redness” is to choose a
feature of a rose for its availability to visual appreciation. To say that “a
plant has roots” is to choose a feature of a plant for its connectivity to
accessible nutrients (water, nitrogen, minerals, etc.) held by soils. To say
that “a soil has moisture” is to choose a feature of a soil for its capacity to
yield water. To say that “water is wet” is to choose a feature of an amount
of water for its partial transferability to another surface on contact (that is
why a single molecule of water cannot be “wet”). To say that “a watermolecule has polarity” is to choose a feature of H2O for its tendency to
orient the oxygen atom towards any positive magnetic charge.
Does science at last reach essences? The definition of H2O as “two
protons in electron bonds with an oxygen atom” cannot identify a fixed
essence, since a group of water molecules in nature rapidly redistribute their
electrons. Molecules are dynamic processes, and so are atoms and all
subatomic particles—with fluctuating wave-function fields describing them
—in accord with expectations of pragmatism and process philosophy.
6
Bringing up “redness” or “wetness” invites two challenges to this process
ontology. A perceptual quality like “red” invites the accusation of
subjectivism, while a physical property like “wet” raises the worry of
irrealism.
Why can’t the red quality really inhere in the rose, the accusation goes,
rather than within the perceiver looking at the rose? Pragmatic
contextualism replies by denying that colors only exist with either object
surfaces, or lighting, or reflectance spectra, or retinal stimulation, or
perception. Colors evidently depend on many contextual factors and hence
colors objectively exist where they can appear, within situations that include
all factors.7
(This situational analysis applies to more than “phenomenal”
qualities; pragmatism treats “meaning,” “value,” and “information” in the
same manner.)
A physical property such as wetness can seem less real than a color, if
standards of permanence are applied. If water isn’t actually wet all the time,
and the wetness isn’t within a perceiver either, it must somehow enter and
depart existence instead of having its own reality, leading to irrealism.
Should we worry about irrealism? Pragmatism does not have to resort to
subjectivism or irrealism. Supposing that “deeper” fixed properties ground
relational capacities and dispositions, or proposing that dispositional powers
are fundamental, is the tactic of a permanence metaphysics.
Deeper properties to things there may be, but they will be no less
contextual, so, those subjectivist and irrealist anxieties due to permanence
linger “all the way down.” Relief comes from abandoning the metaphysics
of permanence and its insistence that reality is marked by fixity and
independence. The real is interactive and effective.Pragmatism replaces the traditional primacy of subject–predicate
relations with structure–function relations. Stabilities taken for their
connections presently are the structures; those connections taken for their
development temporally are the functions. Neither structure nor function
can persist without the other; structures are always functioning and
functions are always structuring—they are two ways of regarding complex
processes from either spatial or temporal perspectives. Scientific
investigations can focus on one or the other depending on the purposes of
inquiry, but science ultimately regards “space-time” as unified.
Isolating a notion of some sort of “static” structure that does nothing
somewhere, or some kind of “generic” function that might manifest
anywhere, is only an imaginative exercise without exemplification in
reality. Reverting to previous illustrations, neither “red” nor “wet” by
themselves torn out of situational contexts can refer to anything actual.
Seeking something, anything, to anchor their references is a hopeless task
for permanence metaphysics. It is unnecessary to suppose that “red” is an
idea due to abstracting out a static commonality from many perceptions, or
that “wet” is conceived by distilling out a rigid causality among many
correlations.
Taking matters in their interdependencies will yield clear conceptions,
while aloofness and isolation leads to meaninglessness. Ontology goes no
“deeper” than structure–function processes. That pragmatist manner of
treating ontology calls for a reorientation of the metaphysical enterprise of
ontological priority.
For the metaphysics of permanence, one thing has ontological priority
over another if the first thing persists while the second stops existing.
Whatever has the highest ontological priority, by surviving the most
comparisons, is the “most real” and substantial. Light is prior to a shadow it
casts, atoms are prior to the rock they compose, and so on.
Pragmatism sees how this test of ontological priority fails for both
mechanical and biological entities. There is no sense to asking, “which
existed first, the screw or the screwdriver?” or “which could exist without
the other, a stomach organ or a mammal?” That puzzling game of asking,
“But which had to come first?” is no longer a productive way of asking
nature about what it has been doing.As science amply discovered during its maturation, ontological priority
no longer has a regulative or explanatory role. In an endlessly dynamic
world, a thing capable of causing change in something else must already be
undergoing a process of change, too. Dewey wrote,
There is no action without reaction; there is no exclusively one-way
exercise of conditioning power, no mode of regulation that operates
wholly from above to below or from within outwards or from without
inwards. Whatever influences the changes of other things is itself
changed. The idea of an activity proceeding only in one direction, of
an unmoved mover, is a survival of Greek physics. It has been
banished from science, but remains to haunt philosophy.
8
Pragmatism’s pluralistic ontology diffuses reality across endless
connectivities and contexts, without anything playing the role of “the most
real.” In a dynamical cosmos, everything can affect something else and
nothing lasts unaffected.
In an endlessly dynamic world, what is capable of causing change
in something else must already be undergoing a process of
change, too.
Emergence is Creative
To illustrate this dynamical pluralism, consider debates among naturalists
over “emergence.” The term “emergence” is nowadays overused, while
allied with the reductionist agenda of physicalism. For “part-to-whole”
emergentism, an individual part has its own rigid properties/powers to
exhibit independently from wholes (the reductionism) while a whole’s
properties remain entirely dependent on its particular parts (the
emergentism). This sort of “bottom up” emergence begs the question in its
presumption that parts are more real than their wholes, so it cannot be a
genuine alternative to reductionism, but only its restatement.Part-to-whole emergentism commits the analytic fallacy: a
decomposition to discriminate a “component” in isolation, so external
relations are required to get it to operate with other components. To avoid
this fallacy, do not presume that (a) a component existed prior to
decomposition or that (b) external relations were at work prior to
decomposition. Whether (a) or (b) might be accurate for any particular
matter is subject to empirical inquiry. A top–down emergentism is not
reductionistic, but it would be just as fallacious, rashly presuming prior to
evidence that (c) a whole existed prior to composition or that (d) internal
relations were at work prior to composition.
Pragmatism, by contrast, finds that parts emerge from wholes as much as
wholes emerge from parts, depending on developing contexts. Sometimes
new properties of a whole arise from configurations of its parts. Sometimes
new properties of parts arise from developments by the whole. Let
“emergence” be about a whole’s attributes that do depend on parts.
Pragmatism equally well recognizes “demergence” about a part’s attributes
that depend on the whole. In other words, both synthesis and analysis are
creative processes. Taking a whole apart creates new attributes of resulting
parts they lacked before analysis, just as assembling a whole creates new
attributes from parts that it lacked before synthesis.
Creativity in a dynamically interrelated and ecological cosmos is always
unavoidable. Both analysis and synthesis involve dramatic alterations of
context. To insist that “a part must have the same properties unchanged
before and after its participation in a whole” has no more validity than “a
whole must have the same properties unaltered before and after its
constitution by parts.”
Put another way, it is all about the conditioned emergence of novelty no
matter how contexts are altering. The related notion of “supervenience” to
explain how a complex whole displays novel attributes that are somehow
less real or quite unreal can be similarly discarded. Nor does contextualism
have to heed warnings about “causal overdetermination” since there is no
level or scale of reality where some exclusively “real” causality is entirely
responsible for all change. Causal perspectivism in step with multiple
ontologies is the sounder scientific approach.9
In philosophy of mind, pragmatism rejects permanence presuppositions
needed for phenomenalism and epiphenomenalism. Later chapters discusspragmatism on the topic of mind. In philosophy of science, pragmatism
rejects similar assumptions at work in the program of reductionism.
Reductionism assumes that entities discovered at the smallest discrete
scales must also exist at any other size and energy scale everywhere in the
cosmos. Reductionism relies on a universalist view of natural laws, because
the laws for those minimal (subatomic) levels must prevail everywhere as
well, and nothing else can occur anywhere without the involvement of those
laws. Reductionism amounts to an overexaggerated and unnecessary
realism.10
Pragmatism offers “productionism” instead: entities discovered through
controlled experimental conditions really exist, whenever and wherever
those conditions happen to prevail anywhere in the cosmos.
Pragmatism denies universalism about natural laws, since there is no
evidence that laws operating under certain conditions are prevailing
anywhere else in the cosmos in dissimilar conditions. Productionism is
contextual scientific realism: theorized entities (whether particles, forces,
fields, and so on) really exist where modeled conditions required for their
existence happen to prevail, such as in controlled experiments or elsewhere
in nature where similar conditions produce them without intelligent control.
Subatomic particles detected in supercolliders are fully real, just as they
were real in the earliest seconds of the Big Bang or under the extreme
conditions within supernovas or near black holes. But there is no logical or
scientific justification for assuming that nature takes those forms under
quite different conditions, such as those prevailing on planets. There are no
quarks present in the tip of my finger, nor are laws governing quark
behavior describing anything occurring inside my body. Other theoretical
entities from electrons to endorphins are realistically present on earth, as
described by physics, chemistry, and physiology under temperature and
pressure conditions at planetary surfaces.
Reductionism misplaces ontological priority upon parts, not because
wholes are more real, but because reductionism, like philosophies of
permanence generally, forgets the crucial role of conditioning context. For
the pluralism of impermanence, ontological priority is replaced by
ontological parity: so long as something is clearly (pragmatically)
conceived, it may be just as real as anything else credibly discovered.Labelling certain sorts of things as “more real” only calls attention to
human preferences and values. Neither smallness nor bigness, neither
locality nor universality, and neither transience nor ubiquity, make anything
more or less real, according to ontological parity. Science cannot disagree.
Cosmology and physics, for example, exhibit such parity. Galaxies are not
more real than atoms, since stars formed from atomic condensations, while
atoms are not more real than galaxies, because galactic evolution created
atoms heavier than oxygen.
Another corollary to a pragmatic process ontology is “real modalism”—
the reality of dynamic generalities. Not to be confused with “modal
realism” in which a proposition’s possibility is made true by an actual world
among innumerable equally existent worlds, “real modalism” takes the truth
of modal propositions to rest on a multiplicity of generals existing in this
one world. To say that “a rock necessarily falls when dropped” isn’t to think
that all worlds of possible rocks have fallings from droppings, but only to
say that this actual world has a generality of unsupported falling rocks. An
ontology of real generals depicts this actual world as one of innumerable
interrelated regularities. Nature has habits.
On Peirce’s pragmatic maxim, conceiving the reality of thing calls for
conceptions of its potencies for detectible effects at any time under certain
contexts. Real things exhibit habits of activity extending indefinitely both
backwards and forwards in time. This realism, central to the pragmaticism
of his later philosophy, is only recommended but not determined by
induction, since real habituality surpasses any finite amount of observation.
(That is why no “problem of induction” derails the productive realism of
pragmatism.)
Peirce asserts that “pragmaticism could hardly have entered a head that
was not already convinced that there are real generals.”11 These are not
static universals or rigid forms; their role is to be “physically efficient” at
most.12 They do not depart from existence in the absence of activating
conditions; their persistent reality explains why conditions can activate
consequences. In Peirce’s words again, “there are, in a Pragmatistical sense,
Real habits (which Really would produce effects, under circumstances that
may not happen to get actualized, and are thus Real generals).”13
Real generals are neither strict universals nor chancy possibilities. They
account for the applicability of universal propositions, such as “trees alwaysgrow leaves in the spring” or “tin melts at 449°F.” Real generals also
explain the accuracy of statistical probabilities—for example, “more than
60% of 65-year-old Americans today will reach age 80” or “the typical fruit
fly lives for 14 days.” Real generals are neither strict necessities nor
uncaused chances, but rather their combination: a stable regularity that
inherently deviates from strict necessity.
Scientific fields use formulaic laws for precise calculations of
experimental consequences, but their universality is grammatically
deceptive. When physics says, “An electron has a charge of –1” it is only
saying, “If something is an electron, then it carries a –1 charge,” and the
question of whether any electron actually or potentially exists is left
indeterminate by this hypothetical proposition. Universality does not bear
the burden of actuality.
Potentiality and actuality are rooted in ongoing potency, which is
perpetually realizing (dynamically be-ing). Nothing is static, entirely
passive, or suspended in mere possibility. At the very least, something be￾ing has potency enough to forestall a lapse into non-being. Potentiality is
realizable potency; actuality is realized potency.
Possibility and necessity are conceptual classifications, characterizing
links of inductive and deductive inference, but they lack exemplification in
actuality by themselves. To be, it is sufficient to be able to make a
difference to something else. Sheer necessity, like mere possibility, may
lend the appearance of accountability, yet it offers no efficacy, or
explanatory power, and cannot be responsible for a single fact.
The Real (ontological): potentialities–actualities–eventualities.
The Conceptual (logical): possibilities, contingencies, necessities.
Potentialities, actualities, and eventualities find creations, confluences, and
compatibilities, as the course of the cosmos proceeds. Possibilities,
contingencies, and necessities set negations, contradictions, and
incompatibilities, as the course of thought proceeds. When thought collides
with an impossibility, thinking must change course, not reality.
As a corollary to pragmatism’s accounting for ontological/logical
distinctions, it cannot accept strict determinism in reality, althoughpragmatism does expect all actualities to have conditioning causes. A
further corollary to pragmatic process ontology and its real modalism is the
tenet that complexity can be explained by simplicity in interactivity plus
time, yielding creativity. Nature’s vitality is visible in creative growth. Real
generals themselves undergo development like any sustained process.
Complexity evidently arises from simplicity. The rival tenet, that
complexity can only be explained by complexity, was enshrined in Western
philosophy by Anaxagoras, Socrates, and Plato, and then endorsed by
Christian theologians crediting a supreme Mind with all creation. The
resulting “argument from design” lingered long enough to mistakenly
contradict Darwinian evolution.
Summary
Knowing is an achievement principally of active exploration and inquiry,
not passive perception or mere cognition. Knowledge, for pragmatism,
therefore occurs within that constructive arena of human–reality interaction,
not entirely on reality’s side (as if the mediation of knowing is primarily
external) or on humanity’s side (as if the mediation of knowing is primarily
internal). Taking mentality and its ways of knowing to be contextual is only
a half-way step towards pragmatism, leaving knowledge mired in
relativism.
Realities themselves exist interdependently and contextually. Allowing
that the mind works contextually while expecting the world to work
mechanically only renders knowledge a mystery. For pragmatism, the
dynamic coordination of knowing occurs in the same world of activity
where all other life functions are already encountering the world.
In a dynamic world, creativity is no mystery. Peirce agreed with Darwin
that complexity is precisely what needs explanation more than simplicity.
He and other pragmatists treated a chemical process, a living organism, an
individual, a mind, a society, a culture, and anything else as the product of
developmental growth. Supposing that simplicity always exists before any
complexity, or expecting complexity to just appear without development, or
imagining how final complexity must be hidden within development, drifts
into unscientific speculation.Explanations for natural knowledge do not need to aim at eliminating
indeterminacy or impermanence. Accounts ignoring developmental
histories while prescribing necessities are the abstractions that fall short of
sufficient explanation.5
Truth in Consequences
Permanence philosophies adopt a “retrospective” view of truth. Real things
should be known, as they are antecedent to knowing. The real cannot be
other than exactly what it is, so right thinking about reality must approach
that exactitude. Mutability in thinking about something immutable is a
mismatch, to be reduced as much as possible for gaining knowledge.
Changing matters, so plentiful for perception, keeps thought in flux and
minds distracted by practical pursuits, but minds unfocused and disunited
will not acquire knowledge.
Unwavering unity, that mark of permanence, serves as the essence of
knowing. Right thinking aims at this ideal rectitude of strictest conformity
with the real’s own unity. The real is surely related to true knowledge of it,
without destabilizing that rectitude of thought. Thinking rightly must
therefore appreciate reality’s independence from mentality while seeking
signs that thoughts are relating to realities.
James well understood the challenge of thinking rightly, particularly
about two matters, thoughts and things, that must be akin yet distinct. He
wrote,
Truth, as any dictionary will tell you, is a property of certain of our
ideas. It means their “agreement,” as falsity means their disagreement,
with “reality.” Pragmatists and intellectualists both accept this
definition as a matter of course. They begin to quarrel only after the
question is raised as to what may precisely be meant by the term
“agreement,” and what by the term “reality,” when reality is taken as
something for our ideas to agree with. In answering these questions the
pragmatists are more analytic and painstaking, the intellectualists more
offhand and irreflective. The popular notion is that a true idea must
copy its reality.
1Pragmatism also expects realities to relate to thoughts and hence resolve
the challenge of knowledge. Reality is fluctuating, pluralistic, holistic,
interdependent, and dynamic. In response, thinking rightly will be flexible,
perspectival, non-dualistic, contextual, and anticipatory. Realities and
mentalities have the same basic character, so knowing is not radically
different from the rest of practical thinking. Knowledge arises from the
ongoing interrelationships of mentality with reality. Realities participate in
their discovery, not in a retrospectively passive manner, but in a
prospectively active manner.
Minds at Rest
A philosophy of permanence explains knowledge in terms of right thinking
about realities relating to thoughts. How does thinking understand that its
thoughts are rightly relating to realities? Permanence is the needed sign.
Knowledge must share in the true character of the real in its permanence,
and the real lacks multiplicity or mutability, so the path to knowing must
eliminate vagueness, variability, and variance in thinking. Two thoughts
cannot match the same real thing so long as they differ from each other.
There wouldn’t be discordant truths about a real thing, so plurality and
perspective are deficiencies, deviations from the truly real, despite the way
that attention to variability is conducive to practical mentality.
Knowledge in itself is not variable. To say that “knowledge changes”
only points to modified knowledge in a mind keeping up with reality, not
that truth changes for each mind. Besides, a philosophy of permanence
insists, how could change satisfy a curious intellect seeking the real?
Whatever is really responsible for change cannot itself be changing, lest
change go unexplained, so thinking must find its own rest in conceptual
stasis to know the real. Thinking rightly amidst the mental cacophony of
mutable thoughts is an intellectual challenge calling for the regulation of
concepts. Regimenting concepts, giving them strict bounds to eliminate
vagueness and vagary, guides thinking towards that defined and determined
uniformity that characterizes the real’s own unity.
A philosophy of permanence aligns with rationalism as a theory of
knowledge. A rationalist philosophy seeks what is changeless in the mind sothat thinking can apprehend the real. Seeking the changeless in a mind
already overflowing with cascading and confluent thoughts calls for
strenuous concentration. Flow and flux find relationality in full force, as the
suggestivity of one meaning beckons the next and the next, and so on
without cessation. Structural relations between thoughts and things is
knowledge’s aim, not substantial relations among fusing and fissioning
thoughts.
Where can a mind come to a full stop on something specially stable? All
thoughts are not created equal. A singular idea or concept, whatever its
origin known or unknown, must be statically beheld for mental assessment.
By conceiving just that concept distinctly and clearly, without taint from
unnecessary relations or contrary notions, the mind becomes free from error
and deception. Permanence in unity is now paired with conception in purity.
Rationalism’s core notion of truth is conveyed by this primal co-unity. The
mind possesses truth by ensuring that the object of its conception is just that
concept itself, rather than something different.
For rationalism, thinking rightly deals in true conceptions. Abstractions
liberated from specificities of temporality, spatiality, perspective, and
personality may pass that stringent test. That is why only what is general
and universal could be fully real for rationalism, leaving anything particular
or individual in an unreal or dependent condition. As James explains,
Rationalism is comfortable only in the presence of abstractions. This
pragmatist talk about truths in the plural, about their utility and
satisfactoriness, about the success with which they “work,” etc.,
suggests to the typical intellectualist mind a sort of coarse lame
second-rate makeshift article of truth. Such truths are not real truth.
Such tests are merely subjective. As against this, objective truth must
be something non-utilitarian, haughty, refined, remote, august, exalted.
It must be an absolute correspondence of our thoughts with an equally
absolute reality. It must be what we ought to think, unconditionally.
The conditioned ways in which we do think are so much irrelevance
and matter for psychology. Down with psychology, up with logic, in all
this question!2Anything particular, relational, perspectival, contingent, or variable cannot
participate in a valid conception, so such a thing must be more illusory than
fully real. Whatever minds think they encounter through perceptions from
the bodily senses cannot be real in their own right, unless and until rational
concepts regiment them into such schemas as categorized classes and
lawful necessities. Only the purest ratiocination of strict reasoning ensures
knowledge’s conformity with the unitary and permanently real.
Rationalism took its fully modern form by divesting from anthropology
and psychology. Studying whatever many minds happen to unreasonably
think about their worlds is relegated to anthropological psychology;
studying what the rational mind must logically think about reality is the
province of philosophy.
On that rationalist basis, empiricism can either limit itself to the
phenomenal (unreal) realms of human belief and all the causes of folly and
error, or empiricism can merge into rationalism by allowing pure concepts
and prior (a priori) categories to dictate what counts as acquired knowledge
of the world. Empiricism kept insisting that perception and its basis in
original sensation, when aggregated through congruent association,
accumulated into plenty of knowledge. In response, rationalism kept
demanding degrees of consistency and coherence that no amount of
aggregated sensations could deliver.
Sensationalism, associationism, and positivism from Thomas Hobbes and
John Locke to J. S. Mill and Rudolf Carnap never surmounted that
challenge. Various strategies to covertly insert conceptual structure into
perceptions have been proposed, so that observations would be ready for
propositional and inferential roles. Rationalists demanded the same
preconceptions for perception, of course, especially because the idea that
thinking is instead caused and controlled by material sensation was
intolerable for denying freedom to the mind. How could sensory
impingements from objects be responsible for, or be held responsible to,
beliefs about those objects? The more that empiricists insisted that
perception has to cause concepts to form, the more that rationalists insisted
that the mind alone must make perceptions meaningful.3
The Kantian demand for percept–concept cooperation only states the
terms of this tension, without resolving it. Idealists next noticed how that
tension is relievable if the external world bears no responsibility formeaning and a singular storehouse of concepts governs all reasoning. This
is an idealism crediting a super-mind, an Absolute mind, for all knowledge.
Human minds are included within this Absolute, borrowing concepts from
its ideal schema in order to make particular judgments as they participate in
cognition like cells within an organ.
The twentieth-century “linguistic turn” taken by ordinary language
philosophy was absorbed into that rationalist–empiricist conflict, and it
soon reinvented idealism. Dismissive towards idealism for its misuse of
language’s evident ability to make reference to the external world, analytic
philosophy chose the proposition as the fundamental unit to bear truth.
What makes a proposition true? If a mere perception couldn’t even cause
the mind to apply the correct concept for it, no perceptions could ever
compel an entire proposition to be credible. Look out a window—how
many propositional beliefs should be impressed upon one’s mind within a
10-second gaze? The epistemological problem of foundationalism and its
quest for original observations of worldly truths cannot answer a simple
question that its own theory raises.
Analytic philosophy, as a phase of post-Kantian philosophy, instead
placed complete responsibility for credible belief on the mind’s own
activity, where a belief’s only credible support comes from other beliefs.
This “space of reasons” insulates rationality from causality, which
comported well with analytic philosophy’s truce with scientific naturalism,
leaving the world without norms, values, or meanings anyways. The
complete burden of all rationality was placed upon language alone, where
no individual minds could have a single cogent thought without consulting
common sense, including the sensible minds of philosophers.
Robert Brandom concisely describes this sort of reduction of rationality
and logic to a branch of linguistics:
By “the linguistic turn,” here I mean putting language at the center of
philosophical concerns and understanding philosophical problems to
begin with in terms of the language one uses in formulating them. But
there is a more specific significance one can take language to have. By
“lingualism” (compare: “rationalism”) . . . I shall mean commitment to
understanding conceptual capacities (discursiveness in general) in
terms of linguistic capacities.4This position amounts to linguistic idealism. Language substitutes for the
transcendental super-mind as the common storehouse of applicable
concepts available for credible judgments capable of being true or false.
Philosophy now had to ponder, “Which language?” The answer of
“God’s own language” was no longer an option for secular philosophy.
Could logic or syntactics serve instead? No, reference to an external world
beyond the sphere of language requires semantics, just as science needs
more input than mathematics. However, expecting all intellectual problems
to be askable and answerable in English exposed the parochialism of
analytic philosophy.
Having reintroduced one social science, linguistics, back into philosophy,
others followed. Anthropology could support cultural relativism about
human knowledge. “Experimental” philosophy could tell what to think
about free will or moral judgment by the sort of group polling done in
sociology. Sociology could explain science’s paradigms in terms of power
structures within scientific fields. Psychology could chart the bounds of
one’s subjective world by the extent of one’s personal vocabulary. Intuitions
of philosophers pumping up their arguments was yet another appeal to
conformity and familiarity.
Rationalism devolving down to linguistic relativism soon degenerated
into skepticism all over again. Linguistic rationalism holds that thinking
rightly amounts to thinking coherently along with all other human thinkers
using the same language. Whether you are able to know something depends
only on the available reasons already affirmed by the vast mass of language
users. One can know whatever others think they know too, but is this really
knowledge, anywhere?
As the coherentist theory of epistemology well understands, any set of
beliefs achieving internal coherence may or may not accurately represent
what the external world is really like. The Flat Earth Society can recount its
worldview on a pamphlet without stating two beliefs in contradiction.
Empiricism has a point: the actual world has to somehow make a credible
difference to belief, too. Linguistic coherentism is a schematic idealism that
arouses skepticism. It all comes back to the real issue: What concepts
should we be using to better understand the world?
By all means agree that concepts sophisticated enough for reasoning are
expressible in human language. The corollary is also accurate, that languageis adaptable for the reach of human conceptualization. Since language
should answer to the development of concepts and learning, and not the
other way around, philosophy can refocus on intelligent cognition rather
than just linguistics.5 All talk but no action would leave a species pretty
speechless. Language as the preeminent tool for coordinating responsible
practices should answer directly to worldly engagements. By comparison,
schematism about concepts only dealing with other concepts does not
prevent skepticism about knowledge, so some sort of practical empiricism
remains indispensable.
Confronted with that dilemma, of skepticism or schematism, empiricism
must address the fundamental issue: what is thinking, rightly? Accused of
disregarding clarity for cacophony and abandoning truth for wanton
opinion, empiricism cannot allow rationalism to define the nature of
reasoning itself. Reasoning deals in conceived ideas—what kinds of
conceptions are best?
The heart of rationalism must be challenged, and pragmatists did not
miss that target. Even if a mind concentrated upon a distinctively clear idea
successfully avoids an erroneous thought, that mind gets trapped in its own
fixation without intending anything else, other than this present luminous
conception. The reality of that conception is admissible, but nothing more.
Anticipating this objection, that a mind at rest is a mind enraptured by
itself, rationalism postulates that all distinct conceptions do intend
something else, so the mind is simultaneously thinking about a conception
and its intended object. This “intentionality” to conceptions cannot amount
to any knowledge about the reality of that object, however, since one’s
conception of the conception and one’s conception of its object are mentally
identical. One might as well try to verify the accuracy of an old memory by
remembering it again the next day. Pragmatism is unimpressed by appeals
to the “self-evident,” “self-explanatory,” and the like. Why should any idea
radiate its truthfulness without borrowed light?
Examples of “a priori” propositions offered by rationalists only seem
indubitable among those already in agreement about knowing and using
particular concepts, an agreement which rationalists cannot explain without
abandoning the point of self-illumined concepts.6 Pragmatism does not seek
a final rest upon certainties or stoppages of thought; at most, cognition finds
temporary rests and reliefs from doubt. Satisfactory ideas allow for workingbeliefs, but only because they are presently going unquestioned, not
because they are unquestionable. Conceptual truths and analytic
propositions get abandoned when they prove unworkable and irrelevant.
While a statement radiates its own truth today, a following generation will
find it inapt, otiose, or meaningless.
Pragmatism learns the lesson: substantial relations make something real,
not its own self-contained or self-sustained isolation. A monadic unity to a
conception goes nowhere; a dyadic mirroring of a conception gets nowhere
real. Neither purity nor tautology are interesting marks of truth. More
should be expected from thinking rightly, if thinking reaches reality.
Concepts at Work
Dynamic thinking must reach farther than frozen or fixated mentality. In
Peirce’s terminology, what is needed is a triadic account of conceptions, and
hence a triadic theory of thinking, inference, and reasoning.
James was ever-ready to credit Peirce for formulating the key principle of
reason itself, a rule of clear thinking, in Peirce’s “How to Make Our Ideas
Clear” from 1878: “Consider what effects, that might conceivably have
practical bearings, we conceive the object of our conception to have. Then,
our conception of these effects is the whole of our conception of the
object.”7
James expressed Peirce’s pragmatic maxim in his own book Pragmatism:
To attain perfect clearness in our thoughts of an object, then, we need
only consider what conceivable effects of a practical kind the object
may involve—what sensations we are to expect from it, and what
reactions we must prepare. Our conception of these effects, whether
immediate or remote, is then for us the whole of our conception of the
object, so far as that conception has positive significance at all.8
Notice the core features of their pragmatic principle: (a) a conception
must have an object, (b) that object must have conceivable effects, and (c)those conceivable effects must be able to make some sort of difference to
our practical activities.
Only this threefold relationality of a clear conception about “object–
effects–evidence” allows cognition to think clearly about something real,
opening up an opportunity to realize a thing’s reality. An idea of something
ineffective is empty; a search for something undifferentiable is blind. By
attending to practical matters, no mind could ever be lost in complete
falsity, even if knowledge at best comes in degrees. Mentalities are always
somewhere anchored in realities, with intelligible realities always somehow
accessible to intelligences. The spectre of skepticism that haunted Europe is
dispelled by the modesty of pragmatism.
On Peirce’s principle, realism is not abandoned, but rescued. Realities
remain central to genuine conceptions. Conceiving something without
effects is to ponder something lacking reality. (Only mathematics deals in
such conceptions, as nothing real is intended or implicated, or needed to
account for mathematical truth.) Conceiving something only in definitional
terms may intend to refer to something, but it does not assert any reality.
For example, thinking about how “every body must have extension” does
not require the actual existence of any physical bodies or extended things.
Proposing that a conception is realizable on Peirce’s conditions is unlike
asserting that a proposition is representational. Sustaining a proposition in
one’s thoughts lets one imagine how a similarly static arrangement exists in
reality, but a mere representation never guarantees realization nor provides
a sure way to confirm its truth. A genuine conception is instead a dynamic
modeling about a possibly real thing participating in the process of its
realization for confirmation. This conceptual model consists of potential
instructions for experimentally realizing its actuality.
A conception passing Peirce’s clarity test is triadic in multiple senses,
explored by his semiotics or theory of signs. Three features are essential for
a revitalized empiricism in the hands of Peirce and James, and further
developed by Dewey.
First, a clarified conception is our conception since the psychology of
right thinking is communal, not solipsistic, where multiple thinkers are
jointly thinking about reality. Lone thinkers are either arranging thoughts
for dialogue or amusing themselves in reveries; even Cartesian meditationsuse a public language for public understanding. This communality to
mentality is emphasized in social psychology.
Second, a clearly consequential conception of something lends itself to
processes of inferential thinking automatically, without supplemental
abstract premises. Chains of meaningful implications are built into all
conceptions worth thinking about, since objects have conceived effects, and
those effects must have conceivable implications for other matters, and so
on, endlessly. Mentality’s endless enchainment in sequences and syntheses
inspires semiotics.
Third, thinking rightly for knowing must predict empirical consequences,
plan out differentiable conditions, and thereby confirm experimental results.
Unlike deduction’s validities or induction’s probabilities, such thinking
requires abduction’s hypotheses about possible realities responsible for
empirical patterns. Candidates for knowledge are creative conceptions of
objects existing within their contexts and contributing to environing effects.
What is real is what can make a difference to something else, and what is
knowably real marks that detectible difference for thinkers suspecting its
role. Thinking’s ability to craft and re-craft concepts for recasting ongoing
engagements with reality is a theory of mentality offered by pragmatism.
Knowledge’s goal of objectivity about the world can be reconciled with
mind’s knowing activity within the world. Minds are not just working with
ideas after the world makes its impact. How the world affects knowers is
itself controllable by intellects seeking genuine information. Whatever
things are doing all by themselves has no value for knowledge. The
meaning of objectivity cannot be “that answer that no one could ever find
out,” but instead “the answer that striving learners can discover.” Every
philosophy should at least agree that what is objective is something that
thought can conform with. The alternative, taking objectivity to be what
thought needn’t conform to, leaves thought to wander lost in subjectivity.
Pragmatism, among all philosophies, takes most seriously the tenet that
anything real is something to which thought may conform and confirm. A
conception of something to be considered without any attendant
consequences in the encounterable world is a conception of something not
real. Conversely, only through conceiving possible empirical effects of a
thing could there be a conception of that thing’s reality. This is the heart of
the pragmatic maxim.In a later article, “What Pragmatism Is” from 1906, Peirce restated his
central thesis.
[A] conception, that is, the rational purport of a word or other
expression, lies exclusively in its conceivable bearing upon the
conduct of life; so that, since obviously nothing that might not result
from experiment can have any direct bearing upon conduct, if one can
define accurately all the conceivable experimental phenomena which
the affirmation or denial of a concept could imply, one will have
therein a complete definition of the concept, and there is absolutely
nothing more in it. For this doctrine he [Peirce] invented the name
pragmatism.9
Something in utter isolation cannot be conceived as having any
properties, capacities, powers (and the like), and hence it cannot have any
explanatory role with regard to anything else. Unless there are empirical
consequences from a thing’s reality, confirmations and disconfirmations are
not possible, and no truths about that thing, including its existence, could be
asserted.
Knowledge on Trial
Pragmatism does not reduce a thing’s reality to just its discernible effects,
nor does it collapse the distinction between truth and reality. Pragmatism is
a robust realism.
Pragmatism does identify the truth of a thing’s actuality with the
confirmation of that thing’s capacity to yield specific discernible effects in
the world. For pragmatism, a real thing undergoes its own variations in
order to effect change for anything else. Something actively real must be
potentially realizable, in the double sense of becoming manifest for the
world through its effects, as well as becoming evident for the inquirer
through observations of those effects. The truth lies neither in what is
evident nor in what is real, but rather in the coordination of what a real
thing can perform with what the inquiring knower can confirm.Truth, in short, must make a difference, because things being real do
make a difference. In 1907 James stated his version of the pragmatic maxim
in Pragmatism:
But the great assumption of the intellectualists is that truth means
essentially an inert static relation. When you’ve got your true idea of
anything, there’s an end of the matter. You’re in possession; you know;
you have fulfilled your thinking destiny . . . Pragmatism, on the other
hand, asks its usual question. “Grant an idea or belief to be true,” it
says, “what concrete difference will its being true make in anyone’s
actual life? How will the truth be realized? What experiences will be
different from those which would obtain if the belief were false? What,
in short, is the truth’s cash-value in experiential terms?”10
Truth, in short, must make a difference, because things being real
do make a difference.
Intellectualism (rationalism) is satisfied with unrealizable truth, matched
with invariant reality on one side and paired to static mentality on the other.
Truth in itself is beyond a knower’s appreciation; only an idea or belief gets
realized by a knower, which may or may not happen to be true (that
depends on reality, not any knower), so that a knower could possess a true
belief without realizing its truth.
Rationalism does not fail to emphasize how a knower can appreciate true
beliefs through intellectual justification. However, a well-justified belief is
not automatically true, according to rationalism, since the rationalist
definition of truth is not simply “justified belief” but something rather like
“justified true belief.” Truth must be a third required factor for knowledge,
since the truth of a belief depends solely on what reality is like, not what a
knower has been able to justify.
As sensible as this triadic approach may seem, it is impossible for a
knower to participate in the making of a truth, for this rationalist view of
truth. Knowledge is attained only if its three terms—reality, truth, and belief
—remain in rigid alignment. If a knower modifies a belief after further
thoughtful justification, that belief may no longer be true.For rationalism, a knower cannot change a truth. A knower can change a
belief, but changing a truth requires altering a reality, and knowers must
never alter the reality to be known. The objective of knowledge is
independent reality, not dependent matters. Creating an object and thereby
making an appreciable “truth” is no proper method for authentic
knowledge. Knowledge is about what truly is, not about what knowers are
doing; what knowers are doing is constantly changing, while realities to be
known are statically indifferent to knowers. If knowers would know reality
as it truly is, they must cease all interference with realities.
Strictures against the knower’s interference with realities are upheld by
every modern type of rationalism, from objective idealism and scientific
materialism to positivistic empiricism.
For objective idealism, what is already known by absolute mind can at
best be partially reduplicated within a knower’s own mind. For a
materialism or physicalism, science controls experimental conditions only
in order to reveal what was already naturally there. As for positivism, the
point of perception is to directly appreciate what is presently given to the
senses, not to infuse perceptions with the knower’s prior conceptions.
With each of these three options, the relationship between a knower’s
mentality and the reality to be known is contorted into a conundrum.
For idealism, the knower’s mind is trying to duplicate the schematically
perfect knowledge. Since this imperfect finite mind is already contained
within the absolute mind, that condition of knowledge duplication could
never be confirmed by any knower. For physicalism, since the theorizer’s
hypothesis only concerns what something real is already doing, the schema
for legitimate experiments must never elicit alterations to that postulated
reality. That seems sound in principle, yet the satisfaction of this condition
is not itself confirmable by science. For positivism, the knower’s perceptual
beliefs should at most schematically reflect given perceptions as they are,
not in a distorted manner introduced by thought. Conceptual relations
inherent to a perceptual belief must be due only to an intrinsically non￾conceptual perception, by way of some unknowable relation between them.
Idealism, physicalism, and positivism are each missing a crucial link.
Other versions of rationalism invariably reach that same skeptical dead￾end. Rationalism effectively forbids a knower’s knowledge that truth
conditions are truly satisfied. The truth-relation is foremost set by a realityindependent from the knower’s mentality, while the rationalistic promise
that a mental schema rightly aligns a knower’s beliefs with reality is not
confirmable by knowers. Knowers are left only with formal schemas and
the mere hope, unprovable by any further philosophizing, that the shape of
truths formed from that schema may match the shape of realities.
Kantian philosophy, and most of post-Kantian philosophy, including
analytic philosophy and much continental philosophy, exemplified this
inevitably skeptical conundrum. Pragmatist interpretations of Hegel11 along
with (enactivist) cognitive science, realistic phenomenology, and some
philosophies of impermanence can avoid that dead-end, along with
pragmatism itself.
Pragmatism’s full resolution is the starkest of all alternatives: truthful
knowledge creatively emerges from thoughtfully deliberate entanglements
with continually changing realities. This alternative violates strictures of
invariance set by rationalism, starting from (a) knowable reality is aloof
from the activity of knowing; (b) truths about fundamental realities cannot
vary across knowers or change over time; and (c) knowable truth cannot
basically depend on the dynamic creativity of knowers.
Pragmatism firmly insists that the coordinating relationship of truth
between knowing and reality must be brought into existence by reality￾modifying engagements with the world. Rationalism always complains that
workable ideas could, at best, luckily match up with stable realities. “What
is useless may still be true, and what is useful may yet be false!” was the
rationalist critique from all sides. No matter how empirically satisfying an
idea could be, and worthy of the label of knowledge, the rationalist at most
admits that this idea had to have been really true all along, long before that
idea was confirmed or even confirmable.
It is precisely that “retrospective” view of truth from rationalism which
pragmatism attempts to replace. John Dewey’s 1907 article “Reality and the
Criterion for the Truth of Ideas” states the pragmatist view of truth in this
way:
After an idea is made true, we naturally say, in retrospect, “it was true
all the time.” Now this truism is quite innocuous as a truism, being just
a restatement of the fact that the idea has, as matter of fact, worked
successfully. But it may be regarded not as a truism but as furnishingsome additional knowledge, as if it were, indeed, the dawning of a
revelation regarding truth. Then it is said that the idea worked or was
verified because it was already inherently, just as idea, the truth, the
pragmatist, so it is said, making the error of supposing that it is true
because it works. If one remembers that what the experimentalist
means is that the effective working of an idea and its truth are one and
the same thing—this working being neither the cause nor the evidence
of truth but its nature—it is hard to see the point of this statement.12
With this bold statement about the irrelevance of “truth” prior to the
effort to acquire knowledge, we can summarize pragmatist contentions
about knowing and truth made by Peirce, James, and Dewey.
Summary
Conceptions of realities having any meaning for constructive explorations
and rational inquiries must include real linkages with empirical matters. In
order for a conception of something real to serve in inquiry’s effort to
develop the coordination leading to knowledge, that conception should
include ideas of what may empirically follow from affirming it and denying
it.
Imagination plays a crucial yet constrained role here for inquiry. Creative
ideas need not have existential import to be meaningful, but if they are
taken to be about something real, they must be developed into rational
conceptions ready for application in worldly engagements and empirical
inquiries.
For the pragmatist prospective view of truth, truths become true, and not
merely known, through the engaging inquiries of knowers. Knowledge is
pragmatically (experientially, empirically, experimentally) justified belief,
and “truths” are simply alternative labels for beliefs known.
In short, “P is true” means “P is known,” or perhaps “P is knowable”
when a new truth is proposed. There is no further intellectual content to an
assertion of truth beyond these meanings. “P is true” cannot just mean “P”because “P” by itself is either an assertion that P is known (on pragmatist
terms), or it lacks a context needed to intend anything.6
Being and Thinking
For pragmatism, truths accrue to successful engagements with the
cooperative world, which is to say that knowable realities emerge through
practical experiments to control outcomes.
A. Realities participate in knowledge-creation through productive
activities of inquiring animals pursuing goals.
B. Results indicate how intelligent animals are discovering reliable
procedures that elicit reacting realities.
Pragmatism takes scenarios A and B to be equivalent descriptions of one
process: A and B are convertible and exchangeable without loss or
distortion of meaning. Only connotations of words and preconceptions
about terms would allow A and B to be read as different matters.
Grammatically, A and B suggest a directionality, from realities to
inquiries to ends, or the reverse. Proposition A may sound more realistic
and “objective” than B, if B seems “subjective” or even idealistic. A
linguistic bias of selective emphasis could be at work as well. Proposition A
allows for an emphasis on knowledge’s confirmation of truth while B
suggests an emphasis on mind’s journey of discovery. All the same,
pragmatism observes one and the same endeavor. Rival philosophies,
especially philosophies of permanence, are compelled to disagree.
Thinking with Reality
To survey the philosophical landscape, five main features stand out.
Pragmatism asserts that these five matters are bonded together, each in
cohesion with the rest:World—Truth—Mind—Purpose—Value
Non-pragmatist philosophies tear away a trio for metaphysical
superiority while denigrating the rest. Rationalism orients Mind to Truth–
World. Subjectivism centers Value in Mind–Purpose. Absolutism identifies
Mind with World–Value. Pragmatism’s commitment to all of them in
concert is a fourth main option, while the abandonment of all five
characterizes the fifth option of Mysticism.
Let rationalism have its say first, castigating pragmatism for tying
knowledge down to variable practicalities. Where does the elimination of
value from knowledge and truth leave mind? An intellect aiming at truth is
best insulated from affective and emotional biases, to stay impersonally
objective. Practicalities divert our particular minds; intellectualities unify
mind. Mentality is thus divided internally, either facing reality or
entertaining fancies. The intellect has a primary purpose, to seek truth for its
own sake. Pragmatism, according to rationalism, allows other goals to steer
knowledge. As the rationalist view of pragmatism says, “knowledge is
valuable, so what is valuable is known,” to put pragmatism into a fallacious
slogan. Truth is most valuable, among many values, but nothing pragmatic
follows, as far as rationalism can see.
What really gives a proposition its truth value? Rationalism counters with
its own slogan, “truth’s value cannot imply value’s truth.” Since most any
thought could be valued at some time by someone somewhere, too many
ideas are valuable and hence knowable as true. That vast cacophony of
truths would never be internally consistent—endless contradictions ensue,
where instances of “P” and “not-P,” cases of “S is P” and “S is not P,” and
beliefs about “R exists” and “R does not exist” are allowable as
simultaneously true.
Suspending the rule of non-contradiction (and the law of excluded
middle) opens up the wide vista of complete relativism where very little has
to be wrong. Robust truth, for rationalism, preserves non-contradiction and
prevents relativism. Regulated by robust truth, known ideas are about what
objectively exists (not whatever desire objectifies). Robust truth therefore
filters out divisive Purpose and distractive Value from the intellectual mind
seeking unified reality rather than chaotic practicality. That unity to an
objective reality has the form of that singular proposition of stable fact,where fact-shaped realities give propositions their truth values. What is
factual can be knowable, as rationality corresponds with Truth–World.1
The next voice to speak up on behalf of knowledge is subjectivism,
which is no more impressed by truth correspondence than pragmatism, but
it discards unitary and fixed truth altogether. Avoiding relativism at all costs
mustn’t demand too high a price, for a mind trying to know “the” truth.
Subjectivism is compelled to ask, “how could it be claimed with surety that
‘minds are many, but truth is one’?”
Tearing mentality apart to liberate disinterested knowing sets up the
“intellect” over and against the rest of vital thinking. In the process, nothing
guarantees that an intellect truly attains knowledge. That independence of
reality from mentality instead opens a gap between a proposition beheld by
a mind and a fact beholden to reality. Formulating a proposition with
needed precision would always be a matter of luck. (And stepping outside
of all mentality to inspect realities before assembling propositions isn’t
humanly possible.) Any actual fit bridging that gap cannot itself be an
intelligible object of thought for any subject.
The thought that “the proposition P* that ‘there a fact F corresponding
with proposition P’ matches fact F* about the mind–reality relationship” is
a sort of mental stuttering, or an eliminable recursion. In other words, to
assert “P is really true” is not different from a person just asserting P. All the
same, assertions are assertions made in a person’s mind, not truths revealed
to minds. The logical dualism between the aloof intellect and the practical
mind, and the ontological dualism separating thoughts from things, deflates
confidence that any intellect is actually knowing truths about things, rather
than just relations among ideas. For subjectivism, correspondence is a
bridge to nowhere.
These are all complaints heard from pragmatists too. Rationalism
decidedly risks skepticism, ensuring that the intellect avoids relativism but
leaving minds minding only their own thoughts. Under such circumstances,
subjectivism concludes that thoughtful minds are at least known best.
Skepticism about knowing external truths still leaves plenty for minds to
think about pursuing. World and Truth can therefore be dropped from
consideration.
With World and Truth sidelined, Subjectivism points out that a mind
surely knows what it wants and knows how to think in ways conducive toattaining those ends. The nature of the subject lies in willing, not reasoning.
Thinking should be guided by attentive Purpose and attractive Value. If this
stance is a kind of relativism, with each subjective mind determining for
itself what serves as veritable belief, at least skepticism is no longer a
worry. Let knowing be determinable through each mind’s own pursuits.
What is desirable can be knowable, by the plurality of Mind–Purpose.2
Skepticism towards truth marks the key pivot for absolutism as well.
Both rationalism and subjectivism, one reluctantly and the other eagerly,
raise skepticism about truth. However, such skepticism is no wiser for its
admission of universal misconception and error, since truth need not be lost.
To class all thinking as erroneous presupposes the possibility of correct
thinking. It is not possible to “miss” in one’s “take” about some matter
without the potential, however slight, for a veritable “hit.” Throw one’s
hand up into the night sky to vaguely point in the direction of the overhead
stars—no bystander would comment, “That’s a poor way to point at Vega.”
Where no “fit” for a thought is in place, no possible “fact” of accuracy or
inaccuracy is around. Likewise, for absolutism, the fact of inaccuracy
implies a possible fit for a thought is around. Assigning wrongness
anywhere lies within the same cognition as admitting rightness somewhere.
Therefore, non-contradiction prevails over any thinking more rational than
insanity (thus refuting relativism and subjectivism). There is no error
without truth, and not merely in the abstract but also for concrete truth in
the actual world where errors are plentiful.
Any mind’s thinking with purport about some matter, thereby classifiable
as accurate or inaccurate, demonstrates the inherent value of veracity to
mentality. Absolutism, better than subjectivism, captures the essence of
mind. Thinking cannot be completely unrealistic; the purposive activity of
mentality presumes an objective reality as knowable, since veracity cannot
be conceived as inherently unknowable. Setting out from skepticism ends
with admitting that knowledge is realistic, and that reality must be truly
knowable by mentality. Not the mentality of particular minds in their
erroneous partiality and plurality, to be sure, but rather the absolute (non￾relative and unitary) Minded Reality.
For absolutism, individual minds are themselves incomplete and
insufficient, and less real than the single reality they intend. Valuable verity
dispels relativism and implies objectivity, requiring the universal structuringof what would otherwise be chaos. Transcending fragmentary subjectivity
and incomplete purpose arrives at the whole finality of Value, the full
attainment of all purposes, where any distinction between true mind and
true reality vanishes. What is real is already knowable, within the absolute
totality of World–Value.3
The worldviews of Truth–World (rationalism), Mind–Purpose
(subjectivism), and World–Value (absolutism) do not exhaust philosophical
options. Besides many impoverished philosophies trying to blend
incongruent samplings from the set [world, truth, mind, purpose, value],
there are two other major options: Mysticism and Pragmatism.
Mysticism proposes a reconciliation among [world, truth, mind, purpose,
value] by denying a key tenet to each rival worldview. Against Purpose–
Mind, it rejects the view that mind’s willing attention yields what is known,
because no effort is needed to be mindful of what truly needs minding.
Against Truth–Reality, it denies the principle that what is knowable must be
conceptual and propositional. The law of non-contradiction is thus
irrelevant (so the objective–subjective dichotomy dissolves).
Against World–Value, mysticism doubts that true worth depends on
conformity with deliberate structure. No conceptual work is called for
where immediacy shines forth in purity. Letting go of those three tenets
permits mentality itself to slow and find rest in the peace of un-concern,
non-affirmation, and non-duality. Non-willing inattention allows
undifferentiated oneness of indefinite and unlimited emptiness, while
individuality becomes non-consequential as distinctive activity gradually
blends unresistingly into unitary harmony. If there yet be verity, let it be
called “Illumination” in the placid unity of authenticity–awareness–
attentiveness, as focus stays in the present, the fully worthy mode of reality.
Pragmatism has little in common with mysticism as a worldview,
although an ideal of verity in experiential harmony comports with
pragmatism’s view of knowledge.4
Being and ThinkingThe option of pragmatism reconciles all five [world, truth, mind, purpose,
value] by affirming, with adjustments, key tenets of the other worldviews:
mind’s purposiveness, knowledge’s objectivity, the world’s worth, and
verity’s harmony. Specifically, consider these modified tenets: (a) mind’s
deliberate attentiveness experimentally yields what is learnable; (b)
knowledge requires the work of conceptual and propositional refinement;
and (c) worth’s acquisition increases from conformity with practical
structure.
These adjusted tenets display a dynamic dimension, transmuting the set
[world, truth, mind, purpose, value] into [reality, veracity, mentality,
activity, finality]. Furthermore, to ensure that no logical or ontological gap
opens, this worldview additionally affirms that (d) intelligent minds actively
operate as practical structurings; (e) knowing veritably grows from
experimental trials of conceptual/propositional refinements; and (f)
practical realities are the final goals of any knowledge worth acquiring.
Finally, knowing arises from harmony, that holistic harmony among the
five:
Reality, Verity, Mentality, Activity, Finality
In this philosophical harmonization, each intrinsically depends on the
rest, and their attachment is indistinguishable from the entrainment of:
Ends, Deeds, Thoughts, Knowns, Reals
Pragmatism’s rivals cannot fully explain knowledge, and risk abandoning
knowledge entirely. Pragmatism can agree with rationalism that robust truth
serves as a regulative ideal guiding knowledge towards objectivity.
Rationalism’s insistence that realities are preformed for knowledge’s
conformity compels pragmatism to object to the resulting dualities
responsible for skepticism. With rationalism, if minds happen to entertain
knowledge, they couldn’t realize it, subverting the point of rationalism’s
adherence to permanence.
Subjectivism, like pragmatism, regards dualism and skepticism as poor
rewards for protecting truth from relativism. Some types of subjectivismjoin philosophies of impermanence (found among personalisms and
existentialisms for example), but their efforts to rebuild some degree of
objectivity to avoid solipsism bring them towards pragmatism. Pragmatism
similarly regards mentality as wholly organized around purpose, but it
expects a plurality of minds to organize in pursuit of knowledgeable
endeavors. Truth isn’t abandoned for relativism, because workable beliefs
tend to converge in objective agreement among cooperative inquiring
minds.
Pragmatism agrees with absolutism that thinking with purport does
presuppose engagements with realities able to comport (or not) with
mentality. However, like rationalism, absolutism assumes the availability of
precise conceptions, exact enough to fit concept-shaped realities. If
individual minds can correctly conceive some realities, those minds can’t be
deemed less real than the reality they know; if individual minds cannot
correctly conceive realities, those minds never apprehend the Absolute
Mind, and skepticism returns.
On rationalism, subjectivism, absolutism, and even mysticism, individual
minds are ultimately left where they began, with their thoughtful pursuits of
valuable ends attainable only by intelligently engaging the world. Truth is
there, and nowhere else. Philosophies of permanence refuse to see truth’s
natural home and habitat with the mentalities creating it. “The truth is out
there,” in the great beyond, outside the warm embrace of experience and
life. In modern European philosophy, that principle was embodied in
Immanuel Kant’s tenet that a “Ding an sich” (“thing-in-itself”) that never
appears is somehow responsible for delivering fresh perceptual content for
the mind’s digestion.
Peirce, James, and Dewey regarded pragmatism as the eventual
destination for philosophy’s repudiation of Kant’s thing-in-itself in any
form. Peirce recollected how his pragmatism of the 1870s, which he later
called “pragmaticism,” eliminated that Kantian feature.
The present writer was a pure Kantist until he was forced by
successive steps into Pragmaticism. The Kantist has only to abjure
from the bottom of his heart the proposition that a thing-in-itself can,
however indirectly, be conceived; and then correct the details of Kant’s
doctrine accordingly . . .
5To “correct the details,” in Peirce’s understated phrasing, a large-scale
reconstruction of modern philosophy would be required, as James and
Dewey fully realized as well. By 1890 Dewey was pointing out how a
philosophy lacking a thing-in-itself could not isolate thought from reality.
For if we reconstruct the Kantian theory of knowledge upon its own
basis and method of analysis, doing away with the thing-in-itself, the
result is to show that the merely logical, equally with the merely
ontological, is an impossible abstraction. The merely logical is not at
all; the logical is only as the thought-factor in the entire determination
of experience . . .
6
In that same year of 1890, James published his path-breaking The
Principles of Psychology, in which he replaced the Kantian dualism
between relational thought and unrelated things with the experiential field
of related things inviting thought’s explorations.7
In a 1904 article, “Humanism and Truth,” James defended pragmatism
under the “humanism” label by declaring that thought seeks truth in the
prevailing relations among things in experience.
There may or may not be an extra-experiential ‘ding an sich’ that keeps
the ball rolling, or an ‘absolute’ that lies eternally behind all the
successive determinations which human thought has made. But within
our experience itself at any rate, humanism says, some determinations
show themselves as being independent of others; some questions, if we
ever ask them, can only be answered in one way; some beings, if we
ever suppose them, must be supposed to have existed previously to the
supposing; some relations, if they exist ever, must exist as long as their
terms exist. Truth thus means, according to humanism, the relation of
less fixed parts of experience (predicates) to other relatively more
fixed parts (subjects); and we are not required to seek it in a relation of
experience as such to anything beyond itself.8
When philosophy stops trying to conceive the strictly inconceivable, such
as that “thing-in-itself,” then it is no longer tempted to postulate as realanything so isolated from all conceptual and mental relationality.
Metaphysical realism justifies a thorough repudiation of all idealisms by
denying that “the real” needs to have any relation to thought. However, to
realistically explain how thought has something real as its object, some
relation between them (besides sheer accidental coincidence, which is just
the absence of explanation) is still required. Avoiding that requirement
yields the mysterious thing-in-itself.
The pragmatists situated cognition and its transformative work within the
broader context of experience. Reality can neither be entirely cognitive, nor
extra-cognitive, but reality must in principle be conceivable in relation to
what is experiential. In general, it is impossible to separate what only
“thought” is, entirely apart from what “reality” is. Only by surrendering the
temptation to dualistically divorce thoughts from things can philosophy
achieve any objectivity.
Only by surrendering the temptation to dualistically divorce
thoughts from things can philosophy achieve any objectivity.
Like James, Dewey regarded thought as actively engaging with the
relations among the multiplicity of matters in the world, rather than
imposing relations among disaggregate entities unable to compose a world.
The inherent difficulty of the Kantian philosophy—that of showing
how two absolutely antithetical elements coming from two opposite
sources, one from the thing-in-itself, the other from thought—led his
successors to move in the direction of the concept of an “absolute
experience,” an experience so comprehensive and permanent as to
cancel the Kantian dualism.
Meanwhile other developments, partly within philosophy and partly
within the biological and social sciences, were making for a radically
different conception of experience . . . The main features of the
resulting concept of experience may be associated with the two chief
connotations of the popular, non-technical use of the term: namely, (a)
to try a thing out, to test in action, and (b) to undergo, to endure, to
suffer. With the first, or more active sense, experiment and the
deliberate control of experience are connected; with the second, ormore passive sense, the dependence of the individual upon contact
with a world, social and natural, beyond himself . . . But in both cases
there is some outreaching effort to modify the environment in the
interests of life.9
For these pragmatists, mentality and objectivity naturally go together,
because what is never thought is unreal and what is only thought is
subjective.
The stern lesson learned from Kant’s dichotomies is that a philosophical
effort to subtract away all relations to mentality and thought in order to
consider what may remain, in its unthought and non-conceived purity, is a
pointless quest, forever unable to discern what that remainder is “really”
like, or what mental thought “adds” to it.
There is nothing about experience insulated from thought or awaiting the
first touch of thought, and there is nothing beyond experience forever
unrelated to possible thought. We think that something surprisingly
encountered has not yet been recognized because thought’s attention
promptly provokes further cognition of it; we think that something outside
of experience is causing an encountered event because thought’s conception
preemptively evokes further relations with it. We intelligibly suppose that
unknown matters still await our cognition by conceiving how those matters
might be directly or indirectly encounterable. The dark side of the Moon
was objectively discoverable by thought (not subjectively created in
thought) due to cognition’s capacity to guide activities towards encounters
with it. By contrast, what is entirely unthought must be left inconceivable
and ignored by philosophy and science, which seek realities.
Since the unthought beyond experience is indistinguishable from the
unreal, the real must be conceived as relatable to thought within experience.
What is objective cannot be unreal, so objectivity lies in the real’s relations
for the experienceable. “Experience” for pragmatism is hardly subjective,
since it is nothing other than the world encounterable in activity, which is
what remains intact for philosophy after the static “thing-in-itself” and the
rigid “thought-in-itself” are both eliminated from consideration.Thinking and Objectivity
Pragmatism rests on experience, but not on a misconception of experience
imposed by rationalism’s demand that reasoning proceeds in some cognitive
realm beyond experiencing. Despite empiricism’s resistance against
rationalism during the course of modern philosophy, full trust in actual
lived experience, beyond the traps of subjectivism and idealism, was left for
pragmatism’s revolution.10
Dewey’s comparison of the old and new empiricism drew attention to
inference’s proper place within proactive experience.
(i) In the orthodox view, experience is regarded primarily as a
knowledge-affair. But to eyes not looking through ancient spectacles, it
assuredly appears as an affair of the intercourse of a living being with
its physical and social environment. (ii) According to tradition
experience is (at least primarily) a psychical thing, infected throughout
by “subjectivity.” What experience suggests about itself is a genuinely
objective world which enters into the actions and sufferings of men
and undergoes modifications through their responses. (iii) So far as
anything beyond a bare present is recognized by the established
doctrine, the past exclusively counts. Registration of what has taken
place, reference to precedent, is believed to be the essence of
experience. Empiricism is conceived of as tied up to what has been, or
is, “given.” But experience in its vital form is experimental, an effort
to change the given; it is characterized by projection, by reaching
forward into the unknown; connexion with a future is its salient trait.
(iv) The empirical tradition is committed to particularism. Connexions
and continuities are supposed to be foreign to experience, to be by￾products of dubious validity. An experience that is an undergoing of an
environment and a striving for its control in new directions is pregnant
with connexions. (v) In the traditional notion experience and thought
are antithetical terms. Inference, so far as it is other than a revival of
what has been given in the past, goes beyond experience; hence it is
either invalid, or else a measure of desperation by which, using
experience as a springboard, we jump out to a world of stable things
and other selves. But experience, taken free of the restrictions imposedby the older concept, is full of inference. There is, apparently, no
conscious experience without inference; reflection is native and
constant.11
Experiencing the world is far more a matter of what is taken, not given.
An interesting thing in the world and an interested observer together yield
valuable meanings and valid understandings; neither side by itself yields
much of cognitive merit. This is the view on active experience that Dewey
labelled as “transactional” and grounds all experimentation. The objectivity
that empiricism promises is attained with pragmatism’s insistence that
thought performs its work out in the world, not within consciousness.
That “thing-in-itself” can assume many guises in philosophies of
permanence, both realistic and idealistic, as they insist that objectivity rests
on realities kept apart from the flux and flex of experience. Likewise, that
“thought-in-itself” lingers for rationalist philosophies as they demand that
the right kind of thought needed for relating to realities must be knowable
in itself. Abandoning these mythical creatures liberates thought to rejoin the
world.
As far as pragmatism can see, a fixation on necessity turns away from
objectivity. For example, “analytic” judgments allegedly display necessity,
contingent on a mental act sustaining two ideas jointly in thought. Another
person’s mental comparison of those ideas may find no such necessity,
leaving necessity a matter of subjectivity. Complaining that any dissenter
“doesn’t know the meaning of those ideas” begs the question, since “the
meaning” here concerns the necessity to be demonstrated, not assumed.
“But I can’t conceive otherwise” is similarly a statement about one’s
subjective thinking and nothing more.
Asserting that rational thinkers already know “the meaning” of an idea
makes a claim about another thought-in-itself transcending actual thinkers.
Language helps to create this mirage. Speakers of a shared language know
the meanings of its terms, so any necessity to conceivability is relative to
linguistic competency. In general, conceptual necessity is bound to
subjectivity and relativism, not any sort of universal objectivity.
Pragmatism is content with linguistic relativism for stable public
meanings, provided that linguistic communities acknowledge their
responsibility for altering and inventing meanings of conceptions to keep upwith enlarging experience and the growth of knowledge. Scientific
communities establish and adjust the meanings of their terminologies at a
rapid pace, but linguistic drift and development also characterizes the
slower pace of entire societies.
Rationalists still asserting that there remain “true concepts” to guarantee
necessities, above and beyond all linguistic communities, are seeking that
thought-in-itself as thinkable by Mind, not just actual minds, so rationalism
leads to absolute idealism. What does such a Mind think about? The
thought-in-itself returns back to the thing-in-itself, which is to say,
nonentity.
Let a proposition be deemed assertible with necessity because nothing
conceivable negates it. When nothing conceivable could falsify a
proposition, it is compatible with anything. Yet a proposition compatible
with anything refers to nothing, on Peirce’s conception principle. Hence, a
necessary proposition cannot refer to anything.
In consequence, the kinds of objective propositions about the world that
are conceived as practically necessary cannot be analytic. The formula
F=MA (force equals mass times acceleration) involves three concepts, each
complex enough to defy a simultaneous intuition of them exposing how
each is “contained” in the others. Pragmatism finds a use for formulas
within empirical knowledge, and to that extent they can participate in
objectivity.
Pragmatism’s avoidance of the thought-in-itself permits it to transform
the analytic–synthetic categorization into a distinction between “formulaic”
and “concretic” propositions. A formulaic proposition binds concepts so
that applying one in a practical situation prescribes that applicability of the
others. A concretic proposition predicts discernible effects from an
encounter with something. “Combustion is the exothermic chemical
reaction of fast oxidization” is a formulaic proposition. “Burning a kilogram
of propane yields 11,950 kilocalories” is a concretic proposition.12
Both formulaic and concretic propositions are empirical: they are learned
empirically, their meanings are exclusively empirical in import, and they are
vulnerable to replacement by improved knowledge. Both express highly
credible items of knowledge, but concretic knowledge justifies formulaic
knowledge, never the reverse. The discovery of concretic truths inspire the
conception of formulaic truths, and that assemblage of concretic truthsjustifies the further application of formulaic truths in fresh experimental
inquiries to make further concrete discoveries.
Formulaic propositions play the role of premised knowledge within the
methodologies of inquiries, with a status “prior” to the opening of specific
empirical investigations, but there is nothing “a priori” about them in any
Kantian sense. They are not universally necessary, they had no truth status
before experiential learning, and they are disconfirmable in the long run.
Again, linguistic competence within a knowledge community arouses a
mirage of necessity immune from ongoing empirical matters.
That mirage of formulaic immunity is all a matter of practical
convenience in the short run, when it is impossible to inquire into
everything. Pragmatism understands how, during any empirical inquiry,
some matters are regarded as secure stabilities while others are questionable
variabilities. Paradigm shifts happening within one’s own lifetime allow
one to witness how eternal verity can get discarded as useless verbiage.
Summary
Pragmatism surpasses and replaces the dichotomy that truth is either about
the outer world of things or about the inner world of ideas. The active
engagement occurring between what we are observing and how we are
thinking is responsible for our judgments about whatever we are dealing
with. The “objectivist” and “subjectivist” stances are unified by
pragmatism’s “transactional” alternative.
As the next chapter explains, pragmatism’s resolute avoidance of both the
thing-in-itself and the thought-in-itself permits it to surmount
epistemological puzzles over the relationship between the knower and the
known, such as ancient philosophy’s Problem of the Criterion and modern
philosophy’s Gettier Problem.7
Pragmatism versus Epistemology
Pragmatism is the sensible alternative to metaphysical inflations for “truth”
into matters knowable as certainties, rigid patterns of inference reducing
methodology to rationalism, or static facts pertaining to a mysterious reality
beyond thought. Pragmatism neither abandons realism nor collapses into
relativism, and it permits more flexible understandings about the role of
truth in knowledge.
Some pragmatists have preferred to label as “truth” just those bodies of
knowledge already highly warranted from past inquiries. Others prefer to
view “truth” within methodological justifications as they occur during
ongoing inquiries. Still others reserve “truth” to point to the potential for
improved knowledge through future inquiries.
Distinguishing practical conceptions of truth is a longstanding feature of
pragmatism, and pragmatists have found value in all three mentioned here.1
A concept of truth as an honorific label bestowed on acquired knowledge is
compatible with another concept of truth as a regulative ideal for reliable
methodology, and both comport well with conceiving truth as an
idealization about unlimited inquiry. They abandon rationalism’s criterion
of reality–independence for knowledge.
Objective Knowledge
Charles Peirce, William James, and John Dewey regarded their approaches
to understanding inquiry, knowledge, and truth as rivals and replacements
for dominant Western views about the nature of knowledge. Each
pragmatist noted sharp disagreements with epistemological stances,
particularly those indebted to, and descended from, tenets about knowledge
and reality which they took to be affirmations of Socrates and Plato. The
overthrow of rationalistic epistemology itself was promised. What preciselyare the essential issues about knowledge and truth that pragmatism must
dispute?
In The Quest for Certainty, Dewey discerns interlocking tenets about
knowledge and reality in Plato, Aristotle, and much of Greek thought. “The
first and foremost is that there is complete correspondence between
knowledge in its true meaning and what is real. What is known, what is true
for cognition, is what is real in being.” This tenet is grounded, Dewey
explains, in another tenet that “only the completely fixed and unchanging
can be real.” He continues: “Secondly, the theory of knowledge has its basic
premises fixed by the same doctrine. For knowledge to be certain must
relate to that which has antecedent existence or essential being.”2
This theory of knowledge effectively demands that
. . . what is known is antecedent to the mental act of observation and
inquiry, and is totally unaffected by these acts, otherwise it would not
be fixed and unchangeable. This negative condition, that the processes
of search, investigation, reflection, involved in knowledge relate to
something having prior being, fixes once for all the main characters
attributed to mind, and to the organs of knowing. They must be outside
what is known, so as not to interact in any way with the object to be
known.3
The requirement that the act of knowing cannot possibly alter the object of
knowledge was therefore an objective for knowledge, and that peculiar act
of knowing then became an item for epistemic interest in its own right.
So long as a knower cannot ensure the proper aloofness of knowing from
the known, that knower cannot fully justify a claim to knowledge. The
knowing relation therefore emerged as a matter of curiosity, and then
concern, and finally as a matter itself requiring verification.
In short, the putative knowing relation itself became a candidate for
knowledge—indeed, it became a crucial criterion for knowledge. It is one
thing to ask, “What is knowledge?” and another to ask, “What can be
known about the knowing relation?” Furthermore, a knowing relation
between the knower and the known leaves three matters for investigation:
the known’s reality outside of a knowing relation, the knower within aknowing relation, and the nature of the relation between knowing and the
known.
Dewey observed in The Quest for Certainty how modern philosophy
perpetuated this view of knowledge as a concern for the peculiar
relationship between mind and reality. Must the knowing relation be known
by a relating knower to be about the known as it is unrelated to being
known? He derided this theory of knowledge as a mere “spectator theory,”
akin to a naïve theory of vision.
Philosophy can’t be so naïve, Dewey urged. The knowing relation
required by this theory of knowledge would be akin to an observer only
able to detect an object by shining a light upon it, all the while trying to
know what the real object as it is unlit would truly be like. Dewey went
back to ancient Greek thought, and especially Plato, to fault its fascination
with a second immaterial kind of thought able to illuminate things as they
truly are. This fascination, according to Dewey, arose from mathematics.
Mathematical conceptions as expressions of pure thought have also
seemed to provide the open gateway to a realm of essence that is
independent of existence, physical or mental—a self-subsisting realm
of ideal and eternal objects which are the objects of the highest—that
is, the most assured—knowledge. As was earlier noted, the Euclidean
geometry was undoubtedly the pattern for the development of a
formally rational logic; it was also a marked factor in leading Plato to
his doctrine of a world of supersensible and superphysical ideal
objects. The procedure of mathematics has, moreover, always been the
chief reliance of those who have asserted that the demonstrated
validity of all reflective thinking depends upon rational truths
immediately known without any element of inference entering in. For
mathematics was supposed to rest upon a basis of first truths or
axioms, self-evident in nature, and needing only that the eye of reason
should fall upon them to be recognized for what they are. The function
of indemonstrables, of axioms and definitions, in mathematical
deduction has been the ground for the distinction between intuitive and
discursive reason, just as deductions have been taken to be the
convincing proof that there is a realm of pure essences logicallyconnected with one another:—universals having internal bonds with
one another.
4
Dewey was a veteran of the great epistemology debates which had raged
since the 1890s when he began formulating his pragmatism. He offered an
empirical way to understand logic in practice after its liberation from
intuitions due to mathematics.
William James knew those debates well. His titanic battle with his
Harvard colleague, Josiah Royce, over knowledge and reality were played
out before a generation of their students. Many of them went on to shape
American philosophy’s prioritization of mental philosophy and
epistemology for the next fifty years.
The vice of epistemology, for James, was its intellectualism. Like Dewey,
James faulted the Greek fascination with a permanent and aloof realm of
being that attracts the exclusive aim of knowledge. Whatever is within a
knower permitting that knowing relation, Greek philosophers typically
inferred, must itself be rigid and unchanging too. James points behind Plato
to the figure of Socrates, who sought to capture conceptual essences in
verbal definitions. His 1910 work A Pluralistic Universe identifies the basic
issue:
Intellectualism in the vicious sense began when Socrates and Plato
taught that what a thing really is, is told us by its definition. Ever since
Socrates we have been taught that reality consists of essences, not of
appearances, and that the essences of things are known whenever we
know their definitions. So first we identify the thing with a concept
and then we identify the concept with a definition, and only then,
inasmuch as the thing is whatever the definition expresses, are we sure
of apprehending the real essence of it or the full truth about it.5
As for the founder of pragmatism, Charles Peirce, he never considered
himself to be an epistemologist. Peirce held little regard for the term (it
came into use in the 1850s) and less regard for self-styled epistemologists
of his day.Peirce’s interpretation of the Greek use of “episteme” associated it with
“comprehension”: “It is the ability to define a thing in such a manner that
all its properties shall be corollaries from its definition.”6 This statement,
from the unpublished treatise Minute Logic (c.1902) in a section titled “A
Detailed Classification of the Sciences,” is accompanied by his view that
“episteme” must never be translated as “science” and cannot be equated
with what moderns call knowledge.
Does epistemology rest on an exaggerated role for the knowing relation
and the essential definition? Pragmatism views traditional philosophy back
to the Greeks as a “quest for certainty,” as Dewey put it. Rationalism was
the core of comprehending knowledge. Following views defended in Plato’s
dialogues, knowledge claims should use rigidly conceived terms so that no
contradictions or counterexamples can be found. Knowing one’s concepts
with unimpeachable definitions must be prior to substantive claims about
any matters.
After this rationalist stance is settled, certainty cannot be compromised.
Demonstrable confidence in one’s avoidance of error is necessary. The
Greek tradition imbued the philosophical problem of knowledge with the
worry that a person cannot know something to be true so long as its falsity
remains a possibility. Furthermore, this Greek tradition also expected a
criterial definition of knowledge to be indubitable as well.
These expectations about knowledge were inherited by modern
epistemology. For any subject matter, whether a concept, a term, a
definition, a description, and so on, knowledge is of what is true, not what
is false. Knowledge, if it truly be knowing, cannot err.
Principle of “Inerrant Knowing”: Unless it can be known that there
are no possible ways where a person P will fail to truly know X, P
cannot know X.
Pragmatism must dispute this epistemological claim. Due to this
principle, traditional epistemology suffers from the two Roycean cases, the
four types of Gettier problems, and the three paradoxes of the Criterion,
explained next.Knowing Knowledge
Epistemology requires the examination of each situation in which P is a
candidate for knowing X, to make sure that a situation doesn’t match any of
these three situations:
Hypothetical Situation (a) imagines that P’s method of ascribing D
about X will require X to have F and possibly not-F.
Hypothetical Situation (b) imagines that there is some N that is a Y
(but not an X) that can fit P’s method of ascribing D about an X.
Hypothetical Situation (c) imagines that there is some M that is X
that cannot fit P’s method of ascribing D about an X.
Situation (a) imposes the rule that something cannot be ascribed
contradictory features; situation (b) expects that no counterexample can be
wrongly included with an ascription; situation (c) expects that no
counterexample can be wrongly excluded from an ascription.
Furthermore, in accord with the “Inerrant Knowing” principle, unless P
knows that P knows X, P cannot know X. Epistemology accordingly
requires the further examination of each situation in which P is a candidate
for knowing X, so that P cannot accidentally obtain knowledge. This means
that:
P must know that the applied method ascribing D to X won’t lead to
contradictory attributions to X;
P must know that the applied method ascribing D to X won’t lead P
to affirm that a Y is D; and
P must know that the applied method ascribing D to X would
reliably lead P to affirm D of each real X.
Therefore, three additional situations would prevent P from knowledge.
Hypothetical Situation (d) finds that P doesn’t know that P’s method
of ascribing D to X might expect X to be F and not-F; so, Pcannot know a real X is D.
Hypothetical Situation (e) finds that P doesn’t know that P’s method
of ascribing D to X is reliably about a real X instead of some
other Y; so, P cannot know that a real X is D.
Hypothetical Situation (f) finds that P doesn’t know that P’s method
ascribing D to X is reliably leading P to affirm that each real X is
D; so, P cannot know that a real X is D.
Hypothetical Situations (a) and (d) yield what can be called the Roycean
Cases. Josiah Royce formulated his complaints against realism by arguing
that realism prizes the real object’s independence at the price of the object
staying knowable.7
In a similar fashion, John Dewey critiqued
epistemology’s reliance on the ubiquity of the knowledge relation. If there
is a unique knowing relation between the knower and the known, it is
impossible to confirm a successful operation of the knowing process.8
Both Royce and Dewey pointed out how there is no way to know if this
ubiquitous knowing is occurring, so long as knowing is an external relation.
The fact, if it is a fact, that a knower is in the knowing relation would not be
automatically known as well, since it is not part of the knowledge.
Knowledge would be a matter of luck, so far as anyone could tell, including
the knower. And if knowing is instead an internal relation, then one can
know when and what one knows, but how the known is known is in the
relation to the knower, and it would not be known whether what is known
also persists outside the knowing relation.
Situation (a), the first Roycean Case, is one in which a real entity X is
supposed to agree to an ascription of D, while X is supposed to be D by
itself. If X is D by itself, then X’s possession of the Fs (the
features/properties) included in D cannot depend in any way on anything
that is not X. Those Fs are therefore intrinsic or essential to X; they involve
relations internal to X, not external or accidental. But then D isn’t a
description of X—D is a (partial) definition of X. To merely define an X in
the abstract does not amount to describing a real X; one can define plenty of
nonexistent things. In order to describe X, P must include in D some
external and accidental Fs for X to individuate and identify a real X. That
arouses a serious risk that those Fs will contradict each other, and in anycase, P’s D will no longer describe X by itself. Consequently, P will fail to
know a real X by itself.
Situation (d), the second Roycean Case, is one in which P tries to
relationally know X as it is by itself (yes, that should sound problematic).
How can P know that P’s method of ascribing D to X is succeeding in
knowing an X by itself? For P to know that X is exemplifying D for P, all of
the Fs included in D have to be relational between X and P. Although P can
know how X is exemplifying those Fs in relation to P, P cannot know if X
possesses those Fs by itself when X isn’t in an external relation with P.
Therefore, P doesn’t know whether P’s method of ascribing D to X is
expecting X to have Fs by itself and not have Fs by itself. Consequently, P
cannot know that a real X is D.
Situations (b), (c), (e), and (f) yield so-called Gettier Cases.9 As the
epistemology literature after Gettier amply displays, many Gettier cases
have been crafted to somehow show that instances of justified true belief
are not actually knowledge. This section is only concerned with the four
basic types of Gettier Cases which follow from “Inerrant Knowing.” To
describe these types, this taxonomy is used: Let N and M stand for
individual nameable entities, while X and Y are generic things, and D is a
description.
Situation (b) conceives of a specific N and a specific M, and X, in such a
way that X fits D, this N is an X (fits D), M is not an X (doesn’t fit D), M
doesn’t fit P’s D of X, P reasonably applies D to M to discern an X, and P
thereby affirms D of an X, so that P truly affirms an X fitting D. P truly
affirms an X fitting D (since N is an X fitting D), but P knows that P’s
affirmation is only about M (which isn’t truly an X). Common sense says
that even though P reasonably and justifiably affirmed D of M and thereby
affirmed a truth that “an X is D,” P didn’t affirm D of the genuine X that
truly is D (that was N, not M). That’s why common sense denies that P has
knowledge of “an X is D.”
Situation (c) conceives of a specific N and a specific M, and X, in such a
way that P reasonably applies D to N at one moment and thereby truly
affirms “X is D”; later, P again reasonably affirms “X is D” but N is absent
and an identical M is now present, so P now thinks M is D while still
affirming “X is D”; so there is some M that is X that doesn’t fit P’s methodof ascribing D to X. That’s why common sense denies that P has knowledge
of “X is D.”
Situation (e) conceives of a specific N, and X and Y, in such a way that P
first affirms that N is D. N is truly Y, but P justifiably believes N is X
instead, so P also affirms that X is D. “X is D” happens to be true, but P has
no reasonable way to affirm that X is D. Although P affirms the truth “X is
D,” P doesn’t know that the method ascribing D to X isn’t reliable about a
real X, so P doesn’t know X is D.
Situation (f) conceives of a specific N, and X, in such a way that P
ascribes D to N using a method not presently reliable, although P’s method
of ascribing D to Xs like N is ordinarily reliable. Despite the way that P’s
resulting ascription of D to N, and P’s affirmation of “an X is D,” happens
to both be true, P doesn’t presently know that P’s method ascribing D to X
is reliably leading to affirming that this real X (this N) is D; so P cannot
know that a real X is D.
Many Gettier cases formulated in the expansive epistemological
literature are specific versions of these four types.10
Paradoxes of Knowledge
If knowing that one knows applies to knowledge itself, the question must
arise, Is a “Definition of Knowledge” itself knowable? The enterprise of
“knowing knowledge” is launched.
Principle of “Knowing Knowledge”: For P to have knowledge of
real Knowledge, P must know an account of Knowledge that
contains no contradictions and permits no counterexamples.
There are three types of conceivable situations where a person will fail to
know real Knowledge:
1. Where P’s account of knowledge displays contradictory
features/properties.2. Where P’s account of knowledge fits something that isn’t
knowledge.
3. Where P knows Knowledge but not by fitting P’s account of
knowledge.
Let P’s account of knowledge be labeled as a Criterion. Three hypothetical
situations have to be considered:
Situation 1 finds it conceivable that on P’s Criterion, P’s attempt to
know Knowledge in itself generates contradictions, so P doesn’t
know Knowledge.
Situation 2 finds it conceivable that on P’s Criterion, P’s attempt to
know Knowledge in itself actually turns out to know Y, and Y ≠
Knowledge, so P doesn’t know Knowledge.
Situation 3 finds it conceivable that P actually knows Knowledge,
but not through P’s Criterion, so P doesn’t know that P knows
Knowledge.
Each situation is a familiar paradox for epistemology. Unless those three
Situations can all be definitively ruled out, no one is able to know
knowledge, and hence no one really has any knowledge of anything.
However, investigating these situations exposes paradoxes, ruling out
knowledge.
Paradox 1. In order for a person to know Knowledge, this person would
already have to have the correct Criterion for gaining knowledge of
anything. If this person could already comprehend how to have knowledge,
this person would already know Knowledge. A person’s attempt to know
Knowledge therefore generates the contradiction that a person is both
knowing Knowledge and not knowing Knowledge. Since (so far as anyone
can tell) no person already knows Knowledge, and the contradiction cannot
be affirmed, then no one can comprehend how to have knowledge of
anything, including Knowledge. Therefore, no knowledge of anything is
possible, including knowledge of Knowledge.
Paradox 2. In order for a person P to correctly use a Criterion for
knowledge, P must use a Criterion that only approves what is true
knowledge and never what is false. However, for P to select the rightCriterion, even if P can compare a Criterion against many cases of true
knowledge, the amount of true knowledge is potentially infinite, so P
cannot know if any Criterion will never approve what is false. Therefore, P
doesn’t know Knowledge.
Paradox 3. Perhaps a person P actually knows Knowledge, but P doesn’t
know how this knowledge of Knowledge is possible. No matter what
Criterion P appeals to, P may not be able to determine if that Criterion is the
exclusive way to know Knowledge, so P cannot know that P knows
Knowledge. Even though P knows Knowledge, P won’t reliably know that
P knows anything else.
These three paradoxes exemplify the classic “problem of the criterion” in
distinctive ways, all leading to skepticism.11
Due to its skeptical problems and unresolvable paradoxes, grounding
epistemology on the mind’s inerrant knowledge must suffer from what may
be labeled as the generalized problem of the Cartoid and the generalized
paradox of the Criterion.
The generalized problem of the Cartoid: Let a “Cartesian factoid,” or
“Cartoid” for short, be a contingent statement asserting a real matter, that
needn’t be ever known by anyone, which is inserted into an envisioned
situation as a truth. Using a Cartoid to show that knowledge isn’t possible is
not difficult: pick a Cartoid so that, even though P is justified in truly
believing S about X, there is a disconnection between what P justifiably
believes and a real X. For any envisioned situation describing a person
apparently knowing X through holding a justified true belief, a suitably
designed Cartoid can be inserted so that it turns out that this person cannot
genuinely know a real X. Hence, no person knows any real X.
The generalized paradox of the Criterion: Only a Criterion tested again
known truths should be applied for ascertaining knowledge, but no truths
are knowable without a Criterion. Hence, no criterion can be reasonably
applied, and no person can know any real X.
SummaryBetween the twin problems of the Cartoid and the Criterion, traditional
epistemology terminates in skeptical exhaustion. On its own principles,
epistemology cannot know knowledge or connect knowledge with static
truth and rigid reality.
Knowledge cannot simply be justified true belief so long as knowledge is
taken to primarily be propositional statements about “preposed” realities.
Epistemology’s hope that knowledge of statements will ensure knowledge
of realities can secure no way to leap across rationalism’s logical and
ontological chasm between thoughts and things.
Discerning where pragmatism makes its dissent from traditional views of
knowledge brings into clarity the pragmatist stance on key epistemological
issues, such as the definition of knowledge, Gettier problems, the mind–
world relationship, and realism.
Avoiding the puzzles and paradoxes inherent to traditional
epistemology’s reliance on rationalism, charted in this chapter, suggests an
alternative theory about the knower–known relationship, delineated in the
next chapter.8
Transactional Knowledge
Pragmatism rejects the principle of “Inerrant Knowing” and epistemology’s
self-imposed strictures for knowing knowledge. The appropriate reply to a
proffered Gettier problem is to say, “It is irrelevant for knowledge of P that
an assertion may claim ‘in truth not-P’ or ‘in truth P.’”
Adding ad-hoc conditions to “justified true belief” won’t work so long as
rationalism is presumed, because it is too easy to add, “And yet, P is really
the case” to a putative knowledge situation. It is that sort of addition which
dooms knowledge, just as the thing-in-itself always does. Restoring
knowledge requires subtracting aloof truth. Claiming that P is true does not
show P, show evidence of P, or show that P pertains to a knowledge
situation.
As for the Criterion problem, pragmatism denies that comprehending
knowledge rests on any inerrant knowledge. Criteria for methodically
justifying knowledge do not have truth conditions. Knowledge criteria are
themselves gradually invented, tested, and improved from the course of
empirical inquiries, not perfectly known in advance of all inquiry. Any non￾rationalistic worldview, particularly one favorable towards empirical
science, should take these stances.
Pragmatism relies on a co-respondence theory of knowledge, not a
correspondence notion of truth. The knowably real thing must at minimum
possess the capacity to respond in anticipatable ways to a learner’s
exploratory methods of inquiry.
Realizing Realities
For pragmatism, a person can continue to know something until its errancy
becomes ascertainably probable, even if conceiving such errancy remains
possible. In general, a merely possible truth or falsity cannot negate anactual item of knowledge. Actual knowledge implies known truth, but
possible truth or falsity cannot imply actual error or justification failure.
The stubborn proponent of a Gettier problem will insist, “But this isn’t
about a possible truth, but an actual truth!” That insistence just doubles
down on a mere claim offered without evidence, reinvoking the
transcendent thing-in-itself. Pragmatism refuses to admit any thing-in-itself
to a knowledge situation, so no mere assertion could disturb knowledge.
Admirers of Gettier-style arguments strangely imagine that the mere
assertion of a truth could properly belong to an empirical situation of
potential knowledge.
Even empiricists, still caught up in Kantian categories and dichotomies,
may fall into this rationalist trap. To avoid the trap, ask for concrete
evidence in a situation of inquiry where knowledge is the goal. If
knowledge is not the goal, all manner of hypotheticals can be entertained,
as in Gettier pseudo-problems. If knowledge is the goal, then additional
evidence in a situation is relevant and the knowing situation is altered; and
so, just as pragmatism would expect, reevaluating knowledge is reasonable.
Pragmatism does not reject the rule of non-contradiction within the
sphere of empirical inquiry. It is impossible to simultaneously know P and
know not-P. But Gettier pseudo-problems fail to include knowledge of, or
even evidence of, a P (or not-P) in their hypothetical situations. Those
hypotheticals rely on unknowables. Rationalism ensures that it is forever
impossible to know P if not-P, regardless of whether there is ever any
cognizance of not-P.
Abandoning rationalism means that knowing P at one time is compatible
with knowing not-P at another time, just as believing P today but not
tomorrow is unremarkable; knowing P better falsifies prior judgments of
knowing not-P. This expresses pragmatism’s principle of “fallibilism.”1
Efforts to test acquired knowledge against further events and future
outcomes has to presume this fallibilism. According to rationalism, there
could be no sense to testing knowledge—true knowledge is necessarily
consistent with any possible testing. For rationalism, reasoning mainly
proceeds from the known towards the as-yet known. For pragmatism,
phases of empirical inquiry may proceed deductively, but acquiring
knowledge generally proceeds from the as-yet known to the known, a
process called learning. Pragmatism accordingly judges that whatever isreally knowable must be responsive to a dynamic process, effecting
anticipatable results during the execution of methods of inquiry.
Key tenets to epistemology’s grounding in permanence and rationalism
can be compared item by item with pragmatism’s transactional alternative.
Epistemology first:
1. Absolute knowledge is only of the real, and the real is autontos,
real by itself—so no relations to anything else may essentially
alter what it is.
2. Absolute truth primarily concerns the real, not in its relations to
other matters, but in its autontos, so truth cannot be altered
without losing it.
3. Either Absolute truth is identical to, and indistinguishable from,
the real—or Absolute truth takes a form identical to the real. If
Absolute truth is entirely identical to the real (truth has substantial
identity with the real), then Absolute truth exists independently
from any knowledge of it. If Absolute truth takes a form identical
to the real, then Absolute truth exists only because of the real, and
only accidentally has relations with any knower.
4. Since Absolute knowledge is only of the real, it is therefore only
of truth (by substantial identity or by formal identity), and truth
admits of no degrees nor changes, so knowledge is digital (1/0)
and identical only to itself (1=1).
5. Knowledge about a matter consisting of a set of truths can have
degrees only in the aggregate sense that it is possible to know a
smaller subset of those truths, and then add knowledge to that
subset. But each truth is either known, or it is not; it is impossible
for one person to partially know a truth, or to know a truth better
or worse than another person.
6. Belief and justification are matters which can have degrees and
levels, but knowledge cannot.
7. Having a stronger or weaker degree of belief about an item of
knowledge is irrelevant to whether knowledge is possessed by a
person.8. If a person P knows S through justification J, and then later
acquires even better justification K for S, that justification
improvement cannot alter P’s knowledge of S in any way.
9. If person P knows S through justification J, while person Q also
knows S but through justification K, and K is a better justification
than J, that justification deficit cannot alter P’s knowledge of S in
any way.
10. Having a better or worse justification for an item of knowledge
is irrelevant to whether knowledge is possessed by a person.
11. If something allegedly known is wrong, what makes it wrong is
not how strongly it was believed or how well it was justified, but
instead how it fails to relate to truth.
12. A reasonable affirmation of knowledge can fail to be actual
knowledge without anyone ever finding out. Therefore, so far as
any knower can tell, they aren’t assuredly knowers, even if they
hold justified true beliefs.
Pragmatism reverses these principles by addressing dynamic realities that
participate in their knowledge.
12* A reasonable affirmation of knowledge cannot fail to be actual
knowledge without anyone ever finding out.
11* If something allegedly known is wrong, what makes it wrong is
how strongly it was believed or how well it was justified.
10* Having a better or worse justification for an item of knowledge
is relevant to whether knowledge is possessed by a person.
9* If person P knows S through justification J, while person Q also
knows S but through justification K, and K is a better justification
than J, that justification deficit alters P’s knowledge of S.
8* If a person P knows S through justification J, and then later
acquires even better justification K for S, that justification
improvement can alter P’s knowledge of S.
7* Having a stronger or weaker degree of belief about an item of
knowledge is relevant to whether knowledge is possessed by a
person.6* Belief and justification are matters which can have degrees and
levels, so knowledge has degrees and levels as well.
5* It is possible for one person to know a truth to a certain degree
and to partially know a truth, and to know a truth better or worse
than another person, because a truth may be more or less adequate
about forging and maintaining relations between real matters.
4* Knowledge is primarily of the real in its actual relations, and
therefore expresses truths about creating and maintaining
dynamic relationships between real interacting matters (the
knower, the knowing, and the known). Neither the known, the
knowing, nor the knower are unaltered through the knowing
process.
3* Truth tracks the forging of relationships between real matters.
The nature of a particular relationship determines the specific
form that truth’s tracking takes, but truth is always about relations
with a real knower.
2* Truth primarily concerns the real in its relations, so truth can be
altered without losing it.
1* Knowledge is of the real in its relations that are making it what it
is.
Whatever is known must be responsive within a justificatory process
allowing it to be knowable. This process, for pragmatism, is a two-way
dynamic process: realities can and do participate in their realization. Reality
need not be known entirely, but something real cannot be forever
impervious to attempts at its conceivability and knowability.
Although thinking of a thing does not alter it, realizing its existence does
involve it in its modifications, because a real thing is engaging with its
environs anyways, eliciting consequences that are able to reach the
inquirer’s solicitations of searching. This dynamic relation of transaction,
not just reaction or interaction, characterizes knowledge of reality.
Realistic KnowingAny rationalist can agree that knowing is a process relating to the known.
Yet permanence and impassivity must prevail. Rationalism expects the
satisfaction of non-contradiction and contingency to keep knowledge
realistic. The real maintains intrinsic properties and stays substantially
unaffected whether known or not.
Pragmatism finds nothing realistic about these two rationalistic
conditions placed upon knowledge. When combined, they forbid realism.
Realism at minimum expects real things to sustain their properties as they
are when known. Irrealism lacks that expectation, letting a thing’s
properties vary or attributing its properties to a knower’s knowing rather
than a thing’s being. Pragmatism satisfies minimal realism, since the real
thing discerned for knowledge is conceived with stable efficacies that are
entirely capable of rediscovery. By contrast, the “reals” of rationalism are
less reliable. What is so essential must lie beyond effective conceivability
and discernability, depriving realistic meaning from an idea of it. What may
be so different apart from knowability could not be discoverable either,
denying realistic contact with it.
Genuine realism needs no mysterious essences nor unstable
manifestations: the real thing as known persists before and after conditions
of inquiry confirming its existence. Rationalism instead demands that a
thing’s reality stays independent from knowledge’s confirmation efforts.
For rationalism, things and thoughts must remain apart. If knowing affects a
thing, only that knowing is truly known and not the thing as it is in itself.
Realism, by contrast, finds that the knowable thing is truly real, unable to
make sense of a superior reality for unknowables.
Pragmatism does capture the spirit of realism: there are real things ready
for adroit inquiries eliciting their natures. Why should a reality worth
believing in have to require that belief may never reach it? Rationalism
suffers needless anxieties over empirical inquiry, hypostatizing the purity of
true conceptions into truths untainted by discovery. Pragmatism does not
hold that something that has not been discerned from inquiry cannot be
conceivably real. Pragmatism does say that something that has not been
conceived as discernible through inquiry has not yet been conceived as real.
“Knowledge is of the real in its relations making it what it is.” This final
tenet (1*) above commits pragmatism to realism concerning knowledge,
from the conceptual stage to the confirmable stage. Conceptions are clearand realistic by conceiving an entity in terms of effects making discernible
differences in practice.
Recall Peirce’s principle: “Consider what effects, that might conceivably
have practical bearings, we conceive the object of our conception to have.
Then, our conception of these effects is the whole of our conception of the
object.”2 This principle ensures than a concept is realizable, rather than just
ideational. Ideations abound and concepts proliferate, but realism sets a
higher standard for credible reference. The notion that ideas only linked to
other ideas (by synonym, definition, connotation, formulation, and so on)
can be meaningful enough to refer to actualities is a view associated with
idealism, not realism.
Knowing is not basically intuitive, didactic, spectorial, ideational, or
testimonial. Familiar acquired knowledge may adopt those formats.
Impressions of unbidden thoughts, repetitions of another’s verities,
envisionings of simple scenes, followings of related ideas, and statements
of recalled events are at most potential material for further learning and
teaching. Affirming knowledge by those means are the rewards of
membership in a community of knowledge, knowledge we did little or
nothing to create.
Verity attaches to “facts” because they are assertible matters relevant to
ongoing activities, noticeable for their meaningful leadings to further
matters of interest. They are, in a sense, “the taken-for-granted,” but they
are never “granted for the taking.” No fact is “given” to apprehension or
cognition, and nothing “fact-shaped” is ever presented to the senses. The
basic reason why neither you nor I know that “the cat is on the mat” or “a
barn is by the road” (illustrations picked for epistemology enthusiasts) is
because we haven’t been looking for that cat, or exploring that barn.
Thinking a thought by itself isn’t knowing anything. Pragmatism advises
that if you are a thinking thing, act like it. Learning arises from trying, and
knowing emerges from stubborn experiments in learning.
Pragmatism finds that more complex matters require the collective
methodical investigations fostered within “communities of inquiry,” to use
Peirce’s label.3 This “community of inquiry” is the smallest unit for
situating knowledge about this or that subject matter. Individual knowers
access knowledge only by membership or followership. Furthermore, only
communities of inquiry are responsible for their methods, as methodologies(including inferential, instrumental, and experimental techniques) develop
right along with empirical inquiries so that confidence in methods tracks the
credibility of discoveries.
There is no criterial problem of circularity to this twinned method–
discovery system, unless rationalism is readmitted. Knowledge tends to
grow. The prior justification of methodology rests on past discoveries, but
methods are tested again in the search for further findings. Examples of data
going unquestioned for too long, or scientists getting dogmatic about
methods, are illustrations of methodology’s resilience, not counterexamples
refuting communal inquiry. Inventing a whole methodology in order to
justify preferred claims is the fraudulent game of charlatanry and pseudo￾science.
Knowledge rests on method, the path towards objectivity. Sincerities and
certainties seem like unchallengeable verities, and one’s “truths” say plenty
about oneself. As a knower, however, one is oriented by methodology, not
subjectivity. Pragmatism offers two regulative criteria (not a “definition”) of
guidance for an individual knower.
Person P knows a real X where
(a) P has methodically become justified in making a
description D about a specific X, and
(b) P asserts D about that X due to that methodical process.
Knowledge, for an individual, is justified assertion. Adding that
knowledge “must be true” is superfluous and misleading; knowledge’s
verity is beheld with its methodical confirmation.
Specifications about proper applications of particular methods falls to the
purview of inquiry communities. Since inquiry communities are responsible
for their methodologies, their collective affirmations are the ultimate
justifications backing any particular claims to knowledge. Knowledge in
general is justified affirmation.
Pragmatism expects the many areas of knowledge to display
contradictions and incoherencies between them, yet this situation is no
refutation, since rationalism’s strictures do not apply. Asking inquiry
communities to seek reconciliations, coherences, and syntheses of theirknowledge is entirely reasonable. Pragmatism urges pluralism and
contextualism in the areas of social epistemology and philosophy of
science.
Futures for Truth
Pragmatism acquired its notoriety with its controversial meaning for truth
while undertaking a confrontation with rationalism. Rationalism aligns truth
directly and statically with reality, leaving the growth of knowledge as a
conundrum. To philosophically explain knowledge, truth must be conceived
as primarily prospective, not circumspective or retrospective.
Looking back, established bodies of knowledge are historical from
today’s vantage, but they were learned from fresh inquiries of their time.
Looking around, knowledgeable communities are plentiful for offering
truths, but mutual adjustments and reconciliations await further
investigations. More truths, and better truths, anticipate practical trials so
that reals can get realized. Pragmatism mediates concepts of reality and
truth through knowing, the methodical processes of inquiry.
This mediation between truth and reality is exemplified in Peirce’s blunt
statements in “How to Make Our Ideas Clear”:
The opinion which is fated to be ultimately agreed to by all who
investigate, is what we mean by the truth, and the object represented in
this opinion is the real. That is the way I would explain reality. But it
may be said that this view is directly opposed to the abstract definition
which we have given of reality, inasmuch as it makes the characters of
the real depend on what is ultimately thought about them. But the
answer to this is that, on the one hand, reality is independent, not
necessarily of thought in general, but only of what you or I or any
finite number of [inquirers] may think about it; and that, on the other
hand, though the object of the final opinion depends on what that
opinion is, yet what that opinion is does not depend on what you or I
or any man thinks.4Here, Peirce is only addressing a conception of truth that itself passes his
test of clear conception, not some other unclear connotation of truth. This is
philosophy, not lexicography.
“The opinion which is fated to be ultimately agreed to by all who
investigate, is what we mean by the truth.”—Charles Sanders
Peirce
Peirce’s conception of truth as that knowledge which would satisfy tests
of indefinitely prolonged inquiry is an effective conception of truth that
makes a difference to practical inquiry. It makes such a vast difference, that
only genuine communities of inquiry form around a shared commitment to
such strenuous truth, such as investigatory disciplines and scientific fields.
Peirce’s meaning for reality is similarly delimited to that sphere, after the
Kantian thing-in-itself gets eliminated and reality turns out to be where it
always was, inviting engagements with its activities. Pragmatism’s theory
of knowledge about the world created by inquirers at work within that
world promises that the triadic relationship of [Reals, Truths, Knowings]
within practical achievements must affect all three components.
Letting rationalistic questions divide apart [Reals, Truths, Knowings] for
separate treatment lends the appearance of paradox to pragmatism. On the
one hand, things are realistically conceived prior to a prediction of their
discovery when inquiry is initiated, but on the other hand, reality is
projected far out at the culmination of maximal inquiries not yet
imaginable. When does pragmatism want a thing to be real—before or after
knowing it? Peirce does encourage a view of the process of knowing as
never ending, and never needing to end.5 Where does the truth lie—does the
truth already exist for discovery, or does the truth only exist when inquiries
are exhausted?
Such interrogations are false to pragmatism. They try to metaphysically
conceive truth and reality apart from knowing, as a-temporally fixed
matters. Pragmatism instead takes knowledge (and true knowing, and
known reals) to be fallible and provisional. Fallibilism about truth is the
sounder realism, and idealism is banished. Peirce does not claim that truth
is limited to whatever actual inquirers manage to discover before their
expiration or extinction. No pragmatist asserts that realities cannot existunless mentalities encounter them. It is a mistake to assimilate
pragmatism’s view of truth to idealism, especially since it asserts that
anything actual must be conceived realistically.
Discovery does require inquiry, nonetheless. “The True” is a regulative
ideal for inquiry in general, expecting “the real” discovered so far to
withstand any amount of potential investigation in the future. This
pragmatist conception of “The True” makes a difference to empirical
methodologies and communities of inquiry applying them, preventing halts
to thought in arbitrary dogma. Today’s knowledge is of hypothesized
entities that are, so far, credibly real, so asserting their actuality is to assert
truths as we know them. But their credibility is lent “on credit” which can
be withdrawn due to future improved inquiries not yet conducted.
To admit that today’s truths will probably be replaced by superior richer
truths only sounds contradictory on rationalism’s dictum that “truth
tomorrow means no truth today.” Fallibilism is not relativism or irrealism—
it stands as reasonably realistic. Although any theory could require revision
or replacement in the future, this displays knowledge’s growth, not its
death. There can be no “pessimistic induction” advising skepticism and
irrealism about today’s theories. Petulant incredulity towards still￾confirmable things is unreasonable, and premature incredulity towards to￾be-confirmed things is irrational.
Pragmatism’s optimism about knowledge is not grounded on the
idealistic principle that The Real is known. Optimism is instead based on
the confirmed knowability of many reals, the intelligent discovery of
innumerable actualities.
Truth tracks the forging of relationships between real matters.
Mmethodical justification is the process of forging the transactional
relationship of co-respondence between the knower and the known. Those
co-respondences yield knowledge of actualities, but concrete propositions
never lose the plasticity of empirical testability and fallibility. Known
beliefs remain propositional, in the sense of “proposals” intending the
future, not the static “propositions” of statements enjoying final truth.
Dewey critiqued the rationalist view of propositions in this way:
[T]he primary common assumption of both realistic and idealistic
conceptions is that a statement by its nature implies an assertion of itsown truth. No, replies the pragmatist, a statement, a proposition, in just
the degree in which it has a genuinely intellectual quality, implies a
doubt concerning its own truth and a search for truth, an inquiry for it.
The proposition which asserts or assumes its own truth is either a sheer
prejudice, a congealed dogmatism; or else it is not an intellectual or
logical proposition at all, but simply a linguistic memorandum . . . [A
proposition] is a hypothesis concerning some state of affairs; that it is
of its nature to be doubtful, not assured, of truth; and that its assertion
of its own truth is only conditional: that it is a means of setting on foot
activities of inquiry which will test the worth of its claim. Truth, then,
can exist only in the testing of the claim, in making good through the
subsequent acts it prescribes.6
This is a consequentialist theory of truth. It fulfills the expectations of
idealism for thought’s efficacy in knowledge, while satisfying the demands
of realism about the objectivity attainable with knowledge. Science is now
set up as an exemplar of objective knowledge, rather than mathematics.
Only rationalistic strictures have allowed philosophy to separate idealism
and realism into opposed worldviews, unable to even view the same world.
Dewey continues,
The pragmatic theory thus claims faithfully to represent the spirit, that
is the method, of science, which (1) regards all statements as
provisional or hypothetical till submitted to experimental test; (2)
endeavors to frame its statements in terms which will themselves
indicate the procedures required to test them; and (3) never forgets that
even its assured propositions are but the summaries of prior inquiries
and testings, and therefore subject to any revision demanded by further
inquiries. . . . [W]ith this change propositions get a future outlook and
reference, while the orthodox notion makes them refer to antecedent
conditions. To realist and idealist alike truth (or falsity) is a property
which exists ready-made in the intellectual assertion. What is done
with the proposition, what happens from its use, the differences it
makes in further experience—these are all irrelevant. The pragmatist
says that since every proposition is a hypothesis referring to an inquiry
still to be undertaken (a proposal in short) its truth is a matter of itscareer, of its history: that it becomes or is made true (or false) in
process of fulfilling or frustrating in use its own proposal.7
Summary
For pragmatism, truth is far more consequential than rationalism could ever
admit. “Truth” is a label, not a referent. It is the most important label that
any product of thought could aspire to attaining.
Truth is adjectival: judgments turn out to be more or less true due to
assessed consequences making a difference for life. Truth is adverbial:
judgments successfully tested by dynamic mentality through practical trial
are veritably affirmable. Truly affirmable judgments are reliable for guiding
innumerable further activities that enliven and enrich our world.9
Ecological Mentality
Philosophies before pragmatism have sought alternatives to Cartesianism
and its irreconcilable dualisms between experience and reason, and between
body and mind. Paths away from Descartes were made easier and straighter
by relying on lingering tenets of permanence. The preservation of
privileged mental responsibilities remained paramount, to keep humanity
elevated far above all animals, and to elevate philosophy above all other
areas of knowledge, especially the sciences. Modern and postmodern
philosophies retreated to the mind, as the last refuge for disciplinary
knowledge, a knowledge of knowledge itself, the sort of knowledge that no
other field could duplicate or replace.
Having expelled natural history, biology, anthropology, psychology, and
any behavioral and social science, academic philosophies erected high walls
around the mind to forever prevent invasion and integration. Alternatives to
Descartes mostly reinvented rationalism.
Philosophies of permanence, along with most philosophies of
impermanence, contended for primacy in their chosen isolation by
contesting the nature of mind. Previous chapters have integrated mind
within pragmatism’s theory of knowledge and truth. The last bastion of
resistance to pragmatism is precisely where post-Cartesian philosophy
carried it away, the mind itself. Pragmatism finds that mentality is selective,
purposive, ecological, and social, with nothing more about “mind” to have
to mind.
Mind–Matter Mutuality
Post-Cartesian philosophies proposed revised conceptions of mind without
abandoning views such as “the mind holds certainties unobtainable from
perception,” or “the mind remains distinct from physical matters,” or“minds stay individualized while externally related,” or “minds make
choices aloof from causal forces.” Above all, the mind’s nature seeks
knowledge, to know truths. A philosopher denying this purpose of mind has
no knowledgeable mind to heed, committing a self-refutation more
devastating than any fallacy. Knowledge, and hence philosophy itself, was
at stake. The world supplies reality enough. The mind must do the rest in
order to possess knowledge.
The legacy of Descartes assigned twinned responsibilities to the mind: it
attends to mind-independent realities, and it independently minds those
realities. Aloof independence is hardly a propitious setting for cooperation.
Pragmatism does agree that mind has better work to do than knowing just
mind, adding that this productive work is precisely what allows mind to be
known. Descartes held that the mind always knows itself best, better than
the world. Pragmatism finds that the mind gradually learns about itself by
learning from the world in which mind is embedded.
Distinctive modes of centralized and organized activity distinguish
mentality from the rest of actuality. In order to accurately identify those
modes, and their orientations towards objectivity, we must directly address
the issue of independence. Cartesianism’s legacy licensed the conflation of
four distinguishable meanings for an “independence” to a reality: (a) not
dependent on mind’s consciousness (a material cause); (b) not dependent on
mind’s concepts (a formal cause); (c) not dependent on mind’s knowing (an
efficient cause); and (d) not dependent on mind’s regimentation (a final
cause).
These tenets can be contradicted, but diametric opposition was never in
pragmatism’s plans. No denial could suffice to reconcile Cartesian
dualisms. Simply reuniting contrary views would inflate mind to cosmic
proportions or consign a mind to solipsist prison. Instead, by reversing that
order of (a) to (d), pragmatism treats telic relationality as the basis for
reuniting mind and world. Organizing mentality effectively constructs a
knowable world through conceptual inferences requiring conscious
attention.
Duality should be replaced by mutuality. Interdependency is the
validation, not a subjugation, for both mentality and physicality. Mentality
without capability is vacuous, physicality without potency is void. Nothing
therefore remains to keep mind and reality apart. Their ontologicalcommonality lies in processive activity comprising all actuality. Classifying
pragmatism as either an idealism or a realism on traditional metaphysical
terms is a mistake. Pragmatism expressly rejected those terms. Worldly
matters subsist for activities having stability; mental functions persist for
activities having reliability. Mentality operates within reality. Dynamic
interactivity characterizes all.
Neither mentality nor materiality must be reduced to the other. Mentality
finds the world to be endlessly discoverable, and reality generates mentality
from its boundless energy. This “generation” is akin to the way that a
crystal grows from a solution or a plant grows from the soil, without any
mysterious ontological gap between process and product. Biology, not
logic, supplies the key terms for comprehending how organic mentality
displays its capacities for exploring and modifying its environment.1 The
mind is not reproducing internal models of externalities. Remodeling
external matters is the mind thinking. Inference, reasonableness, and
logicality grew from mentality’s strivings for precise and reliable control
over manifold conditions and outcomes.
Rationalism insists that what lies beyond and what lies behind has a
separable and more substantial reality, assigning a derivative and dependent
status to whatever grows and learns. Pragmatism assigns no ontological
priority in any direction. Interdependent modification through change is all
that could be said to be fundamental. Therefore, “the mind” has no
permanent attributes or substantial existence all its own. Operations and
functions of what was “the mind” are better attributable to that feature of
reality hereby called “mentality.” Mind is not something responsible for
mentality—there is only mentality, wherever reality permits its
characteristic activity.
To refuse to observe real mentality within patterned processes of dynamic
reality is to presume the very dualism that a metaphysician should have to
prove. Pragmatism has nothing to prove here except to show how to avoid
that presumptive fallacy, a false start still prevalent even in science. Dewey
points out,
The dualism is found today even among those who have abandoned its
earlier manifestations. It is shown in separations made between the
structural and the functional; between the brain and the rest of thebody; between the central nervous system and the vegetative nervous
system and viscera; and, most fundamentally, between the organism
and the environment. For the first of each of these pairs of terms—
structure, brain, organism—retains something of the isolation and
alleged independence that used to belong to the “soul and the mind,”
and later to “consciousness.”2
This worldview endorsed by pragmatism is not a “dual aspect” theory of
mind and matter. Physicality and mentality are not aspects of some
mysterious ultimacy, but modes of one and the same real activity. There is
nothing “behind” mind and matter. Both consist entirely of processive
activity.
Nor does pragmatism endorse panpsychism. A functionally perspectival
view of mentality does not need to imbue all physicality with a degree of
mentality. Anything real, whether more of the physical or of the mental,
occurs in ontologically neutral processes having the form of situational
durations, or “events.” Within reality, time–space–energy are fused and
inseparable.3 From the standpoint of an organism embedded in this
dynamical cosmos, physicality and mentality are distinguishable and
describable according to their different functionalities. Mentality has, in
general, modes of activity that have evolved to be particularly conducive to
self-organizing and systemic growing.
This cosmological interdependency of mentality and physicality resolves
metaphysical conundrums lingering in the West since Democritus and Plato.
The installation of consciousness during the rise of European modernity as
a proxy for the unnatural soul delayed that resolution. At long last, the idea
of substance had to be overthrown.
In the tradition of Baruch Spinoza, Johann Gottfried von Herder, and
Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling, Peirce did not connect mind and
matter with rigid relations. He instead fused them together within patterned
processes.
. . . all mind is directly or indirectly connected with all matter, and acts
in a more or less regular way; so that all mind more or less partakes of
the nature of matter. Hence, it would be a mistake to conceive of the
psychical and the physical aspects of matter as two aspects absolutelydistinct. Viewing a thing from the outside, considering its relations of
action and reaction with other things, it appears as matter. Viewing it
from the inside, looking at its immediate character as feeling, it
appears as consciousness. These two views are combined when we
remember that mechanical laws are nothing but acquired habits, like
all the regularities of mind, including the tendency to take habits,
itself . . .
4
That “subjectivity” of mind can no longer inflate into its own substantial
being. Dewey’s account of this process pragmatism situates the mental, like
the biological, amidst the physical.
The distinction between physical, psycho-physical, and mental is thus
one of levels of increasing complexity and intimacy of interaction
among natural events. The idea that matter, life and mind represent
separate kinds of Being is a doctrine that springs, as so many
philosophic errors have sprung, from a substantiation of eventual
functions. . . . “Matter,” or the physical, is a character of events when
they occur at a certain level of interaction. It is not itself an event or
existence; the notion that while “mind” denotes essence, “matter”
denotes existence is superstition. It is more than a bare essence; for it
is a property of a particular field of interacting events.5
Features or characters of mind, differentiable from worldly matters as
expected for a pluralistic cosmos, do not merit independent metaphysical
status. There is no separate ontology just for mind or consciousness.
Conscious Relationality
William James concurred with this worldview assigning functional
relationality to mentality. Against idealism’s claim that mind organizes
perceptions with ideal relations to produce an immaterial field of
consciousness, he pointed out how relations among perceived things are
equally phenomenally present. Empiricists agreeing with idealism thatconsciousness consists only of ideal copies rather than material objects are
never able to produce any evidence for this spectral sheen. Pointing a finger
up at the moon is not a gesture to something within one’s consciousness or
mind, and the moon’s brightness is a meaningful property of your situation
with the moon, not an inner quality lacking functionality.
That pernicious “scheme–content” dichotomy is a perennial problem.
Idealists and empiricists each isolate one factor to ordinary experience in
order to deny its presence in the world. Idealists abstract out the relatedness
to experience and then credit all relationality to transcendental mind.
Empiricists abstract out the qualitativeness to experience and then credit all
quality to perception untouched by mind.
Both camps cling to an unreal “thought-in-itself” and then deny that the
external world is directly experienced, leaving it as a mysterious “thing-in￾itself.” For pragmatism, that thing called “the concept” is a grammatical
fiction, not really bearing any fixed self-sufficient meaning. That thing
called a “qualia” is an introspective fiction, not really presenting any static
non-intentional intensity.
6 The experienced world is qualitatively
conceivable as we attend to things around us, not to illusions within us.
After dispelling versions of that “thought-in-itself” with an honest
examination of ordinary lived experience—what James called his radical
empiricism7—“consciousness” disappears and one is immediately
confronted with the experienced world, where it always has been. Whatever
consciousness would still be, it persists within this flowing attentiveness
within the world, instead of spectrally hovering above it or entertaining
imagistic duplicates of it. Consciousness never deserved an ontological
status of its own.
In his 1904 article “Does Consciousness Exist?” James cannot
empirically discover what this supposed “stuff” of consciousness could be.
He concludes,
I believe that “consciousness,” when once it has evaporated to this
estate of pure diaphaneity, is on the point of disappearing altogether. It
is the name of a nonentity, and has no right to a place among first
principles. Those who still cling to it are clinging to a mere echo, the
faint rumor left behind by the disappearing “soul” upon the air of
philosophy. . . . The instant field of the present is at all times what Icall the “pure” experience. It is only virtually or potentially either
object or subject as yet. For the time being, it is plain, unqualified
actuality, or existence, a simple that. . . . Consciousness connotes a
kind of external relation, and does not denote a special stuff or way of
being.8
Attentive awareness, what the pragmatists treated as consciousness, is a
particularly focused portion of ongoing experienced reality. Consciousness
must not be equated with that entire phenomenal realm. Both objective
world and subjective mind emerge from this field of experienceable reality.
While consistent with minimal realism, this worldview is not a
metaphysical realism, because reality nowhere is utterly unlike mentality.
9
This worldview cannot be a metaphysical idealism either, because mentality
only participates with the rest of reality to a limited extent. Connective and
interactive relationality binds all. Idealists rightly take all that activity of
relating and intending to be the activity of mind, but they mistakenly
suppose that “the mind” has to be something more than just the relational
activity itself. Nothing lies behind or beyond experience as a “thinker-in￾itself,” such as a transphenomenal subject, the unifying “I,” or the
transcendental ego, to perpetually bind the phenomenal realm together.
Dewey agreed whole-heartedly with James’s dismissal of consciousness
as a mental substance. He put it this way: “Mind is primarily a verb. It
denotes all the ways in which we deal consciously and expressly with the
situations in which we find ourselves. Unfortunately, an influential manner
of thinking has changed modes of action into an underlying substance that
performs the activities in question. It has treated mind as an independent
entity, which attends, purposes, cares, and remembers.”10
There is nothing metaphysically independent or self-sufficient to be
discerned about mentality, for a dynamically processive reality consisting of
innumerable kinds of shifting events. Only variations among functional
stabilities and instabilities distinguish their lasting or fleeting influences.
Experience originally arrives in ever-arriving compositions of situational
durations. Nothing additional is needed to shape a spatiotemporal world.
Within that one world, human mentality engages capacities for adjusting
our habitual behaviors and hence for modifying the encountered world.
Dewey again:The first great consideration is that life goes on in an environment; not
merely in but because of it, through interaction with it. No creature
lives merely under its skin; its subcutaneous organs are means of
connection with what lies beyond its bodily frame, and to which, in
order to live, it must adjust itself, by accommodation and defense but
also by conquest. . . . The career and destiny of a living being are
bound up with its interchanges with its environment.11
Mind is always interrelated with and within the world. Inconstant
realities requiring attentive management and persistent mentality is a
dynamic aspect of ongoing reality.
12 Human mentality develops its own
habitual stabilities to manage the conduct of our practices. Permanencies
are not needed. Seemingly static features of mind, suspended in reflective
abstraction, have only a formulaic status without concrete import. The
idealized concept, that simple essence, or whatever populates metaphysical
fantasies about mind, are examples of that thought-in-itself to be exorcized
from philosophy. Meanings are not trapped inside consciousness for
contemplating. Meanings are out in the world where valued activities are
happening.
Inconstant realities requiring attentive management and persistent
mentality is a dynamic aspect of ongoing reality.
Mentality is about telic relationality embedded within processive reality.
Among the innumerable kinds of purposive relationalities for mentality,
complex forms serve as signs for suitably sentient organisms. All thought,
according to Peirce, consists of the enchained meanings to signs. There
cannot be anything more to consciousness than that.
. . . in what does the reality of the mind consist? We have seen that the
content of consciousness, the entire phenomenal manifestation of
mind, is a sign resulting from inference. Upon our principle, therefore,
that the absolutely incognizable does not exist, so that the phenomenal
manifestation of a substance is the substance, we must conclude that
the mind is a sign developing according to the laws of inference. . . .
consciousness is sometimes used to signify the I think, or unity inthought; but the unity is nothing but consistency, or the recognition of
it. Consistency belongs to every sign, so far as it is a sign; and
therefore every sign, since it signifies primarily that it is a sign,
signifies its own consistency.
13
Although it is of the nature of a sign to participate in representation about
some object, Peirce’s theory of mind is far from traditional
representationalism. A sign offering mere qualitative or isomorphic
similarity conveys little actionable information. The highest grade of sign, a
symbol, need not imitate or resemble an object at all. Its function is not to
remake an acquaintance, but to facilitate an anticipation of what happens
from interacting with the object. Interoperability is memorable for a
practical mind; concepts are retained to connect sensibility with habituality.
As Peirce wrote, “The elements of every concept enter into logical thought
at the gate of perception and make their exit at the gate of purposive action;
and whatever cannot show its passports at both those two gates is to be
arrested as unauthorized by reason.”14
A meaningful conception of an object cannot fail to engage that real
object, because only that engagement supplies the concept’s meaning.
Neither intentionality nor reference need to be mysteries, because sense is
assuredly linked to preference. Where there is no intended selection among
interactions with an object, then there is no reference to it at all.
Embodied Mentality
Cartesianism still pervades too much psychology and philosophy of mind
by demanding a narrow localization of rationality, a priority for self￾consciousness’s powers, and a quest for veritable representations of the
external world. However, all biological evidence points to a very different
portrait of mentality and intelligence. The brain exhibits much dedicated
modular architecture, but massive parallel and networked processing is
dominant. The brain is not hierarchical, but more democratic and
interdependent. Nerve centers across the brains are intricately
interconnected with each other. Most any part of the brain has some direct
or indirect systemic link to every other part of the brain.There is no inner Cartesian theater where all information is gathered and
simultaneously experienced. Experience at best displays rough continuities.
There is no executive command center giving orders to the rest of the brain.
Deliberation at best guides habitual motor action. Ordinary cognition does
not primarily aim at static representation in general, but rather dynamic
adequacy in specific situations.
The Cartesian claim that mind and body are entirely different is
demonstrably false. The vast similarities between the twin functionalities of
mentality and neurology indicate their embodied interdependence and co￾functionality.
15
Thought activity and nerve activity both have temporal durations. They
are both found in localized living organisms rather than diffused throughout
nature. They both consist of relational continuities rather than atomic
accumulations. They are both dynamic rather than static. They both display
growth and decay. They both function in attending to practical dealings with
the environment. And, they both primarily aim at maintaining the
organism’s well-being. Even the most “subjective” parts of consciousness,
such as the flow of feelings and qualities noticeable in self-consciousness,
are features of the dynamically functional flow of thought.
Pragmatism does not seek to “reduce” felt qualities to nervous activity or
anything else to prove that they are natural. The metaphysical formula
demanding identity of all properties for genuine identity is unscientific and
unnecessary. Functional consistency is quite sufficient. Where two
phenomena are entirely correlated and display the same functionalities, the
two phenomena are rightly regarded as the same natural process from
different perspectives. Qualitative feelings happen where nervous systems
achieve certain degrees of complexity. The lived experience supplied by
cognition reflects its neurological basis.
Rationalist philosophies point to features of experience or thought
allegedly lacking dynamic functionality or integration with action.
However, such supposedly “pure” or “inert” features (sense data, intense
qualia, and the like) are only “detectable” through reflective abstraction
from the ordinary flow of active experience. What has to be created through
cognition cannot be attributed to “original” experience.
The brain rapidly merges diverse streams of stimuli from all sources in
order to guide effective action in the lived moment. All cognitive processes(and hence all conscious experiences too) are fusings of information about
external sensations, motor control processes, and internal feedback from the
body. There is nothing like pure sensation, no pure will, and no pure
feeling. There are no dichotomies between sensation, emotion, and reason.
These aspects and phases of cognition work together as they guide
behavior.
Sensationalism and associationism are inadequate theories of experience
because organic circuits create new meaningful wholes that are not merely
sums or sequences of their parts. The circuit of perception, action, and
consequence develops an enlarging fusion: (1) the meaning of a perception
includes a prior action done to gain that perception, such as the turning of
the gaze towards an object; (2) the meaning of the action includes both a
desire (to touch that object) and more perception (to guide the reaching);
and (3) the meaning of the consequences of the touching includes the
guided action of touching.
To illustrate, suppose that a child first touches a fascinating flame. The
felt pain from touching a hot object is not just felt pain, but the pain of
touching that object. The next time the child sees the flame, she sees a hot
flame, and if she reaches for that flame again, fascination has been replaced
by wariness as she reaches for a painful touch. From then on, for that child,
an idea of touching that flame contains the idea of encountering pain, and
reaching habits are modified accordingly.
16
In general, most of the meaning to perceiving things consists of habitual
anticipations of potential reactions upon dealing with those things. Organic
circuits result in holistic organic wholes of experience. Experience is
thoroughly imbued with prospective values of action. That is why we
directly experience meanings and values in the world around us.
If meanings or values were only interior mental events or states, then our
experience of an external object would be stereoscopic, a sort of double
perception. We would observe the external object as a meaningless material
thing, and simultaneously observe it as a useful object, as if one “eye” saw
the world as it is, while another “eye” saw objects as meaningful and
valuable. Does lived experience ever seem like this? Hardly. We
immediately and directly observe significant, meaningful, and valuable
objects without any double “vision” or contrast between an external world
and an internal world.Meanings and values are where they appear to be: embodied in the things
that we know how to approach, engage with, and use. Pragmatism hardly
treats these two matters differently, since meanings are valuable leadings
towards ends and values are the meant results from doings. Meanings and
values are instances of achieved practical knowledge through learning.
Knowledge is built up from our experimental attempts to productively
manage our deliberate modifications to the environment.
Static representationalism, correspondence theories of knowledge, and
Cartesian materialism are not viable theories of mentality and intelligence.
Minds are not isolated or aloof from each other; the reason why minds are
interactive is because they are always interrelated. Mentality is thoroughly
networked, whenever and wherever synchronizing brains are coordinating
action through communing and communication. Therefore, most of
intelligence’s effectiveness arises within communities learning and
preserving collective skills and practices.
Our kind of mentality is dependent on our evolved brains and developed
intelligence. Cognitive functions involve brain functions, either of single or
multiple brains, in the course of sentient conduct. However, it is a mistake
to assume that mentality is localized to just the brain or some region of the
brain. Neurons are all about systemic communication, across synapses and
across spaces between individuals. Many cognitive functions, and all higher
cognitive functions, only operate through brains in communication with
each other about the common environment. Meanings are embedded in the
dynamic relationships and connections, not the final terminations. As Hilary
Putnam emphasized, “meanings ain’t in the head.”17
Human minds are differentiable since their streams of meaningful
experience have separate organic embodiments and particular concerns. Yet
there is nothing metaphysically dualistic about this observation, as Dewey
explains.
Experience when it happens has the same dependence upon objective
natural events, physical and social, as has the occurrence of a house. It
has its own objective and definitive traits; these can be described
without reference to a self, precisely as a house is of brick, has eight
rooms, etc., irrespective of whom it belongs to. Nevertheless, just as
for some purposes and with respect to some consequences, it is allimportant to note the added qualification of personal ownership of real
property, so with “experience” . . . it is not exact or relevant to say “I
experience” or “I think.” “It” experiences or is experienced, “it” thinks
or is thought, is a juster phrase. Experience, a serial course of affairs
with their own characteristic properties and relationships, occurs,
happens, and is what it is. Among and within these occurrences, not
outside of them nor underlying them, are those events which are
denominated selves.18
Experience is among the organic features of lifeforms, and selves emerge
from enriched experiences. On Dewey’s terms, this is hardly different from
pointing out how corn stalks showered with rain will rise tall and yield ears
of corn. Shall we conclude that stalks can’t be of the same earth, or that
corn hides an essence utterly unlike soils from which they grew?
Summary
The organism’s effective coordination of efforts to modify its environment
(natural and social) exemplifies cognition. Pragmatism has always refused
to treat brain cells as the exclusive place where cognitive meaning is
enacted. Neurons are involved with, but not entirely constitutive of,
cognition. Neuroscience properly studies the interrelated processes of brain
activity, including synchronized mental activity functioning through
multiple brains simultaneously. Still, cognitive neuroscience cannot help
explain the processes of learning and knowing by referencing brain activity
alone in isolation from its environing context.
Biology cannot study life with utter disregard for the environment.
Nervous networks, just as any biological system, must not be studied any
differently. The same goes doubly for the functions in which such systems
take part, such as cognition.
Cognition, therefore, is not to be solely done within the head; cognition
should be understood in terms of life, practical activity, and living within
habitats. Perception and memory must be understood in terms of their
contribution to situation-appropriate behavior under the pressure of real-time interactions with environing matters. Grounding mind in biology takes
life seriously. The function of the mind is to guide action.10
Society, Self, and Mind
Self and society both evolved gradually in concert together from the
growing communal relations characteristic of the Homo genus ancestors
down to Homo sapiens. Among our species, the established sociality of a
community is responsible for the rapid socialization and enculturation of
each new generation. Selves are not born; they are nurtured and trained.
Individuality, like mentality, is a developed social facility, not a
biological or metaphysical category. No one is born as a thinking thing or a
personal self. Humanity is a thoroughly symbolic species, but our symbols
are never trapped inside spectral minds. Symbolization is exactly and only
where mentality is functioning, among coordinating and cooperating
people. Communication is a prominent feature of all that communing.
One learns how to be an individual only within a community. Flock,
herd, or pack behavior isn’t sufficient. Highly communal species—one
thinks of chimps, gorillas, dolphins, and elephants—treat members of their
kind as unique individuals.1 Thinking of oneself as an individual, that
capacity for self-awareness, comes with the high intelligence for regarding
others as individuals too.
Social Cognition
Where in the world are minds? A modern problem of philosophy is the
“problem of other minds,” a special case of the general problem of knowing
the “external” world after the mind is cast as the “internal” world. Idealists,
phenomenologists, realists, and empiricists all encounter this problem. In
Bertrand Russell’s version, “there seems no reason to believe that we are
ever acquainted with other people’s minds, seeing that these are not directly
perceived.”2If minds have discrete and separate existences—just like souls, according
to Western Christianity—then minds have no direct contact, and a thought
cannot be simultaneously shared. For this dualism, other minds are far more
inaccessible than external objects. That must be, because experience
supplies ideas of objects, but no amount of experience reaches another
mind. Philosophers and psychologists beholden to the Cartesian legacy first
assume that all minds are strictly individuated entities.
Cartesianism takes one’s own mind to be known best, so any knowledge
about other minds is dependent on one’s conception of one’s self as a mind.
During the twentieth century, materialism reinforced this presumption. The
school of “Cartesian materialism,” as philosopher Daniel Dennett labeled it,
continued to maintain that the brain supplies what we know best: our inner
veridical experience of our own mind.3
The methodological individualism of modern Cartesianism erects
insurmountable obstacles for explaining how minds attain mutual
understanding and coordination. Each of us would have to theoretically
project another mind of the same sort that we take ourselves to already
have. This amounts to a radically individualistic presumption that self￾knowledge of one’s mind is both logically and developmentally prior to
knowledge of other minds. Cartesian individualism encouraged
investigators to experimentally isolate subjects to discern their capacities as
lone thinkers and agents.
Eliminating the inner mind from scientific consideration did not
circumvent this Cartesianism. For example, B. F. Skinner’s methodological
individualism regarded all social entities and events to be entirely
explicable in terms of aggregate actions of agents. This behaviorism never
regarded the cognition of others’ minds as a serious possibility, instead
taking knowledge of others to be anticipations of their observable
behaviors.4
The alternative to methodological individualism is sociological
mentality: minding others is the only way to develop and exhibit one’s own
mind. Social cognition about group activities must be essential to mental
growth. That is a fact largely unappreciated by both philosophy and
psychology during most of the twentieth century, though Jean Piaget and
Lev Vygotsky did go far in that direction.5Dewey and Mead went the farthest, offering empirical-based theories of
childhood learning through social cognition. Humans are hence able to treat
each other as selves because of their intense sociality. Neither selfhood or
society have any prior logical or ontological status. One did not generate the
other or arise from the other. Mead explained,
The self, as that which can be an object to itself, is essentially a social
structure, and it arises in social experience. After a self has arisen, it in
a certain sense provides for itself its social experiences, and so we can
conceive of an absolutely solitary self. But it is impossible to conceive
of a self arising outside of social experience.6
“The self, as that which can be an object to itself, is essentially a
social structure, and it arises in social experience.”—George
Herbert Mead
Mead and Dewey accordingly asserted that individual psychology cannot
be the primary way to study human mentality. At most, individual
psychology is physiological and neurological research available for social
theorizing, or individual psychology is the study of abnormal behavior too
unpredictable to explain social phenomena.
Sociology must be liberated from Cartesianism. Individualizing all mind
was the fallacy at the root of modern political and economic theory as well.
People are not atomized agents acting only from self-interest. Human
psychology is sociological. Dewey stated,
From the point of view of the psychology of behavior all psychology is
either biological or social psychology. And if it still be true that man is
not only an animal but a social animal, the two cannot be dissevered
when we deal with man.7
Regrettably, the social behaviorism of Dewey and Mead was largely
ignored by subsequent academic psychology, and its tenets had to be
experimentally rediscovered over the past thirty years.A debate between two kinds of individualism, reductive behaviorism and
dualistic Cartesianism, continued to preoccupy both psychology and
philosophy instead. Individualism, taking the situation of “self-confronting
world” to be primary, was also central for opponents of behaviorism. If the
self’s experiences after birth are insufficient for accounting for matured
social skills, then there must be innate cognitive structures doing the real
work all along.
Noam Chomsky accordingly proposed that infants are born with
something akin to an adult theory of mind consisting of basic structures of
social cognition, especially a universal grammar for semantic interpretation
to permit fast language acquisition. Jerry Fodor agrees, finding that the
possession of an innate computational theory of mind is needed to explain
the development of social skills during young childhood.8
John Searle’s prominent attempts at social ontology and explaining social
facts and institutions also harbored lingering Cartesianism. His internalism
has never been disguised: “The brain is all we have for the purpose of
representing the world to ourselves and everything we can use must be
inside the brain.” His further expression of this mental individualism states,
“Collective mental phenomena of the sort we get in organized societies are
themselves dependent on and derived from the mental phenomena of
individuals.”9
According to Searle, the most important kind of mental phenomena are
internal symbolic representations. Since an individual cannot directly
display his symbolic representations, he uses language to express them, and
that behavioral conduct is observed by others, so that they can theoretically
infer what symbols are intended. On Searle’s account, our capacity to see
the match between someone else’s representations and our own permits
what he called “collective intentionality”: two or more people who happen
to intend the same thing. However, Searle’s individualism remains strict:
“All human intentionality exists only in individual human brains.”10
Searle’s brains can speak at each other, but that can’t speak with one
voice. Since group plans depend on shared commitments, and one’s
commitments are in the form of symbolic representations requiring
linguistic expression, then one can only tell whether another person has the
same commitment through attending to that person’s statements. However,
not just any sort of statements will do. I can form a theory of your mentalcommitments, according to Searle, only after you utter “declarations” that
state your intentions. Searle rightly denies that “We-intentions” are
reducible without meaningful remainder down to sets of “I-intentions.”
However, his Cartesian Theory of Mind assumptions obstruct any
explanation of how “We-intentions” could first form or ever find each other.
Cartesian individualism obstructs practical collective intentionality. I
could learn that “You intend activity A” and match that up with “I intend
A,” but so far, all that adds up to is “Both you and I intend A,” not “We
intend to do A together in a particular way now.” How do children begin to
participate in collective intentionality? Searle’s Cartesianism assumes far
too much.
What if one of us is immature and unskilled, unsure about how we could
do activity A? If I have little idea how we could do A, can I really intend
that “We do A” in just the same way as another intends to do A, even if I
want to do A and I understand that you intend doing A? “We-intentions,”
however vague, must be developmentally and situationally prior to “I￾intentions.” A small child can intend to “help father bake a cake” in some
vague way because the child anticipates cake, but the child and the father
are not sharing the same idea “I want us to bake a cake.” Only the joint
intention that “We will bake a cake” initiates and coordinates their
particular “I” intentions during the baking.
Developmentally, there is a vast practical gap between “We intend
activity A” and “We are doing A.” During young childhood, none of us
began engaging in any sort of group activity by first conceiving what we are
supposed to do, verifying that all of us intend to do this together by
listening to each other’s utterances, and then undertaking our specific
conduct to complete the group activity. Familiar customs among adults look
that way, but intentionality could not be like that for early humans lacking
sentential language or today’s young initiates lacking experience.
A broad definition of social cognition is needed, such as: “Social
cognition, more generally, constitutes the process by which people think
about and make sense of other people, themselves, and social situations.”11
This view locates it within its proper home of situations containing people
conducting practices and modifying their habitats. Expansive depictions of
social cognition’s core role in explaining human psychology, society, and
culture, have become mainstream.12Individual minds are not assembling society. Sociality is constructing
individual minds. Investigations of “the social brain” have been underway
in a variety of interrelated fields, from developmental and abnormal
psychology to cognitive science and social neuroscience. There are robust
empirical resources for understanding intentionality, intelligence, agency,
and responsibility within the context of social cognition within communal
and cultural groups.13
Social cognition cannot be an emergent phenomenon from aggregate
individual cognitions. Any individualizable cognitions, including much of
self-consciousness and agency, are emergent from a more fundamental field
of embodied and dynamic social interaction.
Eliot R. Smith and Frederica Conrey summarize this research trend:
(a) Cognition is for the adaptive regulation of action, and mental
representations are action oriented. (b) Cognition is embodied, both
constrained and facilitated by our sensorimotor abilities as well as our
brains. (c) Cognition and action are situated in the sense of being
contingent on specific aspects of the agent’s social environment. (d)
Cognition is distributed across brains and the environment and across
social agents (e.g., when information is discussed and evaluated in
groups).14
Once taken to be exclusive possessions of minds taken singly, our
complex cognitive processes are proving to be capacities only of brains
taken communally and thinking distributively.
15
Pragmatism takes the most radical view: comprehending anything
involves social cognition. Navigating a grocery store from entrance to exit
with purchases is a series of social cognition tasks, while choosing what
one’s children like to eat, justifying that expensive cut of meat, and paying
at the check-out line. Remembering what others have done, recognizing
what other people are doing, communicating with others, recalling what
others think, collaborating in practices, and anticipating what others may do
in the future, are tasks at the heart of whatever we are doing every minute
of every day.What could you possibly do, besides the physiological abilities of any
mammal, where no other human being could be involved? Life as a human
is to behave as a human and think as a human. You didn’t invent that.
Pervasive social cognition is not a specialized production out of individual
thinking. All cognition consults and serves social cognition through life’s
innumerable activities and practices.
The theory of social cognition explains why we do not first develop
internally aware minds and then inferentially project mental states on
others. More generally, we do not infer internal mental states of others that
have some separate ontological status from features of observable
behaviors. What we observe from infancy to adulthood is simply mindful
behaviors of both ourselves and others. Mentality and intentionality are
fully exemplified in these behaviors, or they are nowhere.
There is a logical point to admit, that a person’s observably mindful
behaviors underdetermine any estimate of that person’s ongoing mental
states. Yet this point is powerless to show that we must go far beyond
information-poor behaviors to hypothesize information-rich mental entities.
That behavioral underdetermination only shows how our thoughts about
attitudes, intentions, and beliefs of us all, not excepting each of us
ourselves, are somewhat vague and fallible judgments. There is never any
need for anyone to postulate such things in a manner transcending all
behaviors (and any neural events as well).
Group Intentions
Not only must humans learn how to engage in group activities before they
have any adequate conception of what each of them is supposed to do,
humans must engage in group activities before forming any ideas about any
minds whatsoever, their own or others. Self-awareness gradually
accumulates through attentiveness to what others are attempting. Only by
successfully engaging in many sorts of group activities can young humans
be acquiring minds.
The younger mind need not first form ideas about what an older mind
intends before participating too, however haltingly and inadequately. Quite
the opposite: only by attending to what the mature mind is doing andaccomplishing, does the learning mind acquire some partial idea of the
mature mind’s intentions and beliefs. In effect, “We are doing activity A
together” must developmentally come prior to “You are intending that we
do A,” which in turn is developmentally prior to “I intend that we do A”—
and only after that does the child go on to form additional notions such as “I
believe A should be done” or “I believe that A is done this way.”
As the complexity of social activities increases, interconnections
throughout the prefrontal cortex develop further, through infancy and
childhood to early adulthood. The possession of human mentality consists
of advanced capacities for focused, flexible, and successful social practices.
Executive control over one’s tasks and managing interpersonal relationships
are two perspectives on the capacities for competency with human life.
Children acquire facility with the intentions, practices, and attitudes of
others through social interaction. To ask the question, “When does the child
leap from observations of mindful behavior to inferences about the inner
mental states of others?” is a crucial misstep. To presuppose that one’s
appreciation for another’s inner mental life is a matter separable from the
appreciation for another’s mindful conduct, is to assume that Theory of
Mind is not merely distinguishable, but quite separable, from social
conduct. This is a demonstrably inadequate view.
There is ample experimental support to disprove the presumption that
knowledge of any mind, of one’s own mind or minds of others, is
developmentally prior to, or independent of, attentive participation in joint
activities.16 There is that classic example of infants passing the “False
Belief” test, able to understand how others can have false beliefs. This is an
important stage, always developing due to the wider context of an infant’s
enlarging ability to anticipate in the practical goals of others by observing
their conduct. Estimating the false beliefs of others especially depends on
the child perceiving what others can see and do. Reasoning to judgments
about others’ true beliefs develops at a later age.
Judging the intentions of others is rooted in a situational context. For
example, a young child’s development of executive control is another kind
of practical functioning that grows right together with that child’s practical
ability to appreciate others’ mental processes, such as attitudes, emotions, or
beliefs. Developing executive functioning through group participation has
priority. Training in executive function enhances both executive functionand theory of mind, but training in theory of mind alone does not enhance
either executive function or theory of mind.
Situational role-playing is crucial for normal cognitive development.
Three-year-olds not only follow the intentions of others to engage in play
but they figure out normative rules for conducting pretend play, and they
enforce rules of play only on those who have willingly entered the field of
pretense as actors. Games involving co-players sharing common goals are
particularly efficient at enhancing executive and emotional control.17
The heavy reliance on social cognition for the development of one’s
cognitive capacities is not a temporary matter that diminishes in adulthood.
What is adulthood, besides one’s participation in multiple role-playing
positions? Common processes underlie theory of mind capacity and
participation with coordinated joint action in adulthood, and the brain’s
tendency to prioritize and preserve the impact of social interaction and
coordination remains a pervasive adult phenomenon.
Cognition is what brains do, and as brains cognize jointly, then
intentionality and agency operate in multiple brains properly functioning
together, not in any aggregate of separate brains contingently acting side by
side. Intentionality is basically attentionality. This is why each of the
pragmatists, from Peirce and James to Dewey and Mead, took social
experience to be as real as subjective experience.
This experiential sociality is no more mysterious than dancing, talking, or
reading. From a linguistic perspective, symbolic communication must be
about the fused responses of multiple organisms intentionally aware of their
commonality. Pointing to brains generating experience only makes social
experience more plausible. From a neurological perspective, why should the
Hebbian process (introduced by Donald Hebb in 1949) of “neurons firing
together are wiring together” halt at skull or skin? Brains learning together
are literally developing together.
Socialization is signification is habituation. Higher-level cognitions
involved with deliberate practices require simultaneous and synchronized
operations across multiple brains that have grown together through shared
experiences, intentions, communications, and practices. Synchronies of
mentality and harmonies of society reflect each other. People can do many
things by themselves, but only because they grew up doing so much with
others. Localizing the “real” cognition and the “genuine” agency withinbrains taken singly must be false to both the natural development of brains
and the social psychology of cognition.
Collaborative Thinking
The development of social cognition, only sketched in this chapter,
constitutes the solution, or rather the dissolution, of the philosophical
problem of other minds. Searle and so many other philosophers and
psychologists have had it backwards. The mentality of individuals develops
from, and operates with, the group mentality of organized societies.
Neither “inner” consciousness, “innate” concepts, “private” intentions, “a
priori” truths, “pure” essences, nor “qualia” phenomena, or further
examples of permanence’s fictions, can keep the mind in splendid isolation.
Not even thinking in itself. “Only I know the idea that I’m thinking” no
more divides your mind from society than “Only I paint the picture that I’m
painting” proves that no others had anything to do with art. You didn’t
invent thinking, or art. Or anything else you learned to make you human,
including the ideas of selfhood and humanity. As Peirce argues,
. . . a person is not absolutely an individual. His thoughts are what he is
“saying to himself,” that is, saying to that other self that is just coming
into life in the flow of time. When one reasons, it is that critical self
that one is trying to persuade; and all thought whatsoever is a sign, and
is mostly of the nature of language. The second thing to remember is
that the man’s circle of society (however widely or narrowly this
phrase may be understood), is a sort of loosely compacted person, in
some respects of higher rank than the person of an individual
organism.18
Personhood has a broader ontological status than a “self.” The natural telos
of a human being is to become a person among persons in that communion
called humanity.
The dynamics of group intentionality and agency deserve close study by
many disciplines from history, sociology, and anthropology to economicsand politics. It does remain a controversial philosophical topic. That is to be
expected. Ordinary language, folk psychology, and Cartesian individualism
conspire in the West to lend presumptive credibility for subjective
intentions, individualized agency, and a revulsion towards “group mind”
and “collective society.”
Philosophy had not forgotten how absolute idealism, or any transpersonal
collectivism, threatened the effective autonomy of individual persons.19
What would a person’s own plans and deeds be, if the absolute (or the
general will, and so on) is already thinking what can be properly thought?
Allowing a social mind to cause and control how we think, or how we
behave, could hardly seem to be an improvement on absolutism, and a fast
road towards totalitarianism.
Oddly, philosophers safely naturalizing and individualizing the mind by
reducing free will to underpinning neural states are able to turn in
repugnance against the notion of a collective mind overriding personal
responsibility. Even more ironically, while modern philosophy disdains any
long-past evolutionary basis to collective responsibility, it praises ethical
rules to constrain the conduct of organizations motivated by individualistic
ideologies and theologies of recent invention. In any case, hypocrisy aside,
both absolutism and reductivism forget the ontological option of systemic
holism.
Neither agency nor responsibility is at any risk from a socially distributed
theory of mentality and agency. First and foremost, each contributes just as
much talent as one wants, and accordingly receives as much empowerment
as the group enables. Furthermore, one’s capacity for effective productivity
is immeasurably greater within society than whatever one could ever think
or do on one’s own. Finally, taking the social nature of cognition seriously,
one’s enculturation into adult roles powerfully molds both one’s modes of
agency and one’s self-conception of one’s own agency.
Consciousness and conscientiousness are on the same range of social
experience from the most personal to the most collective. Just as physicality
and mentality are just modes of dynamic reality characterized by function,
subjectivity and objectivity are modes of mentality distinguishable by
intent.
Accounts of group or collective intentionality are taking advantage of
experimental psychology and neuroscience.20 Because participation inshared practices with common goals is so tightly interfused with individual
goal pursuit, individual intentions and personal agency cannot be neatly
distinguished when studying interpersonal synchronous conduct. All the
same, no one feels irresponsible or robotic while singing in a chorus or
cooking a meal together, and everything about the brain’s social cognition
would prevent one from feeling that way. What I am trying to do is part of
what we are doing, because we are doing it together while we intend the
same outcome.
We share responsibility for success and failure, unless a joint agreement
about particular individual responsibility can assign one or another more
credit or blame. No matter the results, each of us remains responsible for
choosing how to join efforts and apportion outcomes. To enjoy complete
responsibility from start to finish, just do it all yourself and try to enjoy the
meager fruits. Responsibility is worth little while humans are still pounding
rocks and fleeing predators.
Summary
Pragmatism regards intentional and responsible agency as enlargeable
facilities for living, not as simple “on or off” properties for mind. Control
over choice is a relatively simple ability, inherent to any appreciable
nervous system. Thinking about what might get chosen for which goal is
vastly more complex and significant. Larger brain size yields control over a
greater range of activities, while brains evolved for joint collaboration such
as ours produce control over innumerable opportunities.
Freely participating in accomplishing more is the only freedom worth
having for persons. Causality and sociality are enabling conditions, not
obstructions, for autonomous agents acquiring ever-greater efficacious
capabilities. There is no point to philosophy’s quest to protect autonomy or
rationality from nature’s ways. Humanity is not what it once was. So long
as sociality grows more intelligent, responsible freedom grows too.21 That
co-development of humanity’s possibilities and practices has a name:
Culture.11
Culture and Person
Persons are selves crafted from culture, not directly from biology.
Personhood is far more than molecular or metabolic, but concluding that
persons must be unnatural is too hasty. If biology evolved crafty humans,
and then they developed societies, which educate selves into persons, that
journey reconciles nature with personhood. Persons are no more unnatural
than peacocks or pastries. Humanity happens to specialize in personhood.
Persons, complete with artful skills and responsible agency, are cultural
achievements. They couldn’t spring from just anywhere. Persons can create
other persons, just as minds form more minds. The organic nature to
mindful selves and responsible persons is what situates humanity within
naturality.
In many ways, personhood is humanity’s ultimate art form. Persons are
special because they evolved with humanity itself, the source of everything
we can be. Pragmatism finds that everything about minds, selves, and
persons is congruent with our encultured existence as organic beings in this
earthly world. Pragmatism completes its naturalistic worldview with this
philosophical anthropology.
Biocultural Co-evolution
Staging culture within nature may pose special difficulties that tempt
unnatural solutions if nature is regarded as just mechanistic or culture is
viewed as only conventional. Nature’s blunt forces don’t look like plausible
causes for norms of rationality or morality. Society’s artificed ways do not
seem responsible for them either. Is there a third option? Having made the
first mistake in asking nature or society to be responsible for what we know
and value, the next mistake is a leap beyond them, assigning responsibilityto some unnatural (platonic, spiritual, theistic, etc.) origin instead. False
dilemmas abound.
A better understanding of humanity’s origins gives large credit to the
biocultural co-evolution of humanity. Anthropologist Joseph Henrich
outlines this process:
. . . natural selection favored genes for building brains with abilities to
learn from others. These learning abilities, when operating in
populations and over time, can give rise to subtly adaptive behavioral
repertoires, including those related to fancy tools and large bodies of
knowledge about plants and animals. These emergent products arose
initially as unintended consequences of the interaction of learning
minds in populations, over time.1
We humans have been made to think as we can, not by blind evolution
alone, or bright invention alone, but through their long-entangled co￾creations.2 As our Homo line branched farther away from great apes,
evolutionary pressures began to develop super-learners, acquiring clever
behaviors from social cues and cares. From infancy, simple capacities easily
engage with promptings from one’s elders, to guide strengthening habits,
then prepare the child for further role-taking in collaborations, and so on.
Learning itself has to be learned, but this is no paradox. Childhood
evolved.3
Babies arrived with propensities to learn so quickly that spastic motions
soon become proclivities during childhood, and maturing skills can
promptly be taught to others. Social mentality gradually became more
heritable than selfish egoism. Homo ancestors, particularly Homo habilis
and Homo erectus, accelerated this self-perpetuating and enlarging cycle,
driving larger brain sizes, prolonged juvenile traits, and complex
interpersonal relations, which in turn allowed for craftier invention and
knowledge retention.
Most importantly, intentionality was increasingly recursive as memory
expanded. That development allowed group coordination for participatory
practices such as dancing, singing, mimetic (guttural and gestural)
language, shared childrearing, instruction, and reciprocal morality. Thoseoriginal cultural forms in turn permitted more effective tool-use, strategic
hunting, food processing, security, and solidarity.
4
Partly genetic and partly conventional, what proved necessary for the
survival of both individuals and groups (that distinction blurring in the
super-social Homo species) then became essential for trained mentality.
That pseudo-debate over whether “gene selection,” “individual selection,”
or “group selection” has driven hominin evolution over millions of years is
a relic of needless reductionism. Very little at one level was ever altering
independently from the other levels, and modifications were happening for
many of the same reasons. Given opportunities for concerted attentiveness,
distant ancestors evolved as they discovered practices conducive to better
survival together.
Reductionism is particularly heedless when accounting for the communal
workings of symbolism. The initial sorts of symbolism were not inscribed
materially, nor inspired mentally, but embodied in others’ stylized and
expressive actions. To reverse a theological turn of phrase, in our own
dwelling, Flesh became Word. After participatory synchrony was
established, role-taking and rites in miniature provide the intelligible
structure for the rest of our invented normative practices. When an infant
happily claps along in rhythm with others, the rest of culture is details.
No magical leap from animal-like signals to articulate sentences ever
happened. It took four or five million years and a flexible prefrontal cortex
for intentionality to rise from the second-order stage (awareness that others
have their beliefs) to the third-order (communicating one’s own belief to
change another’s) and then fourth-order (communicating beliefs to be
entertained by multiple hearers).5 Fourth-order intentionality allows for
role-taking within normative practices with the awareness that others
appreciate one’s own participatory role. This is the emergence of
socializing, and hence the self.
As a founding sociologist, former student of Dewey, and admirer of
James, Charles Horton Cooley pragmatically described the nature of the
personal self with his metaphor of the “looking-glass self.” Summarized
neatly, “I am not what I think I am and I am not what you think I am; I am
what I think that you think I am.”6 This fourth-order intentionality supplies
the cognitive grounding for both attentive personhood and normativepractice. They are the same thing from two perspectives, internally and
externally.
This social intentionality of the personal self predates Homo sapiens.
Late Homo erectus branches to heidelbergensis and then neanderthalensis
apparently applied it. Their practices, such as toolmaking from multiple
precise steps, multi-stage food preparation, and fair third-party punishment,
for example, are capabilities practically impossible to acquire from
imitation alone. A large neocortex, larger group sizes, social symbolism,
and complex intentionality was involved. Fully grammatical speech with a
large vocabulary arrived later, and its syntax recursivity, a useful
sophistication, just tracked the earlier recursivity of intentionality.
The great cultural revolution occurred, not when Homo sapiens at last
could start discussing their domiciles, sharper blades, rock paintings, and
jewelry around 100,000 years ago, but much earlier, when previous Homo
species were forging what was to be culture around 800–400 thousand years
ago. Human universals descend from that first inheritance, while particular
cultures sprang from the second. Other generic traits and behaviors are
deeper inheritances from Ardipithecus ramidus and Australopithecus on to
H. habilis.
New fields for cognitive archaeology and paleoanthropology are
investigating the prolonged biocultural evolution of teamwork, teaching,
technology, musicality, language, and artistry.
7 These fields are converging
on a view of Homo development and humanity’s inheritance that was
suggested by the functionalism of classical pragmatism and endorsed by
contemporary pragmatists.
On pragmatism’s account of norms for thought, what society trains into a
new mind had earlier been a novelty preserved by practical advantage. A
new mind’s formation through training, facilitated by a brain evolutionarily
prepared for that learning, results in neural linkages and patterns so strongly
channeled that resulting thought patterns and behaviors feel innate and
inescapable. That conversion of novelty to inevitability through neurology
would seem paradoxical except for millions of years of biocultural co￾evolution. Enculturation succeeds. As Dewey stated, “The acquired may
moreover become so deeply ingrained as to be for all intents and purposes
native, a fact recognized in the common saying that ‘habit is second
nature.’”8Our cultural forms, encompassing everything learnable, replicable,
thinkable, and teachable, became humanity’s nature, as our “second nature.”
Learning, playing, and teaching were our first cultural practices, and all else
followed, including personhood.9
A new mind’s formation through training, facilitated by a brain
evolutionarily prepared for that learning, results in neural linkages
and patterns so strongly channeled that resulting thought patterns
and behaviors feel utterly innate and inescapable.
Cultural Performance
Encultured cognition, having reached higher orders of intentionality, can
now achieve introspective contemplation, perceptive observation,
perspectival depiction, and narrative fiction. Other philosophies take these
capacities as evidence for such notions as unworldly essences, sense data,
inner representations, and possible worlds. Pragmatism cannot deny that
imaginative people can focus on seeming fixities, and such matters do have
cognitive utility as proxies. However, culture still accounts for the richest
cognitive processes. Sophisticated symbolic capacities of human
intelligence are scaffolded on the extended mind of linguistic sociality,
offloading cognitive work onto the manipulation of external symbols.10
The invention of symbolism, followed by gesticulation, speech, and
writing, takes advantage of the way that cognition specializes in dealing
with our transactions with deliberately modified features of our environs.
Human intelligence can offload cognitive work onto that symbolic field
around us so that it retains or even manipulates information for us, and we
harvest that information on a need-to-know basis. That makes the modified
environment part of the socially cognitive system. The information flow
between minds/brains and objects is so dense and continuous that, for
scientists studying cognitive activity, the lone thinker is not a sufficiently
meaningful unit of analysis. The production of higher cognitive activity
does not come from mind or brain alone, but instead blends the
functionalities of mind/brain and its crafted habitat.These core views of pragmatism, in conjunction with embodied,
enactive, and extended (non-representational) cognitive science, resolve
perennial puzzles about the mind–body relation, the naturality of
sophisticated cognitive operations, and the cultural origin of creative
reasoning. For our human cognition, the most important part of the lived
environment needing management is the social world: humans exchanging
information and collaboration. We never represent the same thing twice, for
it’s not the same encounter and we are not the same observer. The brain’s
deeply networked architectures are not about processing “representations,”
but more about “reperformatives” as elements of adroit and appropriate
behavior.
11 For humans, our experience is thoroughly social and cultural.
Cognizing with adeptness is accomplished through transmitted modes of
cultural activities engaging our brains.
The most sophisticated modes of human cognition are assemblages and
refinements of lower-level cognitive processes. These complex modes of
thought, seemingly far from mere matter or biology, remain embodied and
functional for practical success. Higher self-conscious thinking—such as
reflection, inference, and hypothesizing—are socially invented and
instructed capacities to attentively focus on ways to generalize practical
habits for flexible applications. These higher social capacities serve to
coordinate group cooperative practices where much collective creativity is
needed to maintain efficiency in the face of shifting environing conditions.
Enlarging imagination and working memory grow a contemplative space
where techniques can be experimentally rehearsed and attempted on
analogous new problems. Even pure imagination, conceptual play, and
aesthetic contemplation are creative capacities existing to refine practice,
even though we can also do them in isolation from practical concerns.
These creative modes permitted, among other things, the fixation of
concepts and relations among concepts, leading to explicit credible
inference.
Sophisticated kinds of rational thinking—particularly methodical
reasonings and experimental methods—are refined developments from
integrating cognitive processes. The most veritable knowledge that
humanity can acquire from logic and science are products of these
culturally designed and educationally transmitted techniques. The reason
why scientific hypotheses should be understood realistically is becausescientific communities can elicit reliable transactions with theorized
entities.12
Scientific knowledge is continuous with practical and technological skill.
Much of human experience, most of morality, and all of knowledge is an
emergent feature of socially epistemic practices. All a priori, conceptual,
and linguistic truths are internal to one or another epistemic practice.
Because no a priori conceptual rigidity can dictate terms of empirical
adequacy, only the practical adequacy of a knowledge system is relevant to
its overall validity. By avoiding epistemic dualism and reductivist monism,
both epistemology and ethics are (holistically) naturalized, fitting them into
the natural world of encultured humans. Nothing spiritual, transcendental,
or supernatural is needed to account for mind.
Complex modes of human cognition aim at social competence,
technological expertise, and knowledge of reality. Culture educates
members of society into various forms of responsible intelligence, and
expects their dutiful use for group goals, so they ultimately answer to
pragmatic criteria of success. With us sapiens, “humanity” consists of
central cultural praxes, primarily artwork creation, tool machination, cohort
education, linguistic narration, musical composition, expressive
ritualization, spiritual rumination, moral indoctrination, sports competition,
trade transaction, tribal coalition, and kinship cohesion.
Discursive and interpretive norms are intrinsically part of such practices
and thus part of each of us as persons, rather than innately prior to them or
descending transcendentally to structure them.13 Our life as a “personal
self” is bound up with cultural praxes, those “symbolic spheres” of
participatory life. The “person” is an artifactual embodiment and expression
of culture. Long-distant ancestors gradually created persons; nothing else in
heaven or on earth could.
Reason, knowledge, and duty persist due to education and
experimentation, and they are eventually answerable to practical
justification within cultural contexts. There is no logic–practice dichotomy.
Whatever seems certain and necessary is due to cognitive operations so
habitually ingrained that easily trainable brains either implement them
subconsciously or our thinking relies on them so thoroughly. But minds can
be changed over time, across generations.Advanced learning is capable of questioning, amending, or abandoning
the firmest of beliefs through empirical inquiry and experimental science.
Advanced philosophy, especially pragmatism’s pluralistic naturalism,
refutes worldviews that divorce mind from world, persons from practices,
or culture from nature.
Summary
Cognition and culture are thoroughly natural. The evolution of the human
species, with the biocultural co-evolution of complex human associations
and practices, suffices to explain all features of cognition. The two modes
of evolution are not disjunctive—no form of cognition is independent from
either mode, although complex forms of human cognition are mainly
cultural in origin and function.
We humans experience the world in ways prepared by sociality to engage
a responsive nature. Our brains perform cognition in ways prepared by
natural evolution to perpetuate society, which supplies all the practices of
humanity.
Everything about humanity is embedded within ongoing reality.
Continuities as well as contingencies are prevalent. Pragmatism’s
worldview offers these guiding tenets:
Reality is holistic: continuities are pervasive throughout all reality.
Ontology is dynamic: whatever has actuality is always changing and
interactive.
Explanation is contextual: co-responsive conditions account for the
course of processes.
Learning is creative: new information arises from imaginative and
inventive explorations.
Knowledge is communal: improving knowledge requires
collaborative experimentation.
Nature can be reasonable, because its energetic patterns can operate in
systemically organized ways, allowing their metabolic formations oforganisms. Reason can be natural, because its functional processes can
work for embodied encultured humans, allowing their prolific avocations
with nature. The cosmos hosts persons, who reflect their home while
striving for fulfillment.
Everything that this naturalistic philosophy requires for its demonstration
lies within its worldview, including the social intelligence and cultural
techniques permitting its justifications. Pragmatism is a coherent, complete,
and self-sufficient worldview.Acknowledgments
Some paragraphs of chapters 10 and 11 are adapted from passages in two
previous publications. Franks, David D. and Jonathan H. Turner, eds.,
“Social Cognition and the Problem of Other Minds,” in Handbook of
Neurosociology (Berlin: Springer, 2012); and “Neuropragmatism and the
Reconstruction of Scientific and Humanistic Worldviews,” in Neuroscience,
Neurophilosophy and Pragmatism: Brains at Work with the World, edited
by Tibor Solymosi and John R. Shook (London: Palgrave Macmillan,
2014).Glossary
Absolutism
he metaphysical combination of Idealism and Monism. All reality consists of
one ultimate Mind, including finite minds like ours and anything perceivable
and knowable. It relies on epistemic or mystic Reductionism to depict
anything that seems natural or material as either mentally dependent or
unreal.
ehaviorism
he epistemological and scientific position that any mental and psychological
activity, conscious or unconscious, eventually manifests in overt behaviors of
agents. A strict version, that only behavioral matters (not anything mental) are
appropriate objects of knowledge, supports Materialism.
Determinism
What is changeless needs little or no explanation, but any event of novelty and
change must be caused by other event(s) coincident or precedent in time.
Strict determinism, in opposition to Pluralism, says that an event necessarily
occurs precisely in all its features due to prior cause(s) according to invariant
laws.
Dualism
n metaphysics, two different kinds of reality are fundamental but independent
and discontinuous. In epistemology, (mental) knowledge represents mind￾independent realities unaffected by that knowing. Typical dualities are fact vs.
value, matter vs. mind, creation vs. God, freedom vs. determinism, and so on.
mpiricism
he kind of epistemology claiming that all knowledge must be reasonably
based, directly or indirectly, on observing and experimenting. All
confirmation is empirical. Rationalism opposes Empiricism with something
nonempirical, such as intuitive certainty or conceptual clarity, also needed for
knowledge.pistemology
onstructs and compares theories about rational justifications required for any
knowledge of truth. Epistemology includes views about origins of
information, criteria for assessing plausibility and validity, kinds of inferences
warranting conclusions, and tactics for avoiding fallacies and falsehoods.
allibilism
Reliability and revisability are key features of knowledge, rather than strict
necessity or permanent fixity. No knowledge is infallible, and much gets
discarded as false, but sound methodologies yield improving and expanding
knowledge over time.
Historicism
he Relativism view that knowledge (practical and theoretical) is communal
and genealogical, expressing a unique and irreplaceable cultural heritage. In
social theory, a culture’s customs, institutions, arts, morals, politics, and so
on, are only comprehended for their own sake within that culture’s historical
pathway.
Holism
ontinuities and interrelationships prevail among all existences. Nothing is
independent from context, and parts are best explained by wholes. Holism,
like Monism, opposes Dualism, but non-monistic Holism can combine with
Pluralism. In social theory, individuals are created and sustained within
societies.
dealism
he metaphysical view that only mind, its capabilities, and its constructs are
ultimately real. Monistic idealism uses mentalistic Reductionism to justify
Absolutism, while pluralistic idealism leads instead towards Subjectivism.
ndividualism
n metaphysics, the view that particular individuals are just as real, or more real,
than any other kind of reality. Individualism is compatible with Holism but
lends itself to Subjectivism. In social theory, the view that society only exists
due to, and for the sake of, individual members who bear higher value.Materialism
he version of Naturalism asserting a Monism of inert and insensate physical
reality. Materialism relies on scientific Reductionism to account for anything
seeming immaterial (“phenomenal” or “mental” for example) as either
materially dependent or unreal. Pluralism is opposed to Materialism, while
Determinism is allied.
Metaphysics
onders what all ontologies (and everything existing) have in common, and
what is responsible for reality or is most real. Ranking one kind of reality as
supreme or solely real inspires metaphysical Dualism, along with problems
about part–whole relations, perceptual knowledge, mind–body connections,
free will, and so on. Holism and Monism oppose Dualism.
Monism
he metaphysical view that there is only one kind of reality throughout all
existences. Each sort of thing is a manifestation of, or essentially participates
in, this unique reality. Monism is far more compatible with Holism than
Pluralism. Typical monisms are Idealism and Materialism.
Naturalism
Nature is exclusively and ultimately real, and all explanations are empirical and
appeal to something natural. Naturalism is realistic and non-dualistic, but it
typically aligns with Pluralism to accommodate both mind and matter, body
and spirit, and so on. The Reductionism version of naturalism is Materialism.
Ontology
What is taken to exist by some area of experience, practice, or inquiry. A
discourse’s terms, whether about a dream, a drama, a dogma, a discipline, or
a database, is an ontology. Ontology is inherently pluralistic, unless overruled
by scientific or metaphysical Reductionism.
luralism
nnumerable kinds of existences make up all of reality, having mostly
contingent relations among them, so plenitude, discreteness, and diversity
characterize all beings. Social pluralism opposes cultural uniformity by
recognizing the value of different groups or the individuality of each person.ragmatism
A philosophical worldview that integrates Process philosophy and Pluralism
with Holism, Fallibilism, and Naturalism. In social theory, Pragmatism
emphasizes Historicism, the value of cultural diversity, and liberal
democracy.
rocess philosophy
n opposition to permanence philosophy, anything real is gradually changing
both internally and relationally along with everything else. Respect for the
universality of processes is aligned with Pluralism.
Rationalism
he kind of epistemology claiming that knowledge is reasonable due to a non￾experiential basis, such as intuitive certainty or conceptual clarity, rather than
experiential learning alone. A rationalist epistemology finding two spheres of
knowledge, one mainly empirical and one principally rational, leads to
Dualism.
Realism
n metaphysics, most of reality exists independently from mind, mental activity
(such as consciousness or experience), and knowledge. In epistemology,
objective truths are knowable about independent reality while minds attend it.
Making knowledge more dependent on mind leads to Idealism or
Subjectivism.
Reductionism
he scientific or metaphysical strategy of rationally explaining how one
ontology is really just an aspect, function, property, component, etc. of
another ontology. A failed explanation encourages ontological Pluralism or
even Dualism.
Relativism
ruths are knowable within communities, each upholding their own criteria for
credible knowledge. Knowledge from communities can be compared and
even shared, but no community’s knowledge has a rational basis to invalidate
another’s. In social theory, important values of communities and cultures are
similarly distinctive and incommensurable.Representationalism
n epistemology, valid knowledge must resemble or replicate relevant features
or structures of what is known. An empiricist version expects observational
and propositional knowledge to accurately represent what is known. In
science, a realistic hypothesis can accurately model what it postulates.
kepticism
laims to know about fixed or final truths have no rational basis, so no truth
exists, and doubt is more reasonable. Common sense or personal opinion
must serve for belief, and my “fact” can’t prove your different “fact” false.
Relativism and Fallibilism offer compromise alternatives to Skepticism.
ubjectivism
n metaphysics, the idealistic position that all reality consists only of individual
minds and their interrelationships. In epistemology, the skeptical position that
any belief or knowledge only has validity for the individual thinker. The
greatest opposition to Subjectivism comes from Realism and Naturalism.
Voluntarism
n metaphysics, the position that every existence at every scale has dynamic
potency and some degree of volition and purpose. In epistemology, the theory
that all knowledge arises from, and only receives validity through, the willful
and purposive activities of knowers.NotesChapter 1
1. Charles W. Morris, “Neo-Pragmatism and the Ways of Knowing,” The Monist 38.4 (October
1928): 494–510. Also see: Alan R. Malachowski, The New Pragmatism (Montreal: McGill–
Queen’s University Press, 2010); Omayra Cruz, Neo-Pragmatisms and New Romanticisms
(London and New York: Routledge, 2009); David Hildebrand, Beyond Realism and Antirealism:
John Dewey and the Neopragmatists (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2003); Douglas
McDermid, The Varieties of Pragmatism: Truth, Realism, and Knowledge from James to Rorty
(London: Continuum, 2006); Cheryl Misak, ed., New Pragmatists (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2007).
2. Comparative treatments of pragmatism include these works: A. J. Ayer, The Origins of
Pragmatism: Studies in the Philosophies of Charles Sanders Peirce and William James (San
Francisco: Freeman, Cooper, 1968); Arthur O. Lovejoy, The Thirteen Pragmatisms and Other
Essays (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1968); Israel Scheffler, Four Pragmatists: A
Critical Introduction to Peirce, James, Mead, and Dewey (New York: Humanities Press, 1974);
H. O. Mounce, The Two Pragmatisms: From Peirce to Rorty (London and New York: Routledge,
1997); John P. Murphy, Pragmatism From Peirce to Davidson (Boulder, CO: Westview Press,
1990); Cheryl Misak, The American Pragmatists (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013).
3. James, William. Works: Pragmatism, 31. See Further Reading for explanations of citations to
critical editions of the pragmatists.
4. An account of pragmatism’s origins is told in Frank Ryan, Brian Butler, and James Good, ed., The
Real Metaphysical Club: The Philosophers, Their Debates, and Selected Writings from 1870 to
1885 (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2019).
5. James, Works: Pragmatism, 42.
6. James, Works: Pragmatism, 97, dashes and italics in the original.
7. Peirce, CP 5.555, c.1903.
8. William James to Henry James, May 4, 1907, in The Letters of William James, ed. Henry James
(New York, 1920), vol. 2, 279.
9. Presidential addresses of the American Philosophical Association display such wide variety. See
John R. Shook, ed., Historical Essays in 20th Century American Philosophy (Charlottesville, VA:
Philosophy Documentation Center, 2015).
10. James T. Kloppenberg, Uncertain Victory: Social Democracy and Progressivism in European
and American Social Thought, 1870–1920 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986); James
Livingston, Pragmatism and the Political Economy of Cultural Revolution, 1850–1940 (Chapel
Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1994); Andrew Feffer, The Chicago Pragmatists
and American Progressivism (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1993); Morris Dickstein, ed.,
The Revival of Pragmatism: New Essays on Social Thought, Law, and Culture (Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 1998); John Pettegrew, ed., A Pragmatist’s Progress? Richard Rorty and
American Intellectual History (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2000).
11. Consult the following works: Richard J. Bernstein, Beyond Objectivism and Relativism: Science,
Hermeneutics, and Praxis (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1983); W. J. T.
Mitchell, ed., Against Theory: Literary Studies and the New Pragmatism (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1985); Chantal Mouffe, ed., Deconstruction and Pragmatism: Critchley, Derrida,
Laclau and Rorty (London and New York: Routledge, 1996). Mike Sandbothe and William
Egginton, eds., The Pragmatic Turn in Philosophy: Contemporary Engagements Between
Analytic and Continental Thought (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2004); PaulFairfield, ed., John Dewey and Continental Philosophy (Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois
University Press, 2010).Chapter 2
1. Jeroen Bouterse and Bart Karstens, “A Diversity of Divisions: Tracing the History of the
Demarcation between the Sciences and the Humanities,” Isis 106.2 (June 2015): 341–352.
2. Robert J. Richards, The Romantic Conception of Life: Science and Philosophy in the Age of
Goethe (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010); Frederick Beiser, The Fate of Reason:
German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
3. Trevor Pearce, Pragmatism’s Evolution: Organism and Environment in American Philosophy
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2020); John R. Shook, Dewey’s Empirical Theory of
Knowledge and Reality (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2000); Hans Joas and Daniel R.
Huebner, eds., The Timeliness of George Herbert Mead (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2016).
4. Ian Hacking, The Taming of Chance (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
5. Peirce, EP 1.300; CP 1.155; EP 1.331.
6. Kenneth L. Ketner and A. F. Stewart, “The Early History of Computer Design: Charles Sanders
Peirce and Marquand’s Logical Machines,” Princeton University Library Chronicle 45.3 (Spring
1984): 186–211; Risto Hilpinen, “Peirce’s Logic,” in The Rise of Modern Logic From Leibniz to
Frege, eds. D. M. Gabbay and J. Woods (Amsterdam: Elsevier North-Holland, 2004), 611–658;
Jaakko Hintikka, “The Place of C. S. Peirce in the History of Logical Theory,” in The Rule of
Reason: The Philosophy of Charles Sanders Peirce, eds. J. Brunning and P. Forster (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1996), 13–33.
7. Gérard Deledalle, Charles S. Peirce’s Philosophy of Signs (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press, 2000); Thomas A. Sebeok, Signs: An Introduction to Semiotics, 2nd ed. (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 2001); T. L. Short, Peirce’s Theory of Signs (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2007); Tony Jappy, ed., The Bloomsbury Companion to
Contemporary Peircean Semiotics (London: Bloomsbury, 2019).
8. Laura Moorhead, “Down the Rabbit Hole: Tracking the Humanizing Effect of John Dewey’s
Pragmatism on Norbert Wiener,” in IEEE Conference on Norbert Wiener in the 21st Century
(Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, 2014), 1–8.
9. Mark Johnson and George Lakoff, “Why Cognitive Linguistics Requires Embodied Realism,”
Cognitive Linguistics 13.3 (2002): 245–263; James Russell, What is Language Development?
Rationalist, Empiricist, and Pragmatist Approaches to the Acquisition of Syntax (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2004); David Boersema, Pragmatism and Reference (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2009); Daniel Dor, Chris Knight, and Jerome Lewis, eds., The Social Origins of Language
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014); Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Elena Clare Cuffari, and Hanne
De Jaegher, Linguistic Bodies: The Continuity between Life and Language (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2018).
10. Francisco J. Varela, Eleanor Rosch, and Evan Thompson, The Embodied Mind: Cognitive
Science and Human Experience (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991); Jean Valsiner and Rene Van
Der Veer, The Social Mind: Construction of the Idea (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 2000); Harold Blumer, Symbolic Interactionism (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1969); Anselm L. Strauss, Continual Permutations of Action (New York: Aldine de Gruyter,
1993); Radu Bogdan, Our Own Minds: Sociocultural Grounds for Self-Consciousness(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010); Marcello Barbieri, ed., Introduction to Biosemiotics: The
New Biological Synthesis (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2008).
11. Thomas Wynn, Karenleigh Overmann, and Lambros Malafouris, “4E Cognition in the Lower
Palaeolithic,” Adaptive Behavior 29.2 (2021): 99–106; Walter J. Freeman, How Brains Make Up
Their Minds (New York: Columbia University Press, 2001); Fausto Caruana and Italo Testa, eds.,
Habits: Pragmatist Approaches from Cognitive Science, Neuroscience, and Social Theory
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2020).
12. David L. Leary, The Routledge Guidebook to James’s Principles of Psychology (New York and
London: Routledge, 2018).
13. Edward S. Reed, James J. Gibson and the Psychology of Perception (New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1988); Harry Heft, Ecological Psychology in Context: James Gibson, Roger
Barker, and the Legacy of William James’s Radical Empiricism (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 2001).
14. Francesca Michelini and Kristian Köchy, eds., Jakob von Uexküll and Philosophy: Life,
Environments, Anthropology (New York and London: Routledge, 2020); Richard Lewontin and
Richard Levins, The Dialectical Biologist (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985);
Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972).
15. Dewey, How We Think, MW 6: 265.
16. Alva Noë, Out of Our Heads: Why You Are Not Your Brain, and Other Lessons from the Biology
of Consciousness (New York: Hill and Wang, 2009); Andy Clark, Supersizing the Mind:
Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008);
Daniel C. Dennett, Kinds of Minds: Toward an Understanding of Consciousness (New York:
Basic Books, 1996); Evan Thompson, Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of
Mind (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007); Tim Ingold, The Perception of the
Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill (New York and London: Routledge,
2000); Mark Rowlands, The New Science of the Mind: From Extended Mind to Embodied
Phenomenology (Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2010); John R. Shook and Tibor Solymosi, eds.,
Neuroscience, Neurophilosophy, and Pragmatism: Brains at Work with the World (London:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2014); Anthony Chemero, Radical Embodied Cognitive Science
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009); Pentti Määttänen, Mind in Action: Experience and Embodied
Cognition in Pragmatism (Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2018).Chapter 3
1. Peirce, “The Architecture of Theories” EP 1: 288.
2. James, Works: Pragmatism, 78–79.
3. Dewey, “Time and Individuality” ED 1: 224.
4. Parallels and proximities with pragmatism can be ample. Randall E. Auxier, Time, Will, and
Purpose: Living Ideas from the Philosophy of Josiah Royce (Chicago: Open Court, 2013); Mark
Okrent, Heidegger’s Pragmatism: Understanding, Being, and the Critique of Metaphysics (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1988); Brian G. Henning, William T. Myers, and Joseph D. John,
eds., Thinking with Whitehead and the American Pragmatists: Experience and Reality (Lanham,
MD: Lexington Books, 2015); Henry S. Levinson, Santayana, Pragmatism, and the Spiritual Life
(Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1992).
5. Nietzsche’s thought can be fairly co-extensive with pragmatism. See Pietro Gori, Nietzsche’s
Pragmatism: Essays on Perspectival Thought (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2019); and Manuel Dries and
P. J. E. Kail, eds., Nietzsche on Mind and Nature (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015). On
Bergson and Deleuze, see Simone Bignall, Sean Bowden, and Paul Patton, eds., Deleuze and
Pragmatism (London and New York: Routledge, 2014). On existentialism, see also Christina
Howells, Sartre: The Necessity of Freedom (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2009).
Wilhelm Dilthey approaches Dewey’s historicist naturalism.
6. Dewey, Quest for Certainty, LW 4: 13–14.
7. Joseph Margolis, Pragmatism Without Foundations: Reconciling Realism and Relativism, 2nd ed.
(London: Continuum, 2007).
8. A pragmatist reconstruction of Kant and Hegel is Kenneth R. Westphal, Grounds of Pragmatic
Realism: Hegel’s Internal Critique and Reconstruction of Kant’s Critical Philosophy (Leiden,
Netherlands: Brill, 2017). On Quine, see Murray Murphey, The Development of Quine’s
Philosophy (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2012).
9. Gabriele Gava and Robert Stern, eds., Pragmatism, Kant, and Transcendental Philosophy
(London and New York: Routledge, 2016).Chapter 4
1. James, Works: Pragmatism, 143.
2. Russell, A History of Western Philosophy (London: Allen and Unwin, 1946), 846.
3. Albert Einstein, “Foreword” in Phillip Frank, Relativity (Boston: Beacon Press, 1950), viii.
4. James, Works: The Meaning of Truth, 40–41.
5. W. V. Quine’s “indispensability argument” argues that science’s formulaic successes supply
warrant for the real existence of mathematical entities too: “On What There Is,” repr. in From a
Logical Point of View, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980), 1–19; On
pragmatism’s view, the purity of mathematics maintains its unreality in guaranteeing its truths;
there is no naturalistic or Platonic realism destined for mathematics. Consult Philip Kitcher, The
Nature of Mathematical Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984); and George Lakoff
and Rafael E. Nuñez, Where Mathematics Comes From: How the Embodied Mind Brings
Mathematics Into Being (New York: Basic Books, 2000).
6. Dewey judged that quantum mechanics was interpretable along the lines of his pragmatism. See
Thomas C. Dalton, Becoming John Dewey: Dilemmas of a Philosopher and Naturalist
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2002), chap. 7. Physicist Richard Healey concurs
with pragmatism in The Quantum Revolution in Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2017).
7. Joshua Gert, Primitive Colors: A Case Study in Neo-pragmatist Metaphysics and Philosophy of
Perception (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017); Mazviita Chirimuuta, Outside Color:
Perceptual Science and the Puzzle of Color in Philosophy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015).
8. Dewey, LW 1: 65.
9. Huw Price, “Causal Perspectivalism,” in Causation, Physics, and the Constitution of Reality:
Russell’s Republic Revisited, eds. H. Price and R. Corry (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007),
250–292.
10. As argued by Nancy Cartwright, The Dappled World: A Study of the Boundaries of Science
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
11. Peirce, CP 5.503.
12. Peirce, CP 5.431.
13. Peirce, CP 6.485.Chapter 5
1. James, Works: Pragmatism, 96.
2. James, Works: Pragmatism, 38, emphases in original.
3. Wilfrid Sellars exemplifies the struggle to reconcile materialist empiricism with conceptual
rationalism. See Willem A. deVries, Wilfrid Sellars (Chesham, UK: Acumen, 2005); and Robert
Brandom, From Empiricism to Expressivism: Brandom Reads Sellars (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2015).
4. Robert B. Brandom, Perspectives on Pragmatism: Classical, Recent, and Contemporary
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011), 22.
5. Due attention to entwinements of language, reason, and experience tends to send philosophers in
pragmatist directions. See, for example, Richard Rorty’s introduction and retrospective essays in
The Linguistic Turn, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992). Further examples
multiplied, for example: Daniel Dennett, The Intentional Stance (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1987); Donald Davidson, The Essential Davidson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006);
Robert Brandom, Making It Explicit: Reasoning, Representing, and Discursive Commitment
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994); John McDowell, Mind and World
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996); Fred Dretske, Perception, Knowledge and
Belief (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000); Ruth Millikan, Varieties of Meaning
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004); Huw Price, Expressivism, Pragmatism and
Representationalism (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2013).
6. In illustration, see Paul Boghossian and Timothy Williamson, Debating the A Priori (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2020).
7. Peirce, CP 5.402.
8. James, Works: Pragmatism, 29.
9. Peirce, EP 2: 332.
10. James, Works: Pragmatism, 96–97.
11. Kenneth R. Westphal, Grounds of Pragmatic Realism: Hegel’s Internal Critique &
Transformation of Kant’s Critical Philosophy (Leiden, Netherlands: Brill, 2018).
12. Dewey, MW 4: 68–69.Chapter 6
1. A twentieth century exemplar is Bertrand Russell, An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth (London:
George Allen and Unwin, 1940).
2. The subjectivism flourishing during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries is called Personalism.
Jan Olof Bengtsson, The Worldview of Personalism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006);
Juan Manuel Burgos, An Introduction to Personalism (Washington, DC: Catholic University of
America Press, 2018).
3. On modern absolutism, see William Sweet, ed., Bernard Bosanquet and the Legacy of British
Idealism (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2007).
4. Much of non-theistic Buddhism can overlap with pragmatism. Steve Odin, The Social Self in Zen
and American Pragmatism (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1996).
5. Peirce, CP 5.452. See also CP 5.525.
6. Dewey, EW 3: 66.
7. James, Works: The Principles of Psychology, vol. 1, 343–344.
8. James, Works: The Meaning of Truth, 45–46.
9. Dewey, MW 6: 447–448.
10. A recent defense of pragmatism from experience is Steven Levine, Pragmatism, Objectivity, and
Experience (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2019).
11. Dewey, ED 1: 47–48.
12. My terminology of the “formulaic” and “concretic” proceeds from Dewey’s distinction between
universal and generic propositions in Logic: The Theory of Inquiry, LW 12: 263–279.Chapter 7
1. Richard Rorty, Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1991); Hilary Putnam, The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body, and World (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1999); Nicholas Rescher, Realism and Pragmatic Epistemology (Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2005); Richard J. Bernstein, The Pragmatic Turn (Malden, MA:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2013).
2. Dewey, The Quest for Certainty, LW 4: 17, 18.
3. Dewey, The Quest for Certainty, LW 4: 23.
4. Dewey, The Quest for Certainty, LW 4: 140–141.
5. James, Works: A Pluralistic Universe, 99.
6. Peirce, EP 2: 129.
7. Royce, The World and the Individual. First Series: The Four Historical Conceptions of Being
(New York: Macmillan, 1900), 112–132.
8. Dewey, Essays in Experimental Logic, MW 6: 111–122.
9. Edmund Gettier, “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis 23.6 (1963): 121–123.
10. See William Lycan, “The Gettier Problem Problem,” in Epistemology Futures, ed. Stephen
Hetherington (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 148–168; and John Turri, “In Gettier’s
Wake,” in Epistemology: The Key Thinkers, ed. Stephen Hetherington (London: Continuum Press,
2012), 214–229.
11. See Roderick Chisholm, The Problem of the Criterion (Milwaukee.: Marquette University Press,
1973); and Richard Fumerton, “The Problem of the Criterion,” in The Oxford Handbook on
Skepticism, ed. John Greco (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 34–52.Chapter 8
1. Christopher Hookway, “American Pragmatism: Fallibilism and Cognitive Progress” in
Epistemology: The Key Thinkers, ed. Stephen Hetherington (London: Continuum, 2008), 153–
171; Joseph Margolis, “Rethinking Peirce’s Fallibilism,” in Margolis, Pragmatism Ascendent
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2012), 51–110.
2. Peirce, CP 5.402.
3. Christopher Hookway, Truth, Rationality, and Pragmatism: Themes from Peirce (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2000), 21–43.
4. Peirce, EP 1: 139, with my substitutions of “inquirers.”
5. Compare with these expositions: Cheryl J. Misak, Truth and the End of Inquiry: A Peircean
Account of Truth (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991); Elizabeth F. Cooke, Peirce’s
Pragmatic Theory of Inquiry: Fallibilism and Indeterminacy (London and New York: Continuum,
2007); Christopher Hookway, The Pragmatic Maxim: Essays on Peirce and Pragmatism (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2012).
6. Dewey, MW 6: 37, 38.
7. Dewey, MW 6: 38–39.Chapter 9
1. Terrence Deacon, Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from Matter (New York: W. W. Norton,
2011); David Haig and Daniel Dennett, “Haig’s ‘Strange Inversion of Reasoning’ (Dennett) and
Making Sense: Information Interpreted as Meaning (Haig)” (2017), accessed August 2021 at
http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/13287/; Jeremy Sherman, Neither Ghost Nor Machine: The
Emergence and Nature of Selves (New York: Columbia University Press, 2017); Alan Jasanoff,
The Biological Mind: How Brain, Body, and Environment Collaborate to Make Us Who We Are
(New York: Basic Books, 2018).
2. Dewey, LW 13: 324.
3. Scientific cosmology after relativity concurs. See Roberto Mangabeira Unger and Lee Smolin,
The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time: A Proposal in Natural Philosophy (Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2014).
4. Peirce, CP 6.268.
5. Dewey LW 1: 200–201.
6. Vagueness is inherent to all concepts, and not just meanings in symbols or terms in language.
Consult theories of vagueness in Claudine Tiercelin, Pragmatism and Vagueness: The Venetian
Lectures (Milan: Mimesis International, 2019); and Kit Fine, Vagueness: A Global Approach
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020). Fixity to a word’s meaning is not due to rigid concepts
intended by speakers, but to an illusion generated by a language’s habitual utility. See Jody
Azzouni, Semantic Perception: How the Illusion of a Common Language Arises and Persists
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013). On the myths of qualia and consciousness, see Daniel
C. Dennett, Sweet Dreams: Philosophical Obstacles to a Science of Consciousness (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2005).
7. James’s radical empiricism as a method has been paired with neutral monism as a metaphysics.
Erik C. Banks, The Realistic Empiricism of Mach, James, and Russell: Neutral Monism
Reconceived (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2014). Eric James, Routledge
Philosophy Guidebook to William James on Psychology and Metaphysics (London and New York:
Routledge, 2009). David C. Lamberth, William James and the Metaphysics of Experience
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
8. James, “Does Consciousness Exist?” Works: Essays in Radical Empiricism, 3–4, 13, 14.
9. James, unlike Edmund Husserl, does not subtract the observable world from ordinary experience
to find a metaphysically primordial “subjectivity” with an indubitable essence of its own. For
radical empiricism, after objectivity and subjectivity are treated equally as emergent, what is
phenomenal is simply the world again. Dewey’s treatment of “immediate experience” is the same
maneuver. On pragmatism and phenomenology, consult Maria Baghramian and Sarin Marchetti,
eds., Pragmatism and the European Traditions: Encounters with Analytic Philosophy and
Phenomenology before the Great Divide (London: Routledge, 2017); and Jakub Čapek and
Ondřej Švec, eds., Pragmatic Perspectives in Phenomenology (New York and London:
Routledge, 2017).
10. Dewey, Art as Experience, LW 10: 268.
11. Dewey, Art as Experience, LW 10: 13.
12. A sampling of books must serve. Peter Godfrey-Smith, Complexity and the Function of Mind in
Nature (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998); Susan Hurley, Consciousness inAction (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998); Alva Noë, Action in Perception
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004); Richard Menary, ed., The Extended Mind (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2010); Andreas K. Engel, Karl J. Friston, and Danica Kragic, eds., The Pragmatic
Turn: Toward Action-Oriented Views in Cognitive Science (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016).
13. Peirce, CP 5.313. See Richard K. Atkins, Charles S. Peirce’s Phenomenology: Analysis and
Consciousness (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018).
14. Peirce, CP 5.212.
15. Scott Sehon, Teleological Realism: Mind, Agency, and Explanation (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2005); Roman Madzia and Matthias Jung, eds., Pragmatism and Embodied Cognitive
Science (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2016); Mark Johnson, Embodied Mind, Meaning, and Reason: How
Our Bodies Give Rise to Understanding (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017); Pentti
Määttänen, Mind in Action: Experience and Embodied Cognition in Pragmatism (Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2018); Jay Schulkin and Matthew Crippen, Mind Ecologies: Body, Brain,
and World (New York: Columbia University Press, 2020).
16. This sort of example is discussed in James, The Principles of Psychology (New York: Henry
Holt, 1890), vol. 1, 24–26; and Dewey, “The Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology” (1896), ED 2:
3–10.
17. Hilary Putnam, Mind, Languages and Reality, Philosophical Papers, vol. 2 (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1975), 227.
18. Dewey, LW 1: 179.Chapter 10
1. Animals passing the “mirror test” for a sense of individuality are, not coincidentally, most of the
species that display mourning behaviors over the death of a familiar conspecific: humans,
chimpanzees, bonobos, orangutans, gorillas, bottlenose dolphins, killer whales, elephants, and
corvids (magpies, crows, ravens). On animal mentality, consult Kristin Andrews and Jacob Beck,
eds., The Routledge Handbook of Philosophy of Animal Minds (Abingdon, UK, and New York:
Routledge, 2018).
2. Russell, Logic and Knowledge, ed. R. C. Marsh (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1956), 42.
3. Daniel Dennett, Consciousness Explained (Boston: Little, Brown, 1991).
4. B. F. Skinner, The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental Analysis (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1938); B. F. Skinner, Science and Human Behavior (New York: Macmillan, 1953).
5. Jean Piaget, The Construction of Reality in the Child, trans. Margaret Cook (New York: Basic
Books, 1954); L. S. Vygotsky, Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological
Processes (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978).
6. George H. Mead, Mind, Self, and Society from the Standpoint of a Social Behaviorist, ed. Charles
W. Morris (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1934), 140.
7. Dewey, MW 10: 63.
8. Noam Chomsky, Language and Mind (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1968). Jerry A.
Fodor, Psychosemantics: The Problem of Meaning in the Philosophy of Mind (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1987). Pragmatism views pragmatics as the grounding stage, with semantics and
syntax as developmental refinements. For an overview, see James Russell, What is Language
Development? Rationalist, Empiricist, and Pragmatist Approaches to the Acquisition of Syntax
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004).
9. John R. Searle, Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1983), 230; John R. Searle, Making the Social World: The Structure of Human
Civilization (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), 4.
10. Searle, Making the Social World, 44.
11. Susan T. Fiske, Social Beings: A Core Motives Approach to Social Psychology (Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley, 2010), 128.
12. A sampling includes the following works: Michael Gazzaniga, The Social Brain (New York:
Basic Books, 1985); Albert Bandura, The Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social
Cognitive Theory (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1986); James Wertsch, Voices of the
Mind: A Sociocultural Approach to Mediated Action (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1991); Radu Bogdan, Minding Minds: Evolving a Reflexive Mind by Interpreting Others
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000); Philippe Rochat, Others in Mind: Social Origins of Self￾Consciousness (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2009).
13. Albert Newen, Shaun Gallagher, and Leon De Bruin, eds., The Oxford Handbook of 4E
Cognition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018); Michael D. Kirchhoff and Julian Kiverstein,
Extended Consciousness and Predictive Processing: A Third-Wave View (London and New York:
Routledge, 2019); Kirk Ludwig and Marija Jankovic, eds., The Routledge Handbook of Collective
Intentionality (Abingdon, UK and New York: Routledge, 2017).14. Eliot R. Smith and Frederica Conrey, “The Social Context of Cognition,” in Cambridge
Handbook of Situated Cognition, eds. P. Robbins and M. Aydede (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2009), 456.
15. Robin Dunbar, Clive Gamble, and John Gowlett, eds., Social Brain, Distributed Mind (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2010); Clive Gamble, John Gowlett, and Robin Dunbar, Thinking Big:
How the Evolution of Social Life Shaped the Human Mind (London: Thames and Hudson, 2014).
16. Amy A. Weimer, Katherine Rice Warnell, Idean Ettekal, Kelly B. Cartwright, Nicole R.
Guajardo, and Jeffrey Liew, “Correlates and Antecedents of Theory of Mind Development during
Middle Childhood and Adolescence: An Integrated Model,” Developmental Review 59 (March
2021): 100945; Lisa M. Oakes and David H. Rakison, Developmental Cascades: Building the
Infant Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019); Jean Decety, ed., The Social Brain: A
Developmental Perspective (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2020).
17. Anthony D. Pellegrini, The Role of Play in Human Development (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2009).
18. Peirce, CP 5.421.
19. For twentieth century philosophers, the terms of debate over the combination of idealism,
collectivism, and socialism were set by Bernard Bosanquet’s defense in The Philosophical Theory
of the State (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1899); and L. T. Hobhouse’s response in The
Metaphysical Theory of the State: A Criticism (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1918).
20. Michael E. Bratman, Shared Agency: A Planning Theory of Acting Together (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2014); John Cacioppo, Penny Visser, and Cynthia Pickett, eds., Social
Neuroscience: People Thinking about Thinking People (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006);
David D. Franks, Neurosociology (New York: Springer, 2010); Christian List and Philip Pettit,
Group Agency: The Possibility, Design, and Status of Corporate Agents (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2011); Dermot Moran and Thomas Szanto, eds., Phenomenology of Sociality:
Discovering the “We” (New York and London: Routledge, 2016).
21. While naturalistic, this empowerment view of freedom is not yet another compatibilism, or an
agent–causal account. The determinism vs. indeterminism debate is irrelevant to intelligent
practice. Insects do not freely will what they do, not because they don’t determine their actions,
but because they can’t control their reactions. Dewey, Human Nature and Conduct: An
Introduction to Social Psychology (New York: Henry Holt, 1922), 303–305; Daniel Dennett,
Freedom Evolves (New York: Viking, 2003).Chapter 11
1. Joseph Henrich, The Secret of Our Success: How Culture is Driving Human Evolution (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016), 35.
2. Michael Tomasello, Becoming Human: A Theory of Ontogeny (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2019); John Parrington, Mind Shift: How Culture Transformed the Human Brain
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2021); Laurence J. Kirmayer, Carol M. Worthman, Shinobu
Kitayama, Robert Lemelson, and Constance Cummings, eds., Culture, Mind, and Brain:
Emerging Concepts, Models, and Applications (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
2020).
3. Melvin Konner, The Evolution of Childhood: Relationships, Emotion, Mind (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2010); Michael Tomasello, A Natural History of Human Thinking
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2014).
4. Michael C. Corballis. The Recursive Mind: The Origins of Human Language, Thought, and
Civilization (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2011). See also Ronald J. Planer and Kim
Sterelny, From Signal to Symbol: The Evolution of Language (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2021).
5. Robin Dunbar connects a scale of orders of intentionality to stages of pre-sapiens evolution in
“The Social Brain and the Cultural Explosion of the Human Revolution,” in Rethinking the
Human Revolution: New Behavioural and Biological Perspectives on the Origin and Dispersal of
Modern Humans, eds. Paul Mellars, Katie Boyle, Ofer Bar-Yosef, and Chris Stringer (Cambridge,
UK: McDonald Institute, 2007), 91–98. See also Nathan Oesch and Robin Dunbar, “The
Emergence of Recursion in Human Language: Mentalising Predicts Recursive Syntax Task
Performance,” Journal of Neurolinguistics 43 (August 2017): 95–106; John Gowlett, Clive
Gamble, and Robin Dunbar, “Human Evolution and the Archaeology of the Social Brain,”
Current Anthropology 53.6 (December 2012): 693–710; Thomas Wynn and Frederick Coolidge,
“Archeological Insights into Hominin Cognitive Evolution,” Evolutionary Anthropology 25.4
(2016): 200–213.
6. In the words of Robert Bierstedt, American Sociological Theory: A Critical History (New York:
Academic Press, 1981), 98; Cooley’s theory of the social self is in Human Nature and the Social
Order (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1902), chaps. 5–6; and Social Organization: A Study
of the Larger Mind (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1909).
7. Several key stages for cultural development could be discriminated. See Alan Barnard, “Unity
versus Interdisciplinarity: A Future for Anthropology,” Current Anthropology 57.3 (2016): S145–
S153. Recent work on cognitive paleoanthropology and cultural evolution includes the following:
Daniel H. Lende and Greg Downey, eds., The Encultured Brain: An Introduction to
Neuroanthropology (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012); R. I. M. Dunbar, Clive Gamble, and J.
A. J. Gowlett, eds., Lucy to Language: The Benchmark Papers (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2014); Thomas Wynn and Frederick Coolidge, eds., Cognitive Models in Palaeolithic
Archaeology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016); Christoph Durt, Thomas Fuchs, and
Christian Tewes, eds., Embodiment, Enaction, and Culture: Investigating the Constitution of the
Shared World (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017); Karenleigh A. Overmann and Frederick L.
Coolidge, eds., Squeezing Minds From Stones: Cognitive Archaeology and the Evolution of the
Human Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019); Anna Marie Prentiss, ed., Handbook of
Evolutionary Research in Archaeology (Cham, Switzerland: Springer International, 2019); TracyHenley, Matt Rossano, and Edward Kardas, eds., Handbook of Cognitive Archaeology (London
and New York: Routledge, 2019).
8. Dewey, LW 6: 32.
9. Joseph Margolis, Historied Thought, Constructed World (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1995); Roberta Dreon, Human Landscapes: Contributions to a Pragmatist Anthropology
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 2022).
10. Kim Sterelny, The Evolved Apprentice: How Evolution Made Humans Unique (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2012); Kim Sterelny, The Pleistocene Social Contract: Culture and Cooperation in
Human Evolution (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2021).
11. False inner representations persisting from environmental conditions seem improbable or
inexplicable on rationalist terms, but even misguided reperformatives still function for improvable
behaviors. See M. H. Bickhard, “The Emergence of Persons,” in Embodiment, Enaction, and
Culture, eds. Christoph Durt, Thomas Fuchs, and Christian Tewes (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2017), 201–213.
12. Abductive experimentalism adequately justifies scientific realism. See John R. Shook,
“Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics of Scientific Inquiry” and “Abduction,
the Logic of Scientific Creativity, and Scientific Realism” in Abduction in Cognition and Action,
eds. John R. Shook and Sami Paavola (Cham, Switzerland, 2021), 177–206, 207–227.
13. Leo Townsend, Preston Stovall, and Hans Bernhard Schmid, eds., The Social Institution of
Discursive Norms (Abingdon, UK and New York: Routledge, 2021); Joseph Margolis, Selves and
Other Texts: The Case for Cultural Realism (University Park, PA: Penn State University Press,
2001).Further Reading
Charles Sanders Peirce
Collected Papers of Charles S. Peirce. 8 vols. Edited by Charles Hartshorne
and Paul Weiss (vols. 1–6) and Arthur Burks (vols. 7–8). Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1931–1958. Citations are given by CP
with volume and paragraph numbers.
Writings of Charles S. Peirce. Peirce Edition Project. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1982–present.
Volume 1, 1857–1866. Max H. Fisch, General Editor. 1982.
Volume 2, 1867–1871. Edward C. Moore, General Editor. 1984.
Volume 3: 1872–1878. Max H. Fisch, Senior Editor. 1986.
Volume 4: 1879–1884. Max H. Fisch, Senior Editor. 1989.
Volume 5: 1884–1886. Max H. Fisch, Senior Editor. 1993.
Volume 6: 1887–1890. Nathan Houser, General Editor. 1999.
Volume 7: forthcoming.
Volume 8: 1890–1892. Nathan Houser, General Editor. 2009.
The Essential Peirce. Vol. 1, 1867–1893. Vol. 2, 1893–1913. Peirce Edition
Project. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991, 1998. Citations
are given by EP, volume number, and page number.
Pragmatism as a Principle and Method of Right Thinking: The 1903
Harvard Lectures on Pragmatism. Edited by Patricia Ann Turrisi.
Albany: State University of New York Press, 1997.
Illustrations of the Logic of Science. Edited by Cornelis de Waal. Chicago:
Open Court, 2014.
William JamesThe Works of William James, 18 vols. Frederick Burkhardt, General Editor;
Fredson Bowers, Textual Editor; Ignas K. Skrupskelis, Associate Editor.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1975–1984.
Citations are given by Works followed by book title and page numbers.
The Meaning of Truth, 1975.
Pragmatism, 1975.
Essays in Radical Empiricism, 1976.
A Pluralistic Universe, 1977.
Essays in Philosophy, 1978.
Some Problems of Philosophy, 1979.
The Will to Believe and Other Essays, 1979.
The Principles of Psychology, 3 vols., 1981.
Essays in Religion and Morality, 1982.
Essays in Psychology, 1983.
Talks to Teachers on Psychology, 1983.
Psychology, Briefer Course, 1984.
The Varieties of Religious Experience, 1985.
Essays in Psychical Research, 1986.
Essays, Comments, and Reviews, 1987.
Manuscript Essays and Notes, 1988.
The Writings of William James. Edited with an introduction by John J.
McDermott. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978.
Writings 1878–1899 of William James. Edited by Gerald E. Meyers. New
York: The Library of America, 1987.
Writings 1902–1910 of William James. Edited by Bruce Kuklick. New
York: The Library of America, 1987.
The Essential William James. Edited by John R. Shook. Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books, 2011.
John DeweyThe Early Works of John Dewey, 1882–1898. 5 vols. Edited by Jo Ann
Boydston. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1969–1972.
Citations are given by EW, volume number, and page number.
The Middle Works of John Dewey, 1899–1924. 15 vols. Edited by Jo Ann
Boydston. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1976–1983.
Citations are given by MW, volume number, and page number.
The Later Works of John Dewey, 1925–1953. 17 vols. Edited by Jo Ann
Boydston. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1981–1990.
Citations are given by LW, volume number, and page number.
The Philosophy of John Dewey. Edited by John J. McDermott. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1989.
The Essential Dewey, 2 volumes. Volume 1: Pragmatism, Education,
Democracy. Volume 2, Ethics, Logic, Psychology. Edited by Larry A.
Hickman and Thomas M. Alexander. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1998. Citations given by ED with volume number and page
number.
George Herbert Mead
The Philosophy of the Present. Edited by Arthur E. Murphy. La Salle, IL:
Open Court, 1932.
Mind, Self, and Society from the Standpoint of a Social Behaviorist. Edited
by Charles W. Morris. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1934.
Movements of Thought in the Nineteenth Century. Edited by Merritt H.
Moore. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1936.
The Philosophy of the Act. Edited by Charles W. Morris in collaboration
with J. M. Brewster, A. M. Dunham, and D. L. Miller. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1938.
Selected Writings: George Herbert Mead. Edited by Andrew Reck.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.
George Herbert Mead on Social Psychology. Edited by Anselm L. Strauss.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964.Secondary Literature
Alexander, Thomas M. The Human Eros: Eco-ontology and the Aesthetics
of Existence. New York: Fordham University Press, 2013.
Allen, Gay Wilson. William James, a Biography. New York: Viking Press,
1967.
Apel, Karl-Otto. Charles S. Peirce: From Pragmatism to Pragmaticism.
Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1981.
Atkin, Albert. Peirce. London: Routledge, 2016.
Bacon, Michael. Pragmatism: An Introduction. Cambridge, UK: Polity,
2012.
Bernstein, Richard J. The Pragmatic Turn. Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2010.
Bird, Graham. William James. London and New York: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1986.
Bjork, Daniel W. William James: The Center of His Vision. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1988.
Blumer, Herbert. George Herbert Mead and Human Conduct, ed. Thomas
J. Morrione. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2004.
Bordogna, Francesca. William James at the Boundaries: Philosophy,
Science, and the Geography of Knowledge. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2008.
Burke, F. Thomas. What Pragmatism Was. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 2013.
Calcattera, Rosa Maria. Contingency and Normativity: In Dialogue with
Richard Rorty. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill, 2019.
Carreira da Silva, Filipe. G. H. Mead: A Critical Introduction. Cambridge,
UK: Polity, 2007.
Cochran, Molly, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Dewey. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Colapietro, Vincent M. Peirce’s Approach to the Self: A Semiotic
Perspective on Human Subjectivity. Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1989.
Cooke, Elizabeth F. Peirce’s Pragmatic Theory of Inquiry: Fallibilism and
Indeterminacy. London and New York: Continuum, 2007.Deledalle, Gérard. Charles S. Peirce’s Philosophy of Signs. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 2000.
de Waal, Cornelis. Introducing Pragmatism: A Tool for Rethinking
Philosophy. Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2021.
Fesmire, Steven. Dewey. London and New York: Routledge, 2015.
Fesmire, Steven, ed. The Oxford Handbook of Dewey. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2019.
Gava, Gabriele. Peirce’s Account of Purposefulness: A Kantian Perspective.
London and New York: Routledge, 2014.
Goodman, Russell B. Wittgenstein and William James. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Hickman, Larry A. Pragmatism as Post-postmodernism: Lessons from John
Dewey. New York: Fordham University Press, 2007.
Hull, Kathleen A., and Richard K. Atkins, ed. Peirce on Perception and
Reasoning: From Icons to Logic. London and New York: Routledge,
2017.
Joas, Hans, and Daniel R. Huebner, eds. The Timeliness of George Herbert
Mead. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016.
Kitcher, Philip. Preludes to Pragmatism: Toward a Reconstruction of
Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Klein, Alexander, ed. The Oxford Handbook of William James. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2022.
Maddalena, Giovanni. The Philosophy of Gesture: Completing Pragmatists’
Incomplete Revolution. Montreal: McGill–Queen’s University Press,
2015.
Malachowski, Alan, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Pragmatism.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Malachowski, Alan, ed. A Companion To Rorty. Malden, MA: Wiley￾Blackwell, 2020.
Margolis, Joseph. The Critical Margolis, ed. Russell Pryba. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 2021.
Martin, Jay. The Education of John Dewey: A Biography. New York:
Columbia University Press, 2003.Mayorga, Rosa. From Realism to “Realicism”: The Metaphysics of Charles
Sanders Peirce. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2007.
McGranahan, Lucas. Darwinism and Pragmatism: William James on
Evolution and Self-Transformation. London and New York: Routledge,
2017.
Merrell, Floyd. Peirce, Signs and Meaning. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1997.
Misak, Cheryl, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Peirce. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Parker, Kelly A. The Continuity of Peirce’s Thought. Nashville: Vanderbilt
University Press, 1998.
Price, Huw. Naturalism Without Mirrors. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2011.
Rescher, Nicholas. Pragmatism: The Restoration of its Scientific Roots.
New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2012.
Richardson, Joan. Pragmatism and American Experience: An Introduction.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Rosenthal, Sandra B. Charles Peirce’s Pragmatic Pluralism. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1994.
Schneider, Herbert W. A History of American Philosophy, 2nd ed. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1963.
Schulkin, Jay. Naturalism and Pragmatism. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2012.
Schwartz, Robert. Rethinking Pragmatism: From William James to
Contemporary Philosophy. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012.
Shook, John R. Dewey’s Empirical Theory of Knowledge and Reality.
Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 1998.
Shook, John R., and Joseph Margolis, ed. A Companion to Pragmatism.
Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2006.
Spencer, Albert R. American Pragmatism. Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2020.
Thayer, H. Standish. Meaning and Action: A Critical History of
Pragmatism, 2nd ed. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1981.
Whitehead, Deborah. William James, Pragmatism, and American Culture.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2015.Index
Abduction, 36, 61, 104. See also Inference
Absolute, 9, 41, 43, 56, 59, 60, 62, 93, 95, 110, 121, 125, 127, 130, 136, 162–163, 222–223
Absolutism, 60, 116, 121–122, 125, 223
Abstraction, 7, 8, 37, 64, 87, 93, 126, 193, 198
Action, 9, 76, 99, 130, 187, 192, 196–199, 200, 203, 214–215, 219
Active perception, 37
Actuality, 28, 84, 103, 176, 183, 184, 191, 240
Adaptivity, 21, 214, 229
Aesthetics, 2, 4, 19, 237
Agency, 207, 208, 210, 214, 215, 220–225, 227
Analytic fallacy, 79
Anaxagoras, 86
Animals, 14, 23, 25, 35, 115, 181, 210, 229, 231
Anthropology, 2, 15–18, 21, 94, 98, 222, 228
Anti-Foundationalism, 5
Anti-Realism, 13
Appearance, 50, 62, 85, 145
A priori, 8, 27, 94, 100, 137, 221, 237
Aristotle, 52, 140
Art, 2, 6, 221, 227
Associationism, 95, 199
Astrology, 47
Attention, 35, 45, 91, 122, 131, 184, 220
Autonomy, 222, 225
Awareness, 123, 191, 206, 217, 231
Axiology, 4
Bain, Alexander, 9
Bateson, Gregory, 36
Beauty, 4
Behavioral science, 4, 17, 26, 181
Behaviorism, 208, 210
Being, 33, 40–43, 46–55, 71, 84, 105, 123, 127, 133, 141, 144, 147, 188, 191, 193, 228
Belief, 9–11, 34, 52, 58, 60, 65, 94–96, 98, 100, 107, 109, 111, 114, 117, 120, 125, 151, 157, 159, 163–
165, 168, 177, 216–219, 231, 239
Bergson, Henri, 43Biology, 2, 6, 19, 21, 23, 33, 35, 53, 76, 130, 181, 184, 188, 196, 203, 205, 210, 227, 236
Body, 6, 18, 33, 35, 36, 37, 42, 81, 94, 103, 125, 139, 172, 181, 186, 193, 196–198, 200, 201, 214, 215,
229, 230, 236, 238, 240
Bourne, Randolph, 16
Brain, 21, 34, 35, 37, 186, 196–198, 200, 201, 203, 207, 211, 212, 214, 215, 219–221, 224, 225, 228,
229, 233–236, 239, 240. See also Neurology and neuroscience
Brandom, Robert, 97
Carnap, Rudolf, 95
Cartesianism, 25, 104, 181–183, 196, 197, 200, 207, 210–213. See also Descartes, René
dualism, 183
materialism, 207
Cartesian theater, 197
Cash-value, 11, 107
Categories/Categorical, 26, 43, 60, 94, 136, 161, 205
Cause/Causality, 23, 24, 28, 31, 39, 51, 60, 75, 76, 80, 84, 85, 94–96, 113, 182, 183, 223, 225, 228
Certainty, 7, 25, 28, 42, 47, 66, 81, 82, 83, 100, 139, 141, 146, 165, 171, 182, 188, 239
Chance, 41, 42, 84
Change, 7, 29, 39, 40, 43, 46, 48, 50–52, 56, 67, 76, 78, 80, 85, 91, 92, 107, 109, 112, 115, 133, 141, 163,
179, 185, 192, 193, 231, 239
Chemistry, 23, 32, 82
Childhood, 36, 208, 211, 213, 217, 229
Chomsky, Noam, 35, 211
Christianity, 86, 206
Churchland, Paul, 17
Cognition, 6, 18, 35, 45, 59, 86, 96, 99, 100, 102, 121, 128, 131, 132, 134, 141, 170, 197, 198, 201–203,
206, 208, 211, 213, 214–216, 219–221, 223, 224, 233, 235, 236–240
Cognitive science, 17, 18, 33, 36, 37, 59, 112, 128, 214, 236
anthropology, 37
archaeology, 232
embodied, embedded, enactive, extended, 18, 35, 37, 236
paleoanthropology, 232
Columbia University, x, 16, 17
Commonsense Empiricism, 63
Commonsense Realism, 11
Communications, 33, 220
Communities of inquiry, 170–172, 175, 176
Community, 6, 29, 135–137, 169–172, 201, 205, 206, 237
Complexity, 63, 85–87, 188, 198, 217
Computational theory of mind, 211
Computer, 34
Computing, 33Concept, 7, 10, 27, 35, 36, 43, 47, 48, 50, 61, 68, 72, 75, 83–85, 93–97, 99–106, 110, 111, 114, 116, 120,
122, 123, 125, 128, 130, 131, 134–137, 139, 140, 143–146, 168, 169, 173, 175–177, 182–184, 190,
193, 195, 196, 207, 217, 221, 223, 237
Conrey, Frederica, 214
Conscientiousness, 224
Consciousness, 6, 25, 35, 61, 134, 184, 186–193, 195–197, 214, 221, 224, 236, 239
Consequence, 72, 83, 84, 104, 106, 167, 180, 199, 202, 229
Conservatism, 3
Constructivism, 36
Content, 114, 126, 189, 195
Context, 7, 15, 18, 28, 29, 63, 71–75, 78–83, 86, 90, 104, 114, 128, 172, 203, 214, 218, 219, 239, 240
Contingency, 3, 27, 41, 42, 61, 85, 94, 135, 156, 167, 215, 220, 240
Continuity, 7, 26, 29, 35, 59, 63, 133, 197, 240
Cooley, Charles Horton, 231
Cosmology, 2, 29, 32, 82, 187
Cosmos, 1, 5, 14, 31, 32, 45, 78–81, 186, 188, 241
Creativity, 6, 10, 28, 29, 78, 79, 85, 87, 104, 112, 114, 236, 237, 240
Criterion, Problem of, 138, 147, 153–156, 159
Culture, 2, 4, 6, 18, 19, 21, 22, 32, 33, 35, 87, 98, 205, 214, 225, 227, 228, 230–233, 235–241
Cybernetics, 36, 37
Darwin, Charles, 9, 29, 87. See also Evolution
Davidson, Donald, 17
Deconstructionism, 18
Deduction, 10, 34, 84, 104, 143, 162
Definition, 46, 71–73, 90, 92, 99, 103, 106, 109, 143–146, 150, 153, 157, 169, 171, 173, 213
Deleuze, Gilles, 43
Democracy, 6, 196
Democritus, 187
Dennett, Daniel, 17, 207
Descartes, René, 26, 60, 181–183. See also Cartesianism
Desire, 14, 118, 199
Determinism, 41, 42, 59, 80, 83, 84, 87, 92, 120, 127, 155, 166, 216
Development, 5–7, 23, 31, 33, 35, 41, 42, 75, 79, 85, 87, 99, 130, 136, 143, 207, 211, 213, 214, 217–219,
221, 225, 230, 232, 237
Dewey, John, 2, 3, 5, 8, 16, 17, 24, 29, 31, 34, 36, 37, 42, 52, 76, 103, 113, 126, 128, 132, 134, 140–142,
144, 146, 149, 177, 179, 185, 188, 192, 201, 202, 208, 210, 220, 231, 233
Dialectic, 14, 51, 60
Divinity, 26, 29, 31, 67. See also God; Religion; Spiritualism; Supernaturalism; Theology
Dogma, 9, 28, 31, 42, 170, 176, 178
Doubt, 2, 29, 100, 122, 178
Dualism, 2, 18, 22, 25–27, 45, 57, 59, 61–63, 65, 68, 90, 119, 124, 127–130, 181, 183, 185, 201, 206–
208, 210–212, 222, 223, 238DuBois, W. E. B., 16
Eastern thought, 1
Ecology, 2, 7, 18, 24, 29, 36, 37, 79, 182
Economics, 3, 16, 210, 222
Education, 2, 4, 14, 16, 33, 227, 237–239
Ego, 191
Einstein, Albert, 66
Emergence, 78, 79, 214, 229, 231, 237
Emotion, 6, 117, 198, 219
Empiricism, 5, 6, 8–10, 16, 22, 24, 26, 27, 33, 42, 53, 60, 61, 63, 65, 79, 94–96, 98, 99, 104–106, 110,
112, 114, 132–134, 136–138, 144, 160–162, 168, 170, 177, 189, 190, 206, 214, 237, 239
Environment, 6, 18, 36, 69, 104, 130, 133, 166, 184, 186, 192, 193, 197, 200, 202, 203, 215, 235–237
Epiphenomenalism, 16, 80
Epistemology, 4, 17, 46, 48–51, 54, 58, 63, 69, 96, 98, 138, 140, 141, 143–149, 151, 153–157, 159, 162,
170, 172, 237, 238. See also Knowledge; Learning
Essence, 1, 32, 33, 40, 43, 51, 60, 64, 71–73, 89, 121, 133, 143–145, 168, 188, 193, 202, 221, 235
Ethics, 2, 4, 18, 19, 22, 223, 238. See also Morality/Moral sciences
Evolution, 7, 9, 11, 29–33, 35, 37, 41, 81, 86, 132, 187, 201, 205, 223, 225, 227–230, 232, 233, 239, 240
Existentialism, 1, 16, 114
Experience, 7, 10, 11, 18, 36, 52, 61, 62, 66, 107, 123, 125, 127, 128, 130–135, 137, 179, 181, 189–192,
197–202, 206–208, 211, 213, 220, 224, 236, 237, 240
Experimentalism, 27, 113
Explanation, 24, 28, 39, 40, 56, 87, 128, 212, 240
aith, 56, 58, 68, 179
allibilism, 62, 161–162, 176, 177, 216
eeling, 187, 197, 198, 224
odor, Jerry, 35, 211
orm, 7, 8, 23, 34, 52, 53, 58, 60, 66, 94, 95, 118, 126, 133, 163, 166, 175, 186, 212, 217, 227, 239
ormalism, 18
oundationalism, 5, 50, 96
our Causes, 183
reedom (political), 27, 225
reedom of the will, 98, 223, 225. See also Volition; Will
unction, 21, 33, 34, 36, 53, 60, 64, 71, 72, 74, 75, 87, 112, 143, 184–186, 188, 189, 192, 195, 197, 198,
201, 203, 205, 219, 220, 224, 233, 235, 236, 239, 240
uture, 10, 29, 37, 133, 139, 162, 172, 176, 177, 179, 215
Geisteswissenschaften, 22
Gestalt psychology, 18
Gettier Problem, 138, 147, 151, 152, 157, 159–161
Gibson, James J., 36
God, 25, 26, 31, 67, 97. See also Divinity; Religion; Spiritualism; Supernaturalism; TheologyGoethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 23
Government, 4
Green, Nicholas St. John, 9
Habermas, Jürgen, 18
Habit, 8, 24, 25, 60, 71, 83, 125, 188, 192, 193, 195, 197, 199, 203, 214, 220, 229, 233, 235, 236, 239
Hall, G. Stanley, 9
Harvard University, 7, 9, 17, 144
Hebb, Donald, 220
Hebbian learning, 220
Hedonism, 5
Hegel, G. W. F., 5, 24, 60, 112
Heidegger, Martin, 43
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 23
Henrich, Joseph, 228
Herder, Johann Gottfried von, 23, 187
Hermeneutics, 18
Historicism, 6, 24
Hobbes, Thomas, 95
Holism, 18, 28, 31, 71, 90, 124, 199, 223, 238, 240
Holt, Edwin B., 36
Homo (genus), 205, 229, 230, 232
Homo sapiens, 205, 232, 238
Humanism, 1, 2, 4, 21, 127
Humanities, 5, 15, 17, 18
dea, 11, 12, 13, 33, 52, 66, 75, 78, 90, 92, 95, 99, 100, 102, 107, 109, 112, 113, 135, 167, 187, 188, 199,
213, 217, 221
deal, 40, 55, 56, 58, 59, 89, 95, 123, 124, 140, 143, 176, 189, 191
dealism, 8, 14, 15, 24, 25, 56–60, 62, 95–97, 99, 110, 111, 116, 128, 132, 134, 136, 169, 176–179, 184,
189, 191, 206, 222
llumination, 123
llusion, 23, 61, 94, 190
magination, 1, 14, 114, 237
mpermanence, 7, 39, 40, 41, 43, 50, 54, 63, 71, 82, 87, 112, 124, 182. See also Permanence
ndeterminancy, 41, 42, 84, 87. See also Determinism
ndividualism, 7, 25, 41, 122, 182, 205, 207, 208, 210–212, 214, 222, 223
nduction, 10, 34, 60, 83, 84, 103, 177
nerrant Knowing, principle of, 146, 148, 151, 155, 159
nference, 36, 45, 52, 60, 61, 84, 95, 101, 104, 132–134, 139, 143, 144, 170, 184, 185, 195, 212, 216,
218, 236, 237. See also Abduction; Deduction; Induction
nformation, 28, 34, 105, 195, 198, 215, 216, 235, 236, 240
nquiry, 27, 71, 72, 75, 79, 86, 114, 138, 140, 141, 160, 161, 162, 168, 170–173, 175, 176, 178, 179, 239ntellect, 10, 14, 45, 67, 91, 117–119
ntellectualism, 90, 93, 107, 109, 117, 144
ntelligence, 2, 3, 19, 31, 33, 81, 102, 115, 125, 177, 196, 200, 201, 214, 225, 235, 238, 241
ntentionality, 100, 190, 196, 212–214, 216–222, 224, 225, 230–232
I-intentions and We-intentions, 212, 213
nterdisciplinarity, 17
ntuition, 6, 29, 98, 136, 143, 169
rrealism, 15, 65, 73, 75, 167, 177
ames, Henry, 14
ames, William, 2, 3, 5, 7–10, 13, 14, 17, 24, 25, 29, 31, 34–36, 41, 65, 66–67, 90, 93, 101, 103, 107,
113, 126–128, 140, 144, 189, 190, 192, 220, 231
ohns Hopkins University, 9
ustice, 4, 6, 31
ustification, 48–50, 81, 109, 139, 160, 163–165, 170, 172, 177, 239, 241
Kallen, Horace, 16
Kant, Immanuel, 5, 9, 22, 26, 31, 43, 60, 95, 96, 111, 125–127, 130, 131, 137, 161, 175
Knowledge, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 17, 19, 21, 22, 25, 28, 29, 32, 33, 36, 39–43, 45–66, 68–72, 86,
87, 89–92, 94, 95, 98–100, 102, 104–107, 109–126, 131–157, 159–173, 175–178, 181–184, 200, 203,
206–208, 218, 221, 228–230, 235, 237–240. See also Epistemology; Learning
Language, 4, 6, 14, 15, 17, 35, 60, 96–99, 104, 135, 211, 213, 222, 232
Law, 2, 4, 16, 22, 26, 27, 29, 31, 41, 43, 67, 68, 80, 81, 84, 94, 118, 122, 187, 195
Learning, 10, 28, 35, 45, 64, 66, 99, 137, 162, 169, 170, 183, 200, 201, 203, 208, 217, 220, 228, 229,
233, 239, 240
Lewis, C. I., 17
Lewontin, Richard, 36
Liberalism, 1, 6
Life, 1–5, 7, 11, 19, 21, 23, 24, 26, 31, 32, 36–38, 42, 43, 60, 87, 106, 107, 125, 130, 138, 169, 180, 188,
192, 202, 203, 216, 218, 222, 238
Life-World, 36
Linguistics, 16, 17, 34, 97–99
Linguistic Turn, 96, 97
Lippmann, Walter, 16
Locke, Alain LeRoy, 16
Locke, John, 95
Logic, 4, 5, 9, 22, 33, 34, 36, 52, 61, 67, 94, 97, 143–145, 184, 237, 239
Lotze, Hermann, 24
Margolis, Joseph, x
Marquand, Allan, 34
Materialism, 8, 16, 22, 24, 29, 31, 60–62, 110, 200, 207
Mathematics, 4, 51, 68, 72, 97, 103, 142–144, 178
Maxwell, James Clerk, 29Mead, George Herbert, 2, 3, 16, 24, 36, 208–210, 220
Meaning, 27, 29, 31, 36, 55, 62, 64, 66, 74, 75, 92, 95, 96, 101, 104, 105, 114, 115, 134, 135, 137, 140,
167, 169, 172, 175, 183, 190, 193, 196, 199–201, 203, 212, 235
Mechanism, 6, 19, 23, 24, 29, 76, 86, 187, 228
Mediation, 68, 86, 173
Mentality/Mind, ix, 2, 4–10, 14, 17, 19, 22–26, 34–37, 43, 45, 64, 68–70, 80, 86, 87, 90–97, 99–102,
104, 105, 109–111, 116–125, 128, 131, 135, 136, 141–144, 157, 176, 180–189, 191–193, 195–197,
200, 201, 203, 205–208, 210–212, 214, 216–225, 229, 230, 233, 235, 236, 238, 239
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 18
Metaphysical Club, 9
Metaphysics, 4, 6, 9, 25, 28, 31, 55–59, 63, 69, 72, 74, 76, 139, 176, 184, 185, 187, 188, 191–193, 198,
205
Mill, John Stuart, 8, 9, 22, 60, 95
Mills, C. Wright, 16
Modalism, 82, 85
Monism, 31, 41, 238
Morality/Moral sciences, 4, 19, 22, 98, 228, 230, 237, 238. See also Ethics
Morris, Charles, 3, 16
Mysticism, 16, 47, 117, 122, 123, 125
Myth, 6, 16, 134
Naturalism, x, 6, 16, 18, 27, 31, 78, 98, 228, 239, 241
Natural science, 21
Nature, 1, 9, 17, 21, 23, 24, 26, 29, 31, 34, 41, 42, 53, 63, 67, 68, 71, 73, 76, 81, 83, 85, 99, 113, 120,
140, 143, 166, 168, 177, 178, 182, 187, 195, 197, 222, 223, 225, 227, 228, 231, 233, 239–241
Naturwissenschaften, 22
Necessity, 7, 22, 26, 41, 84, 85, 135–137
Neo-pragmatism, 3
Neurology and neuroscience, 18, 21, 31, 33, 37, 198, 201, 203, 210, 214, 220, 224, 233. See also Brain
Newton, Isaac, 23, 24, 29, 31
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 43
Nihilism, 16
Normativity, 2, 45, 64, 231
Novelty, 10, 41, 42, 80, 233
Objectivity, 8, 27, 45, 47, 49–51, 53–59, 61–63, 65, 67, 68, 74, 93, 105, 110, 116–118, 121–125, 131–
136, 138, 140, 141, 178, 183, 191, 201, 224
Ontology, 22, 25, 26, 28, 31, 39, 46–51, 54, 62, 63, 69, 71–73, 75, 76, 78, 80, 82, 83, 85, 119, 123, 126,
157, 184–186, 188, 190, 208, 216, 222, 223, 240
Opportunity, 1, 31, 36, 61, 62, 102, 225, 230
Organicism, 24
Organic/Organism, 23–25, 34, 36, 87, 184, 186, 193, 197, 199, 201, 202, 220, 222, 227, 228, 240
Origins, 1, 6, 9, 228
anentheism, 18anpsychism, 16, 186
aradigm, 14, 19, 37, 98, 138
arity, 82
eano, Giuseppe, 34
eirce, Charles Sanders, 2, 3, 5, 9, 13, 24, 29, 31, 33, 34, 41, 83, 97, 101–103, 105, 106, 113, 126, 136,
140, 145, 169, 170, 173, 175, 176, 187, 193, 195, 220, 221
erception, 10, 36, 37, 60–62, 73–75, 86, 89, 94–96, 110, 111, 126, 182, 189, 196, 199, 200, 235, 247
ermanence, 7, 39–43, 45–57, 59, 61, 63, 65, 71, 72, 74–76, 82, 87, 89, 91, 92, 112, 116, 124, 134, 167,
181, 182, 221. See also Impermanence
ermanence (cont.)
ersonhood, 3, 6, 26, 62, 66, 70, 93, 99, 117, 119, 124, 146, 153–156, 160, 163–165, 171, 202, 205, 212,
216, 218, 222–225, 227–233, 238, 239, 241
erspectivism, 80
henomenalism, 16, 80
henomenology, 16, 37, 43
hilosophy
analytic philosophy, 16, 17, 96, 97, 111
Ancient/Greek philosophy, 46, 52, 58, 78, 132, 138, 140, 142, 144–146
continental European philosophy, 15, 111
eclipse of pragmatism, 16
English-language philosophy, 15, 97
modern philosophy, 50, 126, 132, 223
perennial philosophy, 1, 3, 21, 32, 45, 46, 236
philosophy of culture, 6
philosophy of language, 17
philosophy of mind, 80
philosophy of science, 17, 80, 172
philosophy of technology, 18
process philosophy, 18, 43
professional/university/academic philosophy, 8, 14, 16, 17, 182
hysicalism, 60, 78, 110, 111, 185, 186, 187, 224
hysics, 4, 5, 23, 26, 28, 72, 74–76, 78, 82, 84
hysiology, 23, 82, 210, 215
iaget, Jean, 208
lato, 52, 68, 86, 140, 142–144, 146, 187, 228
luralism, 5, 13, 18, 41, 42, 78, 90, 144, 172, 188, 239
olitical Theory, 16, 18, 19, 210
olitics, 2–4, 6, 222
opulation genetics, 26
ositivism, 8, 16, 95, 110, 111
ostmodernism, 5, 18, 181
otency, 84, 184otentiality, 7, 19, 38, 63, 84, 85, 103, 107, 120, 155, 161, 169, 176, 191, 199
ower, 9, 14, 72, 74, 76, 78, 85, 99, 106, 196, 216, 223
ragmaticism, 83, 126
ragmatic maxim, 61, 72, 83, 101, 102, 105, 107, 136, 169
re-Socratics, 46, 51,
rinciples, ix, 3, 4, 9, 22, 24, 33, 156, 164, 190
First principles, 22, 24, 190
rocess, 11, 16, 18, 26, 28, 29, 34, 40, 43, 64, 68, 72, 73, 75, 76, 79, 82, 85, 87, 103, 104, 115, 118, 141,
149, 162, 166, 167, 171, 173, 175, 177, 179, 184–187, 192, 193, 196, 198, 203, 214, 215, 219, 220,
228, 230, 235, 236, 240
roductionism, 81
rogressivism, 16
roposition, 70, 72, 84, 95, 96, 100, 103, 116–119, 123, 126, 135, 137, 157, 177–179
rotestant Reformation, 15
sychologism, 15
sychology, 2, 6, 7, 9, 10, 15–18, 25, 31, 33, 36, 94, 103, 104, 127, 181, 196, 208, 210, 214, 221, 222,
224
urpose, 23, 31, 45, 51, 75, 116–118, 120–123, 125, 182, 192, 202, 211, 233. See also Teleology; Telic
utnam, Hilary, 17, 34, 201
Qualia, 190, 198, 221
Quality/Qualitative, 62, 73, 178, 179, 189, 190, 195, 198
Quantity/Quantitative, 62
Quantum physics, 26
Quine, W. V., 17, 60
Radical Empiricism, 190
Rationalism, 6, 7, 9–11, 13, 15, 28, 32, 35, 45, 46, 50–61, 63, 65, 68–70, 92–100, 109–112, 117–120,
122, 124, 125, 132, 134, 136, 140, 146, 157, 159–162, 167, 168, 170, 172, 175–178, 182, 185, 198
Real/Reality/Realism, ix, 2, 4, 7, 8, 11, 13–16, 22–24, 26–28, 31, 33, 39–46, 48–50, 52, 53, 55–64, 65–
76, 78, 80–86, 89–94, 98–114, 115–126, 128, 131, 132, 134, 139–145, 148–154, 156, 157, 159, 160,
162–169, 171–173, 175–179, 182–186, 189–196, 202, 203, 206, 211, 213, 220, 221, 224, 237, 238,
240
Reason, 6, 8, 10, 14, 45, 46, 52, 59–62, 67, 94–96, 98, 99, 101, 120, 132, 143, 151, 152, 156, 161, 162,
164, 170, 172, 177, 181, 185, 196, 198, 200, 206, 218, 222, 230, 237, 239, 240
Reconstruction, 19, 126
Reductionism, 19, 78, 79, 80–82, 230
Reflection, 6, 19, 37, 74, 90, 111, 134, 141, 143, 193, 198, 220, 236, 241
Regularity, 40, 84
Relation/Relationality, 17, 23, 28, 36, 43, 53, 57, 64, 71, 72, 74, 75, 79, 92, 94, 101, 102, 107, 110, 111,
119, 127, 128, 130–132, 138, 141, 142, 144, 145, 149, 150, 157, 162, 163, 165–168, 175, 177, 184,
187, 189, 191, 193, 197, 202, 205, 218, 229, 236, 237
Relativism, 58, 59, 65, 86, 98, 118, 119, 120, 121, 124, 125, 135, 139, 177
Religion, 2, 4, 15, 18, 47, 52. See also Divinity; God; Spiritualism; Supernaturalism; Theology
Representationalism, 6, 18, 35, 55, 103, 195, 196, 200, 211, 212, 214, 235, 236Responsibility, 26, 36, 55, 57, 59, 62, 85, 92, 95, 96, 99, 104, 124, 135, 138, 170, 171, 181, 183, 185,
205, 214, 223–225, 227, 228, 238
Ritual, 2, 60
Romanticism, 24
Rorty, Richard, 16, 17
Royce, Josiah, 43, 144, 147, 149, 150
Russell, Bertrand, 65, 206
antayana, George, 43
artre, Jean-Paul, 43
chelling, F. W. J., 23, 24, 43, 187
chema, 46, 51, 53, 55, 59, 61, 62, 69, 70, 95, 111
cholasticism, 7, 16
chröder, Ernst, 34
chütz, Alfred, 18
cience, vii, 2–6, 8, 9, 15–18, 21–27, 31–35, 37, 51–53, 60–63, 66–68, 72, 73, 75, 76, 78, 81–82, 84, 87,
96–98, 110–112, 130, 131, 145, 160, 171, 172, 175, 178, 179, 181, 185, 198, 203, 207, 214, 224, 235–
237, 239
cientism, 16
earle, John, 211–213, 221
elf, 36, 38, 43, 62, 69, 92, 100, 101, 143, 145, 153, 159, 182, 187, 190, 192, 196, 197, 201, 205–210,
214, 217, 222, 223, 229, 231, 232, 236, 238, 241
emantics, 34, 97, 211
emiotics, 5, 18, 34, 35, 102, 104
ensation, 37, 61, 94, 95, 102, 198
ensationalism, 95, 199
ense, 45, 65, 66, 69, 70, 83, 107, 130, 151, 163, 168, 196, 198, 214, 215, 235
ignification, 220
igns, 91, 195, 222. See also Semiotics
implicity, 63, 85–87
ituation, 29, 74, 75, 137, 147–154, 156, 159–161, 172, 186, 189, 192, 197, 203, 210, 213, 214, 219
kepticism, 47, 58, 59, 66, 98, 99, 102, 119–121, 124, 125, 155, 177
kinner, B. F., 207
mith, Eliot R., 214
ocial institution/organization, 4, 33
ociality, 7, 23, 27, 29, 34, 64, 182, 201, 205, 207, 208, 214–216, 220, 225, 229, 232, 235, 240
ocialization, 35, 36, 60, 205, 208, 211, 213, 217–220, 223, 224, 231, 237, 238, 241
ocial Science, 6, 15, 17, 18, 25, 36, 98, 104, 130, 181, 210, 211, 214, 221, 223
ociety, 2, 29, 33, 87, 98, 130, 133, 202, 205, 208, 214, 215, 220–223, 228, 233, 236, 238, 240
ociology, 15, 16, 21, 33, 37, 98, 208, 210, 231
ocrates, 86, 140, 144, 145
olipsism, 103, 125, 183
pinoza, Baruch, 5, 187piritualism, 16, 26, 32, 228, 238. See also Divinity; God; Religion; Supernaturalism; Theology
pontaneity, 41
tatistics, 26, 84
toicism, 1, 16
tructuralism, 18
tructure, 57, 59, 61, 65, 67, 74, 75, 95, 98, 122, 123, 186, 208, 211, 231, 238
ubject, 5, 15, 27–29, 35, 50, 57–59, 65, 66, 73, 74, 79, 93, 98, 105, 115, 118–122, 124, 125, 128, 131–
133, 135, 138, 146, 170, 171, 179, 188, 191, 197, 207, 220, 222
ubstance, 25, 29, 71, 72, 76, 92, 101, 146, 163, 157, 185, 187, 188, 192, 195
upernaturalism, 31, 238. See also Divinity; God; Religion; Spiritualism; Theology
upervenience, 80
ymbol, 35, 68, 195, 205, 211, 212, 220, 230, 232, 235, 238
yntactics, 34, 97
Techniques, 45, 170, 237, 241
Technology, 2, 4, 18, 32, 232, 237, 238
Teleology, 25. See also Purpose; Telic
Telic, 22, 184, 193. See also Purpose; Teleology
Temporality, 41, 42, 75, 176, 192
Theodicy, 16
Theology, 6, 8, 14, 18, 26, 27, 29, 31, 68, 223, 230. See also Divinity; God; Religion; Spiritualism;
Supernaturalism
Thing-in-itself, 126, 128, 130, 132, 134, 136, 138, 159, 160, 175, 189
Thinking/Thought, x, 1, 3, 4, 7, 10, 15, 19, 21, 36, 37, 45, 51, 58, 61, 67, 69, 71, 85, 89–93, 95, 96, 98–
105, 107, 109, 111, 112, 116–121, 123–136, 138–140, 142, 143, 157, 166, 168–170, 173, 176, 178,
180, 185, 189, 190, 192, 193, 195–198, 202, 205, 206, 215, 216, 221–223, 225, 233, 236, 237, 239
Thought-in-itself, 132, 134–136, 138, 189, 190, 193
Tool, 37, 45, 99, 230, 232, 238, 239
Transaction, 134, 138, 162, 167, 177, 235, 237, 238
Transcendental Ego/Mind, 97, 189, 191, 238
Transcendentalism, 9, 15, 60–62,
Truth, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9–14, 17, 32, 46, 50, 51, 54, 55, 63, 65–68, 82, 89–91, 93, 96, 99–101, 103, 106–114,
115–125, 127, 137–140, 143, 145, 151, 152, 156, 159–166, 168, 171–180, 182, 221, 237
Uexküll, Jakob Johann von, 36
Umwelt, 36
Uniformity, 40, 41, 92
Universal, 51, 80–84, 93, 120, 121, 135, 137, 144, 211, 232
University of Chicago, 3
Utilitarianism, 5, 93
Validity/Validation, 11, 54, 80, 94, 104, 133, 134, 143, 184, 238
Value, 4, 5, 11, 19, 27, 29, 31–34, 36, 37, 45, 62, 74, 82, 96, 105, 107, 116–118, 120–123, 125, 134, 140,
161, 193, 199, 200, 215, 228Variety, 15, 18, 41, 42, 214
Verification, 11, 13, 100, 113, 142, 213
Vitality/Vitalism, 2, 16, 23, 43, 85, 103, 118, 133
Volition, 6. See also Freedom of the will; Will
Voluntarism, 24
Vygotsky, Lev, 208
Whitehead, Alfred North, 43
Wiener, Norbert, 34
Will, 98, 198, 223. See also Freedom of the will; Volition
Wisdom, 1, 21, 47
World, 2, 4–8, 11, 14, 15, 17, 21, 23, 27–29, 31, 32, 35, 36, 39, 42, 47, 48, 52–54, 60–62, 67, 69–71, 76,
82, 83, 86, 87, 94–99, 105, 107, 112, 114–116, 118–123, 125, 130, 132–134, 136, 138, 143, 157, 160,
175, 178, 180, 182–184, 186, 188–193, 196, 199, 200, 206, 210, 211, 228, 235, 236, 238–241
Worldview, 2, 4–6, 27, 28, 31, 32, 39, 47, 48, 98, 122, 123, 160, 178, 185, 189, 191, 228, 239–241
Wright, Chauncey, 9
Wundt, Wilhelm, 24
WWII, 16John R. Shook, PhD, is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Bowie State
University in Maryland. He writes about American philosophy, science,
ethics, and neurophilosophy. He is the author of Dewey’s Empirical Theory
of Knowledge and Reality and Dewey’s Social Philosophy, coauthor of John
Dewey’s Philosophy of Spirit, and coeditor of The Blackwell Companion to
Pragmatism and Neuroscience, Neurophilosophy, and Pragmatism.
