Baode Sun
Jun Wang
Da Shu
Precision Forming 
Technology of Large 
Superalloy Castings 
for Aircraft EnginesPrecision Forming Technology of Large Superalloy
Castings for Aircraft EnginesBaode Sun · Jun Wang · Da Shu
Precision Forming
Technology of Large
Superalloy Castings
for Aircraft EnginesBaode Sun
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
Da Shu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
Jun Wang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
ISBN 978-981-33-6219-2 ISBN 978-981-33-6220-8 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-6220-8
Jointly published with Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press
The print edition is not for sale in China (Mainland). Customers from China (Mainland) please order the
print book from: Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press.
© Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publishers, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publishers, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publishers nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publishers remain neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721,
SingaporePreface
The aircraft engine is known as the “flower of industry” and the “crown jewel” in
the high-end manufacturing industry. It is an important indicator of the strength of
science and technology, industry, and the national defense of a country. In addition,
the space of aero-engine industry is also very broad. According to the prediction of
the British Rolls-Royce company, the global market of civil aero-engine will reach
US$1.4 trillion in the next 20 years and the market of military aero-engine will reach
US$430 billion. Developed countries have always listed the aero-engine as a strategic
industry of priority development, and have strictly controlled the transfer of the core
technology to foreign countries. At present, only a few countries in the world, such
as the United Kingdom, the United States, and Russia, can independently develop
aero-engines. The global civil aero-engine market is almost completely monopolized
by European and American enterprises.
Being the heart of aircraft, the aero-engine is one of the determining factors of its
mobility, range, reliability, economy, and environmental impact. Nowadays, a high
thrust-to-weight ratio, supersonic cruise, low life-cycle cost, unconventional maneu￾verability, low fuel consumption, low pollution, and other excellent performance
are the development trends and goals of aircraft in the world. This goal is mainly
achieved by improving the performance of the engine. In order to improve the thrust￾to-weight ratio and reduce the fuel consumption, the most effective way is to increase
the turbine inlet temperature and reduce the structural mass, which requires that
the key materials and manufacturing technology of the engine hot end components
must be constantly innovated. Therefore, the United States, Western Europe, and
other aviation-developed countries have formulated comprehensive strategy, basic
research, and technology development plans to actively carry out scientific research,
exploring and accumulating abundant material data and manufacturing technology.
China has been carrying out the research and development of large-scale civil
aircraft since 2006 and the design and manufacture of large-scale commercial aero￾engines has also begun recently. With the promotion of national security strategy and
localization substitution, it is expected that the research and development of aero￾engine will be supported by major national policies, which will bring huge pulling
effect on the industrial chain. However, at present, the foundation of commercial
aero-engine design and manufacturing in China is still weak, especially in terms of
vvi Preface
materials, key parts, manufacturing equipment, etc., which result in lagging behind
the international top level.
As the key load-bearing component of civil aircraft power system, the structural
superalloy castings are developing rapidly towards the direction of large-scale size,
complex structure, thin-walled surface and integrated components. It is of great tech￾nical challenges to control the defects, such as porosity, deformation, and oversize.
The lack of theoretical and technical basis of precision forming of such large cast￾ings has become one of the bottlenecks limiting the development of aero-engines in
China.
Since 2008, researchers at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University have aimed at
the major national demand for large superalloy castings and have conducted a
series of fundamental research and technological development. With the support
of the Shanghai Science and Technology Committee, the Shanghai Key Labora￾tory of Advanced High-temperature Materials and Precision Forming was estab￾lished in 2013. Through continuous efforts in the last decade, we have made
theoretical achievements and key technological breakthroughs in the precision
forming of large superalloy castings, and have successfully produced qualified large￾scale, complex-structured, and thin-walled castings for domestically-developed
commercial aero-engines.
This book is a systematic summary of the research work of our group over the
years, which has been published in Chinese by the Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Press in 2016. The content not only covers the basic principles, key technologies, and
control methods of the whole process of precision casting of superalloys, but also
introduces a series of new technologies, new methods, and new progresses in the field,
such as synchrotron radiation X-ray radiation of metal solidification process, three￾dimensional computerized tomography (3D CT) image reconstruction of porosity,
error flow modeling of casting process, etc.
This book consists of contributions of many of my students, colleagues, and
collaborators. I thank them for their diligence, efforts, intelligence, and great team￾work. I would also like to thank my postdocs and graduate students who helped me
in the text translation and typing. They are Lishibao Ling, Tao Liu, Yongfei Jun,
Yujie Wang, Ya Zhang, Jiang Ju, Jiahao Liu, Zhen Zhang, Yun Wu, Xuan Zhang,
Ting Zhang, Zhengyi Ding, Jiangping Yu, and Zhicheng Shi.
In our research and in writing this book, we have benefited from encouragement of
many experts and scholars, particularly Chinese Academician of Engineering Jianxin
Xie and Zhongqin Lin. Finally, this book would have never come about had it not
been for the continual editorial support from Ms. Fangzhen Qian of Shanghai Jiao
Tong University Press.
It is a pleasure to dedicate the book to two particularly distinguished scholars,
Chinese Academician of Sciences Yaohe Zhou and Zhuangqi Hu. They have made
great contributions to China’s academy and industry of casting and superalloys and
will be remembered by us forever.
Shanghai, China
June 2020
Baode SunContents
1 Introduction ................................................... 1
Baode Sun, Da Shu, and Maodong Kang
2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy
Castings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Guoxiang Wang
3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern . . . . . . . 67
Donghong Wang
4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Fei Li and Fei Wang
5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings . . . . . . . . 169
Jiao Zhang, Yongbing Dai, Jianbo Ma, Qing Dong, Yanfeng Han,
Taiwen Huang, and Guangyu Yang
6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings . . . . . . . 221
Jun Wang, Haiyan Gao, Xinhua Tang, Maodong Kang, and Yang Zhou
7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 279
Changhui Liu, Sun Jin, and Xinmin Lai
8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 355
Anping Dong, Dafan Du, Hui Xing, and Guoliang Zhu
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407
viiAbout the Authors
Baode Sun is a chair professor of Materials Science
and Engineering at Shanghai Jiao Tong University
(SJTU). He received his Ph.D. degree from North￾western Polytechnic University, China, in 1993. He
became the “Yangtze River Scholar” distinguished
professor in 2007, and the Dean of School of Mate￾rials Science and Engineering in 2013. His research is
focused on the fundamental and applied aspects of liquid
metal processing and investment casting of large-size
thin-wall structural components. He has published more
than 200 technical papers and he holds more than 100
Chinese patents. He won numerous prestigious research
awards, such as second prize of the National Technology
Invention Award of China, and first prize of the Shanghai
Science and Technology Invention Award.
Jun Wang is a professor of Materials Processing at
SJTU. He received his B.Sc. (1991), M.Sc. (1994), and
Ph.D. (1997) at Southeast University. He was a research
fellow in the Venture Business Laboratory in Saga
University and senior researcher in Department of Mate￾rials Engineering at the University of Tokyo in Japan. His
research focuses on investment casting process. He has
published more than 200 peer-reviewed articles, and he
holds 95 China patents and one US patent. He received
a number of awards, including the 2nd Prize of the
National Technology Invention Award, the New-century
Talents of Ministry of Education, China, and Shanghai
Excellent Scientific Leader.
ixx About the Authors
Da Shu is a professor of Materials Processing at SJTU.
He received his B.Sc. (1994) at Nanjing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics and his M.Sc. (1997) and
Ph.D. (2001) at SJTU. He was an academic visitor at the
Department of Materials, Oxford University, in 2009–
2010. His research focuses on processing of advanced
metallic materials and control of solidified structure.
He has published more than 100 peer-reviewed articles,
and he holds 30 China patents and one US patent. He
received a number of awards, including the 2nd Prize
of the National Technology Invention Award, Rising￾Star of Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology
Commission, and the New-century Talents of Ministry
of Education, China.Contributors
Chapter 1 Baode Sun, Da Shu, Maodong Kang
Chapter 2 Guoxiang Wang
Chapter 3 Donghong Wang
Chapter 4 Fei Li, Fei Wang
Chapter 5 Jiao Zhang, Yongbing Dai, Jianbo Ma, Qing Dong, Yanfeng Han, Taiwen
Huang, Guangyu Yang
Chapter 6 Jun Wang, Haiyan Gao, Xinhua Tang, Maodong Kang, Yang Zhou
Chapter 7 Changhui Liu, Sun Jin, Xinmin Lai
Chapter 8 Anping Dong, Dafan Du, Hui Xing, Guoliang Zhu
xiChapter 1
Introduction
Baode Sun, Da Shu, and Maodong Kang
1.1 Requirements of Aircraft Engines on Large Superalloy
Castings
Aeroengines are recognized as the most sophisticated and complex mechanical
systems ever built. Known as the “heart” of an aircraft, the aeroengine represents
a comprehensive embodiment of a country’s scientific and industrial achievements
[1]. The progress in materials, structural design and manufacture are all controlling
factors in the development of aviation industry.
Since the first batch of superalloy GH3030 was successfully made in 1956, the
research, production and application of superalloys in China have undergone over
60 years of development [2]. Most of the designations of superalloys have been
directly related to various types of engines, and the development of aeroengine
and aerospace technology has actively promoted the research and advancement of
superalloys in China. Along with the development of aeroengines, various materials
used in the engine are constantly changing. Although a variety of high-performance
new materials have continuously been used, the dominant use of steel and aluminum
have gradually given way to the age of “Three Kingdoms” of nickel, titanium and
steel, with titanium being the major material for the cold end parts and nickel for
the hot end parts of aeroengines. The K-series nickel casting alloys, e.g., K4169,
K417G, K405, K419, K419H, and K4537, are a type of materials that can serve for a
long time under the condition of large complex stress at temperatures above 650 °C.
Some of the great advantages of this type of alloys include high initial melting
temperatures, excellent cold and hot fatigue resistance, and good anti-oxidation
and corrosion resistance, etc., facilitating their common use in the hot end parts of
engines. For example, the turbine rear frame (TRF), which carries all the thrust and
vibration loads of the engine, is the most important bearing structural component
of an aeroengine, and is listed as one of the key components of the aeroengine in
parallel with the blade, turbine disk and turbine shaft. As a result, the quality of TRF
greatly affects the performance, long-term life, and reliability of the aeroengine,
© Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
B. Sun et al., Precision Forming Technology of Large Superalloy Castings for Aircraft
Engines, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-6220-8_1
12 B. Sun et al.
and currently more than 80% of them are made from Inconel 718 (IN718) alloy
(virtually the same composition as K4169 alloy).
In the early stage, limited by the forming technique, engineers used to increase
the casting wall thickness, simplify the casting design, and hand over the complex
thin-walled structure to the follow-up machining in order to manufacture the key
load-bearing parts of the engine. As a result, the large complex structural parts were
often welded by the separate conventional castings, forgings and sheet metal parts.
The disadvantages of this processing route includes the long development cycle, the
waste of raw materials, and poor overall performance. In the 1970s, leading countries
in industry, such as the United States, adopted the investment casting technology
to produce large-scale castings with a diameter of more than 1 m in batch. The
remarkable advantages of this technology are good integrity, high reliability, low
manufacturing cost, and significant weight reduction effect. With the continuous
improvement of performance and reliability of aeroengines, intensified requirements
on structural design must be met for the new generation of high thrust-weight ratio
aeroengines, such as the usage of a large number of lightweight, integral parts of
hollow, thin-wall complex structures [3]. It puts forward higher requirements for the
structural rigidity, lightweight, reliability, and operation temperature of large-scale
structural parts such as turbine cases. As a result, the precision casting technology
has developed into the world’s mainstream technology route of manufacturing large￾scale structural aeroengine parts, and has become one of the important technical
bases for the development of advanced aeroengines towards lightweight, precision,
and long service life. At present, the largest and thinnest IN718 alloy castings have a
diameter of 1.93 m, a wall thickness of only 1.5 mm, a casting weight of 534 kg, and
a pouring weight of 1900 kg, representing the highest level of nickel-base superalloy
investment casting in the world.
A big gap still exists between China and the leading countries in the field of preci￾sion forming of large-scale castings for aeroengines, and due to a lack of enough tech￾nical resources and support, for many years Chinese aviation enterprises were unable
to produce high-quality and large-scale complex thin-walled load-bearing structural
castings. Until the end of the twentieth century, Beijing Institute of Aeronautical
Materials began to develop and master the integral precision casting technology of
the turbine case with a diameter of 570–800 mm. After 2000, China began to develop
the integral precision casting of the turbine case with a diameter of about 1 m. With
fundamental research and technology breakthroughs, some domestic universities,
scientific research institutes, and enterprises had preliminarily developed the preci￾sion casting technology of the large-scale high-temperature alloy castings with a
diameter of more than 1 m and a wall thickness of about 2 mm. However, the overall
domestic mass production level of superalloy turbine cases is still about 20 years
behind the international top level. The backwardness of the whole precision casting
technology of large castings has become one of the bottlenecks in the development
of China’s commercial aeroengines.
With the continuous progress in structural design of advanced aeroengines, the
load-bearing structural parts will develop towards the direction of larger size, thinner
wall thickness and more complex structure in the future. Taking a turbine case1 Introduction 3
developed for a commercial aircraft engine as an example, the outer flange size
is more than 1.5 m, while the minimum wall thickness is less than 1.8 mm; more￾over, there are a large number of positions with variable cross-sections. The inner
quality and reliability requirements of the part are also very demanding. The preci￾sion forming of such a casting is quite difficult, which poses great challenges for the
existing processing technology. Consequently, it is urgent to carry out the construc￾tion of relevant infrastructure as well as the fundamental research and key technology
development of precision forming of large castings, in order to solve the problem in
manufacturing superalloy turbine cases for large airliner engines.
1.2 Classification of Precision Casting
Precision casting is mainly divided into investment casting(lost wax casting), ceramic
mold casting, metal mold casting, pressure casting, and lost foam casting. Ceramic
mold casting is a metal casting process that uses refractories, binders, and catalysts
to form the surface layer of ceramic mold. It can produce castings with surface
roughness of Ra = 3.2–12.5 μm, and dimensional accuracy of CT5–CT8. It has
advantages of high refractoriness of ceramic mold, stable high-temperature perfor￾mance, simple processing, low investment, and high efficiency, and is thus widely
used in the production of castings with complex surface shapes, such as plastic mold,
glass mold, rubber mold, die casting mold, forging die, stamping die, metal mold,
core box, and cutting tool.
Metal mold casting is a method of casting that uses metal mold, which is charac￾terized by high mechanical properties, high precision, and surface finish of castings,
high yield of process, and simple processing. It is easy to realize mechanization and
automation, but has high cost in mold, poor fallback, and is prone to cause casting
cracks. Metal mold casting is commonly used for aluminum alloys, zinc alloys, and
magnesium alloys.
Pressure casting, also known as “die casting”, is a process where the liquid metal
is injected into the die at high a speed under high specific pressure and solidi￾fied into a casting. It is characterized by close dimensional accuracy, good surface
finish, thin-walled castings, and superior mechanical properties, but the castings are
lacking in internal integrity. It is applicable to low melting point zinc, aluminum,
and magnesium alloys, and the resulting products cover automobile, motorcycle,
communication, household appliances, hardware products, electric tools, and many
other fields.
Lost foam casting is a casting process in which the model (usually made of
polystyrene foam) does not need to be removed from the mold cavity. It has the
characteristics of molding sand without adding binder, absence of parting surface
and draft angle, high dimensional accuracy, and good surface finish. It is suitable for
copper alloys, aluminum alloys, magnesium alloys, and cast-iron alloys, to produce
components such as automobile engine cylinder heads, exhaust pipes, intake pipes,
crankshafts, hubs and brake discs.4 B. Sun et al.
Investment casting, also known as lost wax casting, plays an important role in
nurturing human civilization and promoting social progress. The history of invest￾ment casting can be traced back to more than 4000 years ago, originated from Ancient
Egypt, China and India. For example, various kinds of bells and vessels with fine
patterns and characters were cast in ancient China, such as Wang Zi Wu Tripod and
bronze Jin in the late Spring and Autumn period, bronze Zenghou Yi zun-pan in the
Warring States period, bronze Poshan incense burner inlaid with gold decorations
in the Han Dynasty, etc. The main steps of investment casting includes wax pattern
making, tree making, shell making, dewaxing, sintering, and casting [4]. The prac￾tical application of modern investment casting technology in industry began in 1940s
when it was used to manufacture Aeroengine Blades in the United States. At that time,
developing jet engines required the manufacture of heat-resistant alloy components
with complex shapes, accurate sizes, and smooth surfaces, such as blades, impellers,
and nozzles. However, since it was difficult to machine heat-resistant alloys and
since the shape of components were complex, it was nearly impossible or extremely
difficult to manufacture these components by other methods. Therefore, it is neces￾sary to find a new precision forming method. With reference to the ancient wax
loss precision casting, through a series of improvements on materials and manufac￾turing, the investment casting method has received important development on the
basis of ancient technology. As an advanced near-net forming technology, its main
advantages include: (1) it can manufacture metal castings with complex inner cavity
structures, high melting temperatures, and high chemical activity [5], (2) the dimen￾sional accuracy can reach 5% of the nominal size, and the roughness level is Ra =
0.8–3.2 μm, (3) the cost is relatively low, and (4) it has a wide range of material
adaptability and excellent production flexibility. The continuous improvement of the
investment casting technology has enabled the development and production of key
parts in the aviation industry, and in return the development of the aviation industry
has also promoted the further development and widespread application of investment
casting, which has been used in automobiles, machine tools, ships, internal combus￾tion engines, steam gas turbines, telecommunication instruments, weapons, medical
devices, arts and crafts, cutting tools, and other industries. In the past decade, invest￾ment casting has been developed rapidly. The consumption of investment castings
in major industrial countries in the world is increasing at an average rate of 7–12%,
and that of specified investment castings is increasing at an amazing rate of 30%. For
example, the export value of high-value-added castings used in the fields of aviation,
aerospace, and industrial gas turbines in the developed countries such as Europe and
the United States has accounted for more than 70% of the total export value [6].
1.3 Difficulties in Investment Casting of Large Castings
From the perspective of the overall development trend domestically and abroad,
large-scale structural parts for aeroengines are moving to the direction of larger sizes,
thinner wall thicknesses, and more complex structures. Taking the K4169 TRF and1 Introduction 5
ZTC4 intermediate case designed by one type of verification engine of a large airliner
as examples, their design sizes are 1.4 and 1.2 m in diameter, respectively, most of the
casting thicknesses are less than 2 mm, the wall thickness difference is more than 10
times, and the thin-walled area accounts for more than 80% of the overall component
surface. There are a large number of special-shaped parts such as hollow support
plates, mounting bosses, assembly seats, and stiffeners. The number of dimensions
of the TRF that should be controlled is more than 300, while that of the intermediate
case is 570. These structural characteristics make the large-scale castings different
from the small and medium-sized ones in the process of filling and solidification,
such as the “large size effect” due to the large-scale size, the “variable cross-section
effect” due to the complexity of the structure, and the “thin wall effect” due to the
thin-walled surface. At present, the manufacturing yield of K4169 large castings in
China is low, and casting defects such as porosity, deformation, and dimensionally
being out of tolerance have become the main issues of large castings. Generally
speaking, there are two major difficulties in the precision forming technology of
large-scale nickel-base superalloy castings: prediction and control of solidification
defects and dimensional accuracy control of castings.
(1) Prediction and control of solidification defects
The large size, thin wall, and complex structure of aeroengine case castings make it
difficult to predict and avoid solidification defects in the precision forming process.
The large size of the casting makes the flow path of melt filling greatly increased
during the pouring process and thus the filling process becomes difficult to control,
which easily leads to defects such as misrun and cold shut. The temperature distri￾bution of the whole casting system will also become nonuniform, and the hot spot
(i.e., isolated pools of liquid form inside solidified metal) exhibits the characteristics
of large quantity and wide distribution, which leads to the difficulty of feeding and
many porosity defects. The complexity of the casting structure further highlights the
hot cracking problem caused by a sudden change of wall thickness. Moreover, the
thin-walled structure of the casting results in the increase of resistance during filling
such thin-walled channels for superalloys that typically have a wide crystallization
temperature interval. At the same time, the solidification sequence of the thick and
large parts connected with thin-walled parts is difficult to adjust, in particular, the
latent heat release of the thick and large parts of the casting may result in the re￾melting of the thin-walled parts as well as other special phenomena, thus leading
to the formation of the solidification defects, i.e., thin-walled porosity and harmful
brittle phases. Because of the dispersion of hot spots caused by the complexity of
the structure, the grain size distribution of large-scale complex thin-walled castings
is nonuniform, and the mechanical properties of each part are obviously different,
which has potential danger for the subsequent service safety of castings. There￾fore, “large size effect”, “variable cross-section effect”, and “thin wall effect” in the
process of casting forming become the main causes of solidification defects.6 B. Sun et al.
(2) Dimensional accuracy control of castings
The investment casting is characterized by long process flow, complex influencing
factors, and difficult control of casting dimensions. For large castings, from mold
manufacturing, wax pattern assembly, shell preparation, and baking to alloy casting,
it has undertaken dozens of processes, involving thousands of process parameters.
The process parameters contained in each process may have an impact on the dimen￾sional accuracy of final castings and the accumulation and transfer of errors cannot
be ignored, which is a critical reason why the accuracy of large castings is difficult
to control. With the trend into large-scale size, thin-walled surface, and complex
structure of castings, the dimensional accuracy is more difficult to control. First,
the deformation degree of large wax pattern caused by the movement and nonuni￾form stress in the process of shell coating and sand spraying is increased due to
the increase of self-weight and size, which is one of the reasons for the excessive
size accuracy of castings; Secondly, the deformation and oversize caused by high
temperature creep of the ceramic shell greatly affect the final size accuracy of cast￾ings, because the shell weighs hundreds of kilograms and there is a phase change
during the baking process. In addition, the shell needs to bear the hydrostatic pressure
in the pouring and solidification process. Thirdly, because of the structural charac￾teristics of large castings, namely, “large size”, “variable cross-section”, and “thin
wall”, they will cause nonlinear deformation of castings under multiple constraints
during the cooling process, making it difficult to control the shape and size accuracy
of castings. The traditional “trial and error” method cannot meet the requirements of
dimensional accuracy control of large castings. Therefore, it is necessary to combine
the characteristics of large castings with simulation and typical casting experiments
to study the formation mechanism of casting errors, in order to realize the robust
control of tolerance in investment casting of large castings.
The characteristics of investment casting technology manifest itself as more suit￾able for the formation of large batch and small and medium size precision parts.
Therefore, in the past, most of the relevant process design theories and methods
focused on the manufacturing of small and medium-sized parts. However, for the
investment casting of large-scale structural parts, there has long been lacking in the
process design theory, the formation mechanism and control method of solidification
defects, and the quantitative control method of manufacturing errors for the whole
process, which will be described in detail as follows.
(1) Process design theory for large castings
Due to the requirements of structural design and lightweight, the shape and size of the
characteristic structure of large-scale complex thin-walled castings for aeroengines
have exceeded the traditional design concept of castings. For example, in the classical
design theory, the wall thickness difference of the casting at the variable cross￾sections should not be more than 3 times; otherwise the deformation and cracking
of the casting may be induced by stress concentration. However, different from
the traditional castings, the maximum wall thickness difference of the intermediate1 Introduction 7
engine case is 12 times, and that of the TRF casting is more than 10 times. Moreover,
the area of the thin wall parts in the intermediate case and the TRF accounts for
more than 80% of the castings. The large area of the thin wall will lead to the defects
of filling difficulty, porosity, harmful brittle phases, etc., and therefore needs to be
avoided in the classical design theory. In addition, the large-scale and complex of
castings limit the shrinkage of castings during solidification and cooling, and thus
nonlinear deformation becomes a new problem. Besides the pouring system, it may
be necessary to add integral stiffeners to restrain deformation in the process design.
Therefore, the traditional process design theory is no longer suitable for the process
design of large castings such as engine cases. As a result, it is urgent to study and
explore the new process design theory of large castings.
(2) Formation mechanisms and control methods of solidification defects
The special structural characteristics of large castings bring about “large size effect”,
“variable cross-section effect”, and “thin wall effect”, which lead to the change of
the solidification sequence, temperature field, and solute field distribution. The tradi￾tional defect formation mechanism cannot be directly used to describe the forma￾tion process of defects in special structures. For example, the formation of porosity
and negative segregation in the thin wall parts is not as usual, which needs to be
described by establishing the kinetic equations of solidification. In particular, for the
porosity defect, which is the most difficult to control for large castings, filling and
feeding under pressure is the best way to solve this problem. The essence of counter
gravity or adjusted pressure casting is that feeding is not only realized by fluid flow
under gravity, but also by pressure to keep the feeding channel unblocked. In this
sense, adjusted pressure casting is more suitable for the preparation of large complex
thin-walled castings. Nevertheless, the fluid flow and freezing behavior of super￾alloy during filling and solidification under pressure, the mechanism of micro flow
between dendrites to eliminate porosity, and the optimization of process parameters
are all rarely reported in the literature, which should be an important subject to be
studied systematically.
(3) Quantitative control methods of manufacturing errors for the entire process
The law of formation, accumulation, and transfer of various error sources in the entire
manufacturing process of large-scale complex thin-walled superalloy castings, such
as die design, manufacturing, pressing and assembly of wax patterns, shell mold
preparation, and baking are very complex. Traditionally, the dimension accuracy
control and tolerance design of castings mainly rely on qualitative experience and
error correction, which is of high cost, long cycle, and poor stability and makes it
difficult to meet the urgent need of rapid research and development of key compo￾nents of new generation aeroengines. Due to the three structural effects of large
castings, nonlinear deformation under multiple constraints occurs during the cooling
process, which makes the shape and size of castings difficult to control. There is an
urgent need to (1) study the formation mechanism, transfer rule, and control method
of manufacturing errors in the complete casting process, (2) establish the systematic8 B. Sun et al.
model for numerical simulation of manufacturing errors, and (3) realize the quanti￾tative analysis of thousands of process parameters in the complete casting process
and accurate allocation of tolerance. Only in this way can the technical bottleneck of
traditional qualitative analysis and “trial and error” experience be overcome, enabling
the rapid improvement in the dimension accuracy of large-scale aeroengine castings
and robust control of casting quality.
1.4 Research Status of Precision Forming Technology
for Large Castings
1.4.1 Virtual Manufacturing of Large Complex Thin Wall
Castings
Virtual manufacturing is the virtual realization of the actual manufacturing process
on the computer, which includes the integrated modeling of product design, process
planning, processing, and manufacturing. The use of computer simulation and virtual
reality technology to realize the essential manufacturing processes of product devel￾opment, manufacturing, management and control on the computer, allows to enhance
the decision-making and control capabilities at all levels of the manufacturing
process. Prior to the physical realization of manufacturing, virtual manufacturing
technology allows us to know about the performance or operation state of future
products, so that we can make forward-looking decisions and optimization schemes.
Investment casting is a type of near-net-shape manufacturing technologies with
long process, many working procedures, and high requirements for production envi￾ronment and product quality. Because of the inevitable time and material cost, the
operational cost of investment casting is significantly high. Owing to the further
research on the flow and solidification behavior of high temperature melt, as well
as the development of computer performance and virtual reality technology, the
modeling research on investment casting has made great progress. There have been
some examples of using virtual design and virtual manufacturing to replace lengthy
and expensive experimental verification.
Soon after the concept of “virtual manufacturing” was proposed, it draw great
attention of the world. In recent years, almost all industrially developed countries
focus on the research and application of virtual manufacturing. In the United States,
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) established a virtual
manufacturing environment (known as the National Advanced Manufacturing Test
Bed); in Europe, many universities and research institutes cooperated with each other
and with enterprises for developing virtual manufacturing technology. The historic
development of virtual manufacturing technology in foundry process has experi￾enced three stages. In 1960s, the numerical simulation of temperature fields during
the solidification of castings was initiated based on the partial differential equation of1 Introduction 9
heat conduction. In the 1970s and early 1980s, many researches focused on numer￾ical simulations of the temperature field, involving thermophysical property param￾eters of materials, interface conditions, latent heat treatment, criteria and control of
shrinkage cavity, shrinkage porosity, and other defects. In the late 1980s and 1990s,
the practical and research work was further developed. The research focused on
casting residual stress, grain structure simulation, and calculation of material prop￾erties. In the mid-1990s, a large number of powerful and full-featured commercial
softwares were introduced in the market. Among many casting process simulation
softwares, ProCAST is one of the representatives that can be used for investment
casting. Based on some investigation and evaluation, NASA recommended this soft￾ware as the first choice of CAE software in the field of aerospace. World-famous
precision casting companies, such as Howmet, PCC, Pratt Whitney, GE Aviation,
and Rolls Royce, have chosen ProCAST as an important tool for casting process
analysis and new product development.
At present, virtual casting technology is mainly used in the field of casting design,
numerical simulation of casting filling or molding process, visualization of results,
and simulation optimization of the casting production process.
(1) Casting design and rapid prototyping
A virtual casting system has been developed in the laboratory of Integrated Computer
Aided Research on Virtual Engineering Design and Prototyping (ICARVE) at the
University of Wisconsin. The system uses stereo glasses to observe 3D images,
language to build various geometric models, and data gloves to determine the size
and position of geometry. At present, ICARVE laboratory has successfully completed
the design of injection and die-casting parts by using this system. The goal of this
system is to achieve the design efficiency of 10–30 times faster than the traditional
CAD method.
Additive manufacturing (AM) is a high-tech achievement newly developed in
the 1990s. It is an advanced manufacturing technology that integrates modern disci￾plines such as computer, optics, electricity, precision instruments, and materials. It
is applicable to the asymmetric, irregular curved or complicated parts and dies with
fine structures that cannot be processed by traditional methods in practice. Rapid
prototyping is a new concept of manufacturing technology. It abandons the tradi￾tional machining method and controls the 3D NC forming system according to the
geometric information of parts generated by CAD. Materials are piled up by laser or
other methods to form a component that is completely consistent with the geometry
in the computer. At present, the main molding methods adopted are stereolithograhy
(SLA), selective laser sintering (SLS), fused deposition modeling (FDM), laminated
object manufacturing (LOM), and solid ground curing (SGC).
(2) Numerical simulation of mold filling and visualization of results
Many commercial simulation programs of pouring process have the visualization
module, which is developed using 2D image processing technology and allows
users to visualize the simulation results more intuitively and to analyze the forming10 B. Sun et al.
process of castings. Researchers at Tsinghua University [7] have made much progress
in numerical simulation of the temperature field in casting process, prediction of
shrinkage cavity and porosity, simulation of filling process, 3D stress analysis,
and microstructure prediction. It can predict the temperature field, flow field, and
stress field of cast steel, cast iron, and nonferrous alloy castings, and predict the
possible occurrence of casting defects (the position and size), such as shrinkage
cavity, shrinkage porosity, hot cracking, etc.
Yan et al. [8] established a finite element numerical analysis model for the aero￾engine case. Using the MSC.Marc software, they simulated the temperature field,
stress field, and deformation of the thin-walled parts of the casting. Meanwhile, the
influence of the temperature field and stress field on the deformation was analyzed
qualitatively, providing the basis for reducing the deformation of the actual case
parts.
Based on the results of numerical simulation, Zhang et al. [9] applied the shape
optimization method in the field of structural optimization to the design of pouring
and riser system of castings, and established the integrated system of design, analysis,
and optimization. The optimization model of casting process was established, and
the sensitivity analysis formula of design variables was carried out. For the first time,
the global convergence method (GCM) was used to automatically obtain the search
direction and search step length of the optimization process. Finally, an example of
riser optimization design was given to prove the reliability of the optimization model
and algorithm, which could ensure the quality of casting and achieve the purpose of
minimum material consumption.
Based on the momentum equation, continuity equation, volume of fluid equation
and energy conservation equation, Xue et al. [10] developed a 3D simulation program
coupling fluid flow with heat transfer in the filling process of casting. They performed
the simulation of temperature fields in the filling process of nickel-base alloy blades,
and used the criterion to judge the position of shrinkage cavity and porosity in the
solidification process of nickel-base alloy blades. Li et al. [11] compared different
criterion functions of shrinkage cavity and porosity, and predicted the possibility of
shrinkage cavity and porosity of IN738 shell mold thin-walled plate casting using
the Niyama criterion function.
In order to solve the issue that the computer takes a lot of time to repeat the
“trial and error” process, the Finite Solutions company of the United States proposes
to link the multivariable optimization operation software to AF Solid solidification
simulation software, so that the simulation and optimization can be completed in a
single step, thus greatly improving the efficiency of computer simulations.
(3) Simulation and optimization of casting process
This includes simulation analysis of productivity, production cycle, equipment
utilization, logistics, and other information, such as workshop and section produc￾tion process simulation, allowing to analyze the production capacity and optimize
the allocation of equipment resources. Through computer simulation analysis, virtual1 Introduction 11
operation can be carried out for various situations of production process. The bottle￾neck that restricts productivity in existing production system can also be analyzed,
and the feasibility of new production scheduling scheme can be predicted. These
procedures can help companies optimize the production process, reduce the blind￾ness of investment, improve production efficiency, and fully realize the company’s
potential.
Although the research in this field is still in progress, it has shown broad application
prospects, high application value, and great development potential in the foundry
industry both domestically and abroad. LAEMPE, a German foundry equipment
manufacturer, used discrete event simulation and robot simulation technology to
build a core production line forWaupaca company. The Swedish Foundry Association
also provided virtual production analysis for large-scale enterprises and completed a
series of production simulation works, such as a complete virtual production analysis
from melting to product delivery in an aluminum foundry. FSC company in the
United States has successfully used virtual manufacturing technology to complete
the upgrading of production system and avoid unnecessary investment in the melting
equipment.
1.4.2 Precision Manufacturing Technology of Large
Complex Thin Wall Castings
In the first half of the twentieth century, foreign countries began to study the vacuum
melting and investment casting technology of nickel-base superalloys for aircraft
engines. In the 1970s–1980s, breakthroughs were made in alloy design and invest￾ment casting technology for large castings. A series of high-performance nickel-base
superalloy castings were rapidly industrialized. British AE company has applied a
series of investment castings to new engines. The overall dimensions of these cast￾ings are generally 300–600 mm, and the minimum wall thickness is 0.8–1.5 mm.
In addition, the grain size can be controlled, and the fatigue life of castings can be
greatly improved with the help of hot isostatic pressing technology. Hitchiner, PCC,
and Howmet companies have cast a series of large-scale thin-walled integral cast￾ings for the engine of General Electric company in the United States, among which
IN718 alloy is used as the casting material of TRF, with the thinnest section size
of 1.25–1.75 mm, the outer diameter of up to 1.93 m, and the casting weight of up
to 2040 kg. At present, the smelting process and equipment of large-scale casting
mostly use a vacuum induction degassing and pouring furnace (VIDP). Through the
pattern design, the system has great flexibility, and it is easy to realize the special
pouring process such as refining, degassing, vacuum slag removal, instant chemical
composition control, bottom pouring, and so on.
The research institutes of high temperature structural materials and its precision
casting technology in China mainly include Beijing Institute of Aeronautical Mate￾rials, Shenyang Foundry Research Institute, Institute of Metal Research Chinese12 B. Sun et al.
Academy of Sciences (CAS), Central Iron and Steel Research Institute, North￾western Polytechnic University, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, etc.
Focusing on the precision manufacturing technology of large-scale complex thin￾walled castings, three aspects of investigations have been mainly carried out: the
filling behavior and solidification structure control of large-scale complex thin-walled
castings, the formation mechanism and control of solidification defects, and the
dimensional accuracy control of castings.
(1) Filling behavior and solidification structure control of large complex thin wall
castings
The fluid flow and growth kinetics of dendrites in the filling and solidification process
of castings are always the frontier issues in the field of solidification, and also the key
factors affecting the complete filling of thin-walled structures. Because of the high
temperature and opacity of metal alloys, the solidification process always appears as
a “black box”. People have been expecting to observe and analyze the melt filling
and solidification process directly, to better control the casting process parameters
and hence to obtain the castings with complete shape and excellent quality.
The permeability of X-ray renders X-ray imaging as the tool that metallurgists
have expected for. The early X-ray intensity is low, which could not meet the
needs of scientific research and engineering application. As early as 1974, Japanese
researchers began to use high-energy X-ray to study the melting and solidification
process of Si crystal. Because the X-ray energy was not high enough at that time,
and because the resolution of picture tube-type video camera used was also very low,
the change of crystal could only be identified from the rough outline.
Since its discovery in 1947, synchrotron radiation has been used as a major experi￾mental method in the field of physics because of its intensive photon flux, high energy,
high spatial and temporal resolution, high collimation, and other characteristics and
advantages. By the 1980s, the second generation of synchrotron radiation light source
was created, and synchrotron radiation had gradually become a general interdisci￾plinary research tool. Japanese and French researchers published the research results
on Sn and Al–Cu alloys, respectively, both using synchrotron radiation imaging,
which initiated the use of synchrotron radiation in the solidification field.
In the early stage, limited by synchrotron radiation performance and ability of
signal receiving and analysis, it was difficult to get clear real-time in-situ X-ray
images, which was not helpful to the study of solidification process and not even
compared with the contribution of solidification simulation using transparent organic
material. With the construction and operation of the third-generation synchrotron
radiation light sources, together with the rapid development of electronics, optics,
machinery, computers, and other disciplines, the capability of synchrotron radiation
has been greatly improved since 2000. Meanwhile, the application of synchrotron
radiation to the study of solidification process of metal alloys has been widely spread
all over the world.1 Introduction 13
Yasuda et al. studied the problem of microsegregation in the solidification process
of Al–Si alloy at the Spring-8 light source. Utilizing the European Synchrotron
Radiation Facility (ESRF), Faraji et al. [12] carried out research on the nucle￾ation kinetics and grain refinement of Al–Si alloy during solidification; Terzi et al.
analyzed the mechanism of dendrite coarsening of Al-10wt.% Cu1 during solidifica￾tion; Bogno et al. [13] studied the process of equiaxed dendrite structure of Al–Cu
alloy; Shuleshova et al. [14] observed the in-situ solidification process of Ti–Al
alloy; Lengsdorf et al. studied the dendrite growth characteristics of Al-Ni alloy
under different gravity conditions. These studies showed a more and more in-depth
use of synchrotron radiation in the study of solidification process of molten metals.
Based on the study of the solidification process of a low melting point model alloy,
Yasuda et al. [15] investigated the dendrite structure growth change of iron-based
alloy at SPring-8. Husseini et al. [16] conducted the crystal structure analysis and
defect monitoring of nickel-base superalloy at the beam line of Advanced Photon
Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory by in-situ imaging. The above works
established an experimental foundation for the synchrotron radiation imaging of the
formation and evolution of the solidified structure, as well as the defect analysis of
high melting point alloys.
With the development of the third-generation synchrotron radiation light source
in Shanghai, the research on materials by means of synchrotron radiation has been
carried out rapidly in China. Since 2010, researchers from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University have carried out a series of studies on the solidification structure evolution
and melt structure of Al–Cu alloys at the imaging and small angle scattering beamline
of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) [17, 18], and have made prelim￾inary progress in the imaging research of solidification process of superalloys, as
shown in Fig. 1.1.
Owing to the development of computing method and capability, numerical simu￾lation of filling and solidification process based on finite element and finite difference
method, together with the microstructural simulation of dendrite growth dynamics
Fig. 1.1 Synchrotron radiation imaging of solidification process of metal alloys: a Al-10wt%Cu
[18] and b K4169 superalloy
1Mass percentage.14 B. Sun et al.
based on phase field method, have become a new focal point in the field of solidi￾fication. The simulation of filling and solidification process mainly focuses on the
influence of melt static pressure, pouring temperature, filling speed, alloy composi￾tion, solidification sequence, and gravity direction on the temperature field distribu￾tion at the metal/mold interface. The microstructural simulation of dendrite growth
dynamics mainly focuses on the simulation of dendrite tip shape, crystal orientation
selection, and growth rate in simple alloy systems.
While the above researches have obtained fruitful results in terms of the basic
theory of filling and solidification, they still suffer from some remaining issues that
make them not directly applicable to the precision forming process of large castings.
In general, the solidification systems studied above were relatively simple, and the
influence of multiple components was not considered. In addition, the influence of
casting structural characteristics on filling and solidification behavior was neglected.
In particular, the effect of pressure on macroscopic and microscopic fluid flow and
the formation mechanism of the dendrite arm spacing, dendrite tilt, and solidification
structure are all lacking in the relevant mathematical model.
In the 1980s–1990s, research institutes in China, such as Northwestern Poly￾technic University, Institute of Metal Research CAS, Tsinghua University, Harbin
Institute of Technology, Dalian University of Technology, etc. had carried out in￾depth and systematic research on some fundamental scientific issues of solidification.
The research on filling and solidification process had also focused on the simula￾tion of transparent organic matter and thermodynamic calculation. Aiming at the
core scientific problem of solidification disciplines, substantial progress has been
made on the solid–liquid interface stability, the formation principle of solidifica￾tion structures (in particular, for the solidification process far from equilibrium), the
nucleation, and interface morphology. Zhuangqi Hu and his group [19] have investi￾gated and developed the preparation of hollow turbine blades and DZ38 alloy series
materials in the early stage. The influence of Al, P, B, Ti, Re, C, Co, W, S, Si, Zr, and
other elements on the structure and properties of nickel-base single crystal superal￾loys (DD8, K17G, DZ38, GH761, DD32, etc.) had been systematically studied. The
creep behavior of single crystal alloy under the condition of high-cycle fatigue and
low-cycle fatigue were both analyzed. The effect of coarsening of γ phase on the high
temperature properties was studied and the effects of heat treatment and pre-pressing
on the rupture property of superalloys were also examined. In addition, the influence
of melt refining, structure, and superheat on the alloy properties were explored. In
the field of casting alloys, Zhou and Zeng [20] used mathematical modeling and
hydraulic simulation experiments to study the change of free surface of liquid during
filling. They also used the method to examine the influence of external pressure field
on the solidification process and the influence of casting process parameters on the
temperature field in the counter gravity casting and the adjusted pressure casting
of aluminum alloys. Li et al. [21] have carried out a lot of research in the field
of counter gravity casting of large aluminum alloy and magnesium alloy castings.
They have made important progress in liquid and semi-solid forming, solidification
theory of multi-component and multi-phase alloys, counter gravity casting equip￾ment, and the technology of large complex thin-walled structure parts. Liu et al.1 Introduction 15
[22] have performed considerable research in the field of non-equilibrium solidi￾fication, directionally solidified structures, and ultra-fine structures of superalloys,
established the theoretical framework of dendrite transformation, and proposed the
idea of controlling casting porosity using fine-grained casting.
Numerous research works on phase field simulation of dendrite growth have also
been carried out in China. Zhao et al. [23] studied the quantitative influence of
undercooling and temperature on the coupling coefficient, anisotropy coefficient,
and other parameters in the phase field model. They also discussed the evolution of
dendrite morphology and studied the dependence of grain morphology on the growth
rate and phase field parameters. The criteria of the dendrite branching during growth
and the initiation of the lateral branching were also analyzed. Following the phase
field model of the coupled flow field originally proposed by Chen et al. [24] used
the finite difference method to implement the model numerically and was able to
simulate the solidification process of pure metals in 2D, through which the influence
of different convection velocities on the dendrite growth had been shown. They also
used the phase field model coupled with the flow field developed by Lan and Shih
to simulate the dendrite growth process and the solute field of a Ni–Cu binary alloy
under isothermal conditions; the SIMPLE algorithm was employed in the simulation
to calculate the pressure field, showing the asymmetric growth of dendrites under
convection. Chen et al. [25] used an adaptive finite element method to solve the
governing equations of the phase field model, which allowed for simulating the
evolution of a single equiaxed crystal in undercooled nickel melt under the condition
of large calculation domain and thin interface layer, rendering the simulation result
of the phase field model more relevant to the real process. Wang et al. [26] used phase
field simulation coupled with solute field to study the influence of solute diffusion
coefficient of the solid phase Ds on the dendrite morphology and microsegregation
during dendrite growth of a Ni–Cu binary alloy.
(2) Formation mechanism and control of solidification defects
In the mushy zone at the front of solid-liquid interface, the interdendritic micro￾scopic flow has a great influence on the dendrite growth, solidification microstruc￾ture, and composition distribution. Research has focused on the relationship between
the microscopic melt flow and the dendrite arm spacings as well as the liquid phase
fraction, targeting at establishing a finite element model to predict the location, size,
and quantity of interdendritic micro shrinkage [27]. In addition to using transparent
alloys to simulate the interdendritic flow condition and the interaction with dendrites,
external physical fields are usually used to control the flow characteristics in order to
reduce segregation, break high-order dendrites, and refine the solidification structure.
Nastac and Stefanescu [28] studied the solidification kinetics of IN718 alloy
casting and proposed a predictive model of the formation and evolution of harmful
phases such as NbC/Laves. Their results showed that the solidification process has a
significant impact on the distribution and microsegregation of carbon in Laves phase,
element redistribution, and high-temperature mechanical properties. Knorovsky et al.
[29] found that the element segregation during the solidification of IN718 could16 B. Sun et al.
promote the γ/Laves and γ/MC eutectic structure. The work of Whitesell and Over￾felt [30] showed that the insufficient filling in the solidification process would result
in a large tensile stress in the mushy zone, which was released through the plastic
deformation of the dendrite network and the nucleation of microporosities in the
interdendritic liquid. According to the tensile test and thermodynamic calculation of
IN718 alloy in the mushy zone, it has been shown that the non-uniform deformation
and stress concentration caused by high strain rate can lead to fracture at a level of
low strain. The formation mechanism of porosity caused by stress in liquid phase is
also identified and the corresponding stress threshold values under different strain
rates are obtained as well. Penya et al. [31] used a Bayesian network method to
establish a model for the formation of microporosity and product quality control in
the process of investment casting.
Studies on solidification defects in superalloys have been carried out by North￾western Polytechnic University, Institute of Metal Research CAS, Nanjing University
of Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and other research insti￾tutes in China, mainly focusing on the metallurgical quality control of master alloys,
optimization of process parameters such as cooling rate and pouring temperature,
application of electromagnetic stirring, and addition of refiners for grain refinement.
In terms of structure control of high-temperature materials, the group led by Zhuangqi
Hu from the Institute of Metal Research CAS has carried out research on the opti￾mization of microstructure and properties of nickel-base and cobalt-base superalloys
since 1980s. Minggao Yan and Chunxiao Cao at Beijing Institute of Aeronautical
Materials have carried out intensive studies on the high temperature structural mate￾rials, in particular, with regard to the microstructure, strengthening mechanism, and
superplasticity theory of titanium alloys; nevertheless, there are very few of works on
the solidification structure and defect control of large-sized superalloy and titanium
alloy castings.
The study of the group led by Zhuangqi Hu focused on the microstructure and
properties of K465, IN718, and other alloys, as well as on the influence of casting
process on the microstructure and properties. In particular, for a given cast superalloy
of K417G, the influence of the size effect on the microstructure and properties of cast￾ings was documented, and important progress had been made in the turbocharger
and other parts for aeroengines. Chen et al. [32] studied the influence of casting
process parameters such as solidification rate on the formation tendency of micro￾porosity, composition segregation, microstructure, and property stability of Inconel
718C alloy. The results showed that as the solidification cooling rate was decreasing,
the tendency of forming microporosity decreased and the stability of alloy rupture life
increased, whereas the grain size increased and the average rupture life decreased.
Xiong et al. [33] studied the effect of microstructure refinement of K4169 alloy ingot
on shrinkage porosity and element segregation. Their results suggested that the lower
the casting temperature was, the smaller the length of primary dendrite axis and the
secondary dendrite arm spacing were; meanwhile, the fraction of equiaxed grains in
the casting was increased up to 90%, and the shrinkage porosity and the segregation
of major elements in the casting were reduced, with, however, the size, quantity, and
morphology of MC carbides and Laves phase showing little changes before and after1 Introduction 17
grain refinement. Wang et al. [34] showed that the lower the cooling rate was, the
more significant the degree of segregation of Nb and Mo in the solidified structure of
IN718C were. Tang et al. [35] studied the fine grain casting process of superalloys
and its effect on fatigue life, of which the results showed that 100% fine grain castings
could be obtained by properly controlling the shell and pouring temperatures, with
the low-cycle fatigue life of castings being increased by 2–3 times.
In conclusion, although some researches have been carried out in the field of
solidification structure control and defect suppression for high temperature structural
materials in China, there is little systematic studies on the mechanism of defect
formation of large-scale superalloy castings, in particular, in terms of the formation
mechanism and the method of suppressing defects due to the distinctive “large size
effect”, “thin wall effect” and “variable cross-section effect” of large-scale castings.
(3) Dimensional accuracy control of castings
The tolerance analysis and dimension control method of complex systems in preci￾sion casting are becoming a new trend of academic research both domestically and
abroad. In general, the precision forming process of large castings is very compli￾cated. There are certain errors at each individual step of the entire process, such as
mold design and processing, wax pattern pressing and assembly, shell coating and
baking, melt filling and solidification, and mold removal and casting post-treatment.
The traditional “trial and error” method to achieve the dimensional accuracy and
deformation control of large-scale castings can only ensure that the accuracy of a
certain step and/or a specific local structure may meet the requirements, but cannot
guarantee the accuracy of the entire casting, which inevitably leads to a high cost and
long processing time. Therefore, it is urgent to establish relevant theories to predict
and control the size deviation and deformation in large castings, such that a system
of accurate processing and dimension control can be established for the complete
casting process of large castings.
The deformation and size deviation of wax pattern are the primary factors that
cause the precision out of casting tolerance. The dimension control of wax pattern
is the first step in both theoretical research and production practice. Bonilla et al.
[36] reported the numerical simulation results of wax pattern pressing process based
on the solid expansion/contraction theory and heat conduction theory and was able
to establish a model of wax pattern accuracy according to the thermophysical prop￾erties of wax pattern materials, molding characteristics, and wax pressing process
parameters. Sabau et al. [37], on the basis of the thermophysical and thermomechan￾ical properties of the wax itself, focused on the rheological properties of the wax
during the pressing process and constructed the constitutive equation of wax pattern
deformation. These studies represent some of the pioneering works on the pressing
process and quality control of wax pattern; nevertheless, most of the cases in ques￾tion are wax patterns with relatively small sizes and simple shapes. For the large
wax pattern system with large areas, thin walls, abrupt sections, and other structural
features, the mechanism of deformation and dimensional deviation, together with
the corresponding tolerance design and prediction, have not been reported so far.18 B. Sun et al.
The manufacturing process of ceramic shell is another factor that affects the
dimension accuracy of castings. Although there are many new materials and tech￾nologies for ceramic shell, there are few reports on the study of shell size accuracy
control. The influence of the shell on the casting size and other errors is mostly
coupled with the melt casting process. While most of the previous studies had focused
on the simulation of the heat transfer between the shell and the liquid metal, they
relied only on the heat transfer coefficient between the shell and the metal mate￾rial and thus could not simulate the final dimensional accuracy of the casting. Song
et al. [38] used a 3D nonlinearly coupled thermo-mechanical model to analyze the
influence of the shell on the dimensional accuracy of the casting during the casting
process, and the simulation and analysis results were well verified by experiments.
Following the existing studies, Rafique et al. [39] established the heat conduction
model of shell and melt in the process of filling and solidification using the standard
heat transfer equation containing the heat transfer coefficients of all materials, which
was previously used to predict the dimensional error of casting in the process of
pouring. However, reports are still missing on systematic theoretical studies of the
interaction between ceramic shell and melt as well as the relationship between the
ceramic shell and the special structure of large-scale castings in investment casting.
With regard to controlling the dimension accuracy of castings, the domestic
factory mainly relies on the empirical data of small and medium-sized castings. The
relevant researches mainly focus on the accuracy control of wax pattern and shell,
including the analysis of the influence of pressing mold, pattern material and pattern
making process parameters on the quality of wax pattern, putting forward measures
to improve the quality of wax pattern, and optimizing the binder performance, refrac￾tory performance, and shell making process parameters in the manufacturing process
of mold shell. Lin et al. [40] proposed a nonlinear error analysis model considering
the coupling effect of the part shape error and material error, developed a complex
system error analysis software, and applied it in the fields of automobile, aircraft,
and train. Generally speaking, however, the research on the error analysis method of
complex system and the principle of casting dimension control have not been widely
carried out in the field of investment casting.
(4) Patent analysis of investment casting of superalloys in China
In total, 172 patents were identified in the database of China from 1990 to 2020 when
using “superalloy” and “casting” as the key words (Fig. 1.2).
According to these search results, the total number of patents in the field of super￾alloy investment casting is relatively small in China. Nevertheless, the number of
patent applications has been increasing since 2005. From the perspective of distri￾bution, they are mainly concentrated in metallurgy, chemical industry, and other
relevant industries. The patent holders include Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Insti￾tute of Metal Research CAS, Central Iron and Steel Research Institute, etc. Among
these patents, there are a number of patents for “process” and “method” of super￾alloy investment casting, such as “a vacuum traveling wave electromagnetic refining1 Introduction 19
Fig. 1.2 Distribution of patent applications for superalloy casting in China from 1985 to 2012
device for superalloy investment casting”, “a grain refiner for casting superalloy and
a method to use it in superalloy investment casting”, “a pressure regulating precision
casting device for complex thin wall superalloy castings”, and “a precision casting
method for complex thin wall superalloy castings”, etc.
(5) Patent analysis of investment casting of superalloys in the world
Using the SooPAT search tool, the patents of 99 countries were searched using
“nickel, superalloy, casting, engine” as the key words, with a result showing a total
of 1580 patents found. The top 10 applicants are shown in Table 1.1, which shows
that General Electric (GE, US) has applied for 453 patents, accounting for 35.98%
of the total number of patents. GE is the world leader in the aviation engine industry,
and other top companies include United Technologies Corp., Howmet Res Corp.,
Siemens, PCC, etc.
Table 1.1 indicates that most of the relevant patents are from the United States,
Japan, Russia, and China. In particular, the number of patents is large in the United
States and Russia, both of which are leading countries in aircraft engines. In terms of
Table 1.1 Top ten applicants of patents related to superalloy casting
Applicant name Application number Percentage (%)
1. GEN ELECTRIC 453 35.98
2. UNITED TECHNOLOGIES CORP 201 15.97
3. Howmet RES CORP 64 5.08
4. HONEYWELL INT INC 35 2.78
5. SIEMENS WESTINGHOUSE POWER 28 2.22
6. Howmet CORP 22 1.75
7. PCC AIRFOILS INC 17 1.35
8. ROLLS ROYCE PLC 15 1.19
9. SIEMENS AG 15 1.19
10. SIEMENS POWER GENERATION INC 14 1.1120 B. Sun et al.
the content, most of the patents are focused on welding, coating, single crystal, and
alloy smelting, whereas no patents for the development technology of large complex
thin-walled castings have been found.
In other words, in order to achieve breakthroughs in the precision forming of
high-temperature material castings for large passenger aircraft engines, China must
rely on independent innovation to establish its own research platform and form a
development strategy with independent intellectual property rights.
1.4.3 Quality and Reliability Inspection of Large Complex
Thin-Walled Castings
Usually, the conventional inspection method for castings can ensure that the appear￾ance, shape, surface quality, alloy composition, and mechanical properties of cast￾ings can meet the requirements. However, there are many factors during the casting
process, e.g. the uncertainty of internal quality and the formation of defects (e.g.,
blowhole, inclusion, precipitated phase, porosity, and hot cracking), which can seri￾ously affect the performance and service safety of castings and is especially impor￾tant for large passenger aircraft engine castings. At present, the internal quality
analysis methods of castings mainly include ultrasonic inspection methods, fluo￾rescent magnetic powder detection methods, X-ray photography detection methods,
and industrial CT. Among them, the X-ray photography method has relatively high
accuracy and thus has been widely used.
With the development of high-energy X-ray industrial CT technology, industrial
CT has gradually become an effective way of non-destructive testing of internal
defects for large-scale components, and is currently being widely used in aerospace,
aviation, weapons, nuclear power, machinery manufacturing, and so on. Neverthe￾less, the spatial resolution of the aforementioned inspection methods are quite limited
(0.1 mm for ultrasound, 0.2 mm for X-ray photography, 0.03 mm for CT), and hence
the composition and type of bulk defects cannot be determined accurately.
With the progress in material science and the development of research techniques,
it gradually becomes clear that the microporosity, inclusions, and composition of fine
precipitates in castings are in fact closely related to the mechanical properties of mate￾rials, such as the high-temperature creep, stress rupture, and fatigue. The difficulty
is that casting defects cannot be accurately detected by the non-destructive testing
methods mentioned previously. Apparently, there is an urgent need to understand the
size and spatial distribution of porosities and inclusions, as well as the composition
and properties of precipitates, in order to determine the metallurgical quality of the
casting and the resulting impact on service. Furthermore, most of the alloys used in
aircraft engine castings (such as Ti-6Al-4 V and nickel-base superalloys) are poly￾crystalline multiphase materials, which implies that the properties of different phases
should be significantly different due to the various crystal orientations. In addition,
the deformation of polycrystalline multiphase materials depends on the interaction1 Introduction 21
of grains with different orientations, as well as the anisotropy associated with the
different phases. Moreover, the strain distribution and tension–compression asym￾metry in hardening, which are due to differences in intergranular or interphase elastic
modulus and ductility, can have a major impact on the high-temperature creep and
stress rupture properties of alloys. Therefore, clarifying the strain process of poly￾crystalline multiphase materials is another key to ensuring the metallurgy of aircraft
engine castings in order to improve the service safety.
Recently, the rapid development of synchrotron radiation technique has driven
the fast development of the relevant researches. For example, Puncreobutr et al. [41]
from the UK have thoroughly studied the morphology and evolution of defects in
bulk aluminum alloy specimens using high energy X-ray, as shown in Fig. 1.3.
It can be seen that high energy X-ray imaging and diffraction make it possible to
accurately and effectively analyze the 3D distribution of casting defects before and
after failure and to better evaluate the performance of aircraft engine components.
In addition, Korsunsky et al. [42] from Oxford University utilized the energy￾dispersive X-ray diffraction setup at the high energy white-beam synchrotron beam￾line I12-JEEP at DIAMOND Light Source to study the four-point bent beam Ti￾6Al-4 V samples. Diffraction patterns from the bent polycrystalline Ti-6Al-4 V
samples were collected using a newly designed 23-cell “horseshoe” detector and
then interpreted using Pawley refinement to determine elastic strain. According to
this important report, the quantitative data of the tension–compression strain asym￾metry of the polycrystalline Ti-6Al-4 V relative to the grain orientation was finally
obtained, which provided key data for analyzing the service performance. Hofmann
et al. [43], also from Oxford University, used the high-energy transmission polychro￾matic beam Laue diffraction setup developed at beamline ID15A at ESRF to analyze
the crystal structure of pure Ni. This novel finding demonstrated two methods based
on the high-energy X-ray diffraction for analyzing the lattice orientation and strain
distribution in the grain size range of bulk polycrystalline alloys. Using the beamline
ID15B at ESRF, Leo Prakash D. G. et al. from the University of Manchester studied
the variation of strain of bulk Ti-6Al-4 V alloy under the tension–compression load
with the sample size of 40 mm × 40 mm × 22 mm. French scientist le Graverend J.
B. studied the effects of fine precipitation on non-isothermal creep and creep-fatigue
behavior, with the sample sizes of 14 mm × 6 mm × 2 mm.
As one of the top three aircraft engine manufacturers in the world, Rolls-Royce
plays a very important role in the development and manufacture of aircraft engines.
Since the establishment of the British national light source, i.e. DIAMOND Light
Source in 2007, Rolls-Royce has cooperated with it to build a time-resolved beamline,
namely I12-JEEP, for in-situ real-time imaging of defects and diffraction analysis
of stress–strain in key aircraft engine components. After the beamline was put into
use at the end of 2010, it first analyzed and tested the engine of the Boeing 787
Dreamliner.
With the construction and application of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility
(SSRF), the related research on high-energy synchrotron radiation has been grad￾ually carried out in China. Taking the construction of SSRF Phase-II beamline
project as an opportunity, the development of China’s own high spatial resolution and22 B. Sun et al.
Fig. 1.3 Comparison of 2D and 3D solidification defects (porosity and intermetallic compounds)
in a bulk aluminum alloy [41]: a digitized 2D optical micrograph of porosity and intermetallic
compounds in an A319 aluminum alloy; b true 3D morphology of the same sample; c equiv￾alent radius, Ravg; d maximum length, Lmax; e percentage porosity, P% comparison between
metallographic (2D) and tomographic (3D) analysis for the same alloy; (f) x–y–z bounding box
measurement of the intermetallic from (b); g average size of intermetallic compounds
time-resolved in-situ real-time analyses on defects, stress–strain relationships, and
high-temperature creep performance have become an important goal of this major
infrastructure construction.1 Introduction 23
1.5 Technical Development Trend of Domestic and Abroad
1.5.1 Virtual Manufacturing of Large Complex Thin-Walled
Castings
Nowadays, the Virtual Manufacturing technology has allowed that the actual cast￾ings can be produced more quickly and economically and hence made companies
much more competitive in the market. In recent years, the Virtual Manufacturing
technology has been increasingly chased by users, resulting in a much rapid devel￾opment. When being used in mould manufacturing and rapid model preparation,
Virtual Manufacturing has currently evolved into the following trends.
(1) Integration
The design of the mould directly using the 3D feature modeling system has enabled
virtual assembly and automatic inspection of the various parts of the mould. In
addition, it is possible to complete the planning and machining simulation of the pass
and automatically generate computer programs to quickly produce casting moulds
of high quality. Adopting this method, the design speed of mould development can
be greatly accelerated, which allows the designer to be freed largely from the heavy
computational work and focus more on more creative works.
(2) Rapid Prototyping
Rapid Prototyping has promoted rapid creation of casting entities, which can signif￾icantly shorten the new product development cycles and hence reduce the corre￾sponding budget. Together with CNC machining, casting, metal cold spray, and
silicone moulds, Rapid Prototyping has become a powerful tool for manufacturing
modern models, moulds, and parts. The effective combination of Investment Casting
and Rapid Prototyping has achieved lower costs with higher efficiencies of produc￾tion and has delivered the purpose of individualization, diversity, and rapidity of
casting production.
(3) Concurrent Engineering
Concurrent Engineering is an effective method to minimize design errors at the
beginning of mould design, taking into account all aspects of mould processing,
i.e., assembly, usage, and waste disposal. Owing to the continuous development of
remote design and manufacturing technologies, off-site design and manufacture of
casting parts has become more and more feasible and convenient. Remote design and
manufacturing technologies can give full play to the resources of different countries
and regions to optimize design and manufacturing conditions.24 B. Sun et al.
(4) Computer Detection and Control of Casting Forming Process
By means of computer detection and control technology, the fluidity of molten metal,
casting performance, and the working state of the main and auxiliary machines
of the moulding line can be effectively detected. In addition, on-line monitoring,
integration, and intelligence can also be realized in the foundry industry.
1.5.2 Manufacturing Technology of Large and Complex
Thin-Walled Investment Castings
As the aircraft engine performance and reliability continue to improve, the structure
of critical hot-end components has also changed drastically. Significant changes are
developing towards not only the entirety, thin wall, and hollow direction, but also
gradually towards the structural function integration of structural bearing and gas
guiding. All these require that the components should possess higher stress-bearing
capacity and dimensional precision, better dimensional stability, as well as surface
roughness, better fatigue performance, and service life. Undoubtedly, these new
requirements proposed higher requirements for near-net-shape investment casting
system of key materials, e.g., nickel-base superalloys.
The comparison of the capability in manufacturing large investment castings of
superalloys between China and other countries is shown in Table 1.2, indicating
a huge gap between China and other leading countries. Taking the selection of
casting process as an example, in order to avoid misrun defects in thin-walled parts
of castings, centrifugal casting technology has typically been adopted with large￾scale vacuum centrifugal casting equipment being constructed in China. In contrast,
the gravity casting has been generally solved and used in other leading countries
Table 1.2 Comparison of manufacturing capability of large investment castings of nickel-base
superalloys between China and abroad
China Abroad
Casting size ~1 m ~2 m
Minimum wall thickness 1.8 mm 1.5 mm
Casting precision Tolerance: CT6; surface
roughness: Ra = 3.2
Tolerance: CT5; surface
roughness: Ra = 1.6
Single casting weight <500 kg 2000 kg
Casting process Centrifugal and gravity
casting
Gravity casting
Alloy selection K4169 IN718, GTD222, RENE 220,
Inconel 939
Service temperature 650 °C 650–850 °C1 Introduction 25
through the fundamental research of filling behavior and solidification characteris￾tics of superalloys. The latter method avoids not only technical problems such as alloy
segregation, uneven organization, and precise positioning of the centrifugal casting,
but also the large investment associated with the centrifugal casting equipment.
Since 2000, in order to further reduce the weight of castings and improve their
long-term service performance, researches have been performed outside of China on
the complete filling of ultra-large-area thin-walled castings and the control of micro￾defects in large-scale castings. In 2010, the world’s top large-scale aircraft engine
investment casting manufacturer, the American PCC company, has begun to explore
the investment process of ultra-thin large-scale TRF casting with a minimum wall
thickness down to 1 mm. Up to now, the current technology maturity has reached
6–7 grades, providing a technical basis for lightweight design and manufacturing of
the next generation of high performance aircraft engines.
Over the years, foreign countries have always being imposing strict technical
blockades on China’s investment casting technology and equipment for large-scale
structural components, and the corresponding technical information has rarely been
publicly reported. With the support of the National Key Basic Research Project,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University has systematically studied the basic issues such as
the filling behavior and solidification structure control of large castings under multi￾field coupling, the formation mechanism and control method of casting defects of
large castings, the formation mechanism of errors in complex casting systems, and
the precision control of castings. In addition, the effects of alloy composition and
temperature on the melt structure and solidification behavior of high-temperature
alloys were preliminarily revealed. The technology of melt over-temperature treat￾ment and solidification structure control was developed, and the optimal design
scheme for casting system of large-scale gravity casting process was proposed. In
terms of material research, the criteria for microporosity and harmful brittle phase
formation of K4169 large castings were established and the typical defect map of the
TRF casting was preliminarily established, revealing the relationship among the char￾acteristic structure of large castings, defects, and mechanical properties. Moreover,
the error formation mechanism in the wax mould pressing process was revealed, and
the new high-performance back shell material and its preparation technology were
developed. In 2009, based on the above technical preparation, the TRF castings with
diameter of about 1.1 m and minimum wall thickness of about 2.2 mm were success￾fully manufactured, which made a breakthrough in the development of large turbine
rear casing castings in China. Since 2010, domestic manufacturers have been able to
produce integral precision castings of rear casing, which provides an important tech￾nical basis for lightweight design of aircraft engines in China. However, compared
with other leading countries, the domestic rear casing castings are still far behind on
the lightweight and long-term service performance. In particular, the homogeneity
of the microstructure in the whole casing is not good enough and the fatigue life
of different parts in the main bodies vary significantly, which can seriously affect
the stability and reliability. These problems imply that the overall casting process
technology is in urgent need of significant improvements. Meanwhile, the research
results also show that the gravity casting process can only guarantee the complete26 B. Sun et al.
filling of the area of 100 mm × 100 mm for the thin wall with a thickness of 1 mm.
Therefore, in order to manufacture larger and thinner casing castings, it is necessary
to explore new methods and processes.
The research institutes such as the University of Birmingham in the UK have
conducted in-depth studies on the new casting process. They compared the casting
process such as gravity casting and vacuum-assisted counter-gravity casting, and
found that these casting processes can significantly improve the material utilization
rate and the performance of castings. Anon of the British Investment Casting Trade
Association (BICTA) pointed out that counter-gravity casting used in the production
of aviation components has the potential to improve production efficiency and reduce
production costs, which is a technology worthy of promotion.
A foundry company, named American Metal Casting Technology, LLC., invented
a new counter-gravity low-pressure inert gas protective casting process (CLI) for
manufacturing nickel-base superalloy castings. The relevant patent was licensed to
the famous Hitchiner Company for aviation component production. Compared with
vacuum-melted and gravity-melted parts, the castings produced using this process
have a slight increase in oxygen content, but can still be controlled within 50 ppm,
and, more importantly, the tensile and fracture properties are in line with customer
requirements. Hitchiner has utilized this technology to produce castings of nickel￾base superalloys such as the IN718 turbine diffuser housing with a diameter of
889 mm and a height of 625 mm. In addition, Howmet produced titanium alloy cast￾ings with a maximum weight of 47 kg and a maximum size of nearly 900 mm using
a similar technology. The US has also formed a research center for counter-gravity
casting and control technologies, led by the University of Iowa and the University
of Tennessee, and has achieved technological leadership in the automatic control of
the casting process.
Compared with foreign countries, the research and application of superalloy
counter-gravity casting in China are still far behind. Figure 1.4 clearly shows the size
and weight range of large-scale superalloy castings that have been produced abroad
using counter-gravity casting. However, in China, the research on such technologies
has not been carried out effectively.
Furthermore, the introduction of the tolerance design concept into the error
analysis and control of the investment casting process has shown great potential
to promote the development of large-scale casting dimensional precision control
theory and technology. In the basic research of tolerance design of complex systems,
foreign researches mainly focus on modeling and predicting dimensional deviation of
complex manufacturing systems. In the past decade, the Oak Ridge National Labo￾ratory and the Edison Materials Technology Center have listed casting precision
control as a special research project.
In the early stage, error analysis of complex products was generally based on
multi-parameter linear system modeling. Among these, Gilbert used a linearized
dimensional deviation analysis model to study the cumulative effect of dimensional
tolerances during assembly. By the mid-1990s, the theory of error modeling based
on nonlinear systems began to receive widespread attention. Inoue et al. studied
the coupling effect between temperature, phase transition, and thermal stress in1 Introduction 27
Fig. 1.4 Comparison of superalloy counter-gravity casting technology
the temperature varying process together with phase transition, and established the
constitutive equation. In 1997, Hu first proposed the deviation flow theory to analyze
and predict the transmission mechanism of multiple deviation inputs throughout the
assembly process. Shi and Jin used the state space method in cybernetics to establish
a state equation describing the multi-process deviation transfer, which significantly
improved the control level of manufacturing precision.
At present, the analysis of the formation causes of solidification defects of large
castings ignores the formation dynamic mechanism of solidification defects based on
the structural characteristics of castings and lacks in the necessary research methods
and in-depth studies on the mechanism and influence of the external force field on
solidification defects suppression. In fact, the structural characteristics would cause
large changes in the flow field, temperature field, and solute field. And there is an
interaction between the parameters of the solidification process and the formation of
defects, which cannot be ignored. In addition, a variety of force field effects cause
the solidification process under multi-field coupling to proceed away from equilib￾rium conditions, which may have a favorable effect on the regulation of solidification
structure and defects. It is expected that the solidification defects such as microp￾orosity may be suppressed effectively through vacuum pressurization or adjusted
pressure forming process and it is currently of great significance to carry out relevant
research in-depth.28 B. Sun et al.
1.5.3 Quality and Reliability Inspection of Large-Scale
Castings
With the advancement of science and technology, some countries began to study
the use of digital X-ray technology instead of the traditional X-ray film exposure
technology. In early 2008, the US Air Force organized a number of companies
including aircraft manufacturers Boeing, Lockheed, aircraft engine suppliers GE,
R&R, PW, Honeywell, aviation castings manufacturers Howmet, PCC, etc., to offi￾cially study the application of digital X-ray in aviation castings. After more than
a year of hard work, the preparation of reference standards for digital images was
completed. Simultaneously, high-energy industrial CT has also become the main
technique of non-destructive testing of large castings.
In addition, the research platform based on the fast imaging and in-situ analysis of
the synchrotron radiation technology has been developed rapidly in order to reveal the
stress and strain distribution of castings over the past few years. Many research results
have been achieved in the study of bulk engineering materials and components, the
detection of internal information of components, and basic research fields in metal￾lurgy/crystallography. Four internationally renowned synchrotron radiation sources,
i.e., SPring-8 of Japan, ESRF of Europe, APS and SSRL of the US, have all built
high-energy engineering beamlines for engineering applications. For example, the
ESRF ID15 beamline is designed for industrial materials and components research,
using superconducting Wiggler and Undulator composite light sources, X-ray photon
energy up to 750 keV. This beamline includes two experimental stations: ID15A
can realize energy dispersive diffraction, high energy micro-diffraction, and in-situ
dynamic imaging, mainly applied to engineering materials, material surfaces, and
interfaces hidden in materials, and is used for material engineering, metallurgy, and
aerospace engineering; ID15B can realize high-resolution angular diffraction and
high-energy scattering research, and is equipped with a high-temperature and high￾pressure gas loading system, which can provide in-situ research such as gas–solid and
liquid–solid catalytic reactions. The I12 beamline station under construction in the
UK DIAMOND Light Source is also specially designed for engineering materials,
which uses a superconducting Wiggler light source with an X-ray photon energy
range of 50–150 keV. It contains two experimental stations: EH1 and EH2. Opened
in September 2009, EH1 is located in the experiment hall and mainly used for diffrac￾tion and imaging research. EH2 is located outside the experimental hall and provides
space for large-scale engineering and processing experiments. It is very suitable
for analyzing high-density materials such as the in-situ studies of large industrial
materials and aerospace engine components. Except the 5 beam lines dedicated to
industrial applications, the industrial sections have built more than 4 beamlines at
SPring-8 light source in Japan. It is mainly used in the development of new medicines,
photoelectric materials, structure of engineering materials, stress measurement, and
so on. APS, NSLS, and other light sources in the US also have a number of high￾energy beamlines for material research. The NSLS X17 beamline consists of five1 Introduction 29
experimental stations. The experimental methods include high-energy diffraction,
scattering, and so on, mainly used for material science.
Considering the rapid development of synchrotron radiation technology abroad
as described previously, it is thusly imperative to build a high-energy, high spatial
resolution, and high time resolution engineering harness with high-precision support
platform and several analytical means to facilitate the research on aircraft engine
materials, component preparation technology, and service safety evaluation platform
in China.
1.6 Focuses of Each Chapter and Main Issues to Be Solved
Chapter 2 focuses mainly on the design of investment casting process for large
castings, including the gating system design and optimization. Chapter 3 is mainly
about the wax pattern preparation process for large complex thin-walled castings
via the physical properties test of wax and finite element simulation. Chapter 4
introduces the selection, manufacturing, and mechanic properties testing methods of
shell mould systems. Chapter 5 discusses the method of composition optimization
based on the effect of alloying elements on the melt structure and thermophysical
properties, explores the filling law of castings using hydraulic simulation, and repro￾duces the evolution law of microstructures in thin-walled and variable cross-section
positions of castings using synchrotron radiation technology. In Chap. 6, aiming at
the defect issue of large castings, the non-destructive testing methods and related
optimization measures are first introduced. Then the structural effects of defects are
constructed based on the anatomy of large castings and the prediction criteria for the
formation of microporosity and Laves phase are established as well, together with
the optimization principle of gating system being proposed based on microscopic
defect suppression. Finally, the repair method and repair process of large castings
are introduced. In Chap. 7, targeting at the problem of deformation and oversize of
large castings, the transmission laws of comprehensive errors in the whole process
of wax mould preparation, shell mould preparation, and filling and solidification are
investigated. Meanwhile, the robust control method of multi-process parameters and
the technology of error source detection and traceability are studied. The technology
has formed the tolerance design and process parameter control system method for
dimensional precision control. It has also constructed the technical system of error
detection, evaluation, diagnosis, and control in precision casting process, and has
established a new theory of error simulation of large castings. New technologies
and methods for quantitative analysis, process optimization, accurate detection, and
rapid diagnosis of large casting errors have been proposed as well. In Chap. 8,
to tackle the formability problem of thin-walled complex castings, a new adjusted
pressure casting equipment for superalloy has been developed, and the influence of
adjusted pressure casting process on thin-wall filling and solidification microstruc￾ture is studied. Finally, the ultra-thin-walled complex castings represented by floating
wall tiles are trial-produced by adjusted pressure casting method.30 B. Sun et al.
References
1. B.Y. Tu, M. Zhao, T.S. Shang et al., Advanced structure and key manufacturing technology of
aeroengine. Aeronaut. Manuf. Technol. 7, 53–56 (2014)
2. X.S. Xie, The development and application of high temperature materials in China. Mater.
Mech. Eng. 1, 2–8 (2004)
3. W.D. Huang, Challenge and Countermeasures for Materials Forming Technology Induced
by Development of Advanced Aircraft and Aeroengine (CSAA Science and Technique Youth
Forum, Discovery, Innovation and Communication, 2004).
4. C.Z. Li, Investment casting. Res. Stud. Foundry Equip. 2, 73–75 (1984)
5. Z.G. Lv, History and development trend of investment casting industry in China. Foundry 4,
347–356 (2012)
6. R. Williams, H. Richard, Global investment casting market conditions beginning to stabilize
after 2009 lows. Incast 1, 8–9 (2011)
7. D. Pan, Q.Y. Xu, B.C. Liu,Multi-scale modeling of solidification process of Ni-based superalloy
investment castings. Chin. J. Nonferrous Metals 20(2), 329–338 (2010)
8. H. Yan, Y.D. Zhang, B.K. Wang et al., Numerical analysis of casting deformation in case shell
on aeroengine. Dual Use Technol. Prod. 4, 41–43 (2009)
9. D. Zhang, W.H. Zhang, F.G. Li, Application of shape optimization based on numerical
simulation in feeder design. Foundry 53(2), 129–132 (2004)
10. X. Xue, C.M. Yin, B.D. Zhou et al., Prediction of shrinkage defects in a third class moving
turbine blade by invested casting. Foundry 51(4), 228–231 (2002)
11. D.Z. Li, S.F. Su, J.Q. Wang et al., The shrinkage porosity functions and its application in IN738
castings. Foundry 6, 13–17 (1998)
12. M. Faraji, J.P. Wright, L. Katgerman, In-situ observation of the nucleation kinetics and the
mechanism of grain refinement in Al–Si alloys (part I). Mater. Lett. 64(9), 1016–1018 (2010)
13. A. Bogno, H. Nguyen-Thi, G. Reinhart et al., Growth and interaction of dendritic equiaxed
grains: In situ characterization by synchrotron X-ray radiography. Acta Mater. 61(4), 1303–
1315 (2013)
14. O. Shuleshova, W. Loser, D. Holland-Moritz et al., Solidification and melting of high temper￾ature materials: in situ observations by synchrotron radiation J. Mater. Sci. 47(11), 4497–4513
(2012)
15. H. Yasuda, T. Nagira, M. Yoshiya et al., In-situ observation of peritectic solidification in Sn–Cd
and Fe–C alloys, in 3rd International Conference on Advanced in Solidification Processes, 27,
2012
16. N.S. Husseini, D.P. Kumah, J.Z. Yi et al., Mapping single-crystal dendritic microstructure and
defects in nickel-base superalloys with synchrotron radiation. Acta Mater. 56(17), 4715–4723
(2008)
17. Q. Dong, J. Zhang, J. Dong et al., Anaxial columnar dendrites in directional
solidificationofanAl-15wt.% Cualloy.Mater. Lett. 65(21–22), 3295–3297 (2011)
18. Q. Dong, J. Zhang, J.F. Dong et al., In situ observation of columnar-to-equiaxed transition in
directional solidification using synchrotron X-radiation imaging technique. Mater. Sci. Eng. A
530, 271–276 (2011)
19. Z.Q. Hu, Y.J. Kang, J.S. Zhang et al., Effect of trace elements on directionally solidified IN738
alloy (development of DZ38G alloy). J. Mater. Eng. S1, 102–108 (1992)
20. J.M. Zeng, Y.H. Zhou, A new forming technology for aeronautical castings: adjusted pressure
precision casting process. Aviat. Maintenance Eng. 10, 18–19 (1997)
21. X.L. Li, Q.T. Hao, X.Q. Jie, Equipment technology in low pressure casting for large magnesium
alloy components. Rare Metal Mater. Eng. 43(3), 703–706 (2014)
22. L. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Shen et al., Advances in directional solidification techniques of superalloys.
Mater. China 29(7), 1–9 (2010)
23. D.P. Zhao, T. Jing, B.C. Liu, Influence of phase-field parameters on the dendrite morphology.
Acta Metallrugica Sinica 39(8), 813–816 (2003)1 Introduction 31
24. Z. Chen, C.L. Chen, L.M. Hao, Effect of phase field parameters on the dendritic growth in a
forced convection. Rare Metal Mater. Eng. 7, 1209–1213 (2009)
25. Y. Chen, X.H. Kang, D.Z. Li, Phase-field modeling of free dendritic growth with adaptive finite
element method. Acta Physica Sinica 58(1), 390–398 (2009)
26. Z.P. Wang, R.Z. Xiao, C.S. Zhu et al., Phase-field simulation of binary alloy during directional
solidification. Rare Metal Mater. Eng. S2, 369–373 (2006)
27. K.D. Carlson, C. Beckermann, Prediction of shrinkage pore volume fraction using a
dimensionless Niyama criterion. Metall. Mater. Trans. A 40(1), 163–175 (2009)
28. L. Nastac, D.M. Stefanescu, Computational modeling of NbC/laves formation in INCONEL
718 equiaxed castings. Metall. Mater. Trans. A 28(7), 1582–1587 (1997)
29. G.A. Knorovsky, M.J. Cieslak, T.J. Headley et al., INCONEL 718: a solidification diagram.
Metall. Trans. A 20(10), 2149–2158 (1989)
30. H.S. Whitesell, R.A. Overfelt, Influence of solidification variables on the microstructure,
macrosegregation, and porosity of directionally solidified Mar-M247. Mater. Sci. Eng. A
318(1–2), 264–276 (2001)
31. Y.K. Penya, P.G. Bringas, A. Zabala, Advanced fault prediction in high-precision foundry
production, in 6th IEEE International Conference on Industrial Informatics (2008), pp. 1570–
1575
32. W. Chen, C.C. Li, H Li et al., Effect of casting parameters on mechanical properties of a
superalloy. Foundry (9), 871–874, 2005
33. Y.H. Xiong, A.M. Yang, P.J. Li et al., Effects of pouring temperature and refiners on
microstructures of superalloy K4169. J. Aeronaut. Mater. 21(4), 5–8 (2001)
34. L. Wang, J.X. Dong, C.Q. Li, Effect of cooling rate on the segregation and Rayleigh number
of IN718 during solidification. J. Univ. Sci. Technol. Beijing 29(12), 1222–1227 (2007)
35. X. Tang, F.X. Liu, A.D. Yang et al., Investigation of K417 fine grain casting thermal parameters.
J. Mater. Eng. 7, 23–25 (1995)
36. W. Bonilla, S.H. Masood, P. Iovenitti, An investigation of wax patterns for accuracy
improvement in investment cast parts. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 18(5), 348–356 (2001)
37. A.S. Sabau, S. Viswanathan, Material properties for predicting wax pattern dimensions in
investment casting. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 362(1–2), 125–134 (2003)
38. Y.H. Song, Y.N. Yan, R.J. Zhang et al., Three dimensional non-linear coupled thermo￾mechanical FEM analysis of the dimensional accuracy for casting dies in rapid tooling. Finite
Elem. Anal. Des. 38(1), 79–91 (2001)
39. M.M.A. Rafique, J. Iqbal, Modeling and simulation of heat transfer phenomena during
investment casting. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 52(7–8), 2132–2139 (2009)
40. Z.Q. Lin, X.M. Lai, S. Jin et al., Digital methods of complex product manufacturing precision
control and its development trend. J. Mech. Eng. 49(6), 103–113 (2013)
41. C. Puncreobutr, P.D. Lee, R.W. Hamilton et al., Quantitative 3D characterization of solidifica￾tion structure and defect evolution in Al alloys. JOM 64(1), 89–95 (2012)
42. A.M. Korsunsky, X. Song, F. Hofmann et al., Polycrystal deformation analysis by high energy
synchrotron X-ray diffraction on the I12 JEEP beamline at Diamond Light Source. Mater. Lett.
64(15), 1724–1727 (2010)
43. F. Hofmann, X. Song, T.S. Jun et al., High energy transmission micro-beam Laue synchrotron
X-ray diffraction. Mater. Lett. 64(11), 1302–1305 (2010)Chapter 2
Investment Casting Process Design
of Large-Size Superalloy Castings
Guoxiang Wang
2.1 Outline
2.1.1 The Applications of Large-Size Superalloy Investment
Castings
The performance of aeroengines is built on the delicate continuous rotatory struc￾ture, on which the main difficulty in production also centers. The advancing tactical
and technical targets of modern aircrafts require better aircraft engines, of which the
basic service characteristics includes high temperature, high pressure, high speed
and high reliability, durability, environment-friendly, and easy to maintenance. With
these harsh requirements, the aircraft engine has become the most complex and
sophisticated industrial product in human history [1]. Aeroengines are the deter￾mining factor of flexibility, reliability, economy, and environment-friendliness of the
aircraft, whose performance is the fundamental of aircraft development.
Superalloys are widely used in aerospace and aviation fields. They can be made
into turbine disks, turbine blades, and various other structural parts of the engine.
In addition, most large structural castings are made of superalloys. For example,
more than 30% (mass percentage) of the key components in modern aircraft engines
are made of IN718 [2] (similar to K4169). Nowadays, the most widely used super￾alloy castings are isometric superalloy castings under medium temperature. With the
help of new technology, the aviation industry aims to higher performance and lower
cost. Large thin-walled integrated castings have the advantages in terms of cost and
performance and have more applications other than assembly parts [3]. As the aero￾engine tends to be delicate and complex, the components will have more and more
multilayer thin-walls, narrow cavities and deep holes, and narrow slots structures.
In aeroengines, large-size investment castings such as nickel-base superalloy
rear case frames should withstand the driving force and all vibration loads of the
© Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
B. Sun et al., Precision Forming Technology of Large Superalloy Castings for Aircraft
Engines, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-6220-8_2
3334 G. Wang
engine. As a result, their quality directly affects the performance, life, and relia￾bility of aeroengines. Such castings usually have large sizes, complex structures,
and abrupt changes of cross-section, big thin-wall areas, and strict tolerances. With
the increasing performance of the aircraft, the thrust-to-weight ratio also should
be increased. The structure and materials of Key Hot End Components also have
great changes. For instance, integrated thin-walled and hollow structures are usually
used; the materials should have higher bearing capacity, better mechanical proper￾ties, dimensional stability, durability, and lower cost as well. These new demands
push a rapid development of large superalloy castings.
2.1.2 The Development of the Domestic and Abroad
Due to the big advantage of high precision and surface finish, the investment castings
require little machining.Only when some parts of the castings have very high require￾ments, they will need a little machining allowance, with some castings need certain
grinding or polishing allowance as well; in general, no machining is needed.Since
investment casting is a process with little or no allowance, it can save a lot of machine
tools and time and save raw materials. The other advantage is that this process can
produce complex castings with various alloys, especially superalloy castings. It is
very difficult to produce the thin wall hollow struts with streamline outline of the
turbine rear frame (TRF) of the jet engine. But these support plates can be quantity
producted with consistency use the investment casting process, even there is no stress
concentration of the tool marks after machining.
A series of technologies have been developed to make large complex thin-walled
integral superalloy castings [4–7]. The American companies, such as Hitchiner, PCC
and Howmet have produced a series of large thin-walled integral castings for GE
engines. The TRF castings for turbine were made of alloy IN718, with a thickness
1.25 ~ 1.75 mm and a size of 1.93 m and pouring metal weight of 2040 kg. In
addition to the large size and thin wall, the general linear tolerance of investment
castings is CT4-6, and some special linear tolerance can be up to CT3, while the
surface roughness is getting smaller and smaller down to Ra 0.8 μm.
Since the beginning of the twenty-first century, China’s aviation industry has been
developing rapidly, with various advanced aircrafts having been developed contin￾uously. However, in sharp contrast, China’s aeroengines have seriously dragged
the development of aircrafts. For a long period of time, a significant dependence
on purchasing foreign aircraft engines has posed a huge threat to China’s national
security, which has become one of the most urgent problems to solve.
Casting technology is one of the important bases of aeroengines. However, the
design, control, and casting process often rely on the experiential knowledge, which is
difficult to ensure casting quality, and the rejection ratio is high. Due to the technology
blockade, we have to develop these advance technologies ourselves. With the steady
accumulation of technology and continuous innovation and improvement, we have2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 35
to establish the investment casting technology system of the large complex thin-wall
castings with our own independent intellectual property rights.
2.1.3 The Process of Investment Casting
The process of investment casting includes pattern made of wax and assembled into
a tree, then coated with multiple layers of refractory material on the surface of the
pattern. After drying and curing, the mold is autoclaved and the pattern melt off, then
pours liquid metal into the roasted shell and obtains investment mold casting [8–10].
Normal process of investment casting follows the steps: mold preparation →
pattern → shell preparation → pattern meltout → roasting → pouring → cleaning
→ repair & grinding → qualified castings.
Figure 2.1 shows the process of large complex thin-wall investment castings,
virtually the same as the normal investment casting except for some special steps in
the process. According to different workplaces, the casting process can be roughly
divided into the following four sections:
1. pattern making (injection wax, pattern cleaning, pattern measurement, and
pattern assembly);
2. shell preparation (coating, autoclaved, roasting);
Qualified castings
Mold Pattern Pattern 
assemgly 
Slurry 
coating 
Stucco 
coating 
Autoclaved
Visual 
inspection
Riser cutting Shakeout Pouring Roasting 
Cleaning Composition 
test 
Surface 
grinding X-ray
Internal 
grinding 
Weld 
repairs 
Heat 
treatment
Performance 
measurement 
Dimension 
measurement 
Fluoroscopy
Fig. 2.1 The process of investment casting36 G. Wang
3. pouring (metal melting, pouring);
4. cleaning and measurement (shake out, riser cutting, blasting, grinding, measure￾ment).
The investment casting should start with the wax pattern that is exactly the same as
the required casting, it is necessary to prepare the mold to make pattern by injecting
wax. Normally the mold is made of steel or aluminum alloys, and sometimes the
mold can be made of easily fused gold, epoxy resin, gypsum, etc. with a small
batch of production. The cavity of the mold forms the shape of the pattern. The
mold can be made into horizontal parting, vertical parting, etc., according to the
complexity of the casting. The cores should be used if the pattern has internal cavity
or external geometric characteristics that are difficult to reject. The cores should be
used repeatedly with high strength, not easy to deformation, and easy to ensure the
size accuracy of pattern, they can be made of steel, aluminum alloys, and other metal.
Targeting at the lightweight, a large number of hollow and thin-walled castings are
produced, most of which have internal cavities with complex structure that cannot
be ejected from the mold. Thus, the only choice is the water-soluble core, which
can dissolute or collapse in the presence of water or acidified water. Ceramic cores
can be used in case of more complex and smaller cavities, such as hollow blades.
Before injecting wax, the core is put into the mold in advance, and the melted wax
is injected into the cavity of the mold. Then the pressure is maintained until the
wax is solidfied and the pattern can be ejected from the mold after cooling. It is
difficult to cast large-sized castings using the traditional investment casting. One of
the reasons is due to the capacity of the wax injection machine, which can not fill
the whole pattern successfully at one time. Shanghai Key Laboratory of Advanced
High temperature Materials and Precision Forming (Shanghai Jiao Tong University)
seperates the pattern into several parts. Patterns exceeding 1000 mm in size can be
divided into more than 10 pieces, which are then made separately. Later on, these
pieces of patterns are assembled into the complete pattern with the help of a specific
tool.We have produced the required pattern successfully use the 100 ton wax injection
machine.
The pattern workshop should be located in a room with constant temperature to
make sure the dimensional accuracy of the pattern.
After the pattern is ready, it is transferred to the shell making department, where
the casting mold is made. According to the different binder, there are ethyl silicate
shell, silica gel shell, and ethyl silicate-silica gel composite shell. The above shells
can make castings with small surface roughness and high dimensional accuracy,
but these materials are expensive, giving rise to high cost of the castings, such that
they are usually used only for superalloy castings. Due to the rough surface and
low dimensional accuracy, the sodium silicate bonded shell is seldom used for large
complex thin-wall castings.
Then the pattern assembly is first coated with binder, and then coated with refrac￾tory materials. After drying, it is coated with binder again, and then with refractory
materials. This process is repeated in the workshop with constant temperature and
humidity to ensure that the shell is of a high quality. The shell will gain certain2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 37
strength after more than ten times of repeatitions. Then the shell is sealed and dried,
after which the shell is put into the high-pressure steam dewaxing tank. The wax
pattern melts off under high temperature and high pressure, leaving the shell without
wax inside. The shell is then sent into a roasting furnace. The strength of the shell
is further improved under a high temperature of 1000°C for a long time. After these
steps, the shell can withstand the pressure and scouring of metal liquid during pouring
and the metal can then be poured into the shell.
Before pouring, proper amount of superalloy ingots is put into the crucible of
the vacuum induction furnace, with the furnace being vacuumed and the alloy being
heated up. After the melting is completed, the high temperature shell is removed
from the roasting furnace and transferred to the vacuum furnace quickly. The high
temperature molten metal is then poured into the cavity of the shell under the action
of gravity, and then the vacuum is removed. The casting is taken out of the furnace
together with the shell and is cooled down at room temperature.
After pouring, the cleaning and inspection of large thin-wall superalloy investment
castings have additional steps, which are rather complex. After shakeout and cutting
of the riser, visual inspection shall be carried out, followed by holes welding repair,
grinding, and X-ray and fluorescence inspection. If there are any defects, welding
shall be carried out after removing the defects, and then repeat heat treatment and X￾ray and fluorescence inspection to ensure that there are no long any casting defects.
Note that some castings also require hot isostatic pressing.
The hot isostatic pressing (HIP) is to put the castings into a sealed tank filled with
high purity argon gas and then apply equal static high pressure along all directions to
the castings at high temperatures according to Pascal’s principle, which will close up
the holes in the castings and hence obtain highly dense castings. The experimental
results show that the mechanical properties, in particular, the fatigue properties of
the superalloy castings have been improved significantly after HIP.
To sum up, the large thin-wall investment castings have a time-consuming and
complex process, wherein all the processing factors can affect the final quality. It
is a huge challenge to control the defects and deformation, in particular, the shape
control. In addition, tolerance accumulates in mold, pattern, shell, and castings and
the mold, wax pattern, shell, and the master alloy will affect the final shrinkage rate.
As a result, the materials and process must be strictly controlled.
2.2 Function and Design Principle of Gating System
for Large Complex Thin-Wall Investment Castings
For the purpose of high efficiency, low cost, and reliable quality of castings, the filling
and solidification process must be effectively controlled. The clean molten metal can
be solidified sequentially from casting to riser while no turbulent flow is allowed in
the casting cavity. For the larege castings such as TRF, the main problem is to design
the process to control the filling mode and solidification sequence according to the38 G. Wang
complex structure. The complex structures in TRF castings can be seperated into
two types, i.e., large-area thin-wall structures and varying cross-section structures.
During the filling, the former, due to the narrow cavity, may misrun and the abrupt
change of cross-section of the latter may cause the disturbance of melt flow, leading
to bubble involvement and other problems and affecting the stability of filling and the
density of castings. During the solidification, the large area thin-wall structure has
a higher cooling rate than the thick-wall structure, and the abrupt change of cross￾section also has an important influence on the growth direction and stability of the
dendrites. These factors make it difficult to obtain a uniform solidification structure
of the large casting.
2.2.1 The Threshold Value of Large Thin-Wall Castings
Friction and surface tension are the main factors of structure resistance during the
filling.
Surface tension is the result of molecular attraction in the fluid. It is the property
of the substance itself, which is related to the temperature and the properties of the
substance at and near the phase interfaces. The additional pressure caused by the
surface tension must be considered when dealing with the flow between thin walls.
According to the Young-Laplace equation [11],
p = σ (
1
R1
+
1
R2
) (2.1)
where σ is the surface tension and R1 and R2 are the principal radii of the curvature of
the interface. The relationship between the curvature radius and cavity size is shown
in Fig. 2.2.
It is assumed that (a) the wetting angle of liquid flow and the top plate is equal
to that of the liquid flow and the side of the plate and (b) during the whole filling
process, the wetting angle is a constant, which, in fact, is related to the filling rate
and the pressure of the riser tube.
From above:
R1 = − W
2 cos θ
R2 = − H
2 cos θ (2.2)
where, W and H refers to the width and wall thickness of the runner, respectively,
and θ is the wetting angle (Fig. 2.2).
Combining Eqs. (2.1) and (2.2), we get2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 39
Fig. 2.2 The relationship between curvature radius and cavity size
p = −2σ cos θ
 1
W +
1
H

(2.3)
If it is assumed that the alloy liquid does not wet at all with the cavity wall, the
Laplace force can be simplified as,
p = −2σ
 1
W +
1
H

(2.4)
The resistance of fluids to shear deformation is called viscosity. When the fluid
flows uniformly, the velocity distribution on the flow section is not uniform due to the
viscous action, and there is a relative motion between the two adjacent flow layers.
As a result, there is shear stress (friction force) between the fluid flow layers as well
as between the fluid and the boundary, exhibiting certain flow resistance. The flow
resistance generated in the uniform flow section is called the along resistance or
friction resistance.
For the runner with the parallel plate, the formula of flow friction pressure drop
is:
p = 12Lμv¯/H2 (2.5)40 G. Wang
where, Δp is flow friction pressure drop, L is the length of the runner, μ is hydro￾dynamic viscosity, v¯ is the average velocity in the parallel runner, and H is the plate
spacing.
For thin-wall castings, the Weber Number ‘We’ criterion (surface tension) is used
as the primary criterion and the Froude ‘Fr’ criterion as the secondary one. Therefore,
the wall thickness corresponding to We/Fr = 1 is called the critical wall thickness,
given as
δc =
 σ
ρg
(2.6)
where, ρ is the density, and g is the gravity acceleration.
At 1500°C, these properties of nickel-base superalloy K4169 are:
σ = 1.75 N/m, g = 9.81 m/s
2
, ρ = 7210 kg/m3
and we get
δc ≈ 4.9mm (2.7)
As to nickel-base superalloy castings, if the wall thickness is less than 4.9 mm, it
can be considered as thin-wall castings.
For large thin-walled castings, ‘Re’ criterion is the main criterion, that is, the
viscous force becomes the dominant resistance to fluid, leading to
viscous force
surface tension = 12Lμv/H2
2σ
 1
W + 1
H
 = 6Lμv W
σ H(W + H)
> 1 (2.8)
LW
H(W + H)
> σ
6μv¯ (2.9)
According to Eq. (2.9), when the thickness of the plate meets the condition of
thin-wall castings, the width of the plate has little influence to the flow. Therefore,
the large thin-wall plate can be regarded as the ratio of the filled path (length of the
plate) and the characteristic structure size (thickness of the plate).
As to nickel based superalloys, μ = 6.75 mPa·s, σ = 1.75 N/m at 1500°C, when
v¯ = 0.2 m/s, H = 1 mm, W = 200 mm, we get
L > 0.217 m (2.10)
For nickel-base superalloys, a plate with a width of 200 mm, a length of 217 mm,
and a thickness of 1 mm can be regarded as a large thin-wall casting when the wall
thickness meets the thin-wall condition. See Table 2.1.2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 41
Table 2.1 Characteristic Dimensions of Large Area Thin Wall of Nickel-based Superalloy
Thickness of the plate
(mm)
Width of the plate (mm) Filling velocity (m/s) Critical length (mm)
H = 1 W = 200 0.2 217
H = 2 W = 200 0.2 436
2.2.2 Casting Design and Concurrent Engineering
Nowadays, the computer has become an indispensable advanced tool for manufac￾turing industry with its outstanding advantages such as powerful computing ability,
graphics processing power, and storage capacity. CAD (computer aided design),
CAE (computer aided engineering), CAM (computer aided machining), and other
technologies have been extensively used in foundry industry.
Investment casting has many advantages, as well as many disadvantages. It has a
long chain of processes, which are always complicated with long production cycles
and many factors affecting the quality of castings. This has influenced the application
and development of investment casting. With the rapid development of computer
technology, the application of computer technology has brought great changes to
the production of investment castings, such as the structural design, process design,
pattern mold design and manufacture, wax pattern forming, and the preparation of
shell and core.
2.2.2.1 Application of Numerical Simulation in Structure Design
and Process Design of Investment Castings
The investment castings are becoming lighter, thinner and net shaping. The net cast￾ings or near net castings has been put forward in recent years, in order to meet the
demand of modern industry for high quality parts. This requires the structure of
investment casting to be more reasonable and the process be more optimized.
The traditional investment casting process consists of the following 5 steps:
(1) The user issues the design blueprint to the foundry;
(2) The foundry makes a budget. For the purpose of easy production and low cost,
the foundry gives some advises to the designer;
(3) The foundry designs necessary equipment;
(4) The foundry issues drawings to the mold workshop or pattern workshop;
(5) Metal casting and castings inspection.
In the process of casting structure design, pattern mold design, wax injection
process parameters design, gating system design, etc., the traditional production
mainly relies on the actual experience of engineers, they seldom use scientific theory.
Especially for complex parts and important parts, it is often necessary to modify the42 G. Wang
casting structure, pattern mold and gating system repeatedly to meet the technical
requirements.
The application of CAE simulation software has partially replaced the physical
tryout. CAE technology is gradually used in product development, performance
simulation, manufacturing process, and production management, etc. It not only
provides effective guarantee for the whole life cycle of product development such as
structural strength, lightweight design, kinematics check, fatigue life, and collision
safety, but also greatly reduces the tryout cost and product developing time and thus
saves the cost of new product development.
Computer has powerful computing and graphics processing ability. It can combine
numerical analysis, database, and visualization with the classical theory of heat
transfer, flow, and solidification. In particular, through modeling the casting filling,
cooling, and solidification, we can obtain the flow field, temperature field, and stress
field of the investment castings, and predict the organization and the defects, such as
cold shut, porosity, cracking, and deformation, etc. Therefore, computer simulation
can be used to study the casting structure and casting process, and provide useful
information on castings structure and process design, and to avoid the blindness of
traditional structure design and process design which is sbased on experiences. It
can shorten production preparation time and save trial production cost.
2.2.2.2 Application of Concurrent Engineering in Investment Casting
With the continuous development and popularization of computer technology,
concurrent engineering will be widely used in the investment casting industry in
the future.
Concurrent engineering is to establish the electronic data communication mech￾anism which is closely related to the investment castings user and the factory, and to
carry out the parallel product and process design of the user and the foundry. Users
give the 3D geometry of castings to the foundry online. The foundry engineers can
easily check the 3D model before the computer screen and then show the users and
designers possible problems under different process conditions after CAE simula￾tion, such as hot crack, porosity, etc., in order to make improvement and obtain high
quality castings. Similarly, the manufacturing process of pattern mold, pattern, and
the shell can also be realized simultaneously. In this way, the earlier the foundry gets
involved in product development, the shorter the development time and the lower the
cost, which increases the market competitiveness of the product [12].
2.2.2.3 Application of Computer Technology in Investment Casting
The application of computer modeling and simulation in the investment castings over￾comes the shortcomings of the investment castings process and makes this technology
more flexible and more adaptable to meet the requirements of fast development, high
quality, and complexity.2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 43
(1) The CAE technology helps to get the reasonable casting structure and the most
optimal process design of investment castings.
(2) The application of rapid prototyping in the pattern and the mold has greatly
shortened the time to prepare the pattern and the mold.
(3) Compared with the traditional method, 3D printing technology can reduce the
time of shell making.
(4) Complex ceramic cores can be produced by computer-controlled laser fabrica￾tion.
With the continuous development and application of computation technology,
concurrent engineering and integrated manufacturing will be widely used in the
investment casting industry in the future.
2.2.3 Design of Gating System
For the large complex thin-wall superalloy castings, centrifugal casting has some
disadvantages, such as propensity to component segregation, which gradually
reduces its application. Engineers are more likely to use the gravity casting method.
This section mainly discusses the basic rules of the gating system under the condition
of gravity casting.
2.2.3.1 The Determination of Pouring Position
The rules of pouring positions are as follows: ➀ Important parts of the casting should
be placed at the bottom as far as possible. ➁ Important machined surfaces should
be facing down or upright. ➂ Make the large plane of casting face down to avoid
scarring defects. For large plate castings, tilt casting can be used to speed up the rise
of metal surface and prevent scarring defects. During tilting casting, the total gating
system pressure head should be in the range of 200 ~ 400 mm according to the size
of the mold. ➃ The casting shall be fully filled. For castings with thin-walled parts,
the thin-walled parts should be placed in the lower half or below the ingate to avoid
defects such as misrun and cold shut. ➄ Easy to feed the casting. ➅ Chillers should
be avoied, which are very difficult to place in the process of investment castings. ➆
The pouring position and the cooling position of the casting should be the same, in
order to avoid turning over the mold after metal pouring.
2.2.3.2 The Parting Line
For investment casting, the metal pours into a whole shell mold without parting
lines. However, the pattern molds have parting lines. The parting surfaces are the
places where the two halves of the pattern mold meet. The parting surface is usually44 G. Wang
selected after the location of wax injection is determined. The parting surface affects
the pattern accuracy, cost, and productivity to a great extent. It should be carefully
analyzed, compared, and design. The parting line design should conform to the
following rules: ➀ All or most of the wax pattern should be placed in the same half.
➁ The number of parting lines should be minimized; the wax pattern should be more
accurate with less parting lines, as well as a smaller number of mold components.
➂ The parting surface should be a plane. It is easier to manufacture the flat parting
surface and then ensure the accuracy of the wax pattern. ➃ The mold components,
two halves and cores, should be easy to assemble and easy to inspect as well. ➄
Parting surface is usually selected on the largest section of the wax pattern, so that
the mold is not too high.
2.2.3.3 Rules of the Gating System
The general rules of the gating system design are as follows: ➀ Help the melt metal
fill the cavity steadily and smoothly, avoiding air entrapped due to the turbulence,
and scour the core, avoiding the oxide inclusion and shell debris. ➁ During the
filling,the flow direction and speed can be controlled to ensure clear and complete
shape. ➂ The cavity should be filled at the right time. The gating system should have
the ability to block slag and overflow slag, and purify the melt metal. ➃ Control
the temperature distribution of the metal to benefit the feeding, reducing the casting
stress, and preventing the casting from deformation and cracking.
2.2.3.4 Types of Gating System [13]
The right gating system type is one of the important parts in the process design.
It is related to the alloy composition, structure, size, technical requirements, and
production requirements of the casting. The gating system can be classified by the
position of the ingate or by the section area ratio of the gatings.
(1) The position of the ingate
a. Top filling system. The melt metal is introduced from the top of the cavity.
The advantage of top filling system is: (i) the temperature of the upper part of the
casting is higher than that of the lower part during the filling and solidification, which
is beneficial to feeding the casting; (ii) it can have large metal flow, the cavity can
be filled in a short time with strong filling capacity; (iii) the gating system and riser
need less metal and they are easy to be cut after casting.
The biggest disadvantage of the top filling system is that the melt metal falls down
from the high place, which has a great impact on the shell. In addition, it is easy to
cause the splash, oxidation, and gas entrapment, as well as to lead to the oxidation
slag and porosity defects.2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 45
The top filling system is suitable for small and medium sized castings with small
quality, low height, and simple shape.
b. Bottom filling system. The ingate is located at the bottom of the casting.
The advantage is: (i) the metal fills the cavity smoothly; (ii) the runner is mostly
filled with metal during the filling, regardless of the ratio of runner area and ingate
area, which keeps the slag out of the cavity.
The disadvantage is that, after filling, the temperature of the lower part of the
casting is higher than that of the upper part, which is on the contrary to the sequential
solidification from bottom to top and thus weakens the feeding effect of the top riser.
The bottom of the casting, especially near the ingate, is easy to overheat, which
results in shrinkage porosity, coarse grain, and other defects. The filling capacity is
poor, so it is easy to have misrun and cold shut for large thin-walled castings, even
though it consumes more metal.
The disadvantages of the bottom filling system can be solved through some tech￾nical methods, such as fast pouring, dispersing multi-runner, exothermic riser, and
so on.
Bottom filling system is widely used in aluminum and magnesium alloys and
other non-ferrous castings, which is also suitable for all kinds of ferrous castings
with complex shapes and high requirements.
c. Medium filling system
The ingate of medium pouring system is between the top pouring system and the
bottom pouring system, whose advantages and disadvantages are also between these
two pouring systems. It is widely used in small and medium-sized castings with a
small height and large horizontal size. When the casting quality is high, the falling
height of the melt metal, that is, the depth of the lower half cavity, should be limited
when high quality castings are desired.
d. Multi-step gating system for setting up multi-layer ingates at different heights of
casting.
A well-designed multi-step gating system has the following advantages: the metal
filling the cavity smoothly from bottom to top; the gas escapes the cavity smoothly;
the temperature of the upper casting is higher than that of the lower part after filling,
which is benificial to sequential solidification and help the riser feed the casting. The
strong filling ability can avoid defects such as cold shut and misrun. In addition, the
local overheating near the ingate can be reduced with multiple ingates. The main
disadvantages are as follows. Correct calculation and structural design are needed.
Otherwise, the metal will enter the cavity from the upper and lower ingates at the
same time in a mess; the temperature of the lower part is also higher than the other
part of the casting due to too much metal entered the cavity from the bottom ingates.
Multi-step gating system is widely used for pouring large and medium-sized steel
castings and iron castings.46 G. Wang
(2) The section area ratio of the gatings
The gating system can be categorized into closed, open, and semi-closed types
according to the proportion of the cross-section area of the sprue, runner, and ingate.
a. Closed type
The cross-section area of the spure, runner, and ingate decreases sequentially
(Asprue > Ar unner > Aingate). As the cross-section area of the runner is getting
smaller and smaller, the flow velocity is higher and higher in this gating system.
Since the velocity at the ingate will be significantly high, the metal will impact the
shell with splashing and violent oxidation. However, during the entire filling from
the begining, the sprue is kept in full state, and the slags in the liquid metal is easy to
float up to the top of the sprue and avoid entering the cavity. In addition, the volume
of this gating system is small and need less melt metal.
b. Open type
The cross-section area of the spure, runner, and ingate enlarges sequently (Asprue <
Ar unner < Aingate). The characteristics of the open gating system is opposite to the
closed one. The main advantage of the open gating system is that the metal flow in
the runner and the ingate is slower and the metal enters the cavity smoothly. The
disadvantage is that the slags can hardly be kept out from the cavity while the runner
is half filled up during the initial stage of filling.
c. Semi-closed type
When (Asprue < Aingate < Ar unner), it is called the semi-closed gating system. Its
characteristics is between the open type and the closed type, that is, the melt flow
is relatively stable and the filling capacity and slag rejection capacity is better. It is
suitable for small and simple structure castings.
The section area ratio of the gating system has a big effect on the casting quality.
As a result, it is important to choose the correct gating ratio during the design of
gating system.
In practice, the engineers have accumulated a lot of experience to choose the right
ratio, leading to many relevant data in the literature. However, it is difficult to give
out an effective, simple, and easy method due to the different casting structures,
processes, and other specific conditions.
2.2.3.5 The Dimension and Structure Design of the Gating System
After the type of the gating system and the ingates have been determined, the size
and structure of the gating system can be further determined. The minimum section
area of the gating system (that is, the choke section) is calculated by hydraulic or
empirical formula. And the gating ratio is determined according to the structural2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 47
characteristics and geometry of the castings. Finally, the size and structure of each
part are determined and the size and structure of each part are then checked and
optimized using computer simulations.
(1) The minimum section area calculation by hydraulic formula
Based on fluid mechanics, the melt metal fluid is regarded as a common fluid and
the gating system as a channel. For the semi-closed gating system, the cross-section
at the bottom of the sprue has the minimum section area. If the metal at the pouring
basin is one end and the outlet of the sprue is the other end, between the two ends,
according to the Bernoulli equation, Eq. (2.11) is used to calculate the minimum
section area.
Amin = G/0.0433γτμ
HP (2.11)
Where, G is the total mass of liquid metal (kg), A is the cross section area at the
outlet of the sprue (cm2), μ is the flow consumption coefficient, τ is the pouring
time(s), γ is the density of liquid metal (g/cm3), and HP is the average calculated
static pressure head (cm)
For a closed gating system, the ingate has the minimum cross-section area. The
Bernoulli equation can also be used to derive the above formula. According to this
formula and the value of each factor, the minimum cross section area of the gating
system can be calculated.
According to the type of gating system, we can know where the minimum cross￾section area is located, in the sprue, runner, or ingate. Then we can get all the cross￾section areas of the sprue, runner, and ingate according to the appropriate ratio
(Asprue : Ar unner : Aingate), which allows us to obtain the whole dimensions of the
gating system in a preliminary way. Since the predetermined values of ‘G’ and ‘r’ in
the initial calculation are estimated values, and since the actual ratio of the section
area of each part is different from the one selected, the calculation results still need
to be calibrated against experiments.
(2) Section ratio design method
Experiments shows that the position, quantity, shape, and size of ingate have a great
influence on the quality of the castings when the alloys are easy to oxidize. Sometimes
the method above do not work. Therefore, “backward induction” is used to calculate
the size of the gating system on the basis of practice.
The “backward induction” is to determine the number and cross-section area of
the ingates according to the specific casting process at first, and then to determine
the size and structure of the runner and sprue according to the total cross section area
of the ingates and the selected gating ratio. The specific steps are as follows.
a. According to the characteristics of casting structure, select the type and structure
of gating system;48 G. Wang
b. According to the alloy, casting structure characteristics, and process, the ingate
number and total cross-section area are determined by experience. Normally the
engineer makes tables through induction and summary according to the workshop
experience, to design the similar gating system.
c. Select the thickness, width, and length of the ingate according to the casting wall
thickness connected to the ingate.
d. Select the gating ratio according to the casting characteristics and determine the
dimensions of the runner and sprue.
2.2.3.6 Riser Design
The riser size is calculated using the modulus method.
The casting solidification time depends on the ratio of the volume of the casting
to the heat transfer surface area. The ratio is called the solidification coefficient, or
modulus for short. Let us write it this way:
M = V/A (2.12)
where, M—modulus; V—volume; A—heat transfer surface area.
In order for the casting and riser to solidify sequentially, the riser modulus M must
be greater than the modulus of the part to be fed. In the vacuum condition, due to
the lack of atmospheric pressure, the feeding depends on the gravity of metal only.
Therefore, the modulus of the riser should be more than 1.5 times of the modulus of
the part to be fed under vacuum conditions.
2.3 Casting Equipment
According to the characteristics of superalloy, it needs to be melted under vacuum
condition. As a result, the vacuum furnace is necessary. Normally, the pouring weight
of the melt metal is more than 4 times the weight of the casting, so the melting furnace
should have a volume to hold above 400 kg for the casting of 100 kg. According to
the integral large complex thin-walled investment casting, the diameter of castings
should exceed 1000 mm, considering the thickness of the shell and appropriate
operating clearance, the diameter of the slurry bucket and dewaxing kettle should
exceed 1500 mm. During the slurry coating and stucco coating, the manipulator
grasps the pattern assembly to dip in the slurry bucket and then place it into the
stucco coating machine. According to the size of the casting, the payload of the
manipulator should be more than 500 kg, in particular, for the manipulator for the
back layer shell. If the sand is scattered by hand, the labor intensity of the workers is
high. In addition, there is still uneven shell and the repeat-ability is difficult to ensure.2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 49
Thus, it is difficult to ensure the shell quality of large investment castings. For the
partitioning wax pattern, 100T wax injection machine is needed, such as MPI51660
of MPI Company, a larger wax injection machine is needed if we want to inject the
integral wax pattern.
To sum up, the necessary equipments for large complex thin-wall integral invest￾ment castings are as follows. The furnace: 500 kg and above vacuum induction
furnace. The slurry bucket:the diameter should be 1500 mm or above, at least one
bucket for surface layer and one bucket for back layer. The dewaxing kettle: the
diameter should exceed 1500 mm. The wax injection machine: the locking force
should be 100T or above. The Roasting furnace: the width of the furnace should be
1700 mm or above.
2.4 Process Design
The characteristics of large size thin-walled complex castings should be fully consid￾ered in the process design. Thin-walled castings have the characteristics of fast melt
heat transfer, rapid rise of liquid level, and large resistance caused by surface tension
during the filling. During the solidification process, the melt solidification time
is short, the time windows of dendrite formation and feeding are narrow, and the
temperature of the melt metal drops significantly after a long distance of flow.
For the complete filling and effective feeding of thin-wall structures at the most
edge, the correspondence between solidification characteristics and process param￾eters at the characteristic structure has been studied in real time through synchrotron
radiation in situ. Based on the original process based on gate design, the process
parameters suitable for thin-walled casting have been designed.
It is assumed that after the melt enters the cavity, it flows laminar away from the
ingate, and the whole shell has the same temperature before cavity filling. After the
melt flows through the shell, heat is transferred between the high-temperature melt
and the shell. Since the thermal conductivity of the shell is low and the filling speed
is rather high, it is assumed that the shell keeps the original temperature unchanged
before it contacts with the melt.
Solidification sequence at the thin wall is as follows. As the melt begins to solidify
after filling the cavity, there is no directional solidification and the temperature at the
bottom is lower than that ad the top.
During the filling process, the temperature change of melt along the flow route
can be used to analyze the melt temperature at the thin wall of the farthest end.
Let the flow distance from the gate to the farthest thin wall be L and the filling
height be H (Fig. 2.3). The radius of the castings is Rg. If the casting is a rotor, then
L3≥Rg. For simplicity, let L = Rg. KM is the thermal conductivity between the shell
and the melt, and Km is the thermal conductivity of the melt itself.50 G. Wang
Fig. 2.3 Solidification process of large size thin-walled castings
Assume that the initial temperature of the shell is T M , and after contact with the
melt, the shell temperature is the same as the melt temperature T(x).
Then the unit mass melt flows from the gate to the final thin-wall position, and
the temperature at different positions is as follows:
T0 − x
dT
dx = T (x), x = L, T (x) = Tt (2.13)
The heat dissipation during the flow to the final position is as follows
(T0 − Tt) · C = L
v · K(T0 − TM ) (2.14)
where L is the flow distance of the melt and v is the flow velocity of melt under the
condition of free liquid level in the cavity. Sg is the total ingate section area, The
pouring quality per unit time is m, then:
v = 
2gHp (2.15)
At the same time, v = m
sg ·g .
Assuming that the melt flow always keeps laminar,during the flow process, the
heat conservation state per unit melt per unit time is:
C
dt
dx = K M (T0 − T(x) − Km
dt
dx (2.16)
The left-hand side above is the loss of melt heat per unit volume per unit mass.
The first term on the right-hand side is the heat transfer from melt to shell, and the
second term is the heat transfer from unit volume and unit mass melt with higher
temperature to this melt unit. By combining the above 3 equations, we can obtain Tt.2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 51
When the melt flows to the final position of the cavity, the temperature of the
melt must be guaranteed to fullfill. The fitting formula is obtained according to the
experimental data,
t2mm = 3.14312 × 10−9 × T 3.30319 t (2.17)
According to Eq. (2.17), the dendrite network formation time can be set as the
time since melt fully filled to dendrite network formation. According to the size and
shape of the casting, t2mm can be set. To get the smaller grain size of the casting, the
pouring temperature should be as low as possible.
The melt temperature Tt can be derived according to the dendrite network forma￾tion time. According to this temperature, we can get the pouring speed, the shell
temperature, and pouring temperature, as well as the height of the sprue.
The accuracy of the above design is based on the in situ and real-time monitoring
data of the dendrite network formation, as well as relevant assumptions. Actual
casting data and in situ analysis has shown that this design parameter can be used as
a reference.
2.4.1 Design of Gravity Casting Process for Large Complex
Thin-Walled Castings
Gravity casting is the most widely used casting method of investment casting for
superalloys. It has two options, either directly pouring from melting furnace or
pouring from converter. At present, most superalloy castings are directly poured
in vacuum induction furnace. The quality of superalloy castings, besides that the
master alloy must meet the quality requirements, depends mainly on casting process
parameters.
2.4.1.1 Design of Gating System for Gravity Casting of Large Complex
Thin-Walled Superalloy Castings
Turbine rear frame casting, as shown in Fig. 2.4, are of large size, complex structure,
and thin wall, which are typical to large complex thin-walled castings. According to
the structural characteristics of rear case frames, the section changes sharply and it is
a large-area thin-walled piece, which makes it difficult to fill. Therefore, the bottom
filling and open gating type is selected. At the same time, for the better feeding, the
upper runner is used to let the melt metal flow into the riser directly at the final stage
of solidification.52 G. Wang
Fig. 2.4 Turbine rear frame
castings
(1) The rising speed of liquid metal
a. Pouring time
The filling up time of cavity is the pouring time, which is an important parameter
of the gating system. The longer the pouring time, the higher the required pouring
temperature. However, if the pouring time is too short, there will be casting defects
due to turbulence flow. Therefore, there is an optimal pouring time for a given casting.
Pouring time depends on the type of the alloy, the complexity of the casting,
the wall thickness, and section size, etc. The pouring time is usually calculated by
empirical formula, which is based on the experience of the engineers. It is hard to
derive from theory.
Since the thickness of the casting is largely affected by the ratio of volume to
surface area of the casting, the wall thickness is also an important parameter apart
from the weight of the casting when calculating the correct pouring time. Usually, the
casting weight is considered when the gating system is not fully designed. In addition,
it is considered that the gating system is fully filled before the metal liquid begins
to enter the cavity, so the weight of the gating system is generally not considered.
However, if the size of the gating system is almost the same as the casting size, the
weight of the gating system should be considered in the calculation of pouring time.
For complex thin-walled castings with the pouring mass less than 450 kg:
t = K1
√3
W (2.18)
where t is the pouring time (s), W is the total weight of the casting, the gating system
and the risers (kg), and K1 is a constant number (Table 2.2).2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 53
Table 2.2 Recommended
values of K1 for castings with
different wall thickness
δ/mm K1
1.5–2.5 1.62
2.5–3.5 1.68
3.5–8.0 1.85
8.0–15.0 2.20
b. The rising speed of liquid metal in the cavity
The filling speed of liquid metal has a close relationship with casting quality. If
the filling speed is too fast, the melt metal will impact the shell with splashing
and turbulent flow, resulting in the oxidation inclusion and porosity defects of the
castings. On the other hand, if the filling speed is too slow, it is easy to have defects
such as cold shut and misrun, especially for the large thin-walled castings that are
difficult to fill. Therefore, reasonable filling speed and sufficient liquid metal flow
are required during the cavity filling. The velocity V is,
V = c/t (2.19)
where, c is the height to fill(mm), t is the filling time (s).
Normally the filling time of large castings should conform to Table 2.3.
(2) Determination of average pressure head Hp
The average pressure head is determined by Eq. (2.20):
Hp = Ho − p2
2C (2.20)
where, Hp is the average pressure head (mm);Ho is the pressure head above choke
section (mm); P is the height of the cavity above the choke section (mm); C is the
total height of the casting at the casting position (mm).
This is easily obtained from Fig. 2.5:
For bottom filling system where P = C, we have Hp = Ho − P
2 ;
For top filling system where P = 0, we have Hp = Ho.
Practical experience shows that if the sprue is too low, the filling pressure and feeding
pressure may not be high enough. It is then easy to have defects such as the edges and
Table 2.3 The relation between minimum metal rising speed and wall thickness
Wall thickness mm <4 4–10 10–40 >40
Minimum speed mm/s 30–100 20–30 10–20 8–1054 G. Wang
Fig. 2.5 Diagram of each
variable in the calculation
formula of average pressure
head Cavity 
Gating system 
contours not being clear, misrun, concave on the upper surface, and other defects.
In particular, for large superalloy castings, the melt metal should maintain enough
residual pressure head HM such that the liquid from the pouring basin and the sprue
can effectively feed the casting during the solidification. When the superalloy casting
solidifies in a vacuum furnace, the residual pressure head should be of sufficient
height. The following equation is the relation between residual pressure head and
pressure angle of melt metal:
HM = L × tgα (2.21)
where, as shown in Fig. 2.3, L is the horizontal distance from the furthest point of
the casting to the center line of the sprue (in units of mm) and α is the pressure angle
(in units of °).
In the vacuum state, the feeding pressure needed during the solidification mainly
comes from the gravitational potential of the liquid metal. Therefore, the pressure
angle in Table 2.4 should be appropriately enlarged. In the vacuum state, 1.5 times
of the pressure angle in the table should be taken.
Table 2.4 The relationship
between pressure angle and
casting size
Wall thickness (mm) 3–5 5–8
L (mm) Pressure angle
600 13–14 9–10
800 12–13 9–10
1000 11–12 9–102 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 55
2.4.1.2 Influence of Pouring Parameters of Superalloy
(1) Pouring temperature
Pouring temperature has a significant effect on the dendrite, grain size, porosity,
and the size and number of γ + γ’ eutectic structure of the superalloy castings. The
pouring temperature should be 100–150 °C above the liquidus temperature. If the
pouring temperature is too low, the cavity will be insufficiently filled and there will
be cold shut, misrun, and porosity as well. However, if the pouring temperature is
too high, it will lead to dendrite thickening and significant grain coarsening, together
with significantly increased γ + γ’ eutectic size and serious porosity issue. For
large complex thin-walled rear case frames, the influence of pouring temperature
is more complicated. The rear case frames have many structures where the cross￾section changes abruptly. With high pouring temperature, thick sections tend to form
porosity and severe segregation, whereas with low pouring temperature, the parts
with thin wall thickness will have serious porosity. Therefore, it is very important to
choose the appropriate pouring temperature during the experiments.
(2) Filling speed
Filling speed has an obvious effect on casting quality. If the speed is too slow, there
will be defects like misrun, cold shut, and quenched grain. If the speed is too fast,
the melt is easy to rush out of the pouring basin. It is generally beneficial to the
cavity filling when the speed is faster, but it is also easy to entrap air and inclusions.
The appropriate filling speed should be: for thick large castings or bottom filling
system, the filling speed should be fast at first and then slow down, such that there
is a certain amount of high-temperature melt in the pouring basin that can reduce
shrinkage cavity and porosity in the casting. For small thin-walled castings, it is
better to pour slowly at first and then quickly, which can reduce the defects such as
air entrapment and inclusions. As to superalloys, the filling rate at the ingate should
be about 0.9 kg/s if there is ceramic filter. If no filter is present, the filling speed can
be slower, generally about 0.6 kg/s.
(3) The shell temperature
The shell temperature is also an important parameter affecting the quality of supper￾alloy castings. The shell should be preheated for superalloy investment castings and
the preheating temperature of the shell should not be too low. Otherwise the casting
is not easy to be filled and there will thus be cold shut, porosity, and inclusions. In
addition, the shell temperature should not be too high. If not, the degree of under
cooling of the melt will be too small such that the nucleation rate becomes lower
and the grain size becomes larger, thus reducing the plasticity and toughness of the
alloy. The appropriate roasting temperature should be selected according to the shell
condition and alloy requirements.56 G. Wang
(4) Effect of cooling rate
The solidification rate of superalloy casting is mainly affected by the pouring temper￾ature, shell temperature, and the condition whether or not there is sand surrounding
the shell. The microstructure and mechanical properties of the alloy as cast are
affected accordingly. The influence of pouring temperature and shell roasting temper￾ature is introduced in the previous sections. Usually, the lower the pouring tempera￾ture or the lower the shell temperature, the faster the solidification proceeds. However,
if the shell temperature is too low, it may result in too large melt temperature gradient
and thus lead to the columnar crystals.
When the shell is put into the sand-filled box, the solidification rate is different
in vacuum and atmosphere environments. Compared with single shell casting, sand
filling casting in atmospheric environment has good insulation effect, resulting in
slow cooling rate and coarse grain. The solidification rate of single shell casting is
faster and the grain size is smaller due to the good effect of convection and heat
dissipation in the atmosphere. In constrast, under the vacuum condition, the solid￾ification rate of single shell casting is slow while the sand surrounding the shell
absorbs the heat from the casting. Consequently, the cooling speed is faster and the
grain becomes smaller.
2.4.2 Simulation of Casting Process
On the basis of the traditional design, numerical simulation technology is used to
quantify the gating system and riser and evaluate whether or not the process design
goal can be achieved. Based on the simulation results, the optimal pouring system
and riser is selected. This process should start at the casting design stage, which will
effectively reduce the process difficulty and shorten the product development cycle.
This section describes a more detailed simulation of the actual casting process.
The first step of numerical simulation is to acquire the casting model, 3D model
of pouring system, and boundary conditions. After the 3D modeling, provide the
software with the composition and material type of the casting metal and the shell,
together with the pouring temperature, shell temperature, environment temperature,
pouring speed, heat transfer coefficient, etc. The software will divide the casting,
riser, and the shell into small elements, combined with the discretization in time, and
then calculate the temperature and velocity of every small cell. Finally, we obtain
the result of the liquid metal flow field and temperature field during the filling and
solidification process es, together with some criteria. The engineer then analyzes the
results and further optimize the gating system and riser.2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 57
2.4.2.1 Model of Casting, Gating System and Riser
Using 3D software, such as UG NX, Pro/E, CATIA, SolidWorks, Solidedge, CAXA,
and other CAD software, we first construct the 3D geometry model of casting, gating
system, and riser, and import the result into CAE software through STL or other
interfaces.
2.4.2.2 Input of Casting Parameters and Boundary Conditions
Metal: IN718 (Liquidus:1337°C; Solidus:1255°C).
Shell: Corundum.
Casting process: investment casting (gravity).
Casting parameters: pouring temperature 1500 °C; shell temperature 1000 °C; the
pouring time is 12 s.
2.4.2.3 Analysis of Simulation Results
(1) Information from filling simulation
Check the mold filling sequence, flow field, velocities, and temperature in the cavity,
loss of superheat and temperature distribution in the melt. Pay attention to whether
the temperature of the melt is lower than the liquidus during the pouring process. If
the melt temperature is lower than the liquidus, there may be cold shuts and misruns.
If there is turbulence in the flow, slags and inclusions can not float up. If two melt
flows collide in the cavity, there may be weld marks or cold shuts. Finally, check
the temperature distribution of the melt after pouring, in particular, whether the melt
temperature is high at the top of the cavity and low at the bottom, which can help the
feeding.
(2) Information from solidification simulation
Check the solidification paths and feeding patterns. The metal in the riser should
remain in liquid until the casting is solidified and the feeding paths should keep
connected.
(3) The criteria of casting defects
a. Niyama criterion
Niyama et al. evaluated the influence of flow resistance on shrinkage porosity, which
was a comprehensive prediction method for determination of center line shrinkage in
cast steels. The method proposed by Niyama, namely Niyama criterion, represents
the relationship between the gradient (G) and cooling rate (R) [14]. It is calculated
according to the following formula:58 G. Wang
Niyama = G/
√R (2.22)
where, Niyama is dimensionless, G is the gradient, and R is the cooling rate.
The volume contraction between the liquid state and liquid-solid state during
the solidification is the main cause of shrinkage and porosity. When the feeding
path is unobstructed, the dendrite has not formed a skeleton, the volume shrinkage
results in shrinkage cavity (primary or secondary), which is located in the upper
part of the casting. However, when the dendrite forms a skeleton and the feeding
path is blocked, the volume shrinkage of the hot melt surrounded by dendrite results
in micro porosity (within the dendrite range). Solid shrinkage has little effect on
the formation of shrinkage cavity and porosity. As a resutl, solid shrinkage is not
considered. During the solidification, the fraction of solid in the cell increases and the
fraction liquid decreases. When the fraction of solid in the cell is greater than a critical
value, the cell will become an immobile cell, such that it cannot feed the others. In
every calculation step, it should be determined which cell is flowable and which cell
is immobile. Then by substracting the flow cell from the top down and making the
reduce number of the flow cell equal to the increase number of shrinkage cavity
cell, a collection of all the shrinkage cavity cell becomes the primary or secondary
porosity, while the coordinate of the cell is the position of the shrinkage cavity.
When the solidified dendrite forms a skeleton, the melt surrounded by dendrite will
shrink and form porosity. The criterion G/
√R proposed by Niyama can be used
to predict the location where shrinkage occurs. When the G/
√R value of the cell
is less than a critical value, the cell may contain porosity. The porosity distribution
range is the collection of all possible porosity cells. For 2D temperature field, the G
and R values of 26 neighboring cells of each node should be calculated, wherein the
maximum value of G/
√R represents the interdendrite feed ability. Points that reach
or remain below the defined G/
√R value are considered as porosity and otherwise
not. Niyama considered that the critical value was 1.0, but Lee Wenzhen et al. found
that the critical value was related to the size of the casting, with the range of the
critical value is from 0.8 to 1.10, with the upper limit corresponding to large castings
and the lower limit to small castings [15].
We recommend that the critical value is 0.8 for large castings.When it is larger than
this value, it will be gray on the scales, that is, there is no shrinkage in this region. If it
is less than this value, it means that the region cannot be feeded effectively, resulting
in possible shrinkage.
b. Porosity criterion
Porosity criterion is an effective way to visualize porosities in the casting. The portion
of porosities at the end of solidification simulation is displayed. An analysis of
porosity problems is more reliable when combining Niyama criterion and Porosity
criterion together, which guarantees the optimizing casting process and reducing
casting rejection rate.
Porosity criterion is set as 0.001 ~ 10. The color scale can be used to correspond to
the porosity of 0.001% ~ 10%. For example, the blue area indicates that the porosity2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 59
is zero, that is, there is no shrinkage problem, whereas the white area indicates that
the porosity is very high and the value is close to 10%. The corresponding porosity
can be found on the color scale.
c. FSTIME criterion
The FSTIME criterion means the time that the casting needs to reach the critical
portion of solidified melt. It is used to determine the causes of porosity and solutions.
It is generally believed that after the melt reaches the critical “Fraction Solid”, it is
no longer flowable due to dendrite lap joint. If the FSTIME of a part of the casting
is larger than that of any other points nearby, there will be porosity tendency. The
critical “Fraction Solid” varies according to the composition of the liquid metal.
d. HOTSPOT criterion
The HOTSPOT criterion shows the solidification time of hot spot during solidi￾fication, with a unit of “s”. This criterion shows porosities in these residual melt
regions.
The HOTSPOT criterion shows the solidification time in the local area of the
casting by the color scale. The solidification time is longer in these residual metal
regions that are called hot spots, and porosity problem will occur during solidifica￾tion. Through the comprehensive analysis of the solidification time criterion and the
HOTSPOT criterion, it can be seen that, for large castings, if no riser is added, the
hot spot part of the casting will have defects.
2.5 Shape and Size Control of Large Castings
Quality control of large castings have two aspects: casting defects and size defects.
The shrinkage rate of wax pattern and casting are different depending on whether it
is free or restrained. In addition, different restrained conditions can result in different
shrinkage. For small parts, the size does not change much for different shrinkage
rates; but for large castings, the change is large enough to exceed the tolerance and
make scrap. Casting deformation is also easy to cause shape and position deviation
and lead to scrap.
2.5.1 Factors Affecting Deformation [16]
The process of investment casting is complicated, and there are many factors that
affect the dimensional accuracy. The dimensional accuracy of casting will be affected
by the casting structure, material, pattern making, shell making, roasting, pouring,
and other factors.60 G. Wang
(1) Effect of pouring temperature: The higher the pouring temperature, the greater
the shrinkage; the lower the pouring temperature, the smaller the shrinkage.
(2) The influence of casting structure: ➀ The shrinkage is greater with a higher wall
thickness, and smaller with a thinner wall thickness; ➁ The free shrinkage is
bigger, whereas the shrinkage becomes smaller when restrained.
(3) The influence of shell materials: Since the expansion coefficient of zircon sand
or powder is only 4.6 × 10−6/°C, the resulting expansion can be ignored.
(4) The effect of shell roasting: the shell expansion coefficient is small, the expan￾sion is only 0.053% when the shell temperature is up to 1150°C; In addition,
some data show that there may be partial collapse due to phase transition after
contact with high-temperature melt; however, experience shows that the effect
can be ignored.
(5) The influence of material: The higher the carbon content in the material, the
smaller the line shrinkage, and vice versa.
(6) Effect of pattern on line shrinkage: ➀ Radial (restrained) shrinkage of pattern
is only 30–40% of the longitudinal (free) shrinkage, and the influence of wax
injection temperature on free shrinkage is far greater than that on the restrained
shrinkage (the best wax injection temperature is 57–59 °C. The higher the
temperature, the greater the shrinkage). ➁ The line shrinkage of wax is about
0.9–1.1%. ➂ When the pattern is stored, it will further shrink, with a shrinkage
value about 10% of the total shrinkage. However, after 12 h, the size of the
pattern is almost stable. ➃The wax injection temperature, injection pressure,
and pressure hold time. Studies have shown that the size deviation of pattern is
more than 40% of the casting size deviation [17, 18].
To sum up, there are three key processes in investment casting that can have
great influence on the size and deformation of the casting, which include pattern
preparation, shell preparation, and casting solidification and cooling.
2.5.2 Control of the Shape and Size of Large Castings
The factors influencing the casting shape and size can be classified into two aspects:
material and process. The raw materials and process should be strictly controlled
during the manufacturing. The raw materials such as wax, shell, and master alloy must
be stable and controllable. Regarding the process, in order to optimize process param￾eters and reduce deformation, the traditional experience design has been followed
and information technology has also been used, together with numerical simulation
being carried out for pattern making and casting processes. After the process param￾eters are set down, strict control is required, including the environmental conditions
of the wax injection and shell making workshop, which should be controlled within
a certain range.2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 61
2.5.2.1 Numerical Simulation of Deformation
(1) Numerical simulation of casting stress
During the solidfication, the cooling rate in the casting is different everywhere due
to the interaction of the geometric structure and boundary conditions and the cooling
shrinkage is also different, resulting in deformations caused by stresses in the casting
system. Numerical simulation of stress and strain can help better understand the
dynamic changes of stress and deformation during the casting solidification. As a
result, research and prediction of casting deformation and residual stress analysis
can guide the castings at the shop floor scientifically [19–21]. Nowadays the casting
simulation softwares can successfully combine the flow field, temperature field, and
stress field together to simulate the casting process of large castings [22–31]. The
subsequent stress, crack, and deformation can be well predicted as well. Based on
these simulation results, the process parameters are modified to make the cooling of
the casting as evenly as possible, thus reducing the deformation of the casting.
(2) Numerical simulation of wax injection
The dimensional accuracy of wax pattern directly affects the dimension accuracy
of final casting. As a result, it is necessary to simulate the injection of wax pattern.
To this end, first measure the theological and compressible properties of wax and
then construct the mathematical model and carry on the numerical simulation of wax
injection. Based on the simulation results, the runner system for the wax pattern is
optimized and the displacement field of the wax pattern deformation is predicted.
Combined with experiments data, the shrinkage rule and shrinkage mechanism in
different directions of wax pattern have been studied. In addition, the mathematical
shrinkage model of large thin-wall pattern has also been established to optimize
injection parameters and reduce wax pattern deformation.
2.5.2.2 Dimension Detection During the Investment Casting Process
There are many factors that affect the shape and size of the casting, some of which
have not been fully studied. Consequently, the simulation can hardly predict the
deformation of the casting exactly. Currently, inspection, rework, and rejection rates
account for 35 percent of the cost of casting. Both process measurement and final
product measurement are the key to realizing accurate process control and cost
reduction. In the United States, the next generation manufacturing technology plan
will carry out research on digital imaging detection technology of castings for air
plane and aerospace [16]. Measurement is indispensable for casting development
and production. It is necessary to carry out more studies on the size measurement
technology for wax pattern, shell, and casting in the process of investment casting.
Wax pattern, especially the low temperature wax pattern, is soft. The traditional
contact measurement will affect the dimension accuracy of the thin-wall wax pattern.62 G. Wang
3D digital detection is a new advanced technology with broad application prospects,
which is of great significance owing to its flexibility, automation measurement, and
product design [32–36]. Non-contact techniques, such as knuckle-arm or hand-held
laser scanner, are used to scan the full surface of wax pattern and casting rapidly
and form a solid surface model. Then the 3D surface tolerance comparison, section
deviation analysis, and rapid dimension measurement will be performed by some
softwares, which provide a reference for the accurate study of casting deformation.
The new scanning measurement technology can accurately record the process of
deformation in the entire process of investment casting, quantitatively record the
size deformation in each process, and help determine the main factor influencing the
casting size and deformation deviation, which are then used to control the deformation
of large complex thin-walled castings.
2.6 Wax Pattern Mold Design
According to the process of investment casting, casting is transformed from wax
pattern, implying that the shape and size of wax pattern can directly affect the shape
and size of casting. Researches have shown that the size fluctuation of casting is
largely inherited from the size fluctuation of its corresponding wax pattern [17]. The
wax pattern size deviation accounts for over 40% of the casting size deviation [18].
In order to obtain the correct shape and size of the wax pattern, the size of the pattern
mold cavity should be controlled so that the casting with reliable dimension accuracy
can be obtained. This means that it is necessary to correctly assign the shrinkage
rate of each dimension of the casting when designing the wax pattern mold. The
dimensional accuracy of the final casting is realized by setting the dimension of
the wax pattern mold to compensate for the size change during the wax injection
and the casting process. The principle of mold surface compensation design is to
apply an appropriate amount of reverse deformation to the deformed parts to offset
the shrinkage deformation of wax patterns and castings during solidification and
cooling. Therefore, it is very important to calculate the size of mold cavity.
In the long-term study and practice, the three influential factors of wax pattern
shrinkage, i.e., alloy shrinkage, shell expansion, and deformation are all taken into
account comprehensively and the researchers have carried out a lot of shrinkage
calculation solutions and achieved certain results [37]. However, casting structure,
including the wall thickness and shape, has more a significant effect on the total
shrinkage rate, but is relatively difficult to calculate. For complex castings, some
parts are constrained, some are half constrained, and some are constraint-free. As a
result, they should be analyzed carefully, with different shrinkage rates being assigned
to each part, in order to achieve high dimension accuracy castings. Due to the lengthy
process and many relevant factors, the total shrinkage rate is difficult to determine.
Therefore, the shrinkage compensation rate of the mold obtained by the “formula
calculation” also has a large uncertainty. Although it can be ignored for small castings,
for large castings it cannot. Otherwise it may lead to out-of-tolerance.2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 63
The compensation shrinkage method of mold cavity design has been lacking in
accurate theoretical guidance, and still remains in the design practice as “experi￾ence + experiment” [38], which mainly includes empirical data method, formula
calculation method, and trial and error.
For important castings, specific parts should be tested under different processing
conditions, in order to find out the appropriate total shrinkage under the shop
floor conditions. Then the product shrinkage compensation and pouring system are
adjusted accordingly, which is followed by designing and manufacturing the pattern
mold, and finally move to production. When the traditional “experience + exper￾iment” trial and error method is used to design the mold, several modifications
are needed. Although the “trial-production method” can finally get the appropriate
shrinkage compensation rate, its long cycle and high cost seriously restrict the devel￾opment of investment casting. The pattern mold design of high temperature castings
for aeroengines is always a bottleneck problem.
In order to shorten the R&D cycle time, reduce the mold repair, and mold cost,
the method of split pattern mold is used in the R&D stage.
2.6.1 Split Pattern Mold
Due to the large, complex, and thin wall of large castings, if the wax injection
is carried out using the traditional wax pattern mold, it is difficult to control the
dimension accuracy of wax pattern. In addition, it is difficult to adjust the dimen￾sion inaccuracy caused by improper shrinkage. For circular castings (such as TRF,
intermediate casing, etc.), since they are axisymmetric and geometrically meet the
requirements of separate designs, split wax pattern molds can be applied.
As to the TRF, it has 10 hollow joint struts. The wax pattern is divided into 10
pieces along the center surface of the two adjacent struts. In this way, the wax pattern
partition is 1/10 of the whole wax pattern. Prepare the 10 wax blocks by the wax
injection machine, adjust the positioning size of special fixture tool, and then put the
wax blocks into the fixture tool, weld the wax blocks, and finally form the whole
wax pattern.
The advantages of split wax pattern are:
(1) Easy to adjust. When the incorrect shrinkage rate is used, we can also get the
correct size by adjusting the wax fixture tool, such that re-manufacture the
pattern mold is avoided.
(2) The size of the wax pattern is smaller and it is easier to get the correct shape and
dimension accuracy of the wax pattern. The wax pattern rejects things such as
short runs and hence low density are reduced and the wax pattern mold is easy
to open and operate;64 G. Wang
(3) Compared with the overall mold, the split mold is smaller in size, much simpler
in terms of the structure, and easy to design and manufacture. Even with the
addition of design and manufacture of special tools, the preparation cycle is
greatly shortened and the cost of tooling can be greatly reduced.
2.6.2 Overall Pattern Mold
Although the split pattern mold has many advantages, it needs to weld the wax
blocks together, which need time, and even more time for injecting the 10 wax blocks
separately. For overall mold, one injection is just needed to get the wax pattern, and
it does not need to assemble and weld the wax blocks. Clearly, the disadvantage
of split pattern mold becomes more obvious for mass production. In addition, it is
easy to leave welding traces with improper operation, and the wax pattern is easy to
deform during the welding manually. Therefore, after trial production, the shrinkage
problems of the casting have been controlled, the overall pattern mold can be used in
mass production, which can easily ensure the dimension accuracy of the wax pattern
and improve the production efficiency as well.
References
1. Longtengriyue. How hard is an airline jet engine, Aerospace knowledge. (12), 28–31, 2010
2. Q. Huan, Development and process of superalloy INCONEL 718 (GH4169). J. Mater. Eng.
40, 8 (2012)
3. J. He-Fu, Development and manufacturing technology of gas turbine engine. Aeronaut. Manuf.
Technol. 5, 36–39 (2007)
4. H. Xiangping, Overview of foreign investment investment casting development. Spec.-Cast
Non-Ferrous Alloy. 12(3), 40–43 (1992)
5. N. Hai, X. Chengmu, Application and development of titanium alloy casting abroad. China
Foundry Mach. Technol. 6, 1–3 (2003)
6. L.-T. Zhang, C. Lamei, L. Guoli et al., Theory and Practice of Near Net-shape Investment
Casting (National Defense Industry Press, Beijing, 2007)
7. C. Lamei, T. Xin, Z. Yong et al., Progress of advanced near net-shape investment casting
technology of superalloys. J. Aeronaut. Mater. 26(3), 238–243 (2006)
8. T. Tianfu, C. Bing, B. JIANG, Investment Casting Technology (China Machine Press, Beijing,
1991)
9. B. JIANG, Practical Investment Casting Technology, (Liaoning Science and Technology Press,
Shenyang, 2008)
10. B. JIANG, Investment Casting, China Machine Press, 2004
11. Leiden; Boston: Brill, Bubble and drop interfaces Progress in colloid and interface science,
vol. 2, pp. 1877–8569, 2011
12. Z. Yuan, Product Design Guidelines for Manufacturing and Assembly, China Machine Press,
2011
13. Foundry Institution of Chinese Mechanical Engineering Society. Casting manual, vol. 5, casting
process, 2nd edn, China Machine Press, 2003
14. P. Liwen, Z. Lijing, Z. Hu, Applicability of shrinkage porosity prediction for casting with
Niyama criterion, J. Beijing Univ. Aeronaut. Astronauties, 37(12), (2011)2 Investment Casting Process Design of Large-Size Superalloy … 65
15. W-Z. Li, Numerical Simulation of Microstructure and Shrinkage Cavity Formation During
Solidification of Castings [D]. Tsinghua University, 1995
16. C. Bing, Dimensional stability and accuracy of investment casting. Spec.-Cast Non-Ferrous
Alloy. 1, 53–56 (2003)
17. H. Xiangping, The general situation of wax pattern precision in investment casting. Spec.-Cast
Non-Ferrous Alloy. 24(1), 156–159 (1999)
18. Z. Zhenyu, L. Bunv, Factors that affect the dimension accuracy of casting during mold making.
Mech. Res. Appl. 15, 15–16 (2002)
19. X. Yan, K. Jin-Wu, H. Tian-You, Application of contact element method in simulating thermal
stress during solidification of casting. Comput. Appl. 27(5), 506–510 (2006)
20. K. Jinwu, Numerical Simulation Analysis of Thermal Stress Fields during Solidification of Steel
Casting. [D]. Tsinghua University, 1998
21. Y. Yi, J. Yuming, L. Liling et al., Numerical simulation of thermal stress field and thermal
cracking of casting during solidification. Foundry Technol. 2, 36–39 (2000)
22. L. Hui, S. Jian-song, Z. Ai-Qin, Numerical simulation and deformation analysis of thermal
stresses in stress frame. China Foundry 59(1), 38–41 (2010)
23. C. Jianguo, K. Jinwu, Z. Jiafeng et al., Extraction of deformation of castings from simulated
displacement results. Foundry Technol. 29(10), 1322–1326 (2008)
24. C. Bing, Numerical simulation of investment casting process. Spec-Cast Non-Ferrous Alloy.
25, 683–686 (2005)
25. S. Liwen, H. Hua, X. Hong, Numerical simulation of thermal stress and thermal cracking of
casting. Res. Stud. Foundry Equip. 3, 20–22 (2006)
26. L. Meie, X. Jiandong, Research development of thermal-mechanical numerical modeling of
casting stress field. Foundry 51(3), 141–144 (2002)
27. Z. Hui, K. Jinwu, H. Tian-you, Study of effect factors on thermal stress during solidification
process. Hot Working Technol. 35(13), 69–72 (2006)
28. Z. Xianshu, Y. Shan, J. Jun-ze, Study on calculation model of resistance stress of cast mold. J.
Dalian Univ. Technol., 36(6), 687–691, (1996)
29. Z. Xianshu, J. Jun-ze, Thermo-elasto-plastic analysis of the dynamic stress in stress-frame
specimen. J. Dalian Univ. Technol. 22(3), 1–4 (1983)
30. S. Kun, Z. Dongbo, L. Bingheng, Numerical simulation of casting stress considering mold
resisting stress. Acta Metall. Sinica 12, 1258–1262 (2000)
31. F. Xianjun, L. Dunming, Z. Jianxin et al., Bidirectional coupled simulation for casting thermal
stress based on ANSYS. China Foundry 60(11), 1103–1106 (2011)
32. H. Xiaomei, L. Jiayan, C. Wei et al., Study on digieal design and check of turbine blades based
on reverse engineering. Metrol. Meas. Technol. 29(2), 8–10 (2009)
33. Z. Meng, C. Liliang, W. Junchang, Dimension measurement of castings based on 3d
reconstruction technology with marking points. China Foundry 59(4), 379–383 (2010)
34. Y. Yongquan, Z. Shichao, X. Zhenjia, Application of 3d scanning technology in new casting
development. J. Stand. Qual. Mech. Ind. 478, 37–41 (2013)
35. Z. Shichao, Y. Yongquan, Z. Shoushuang et al., Application of 3d laser scanning technology
in casting dimension inspection. Automobile Technol. Mater. 12, 61–64 (2012)
36. H.-S. Li, Qualify for CAE and CAI integration applications based on moldflow and geomagic.
CAD/CAM Manuf. Inf. 8, 51–53 (2009)
37. L. Jingguo, Z. Xiaofeng, L. Xintao, Research on the production technology in the process of
investment casting. Mod. Cast Iron 6, 67–69 (2006)
38. J. Liu, K. Bu, Y. Li et al., Casting shrinkage analysis of turbine blade. Mod. Manuf. Eng. 3,
9–12 (2008)Chapter 3
Dimensional Deviation and Defect
Prediction of Wax Pattern
Donghong Wang
A large number of studies have shown that in many processes of investment casting
there are three key processes that have a great influence on the dimension and defor￾mation of castings, namely, wax pattern, shell preparation, and casting solidification
[1–5]. Sabao et al. [3] analyzed the dimension errors that occurred in each process of
investment casting. Figure 3.1 shows the fluctuation behavior of the casting dimen￾sion in the three key processes. The results show that the fluctuation in dimensions of
castings is mostly inherited from the corresponding wax pattern fluctuation. Zhang
et al. [6] also confirmed that the dimension deviation caused by wax pattern stage
accounts for more than 40% of the total deviation from the design dimensions to the
final dimensions of castings. It can be seen that the injection process of wax pattern
has a decisive influence on the final dimensions for investment casting. Taking the
wax material used in engineering practice as an example, this chapter expounds on
the influencing factors of dimensional accuracy of wax pattern and the method for
prediction and control of the wax injection process during investment casting.
3.1 Factors Affecting the Dimensional Deviation of Wax
Pattern
The dimensional accuracy of wax pattern is affected by many factors. Firstly, the
chemical composition affects the linear shrinkage caused by heating expansion and
cooling shrinkage of the wax. Second, the linear shrinkage of the wax pattern is
also related to the shape and dimension of the pattern, as well as to the position
of the pouring system and the parameters of the injection process [7]. Therefore,
the main factors that determine the final dimension of wax pattern include (1) the
composition and properties of wax material, (2) wax injection process parameters,
(3) the dimension and structure characteristics of pattern, and (4) injection channel
system and die design.
© Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
B. Sun et al., Precision Forming Technology of Large Superalloy Castings for Aircraft
Engines, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-6220-8_3
6768 D. Wang
Fig. 3.1 Dimensions in the investment casting process [3]
3.1.1 Composition and Properties of Wax Materials
The investment casting wax is a complex mixture, which mainly includes synthetic
wax, natural or synthetic resin, solid organic fillers, and water, as well as additives
such as plastics, oil, and plasticizers. Its components also have their own uses. For
example, the addition of resin can increase the strength of wax materials and the addi￾tion of fillers can improve the shrinkage performance of wax materials. Owing to the
existence of these additives, the investment casting wax shows complex mechanical
and thermal properties.
The composition of additives and fillers has a great influence on the properties
of wax materials. At present, wax materials with fillers are widely used, such as
powdered polyethylene, polystyrene, organic acid, fatty acids, and starch, etc., which
accounts for 30–45% of the total amount. This type of wax has good heat preservation
and liquidity and can be molded at relatively low temperatures. Wu et al. [8] found
that the shrinkage of wax mold added to the wax material was more than 5% lower
than that without filling materials. Liu et al. [9] improved the strength and shrinkage
of wax by adding EVA (a polymer of ethylene and vinyl acetate). Hao [10] showed
that the shrinkage properties of wax materials with similar chemical structures but
different compositions were obviously different. These studies fully show that the
filling material has a great influence on the properties of wax.
It should be pointed out that some performance indicators such as melting point,
freezing point, penetration, hardness, and so on, which are usually used in engi￾neering, only provide a general description of wax products in order to ensure their
supply quality. These simple data cannot provide enough help for the selection of wax
injection process parameters and the design of flow passage. However, some useful
physical properties, such as shear viscosity, surface tension, the compressibility of
wax, specific heat, thermal conductivity, and heat transfer coefficient between mold3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 69
and wax, cannot be characterized and tested simply and efficiently. In order to under￾stand the performance and behavior of wax, researchers have made great efforts.
Harvey Feld et al. [11] studied the mechanical properties of investment casting wax.
Han et al. [12] tested the rheological properties of wax materials and established the
flow constitutive equation of wax materials for investment casting using the power￾law viscosity model. Gebelin et al. [13] tested the viscosity state of wax materials
and the viscosity of liquid injection, and fitted the rheological curve of wax mate￾rials using the Carreau and modified cross WLF viscosity model. These studies have
established a critical relationship between the composition and properties of wax.
3.1.2 Wax Injection Process Parameters
The so-called wax pattern manufacturing process refers to the process of transfer￾ring wax material into the mold to form wax mold. The main parameters involved
are wax temperature, injection temperature, mold temperature, injection pressure,
holding time, and holding pressure. These parameters will have an impact on the
dimensional accuracy of wax pattern. Taking the wax melting temperature and time
as an example, the insulation tank should maintain a setting temperature slightly
higher than the ejection temperature and be heated for at least 8 h. It cannot be used
until the wax material melts evenly; otherwise it is easy to produce defects such as
filling dissatisfaction, cold insulation, grain surface, flow pattern, and mesh grain.
The researchers studied the importance of the parameters of various wax injection
stages, including wax injection temperature, wax injection time, injection pressure,
holding pressure, and static time of wax mold after demoulding. Kelkar et al. [14]
found that wax injection temperature has a great influence on the dimensions of the
constrained shape. With increasing the injection cycle time, the size shrinkage of
wax mold decreases, in particular, for the case of the constrained shape. However,
injection pressure has little effect on the size shrinkage of wax mold. Horacek et al.
[15, 16] suggested that injection pressure and rate had no significant effect on the
shrinkage of wax pattern, but the holding pressure and time are the important factors
affecting shrinkage. Bonilla et al. [17] suggested that most of the shrinkage of wax
pattern occured within 2 h after demoulding and the pressing process had a little
effect. Other studies have also given various conclusions, which, however, are even
contradictory to each other and thus have not been widely accepted. In-depth and
comprehensive studies on the influence of visible wax injection process parameters on
the size deviation are currently insufficient and still lacking. Therefor it is necessary
to systematically consider the process factors that affect the size deviation of wax
mold and introduce the process robust optimization design, which can then help
solve the problem of process optimization, as well as the optimization theory of
wax injection molding from the perspective of basic research, and develop the large
complex thin-wall wax mold with higher size accuracy and better stability.70 D. Wang
3.1.3 Dimension and Structure Characteristics of Wax
Pattern
(1) Variable cross-section structures
For the characteristics of variable section structures, the uneven shrinkage
caused by the sharp change of interface thickness will lead to serious deforma￾tion. The researchers found that the use of wax mold core, wax mold drawing,
and other techniques can effectively reduce the thickness of the part of the size
deviation, with, however, the impact of the overall wax mold size deviation still
unclear.
(2) Hollow thin-wall structures
In order to reduce the weight of castings, castings with hollow thin-walled
structures are favored by designers, and technically, it is necessary to use a
predetermined core during wax mold pressing. However, it is difficult to predict
the dimensional deviation of the wax mold when preparing the hollow structure
wax mold. Horacek et al. [16] suggested that the dimension deviation of the
hollow structure castings was mainly due to the influence of injection param￾eters. The research based on injection molding showed that the deviation of
preset water-soluble core in the wax pressing process may be the most dominant
factor. In 2004, Bakharev et al. [18] confirmed the core deflection of injection
molding process using simulation software. In 2009, Dong et al. [19] showed
that melt temperature and injection time had little effect on core deflection size.
In constrast, injection pressure was the most important process parameter of
core deflection [20, 21]. Giacomin et al. [22] had focused on the study of core
migration in the injection molding process. In their study, the viscoelastic model
was used to describe the wax material and the predicted core shift was larger
than the measured value. The results showed that the core shift predicted by the
fifth-order nonlinear theory was very close to the measured value [22].
(3) Constraint and free shrinkage
Okhuysen et al. [23] designed feature parts to study the shrinkage of wax
pattern. The features of ring shape were divided into three types of deformation:
constrained, partially constrained, and free deformation. It was found that not all
the dimensions of the characteristics changed along with the injection process
parameters, and the shrinkage of free deformation wax pattern was larger than
that of constrained deformation dimension. Yarlagadda et al. [24] studied the
accuracy of H wax pattern injected using low-pressure injection molding of
polyethyl carbamate (hard mold) and silicone rubber (soft mold). The results
showed that the shrinkage rate of free deformation size was twice as much as
that of a restricted deformation position.3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 71
3.1.4 Wax Injection Filling System and Mold Design
The effects of wax injection runner systems are often overlooked by researchers
and process designers. For small castings, an extremely simple runner design can
be met. But for wax molds of large complex thin-wall castings, it is necessary to
design the runners into the runner itself and the gate. The gate is a very short and
narrow-section flow passage connecting the splitter and the cavity. It can be placed
at one or more parts of the workpiece and can be of various types, generally used
according to the respective characteristics. The main function of the gate is to ensure
faster flow velocity and better fluidity when filling the mold, prevent backflow of the
melt, facilitate demolding of the product, and control the freezing time of the gate
and the flow during the filling of the melt performance [25].
The wax injection gate design mainly includes the design of the number, position,
shape, and size of the gates, wherein the number and position of the gates mainly
affect the filling mode whereas the shape and size of the gates affect the melt flow
properties. It has been reported that the uniformity of the size of injection molded
articles can be improved by gate size optimization [26, 27]. The basic principles of
the wax mold runner system design during investment casting are as follows [28–31].
(1) The gate location should be placed at the farthest point where a hysteresis
effect may occur to eliminate or reduce the hysteresis. The so-called “hysteresis
effect” here refers to the phenomenon that when the melt flows to the thick and
thin junction, the flow resistance is large at the thin point. The phenomenon of
“cutting near the road” is also caused by the blockage at the same place, which
is also called “short shot”.
(2) When determining the number and location of gates for a product, the flow ratio
must be examined to ensure that the melt can fill the cavity. The flow ratio is
determined by the ratio of the flow length to the thickness of the flow channel.
If the calculated flow ratio is greater than the allowable value, it is necessary
to increase the thickness of the product or change the gate position or use a
multi-gate method to reduce the flow ratio.
(3) The cavity layout and gate opening position should be symmetrical to prevent
the flash phenomenon caused by the eccentric load of the mold. The gate position
should ensure that the flow length in all directions is equal to prevent resions of
the part from experiencing overpressure.
(4) For gates with slender cores, the core will be deformed by the impact of the
melt. In this case, the front side of the wax should be avoided to determine the
position of the gate.
Based on the above analysis, it is seen that gate location is a key variable in
injection mold design. An incorrect gate location will result in a series of defects
such as overpressure, high shear rate, poor weld line properties, and warpage. For
simple parts, we may get a satisfactory design by analyzing the relationship between
the gate position and the product. For complex parts, however, these guidelines may
help us judge the rationality of the gate location design, but cannot automatically72 D. Wang
provide us with a reasonable design. Therefore, the researchers [32, 33] have turned
to numerical simulations to optimize the design and achieved good results.
3.2 Numerical Simulation of the Investment Molding
Process
As mentioned earlier, the dimensional change in the wax mold preparation stage is
the main cause of the oversize of the investment casting and needs to be predicted
and controlled as much as possible. As precision castings continue to become larger,
more integrated, and thinner, the pressing process of investment casting wax molds
increasingly relies on numerical simulations as a powerful analytical tool.
A number of numerical simulation studies have been conducted in terms of the
filling behavior of wax injection molding. For example, Gebelin et al. [13] used
Moldflow software to simulate the flow process of the wax and analyzed the influ￾ence of different mesh types on the numerical simulation of the filling process and
the influence of gate location on filling process. Sadegh et al. [34] performed numer￾ical simulations of solidification time, cavitation, and temperature fields during wax
filling. On the basis of the experiment, the numerical simulation of the mold filling
process for investment casting was successfully realized by Han [12]. Sabau et al.
[1] used ABAQUS software to simulate the viscoelastic deformation of a stepped
wax pattern. Figure 3.2 shows the displacement in the length of the wax mold after
the demolding and the displacement on the broadband after 3.5 h of demolding. The
work of these researchers demonstrated the versatile applications of numerical simu￾lation methods in the wax mold preparation process and the new methods of wax
mold preparation research brought by the numerical simulation technology based on
the flow and solidification theory of polymer materials.
Fig. 3.2 Viscoelastic case: Displacement distribution (cm) in the wax pattern a along the length
and b along the width at 3.5 h after the pattern is removed from the die. Displacements are magnified
20 times3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 73
Fig. 3.3 Thermal
conductivity and specific
heat for the pattern wax
3.2.1 Performance and Theoretical Model of Wax
Before the establishment of the model, it is necessary to conduct an in-depth study on
the properties of wax and measure the properties of wax, including thermal properties,
rheological properties, and mechanical properties. At the same time, there is still a
lot of work to be done for the constitutive model of wax. It must be pointed out that
waxes vary in performance depending on the manufacturer. This chapter only uses a
certain type of wax used in the engineering practice of the author as an example. The
results in this paper are also related to the model, but the discussion is applicable to
most waxes.
3.2.1.1 Thermal Performance
Figure 3.3 shows the relationship curve between the thermal performance of the tested
wax and the temperature. As the temperature increases, the thermal conductivity first
increases and then decreases, while the thermal conductivity of the liquid wax is
small. It can be seen from the specific heat curve that near the softening point of the
ring, the specific heat decreases rapidly, and it does not change substantially after
70 °C.
3.2.1.2 Rheological Properties of Wax
Quantitative analysis of the fluidity of wax provides a scientific approach to control￾ling the investment casting process and dimensional accuracy. It is considered that
the shrinkage of casting is inversely proportional to the fluidity of wax [35]. In the
standard for measuring the technological properties of mold, rheology is reflected by
measuring the viscosity of mold at a predetermined temperature when it is in liquid74 D. Wang
state [2]. Figure 3.4 show viscosity curves of wax melt at different temperatures and
shear rates. It can be seen that wax melt shows shear thinning behavior. However,
the tested viscosity curve cannot reflect the true viscosity of the mold in the mold
filling process, nor the dynamic change of the mold viscosity with the change of
temperature and flow velocity. [36]. Therefore, it is necessary to carry out mathe￾matical treatment on the basis of the measured rheological curve and establish the
constitutive equation of the mold material to reflect the real dynamic performance
of the mold material flow process.
In the process of filling and compaction, the viscosity is affected by not only
temperature and pressure but also shear rate. Therefore, the Cross-WLF model of
pseudoplastic fluid in non-newtonian fluid can be used to express the relationship
between the viscosity and temperature and shear rate in the numerical simulation of
mold melt filling flow [2, 13, 31, 36]. It describes the zero-shear viscosity, which
is also sufficiently accurate at low shear rates. The flow process of wax melt in
wax injection mold mainly considers the action of shear stress, ignoring viscoelastic
behavior. The formula of cross-wlf viscosity model with shear thinning is shown as
follows:
η = η0
1 +

η0γ˙
τ∗
1−n (3.1)
η0 = D1 exp −A1(T − T ∗)
A2 + (T − T ∗)

(3.2)
Tau∗ = D2 + D3 p (3.3)
A2 = A¯ 2 + D3p (3.4)
Fig. 3.4 Viscosity versus
shear rate at different
temperatures of wax3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 75
Table 3.2 Tait PVT model
coefficients Parameter Value Remark
b1m (m3/kg) 0.001078 Melted state
b2m [m3/(kg-K)] 6.271e-007 Melted state
b3m (Pa) 1.69603e+008 Melted state
b4m (1/K) 0.007912 Melted state
b1s (m3/kg) 0.001022 Solid state
b2s [m3/(kg-K)] 4.603e-007 Solid state
b3s (Pa) 2.60746e+008 Solid state
b4s (1/K) 0.005987 Solid state
b7 (m3/kg) 0.000056
b8 (1/K) 0.05867
b9 (1/Pa) 1.185e-008
b5 (K) 339.15
b6 (K/Pa) 1.490e-007
where −
A2 is the average. Table 3.1 shows the viscosity model parameter values fitted
using the least-squares method. The value of D3 is 0, indicating that the viscosity
model does not take into account the effects of pressure.
3.2.1.3 Compression PVT Characteristics of Wax Melt
The pressure-specific volume-temperature (PVT) relation of polymer describes the
change of specific volume of polymer with the change of temperature and pressure.
As the basic property of polymer, it is the basis for flow analysis, mold design,
injection molding process control, and process analysis. The PVT curve shows the
influence of temperature and pressure on the specific volume of polymer. Figure 3.5
shows the PVT data of the tested wax material KC4017B.
PVT equation of state can also be used to study and calculate the specific volume
properties of polymers, mixing and phase separation laws of polymers, and phase
equilibrium calculation. In addition, the PVT equation of state is also used to describe
the PVT relationship of the polymer, which provides the calculation formula and
theoretical basis for the simulation and control of injection molding of the polymer.
The modified two-domain Tait state equation is the most commonly used one to
describe the PVT relationship of polymer in injection molding field. The formula of
modified two-domain Tait state equation is as follows:
ρ =

ν0

1 − 0.0894 ln
1 +
P
B
 + νt
−1
(3.5)
where for T < b5 + b6P we have76 D. Wang
Fig. 3.5 PVT diagram of the wax
V0 = b1s + b2s(T − b5) (3.6)
B(T ) = b3s exp[−b4s(T − b5)] (3.7)
V1 = b7 exp[b8(T − b5) − b9P] (3.8)
and for T > b5 + b6P we have
V0 = b1m + b2m(T − b5) (3.9)
B(T ) = b3m exp[−b4m(T − b5)] (3.10)
V1 = 0 (3.11)
In the formula, ρ is the density of wax, i.e., the reciprocal of specific volume, V0 is
a specific volume at zero pressure, and B is material of stress sensitivity. According to
the thermodynamic property of polymer, the PVT relationship needs to be described
in two temperature domains. The transition temperature of the measured volume at
zero pressure is represented by bs. The transformation temperature linearly increases
with the increase of pressure, and the change is represented by b6. b1 represents the3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 77
specific volume obtained by extrapolating the zero pressure isobaric curve to the
transition temperature, and the value of this transition point is the same for both
temperature domains. The relationship between the specific volume and temperature
is contained in b2, while b3 and b4 represent the characteristics of the solid-state and
molten state, respectively. When b4 is determined, the specific volume becomes more
sensitive to pressure with the increase of temperature. b7, b8, and b9 characterize
the specific volume vt in the solid-state. According to the experimental data, 11
parameters of the Tait equation are fitted using the multivariate nonlinear regression,
as shown in Table 3.2.
3.2.1.4 Viscoelasticity of Wax Material
Under certain external conditions, the polymer from an equilibrium state can reach a
new equilibrium state adapted to the external conditions through the thermal move￾ment of molecules. This variable speed process is also known as relaxation process
and the time required to complete the process is called the relaxation time. The relax￾ation process is related to the relative molecular weight of the polymer. Since the
polymer has a certain molecular weight distribution, the relaxation time is not a fixed
value but with a certain distribution, called the relaxation time spectrum. In general,
the relaxation time spectrum has the most general functional form describing the
viscoelasticity dependence on time or frequency. As can be seen from Bolzmann’s
superposition principle, all properties of materials are shown in all motion modes and
contributions with different relaxation time, and all materials’ functions measured
by experiments are based on the same relaxation time spectrum. Therefore, the relax￾ation time spectrum is undoubtedly the core of all viscoelastic functions. Because
the relaxation spectrum is central to describing the viscoelasticity of polymer fluid,
it is a hot topic to obtain the relaxation spectrum.
Fig. 3.6 Relationship
between strain rate and
storage modulus78 D. Wang
It can be seen from Fig. 3.6 that the storage modulus G and the loss modulus G
will change in a curve with the strain rate γ. When the curve enters the plateau range,
the storage modulus G and the loss modulus G has nothing to do with the strain
rate γ. That is, the storage modulus G and loss modulus G" at this time are only
related to frequency, so that the relationship between wax frequency and modulus
can be obtained. As shown in Fig. 3.6, it is most appropriate to set the strain rate of
0. 04% in the range of viscous elastic platforms.
According to the relaxation property of the polymer movement, the polymer chain
can be made to have sufficient activity, so that the polymer can exhibit high elastic
deformation, or it will take some time for the whole polymer to move and show
viscous flow (measured by the relaxation time). With the increase of temperature,
the relaxation time can be shortened. Therefore, the same mechanical relaxation
phenomenon can be observed not only at a higher temperature in a shorter time
but also at a lower temperature in a longer period of time. Therefore, according to
the principle of time–temperature equivalence, the effects of increasing temperature
and prolonging time on the molecular motion is equivalent. Reducing temperature
and shortening time are equivalent to molecular motion and Viscoelastic behavior
of polymers. With the help of conversion factor, the mechanical data measured at
one temperature can be transformed into mechanical data at another temperature.
If the experiment is carried out under an alternating force field, then the reduction
in frequency is equivalent to prolonging the observation time, and the additional
frequency is equivalent to shortening the observation time. Therefore, the practical
dynamic mechanical data measured at different temperatures can also be superim￾posed by means of moving factors. Owing to the principle of time–temperature
equivalence, the mechanical properties of the polymer measured at different temper￾atures or at different frequencies can be compared and converted, resulting in results
that can not actually be measured directly from the experiment. For example, in order
to obtain the stress relaxation behavior of natural rubber at a specified temperature,
because the temperature is too low and the stress relaxation is too slow, it may take
centuries or more to get the complete data, which is actually impossible. There￾fore, under the principle of time–temperature equivalence, stress relaxation data
can be measured at higher temperatures, which can be converted into the required
low-temperature data.
According to the principle of time–temperature equivalence, the increase of
temperature and the decrease of frequency are equivalent to the motion of the
molecule; the decrease of temperature and the increase of frequency are equivalent to
the motion of the molecule. As a result, each line spectrum is translated horizontally
or vertically. After adjustment, two main curves of storage modulus (ω) and loss
modulus (ω) can be obtained, and the master curve can be obtained by optimizing
the main mode curve, as shown in Fig. 3.7.
The approximation method of calculating the relaxation spectrum from the mate￾rial function is as follows. The steady-state relaxation modulus function is first
obtained using the steady-state stress relaxation experiment or the dynamic shear test.
Then the approximate solutions of the relaxation spectrum (λ) are obtained using
these functions to obtain the steady-state relaxation modulus function (ω) or the3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 79
Fig. 3.7 Master curves for the storage (G
) and loss module (G")
dynamic modulus function (ω). Finally the approximate solutions of the relaxation
spectrum (λ) are obtained using these functions [37]. In the process of calculating
the discrete relaxation spectrum using linear least square method, in order to obtain
more accurate results, the value range of the number of Maxwell motion elements is
generally 5–9, and usually with a value of N = 8 [5]. Our calculation is N = 5, 8. It
can be seen from Fig. 3.8 that the calculation results have the same changing trend
Fig. 3.8 The relaxation time spectrum of wax80 D. Wang
for both N = 5 and N = 8, and it can be seen that the accuracy of N = 5 is obviously
not as good as that of N = 8. With the relaxation time spectrum, the deformation
caused by the stress relaxation of the residual stress can be predicted after the wax
material is separated from the die, which is of great help to the correction of the die
size.
3.2.1.5 Theoretical Basis of Numerical Simulation of Wax Injection
Molding
In this chapter, the filling/backfilling process model of wax injection molding is based
on the generalized Hele-Shaw flow of non-Newtonian fluid under non-isotherm,
and the effects of material compressibility and phase transition are considered. The
flow behavior of polymer wax in the mold cavity dependends strongly on the shear
viscosity of the melt. In this chapter, the Cross-WLF viscosity model and the two￾domain Tait empirical equation are used to describe the PVT relationship. The finite￾element/finite-difference/controlled-volume methods have been used to solve the
above unified mathematical model and realized the integrated numerical simulation
of the injection filling/post-filling process.
In the filling/post filling stage of injection molding, the flow and heat transfer of
melt in the cavity belong to the flow and heat transfer of a continuum. Therefore, the
flow of melt should follow the law of conservation of mass, the law of conservation
of momentum, and the law of conservation of energy. Here, without considering the
viscous elastic behavior of the material, the polymer melt is regarded as a generalized
Newtonian fluid. In the Euler coordinate system, the melt flow satisfies the viscous
fluid continuity equation, the equation of motion, and the energy balance equation.
However, using only these equations can not solve the complex flow behavior in
the mold cavity of wax injection molding process and it is necessary to establish a
model describing the melt constitutive relation and other material behaviors in the
mold cavity, such as the rheological properties (viscosity model), physical properties
(density of solid–liquid two phases), and thermodynamic properties (specific heat,
thermal conductivity) of the wax materials established above, as well as the physical
behavior of the molding process, Only by properly simplifying the above equations
can the geometric characteristics be solved.
3.2.2 Numerical Simulation of Injection Process for the Ring
to Ring Part
In this section, the preparation process of the wax pattern for a ring-ring characteristic
part is studied using numerical simulation. Through the interpretation of the results,
the wax injection channel system can be carried out, the process parameters of wax
injection can be optimized, the deformation of wax die can be predicted, and the3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 81
Fig. 3.9 Model and size of feature parts
shrinkage law of wax die size can be revealed. The calculated results are verified
against the cavity pressure experiment.
The design of the feature is shown in Fig. 3.9.
3.2.2.1 Numerical Simulation of the Injection Process
Flow Filling System Optimization
Gate position plays a decisive role in determining the shape of melt flow front and
pressure holding pressure, together with the wax mold strength and other properties
of injection molding. A correct gate location can avoid some foreseeable problems.
The position of the gate is based on the geometry and technical requirements of the
product. The flow state, filling, shrinkage, and exhaust of the melt in the flow channel
and the cavity are analyzed, in general, based on the following principles [25, 28,
38–40]:
(1) The pouring gate shall be arranged at the thicker part of the section so that the
melt flows from the thick section to the thin section, ensuring that the charging
mode is complete;
(2) The flow direction of the melting material filling mode should be the shortest
and the flow direction change as well as the energy loss should be the minimum,
in order to reduce the pressure loss;
(3) The invention is beneficial to the elimination of air in the cavity;
(4) The pouring gate is not suitable for direct vertical flushing of the melt into the
cavity. Otherwise, a swirling flow is generated;
(5) The wax material is beneficial to the wax material to be filled with the cavity at
a low flow rate such that the melt fracture phenomenon can be avoided and the
welding marks on the wax pattern can be eliminated.
Figure 3.10 is a diagram of the filling time of wax at different gate positions. As
shown in Fig. 3.10a, the gate position is at the junction of the connecting branch plate82 D. Wang
Fig. 3.10 Wax melt filling time in different channel systems. a Before optimization; b After
optimization
Fig. 3.11 Simulation results of the weld line and the air traps in the wax mold
and the outer ring. Since the connecting branch plate wall is thin and since the melt
flows along the outer ring wall thickness, the wax melt will have a “lag effect” during
the flow process of the support plate. It can be seen that the filling time of the four
supports are quite different, and the uneven filling of the supports leads to uneven
cooling, which will lead to the excessive warping deformation of the wax die. The
optimized gate position is shown in Fig. 3.10b. The flow time of the wax melt in four
branches are the same. Owing to the thin wall of the support plate, the filling time of
the four branches is the same as that on the inner ring, even though the lag effect will
appear on the support plate as well. Therefore, the optimized flow channel system
experiences relatively uniform filling, which will not lead to excessive deformation
of the wax mold size. After optimization, the filling time is short, which is 10.35 s.
Thus the filling time is shortened by 2.01 s, which is more beneficial to filling.
Figure 3.11 shows the distribution of the weld line and air traps in wax die. The
existence of weld line will affect the surface quality of wax die. The simulation results
show that the angle of weld line is small after the optimization of the flow channel3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 83
system. It can be seen from the simulation results that there is a high possibility of gas
entrainment at the bottom of the outer ring and the top of the inner ring. According
to the simulation results, the exhaust tank needs to be set at the bottom of the die.
Wax Mold Shrinkage Law
The shrinkage deformation is directly related to the residual stress in the injection
molding process [41–44]. It is generally believed that there are two sources of residual
stresses in the injection wax mold, i.e., the thermal residual stress and the flow residual
stress. The former is caused by the rapid decrease of the surface temperature of the
wax mold in contact with the mold, which causes the surface layer to be cured when
the core of the wax mold is still in the melt state. With the gradual advance of the
cooling layer from the outside to the inside, the cooling shrinkage of the internal
melt is gradually limited by the external curing layer, resulting in tensile stress. The
points in the article are below the glass transition temperature at different times from
the higher temperature, and the shrinkage deformation experienced is not the same,
resulting in a stress referred to as the thermal stress. Due to the thermal viscoelasticity
of the polymer material, the product is only partially relaxed in the mold cavity after
the release. The unrelaxed thermal stress is thus referred to as the thermal residual
stress. This type of residual stress is due to the fact that when the flow of the wax
melt is stopped, the polymer chains which are oriented in the flow direction start to
develop towards the random arrangement under the action of thermal transport. Due
to the rapid cooling process, the molecular orientation of the melt in the vicinity of
the mold cavity wall does not have time to re-reach the equilibrium state to be frozen,
resulting in the existence of the residual stress after the product is demoulded.
Figure 3.12 shows the point cloud of the wax model signature scanned by 3D
laser, together with the corresponding CAD model. It can be seen that the inner and
outer rings contract to the center of contraction and the contraction of the outer ring
is larger than that of the inner ring.
Figure 3.13 presents the comparison between the measured and the predicted
values of the flow direction of the wax mold as well as the vertical flow direction,
where the flow direction is the height direction and the vertical flow direction is
the thickness direction. The contraction displacement of the wax mold in the height
direction is 0.4–1.2 mm; as the height increases, the contraction distance becomes
greater. In the thickness direction, as the wall thickness increases, the shrinkage value
of the thickness increases sharply, with a contraction displacement of 0.2–1.3 mm.
As can be inferred from Fig. 3.13, the shrinkage in the direction of flow of the
wax is much smaller than that in the thickness direction because the thermal residual
stress is an order of magnitude greater than the flow residual stress [42]. At the same
time, for this reason, the shrinkage behavior of the wax mold shows anisotropy of
the shrinkage in the flow direction of the wax and the direction of the vertical flow
[41, 42].84 D. Wang
Fig. 3.12 Comparison between scanned point cloud and actual CAD model
Fig. 3.13 Comparison
between measured and
predicted shrinkage
displacements of wax mode
flow direction and vertical
flow direction
Figure 3.13 also shows that the shrinkage trend of wax mode predicted by numer￾ical simulation is basically consistent with the measured value and the numerical
simulation can accurately predict the shrinkage deformation trend of wax mode. In
the height direction, the predicted deformation displacement value is about 0.1 mm
larger than the measured value, while in the thickness direction, the predicted value
is about 0.3 mm larger than the measured value. The numerical simulation shown
in Fig. 3.14 can also be used to predict the deformation of wax mould. Since the
analysis method is similar, it will not be repeated here.3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 85
Fig. 3.14 Predicted wax die warping deformation diagram/mm
3.2.2.2 Numerical Simulation of the Storage Process
Modern engineering utilizes many types of materials, such as concrete, plastics (rein￾forced or unreinforced plastics), and some biological tissues, of which the underlying
stress–strain relationship is related to time, a phenomenon called viscoelasticity. The
polymer shows obvious viscoelastic deformation, which is essentially a deformation
behavior between elasticity and viscosity. The stress in viscous elastic materials is a
function of strain and time. It is described that when the strain remains unchanged,
the stress will decrease with the increase of time, which is called relaxation. When the
temperature is constant and deformation remain unchanged, the stress in the polymer
decreases gradually with the increase of time, which is called stress relaxation. Wax
usually shows linear viscoelastic properties, and there will be stress relaxation in the
process of wax mold storage, which means its size will change with the increase of
time.
The melting die will continue to shrink within a few hours after removal, and
most of them will not stabilize until 24 h later. In order to prevent the shrinkage and
deformation of the wax mold during storage, the wax mold preparation and storage
should be kept at constant temperature and humidity. For wax moulds with special
requirements, they should be placed in the tire mould after taking the mould, store it
for a period of time, take it out after the dimension is stable, or make anti-deformation
tension tendons. For some plate-like parts, the plate can be clamped to correct the
deformation. Although scholars have done some research on the storage conditions
of wax mould, the deformation size of wax mold in storage is not quantitatively
described, and the deformation mechanism of wax mold is not described. In this86 D. Wang
Fig. 3.15 Displacement distribution of 1000 s elastic deformation of wax mode: a elastic
deformation, b viscoelastic deformation
section, the finite element software ABAQUS is used to predict the viscoelastic
stress relaxation deformation size of the wax die during storage.
Figure 3.15a is the size deformation result of 1000 s wax mold elastic deformation
prediction under elastic condition and Fig. 3.15b is the size deformation result of
1000 s after wax mold release predicted under the viscous elastic model. It can be
seen that the maximum deformation value of viscoelastic deformation is 0.1088 mm
larger than that predicted by the elastic model. The results of viscoelastic prediction
show that the size shrinkage of inner ring is smaller whereas that of outer ring is larger
and with the increase of thickness, the deformation of wax die increases. Under the
condition of elastic model, the deformation gap between the wax die inner and outer
ring and its wall thickness is not predicted. As a result, the viscoelastic model is more
suitable for predicting the deformation of wax mold storage.
Figure 3.16 shows the displacement field and temperature field of wax mode after
1000 s obtained using the viscoelastic model. It can be seen that with the prolongation
of the storage time from 1000 to 10000 s, the maximum deformation size of the wax
mold increases from 0.6362 mm to 0.9883 mm, which increases by 55.34% due to
the stress relaxation of the wax die. From the temperature field of Fig. 3.16b, it can
be seen that the thick wall of wax die is not completely cooled to room temperature
after 1000 s. This is because the thermal conductivity of the wax mold is relatively
Fig. 3.16 Deformation and temperature of 1000 s after wax mold demoulding: a viscoelastic
deformation of wax die, b temperature distribution3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 87
Fig. 3.17 The predicted and
experimental results of the
viscoelastic deformation of
100,000 s after the departing
of the wax
low, which results that the wax melt in the thick wall part of the wax mold has not
been completely cooled and thus continues to shrink.
Figure 3.17 is a predicted and measured deformation dimension of 100,000 s after
the inner diameter of the outer ring of the wax mould is demoulded. It can be seen
that the deformation dimension of the viscoelastic prediction is about twice as large
as the measured result. During the actual forming process of the wax mould, the wax
mould is continuously pressed into the mould cavity during the pressure maintaining
of the wax mould, and the shrinkage of the wax mould is compensated. However,
when the viscoelasticity is predicted, the deformation displacement is not taken into
consideration during the pressure maintaining process of the wax mold, and the
predicted deformation displacement therefore tends to be larger. For example, the
deformation results of the Sabau [45] and other viscoelastic projections are about
2.5 times larger than the measured value. The experimental results of Chen [46] and
others show that the longer the wax mold is placed, the greater the shrinkage of the
wax mold, and the size of the wax mold tends to be stable after a certain period of
time. The greater the wax mold thickness, the longer the wax mold shrinkage tends to
be stable. It can be seen from the measured and predicted deformation displacement
of the wax pattern of Fig. 3.17 before 60,000 s, the deformation size of the wax mold
is increased with the increase of the storage time, and the deformation size of the wax
mold after 100,000 s has a tendency to decrease, which, nevertheless, is basically
stable.88 D. Wang
3.2.3 Dimensional Deviation of Wax Patterns
with Water-Soluble Cores
As investment casting is developing towards lightweight, complex hollow thin-wall
structure castings have emerged. For these closed cavities, hollow structures, small
outlets and large internal cavities, or parts that are not allowed to have draft angles,
such as metal molds, they often need to be assembled from multiple pieces. Not only
are the design complicated, the manufacturing cost is high, and the cycle is long, but
also Demoulding is extremely difficult or even impossible. Even if some of them can
be demolded forcibly, they will usually cause larger residual stresses in the structural
parts, and even cause some structural parts to be damaged. As a result, the castings
of these hollow structures typically employ a soluble core to form such an internal
cavity. The so-called soluble core, also known as a water-soluble core, refers to as a
preset wax core that can be dissolved in water. The water-soluble core is a common
technique for forming a large-area thin-wall wax mold. Now, the research on the
water-soluble core mold materials both domestically and abroad mainly includes the
urea core, the polyethylene glycol (PEG) core, the polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) core, the
starch core, the polyacrylic acid (PAA) core, the polyethylene terephthalate (PVP)
core, the PEX water-soluble core, and the Aquacore core, The water-soluble core
mold material is made of the Aquapor core and other adhesives.
During the injection process, the flow relationship of wax melt along the core
is not the same everywhere, so the pressure distribution on the core is uneven. The
uneven pressure distribution will cause the core to shift during the injection process,
especially when the core is injected on the side of the core. Once the deviation occurs,
the core will have a certain amount of eccentricity relative to the wax melt. If the
eccentricity exceeds the allowable tolerance range, the size will be unacceptable.
3.2.3.1 Simulation Analysis
In order to determine whether or not the core deviation will occurr during the process
of injection molding of large and complex thin-wall wax mold, a large ring-ring
casting with the inner ring and part of outer ring is selected for simulation and anal￾ysis. For the convenience of description, it is called oblique support plate. The core
migration analysis provides detailed information on the movement of the core and the
interaction between the core and the wax melt during the process of flow, which allows
the product designer to use this information to reduce the core deviation through,
e.g., adjusting the design or processing parameters of the parts. Figure 3.18 shows
the migration results of water-soluble core predicted using numerical simulation. It
can be seen that the location of migration and deformation of the water-soluble core
is mainly near the gate areas A and B region near the convex platform. The maximum
offset of the core in area A is 0.4464 mm and the migration direction is facing gate
filling direction, whereas the maximum offset value in area B is 0.2234 mm and
the migration direction is backward gate filling direction. Obviously, the deviation3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 89
Fig. 3.18 Predicted core deflection location for the wax pattern
direction in area B is just the opposite of that in area A. In addition, the wall thick￾ness of wax mold in area B is hollow thin-wall structure, which is not easy to be
repaired with repair wax, resulting the hollow wall thickness of final castings being
unpredictable and uncontrollable.
3.2.3.2 Experimental Comparison
In order to verify the prediction on core deviation from numerical simulation, the
injection molding experiment of wax mold is carried out under the same injection
process parameters, and the wall thickness of A, B area are measured by high preci￾sion ultrasonic thickness gauge. The data shows that there are the same regular size
over the difference in the B region of 12 oblique support plate wax molds. The direc￾tion of migration in A and B regions are also consistent with the numerical simulation
results. Therefore, the numerical simulation are overall consistent with the experi￾mental results and the core deviation occurs in the water-soluble core, resulting in a
change in the wall thickness of the B region.
Figure 3.19 shows the profile analysis of A and B regions. The maximum wall
thickness of A area is 2.36 mm and the minimum wall thickness of B area is 1.87 mm.
The wall thickness of B area exceeds the dimensional tolerance range of castings and
the core offset area predicted from numerical simulation is consistent with the direc￾tion and experiment. Figure 3.20 shows the minimum and maximum wall thickness
of the hollow support plate A predicted from numerical simulations and tested using
experiments. Compared with the experimental results, the measured value in region
A is 3.66% smaller than the predicted value and the maximum offset size in region B
is 3.1% smaller than the predicted value. The predicted value is slightly larger than90 D. Wang
Fig. 3.19 The experimental wax pattern and the real thickness in the deflection regions
Fig. 3.20 Comparisons of
the experimental and
simulated maximum and
minimum thickness of
thin-walled
the measured value [20]. From the results of Giacomin research, the predicted value
of the core deviation may be too large to consider the viscous elastic deformation of
polymer melt during cooling.
3.2.3.3 Mechanism Analysis
The deviation of the core is mainly caused by the following three factors: (1) the
size error caused by the injection process of the water-soluble core itself and the
deformation of the mold, (2) the deformation caused by the insufficient strength at
the fixed end of the water-soluble core wax mold under high injection pressure, and
(3) the deformation caused by the pressure difference between the two sides of the
core, which is caused by the unreasonable gate position or the change of the thickness
of the parts. Due to the manufacturing error between the actual water-soluble core
and the theoretical model, it is inevitable to have an uneven distribution of wax wall
thickness, which then affects the wall thickness forming accuracy of precision casting3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 91
Fig. 3.21 Cross-section contour comparison between the scanned part and design model
castings. Therefore, it is necessary to match the profile data of the actual water-soluble
core with the theoretical model, in order to eliminate the manufacturing error and
assembly error of the water-soluble core. As shown in Fig. 3.21, for the comparison
of the 2D size of the scanned actual water-soluble core with the theoretical model,
the overall shrinkage and uniform shrinkage occur in the A and B regions where the
water-soluble core is offset and deformed. Therefore, the size error of water-soluble
core preparation is excluded, which is the cause of the super-poor hollow thin-wall
size of the support plate. After the experiment, the surface of the fixed end of the
water-soluble core tested is in fine quality, with no fracture nor deformation due to
insufficient strength.
Obviously, the deviation of the thickness dimension of the thin wall is due to
the large pressure difference on both sides of the core. The hollow branch plate is a
deep cavity structure with a length of 300 mm and a width of 30 mm and the wall
thickness on both sides are 2–3.5 mm. In the molding process, the core is easily
offset by uneven pressure, resulting in a product that cannot be molded or does not
meet the design requirements in terms of the wall thickness.
Figure 3.22 shows the relationship between the core offset and the time of the
nodes in the A and B regions. It can be seen that because the viscosity of the wax
material is low, the injection pressure in the filling process is small and the struc￾ture on both sides of the water-soluble core is relatively symmetrical. Note that
during the process of injection filling of the wax material, the core offset is about
0.04 mm. In addition, the maximum offset of the A region occurs at the moment of
switching between filling and pressure-holding, at which the pressure holding pres￾sure increases instantly, resulting in the pressure on both sides of the A region near
the gate losing balance and hence a large core deviation. As the pressure holding92 D. Wang
Fig. 3.22 Core deflection
displacement as a function of
time in regions A and B
continues, the migration size remains virtually unchanged. Finally, owing to the
protruding area near the support plate, there are large unmelted wax melts in the
convex platform area after filling. Once the pressure holding begins, the pressure
imbalance in the A region is transferred to the B region. With the holding pres￾sure continuously applied, the wax melt in the convex platform area solidifies and
the offset of the core in area B increases gradually. However, after the thin-wall
wax mold has solidified in 14.01 s, the migration in the B region remains nearly
unchanged.
These results show that during the wax injection molding process, the core deflec￾tion of the water-soluble core mainly occurs during the pressure holding process,
rather than the filling process. It can thus be inferred that as the holding pressure
increases, the core offset will also increase.
3.2.3.4 Control and Optimization
In order to overcome the phenomenon of serious eccentricity and difficulty in
demolding in the process of production and trial molding. The following measures
were adopted in the mold design and molding process [30]: (1) The core is offset,
the root cause is insufficient stiffness, so the strength of the core must be improved;
(2) Since the hollow thin-walled structure cannot be changed, then Without affecting
the product molding, add positioning pins in the thin-walled parts of the small cores;
add process positioning pins to the mold and leave process holes on the product, so
that when the melt enters the cavity, the core can rely on, When the core is subjected
to lateral force, the left and right swing deformation and bending are reduced; (3)
Increase the size of the fixed part of the core and design a reasonable feeding position.
(4) Optimize the wax injection molding process.
The results show that increasing the strength of the core is not effective in reducing
the core offset and enhancing the strength of the water-soluble core may affect its3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 93
Fig. 3.23 The core pattern with an added fixed pin
water solubility. Expanding the size of the fixed end of the core will result in a
large process hole that cannot be filled. As shown in Fig. 3.23, six symmetrical
positioning pins (2 mm in diameter and 2 mm in height) are added to the two sides
of the water-soluble core. From the experimental results, the process positioning pin
can significantly improve the core offset.
The core offset is caused by the pressure difference during the holding process.
For this reason, reducing the holding pressure reduces the core offset size. Figure 3.24
shows the two-stage low holding pressure process curve. After the filling is
completed, the holding pressure is instantly reduced to 80% of the injection pres￾sure, which ensures the dimensional stability and reduces the core offset. Finally,
after the process optimization and the addition of the locating pin, the core offset
size is controllable. From the optimization results in Fig. 3.25, it can be seen that the
final large wax mold hollow thin-wall size is maintained between 1.93 and 2.07 mm,
within the dimensional tolerances.
Fig. 3.24 The optimization
packing pressure profile94 D. Wang
Fig. 3.25 Optimized
thickness in areas A and B
3.3 Shrinkage Compensation Rate of Investment Mold
Surface
Since the investment casting process is complicated, the final casting is obtained
through the processes of molding, shell making, pouring, post-processing, etc. There￾fore, controlling the dimensional accuracy of the investment casting is a systematic
project involving all aspects of the casting process. Figure 3.26 shows a simplified
diagram of the important factors affecting dimensional accuracy during investment
casting [47]. It can be seen that the factors affecting the dimensional accuracy of
investment castings are categorized into four major aspects: casting structure shape,
size, mold, and production process. However, the dimensional accuracy of the final
casting is achieved by setting the size of the mold to compensate for dimensional
changes during the casting process. The principle of the mold face compensation
design is to give an appropriate amount of reverse deformation at the deforma￾tion site to offset the shrinkage deformation of the casting during solidification and
cooling. It is reasonable to expect that the dimensional error caused by the shrinkage
compensation rate is small for small castings, but it is quite large and cannot be
ignored for large castings. However, the compensation shrinkage rate design of the
mold cavity has been lacking in theoretical guidance and still stays in the design
stage of “experience + experiment”, which mainly includes empirical data method,
formula calculation method, and trial production method.
Many scholars use the “experience data method” to guide the design of the
shrinkage compensation rate of casting molds. Table 3.3 shows the empirical data
of shrinkage accumulated in the production of carbon steel and alloy structural steel
[48]. This empirical design method is also feasible for the same casting, but the cast￾ings of different alloys and size shapes obviously cannot meet the design require￾ments. Therefore, the total shrinkage of the casting is preferably based on the specific3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 95
Fig. 3.26 Schematic diagram of important factors affecting shrinkage during investment casting
alloy grade and casting temperature, and the recommended empirical values are
appropriately modified.
Jiang et al. [48, 49] believed that only by strictly controlling the size of the mold
cavity was it possible to obtain a casting with dimensional accuracy. This requires a
correct assignment of the shrinkage of each size of the casting when designing the96 D. Wang
Table 3.3 Empirical data on total shrinkage of carbon steel and alloy structural steel
Thickness/mm Catalogs of shell Line shrinkage in total K/%
Free shrinkage Semi-free
shrinkage
Hindered
shrinkage
1–3 I 0.6–1.2 0.4–1.0 0.2–0.8
II 1.2–1.8 1.0–1.6 0.8–1.4
III 1.6–2.2 1.4–2.0 1.1–1.7
3–10 I 0.8–1.4 0.6–1.2 0.4–1.0
II 1.4–2.0 1.2–1.8 1.0–1.6
III 1.8–2.2 1.6–2.2 1.3–1.9
10–20 I 1.0–1.6 0.8–1.4 0.6–1.2
II 1.6–2.2 1.4–2.0 1.2–1.8
III 2.0–2.6 1.8–2.4 1.5–2.1
20–30 I 1.2–1.8 1.0–1.6 0.8–1.4
II 1.8–2.4 1.6–2.2 1.4–2.0
III 2.2–2.8 2.0–2.6 1.7–2.3
>30 I 1.4–2.0 1.2–1.8 1.0–1.6
II 2.0–2.6 1.8–2.4 1.6–2.2
III 2.4–3.0 2.2–2.6 1.9–2.5
mold. Therefore, the size calculation of the mold cavity is necessary. The formula
for calculating the shrinkage rate proposed by Lu [50] is shown in Eq. (3.12):
L = (1 + l) ± (1/2 ∼ 3/4)M (3.12)
where L is the compression size, l is the casting blank size, Δl is the total shrinkage,
and M is the dimensional tolerance of the casting. There are three factors that affect
the total shrinkage of the casting in investment casting, namely, the shrinkage of the
wax mold, the shrinkage of the alloy, and the expansion and deformation of the shell.
Consider the effects of these three aspects separately and then superimpose them as
indicated in Eq. (3.13):
K = K1 + K2 + K3 (3.13)
where K (%) is the total shrinkage, K1 (%) is the shrinkage of the alloy, K2 (%)
is the shrinkage of the mold, and K3 (%) is the expansion and deformation rate of
the shell (generally, K3 is a negative value). Although there have been a lot of tests
and a lot of data for K1, K2, and K3, it has been shown that these calculations are
not accurate, which is mainly due to the following reasons. First of all, these three
factors are all related to the structure of the casting and thus play restriction on each
other. The structure of the casting has a great influence on the total shrinkage rate3 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 97
and is difficult to evaluate. Whether the shrinkage of the casting is hindered or not
is related to the shape of the casting. The different parts of the complex casting have
different resistance, semi-resistance, and unimpeded states. Therefore, it is necessary
to analyze and assign different shrinkage rates to obtain high-precision castings. The
casting structure is influenced by both the wall thickness and shape of the casting. The
influence of the wall thickness of the casting is regular, and the thicker the wall, the
larger the shrinkage rate. Therefore, among the three factors of total shrinkage, the
thicker the wall, the more the shrinkage of the alloy and the shrinkage of the wax. In
very rare cases, such as two thin-walled frames, the expansion and deformation of the
shell predominate, often making the total shrinkage K negative. Second, each factor
is affected by the specific process operation, so the value of total shrinkage varies
with specific conditions and cannot be encapsulated in one formula. In summary, it
can be seen that due to the complicated casting process and numerous influencing
factors, it is difficult to select the total shrinkage rate. Therefore, the mold shrinkage
compensation rate obtained by the “formula calculation method” also contains a
large error, which eventually leads to an oversize of the casting.
Therefore, it is only possible to test specific parts under different process condi￾tions from the actual situation. The product’s shrinkage compensation and gating
system are adjusted through trial production. Thus, it is usually necessary to adjust
the shrinkage rate by repeatedly reworking the mold. Although the “trial production
method” can finally obtain a suitable dimensional shrinkage compensation rate, its
long production cycle and high cost seriously restrict the development of investment
casting.
For important parts, always test first to find the appropriate total shrinkage under
field conditions, then design and manufacture the mold, and finally put into real
production. However, Zhang et al. [51] of Northwestern Polytechnical University
proposed a simple and efficient reverse casting design method for precision casting
molds, that is, reverse adjustment of characteristic parameters. The method integrates
CAE displacement field simulation and CAD 3D modeling technology to avoid the
problem of surface splicing caused by completely relying on grid information to solve
the mold cavity. Its application can guarantee the dimensional accuracy and shape
accuracy of precision casting, which realizes the computer-aided design and casting.
Nevertheless, it only considers the solidification shrinkage deformation of the alloy
during investment casting and the numerical simulation of the displacement field of
the whole process is not carried out. Since it is the calculation of the displacement
field based on the casting that leads to the final compensation, there is a certain error
in the shrinkage rate.
The precise determination and setting cycle of precision casting mold design
has always been the bottleneck problem that restricts the manufacture of high￾temperature castings for aviation engines. When the traditional “experience + exper￾iment” trial-and-error legal molds require several repairs, the CAD/CAM software
and digital modeling technology are used to establish a mold surface optimization
design system based on the size error displacement field of the investment casting
process, which can provide a solid theoretical foundation and technical support for
the rapid near-net-shape investment casting.98 D. Wang
References
1. A.S. Sabau, S. Viswanathan, Material properties for predicting wax pattern dimensions in
investment casting. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 362, 125–134 (2003)
2. T.T. Zhou, C.G. Han, Z.T. Chai et al., Constitutive equation of investment casting materials
and its application. Casting 50, 78–80 (2001)
3. Y.Z. Xu, Polymer Structural Rheology (Sichuan Education Press, Chengdu, 1988).
4. Q.M. Qiu, Q.C. Wu, G.Z. Zhou, A numerical calculation method for quasi-relaxation time
spectrum of materials from static stress relaxation experiment. Acta Polymerica Sinica 5,
535–538 (1994)
5. R.J. Hao, G.B. Che, C.Y. Shen et al., Calculation of relaxation time spectrum of polymer melt.
J. Zhengzhou Univ. Technol. 22(4), 90–92 (2001)
6. Z.Y. Zhang, B.N. Liang, Factors affecting casting dimension accuracy in die making process.
Mech. Res. Appl. 15, 15–16 (2002)
7. X.P. He, Wax mold precision in investment casting. Spec. Cast. Nonferrous Alloys 24(1),
156–159 (1999)
8. B.R. Wu, L.L.Y. Xiao, Wax mold manufacturing in precision casting. Casting 12, 36–38 (1999)
9. R.M. Liu, X.H. Zhang, Z.F. Guo et al., Effects of EVA on properties of die materials for
precision casting blades. Mater. Eng. 11, 17–18 (1994)
10. S.J. Hao, Wax for silica sol precision casting and application of jx001-3 mold. Casting 58,
295–298 (2009)
11. Haweifeide (2003) Mechanical properties of melt casting materials and the role of fillers, in
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference On Nonferrous Alloys and Special Casting,
Shanghai
12. Z.T. Chai, T.T. Zhou, C.G. Han, Analysis of factors affecting rheological properties of die
materials. Cast. Technol. 2, 26–27 (2001)
13. J.C.Gebelin, M.R. Jolly, A.M.Cendrowicz et al., Simulation of die filling for the wax injection
process: part I. Models for material behavior. Metall Mater Trans B35, 755–759 (2004)
14. A.Kelkar, Wax dimensional control with design of experiments, in Proceedings of the 39th
Annual Technical Meeting. InvestmentCasting Institute, 4, 1991
15. M. Horacek, Accuracy of casting manufactured by the lost wax process. Foundry Trade J. 10,
12–15 (1997)
16. M. Horacek, S. Lubos, Influence of injection parameters to the dimensionalstability of wax
patterns, in Proceedings of the Ninth World Conference on Investment Casting, San Francisco,
California, USA, 1996.
17. W. Bonilla, S.H. Masood, P. Iovenitti, An investigation of wax patterns for accuracy
improvement in investment casting parts. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 18, 348–356 (2001)
18. A. Bakharev, Z. Fan, S. Han et al., Prediction of core shift effects using mold filling simulation,
in ANTEC Conference Proceedings, vol. LXII (Society of Plastics Engineers, Brookfield, NJ,
2004) pp. 621–625.
19. D.G. Ahn, D.W. Kim, Y.U. Yoon, Optimal injection molding conditions considering the core
shift for a plastic battery case with thin and deep wall. J. Mech. Sci. Technol. 24, 145–148
(2010)
20. A.J. Giacomin, A.J. Hade, L.M. Johnson et al., Core deflection in injection molding. J.
Nonnewton. Fluid Mech. 166, 908–914 (2011)
21. Y.C. Chen, H.C. Liao, S.C. Tseng et al., Core deflection in plastics injection molding: direct
measurement, flow visualization and 3D simulation. Polym. Plast. Technol. Eng. 50, 863–872
(2011)
22. Y.Y.Chou, W.H.Yang, A.J.Giacominet al..Validating 3D numerical simulation of core deflec￾tion, inProceedings of the 24th Meeting of the Polymer Processing Society, Salerno, Italy, June
15–19, 2008, pp. 1–5
23. V.F. Okhuysen, K. Padmanabhan, R.C. Voigt, Tooling allowance practices in the investment
casting industry, in Proceedings of the 46th Annual Technical Meeting, Investment Casting
Institute, 19983 Dimensional Deviation and Defect Prediction of Wax Pattern 99
24. P.K.D.V. Yarlagadda, T.S. Hock, Statistical analysis on accuracy of wax patterns used in
investment casting process. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 138, 75–81 (2003)
25. V. Leo, C.H. Cuvelliez, The effect of the packing parameters, gate geometry, and mold elasticity
on the final dimensions of a molded part. Polym. Eng. Sci. 36(15), 1961–1971 (1996)
26. G.H. Hu, Z.S. Cui, Effect of packing parameters and gate size on shrinkage of aspheric lens
parts. J. Shanghai Jiaotong Univ. 15(1), 84–87 (2010)
27. M. Zhai, Y.X. Gu, C.Y. Shen, Optimization design of the number and position of injection
mold gate. Acta Chemica Sinica 54(8), 1141–1145 (2003)
28. W. Fu, S.J. Fan, H. Zhang, Selection of gate position and structural form in injection mold
design. Eng. Plast. Appl. 35(10), 60–63 (2007)
29. W.G. Wang, B.S. Tian, Y.C. Tian, Design Techniques and Examples of Plastic Injection Mould
(Chemical Industry Press, Beijing, 2004)
30. R.Z. Qiang, Several measures to overcome core deformation. Die Ind. 11, 32–35 (1992)
31. J. Zhang, H.W. Ye, K.W. Li, Numerical simulation of mold filling process for wax pattern of
the impeller in investment casting. Appl. Mech. Mater. 80–81, 965–968 (2011)
32. Y. Shi, Formulation and process parameter optimization of temperature mold in precision
casting. Master’s thesis. Hefei, Hefei University of Technology
33. H.Y. Zhao, T.F. Tong, Study on linear variation of mold shell in investment casting. Spec. Cast.
Nonferrous Alloys 1, 17–20 (1990)
34. R. Sadegh, R.M. Reza, A. Javad, Design and manufacture of a wax injection tool for investment
casting using rapid tooling. Tsinghua Sci. Technol. 14, 108–115 (2009)
35. M. Ito, T. Yamagishi, Y. Oshida, Effect of selected physical properties of waxes on investment
s and casting shrinkage. J. Prosthet. Dent. 75, 211–216 (1996)
36. Z.T. Chai, T.T. Zhou, C.G. Han, Rheological properties of die materials and its application in
wax injection process formulation. Thermal Process. Technol. 6, 23–24 (2001)
37. C.F. Liu, W.K. Bao, J.L. Xu, Shear modulus approximation function and exact numerical
integral expression. Shanghai Aerosp. 5, 26–28 (2003)
38. Z.X. Zhong,Plastic Injection Molding Technology (Guangdong Science And Technology Press,
Guangzhou, 1995)
39. W.L. Chen, Design and Manufacture of Practical Plastic Injection Mould (Machinery Press,
Beijing, 2000)
40. M.C. Song, X.N. Jing, D.Y. Zhao, Study on shrinkage characteristics of injection molding of
fan products. Eng. Plast. Appl. 2, 31–33 (2006)
41. X. Chen, Y.C. Lam, D.Q. Li, Analysis of thermal residual stress in plastic injection molding.
J. Mater. Process. Technol. 101, 275–280 (2000)
42. W.F. Zoetelief, L.F.A. Douven, A.J.I. Housz, Residual thermal stresses in injection molded
products. Ploym. Eng. Sci. 36(14), 1886–1896 (1996)
43. K.K. Kabanemi, H. Vaillancourt, H. Wang et al., Residual stresses, shrinkage, and warpage
of complex injection moulded products: numerical simulation and experimental validation.
Ploym. Eng. Sci. 38(1), 21–37 (1998)
44. W.B. Young, Residual stress induced by solidification of thermoviscoelastic melts in the
postfilling stage. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 145, 317–324 (2004)
45. N. Cannell, A.S. Sabau, Predicting Pattern Tooling and Casting Dimensions for Investment
Casting, Phase II (Tennessee, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 2005).
46. Y.H. Chen, J.D. Duan, Dimensional stability analysis and improvement of investment casting,
in 10th Annual Meeting of China Foundry Association, Beijing, 2012
47. H. Wan, H. Yu, Z.F. Xu et al., Study on transfer law of surface roughness and dimension
accuracy of gypsum mold, mold shell and casting. Therm. Process. Technol. 39(17), 71–73
(2010)
48. B.J. Jiang, Practical Investment Casting Technology (Liaoning Science And Technology Press,
Shenyang, 2008).
49. L.M. Cao, X. Tang, Y. Zhang et al., Advanced high temperature alloy near-net form investment
casting technology. Spec. Cast. Nonferrous Alloys 26(3), 238–243100 D. Wang
50. J.G. Lu, X.F. Zhang, X.T. Lu, Research on some processes in investment casting. Modern Cast
Iron 6, 67–69 (2006)
51. D. Zhang, W.H. Zhang, M. Wan et al., A reverse design method based on displacement field
simulation and feature parameter extraction for precision casting die. Acta Aerologica Sinica
27(3), 509–514 (2006)Chapter 4
Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells
Fei Li and Fei Wang
Investment casting is one of the most critical technologies that produce can complex
components used in aircraft engines [1]. The preparation of the ceramic shell is one
of the essential processes in investment casting. The dimensional accuracy, surface
roughness, and even internal quality of casts are all closely related to the ceramic
shells [2]. In recent years, the structure of casting parts for aircraft engines has
become more and more complex, and the surface quality requirements have become
much higher, which demands higher standards for the performance of ceramic shells.
How to further enrich and optimize the shell material system formulates a scientific
and reasonable shell-making process. Besides, how to prepare a ceramic shell with
excellent performance has become one of the critical points in the development of
modern investment casting technology.
4.1 Overview of Ceramic Shell
4.1.1 Composition, Structure, and Performance
Requirements of Ceramic Shells
The term investment casting derives from the characteristic use of mobile ceramic
slurry, or ‘investments,’ to form a shell with an extremely smooth surface [3, 4].
These are replicated from precise patterns and transmitted in turn to the casting.
Investment casting allows dimensionally accurate components to be produced and is
a more cost-effective alternative than forging or machining since waste materials are
kept to a minimum. Production of the investment casting ceramic shell is a crucial
part of the whole process. The necessary steps in the production of an investment
cast component using a ceramic shell are shown in Fig. 4.1. First, multi-component
slurries are prepared, which are composed of a fine mesh refractory filler system and
a colloidal binder system. A pattern wax is then dipped into the slurry, sprinkled with
© Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
B. Sun et al., Precision Forming Technology of Large Superalloy Castings for Aircraft
Engines, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-6220-8_4
101102 F. Li and F. Wang
Fig. 4.1 Basic principles of the investment casting process
coarse refractory stucco, and dried. The purpose of stuccoing is to minimize drying
stresses in the coatings by presenting some stress concentration centers that distribute
and hence reduce the magnitude of the local drying stress. The second purpose of
stuccoing is to produce a rough surface, thus facilitating a mechanical bond between
the primary coating and the back-up or secondary investment. When the primary
coat has set (air-dried until the binder gels), the assembly is systematically dipped
into a secondary slurry and stuccoed until the required thickness of the shell is built
up. The particle size of the stucco is increased as more coats are added to maintain
maximum shell permeability and to provide bulk to the shell [5–7].
Thus, an investment casting shell consists of individual layers of fine refractory
materials and granular refractory materials held together by a binder that has been set
to a rigid gel. Flexibility exists in changing the composition of each layer. Different
methods can be used to remove the wax pattern, usually steam autoclave, leaving a
hollow shell. Shells are fired and filled with molten metal that solidifies inside the
shell. After casting, the ceramic shell is removed through mechanical or chemical
methods to obtain the parts.
It is necessary to prepare the ceramic shell with excellent properties to obtain cast￾ings of high quality. According to the working conditions of the ceramic shell, high￾quality shells should meet the following basic performance requirements, including
strength, deformation resistance, permeability, thermal expansion, thermal conduc￾tivity, thermal shock stability, and thermochemical stability, etc. This list is by no
means exhaustive. The range of alloys cast, size, complexity of castings, and specific
requirements of the cast components lead to an array of shell properties and mate￾rials, all used for a specific purpose within the casting industry. The underlying factor4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 103
in all cases is the extensive range of exacting requirements to produce a successful
casting.
(1) Strength
Strength is the most critical and fundamental property of a shell. In the different
process stages of investment casting, three different strength play an essential role,
namely, green strength, high-temperature strength, and residual strength. The green
strength refers to the strength of the shell after drying. If the green strength of the
shell is too low, cracks can easily happen during dewaxing. High-temperature strength
refers to the strength of the shell when sintering or pouring. Residual strength refers
to the strength of the shell after pouring, which affects the ease of casting cleaning. If
the residual strength is too high, it is not easy to clean up and even cause the casting
deformation or breakage during the process of cleaning. With careful consideration
of the three strengths, the shell should have high green strength, sufficient high￾temperature strength, and a residual strength as low as possible.
(2) Anti-deformation
Anti-deformation is another critical performance of the shell. The high-temperature
deformation of the shell is one of the main reasons for the deformation of the casting,
which mainly includes the thermal expansion and deformation of the shell associated
with two aspects, i.e., during the sintering process and under the pressure of the metal
liquid when pouring.
(3) Permeability
The air permeability of the shell refers to the ability of gas to pass through the shell
wall. If the permeability of the shell is low, the efficiency of steam dewaxing decreases
significantly, and the gas in the shell cannot be discharged smoothly during pouring.
At high temperatures, these gases expand to form a higher air cushion pressure, which
hinders the filling of liquid metal and causes defects such as porosity or insufficient
pouring, especially in thin-walled castings. The permeability mainly depends on
the compactness of the shell structure and the type and content of the binder. The
properties and viscosity of refractories are the main factors affecting permeability.
(4) Thermal expansibility
The shell’s thermal expansibility refers to the expansion or contraction of the shell
with the increase of temperature. When the shell is heated, factors like the thermal
expansion and crystal transformation often increase its size. The shrinkage is caused
by the dehydration of the shell, the thermal decomposition of the material, the
sintering of the materials, the liquid phase’s production, and the silica gel’s condensa￾tion, resulting in the densification of the shell. Thermal expansion not only directly
affects the dimensional accuracy of castings but also affects the quench and heat
resistance and high-temperature deformation resistance of the shell. When the refrac￾tories in the shell are heated up, some of them expand uniformly, while others expand
non-uniformly. The use of refractories with small linear expansion coefficients and
uniform expansion meets the requirements of high-quality shell and castings.104 F. Li and F. Wang
(5) Other performance
Other properties include thermal conductivity, thermal shock stability, and thermo￾chemical stability of the shell. Thermal conductivity refers to the thermal conductivity
of the shell, which affects the cooling rate of the castings, thus affecting the grain
size and mechanical properties of the castings. Thermal shock stability is the ability
of the shell to resist rapid temperature change without damage. The shell with poor
thermal shock stability tends to crack when pouring. Thermochemical stability refers
to the ability of interfacial thermochemical reactions between the shell and molten
metal. It has a significant influence on surface roughness, chemical bonding, pitting,
and shell peeling.
4.1.2 Raw Materials
4.1.2.1 Binder
The binder is the primary raw material for shell building in investment casting. It
directly affects the quality, production cycle, and cost of the shell and castings. The
choice and use of binder can be determined by casting size, shell baking temperature,
pouring temperature, alloy type, and many other factors. The primary binders used to
prepare investment casting ceramic shells are ethyl silicate, silica sol, sodium silicate,
ethyl silicate silica sol composite binder, phosphate, refractory cement, plaster, and
so on. The most widely used binders for investment casting are ethyl silicate and
silica sol.
During World War II, due to the development of the national defense and aviation
industry, the United States first used ethyl silicate as a shell binder to produce complex
aeronautical castings such as jet turbine engine blades with a smooth surface and
high dimensional accuracy. The production cycle of ethyl silicate shell is short,
its wet strength and high-temperature strength are high, and its high-temperature
deformation resistance is strong. Therefore, as a high-quality binder, ethyl silicate
has been widely used in the investment casting industry for some time.
An ethyl silicate binder contains organic volatiles, which can easily pollute the
workshop environment. Therefore, various air purification devices, such as biofil￾tration, have been adopted in factories using ethyl silicate as shell [8]. Hitchiner
developed a system in cooperation with Environair S.I.P.A. to discharge alcohol and
a small amount of ammonia gas from the air between shells into the scrubbing tower.
The scrubbing liquid absorbs alcohol and ammonia gas and then enters the sepa￾rator to separate alcohol and ammonia gas. Alcohol is recovered, and ammonia gas
is discharged into the thermal oxidizer for oxidation [9]. The use of ethyl silicate
binder has been limited in foreign countries. At the same time, the application of
ethyl silicate in the investment casting industry is diminishing gradually because of
its high price and high cost.
Thanks to the simple shell-making process, safety, and non-toxicity, silica sol
binder was introduced into investment casting shell production in the 1960s. Besides,
silica sol coating has stable performance, high-temperature strength, and good4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 105
thermal shock stability. The surface quality and dimensional accuracy of the cast￾ings produced by the shell made of silica sol binder are excellent. As a result, the
application of silica sol in the investment casting industry is becoming more and
more extensive [10, 11]. However, silica sol also has some shortcomings, e.g., slow
drying of coating, long shelling cycle, low wet strength of the shell, high residual
strength, and poor shelling performance. Since the 1980s, polymer reinforced quick￾drying silica sol, large particle size, high concentration fast-drying silica sol, and
fiber-reinforced silica sol have been introduced, which significantly improve and
optimize the performance of silica sol binder, as shown in Table 4.1.
With the increasing variety of active alloys used in investment casting as well as
the increasing size of castings and the development of directional solidification tech￾nology, silicon-based binders are increasingly inadequate in the high-temperature
properties of the shell, including (1) the active interfacial reaction between molten
metal and shell; (2) the high creep of the shell; and (3) the transformation of silicon
dioxide to shell. The thermal and mechanical stability of the shell has adverse effects.
For this reason, some non-silicon-based binders have emerged, including zirconia
binder [17, 18], alumina binder [19], and mullite/aluminosilicate binder [20].
4.1.2.2 Refractory Materials
Refractories account for more than 90% of the shell weight and have a significant
influence on shell performance. The refractories in the shell can be divided into
Table 4.1 Several modified silica sol with excellent properties [12–16]
Name of silica sol Characteristic Representative
products
Remarks
Polymer reinforced
quick-drying silica sol
Good stability
Strong adhesiveness
High wet strength
Low residual strength
Good air
permeability[22]
Ludox SK [21]
LP-3301 [21]
Polymers are soluble
in water, including:
Polyvinyl alcohol
(PVA)
Hydroxymethyl
cellulose, etc.
Fast-drying silica sol
with large particle size
and high concentration
High strength
Quick-drying
Good stability
Megasol [25] The silica sol with a
small particle size is
subjected to high
temperature and
pressure
Prepared by adjusting
pH value [23, 24]
The particle size can
reach 50–100 nm
Fiber-reinforced silica
sol
Strong adhesiveness
Spread evenly
Thickness
High wet strength
Good air permeability
Buntrock Industries,
Inc.
Wex Chemicals Co.
Nylon fibers
Length: 1–1.5 mm
Diameter: 19–21 μm106 F. Li and F. Wang
fine refractory powder used in the slurry preparation and coarse granular sanding
materials used in stuccoing.
During the 70 years after the World War II, the industrialization of investment
casting has developed rapidly. Influenced by geographical and economic factors,
shell-making refractories are widely used. However, the application status of refrac￾tories has hardly changed in recent decades [21]. The main refractories used for the
primary shell layer are zircon, fused corundum, and so on. The main refractories used
for the back layer of the shell are fused quartz [22] and aluminum-silicon refractories
(including kaolin clinker, bauxite, coal gangue, Molochite, Malay sand, etc. [23]).
The physical and chemical properties of typical refractories are listed in Table 4.2.
In 2001, Minco Company, a well-known refractory manufacturer in the United
States, published statistical data on the use of shell-making refractories in investment
casting enterprises in the United States. The proportion of consumption of various
refractories (mass fraction) is rough as follows [24]: aluminum-silicon refractories
55%, fused quartz 30%, corundum 9%, and zircon 6%. In the American investment
casting industry, fused quartz has emerged as a new type of shell refractory, of
which the usage is second only to that of aluminum-silicon refractories that have far
exceeded other refractories such as zircon.
Fused quartz is made by rapidly cooling quartz (cristobalite or phosphorus quartz)
to above 1710 °C (“melting point”) [25]. Compared with other refractories, fused
quartz has the following advantages.
(1) Low density
The density of fused quartz is only 2.2 g/cm3, which is much lower than those of
other refractories. Therefore, the quality of fused quartz shell with the same thickness
is much smaller, which is conducive to reducing the labor intensity of workers and
the operating burden of manipulators [26].
(2) Low thermal expansion
A low thermal expansion rate is a tremendous advantage of fused quartz. It is bene￾ficial to reduce the thermal stress caused by the temperature difference between
inside and outside the shell during heating, and can thus help prevent the cracking
and deformation of the shell during dewaxing and sintering. Besides, a low thermal
expansion rate is also beneficial to improve the dimensional accuracy of castings.
(3) Good collapsibility
About 70% of fused quartz transforms into cristobalite (crystallization) at 1100 °C.
When it is cooled to 180–270 °C, cristobalite transforms from high-temperature
alpha phase to low-temperature beta phase, with the volume experiencing a sudden
change. The schematic diagram of crystal transformation is shown in Fig. 4.2. At
this time, a large number of cracks occur in the shell, and the residual strength is
significantly reduced. Improving the shelling property of castings [27, 28].4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 107 Table 4.2 Physicochemical properties of typical shell-making refractories Name of refractory Chemical formula Chemical property Melting point/°C Density/(g cm−3) Mohs hardness Coefficient of linear expansion/× 10−6 °C to 120–1200 °C Thermal conductivity/W m−1 K−1 400 °C 1200 °C Fused quartz SiO2 Acidic 1713 2.2 7 0.51–0.63 1.591 – Fused corundum Al2O3 Amphoteric 2050 4.0 9 8.6 12.561 5.276 Mullite 3Al2O3·2SiO2 Amphoteric 1810 3.16 6–7 5.4 1.214 1.549 Sillimanite Al2O3·SiO2 Weak acidity 1545 3.25 6–7 5 – – Zircon ZrO2·SiO2 Weak acidity 1960 4.5 7–8 4.6 – 2.094 Magnesium oxide MgO Alkalinity 2800 3.57 6 13.5 5.443 2.931 Calcium oxide CaO Alkalinity 2600 3.32 – 13 – 7.118108 F. Li and F. Wang
Fig. 4.2 A schematic diagram for the transformation of fused quartz to cristobalite
4.1.3 Research Status of Ceramic Shells
The preparation of a high-performance ceramic shell is a critical step in the whole
investment casting process since it significantly influences the surface quality and
dimensional accuracy of castings. Research on ceramic shells has always been the
focus of investment casting practitioners. Many scholars and foundry engineers have
carried out numerous studies on ceramic shells, which focus mainly on the following.
4.1.3.1 Relationship Between the Ceramic Shell and Surface Quality
of Castings
One of the goals of investment casting is to obtain castings with good surface quality.
The surface quality of castings is the result of the interaction of metal and shell. The
factors that affect the surface quality of castings include (1) the surface quality of
shell and (2) the interface reaction between the shell and liquid metal.
The surface quality of the shell is mainly related to the selection of raw materials
and shell making process. Zengyan et al. [29] studied the effect of the binder and
refractory on the surface finish of the shell. It was found that the binder type, the
size distribution of powder in the slurry, and the drying process of the shell all had a
significant influence on the surface quality of the shell. Rongchang et al. [30] found
that if the hydrolysis and drying control of ethyl silicate shell were not good enough,
the primary layer of the shell would form white SiO2 particles after calcination at high
temperature, which would prevent the contact between a refiner and liquid metal and
thus affect the refining effect. Minghan et al. [31] used vacuum coating technology
to coat the primary slurry, to minimize the gas content involved in the slurry, and
showed that the surface finish and yield of the castings were significantly improved.
4.1.3.2 High-temperature Mechanical Behavior of Ceramic Shells
The high-temperature mechanical property of the ceramic shell is one of its most
essential properties. The high-temperature strength and deformation of ceramic
shells have a significant influence on the dimensional accuracy of castings. The
high-temperature mechanical behavior of the ceramic shell depends mainly on
its microstructural characteristics and two main factors, namely, the quantity and
viscosity of the glass matrix (glass effect) and the degree and mode of contact or
bonding between crystals (crystallization effect) [32]. The low content of the glass
phase, high viscosity, high intercrystalline bonding, and the formation of a contin￾uous staggered network structure is conducive to improving the high-temperature
mechanical properties of the shell [33].4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 109
On the one hand, the glass phase in the shell comes from the glass phase formed
during the preparation of refractories, which is cooled to room temperature after
high-temperature preparation of refractories and evenly dispersed in the refractories.
On the other hand, it comes from Na2O in the binder and other refractory components
in the shell in the process of shell sintering or pouring. The higher the content of
Na2O and other impurities, the worse are the high-temperature mechanical properties
of the shell. For the binary shell system (SiO2-NaO2), the liquid glass phase has been
formed below 800 °C, which harms the strength and deformation of the shell. For the
ternary shell system (SiO2-Al2O3-NaO2), the feldspar or nepheline reinforcing phase
forms in the shell with calcination, which can improve the mechanical properties of
the shell at medium and low temperatures below 1200 °C. However, as increasing
the shell temperature, the iso phase viscosity of feldspar decreases significantly, and
the mechanical properties of the shell at high temperatures decrease accordingly [34,
35]. It can be seen that the number and viscosity of the glass phase in the shell must be
controlled to obtain excellent mechanical properties of the shell at high temperatures.
According to the characteristics of SiO2 binder that is widely used in ceramic
shells, if the crystalline phase of refractory can react with the binder SiO2 to form
another high temperature resistant crystalline phase, the number of glass phase at
the grain boundary can then be reduced, and the distribution of glass phase can be
improved. Also, the so-called “direct bonding” microstructure can be formed, and
the intergranular glass can thus be reduced. The viscous flowability of the glazed
phase significantly improves the strength and creep resistance of the shell [36].
The amorphous SiO2 with about 10% of the SiO2 binder in the shell is the main
source of glass phase formation. Therefore, the huge phase interface between SiO2
binder and refractory particles becomes the weakest point of the whole shell. If the
glass phase can be transformed into a crystalline phase and if the main crystalline
phase can be directly combined with the high temperature stable heterogeneous
phase, then the creep resistance of the shell can be effectively improved. The most
commonly used method for this purpose is to add a certain amount of alumina with
particle size less than 10 μm into the slurry so that the shell can form a mullite
phase at high temperature, to change the intergranular bonding state [37]. A suitable
amount of mineralizer can be added to promote mullite to form a certain glass phase,
thus reducing the mullite phase’s formation temperature facilitating the formation
of mullite in the glass phase. The reaction temperature can be reduced to below
1300 °C. The mineralizers included Si-Ca [38], Al-Si-Ca [39, 40], Al-Si-Mg [41],
ASM-Cr [42], B2O3-CaO [43], CaO [44], etc. The high-temperature strength of
the shell increased by about 20 times [45] as compared with that before adding no
mineralizer.
With the development of industrial gas turbines, the demand for large directionally
solidified blades and other castings is continuously increasing. Simply adding miner￾alizers cannot meet the high-temperature strength and creep resistance requirements
of large-scale shells. To solve the problem of insufficient strength and dimensional
stability issue of a large-size ceramic shell at high temperature, technicians have used
the method of adding fibers to strengthen the ceramic shell, wherein mullite fibers,
alumina fibers, and carbon fibers are commonly used. The representative fibers are
GE Company, HOWMET Company, Mitsubishi Company, Japan, etc. [46–49].110 F. Li and F. Wang
The restriction (hindrance) of the shell on the cooling shrinkage of the castings also
significantly influences the castings’ size [50]. The mechanical interaction between
the alloy and shell during solidification may cause thermal tearing, deformation, or
residual stress [51]. Excessive high-temperature strength of the shell can easily lead
to thermal tearing during the solidification of castings. Therefore, the higher high￾temperature strength of the shell is always desired. As long as the high-temperature
strength of the shell is sufficient to support the casting forming, the high-temperature
strength of the shell can be appropriately reduced by adding polymer and other
additives to the shell, such that the thermal tearing of the casting can be restrained
[52].
4.1.3.3 Performance Optimization of Ceramic Shell
The research on the performance optimization of ceramic shells mainly focuses on
improving the permeability and collapsibility of the shell. Yuan et al. [53, 54] studied
the effect of WEXPERM nylon fiber on shell thickness and air permeability. The
nylon fiber was 1 mm in length and 20 μm in diameter. The addition amount was 20 g
per liter of silica sol. The results showed that the coating thickness of the shell at the
plane and bend corners increased by 13% and 40%, respectively, with the addition of
nylon fibers. The melting point of nylon fibers is 240 °C. After steam dewaxing, the
nylon fibers remain in the shell and continue to play a reinforcing role to ensure that
the strength of the shell is virtually the same before and after steam dewaxing and to
prevent the shell from cracking, as shown in Fig. 4.3. In the process of calcination, as
long as the temperature exceeds 650 °C, the fibers are completely burned out with so
many tiny holes being formed in the shell, which significantly improves the shell’s
permeability.
Xin et al. [55] studied the effect of impurities and calcination temperature on the
residual strength of silica sol coal gangue shell. It was found that with the increase of
Fig. 4.3 Fracture microstructure of shell: a one end of the fiber is pulled out of the shell; b the void
left by the pull-out of the fibers4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 111
calcination temperature of the shell, the glass phase content in the shell increased, and
secondary mullite formation resulted in the increase of residual strength of the shell.
Yuan et al. [56] changed the sanding material of the third layer of the shell from fused
corundum to monoclinic zirconia. It was found that the residual strength of the shell
was reduced without affecting the high-temperature strength and permeability of the
shell at room temperature. Junhao [57] added fused quartz into the shell transition
layer to reduce the residual strength of the shell and to improve the shell shelling
performance by utilizing the characteristics of high-temperature crystallization and
low-temperature phase transformation of fused quartz. Qifu and Tianfu [58] made
foaming coatings and porous shells by adding a foaming agent and foam stabilizer
in the back slurry. Based on ensuring enough wet strength and high-temperature
strength of the shell, the residual strength was reduced, and the collapsibility of the
shell was improved. Jinzhi et al. [59] used the coated sand as the sand-drenching
material for the third and fourth layers of the shell, which improved the collapsibility
of the shell. Besides, Guizhi et al. [60] proposed a testing method for evaluating the
shelling property of investment casting mold shell. Lei et al. [61] developed a testing
device for sand concession based on PC.
4.1.3.4 Improvement of Shell Making Technology and Control of Shell
Defects
With the rapid development of the investment casting industry, there are more and
more types of binders for ceramic shell making, and the shell making technology is
also developing. The traditional silica sol shell has a low drying rate, low efficiency,
and low wet strength. With the development of fast-drying silica sol [62, 63], this
problem has been significantly solved. Water-soluble polymers such as latex have
been commonly added to the quick-drying silica sol, and latex can also be added to
the slurry of ethyl silicate hydrolysate, which can improve the wet strength and air
permeability of the shell and reduce the residual strength of the shell [64].
Ethyl silicate silica sol composite binder [65] combines the advantages of both
ethyl silicate hydrolysate and silica sol binder, offering better stability than that of
ethyl silicate hydrolysate. As a result, it simplifies the shell making process and
improves the high-temperature strength of the shell. Alternating shell-making with
two binders of ethyl silicate and silica sol [66, 67] can significantly improve shell￾making efficiency and shorten the shell-making cycle. The drying rate of the shell
is greatly influenced by ambient temperature, humidity, and airflow [68, 69]. The
determination method of shell drying has also been proposed [70].
Reducing the number of coating layers shortens the shell-making cycle and
improve the shell-making efficiency. However, the decrease of the coating layer
results in a decrease of coating thickness and load resistance of the shell. Increasing
the strength of the shell is undoubtedly one way to reduce the number of coating
layers of the shell, and the use of die materials with small thermal expansion during
dewaxing can also reduce the requirement for the strength of the shell. Decheng et al.
[71] used polystyrene as the mold material to prepare shell with a thickness of only
3–4 mm, which can meet the needs of low carbon steel, high alloy steel, and other
metal castings. This process is called Replicast CS.112 F. Li and F. Wang
Defect control of ceramic shell has attracted much attention to precision casting
enterprises. Much research has been carried out on the causes and restraining
measures of defects, such as the uneven wall thicknesses [72, 73], stratification [74,
75], cracks [76, 77], and holes [78].
4.1.3.5 Green Manufacturing of Shell and Shell Waste Utilization
With the development of science and technology, more and more attention has been
paid to environmental protection. Volatile organic compounds (VOC) such as ethanol
and ammonia are emitted from ethyl silicate shells during shell-making, which is
harmful to the environment. As early as the end of the twentieth century, western
developed countries have promulgated decrees to limit the use of alcohol-based
binders. However, there is no explicit regulation in this regard in China. With the
continuous development and upgrading of water-based silica sol binders, various
modified silica sol products with excellent properties have been introduced, and
more and more alternatives of ethyl silicate are available.
How to realize the sustainable development of investment casting has become the
focus of attention [79]. The treatment and recycling of waste ceramic mold shells
are crucial, and the establishment of its guidelines and measures is an urgent matter
for the development of precision casting [80]. As early as the 1970s and 1980s, the
United States and Japan, and other industrially developed countries have begun to pay
attention to the emission and reuse of waste from investment casting plants, especially
the waste shell. In 1976, Orbis Fine Casting Plant, California, USA, purchased the
recycled shell from Sweco Company, which produces crushing and classification
equipment. In 1987, the ICI-led research project on shell recycling in the United
States officially started, and there were reports that the waste shell was properly
treated and processed into one-time refractory products (such as gate cups, molding
runners, etc.) [81]. According to the literature [82, 83], waste shell materials can also
be used as raw materials for building materials. Valenza et al. [84] used waste shell
crushed materials with 3–32 μm particle size in the preparation of refractory tiles
and achieved good results.
At present, according to rough estimates, the annual output of investment castings
in China has reached more than 50,000 tons, and the annual output of waste shells is
nearly 1 million tons. Hengyi et al. [85] of Ningbo University made a thorough and
comprehensive experimental study on the chemical composition, phase composition,
strength, permeability, and thermal deformation resistance of the waste shell. The
research shows that as long as the treatment method is proper, the waste shell can be
recycled entirely. In 2004, Jinding and Xinyu Precision Casting Co., Ltd. of Taizhou,
Jiangsu Province, used the crude sand made from the recycled waste silica sol shell
as the sand drenching material after the fourth layer and the powder as the slurry for
the sealing layer and achieved good results.
4.1.3.6 Deformation of Ceramic Shell
Jiang et al. [86–89] systematically studied the size change and influencing factors
of a simple plate-shaped shell in various technological links of shell-making and4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 113
designed a stepped pyramid-shaped wax pattern. The size relationship among the
wax pattern, 950 calcined shells, and 520 tool steel casting cast at 1580 was studied.
The results showed that the shrinkage of shell size after calcination was 2.06%,
which was more than 50% of the change of casting size. It was thus concluded as
the most critical factor affecting the size of castings. However, the shell used in this
experiment is silicic acid ethyl ester hydrolysate slurry formed by silicon sol-gel
casting, which is very different from the traditional shell-making process. The size
of the shell is measured after sintering and cooled to room temperature, which cannot
wholly reflect the influence of the shell on the casting size.
Morrell et al. [90] studied the elastic creep and compressive creep of the ceramic
shell using different material systems. The results showed that there were different
fragile temperature ranges for different shell systems, and the fragile temperature
ranges corresponded to the fragile temperature ranges of shell microstructures. For
the silicon-based shell, the fragile zone was below 1000 °C. When the temperature
was higher than this zone, the microstructures of the shell were consolidated and
exhibited minimal distortion under load. For alumina-based and aluminum-silicon￾based shell, the fragile zone was slightly above 1000 °C. Therefore, it is necessary to
guard against the change of alumina-based and aluminum-silicon-based shell before
pouring.
4.1.3.7 Simulation of Ceramic Shell
At present, the research on the simulation of ceramic shell mainly focuses on the
stress analysis of the shell fracture, but there are few studies on the shell deformation
and the subsequent impact on the accuracy of castings. Chen et al. [91], aiming
at the problem that the shell of turbine blade casting is easy to break, proposed
a finite element analysis method of shell based on an elastic continuum model,
where deformation and stress analysis was carried out. Based on the analysis result,
polyimide was added to the fragile area to increase the shell’s strength, the correctness
of which was confirmed by experiments.
Everhart et al. [92] targeted at the problem that hard plastic shell is easy to break
in casting and established a shell deformation model by combining finite element
analysis and thermodynamic analysis, obtaining a set of optimized process parame￾ters through considering the shrinkage caused by cooling. Everhart et al. [93] used
a continuum medium to simulate porous shell materials. Formulas and simulations
were used to predict cracks at corners and edges of the shell, and it was concluded
that the porosity of the shell affects the stress distribution. Radiation heat transfer
is the primary heat transfer mode between the shell and the furnace body when the
shell is sintered [94]. Zashkova [95] aimed at the fracture of the shell caused by an
ultrafast heating rate, as well as the resulting physical and chemical changes of the
shell during the calcination process. They studied the transient temperature of the
shell in different heating time by a sequential heat transfer method, which allowed
for the selection of reasonable heating time and heating rate and hence saved time
and cost.114 F. Li and F. Wang
4.1.3.8 New Technology and Equipment for Shell Making
Investment casting is a traditional and modern casting process, which has been used
for thousands of years. However, the integration of this old method with some new
technologies is very active. The development of advanced techniques and equipment
has a significant impact and promotion on investment casting ceramic shell.
Rapid prototyping (RP) is a high-tech developed in the 1990s. Mold making is
an essential aspect of rapid prototyping technology in investment casting [96]. At
present, the popular rapid prototyping methods include stereolithography (SLA),
selective laser sintering (SLS), melt deposition (FDM), layered solid manufacturing
(LOM), and three-dimensional printing (3D-P). The shell made from the above rapid
prototyping patterns needs to be removed by the flash burning dewaxing method,
which brings about specific requirements for the thermal shock stability of the shell.
Rapid freezing prototyping is a new rapid prototyping method. Deposited water
can be selected layer by layer and solidified rapidly with the aid of the CAD model
to directly prepare ice mold with a specific 3D shape [97]. Ice mold has plentiful
requirements for shell making materials and technology. The ice slurry used for ice
mold needs to be maintained below the freezing point. The ambient temperature of
the ice mold shell should also be controlled below zero. Besides, the catalyst should
be added to the slurry to shorten the gelation time of slurry on the ice mold surface.
Besides, to inhibit the dissolution of the ice mold surface, the interface agent [98,
99] is also needed.
Flash burning dewaxing is a dewaxing method developed in the 1990s [100].
Flash-burning dewaxing combines dewaxing with sintering, which is probably the
best choice so far for removing the materials that cannot be removed by steam
dewaxing such as plastic molds (including SLA, LOM, and other rapid prototyping
methods) [101]. Flash burning dewaxing can also remove wax from the shell and
has a wax recovery rate of up to 80–95% [102]. Compared with steam dewaxing and
sintering, it can save about 20% energy consumption [103].
Manipulator has developed into the hydraulic transmission, with 5–6 degrees of
freedom. Its movement is more convenient, and automation is further improved. For
example, VA Technology Ltd. has developed a new type of shell-making manipulator
[104, 105]. The fully automatic shell-making machine (including drying process)
introduced byMK Technologies Cyclone in Germany is reported to be able to produce
shells in a few hours [106]. It is specially developed for the rapid production of invest￾ment castings. To meet the requirement of Rolls Royce Company to transform ethyl
silicate shell-making into the silica sol shell-making process, Drytech Processing
Ltd [107] designed and manufactured an automatic shell-drying system in 1995. The
drying room is closed around, occupying small space and space, which is conducive
to adjusting and controlling process parameters such as temperature, humidity, and
wind speed, and is also conducive to energy saving.
Wind tunnel shell-making machines can establish the best aerodynamic wind
tunnel to accelerate the air to 4 m/s and use a cyclone to dry the shell so that the shell
can be dried in 30 min, thus shortening the shelling time of eight-layer shell to 4–7 h.4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 115
The strength of the shell dried by the wind tunnel shell maker is about 50% higher
than that of the ordinary shell. It can be used to produce all kinds of metal castings,
including magnesium and titanium alloy castings.
4.1.4 Difficulties in the Fabrication of Large Ceramic Shells
In China, the development of aero-engines and even the whole aero-industry is
bumpy, and the aero-materials and manufacturing technology lag far behind the
international top level. The integral precision casting technology of large aero-engine
components has become a bottleneck restricting the development of aero-engines.
As a critical linkage in the process of precision casting, it is urgent to have a break￾through in the preparation technology of large ceramic shells. However, there are
still many difficulties in the preparation of large ceramic shells, as discussed in the
following:
(1) The physical and chemical properties of the shell have much higher require￾ments. The complex structural characteristics of large, thin-walled castings ask
for higher requirements for the strength, permeability, deformation resistance,
and yielding of the ceramic shell. The larger the casting size is, the greater is
the wax pressure on the shell during steam dewaxing, and the greater is the
hydrostatic pressure on the shell during pouring, which all require the shell to
have sufficiently high strength at both room temperature and high temperature.
However, as the structure of castings becomes more and more complex, the wall
thickness of castings becomes thinner and thinner, and the requirement of shell
collapsibility becomes higher and higher. If these requirements were not met,
it is easy to cause thermal tearing of castings; consequently, the shell strength
needs to be controlled by adjusting the shell thickness. At the same time, the
increase of shell thickness leads to a decrease in air permeability, which harms
dewaxing efficiency and metal liquid filling. Therefore, it is of great significance
to optimize the shell formulation appropriately to achieve an optimal balance
between the strength and permeability of the shell.
(2) The shell-making prefers a higher level of automation. The shell of large castings
is often of heavyweight, which can weigh more than 500 kg. It is impossible to
finish the soaking operation by hand. It is thus necessary to use a more automated
manipulator to cooperate with the large-scale soaking barrel and sand drenching
machine. These requirements make manipulators more and more expensive.
Besides, the design of the manipulator’s mortar and the sand spraying procedure
also significantly influences the quality of the shell.
(3) It is challenging to prepare the shell with some unique structures, such as the
narrow inner cavity of castings. Coating, drying, use of core-filling materials,
or ceramic cores are the vital forming technologies to the shell at the narrow
and long inner cavity.116 F. Li and F. Wang
(4) The control of the shell-making process is stricter. Large castings require higher
internal quality and dimensional accuracy. Therefore, the control of the tech￾nological parameters of the shell-making process is more stringent, including
shell drying parameters (drying temperature, drying humidity, and drying time),
dewaxing parameters (dewaxing temperature and dewaxing time), and sintering
parameters (sintering process curve).
Investment casting has been developed rapidly in recent decades. Scholars have
made more in-depth and systematic researches on investment casting shells. However,
there are still some shortcomings in the research of large-scale shells.
(1) The long production cycle has always been the disadvantage of investment
casting technology. The main reason is that the time spent on die processing,
die assembly welding, and shell contamination is long. However, with the
rapid development of rapid prototyping technology, rapid prototyping pattern
preparation technology has become more and more mature, which not only
saves the opening time but also dramatically shortens the time required for
pattern pressing and welding. At present, the shell-making method used in
most foundries and laboratories is still the traditional multi-layer shell-making
method with mortar and sand spraying. The traditional method of soaking mortar
and drenching sand needs to be coated and dried layer by layer on the surface of
the molten mold, and the shell-making cycle is long. In particular, for the shell
of large castings, the thickness of the shell needs to be coated much thicker, and
sometimes nearly 20 layers need to be coated. Because of this, it takes nearly ten
days to prepare the shell alone. Although some researchers have proposed new
shell making methods such as silica sol gel-forming, these methods are ineffi￾cient and have not been widely recognized for the time being. The long period of
shell preparation has become a bottleneck that limits the production efficiency
of investment casting. The rapid shell-making process based on a fast-drying
binder and automatic shell-making drying room can improve the shell-making
efficiency to a certain extent. However, this process can only be applied to small￾sized shells. For large-scale shells with a large size and complex structure, the
application of rapid drying technology is significantly limited because of the
higher requirements for drying uniformity and wet strength of different areas of
the shell. Therefore, it is of great significance for investment casting researchers
to explore a new rapid shell-making technology suitable for large-scale shells.
(2) The performance of the shell is determined by the binder and refractory used
in shell making. In recent decades, significant progress has been made in the
field of shell-making binders. The types and brands of binders are becoming
more and more abundant, which can be used to prepare ceramic mold shells
meeting different casting requirements. However, the types of shell refracto￾ries are mainly confined to corundum, zirconium silicate, aluminosilicate, and
fused quartz. The types of refractories used in shell making have not been
expanded, which restricts the space for further optimization and improvement
of ceramic shell properties. The shell system used in most foundries is a single
refractory system. For example, corundum is used as a refractory powder in the4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 117
primary slurry, and mullite is used as a refractory powder in the back slurry.
The advantage of this method is the simplification of the shell formulation and
reduction in the workload in many aspects such as raw material procurement
and slurry preparation. However, different refractories have different proper￾ties at high and low temperatures, with different effects on the binders as well.
Often, a variety of refractories can be used together to make the shell obtain
more balanced and excellent properties at both high and low temperatures. For
example, adding a small amount of alumina to the fused silica shell can produce
a secondary mullite phase at high temperature, which can further improve the
high-temperature strength of the shell without affecting the permeability and
yielding of the shell. Also, some additives, such as some mineralizers, ceramic
fibers, have greatly improved the shell’s properties. Further research in this area
is still in need.
(3) With the development of investment casting, the requirement for dimensional
accuracy of castings is getting higher and higher. However, most of the research
on casting deformation is focused on the deformation of investment casting
and metal solidification and cooling, and the attention on shell deformation is
lacking, which is related to the relatively uniform and stable deformation of the
shell. The larger the size is, and the more complex the structure of the castings
is, the worse becomes the uniformity of the deformation of the ceramic shell,
and the larger is the deformation. With the development of research, more and
more attention has been paid to the deformation of shell, especially for large
and complex castings. The shell’s influence on the size of castings mainly mani￾fests in (1) the deformation of the shell under the action of uneven temperature
field during sintering, and (2) the deformation of the shell under the action of
hydrostatic pressure during pouring. For large castings with complex shapes,
the deformation caused by the hydrostatic pressure of metal can be neglected.
The main factor affecting the deformation of the shell is the deformation of the
shell during sintering. The deformation of a simple flat shell during sintering is
characterized by a simple linear relationship, which can be measured directly
by experiments and calculated using the thermal expansion coefficient of the
shell. However, the size change of the shell with a complex inner cavity during
baking is affected by the temperature field and deformation constraints. The
size change law is thus very different from that of the simple flat shell, which
cannot be directly measured from experiments and can only be studied using
computer simulations. At present, the simulation analysis of the shell mainly
focuses on the fracture of the shell, while the simulation of the high-temperature
deformation of the shell is rarely carried out. Most foundries assume that all
parts of the shell expand evenly after calcination at high temperature, but only
refer to the coefficient of thermal expansion of the shell when determining the
expansion rate of the shell, or rely on experience and repeated modification
through experiments.118 F. Li and F. Wang
4.2 Preparation and Characterization of Large Ceramic
Shells
Compared with medium and small castings, the characteristics of large castings
are not only large in size but also very complicated in structure. Because of the
requirement of weight reduction, a large area of the thin-walled structure is designed
under the condition of meeting the mechanical properties. Taking the turbine rear
frame (TRF) of nickel-base superalloy for aero-engines as an example, the contour
size of this kind of large castings is more than 1 m, and there are several support plates,
convex platforms, lifting lugs, and other structures, with the wall thickness being
only about 2 mm. These structural characteristics of large and complex thin-walled
castings demand higher requirements for the strength, permeability, and deformation
resistance of ceramic shell.
4.2.1 Raw Material Composition of Large Ceramic Shells
In this section, the preparation process of two types of large ceramic shells is intro￾duced, which are named as MS shell and WS shell, respectively. These two types
of ceramic shells have the same primary layer but different back layers. MS shell is
composed of a primary layer and MS back layer, whereas the WS shell is composed of
a primary layer and WS back layer. For the primary shell layer, a relatively traditional
and economical material combination was selected, using alkaline silica sol as the
binder, high-temperature alumina powder, and zircon sand as the refractory powder,
and sand-spraying material for the primary slurry. The wet strength enhancer latex
and grain refiner cobalt aluminate were also added to the primary slurry to make the
primary shell layer have high strength in both room temperature and high tempera￾ture, which not only ensures the thermal stability of the shell but also makes the shell
surface have the function of grain refinement. This kind of primary layer can form
a flat, compact, solid, and smooth surface of the shell and does not interact with the
liquid metal to ensure the surface quality of the castings.
For large superalloy castings, the requirements of surface quality are very high.
However, the key and difficult points in the entire investment casting process are
the dimensional accuracies and deformation control of the castings, which raises
higher requirements for the performance of the back layer of the ceramic shell. Two
types of back-layer materials, namely, the MS back layer and the WS back layer, are
designed to this end. The back layer of MS is composed of ethyl silicate and A3125
acid silica sol, which combines both water-based silica sol and ethyl alcohol silicate
hydrolysate. The slurry prepared this way has good fluidity, the fast-drying speed of
the shell, and a high strength of wet billet. The quick-drying silica sol is used as a
binder, which is of high quality, environmental protection, high strength, and good
collapsibility.4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 119
Regarding the choice of refractories for the back layer of the shell, fused quartz
is undoubtedly an excellent choice. However, it has its shortcomings. Fused quartz
powder has polygonal distribution, low bulk density, low slurry powder, and low
strength. Therefore, fused quartz is seldom used alone. It is usually used in conjunc￾tion with other materials to enhance its advantages and avoid its disadvantages,
achieving the ideal application effect. MS back layer uses fused quartz and fused
mullite as a refractory powder for slurry and fused mullite as drenching material.
Mullite has high refractoriness, small linear expansion coefficient, good thermal
shock stability, and low price and is suitable for the use combined with fused quartz;
theWS back layer uses fused quartz as the main refractory powder for slurry. A certain
amount of needle petroleum coke was added to the slurry. Needle petroleum coke
is beneficial to enhancing the adhesion of slurry, optimizing the coating thickness
of the shell, improving the strength and permeability of green shell, and improving
shelling. The back of WS still uses fused quartz as sanding material.
The main parameters of the binder for shell making are listed in Table 4.3, in
which the primary layer and the filling materials are used as follows. DVSTU006
silica sol is used for the back shell of WS and 1130 C silica sol. These two silica sol
are alkaline binders. The A3125 used in the back layer of MS is a composite binder.
A3125 composite binder is an acid binder made of ethyl silicate, acidic silica sol
with 30% silica content, and some organic solvents. DVSTU006 silica sol contains
a certain amount of liquid water-soluble polymer, which is of great significance to
improving the slurry coating property and the strength of the shell body. The types
and sizes of refractories for shell making are listed in Table 4.4.
Table 4.3 Binder for shell making
Binder SiO2 content
(wt%)
Particle size
(nm)
Polymer
content
(wt%)
Density
(g/cm3)
pH Suppliers
1130C Silica
sol
29–31 8–10 – 1.21–1.22 9.7–10.5 Nalco
A3125
Composite
binder
19–21 15–30 – 1.00–1.01 1.1–1.6 –
DVSTU006
Silica sol
28–30 11–16 7.7 1.19–1.20 9.8–10.2 Nalco
Table 4.4 Refractories for
shell making Refractory material Particle size/mesh
High-temperature alumina −325
Aluminum cobalt oxide −200
Zircon sand 70/200
Fused silica −325, 40/150, 120, 30/50, 50/100
Electric melting mullite 40/150, 10/70120 F. Li and F. Wang
4.2.2 Preparation Process of Large Ceramic Shells
Mold shell preparation is an essential part of the whole investment casting process.
The dimensional accuracy, surface roughness, and even internal quality of castings
are closely related to the ceramic shell. However, the process of shell preparation is
complicated, the production cycle is long, and many process parameters are involved.
All these bring about many difficulties for shell quality control.
4.2.2.1 Slurry Preparation
The slurry made of binder and refractory powder is the basis of the shell structure.
It can be divided into the primary layer and back layer. A fast mixer can prepare
the slurry. As shown in Fig. 4.4, the slurry can be mixed evenly. The capacity of the
slurry mixer is 200 L, and the speed can be adjusted, with the maximum speed being
able to reach 1000 r/min. Also, the control system and alarm device can adjust the
temperature of slurry in the pulp mixer through an external ice water machine. When
the material is added, the slurry viscosity is measured with the Cain cup every hour,
and the variation of the slurry flow viscosity is recorded. It is found that the slurry
flow viscosity decreases gradually until the difference between the two consecutive
flow viscosity measurements is less than 1 s, as shown in Fig. 4.5. At this point, the
slurry viscosity tends to be stable, indicating that the slurry flow viscosity is gradually
reduced. The slurry usually needs to be stirred continuously in the mixer for at least
8 h before mixing evenly to mix all the materials evenly in a dipping barrel.
Fig. 4.4 Preparing slurry in
rapid pulping machine4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 121
4.2.2.2 Dipping and Stuccoing
Dipping and stuccoing slurry are the core steps of shell preparation. Before dipping
slurry and stuccoing, the viscosity and temperature of slurry should be adjusted,
and the caking and ash in spreading sand materials should be screened out. Table 4.5
lists the specific shell-making process parameters. For large-scale melt molds, 500 kg
and 1000 kg manipulators are, respectively, used for the dipping slurry and stuccoing
operation of the primary and the back layers. The processes of dipping slurry and
spreading sand stuccoing by manipulators are shown in Fig. 4.6. During shell making,
the primary layer is coated and hung first. After drying the primary shell layer, the
coating and hanging of the back layer are repeated until the required number of layers
is reached. The last back layer is a closed layer, which is only dipped with back slurry
and not stuccoed. The process parameters are given in Table 4.6.
Fig. 4.5 Viscosity stability
curve during slurry
preparation
Table 4.5 Process parameters of dipping and stuccoing
Shell system MS shell WS shell
Primary
layer
Back layer Sealing
layer
Primary
layer
Back
layer
Sealing
layer
Type of slurry Primary
slurry
MS back
slurry
MS back
slurry
Primary
slurry
WS
back
slurry
WS back
slurry
Sand 70/200
zircon
sand
10/70
Mullite
n/a 70/200
zircon
sand
30/50
fused
silica
n/a
Slurry temperature/°C 19–25 7–10 7–10 19–25 19–25 19–25
Wind speed/(m/s) 0.5 3.0 3.0 0.5 3.0 3.0
Drying time/h 24 10 24 24 8 24
Ambient
temperature/°C
19–25 19–25 19–25 19–25 19–25 19–25
Relative humidity/% 50–70 50–70 50–70 50–70 50–70 50–70122 F. Li and F. Wang
Fig. 4.6 Dipping and stuccoing by using robot manipulator
Table 4.6 Types and layers
of ceramic shells coated with
different samples
Sample species MS shell WS shell
Strength/air permeability/deformation 6 6
Thermal expansion coefficient 5 5
Features/single slant plate castings 10 –
Rear casing 18 –
Fig. 4.7 Steam dewaxing
kettle for shell dewaxing
4.2.2.3 Steam Dewaxing
The process of wax pattern melting from the ceramic shell is called dewaxing. Large
ceramic shells are dewaxed using steam dewaxing, which is the most widely used
method at present. The sealed shell needs to be dried for 24 h before dewaxing
to provide the shell with greater green strength so that it would not crack during
dewaxing. Shell dewaxing is carried out in a steam dewaxing kettle, as shown in
Fig. 4.7. The process parameters of shell steam dewaxing include dewaxing temper￾ature and dewaxing time. The dewaxing temperature and pressure are a set of related
parameters. The temperature and pressure in the dewaxing kettle are all provided4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 123
Fig. 4.8 Sintering and casting of TRF castings. a Before sintering. b After sintering
by water vapor. The dewaxing temperature and pressure correspond to the temper￾ature of water vapor and the saturated vapor pressure at the given temperature. The
steam dewaxing temperature and dewaxing pressure are set as 170 °C and 0.75 MPa,
respectively, for precision casting shells of casing castings. However, for different
sizes of shells, different dewaxing times are adopted, generally 1000–2000s. After
dewaxing is finished, the pressure in the dewaxing kettle is unloaded, and the shell
can be taken out.
4.2.2.4 Sintering and Pouring
Shell sintering is one of the critical processes in investment casting. Many shell
samples need to be treated at a high temperature. Figure 4.8 shows the photos of
large ceramic shells before and after sintering.
4.2.3 Performance Testing Method for Large Ceramic Shells
4.2.3.1 Performance Test of Ceramic Slurry
(1) Slurry viscosity
The flow cup viscosity of the slurry is measured using the Zahn Cup, as shown in
Fig. 4.9a. Before the measurement, the flow cup is cleaned and dried, and the slurry’s
temperature is maintained in a proper range. The flow cup is immersed in the slurry,
and the flow cup is lifted quickly. Once the upper edge of the flow cup leaves the
slurry’s surface, the time is started when the flow is interrupted under the small hole
of the flow cup. The time used is recorded as the flow cup of the slurry viscosity.
Zahn Cup has a volume of 44 mL, including five flow cups with different aperture
sizes. The aperture of the Cain cup increases gradually from No. 1 to No. 5. In this
chapter, Zahn Cup No. 4 is used to measure the viscosity of the primary slurry flow124 F. Li and F. Wang
Fig. 4.9 Zahn cup (a) and
rotary viscometer (b) for
testing slurry viscosity
cup, and its aperture is 4.35 mm; Zahn Cup No. 5 is used to measure the viscosity
of two kinds of back slurry flow cup, its aperture is 5.41 mm.
The flow viscosity of the slurry can be converted into kinematic viscosity through
the equation. For the 4 # and 5 # Zahn Cups used in this chapter, the kinematic
viscosity ν (mm2/s) of the slurry can be calculated using Eqs. (4.1) and (4.2):
ν = 1.48(t − 5) (4.1)
ν = 23t (4.2)
The dynamic viscosity of the slurry of the shell and core filling material are
measured using NDJ-5S and Model NXS-11A rotary viscometer, as shown in
Fig. 4.9b.
(2) Slurry specific gravity
The process is described as following. (1) Prepare a clean measuring cylinder with
a capacity of 100 mL and a weight of WT g. (2) Pour the slurry into the measuring
cylinder at the 100 mL scale and then weigh the total weight as WG g. (3) Wash
and dry the measuring cylinder and then pour the same volume of water into the
measuring cylinder, weighing the weight as WC g. The specific gravity of the slurry
SP is then calculated as:
Sp = (WG − WT )/(WC − WT ) (4.3)
(3) Slurry solid content and silicon content
One glass dish to be dried is weighed as WT g, about 50g slurry or 10 ml slurry
centrifuge (centrifuge speed > 3500 r/min, centrifuge time 30 min) is weighed into
the glass dish, and the total weight WS g of slurry or centrifuge and glass dish is
weighed. The sample is put into an oven at 120 °C, and after 1 h, the sample is
taken out. After recording the sample’s weight when it cools to room temperature,
the sample is put into an oven at 120 °C for heating again. After 30 min, take out the4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 125
sample, cool and weigh, record the weight of the sample, and repeat the operation
process until the weight of the sample remains unchanged. The weight is the dry
weight of WD g and then the slurry solid content or silica content percentage TSC is:
T SC = (WD − WT )/(WS − WT ) (4.4)
(4) The coating weight of the slurry
Prepare a stainless steel plate with a size of 150 mm × 150 mm × 1.5 mm, calculate
the surface area C cm2 of the steel plate, clean the stainless steel plate, dry and weigh
A g, then immerse the stainless steel plate in the slurry for 5 s, quickly take the steel
plate out of the slurry, as shown in Fig. 4.10, and then start recording time at the
same time. After 120 s dripping time, weigh the total weight B g of the stainless-steel
plate and the slurry adhered to it, and the coating amount R of the slurry is given as
R = (B − A)/C (4.5)
For different types of slurries, owing to their different densities ρ, the coating
amount R of the slurry on the coating sheet per unit area cannot fully reflect the
adhesion amount of the slurry on the stainless-steel plate. In this case, the coating
thickness D of the slurry is more suitable to represent the coating property of the
slurry:
D = R/ρ (4.6)
Fig. 4.10 Smear Weight
Test of Slurry126 F. Li and F. Wang
(5) The wet film thickness of the primary slurry
Prepare a clean glass sheet, immerse the glass sheet in the primary layer slurry for
at least 4 in (1 in = 0.0254 m) deep, and then take out the glass sheet until the slurry
on the surface of the glass sheet stops flowing. After drying for 5 min, measure the
coating thickness of the primary layer slurry with a wet film thickness gauge, as
shown in Fig. 4.11.
(6) Slurry bubble test
Prepare one clean slide, stick one side of the slide with adhesive tape, and then dip the
slide into the primary slurry and pour sand, remove the adhesive tape adhered on one
side, and observe the number of bubbles on the side of the slide stained with slurry
and pour sand under the light source, as shown in Fig. 4.12a. The number of bubbles
should be no more than one bubble per square inch; otherwise, an appropriate amount
of defoamer should be added. Take another 10 ml of the slurry centrifuge (centrifuge
speed > 3500 r/min, time 30 min), put it into the centrifuge tube, shake the centrifuge
tube, stop shaking after 10 s, and record the time required for bubbles in the slurry to
disappear completely, as shown in Fig. 4.12b, it is generally appropriate to use 30 s
or less; otherwise, add an appropriate amount of defoamer.
Fig. 4.11 Measurement of the wet film thickness of the surface slurry
Fig. 4.12 Test of slurry
bubble quantity (a) and
bubble rupture speed (b)4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 127
4.2.3.2 Microstructure Observation and Performance Test of Ceramic
Shell
(1) Phase analysis
The phase of the ceramic shell was qualitatively analyzed by X-Ray Diffractometer
(XRD). The diffracted samples were ground and pulverized, screened with a 100
mesh sieve, and the screened sample was taken. The test parameters are Cu target,
voltage 40 kV, current 60 mA, scanning step length 0.02°, scanning speed 5°/min,
diffraction angle 2θ ranging from 10° to 70°.
(2) Microstructure analysis
The microstructure and fracture morphology of the material is analyzed by a scanning
electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS).
(3) Bending strength test
The room temperature strength and mechanical properties of the shell and core￾filled materials were tested on a universal material testing machine, and the high￾temperature mechanical properties of the shell materials were tested on a high temper￾ature bending testing machine. The sample size was 150 mm × 20 mm × 20 mm,
and the loading rate was 1 mm/min. The bending strength of the material can be
calculated using Eq. (4.7),
σmax = 3Pmax L/2W H2 (4.7)
where σmax is the bending strength (MPa) of the shell, Pmax is the maximum load
(N), L is the span (mm) of the sample, W is the width (mm) of the sample, and H is
the thickness (mm) of the sample. The test results are then obtained as the average
of 3 or more sets of data.
AFLB, i.e., corrected fracture load, is defined as the maximum load required to
fracture a 10 mm wide and 70 mm span shell sample and is a method for standardizing
the bearing capacity of the shell. It can be calculated using (4.8):
AFL B = fBσmax H2 (4.8)
where fB is a constant equal to 0.1.
(4) Wedge strength test
A wedge-shaped wax pattern with an internal angle of 12°, a side length of 20 mm,
and a width of 10 mm is coated with a shell sample. After six layers of coating
are applied, the wedge-shaped strength pattern shell sample can be obtained after
sanding. The cross-sectional schematics of the wedge-shaped strength wax pattern
and the shell sample are shown in Fig. 4.13.
When measuring the wedge strength of the shell, the wedge-shaped strength
sample is placed on the wedge-shaped base with an internal angle greater than 12°.128 F. Li and F. Wang
Fig. 4.13 Cross-sectional schematic diagram of wedge-shaped strength wax pattern and shell
sample
The wedge-shaped strength sample applies a specific load to break the sample, and
the inner surface of the wedge-shaped shell is subjected to tensile stress when loaded.
The outer surface is subjected to compressive stress, as shown in Fig. 4.14. The wedge
strength of the shell can be calculated by Eq. (4.9) according to the maximum load
that makes the shell sample fracture:
σedge = 12.2
Fd sin θ cos θ
W T 2 (4.9)
where σedge is the wedge strength (MPa) of the shell, F is the maximum load (N) for
the shell fracture, d is the side length (mm) of the sample, T is the thickness (mm)
at the tip of the sample, and W is the width (mm) of the sample.
Fig. 4.14 Schematic diagram of wedge-shaped shell strength measurement4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 129
(5) Deformation measurement
The shell is coated on a wax pattern with a size of 40 mm × 10 mm × 10 mm,
and the primary layer is coated with a layer. After drying for 24 h, the back layer is
coated with seven layers, which are dried for 8 h. The last layer is the sealing layer,
which only sticks to the pulp and does not scatter sand. After the coating is finished,
the shell is steam dewaxed, cut, and polished to a size of 20 mm × 10 mm × 5 mm
strips.
The flat-shell sample strip is placed on the corundum fulcrum in the roaster, and
the span between the fulcrums is 150 mm. After heated to a specified temperature
with the calciner, the sample is applied by placing a zirconium silicate load sheet
in the middle of the sample. After holding the temperature for 1 h, the load piece is
removed. Then, the sample is cooled with the furnace, as shown in Fig. 4.15. After
cooled down to room temperature, the deflection, thickness, and width of the sample
are measured. When the molded shell sample is loaded, the corresponding stress and
elastic strain can be calculated using Eqs. (4.10) and (4.11), respectively:
σ = 3Fmax L
2W H2 (4.10)
ε = 6Hδ
L2 (4.11)
where F is the loading amount (N), L is the span (mm), W is the sample width (mm),
H is the sample thickness (mm), δ is the deflection (mm), and ε is the strain (%).
(6) Permeability test
Insert one end of a quartz tube, which has an inner diameter of 6 mm, an outer
diameter of 10 mm, and a length of 250 mm, into a ping pong with a diameter of
40 mm. In the ball, the insertion depth is controlled within 5–20 mm, and the bonding
table of the table tennis ball and the quartz tube is closed and fixed by the bonding
wax. Then prepare the shell on the table tennis, and coat the layer. The back layer of
the sixth layer and the back layer of the last layer is closed. Also, the quartz tube and
the table tennis ball’s connection end with about 30 mm length should be coated on
the shell. After the shell is coated and dried, the butanone solution is poured into the
table tennis from the open end of the quartz tube. The butanone solution can dissolve
the table tennis ball and continuously change the butanone solution until the methyl
ketone solution does not change color, which indicates that table tennis has been
Fig. 4.15 Schematic
diagram of bending
deformation measurement
under shell load
)RUFH130 F. Li and F. Wang
Fig. 4.16 Gas permeability sample of shell
completely dissolved. After drying for 2 h, the gas permeability can be measured. A
sample for the gas permeability test of the shell is shown in Fig. 4.16.
The schematic diagram of the shell gas permeability’s testing device is shown in
Fig. 4.17. By using compressed air as a gas source, the shell sample’s air pressure is
kept constant at 68.95 kPa (10 psi), and the temperature rise rate of the shell sample
is 3 °C/min. The test temperatures are 25, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 °C. Then the
permeability of the shell μ (m2) can be derived from Eqs. (4.12) and (4.13).
μ = ηV l
αp
(4.12)
η = η0
T0 + B
T + B
 T
T0
3
2
(4.13)
where η is the viscosity of air at the test temperature (Ns/m2), V is the flow rate of
air (m3/s), l is the thickness of the shell sample (m), a is the inner surface area of the
molded shell (m2), p is the gas pressure passing through the sample of the mold shell
(N/m2), η0 is the viscosity of air at room temperature (Ns/m2), T is the elevated test
Fig. 4.17 Schematic diagram of shell permeability testing device4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 131
temperature (K), T0 is room temperature (K), B is a constant whose number is about
10.4 K.
Each group of samples consists of six samples. Calculate the gas permeability
values of the six samples separately and then take the average. Samples that exceed
the average of 15% are rejected.
(7) Density and porosity measurement
The density of the shell was measured using the Archimedean method. Three samples
are selected from each group, and the serial number is indicated. In the electronics
balance Ma according to its weight. And then the specimen in a beaker of water
to boil until there is no air bubbles escape, remove with a damp cloth to wipe the
water on the surface of the specimen, Mb according to its weight. Place the beaker
with water on the electronic balance and zero. Note that the water is not too full
of exceeding the maximum range of the balance. Next, attach the sample to a thin
wire and immerse it in a beaker filled with water. Note that the sample should be
completely immersed in water but not in contact with the beaker wall and, at the
bottom of the beaker, weigh the weight in water Mc. If the density of water is ρw, the
sample can be calculated according to the following equation:
ρ = Mα
Me
· ρw (4.14)
θ = Mb − Ma
Ma
(4.15)
where ρ is the bulk density (g/cm3), and θ is the porosity (%).
(8) Measurement of thermal expansion coefficient
The coefficient of thermal expansion of the shell in the range from room temperature
to 1400 °C was measured using a “zero friction” dilatometer. The sample size was
4 mm × 4 mm × 20 mm, and the heating rate was 5 °C/min at standard atmospheric
pressure.
4.3 Characterization of Large Ceramic Shells
4.3.1 Characterization of Ceramic Slurry
4.3.1.1 Physical Properties of Ceramic Slurry
The ceramic slurry is a vital part of the shell. The behavior of the slurry directly
affects the performance of the shell. The shell can be divided into a primary layer
and a back layer, the slurry is also divided into a primary layer slurry and a back
slurry. The MS and WS shells described in this chapter have the same primary132 F. Li and F. Wang
Table 4.7 Properties of
ceramic slurry Test item Primary MS secondary WS secondary
Temperature (°C) 18–25 7–10 18–25
Viscosity time (s) 26–28 21–25 12–15
pH value 9.6–10.5 1.5–3.0 9.6–10.5
Density (g/cm3) 2.4 1.4 1.5
Solid content (%) >78 >76 >72
SiO2 content (%) 18–23 18–23 26–32
Plate retention
(μm)
89 146 174
Wet film thickness
(μm)
75 – –
Bubble test (in.−2) <1 <1 <1
Foam test (s) 28 18 26
slurry but different back layer slurries. The physical properties of the three slurries
are shown in Table 4.7. Test items include slurry temperature, viscosity, pH, density,
solids content, silica content, amount, wet film thickness, bubble content, and bubble
rupture rate.
The functionality of the ceramic slurry is mainly determined by the formulation of
the slurry, which means the type of binder and refractory materials of the slurry, e.g.,
solid content, silica content, etc. However, for a particular formulation of the slurry,
the focus is on its process and rheology. Among the properties listed in Table 4.7,
temperature, pH, and viscosity are the three most basic performance indicators of
the slurry. Temperature and pH mainly affect the stability of the slurry, and viscosity
mainly affects the work of the slurry.
The temperature of the slurry is easier to control. The shell making workshops of
large precision casting plants are generally equipped with constant temperature and
humidity systems. A temperature control device can also be installed in the barrel to
control the temperature of the slurry more accurately.
The pH value of the slurry has many influencing factors, and the electrolyte in
the non-deionized water, refractory material, and the investment cleaning agent has
a significant influence on the pH value of the slurry. Besides, low renewability, high
silicon content, over-mixing, bacterial content of the slurry, and excessive standards
also have a more significant impact on the pH of the slurry. Therefore, when the
pH in the slurry deviates too much, acid adjustment is required. The acidic slurry
is generally adjusted with dilute hydrochloric acid, and alkaline slurry can be used
with ammonium hydroxide or tri-ethanol.
The viscosity of slurry can be divided into flow viscosity, kinematic viscosity,
and dynamic viscosity. The viscosity of slurry listed in Table 4.7 is flow viscosity,
which reflects the fluidity of the slurry. The so-called flow viscosity corresponds to
the scenario where the slurry flows out completely from a specific volume of flow
cup at the bottom of a certain aperture in the nozzle.4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 133
The primary layer slurry is used to form a smooth and compact surface of the
ceramic shell surface. In general, the size of the refractory powder is relatively small,
and the solid content of the slurry is relatively high. Therefore, compared with the
back slurry, the primary layer slurry generally has higher viscosity of flow cup. The
flow viscosity of MS back slurry is higher than that of the primary layer slurry.
However, since MS slurry is alcohol-based, its fluidity and wettability are better than
those of the water-based slurry, and the higher viscosity does not harm the coating
of the shell. For the water-based WS slurries with the same back layer, the viscosity
of the flow cup is required to be lower than that of the primary layer slurries and MS
slurries to obtain a better coating effect.
The flow viscosity of the slurry is mainly affected by the particle size of the
refractory material and its volume content in the binder. In the case of a fixed grade
of refractory, the size distribution and shape of refractory are fixed, and the viscosity
of the slurry flow cup is mainly affected by the volume content of refractory in the
binder. The larger the volume of refractory in the slurry, the greater the slurry flow
cup’s viscosity and the thicker the slurry, as shown in Fig. 4.18a.
It can be seen that the flow viscosity of the primary slurry and the two back
layer slurries increase as the volume fraction of the refractory material increases.
The flow viscosity can be converted into kinematic viscosity, which can be used for
kinematic viscosity on No. 4 and No. 5. The flow viscosity between the flow cups is
converted, as shown in Fig. 4.18b. Based on Fig. 4.18a, b, it can be seen that under the
same flow viscosity, the back slurry has the most considerable solid volume content,
whereas the WS back slurry has the second largest. The layer slurry has the smallest
volume content of solids; this is determined by the particle size and grain shape of the
refractory material in the three slurries. The refractory material used in the primary
slurry is 325 mesh alumina, and the particle size is much smaller than that in the
two back layer slurries, resulting in the lowest solid volume content. The refractory
particle size used in the two back layer slurries do not differ much, but the WS slurry
is a full fused silica slurry. In addition to fused silica, the MS slurry contains a certain
amount of mullite. Therefore, compared with WS slurry, MS slurry has a higher solid
volume content.
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Solid loading (vol.%)
Flow time (s)
 Primary test with Zahn cup #4
 WS secondary test with Zahn cup #5
 MS secondary test with Zahn cup #5
(a)
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Viscosity (mm2/s)
Flow time (s)
Zahn Cup #5
 Zahn Cup #4
(b)
Fig. 4.18 Relationship between solid content and viscosity of the slurry. a The relationship between
slurry solid content and flow time; b relationship between kinematic viscosity and low viscosity134 F. Li and F. Wang
4.3.1.2 Rheological Properties of Ceramic Slurry
Flow viscosity is one type of technological viscosity commonly used in the daily
maintenance of slurry, which can reflect the flow energy of slurry but cannot charac￾terize the fluid type of slurry. To this end, the kinetic viscosity of the three slurries is
measured using a rotating viscometer, and the result is shown in Fig. 4.19. The kinetic
viscosity curve can reflect the rheological properties of the slurry. The silica sol and
ethyl silicate hydrolysate slurry are generally pseudo-plastic fluids with low yield
value [108]. The yield value of slurry refers to certain minimum shear stress needed
to drive the fluid to flow. The strength of the internal structure of slurry is mainly
caused by a network structure with low strength formed by the mutual attraction
between dispersed phase particles of the whole system.
It can be seen from Fig. 4.19 that when the rotor speed is constant, the viscosity
of the slurry is higher, so is the dynamic viscosity. The viscosity of the three ceramic
slurries decreases with the increase of the rotor speed, which is characterized by shear
thinning. It is a typical pseudoplastic fluid, which is most suitable for the use as an
investment casting slurry. When the slurry is stored in the pulp tank daily, most of
the slurry in the pulp tank is in a low shear rate state. In this case, the slurry viscosity
is high, and the slurry can be suppressed to the maximum extent. The precipitation
of the refractory powder keeps the slurry uniform and stable. However, the shear rate
at the contact point between the rotating wax mold/shell and the slurry is larger, and
the viscosity of the slurry at the interface is lower, which is beneficial to the slurry
coating.
Fig. 4.19 Kinetic viscosity
curve of ceramic slurry
under different viscosities of
flow cup
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
0
1000
2000
3000
6000
7000
Viscosity (mPa.s)
Rotation speed (r/min)
 Primary 32s
 Primary 28s
 Primary 26s
 MS 21s
 MS 28s
 MS 25s
 WS 10s
 WS 18s
 WS 15s4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 135
4.3.2 Microstructure Analysis of Ceramic Shell
The ceramic shell is structurally composed of a top layer and a back layer. Since
the primary layer and the back layer have different functional requirements, the
material compositions of the primary shell layer and the back layer generally can
vary significantly, and different binders and refractory powders are typically used.
Therefore, the composition of ceramic shells is complex, and some complex shell
systems can contain nearly ten elements.
The preparation process of ceramic shells is complex, which requires a layer-by￾layer coating. For a certain layer of the shell, different coating areas are limited by the
technical characteristics of the slurry coating and sand spraying, e.g., uneven slurry
coating thickness and uneven sand spraying, which occur inevitably. The structural
difference between different layers is significant, not only between the primary shell
layer and the back layer but also between the back layer. It is hard to achieve a
uniform structure in the shell due to different coating time under the slurry process
and rheological property in the fluctuation.
The cross-section structure of a typical ceramic shell is shown in Fig. 4.20. The
structure of the shell is generally divided into a primary layer and a back layer. There
are two points worth mentioning regarding the cross-section structure of the molded
shell: the combination of the primary layer and the back layer, distribution of slurry,
and sand-spraying materials in the back layer.
4.3.2.1 Combination of Shell Primary Layer and Back Layer
The bonding condition between the shell primary layer and back layer has a great
influence on the casting quality. The main concern of the primary layer and back
layer is the requirement of its bonding strength.
Fig. 4.20 Typical structure
diagram of ceramic shell
[109]136 F. Li and F. Wang
Fig. 4.21 Combination of primary layer and a back layer. a MS shell; b WS shell
The refractories used by the primary layer and the back layer are generally
different, and their expansion coefficients are different. If the bonding strength
between the primary layer and the back layer is not high enough, the former is likely
to fall off when the shell is subjected to high temperature or metal liquid impact,
resulting in leakage and inclusion defects. The particle size of the primary layer is
generally small, which is not conducive to the combination of the primary layer and
back layer. The cross-section microstructure of the MS-shaped shell and WS-shaped
shell is shown in Fig. 4.21. It can be seen that the primary layer and back layer of
the MS-shaped shell are closely bound, and no signs of poor bonding between the
primary layer and back layer can be observed in SEM images, as shown in Fig. 4.21a.
However, in the cross-section structure of the WS shell, traces of clearance can be
faintly seen at the junction between the primary layer and back layer, as shown in
Fig. 4.21b. It can be seen that the bonding condition of the MS back layer and the
primary layer is better than that of the WS back layer and primary layer, which is
related to the good wettability and strong permeability of alcohol-based slurry of MS
shell.
4.3.2.2 The Layered Structures of the Two Shell Back Layers
In general, there is no need to worry about the bonding strength between the back
layers, except for the occurrence of excessive dust content of sand-coated materials
and extremely rough inter-layer drying conditions. The distribution of slurry and
sand-spraying materials in the back layer directly depends on the slurry viscosity
and sand-spraying grain size. When the slurry with low viscosity and good fluidity is
used, and the sand spraying material with appropriate granularity is used, a thin and
compact overall shell can be obtained. The layered shell can be prepared using the
slurry with high viscosity and the sand spraying material with appropriate granularity.
The strength of the layered shell is generally lower than that of the monolithic shell,
but when cracks appear, the crack propagation can be effectively prevented through
the gap in the sand layer.4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 137
The cross-section structure of the back layer shell can be divided into three
types: monolithic structure, semi-layered structure, and fully Layered structure [110].
Generally speaking, the permeability of monolithic shells and layered shells is better
than that of semi-layered shells, while the strength of monolithic shells is weaker
than that of layered shells and semi-layered shells because their structures are more
conducive to crack propagation [111]. The cross-section structures of the two back
shell types are shown in Fig. 4.22. It can be seen that the MS back layer shell is a
typical layered shell due to its high slurry viscosity, whereas the WS shell presents the
characteristics of the overall shell. However, for WS shells, the addition of needle
petroleum coke significantly improves the billet strength and air permeability of
the shells. Additionally, the refractory material of fused quartz, which has extremely
strong thermal shock resistance, can reduce the generation and propagation of cracks
in the shell during dewaxing, sintering, and pouring.
The slurry viscosity was adjusted from 25 to 19 s, and the MS-shaped shell was
shown in Fig. 4.22c. It is evident that the MS-shaped shell in Fig. 4.22d presented
a semi-stratified structure since the slurry viscosity was adjusted to thin by using
a granular-grained sand-coated material. Compared with the medium-sized shell in
Fig. 4.22c, the MS-shaped shell in Fig. 4.22d presented an obvious stratified structure.
It can be seen that the smaller viscosity of the slurry and the thicker granulation of
sand are conducive to the formation of the overall shell, while the thicker viscosity of
the slurry and the finer granulation of sand are conducive to the formation of layered
shell.
Fig. 4.22 Cross-section structure of the ceramic shell back layer. a MS back layer shell (slurry
viscosity of 25 s, sand granule of 10/70 mesh); b WS back layer shell (slurry viscosity 15 s, sand
granule 30/50 mesh); c MS back layer shell (slurry viscosity 19 s, sand granulation 10/70 mesh);
d MS back layer shell (slurry viscosity: 19 s, sand granulation: 50/70 mesh)138 F. Li and F. Wang
4.3.2.3 Microstructure and Phase Analysis of Ceramic Shells
The primary layer of the shell directly is contacted with the metal liquid, which
requires high chemical stability and smoothness of the primary layer. The microstruc￾ture of the primary shell layer is shown in Fig. 4.23. It can be seen that after the primary
layer is dried, its organization is flat, dense, and uniform. After the shell is sintered at
1000 °C, the primary layer’s porosity increases significantly with the loss of solvent
and latex in the shell. With the increase of sintering temperature to 1200 °C, the
viscosity of the nepheline phase formed in the surface shell of SiO2-Al2O3-Na2O
during sintering decreases sharply. The content of the nepheline phase is very small,
but it has a great influence on the sintering of the shell, which intensifies the sintering
of the surface shell and makes the structure dense. When the sintering temperature
of the shell continues to rise to 1400 °C, a denser sintered structure is achieved.
With the increasing of sintering temperature, the grain size of the primary layer also
increases.
For ceramic shells, the primary layer is usually only one layer, and the back layer
contains more than one layer. The back layer determines the strength, permeability,
thermal conductivity, and other indicators of the shell. Therefore, the microstructure
of the back layer is also observed. The microstructure of the MS back shell is shown
in Fig. 4.24. Because MS back layer shell uses alcohol-based adhesives, most of the
solvent has evaporated in the drying process. As a result, compared with the primary
Fig. 4.23 Microstructure of primary shell layer. a Blank; b roasted at 1000 °C for 2 h; c roasted at
1200 °C for 2 h; d roasted at 1400 °C for 2 h4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 139
layer, after drying of the shell body, a higher porosity is presented; after 1000 °C
sintering, shell porosity increase is not obvious, and the organization also no obvious
change after sintering. With the increase of sintering temperature, the shell is sintered
gradually, and the quartzite is precipitated.
The addition of needle focus has a great impact on the structure and properties of
the WS shell. Therefore, it is necessary to understand the microstructure of needle
focus. Figure 4.25 shows the microscopic structure of the needle coke. It can be seen
from Fig. 4.25 that the length of the needle coke is about 1–2 mm, and the width is
about 0.2–0.5 mm. Additionally, the needle coke surface is distributed in needle-like
areas. The needle-like fibers are tightly combined, and the surface of needle-like
areas is very rough, with many small bumps.
The cross-section of needle coke is composed of a needle-like area and mosaic
area. The needle-like area is composed of fine needle-like materials with a diameter of
3–30μm. The mosaic area is the main structure of the needle coke section. Compared
with the needle area, the mosaic area shows less anisotropy and has a porous structure
with pore diameter ranging from several hundred nanometers to tens of microns.
The cross-section of the needle coke is a composite structure consisting of a
needle-shaped area and a mosaic area. The needle-shaped area is composed of small
needles with a diameter of 3–30 μm. Moreover, the surface of the needle is also
distributed with many small protrusions. The mosaic area is the main structure of
the needle-shaped focal section, which is less anisotropic than the needle-like area
and has a porous structure with pore diameters ranging from hundreds of nanometers
Fig. 4.24 Microstructure of MS back shell140 F. Li and F. Wang
Fig. 4.25 The microscopic structure of needle coke. a Outside of the needle; b needle coke section
to tens of micrometers. This special structure of needle coke greatly increases the
specific surface area. The solvent and tiny particles in the slurry can enter into the
pores of the cross-section, causing the needle coke and the shell base to bond more
tightly, which is of great significance to improve the strength and permeability of the
shell.
The microstructure of the WS shell is shown in Fig. 4.26. It can be seen that there
are many pores in the shell body, especially those with a diameter of about 100 nm,
which is closely related to the porous honeycomb structure inside the needle coke.
Small pores in the porous honeycomb structure in the needle coke deny the entrance
of the fused silica particles in the refractory powder, so only the silica particles in
the silica sol can enter. Since the solid content in the pores is too low, these pores
would appear after drying.
After calcination at 1000 °C, most of the needle petroleum coke of the shell has
been burned out, and the fused silica has been substantially converted into cristobalite.
As the calcination temperature increases, the pores in the shell gradually merge,
leading to increased pore size and a decreased pore number.
Both the MS shell back layer and the WS shell back layer contain a large amount
of fused silica, which is prone to crystal transformation at high temperature and
cristobalite precipitate, thus posing a significant influence on the performance of the
shell. Therefore, it is necessary to study the phase analysis of the high-temperature
crystallization of the two types of back shell layers.
Fused silica remains a metastable state below the melting point but is unstable from
a thermodynamic point of view. At high temperatures, it gradually transforms into α
cristobalite, also known as crystallization. Factors like impurity content, dispersion,
temperature, and holding time all affect the crystallization rate. During crystalliza￾tion, with a volume expansion of 0.9%, the volume change due to crystallization
causes the ceramic shell to produce a network crack, which to some extent, reducing
the strength of the shell. However, crystallization also changes the silica from a
glassy state to a crystalline one, which can effectively inhibit the softened viscous4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 141
Fig. 4.26 Microstructure of the WS shell. a Green body; b calcined at 800 °C for 2 h; c calcined
at 1000 °C for 2 h; d calcined at 1200 °C for 2 h; e calcined at 1400 °C for 2 h142 F. Li and F. Wang
flow of fused silica, reduce the high-temperature deflection value of the shell, and
significantly improve the high-temperature deformation resistance of the shell during
crystallization. The volume expansion can also offset some of the shrinkage caused
by sintering. The fused silica is transformed into α-cristobalite at high temperatures.
When the shell is cooled to 170–220 °C after the casting, the α cristobalite transforms
from the high-temperature type to the low-temperature type with a volume shrinkage
of 2.8%, causing cracks in the shell. This sharp drop in strength is conducive to the
removal of the shell. Therefore, the crystallization of fused silica during calcination
and casting is of great significance to improving the high-temperature deformation
resistance and improving the peel back resistance of the shell. In general, it is desir￾able to melt as much as possible during the calcination and casting process to convert
quartz to cristobalite.
The XRD patterns of the MS back layer shells at different calcination temperatures
are shown in Fig. 4.27a, when the heating rate is 5 °C/min, and the holding time is
1 h. It can be seen from the figure that no obvious cristobalite precipitates over
1000 °C, and as the calcination temperature increases to 1250 °C, crystallization
begins to become apparent. The XRD patterns of theWS shells at different calcination
temperatures are shown in Fig. 4.27b. The heating rate of the shells during calcination
is 5 °C/min, and the holding time is 1 h. It can be seen from the figure that XRD cannot
detect the diffraction peak due to the low content of needle petroleum coke in the
body, as well as a large amount of cristobalite has been precipitated after 1000 °C. As
the calcination temperature increases, the crystallization is more dominant. All the
diffraction peaks in the figure are cristobalite phases. Since the fused silica powder
grades used in the two back-layer shells are different, the crystallization conditions
show certain variation.
20 30 40 50 60 70
0
400
800
1200
1600
1200 sintered
1000 sintered
800 sintered
Intensity, a.u.
2Theta, deg.
(a)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
(b)
1400 sintered
1200 sintered
1100 sintered
1000 sintered
Intensity, a.u.
2Theta, deg.
green body
Fig. 4.27 XRD spectra of the shell at different calcination temperatures4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 143
4.3.3 Characterization of Coating Performance of Ceramic
Shells
The coating properties of ceramic shells have to be considered in the research of
ceramic shell. If the same strength shell is coated with the same number of layers,
it has a thicker thickness, which undoubtedly makes the shell have a stronger load
resistance. The shell is composed of slurry and sand spraying. The adhesion thickness
of slurry and sand spraying affects the coating thickness of the shell.
Many important parameters need to be controlled when the wax pattern is soaked
in the slurry. For instance, the time the wax pattern is immersed in the slurry, the
time it takes to be removed from the slurry, and the time the slurry flows, etc. Among
them, the drain time of the wax pattern from the slurry is related to the slurry layer’s
thickness and the adhesion ability of the slurry to the sand. For this reason, the weight
of smear and the amount of sand-spraying adhesion of surface slurry, MS back slurry,
and WS back slurry are measured.
Figure 4.28 shows the slurry retention and coating thickness on the stainless-steel
plate at different drain times. It can be seen that as the drain time increases, the
retention of the slurry on the stainless-steel plate is continuously reduced until a
steady-state is reached. The retention and adhesion thickness of WS slurry are the
highest, MS slurry is in the middle, and the amount of primary layer slurry is the
lowest. It can be seen from the figure that when the drain time reaches 80 s or more,
the retention of the slurry on the stainless-steel plate is stabilized. The thicker slurry
is beneficial to the coating thickness of the shell.
For the slurry of different sanding materials, the particle size and density of the
sanding material can vary. As a result, the adhesion effect of the slurry on the sanding
is not comparable, and it is therefore difficult to directly compare the thickness
difference between the different shells. Due to the limited area of sanding adhesion
at the sharp corners of the shell, the amount is insufficient, so the corners tend to
have a lower coating thickness than the plane. Consequently, wedge samples of MS
0
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Slurry retention (g)
Drain time (s)
Primary
 MS secondary
WS secondary
(a)
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
80
120
160
200
240
280
320
Primary
MS secondary
WS secondary
Film thickness (μm)
Drain time (s)
(b)
Fig. 4.28 a The relationship between the weight of the ceramic slurry smear, b the coating’s
thickness and the slurry’s flow time144 F. Li and F. Wang
and WS shells are prepared to measure the thickness of the shell at the plane and
sharp corners. The thickness of the coating is six layers, including a primary layer
and a layer of sealing, as shown in Fig. 4.29.
The shell sample’s thickness at the plane and the sharp corners are measured
separately, and the results are shown in Fig. 4.30. It can be seen from the data that
the WS shell has a higher coating thickness than the MS shell at both the plane and
the sharp corner. The 6-layer WS-shell has a coating thickness of 5.90 mm at the
plane, which is 38% higher than the 4.29 mm of the MS-shell. The thickness of the
two shells at the sharp corners is lower than that of the corners. The thicknesses of
the WS and MS shells at the sharp corners are 4.53 mm and 2.46 mm, respectively.
At the flat surface, the coating’s thickness is respectively reduced by 23 and 43%,
while the thickness of the WS-type shell at the sharp corner is 84% higher than that
of the MS shell. It can be seen that the WS shell has a higher coating thickness and
better coating uniformity at the plane and sharp corners.
Fig. 4.29 Thickness test
sample of ceramic shell
Fig. 4.30 Comparison of the
thickness of the ceramic shell
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Mold thickness (mm)
Flat piece Trailing edge
 MS mold
 WS mold4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 145
4.3.4 Strength Characterization of Ceramic Shells
Strength is the most important and basic property of the shell. The strength of the
shell should be able to withstand the following conditions: mechanical treatment
stress during coating and moving; wax mold shrinkage and expansion force caused
by temperature change during drying; expansion stress of wax mold during heating
dewaxing; thermal shock, erosion, and static pressure during molten metal casting;
shrinkage stress when the metal solidifies and cools [112]. Therefore, there are
three strength indicators at different stages of investment casting, namely, green
body strength, high-temperature strength, and residual strength. Shells with excel￾lent performances should have high green body strength, sufficient high-temperature
strength, and low residual strength.
4.3.4.1 Drying Mechanism of Ceramic Shell
The drying condition of the ceramic shell has a great influence on the strength of the
shell. For the constant temperature and humidity in shell room, the temperature and
humidity can be maintained within a suitable range, and the drying time becomes
a key factor affecting the shell strength. The slurry prepared by different types of
binders lead to huge differences in drying time preparing shells. Therefore, it is
very important to determine the dry time of the shells. The relationship between the
evaporation amount of the solvent, under different dry time, in the single layer, the
MS back layer, and the WS back layer shell with the dry time of the shell was studied,
as shown in Fig. 4.31. The relationship between the strength of the dry layer of the
six-layer primary layer, the MS back layer, and the WS back layer shell as a function
of the dry time of the shell is shown in Fig. 4.32.
Fig. 4.31 The relationship
between solvent
volatilization and dry time in
the shell
0 100 200 300 400 500
0
20
40
60
80
100
Dry time (min)
Loss of moisture (%)
 Primary
 MS secondary
 WS secondary146 F. Li and F. Wang
Fig. 4.32 The relationship
between the green strength
and the dry time of the shell
0 300 600 900 1200 1500
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Dry time (min)
Green dry strength (MPa)
 Primary
 MS secondary
 WS secondary
The volatilization of the solvent in the shell can be roughly divided into two stages,
i.e., the constant-speed stage and the deceleration stage [112]. It can be seen from
Fig. 4.31 that the first 100 minutes of drying of the primary layer and the back-layer
shells is approximately a constant speed stage. The solvent volatilized at this stage is
mainly a free solvent encapsulating the ceramic particles on the surface of the shell,
as to dry the surface. The evaporation rate of the solvent in the shell is relatively
fast and constant. During drying, the solvent migrates from the inside to the surface
of the shell by capillary attraction. As the drying process continues, the refractory
particles squeeze up against each other, which impedes the solvent’s diffusion from
inside to the surface. As the shell enters the deceleration stage, during which the
evaporation rate of the solvent in the shell is continuously reduced until the solvent
exchange between the shell and the external environment is balanced.
As can be seen from Fig. 4.31, the solvent volatilization rate of the MS shell is the
fastest, the WS type shell in the middle, and the primary layer shell the slowest. The
volatilization rate of the solvent in different shells is related to the volatilization char￾acteristics of the solvent and the microstructure of the shell. The MS shell contains
a large amount of highly volatile organic solvent, leading to generally a faster rate,
whereas the solvent in the primary layer shell is water, leading to a relatively slower
the volatilization rate. Besides, the refractory material used in the MS shell has a small
particle size and a relatively dense microstructure, which also hinders the diffusion
of the solvent from the inside to the shell’s surface. As a result, the primary layer shell
has the slowest drying speed. The solvent in the WS shell is also water. The refrac￾tory material is fused silica with coarser particle size and irregular particle shape;
therefore, the solvent diffusion channel is wider. Therefore, the solvent evaporation
rate in the WS shell is moderate.
Figure 4.31 shows the volatilization of the solvent as a function of the dry time in
the single-layer shell. However, for the multi-layer shell, the diffusion of the solvent
in the shell is much more complicated. In the beginning, the solvent can diffuse to4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 147
0
2
4
6
8
(a) 10 Flat Bar Fracture Strength (MPa)
Green, dry Green, wet
 MS mold
 WS mold
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Flat Bar AFL (N)
(b)
Green, dry Green, wet
 MS mold
 WS mold
Fig. 4.33 a Strength and b fracture load of ceramic shell
both the surface and the inside of the shell. As the drying process continues, the
solvent previously diffused into the interior gradually diffuses back to the surface
again, and then drying is achieved. It can be seen that as the number of coating layers
increases, the time required for the shell to dry completely is gradually increased.
Thus, Fig. 4.32 shows the strength of the dry body coated with a six-layer shell as a
function of the dry time. It can be seen from the figure that as the drying time of the
shell prolongs, the strength of the dry body of the shell gradually increases. When
the drying time reaches a certain value, the shell strength tends to be stabilized and
gradually approaches the maximum. The six-layer surface shell and the MS back
layer shell need to be dried for at least 10 h and 8 h, respectively, for the dry body
strength to be stabilized. For the six-layer WS back layer shell, the stable strength of
the shell can be achieved for 6 h.
4.3.4.2 Bending Strength of Ceramic Shells
The strength of the green body is divided into two types, namely green dry strength
and green wet strength. The so-called green dry strength refers to the strength
measured after steam dewaxing of the shell at a temperature of 20–25 °C, rela￾tive humidity of 50–70%, and drying for 24 h. The green wet strength refers to the
strength measured after 15 min of steam dewaxing.
It can be seen from Fig. 4.33 that the green dry strengths of the MS shell and the
WS shell are 5.59 MPa and 9.32 MPa, respectively, and the green dry strength of the
WS shell is 67% higher than that of the MS shell. The green dry strength of the shell
is not sufficient to measure its ability to resist cracking during steam dewaxing [113].
The dewaxing steam atmosphere (temperature and moisture) has a significant effect
on the shell properties [114]. The study shows that the green wet strength of the two
shells is both lower than the green dry strength, which is 4.25 MPa and 7.10 MPa,
respectively, about a quarter lower; this is mainly because that the colloidal network
in the shell adsorbs water vapor during steam dewaxing. When the adsorbed water148 F. Li and F. Wang
vapor reaches a certain level, the strength of the shell is weakened, and the polymer￾like latex in the shell is softened after exposure to high-temperature water vapor, so
the combination of the high polymer and the surrounding silica gel particles is also
weakened, which adversely affects the strength of the shell.
The (AFLB) of the shell takes the various thickness of the different shells into
account and truly reflects the ability of the shell to resist external forces in certain
coated layer. It is a method of normalizing shell bearing capacity [115]. The fracture
load of the shell is proportional to the flexural strength of the shell and the square
of the shell thickness. It can be seen from Fig. 4.33 that the dry body fracture loads
of the MS shell and the WS shell are 10.27 N and 32.44 N, respectively. Since the
thickness of the WS shell is 38% higher than that of the MS shell, the fracture load
of the WS shell is much higher than the MS shell, with an increase of 2.16 times.
The wet body fracture load of the shell is also lower than the dry body fracture load,
and the wet body fracture loads of the MS shell and the WS shell are 7.82 N and
24.71 N, respectively. It can be seen that under the same number of coating layers,
the fracture load of the WS shell is much higher than that of the MS shell.
The high-temperature strength of the ceramic shell is shown in Fig. 4.34a, and the
data of the MS shell and the WS shell at 800 °C are 7.81 MPa and 3.07 MPa, respec￾tively. When the test temperature rises to 1000 °C, the high-temperature strength of
the MS shell is abruptly increased to 10.32 MPa, and that of the WS shell is also
slightly increased to 3.27 MPa. The high-temperature strength of the ceramic shell
is closely related to the number and viscosity of the glass matrix in the shell (glass
effect), as well as the degree and mode of contact or bonding between the crystals
(crystallization effect) [32]. The low glass phase content, high viscosity, high degree
of crystal-to-crystal bonding, and the formation of a continuous interlaced network
structure are beneficial to improve the high-temperature strength of the shell [33].
For both the MS shell and the WS shell, the factors affecting the high-temperature
strength are mainly the quantity and viscosity of the glass phase. The mullite powder
used in the MS shell contains a relatively high content of Na2O. Therefore, the MS
2
3
7
8
9
10
(a) 11 Flat Bar Fracture Strength (MPa)
MS mold
 WS mold
800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
MS mold
 WS mold
(b)
Temperature 
Flat Bar AFL (N)
Fig. 4.34 a Shell high-temperature strength and b shell fracture load4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 149
shell can be regarded as a ternary (SiO2-Al2O3-Na2O) shell system. As the calcina￾tion proceeds, the MS shell forms a feldspar or nepheline-reinforced phase at a lower
temperature, increasing the strength of the shell [34]. Therefore, the MS shell has
higher high-temperature strength at 800–1000 °C. As the calcination temperature
increases, the number of reinforcing phases also increases, which greatly improves
the high-temperature strength of the MS shell. The content of Na2O impurities in
the WS shell is extremely small. Although SiO2 and Na2O form a liquid glass phase
at 800 °C, the formation of the glass phase has little effect on the high-temperature
strength of the shell. At 800–1000 °C, the WS shell sintering can only rely on the
surface diffusion between the refractory particles, not much on the glass phase, and
the burning loss of the needle petroleum coke in the shell can then adversely affect
the high-temperature strength of the shell. Under the combined effect of all these
factors, the high-temperature strength of the WS shell showed a small increase.
When the test temperature is raised from 1000 to 1200 °C, the high-temperature
strength of both shells is lowered. For the MS shell, when the calcination temperature
reaches 1050 °C, the viscosity of the feldspar phase is significantly reduced [35],
resulting in a huge decline of the strength of the MS shell, from 10.32 to 7.40 MPa,
while theWS shell’s strength, limited by the refractoriness of the fused silica, declines
from 3.27 to 3.03 MPa.
When the test temperature rises to 1400 °C, with the further decrease of the
viscosity of the glass phase in the MS shell, it has undergone significant softening
deformation, and the strength has been impossible to measure. For the WS shell, the
strength is further reduced due to insufficient refractoriness of the fused silica, from
3.03 MPa at 1200 °C to 2.63 MPa.
For the high-temperature fracture load of the shell, the strength of the MS shell
is higher, but the thickness of the WS shell is larger, which closes the gap between
the high-temperature fracture loads of the two shells. The MS shells’ fracture loads
are 14.37 N, 18.99 N, and 13.62 N at, respectively, 800 °C, 1000 °C, and 1200 °C,
while the fracture loads at WS shells’ are 10.69 N, 11.38 N, 10.55 N and 9.16 N,
respectively at 800 °C, 1000 °C, 1200 °C, and 1400 °C, as shown in Fig. 4.34b.
The collapsibility of the ceramic shell depends largely on its residual strength. The
influencing factors of the residual strength are similar to those of the high-temperature
mechanical properties of the shell. However, contrary to the high temperature, the
higher the glass phase content in the shell matrix, the higher the residual strength of
the shell. The contacting or bonding state between crystals in the shell, such as the
precipitation of silica, generation of secondary mullite, conversion from α silica to
β silica, cracks generated during sintering cooling, etc., also significantly influences
the residual strength. It can be seen that the impurity content and the calcination
temperature in the shell are the main factors affecting the residual strength.
The residual strength of the shell is shown in Fig. 4.35a. The residual strength of the
MS and the WS shell after calcination at 1000 °C and cooling to room temperature
are 3.35 MPa and 2.35 MPa, respectively. The higher glass phase content of MS
shell leads to a relatively high residual strength. The residual strengths of the MS
and WS shells after calcination at 1200 °C and cooling to 400 °C were 5.53 MPa and
3.01 MPa, respectively, which was much higher than the residual strength measured150 F. Li and F. Wang
0
1
2
3
4
5
(a) 6 Flat Bar Fracture Strength (MPa)
1000 →25 1200 →25 1200 →400
 MS mold
 WS mold
0
2
4
6
8
10
12 (b)Flat Bar AFL (N)
1000 →25 1200 →25 1200 → 400
 MS mold
 WS mold
Fig. 4.35 a Residual strength of the shell and b residual fracture load of shell
after calcination at 1200 °C and then cooled, which are 1.85 and 1.55 MPa. It can be
seen that since the conversion from α cristobalite to β cristobalite has not occurred
when the shell is cooled to 400 °C, it still has high residual strength. When the shell
is cooled to room temperature, because a large amount of α cristobalite has been
formed when the shell is calcined at 1200 °C, so at the temperature of 170–220 °C,
the conversion from α cristobalite to β cristobalite occurs in the shell, resulting in
cracks out of crystal transformation. Therefore, the residual strength of the MS and
the WS shell is lower when cooled from 1200 °C than cooled from 1000 °C.
The residual fracture load of the shell is shown in Fig. 4.35b. Although the residual
strength of the WS shell is lower than that of the MS shell, the residual fracture load
is slightly larger because of the thick shell. The residual fracture loads of the MS
and WS shells after cooling to room temperature from 1000 °C were 6.16 N and
8.18 N, respectively. And 3.40 and 5.40 N after calcination from 1200 to 400 °C.
The residual fracture loads cooled to room temperature from calcination at 1200 °C
were 10.18 N and 10.48 N, respectively.
4.3.4.3 Effect of Needle Petroleum Coke on Bending Strength of WS
Shell
The green strength of the WS shell and the cristobalite shell without petroleum coke
is shown in Fig. 4.36. The green dry strength of the full-quartz shell is 7.59 MPa,
which is 19% lower than the 9.32 MPa of the WS shell. The green wet strength of
the full-quartz shell is only 4.86 MPa, which is much lower than the 7.10 MPa of
the WS shell. It can be seen that the addition of needle petroleum coke is beneficial
to the green body strength of the shell. Promoting the green body strength of the
shell has always been the focus of the research community. With the increasing size
of the shell and the use of new molds with high expansion coefficients like organic
foam, which increase the possibility of cracking during shelling and dewaxing, and
raises higher requirements [116]. Latex is usually added to the slurry to enhance
the strength of the shell [117]. However, latex is expensive, and the shell with latex4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 151
0
2
4
6
8
(a) 10 Flat Bar Fracture Strength (MPa)
Green, dry Green, wet
 WS mold
 Full fused silica mold
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
 WS mold
 Full fused silica mold
Flat Bar AFL (N)
(b)
Green, dry Green, wet
Fig. 4.36 a Strength and b fracture load of ceramic shell
Fig. 4.37 a Needle petroleum coke mosaic zone in section and b needle petroleum coke mosaic
zone in WS shell fracture
added shows a significantly weakened wet body strength under steam. Nylon fiber
can inhibit the reduction [118], but the surface of the nylon fiber is too smooth, and
the stress used to pull the nylon fiber out of the shell base is small, which has little
practical use on promoting the body strength.
The green strength enhancement of the spheroidal petroleum coke is mainly deter￾mined by the physical properties and microstructure of the needle petroleum coke.
The needle petroleum coke is a special petroleum coke produced through delayed
coking of petroleum residue and coal tar. Due to its high degree of graphitization,
high strength, low expansion rate, good thermal shock resistance, abundant sources,
and low cost, it is the primary filler material for graphite electrodes in electric arc
furnaces [119, 120]. The outer surface of the needle petroleum coke is rough and has
a porous cross-sectional structure, as shown in Fig. 4.37a, where the pore diameter
varies from hundreds of nanometers to tens of micrometers. This unique structure of
the needle coke significantly increases the specific surface area; therefore, the silica152 F. Li and F. Wang
Fig. 4.38 Diagram of stucco
distribution at the corner of
the shell
sol particles and the fine refractory particles in the shell slurry can enter into the pores
of the cross-section; so that the needle coke and the shell base has a tighter degree of
bonding, as shown in Fig. 4.37b, which is vital to improving the green body strength
of the shell.
4.3.4.4 Wedge Strength of the Ceramic Shell
Strength differs in different parts of the shell. Cracking and breakage of the shell
during dewaxing and casting occur mainly at the cusps and corners of the shell,
such as the trailing edge of the turbine blade, where the shell has low strength and
is prone to stress concentration, which easily leads to the rupture [121–123]. The
cusps of the shell have different structures on the same plane, which is determined
by the distribution of the sand particles, as shown in Fig. 4.38. As the number of
coating layers increases, the area at the cusps of the shell increases gradually. Close
to the investment mold, the area at the cusps is small, and the distribution of the sand
particles is sparse, which makes the cracks highly possible to be observed [124].
The wedge strength test results of the shell are shown in Fig. 4.39. The wedge
strengths of the MS and WS shell body specimens are 1.25 MPa and 1.96 MPa,
respectively. The sample is cooled down from 1000 °C to room temperature. The
residual strengths obtained were 1.15 MPa and 1.02 MPa, respectively. After cooling
from 1200 °C to room temperature, the strength was further reduced, to 0.78 and
0.63 MPa. It can be seen that the wedge strength of the shell is much lower than
the flexural strength of the flat sample in the same dry or heated state. In the WS4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 153
Fig. 4.39 Wedge strength of
mold shell
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Flat Bar Fracture Strength (MPa)
Green, dry 1000 →25 1200 →25
 MS mold
 WS mold
shell, due to the addition of the needle petroleum coke, the coating property at the
cusps is improved, and the thickness significantly increased, which is beneficial for
improving the wedge strength.
4.3.5 Air Permeability Characteristics of Ceramic Shells
Air permeability refers to the ability of gas passing through the shell wall, which
is one of the essential properties of the shell. The permeability of the shell has a
significant influence on the dewaxing and pouring process. During steam dewaxing,
water vapor enters the surface of the wax pattern through the void of the shell,
and the wax can also penetrate the void of the shell after melting to alleviate the
expansion stress of the wax material. The shell with good permeability can improve
the dewaxing efficiency of the shell and reduce the possibility of cracking when the
shell is dewaxed. When pouring, the permeability determines the filling capacity of
the shell [125, 126]. The air in the cavity must have the outlet of discharge. Otherwise,
the backpressure would delay the filling speed of metal and even cause insufficient
pouring [127]. The air permeability can affect the backpressure of trapped gas in the
cavity. It is estimated that at least 70% of the dimensional accuracy of castings is
related to the permeability of the shell [128].
4.3.5.1 Permeability of Ceramic Shell
At a constant pressure difference and a specific test temperature, the gas viscosity
and the inner surface area of the shell are fixed. In this case, the shell’s permeability
is proportional to the gas flow rate and the thickness of the shell. The gas flow rate is154 F. Li and F. Wang
affected by the apparent porosity of the shell and the thickness of the shell. Therefore,
apparent porosity and shell thickness are two key factors affecting the permeability
of the shell. At different test temperatures, the change of gas viscosity also affects
the permeability of the shell; with the increase of test temperature, the gas viscosity
increases, and the gas flow rate decreases.
In this chapter, the shell samples’ permeability from room temperature to 1000 °C
is tested, and the data of the MS shell and WS shell are shown in Fig. 4.40. For the
MS shell and WS shell, the sample’s thickness is 4.29 mm and 5.90 mm, respectively.
It can be seen that under the test conditions, the WS shell has a larger gas flow
rate, higher apparent porosity, and better permeability than the MS shell. With the
increase of test temperature, the permeability of the WS shell and MS shell increases
continuously.
The permeability of the WS shell is 0.15 × 10−14 m2 at room temperature, which is
higher than that of MS shell 0.09 × 10−14 m2. With the increase of test temperature,
solvents, polymers, and petroleum coke in the shell are evaporated and burn out
gradually, so the apparent porosity of the shell increases continuously. However,
the increase of apparent porosity of the MS shell is much less than that of the WS
shell, which is mainly due to the formation of feldspar or nepheline glass phase
in the ternary system (SiO2-Al2O3-Na2O) MS shell, which is not conducive to the
0 200 400 600 800 1000
0.1
1
10
(a) 100 Air flowrate (m3/s 10-5)
Temperature ( )
MS mold
WS mold
0 200 400 600 800 1000
1
2
3
4
5
Temperature ( )
Dynamic viscosity of air (Ns/m2 10-5)
(b)
0
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
MS mold
WS mold
(c)Permeability (m2 10-14)
Temperature ( )
200 400 600 800 1000 0 200 400 600 800 1000
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
MS mold
WS mold
(d)Apparent porosity 
%( )
Temperature ( )
Fig. 4.40 a Gas flow rate at different temperatures, b air viscosity at different temperatures, c perme￾ability of ceramic shell at different temperatures, d apparent porosity of shell samples calcined at
different test temperatures4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 155
increase of apparent porosity of shell. The apparent porosity of the WS shell and
MS shell increased to 23.96% and 15.96%, respectively, when the test temperature
reached 600 °C. When the test temperature reaches 400 °C, the gas flow rate increases
significantly. In the interval of 400–600 °C, the gas flow of the two shells showed a
distinctly different trend. The gas flow rate of the WS type shell continues to increase,
while the gas flow rate of the MS type shell shows a slight downward trend; this is
mainly due to the gas viscosity increases with the increase of test temperature, as
shown in Fig. 4.40b. The MS shell is more affected by the increase of gas viscosity,
and thus the gas flow rate of MS shell in the range of 400–600 °C is lowered. With
the increase of test temperature, the air permeability of the two types of shells is
continuously improved. The air permeability of WS shells at 200 °C, 400 °C, and
600 °C is respectively 0.73 × 10−14, 2.19 × 10−14, and 3.43 × 10−14 m2. The
permeability of MS shell at the three temperatures increases to 0.72 × 10−14, 1.33
× 10−14, and 1.51 × 10−14 m2.
When the test temperature is from 600 to 800 °C, the number of glass phases in
the MS shell increases, further reducing viscosity. The binary system (SiO2-Na2O)
type WS shell also generates the glass phase at 793 °C, introducing the glass phase
into the pore type shell. These glass phases are easy to enter into the pores of molded
shells and aggravate the sintering of molded shells. Therefore, when the temperature
rises to 800 °C, the apparent porosity of the two types of shells presents a downward
trend, and the apparent porosity of WS shells and MS shells decreases to 21.82%
and 14.32%, respectively. Due to the increase of gas viscosity, the gas flow in the
MS shell continues to decrease slightly, while the gas flow in the WS shell continues
to increase. The permeability of WS shell and MS shell at 800 °C was 4. 37 × 10−14
m2 and 1.65 × 10−14 m2, respectively.
When the test temperature reached 1000 °C, cracks were gradually formed along
with the sintering, and the apparent porosity of the shell increased significantly.
The apparent porosity of the WS shell and MS shell reached 26.06% and 15.64%,
respectively, and the gas flow volume also rose to 13.53 × 10−5 m3/s and 2.66 ×
10−5 m3/s, respectively. At this temperature, the permeability of the MS shell is 2.40
× 10−14 m2. The permeability of the WS shell is about four times that of the MS
shell, which is 11.13 × 10−14 m2.
4.3.5.2 Effect of Needle Petroleum Coke on Gas Permeability of WS
Shell
The methods that help improve the permeability of shell include the following. (1)
The use of granular polygonal, loosely packed low-density refractories as shell mate￾rials [129], which can significantly improve the porosity of the shell and make the
shell have better air permeability in dewaxing and sintering. (2) Adding high polymer
to the shell size [2]. The loss of polymer during shell sintering leaves pores, which
are helpful to improve the permeability of the shell. However, the above two ways
of improvement are inadequate. The use of polygonal refractory material seriously156 F. Li and F. Wang
affects the strength of the shell; the use of latex, nylon fiber, and other high poly￾mers can improve the shell at high-temperature permeability, but cannot improve the
permeability of the shell in steam dewaxing.
Permeability was tested to study the effect of needle petroleum coke on the shell.
The sample thickness of theWS shell and all quartz shells were 5.90 mm and 4.37 mm,
respectively. Air permeability data are shown in Fig. 4.41. It can be seen that WS
shells have more massive gas flow and higher apparent porosity than all-quartz shells
under the same test conditions. The addition of needle petroleum coke significantly
improved the permeability of WS shell by nearly 4 times.
The permeability of the WS shell was 0.15 × 10−14 m2 at room temperature,
which was higher than 0.04 × 10−14 m2 for all quartz shell. The blank body of the
WS shell is evenly distributed with many holes with diameters of tens to hundreds
of nanometers. These holes are derived from the cross-section Mosaic area of needle
petroleum coke, which can form additional aeration channels in the shell, allowing
the WS shell to have greater apparent porosity, gas flow, and better permeability.
Studies show that not all the pores in the molded shell affect the air permeability
of the elevated shell, and the closed holes in the molded shell or the tiny cracks in
one layer of the molded shell do not have a significant effect on the air permeability
of the elevated shell [56]. Only the holes with good connectivity are beneficial to
Fig. 4.41 a Gas flow rate of shell samples at different temperatures at 10 psi gas pressure; b gas
permeability of ceramic shell samples at different temperatures; c apparent porosity of shell samples
after calcination at different test temperatures4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 157
the permeability of the raised shell. High air permeability at room temperature can
improve the efficiency of steam dewaxing of shell and greatly inhibit the cracking of
shell during steam dewaxing.
With the increase of the test temperature, the moisture in the shell gradually
evaporates, the polymer and petroleum coke gradually lose, and the apparent porosity
of the shell increases continuously. Petroleum coke in the WS shell was continuously
burned out with the increase of sintering temperature of the shell, thus forming well￾connected holes and improving the apparent porosity of the shell. When the test
temperature reaches 600 °C, the apparent porosity of the WS shell increases to
23.96%, higher than the apparent porosity of all quartz shell 22.36%. When the test
temperature reached 400 °C, the gas flow rate increased significantly. In the interval
of 400–600 °C, the gas flow of the two shells showed a distinct trend. The gas flow
of the WS shell continued to increase, whereas the gas flow of the all-quartz shell
showed a slightly downward trend; this is mainly due to the gas viscosity increases
with the increase of the test temperature, as shown in Fig. 4.40b. It is apparent that
the all-quartz shell is more affected by the increase of gas viscosity, thus causing a
decrease in the gas flow rate of the entire quartz shell in the range of 400–600 °C.
With the increase of test temperature, the two types of shells’ air permeability are
continuously improved. The permeability of WS shell at 200 °C, 400 °C, and 600 °C
are 0.73 × 10−14 m2, 2.19 × 10−14 m2, and 3.43 × 10−14 m2, respectively; and the
all-crystal shell’s gas permeability at these three temperatures increased to 0.41 ×
10−14 m2, 0.81 × 10−14 m2, and 0.91 × 10−14 m2, respectively.
When the test temperature increases to 800 °C, both types of the shell form sodium
silicate glass, then the low viscosity of the glass phase flows into the pore in the shell
and reduces the porosity. The WS type and quartz type shell’s porosity decreases to
21.82% and 19.51%, respectively. Due to the increase of gas viscosity, the gas flow in
Fig. 4.42 Relationship between strength and permeability of a typical ceramic shell [90]158 F. Li and F. Wang
the all-quartz shell continues to decrease slightly, while the gas flow in the WS shell
continues to increase with the further loss of needle petroleum coke in the WS shell
and the further increase of well-connected holes in the WS shell. The permeability
of the WS shell reached 4.37 × 10−14 m2 at 800 °C, much higher than the whole
quartz shell at this temperature permeability 0.98 × 10−14 m2.
When the test temperature increases to 1000 °C, the cracks formed in the sintering
process of the shell gradually increased, and most of the needle petroleum coke was
burned away, leading to a significant increase in the apparent porosity of the shell.
The apparent porosity of the WS shell increased more significantly, and the apparent
porosity of the WS shell and the all-quartz shell reached to 26.06% and 21.98%,
respectively. At 1000 °C, the permeability of the whole quartz shell is 2.64 × 10−14
m2, and the gas permeability of the WS shell reaches 11.13 × 10−14 m2. It can be seen
that the addition of needle petroleum coke greatly improves the high-temperature air
permeability of the shell, which is of great help to the filling integrity of the raised
shell.
4.3.5.3 Overall Optimization of WS Shell Strength and Permeability
by Needle Petroleum Coke
As being the two most important performance indexes of ceramic shells, the strength
and permeability of the shell are often not fully taken into account, and it is often
necessary to make a balance between the strength and permeability of the shell
[90]. The typical relationship between shell strength and permeability is shown in
Fig. 4.42. It can be seen that the shell with good permeability often has high porosity
and low green body density, resulting in insufficient shell strength, while the shell
with high strength generally has poor permeability.
In this chapter, the design idea of the WS shell is to break the traditional concept
that the strength and permeability of the shell cannot be controlled at the same time.
It is intended to improve the permeability and load resistance of the shell.
Adding needle petroleum coke into the all-quartz shell can achieve the overall
optimization of the strength and permeability of the shell.
The relationship between shell strength and permeability is shown in Fig. 4.43a. It
can be seen that the permeability of WS shells at room temperature, 800, and 1000 °C
are better than that of all-quartz shells, especially at high temperatures. Meanwhile,
the green strength of the WS shell is also significantly higher than that of the all￾quartz shell. The high-temperature strength of the WS shell at 800 and 1000 °C is
also comparable to that of the all-quartz shell. The thickness of the WS shell is thicker
than that of all quartz shell due to the addition of needle petroleum coke. Therefore,
WS shell still has a significantly better load resistance than all-quartz shell under the
condition that its high-temperature strength is not dominant, as shown in Fig. 4.43b.
In summary, the addition of needle petroleum coke greatly improves the high and
low-temperature load resistance and high and low-temperature air permeability of the
WS shells, realizing the overall optimization of shell strength and air permeability.4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 159
Fig. 4.43 Relation between a shell strength and b fracture load and permeability of the ceramic
shell
4.3.6 Linear Deformation Characteristics of Ceramic Shells
The thermal expansion of shell refers to the expansion or contraction of the shell with
the increase of temperature. Linear expansion coefficient is usually used to represent
the thermal expansion of shell and refractories in investment casting. The increase of
shell size is caused by the thermal expansion of shell material and isomeric crystal
transformation. In contrast, the shrinkage of shell size is caused by the dewatering
of the shell, thermal decomposition of material, sintering, production of the liquid
phase, and condensation of silicone gel.
Thermal expansion is one of the important properties of the shell, which has a
direct influence on the dimensional accuracy of casting and also affects the resis￾tance to quench and heat and high-temperature deformation of the shell. The shell
with a small linear expansion coefficient and uniform expansion is in line with the
requirements of high-quality shell and casting.
4.3.6.1 Linear Expansion of the Shell
The thermal expansion coefficient of MS and WS ceramic shells was measured, and
the temperature range was from room temperature to 1400 °C.WS shell sample length
is 19.94 mm, and the MS shell sample length is 20.14 mm, with a heating rate of
5 °C/min under the air atmosphere. The obtained average linear expansion coefficient
of shell and the average linear expansion amount are shown in Fig. 4.44. It is shown
that with the test temperature goes up to 200 °C the coefficient of expansion of shell
fell sharply. When the temperature is higher than 200 °C, the MS shell and thermal
expansion coefficient of thermal expansion amount of basic constant before plunging
trends change, and the shell of the thermal expansion coefficient and the change of
the thermal expansion amount except at 800 °C or so appear a little inflection point,
change in other temperature range are relatively uniform.160 F. Li and F. Wang
Fig. 4.44 a Average linear expansion coefficient of the shell and b average linear expansion
Also, the sintering shrinkage of ceramic shells after cooling to room temperature
at different sintering temperatures and holding time is tested. The samples are coated
with 8 layers, and the size of the block samples was 50 mm × 40 mm × 6 mm,
as shown in Fig. 4.45. When measuring the sintering shrinkage of samples in the
two directions of length and width, the dimensional accuracy of the shell billet in
the two directions shall be ensured, and the dimensional error of the shell in the two
directions shall not be greater than 0.04 mm.
The experimental results are shown in Table 4.8. It can be seen that the sintering
shrinkage of the mold shells are all negative, which indicates that the sintering
shrinkage of the mold shells show size shrinkage when the mold shells are cooled
to room temperature. The sintering shrinkage of the mold shells increases with the
increase of sintering temperature and the extension of insulation time, while the influ￾ence of sintering temperature on sintering shrinkage is greater than that of insulation
time. When the sintering temperature of the shell is lower than 1100 °C, the sintering
shrinkage is small, and the sintering shrinkage increases little with the extension of
insulation time. However, when the sintering temperature rises above 1250 °C, the
Fig. 4.45 Shell sample used to measure the shrinkage of the shell4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 161
Table 4.8 Sintering shrinkage of ceramic shells at different sintering temperatures and holding
times
Sintering temperature/holding
time
WS shell MS shell
Size change
X/%
Size change
Y/%
Size change
X/%
Size change
Y/%
1000 °C/1 h −0.04 −0.02 −0.07 −0.04
1000 °C/3 h −0.16 −0.18 −0.16 −0.13
1000 °C/5 h −0.28 −0.22 −0.18 −0.20
1100 °C/1 h −0.52 −0.50 −0.42 −0.48
1250 °C/1 h −1.08 −1.11 −1.12 −1.11
1400 °C/1 h −1.32 −1.29 −1.48 −1.40
sintering shrinkage starts to increase significantly, which is related to the increase
of the number of glass phases in the shell, the decrease of viscosity, and the more
significant crystallization of fused quartz.
4.3.6.2 Linear Deformation Mechanism of the Shell
Linear deformation closely relates to changes in shell’s physical phase and
microstructure. Processes like the solvent’s evaporation, the crystal transformation,
the liquid glass phase formation, and the decrease of the glass phase’s viscosity all
have an important impact on the linear deformation of the shell.
According to the linear expansion coefficient and linear expansion amount of the
shell in Fig. 4.44, the rapid decrease of the linear expansion coefficient between the
MS type shell and the WS type shell from room temperature to 200 °C is caused by
the volatilization of the solvent in the shell. The linear expansion coefficient of the
solvent is 1–2 orders of magnitude higher than the shell. Therefore, as the solvent in
the shell evaporates, the linear expansion coefficient of the shell decreases sharply.
At this stage, although the linear expansion coefficient of the shell changes greatly,
the linear expansion of the shell is not significant because of the low temperature of
the shell.
After the solvent in the shell is substantially volatilized, the shell’s linear expan￾sion coefficient mainly depends on the viscosity and quantity of the glass phase in the
shell. For the ternary system (SiO2-Al2O3-Na2O) MS type shell, when the tempera￾ture rises to 500 °C, the mullite in the shell reacts with the Na2O impurity to form new
crystalline phase nepheline. It is a rack-mounted structure of sodium aluminosilicate
without additional anion, melting point of 1526 °C, which has a significant enhance￾ment in the shell. Therefore, with the increase of temperature, the coefficient of linear
expansion of the shell remains stable. When the temperature rises above 1050 °C,
the nepheline phase adhesion in the MS shell decreases sharply, causing the linear
expansion coefficient of the MS shell to drop sharply. When the temperature exceeds162 F. Li and F. Wang
1240 °C, the coefficient of thermal expansion of the shell is negative, and the shell
exhibits shrinkage.
For the binary system (SiO2-Na2O) WS shell, the inflection point appears near
800 °C, and the expansion coefficient at the inflection point decreases sharply; this
is mainly because Na2O in the shell reacts with SiO2 at 793 °C to form a liquid glass
phase, thereby reducing the expansion coefficient of the shell.
Shell calcination at high temperatures produces liquid glass phases, which leads
to the sintering shrinkage in the sintering temperature. At the same time, due to
the crystallization of fused silica in the shell at high temperature, cristobalite is
precipitated out. The calcined shell undergoes a transition between high and low￾temperature crystal forms of cristobalite when cooled to between 170 and 220 °C,
along which a volume shrinkage also occurs. These factors lead to a certain amount
of shrinkage after calcination of the shell. These shrinkages can react to some extent
to the extent of the glass phase in the shell and the high-temperature crystallization
of the shell at a certain calcination temperature and holding time the contraction can,
to a certain extent, reaction under a certain sintering temperature and holding time,
which has an important significance to the research process of the shell.
References
1. Z. Litong, C. Lamei, L. Guoli et al., Near Net Shape Investment Casting Precision Casting
Theory and Practice (National Defense Industry Press, Beijing, 2007)
2. S. Jones, C. Yuan, Advances in shell molding for investment casting. J. Mater. Process.
Technol. 135(2–3), 258–265 (2003)
3. N. Cannell, A.S. Sabau, Predicting Pattern Tooling and Casting Dimensions for Investment
Casting, Phase III (Oak Ridge National Laboratory, US, 2007)
4. N. Cannell, A.S. Sabau, Predicting Pattern Tooling and Casting Dimensions for Investment
Casting, Phase II (Oak Ridge National Laboratory, US, 2006)
5. J. Buju, Practical Investment Casting Technology (Liaoning Science and Technology Press,
Shenyang, 2008)
6. B. Yanzhen, C. Caijin, Z. Jinlun, Investment Casting Precision Casting Technology (Zhejiang
University Press, Hangzhou, 2012)
7. China Foundry Association, Investment Casting Handbook (Mechanical Industry Press,
Beijing, 2000)
8. Y. Shuangjing, W. Jianli, L. Zhigang et al., International investment in casting adhesives
and surface coatings additive, in Proceedings of the 6th Annual Meeting of China Foundry
Association Casting Branch, Wuhan, 1999
9. M. Oles, R. Sharkey, A new approach to the treatment and recovery of alcohol from the exhaust
air steam of ethyl silicate shell building, in 9th World Conference on Investment Casting, San
Francisco, 1996
10. J. Buju, Z. Zeheng, C. Bing et al., Investment Casting Handbook (Mechanical Industry Press,
Beijing, 2000)
11. W. Jianli, Application of Quick-Drying Silica Sol in Investment Casting (Tsinghua University,
Beijing, 1997)
12. A.T. Bozzo, Remasol Abdond SP-3301 and LP-3301 binders, in 48th Annual Technical
Meeting, 2000
13. C. Bing, Polymer and fiber-reinforced silica sol—a review of the progress of precision casting
technology at home and abroad (4). Spec. Cast. Nonferrous Alloys 25(4), 231–233 (2005)4 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 163
14. Z. Yangzheng, Method for producing large particle size and low viscosity silica sol. CN:
86104144A, 1998
15. S. Weide, W. Xiujing, D. Yirui et al., Method for producing large particle silica with high
purity, high concentration and high uniform particle distribution. CN: 1155514A, 1997
16. J. Vandermeer, A new silica binder for investment shell slurries. INCAST 3, 18–19 (1999)
17. N. Ichinose, Introduction to Fine Ceramics—Applications in Engineering (Wiley, 1987)
18. Magna Industrials Limited Product Specification MIL/21. Zirmast-zirconia binder of refrac￾tory grade
19. R.C. Feagin, Method of making a ceramic shell mould. US Patent 4,216,815, 12 Aug 1980
20. A.J. Skoog, R.E. Moore, Refractory of the past for the future: mullite and its use as a bonding
phase. Ceram. Bull. 67(7) (1988)
21. R.L. Wood, D. Von Ludwig, Investment Casting for Engineers (Reinhold Publishing
Corporation, New York, 1952)
22. J.D. Snow, D.H. Scott, Comparing fused silica and alumino-silicate investment refractories.
INCAST 4, 21–25 (2001)
23. J. Buju, Y. Shuangjing, L. Zhigang et al., Today’s investment casting shell list, in Proceedings
of the 6th Annual Meeting of China Foundry Association Precision Casting Branch, Wuhan,
1999
24. C. Bing, A new rooster of shell-making refractories—a review of the progress of precision
casting technology at home and abroad (5). Spec. Cast. Nonferrous Alloys 25(5), 294–297
(2005)
25. W.E. Worrall, Ceramic Raw Materials—Second Revised Edition (Pergamon Press, 1982)
26. D. Jerry, H.S. David, Comparison fused silica to alumino2silicates in water based shell
systems, in Investment Casting Institute: 48th Annual Technical Meeting, USA, 2000
27. J. Junhao, X. Guangmin, Application of fused silica in silica sol shells. Foundry 57(8), 788–
792 (2008)
28. C. Meiyi, L. Zide, Cristobalite transformation and its significance in investment casting.
Casting 4, 9–13 (1993)
29. Z. Zengyan, S. Zhixiong, H. Jianping, Surface quality of precision cast shell. Model. Mater.
3, 44–45 (1997)
30. G. Rongchang, L. Bangsheng, Y. Yongcun et al., Analysis of white matter on the inner surface
of nickel-based superalloy and ceramic shell. Foundry Technol. 24(6), 517–518 (2003)
31. Z. Minghan, Z. Bo, X. Yugui et al., Precision casting surface coating vacuum coating process,
in Proceedings of Shanghai International Conference on Nonferrous Alloys and Special
Casting, 1998, pp. 357–360
32. L. Xiaofu, L. Yanchun, S. Guiqiao et al., Research status of high temperature mechanical
properties of ceramic shells for directional solidification. Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys
30(10), 913–918 (2010)
33. S. Gengchen, Z. Xiangchong, High temperature mechanical properties of Al2O3-SiO2
refractories. Adv. Mater. Sci. 2(4), 61–68 (1988)
34. Z. Hengyi, B. Yin, T. Tianfu, Study on thermal deformation characteristics of water glass
shell. Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 1(Supplement), 24–25 (1999)
35. T. Tianfu, C. Defu, Z. Hengyi et al., Study on the behavior of investment casting water glass
shell Na2O. Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 5, 17–22 (1990)
36. Z. Litong, Y. Xinghua, Creep resistance and microstructure of fused corundum shell. Foundry
3, 25–30 (1985)
37. D.G. Charis, Ceramic investment molds embodying a metastable mullite phase in its physical
structure superalloys. US Patent, 4188450, 1980
38. H. Huiwen, Study on Investment Casting Technology of Directionally Solidified Nickel-Based
Superalloy Blades (Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 2002)
39. X. Mingren, H. Deyuan, D. Zhenrui et al., Study on high temperature shell of directional
solidification investment mold. Aeronaut. Mater. 3, 25–26 (1986)
40. X. Ke, Improvement of shell forming process of directional solidification hollow blade. Mater.
Eng. 3, 36–38 (1998)164 F. Li and F. Wang
41. X. Mingren, Z. Yong, Study on high-strength thin-walled shell of single crystal blade. Mater.
Eng. 9, 74–77 (1999)
42. Y. Dingao, C. Shufeng, Effect of adding Cr2O3 on the sintering and properties of mullite
spinel composites. Foreign Refract. 29(1), 48–52 (2004)
43. Z. Shidong, C. Zhongqiang et al., Study on thermal strength properties of alumina shells for
directional solidification casting. Foundry 60(4), 338–340 (2011)
44. P.M. Current, M.H. Fassler, J.S. Perron, Calcia modified ceramic shell mold system. CA
Patent, 1080428A1, 1980
45. L. Lianqing, Blade directional solidification process. Aerosp. Mater. Technol. 1, 11 (2004)
46. J.M. Lane, C. John, Reinforced ceramic investment casting shell mold and method of making
such mold. US Patent, 4998581, 1991
47. G. Asish, J.K. Frederic, H.M. Philip et al., Reinforced ceramic shell mold and related
processes. US Patent, 6352101, 2002
48. G. Asish, A.G. Robert, J.K. Frederic et al., Ceramic shell molds provided with reinforcement
and related process. US Patent, 6431255, 2002
49. V.N. Rajeev, C. John, Reinforced ceramic shell mold and method of making same. US Patent,
6568458 B2, 2003
50. C. Bing, Dimensional stability and precision of investment castings. Spec. Cast. Nonferrous
Alloys 1, 53–58 (2003)
51. S. Norouzi, H. Farhangi, M. Nili-Ahmadabadi et al., Proceedings of International Confer￾ence on Manufacturing Science and Technology, ICOMAST2006, Maleka, Malaysia, 2006,
pp. 454–459
52. S. Norouzi, H. Farhangi, The impact of ceramic shell strength on hot tearing during investment
casting, in International Conference on Advances in Materials and Processing Technologies,
2011, pp. 662–667
53. C. Yuan, S. Jones, Investigation of fibre modified ceramic moulds for investment casting. J.
Eur. Ceram. Soc. 23(3), 399–407 (2003)
54. C. Yuan, S. Jones, S. Blackburn, The influence of autoclave steam on polymer and organic
fibre modified ceramic shells. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 25(7), 1081–1087 (2005)
55. G. Xin, L. Xiaoyang, L. Zhigang et al., Morphology and strength change of silica sol shell
after high temperature action. Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 31(7), 636–639 (2011)
56. C. Yuan, P.A. Withey, S. Blackburn, Effect of incorporation of zirconia layer upon physical
and mechanical properties of investment casting ceramic shell. Mater. Sci. Technol. 29(1),
30–35 (2013)
57. J. Junhao, An effective way to improve the shelling performance of silica sol shells. Spec.
Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 30(3), 245–251 (2010)
58. Z. Qifu, T. Tianfu, Investment casting foam coating and porous shell research. Spec. Cast.
Non-Ferrous Alloys 5, 6–9 (1994)
59. Z. Jinzhi, M. Xueming, Y. Xiaohong, Application of coated sand in investment casting of
silica sol. Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 30(11), 1035–1037 (2010)
60. L. Guizhi, T. Tianfu, B. Yin, Test method for shelling of precision cast shell. Spec. Cast.
Non-Ferrous Alloys 3, 24–25 (1991)
61. R. Lei, L. Ke, Z. Ying et al., Development of a sand-based repellent detection device based
on PC. 57(1), 33–35 (2008)
62. Y. Shuangjing, J. Buju, W. Jianli et al., FS-30 quick-drying silica sol shell process research.
Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 2, 13–16 (1998)
63. L. Zhigang, Y. Shuangjing, C. Xulong et al., Investment casting shell manufacturing and
reinforced fast-drying silica sol. Foundry 10, 28–31 (2005)
64. H. Jingtan, The addition of ethyl silicate shell to the strength enhancer of the body—latex
research. Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 3, 21–23 (1992)
65. L. Shouxin, S. Yuhai, L. Younian, Ethyl silicate-silica sol hybrid binder and its new preci￾sion casting process, in China Foundry Association Precision Casting Branch Ninth Annual
Meeting, 2005, pp. 127–1354 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 165
66. Y. Shuangjing, Z. Hongmei, J. Buju et al., Discussion on the composite shell of silica sol and
ethyl silicate—one of the methods for shortening the shelling period of silica sol. Charact.
Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 3, 15–17 (1997)
67. Y. Shizhou, F. Jun, A preparation process of high performance investment casting composite
shell. Foundry Technol. 31(5), 628–630 (2010)
68. L. Zhigang, J. Buju, Y. Shuangjing et al., The effect of wind speed and humidity on the drying
process of silica sol. Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 4, 48–49 (2003)
69. B.K. Chakrabarti, Drying conditions and their effect on ceramic shell investment casting
process. Mater. Sci. Technol. 18(8), 935–940 (2002)
70. W. Leyi, S. Zhengxing, P. Xingshu, Drying of silica sol bond type shell and its determination.
2, 33–39 (1981)
71. L. Decheng, S. Guirong, H. Jingfu et al., ReplicastCS ultra-thin high-strength shell preparation
process. Foundry Technol. 5, 26–28 (1993)
72. H. Dejun, The effect of local thickening of shell on the shrinkage of castings. Spec. Cast.
Non-Ferrous Alloys 3, 43 (2003)
73. Z. Yong, X. Mingren, A way to improve the uniformity of the wall thickness of investment
casting shell. Mater. Eng. 10, 39–40 (1998)
74. C. Wei, Measures to prevent delamination of investment casting shells. Locomot. Roll. Stock
Eng. 3, 43–45 (2002)
75. G. Yusheng, T. Junshan, Q. Xuan, The influence of shell stratification on the quality of
investment castings and countermeasures. China Foundry Equip. Technol. 4, 16–17 (2002)
76. R. Zhongxiang, Elimination of investment in investment casting shell. Foundry 12, 49 (1998)
77. Z. Minhua, L. Bing, C. Jianhua, Discussion on cracking of ceramic casting shell baking
process based on SL prototype. China Foundry Equip. Technol. 4, 16–18 (2003)
78. G. Yingmin, Research on ant hole defects of precision casting shells. Foundry Technol. 12,
1170–1171 (2005)
79. C. Bing, The sustainable development of investment casting in China. Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous
Alloys 2032(1), 24–26
80. Yamaguchi, Basic application technology of precision casting method, in Heat Treatment of
Casting and Forging, Vol. 7, 1992, pp. 45–46
81. R.C. Oberst, M. Oles, Benefits of using recycled ceramic shell materials in the manufacture of
technical refractories, in Investment Casting Institute: 49th Annual Technical Meeting, USA,
2001
82. Z. Zhuxing, Recycling cycle of foreign foundry waste. Model. Mater. 2, 41–42, 36 (2000)
83. Z. Weiqiang, Solid Waste Treatment and Utilization (Chemical Industry Press, Beijing, 2001)
84. F. Valenza, R. Botter, P. Cirillo et al., Sintering of waste of superalloy casting investment
shells as a fine aggregate for refractory tiles. Ceram. Int. 36(2), 459–463 (2010)
85. Z. Hengyi, The composition and re-use analysis of investment casting shell waste. Spec. Cast.
Non-Ferrous Alloys 25(1), 52–54 (2005)
86. J. Jiang, X.Y. Liu, M. Yeung, Factors affecting dimensional changes in solid ceramic moulds.
Trans. AFS 109, 975–986 (2001)
87. J. Jiang, X.Y. Liu, Observations of mould dimensional changes during gelling in the ceramic
mould process, in Proceedings of the 10th Word Conference on Investment Casting, Paper 22,
Monte Carlo, 14–17 May 2000
88. J. Jiang, X.Y. Liu, The burning-out process of ceramic moulds. J. Int. Metal Res. 17(2), 1–7
(2004)
89. J. Jiang, X.Y. Liu, Dimensional variations of castings and moulds in the ceramic mould casting
process. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 189(1–3), 247–255 (2007)
90. R. Morrell, P.N. Quested, S. Jones et al., Studio Project DISIC-Dimensional Stability of
Ceramic Casting Moulds (National Physical Laboratory, UK, 2006)
91. X.J. Chen, D.C. Li, H.H. Wu et al., Analysis of ceramic shell cracking in stereolithography￾based rapid casting of turbine blade. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 55(5–8), 447–455 (2011)
92. W.A. Everhart, S.N. Lekakh, V.L. Richards et al., Foam Pattern Aging and Its Effect on Crack
Formation in Investment Casting Ceramic Shells (Transactions of the American Foundry,
Columbus, OH, 2012)166 F. Li and F. Wang
93. W. Everhart, S. Lekakh, V. Richards et al., Corner strength of investment casting shells. Int.
J. Metalcast. 7(1), 21–27 (2013)
94. C. Miao, C. Haiggeng, X. Wanda, Analytical solution of temperature field of one-dimensional,
non-steady-state, variable heat flow billet in heating furnace. China Metall. 17(3) (2007)
95. L. Zashkova, Mathematical modeling of the heat behaviour in the ceramic chamber furnaces
at different temperature baking curves. Simul. Model. Pract. Theory 16, 1640–1658 (2008)
96. C. Bing, Application of rapid prototyping technology in investment casting—review of
progress in foreign precision casting technology (12). Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 25(12),
732–735 (2005)
97. Q. Ming, M.C. Leu, V.L. Richards et al., Dimensional accuracy and surface roughness of
rapid freeze prototyping ice patterns and investment casting metal parts. Int. J. Adv. Manuf.
Technol. 24, 485–495 (2004)
98. Q. Liu, G. Sui, M.C. Leu, Experimental study on the ice pattern fabrication for the investment
casting by rapid freeze prototyping. Comput. Ind. 48, 181–197 (2002)
99. S. Pattnaik, D.B. Karunakar, P.K. Jha, Developments in investment casting process—a review.
J. Mater. Process. Technol. 212(11), 2332–2348 (2012)
100. F. Glenn, Flashfire dewax enters new generation. INCAST 2, 14–15 (1995)
101. Pacific Kiln, Insulations, Inc., Flashfire dewax system responds to rapid prototyping needs.
Addresses traditional concerns. INCAST 2, 13 (1994)
102. C. Bing, A new generation of flash dewaxing furnace and waste shell utilization—a review of
the progress of precision casting technology at home and abroad (7). Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous
Alloys 25(7), 433–435 (2005)
103. J. Tom, Dewax and burnout energy efficiency in the investment casting foundry. INCAST 3,
19–21 (2002)
104. C. Bing, Automating the shell making process—a review of the progress of precision casting
technology at home and abroad (6). Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 25(6), 366–368 (2005)
105. VA Technology Ltd., Offers shell room automation for the new millennium. INCAST 3, 22–23
(1999)
106. MK Technology # s Cyclone, German Company develops machine for automatic shellbuilding
and drying; reduces process to hours rather than days. INCAST 1, 23 (2005)
107. N.M. Ford, Environment regulations spur advances in water based shell systems and shell
room automation. INCAST 8, 14–15 (1995)
108. B. Yankun, Y. Liancong, K. Agen et al., Study on rheological properties and process properties
of silica sol coatings for investment casting. Spec. Cast. Non-Ferrous Alloys 5, 4–8 (1993)
109. S. Jones, Improved Sol Based Ceramic Moulds for Use in Investment Casting (University of
Birmingham. 1993)
110. R.S. Doles, A new approach to the characterization and optimization of investment casting
shell systems, in 9th World Conference on the Investment Casting, San Francisco, California,
USA, 1996, p. #8
111. B.S. Snyder, D.H. Scott, J.D. Snow, A new combination shell strength and permeability test.
Invest. Cast. Inst. 51(11), 1–26 (2003)
112. Three-Machine Engine Technical Information Network Casting Blade Research Group. The
Second Part of the Investment Casting Translation Set (Shanghai Institute of Science and
Technology Information Publishing, Shanghai, 1977)
113. T. Branscomb, The importance of green MOR for autoclave cracking, in Proceedings of 50th
Investment Casting Institute (ICI) Technical Meeting, Chicago, 2002
114. F. Wang, F. Li, B. He et al., Microstructure and strength of needle coke modified ceramic
casting molds. Ceram. Int. 40(1), 479–486 (2014)
115. J. Vandermeer, A unique silica binder for investment shell systems, in Proceedings of 10th
World Conference on Investment Casting, Monte Carlo, Monaco, 2000, p. 3
116. D. Kline, S. Lekakh, C. Mahimkar et al., Crack formation in ceramic shell during foam pattern
firing, in Proceedings of the Technical and Operating Conference, Chicago, Illinois, USA,
20094 Preparation Process of Ceramic Shells 167
117. S. Jones, S. Leyland, The use of conductivity as a means of assessing the extent of wet back in
an investment casting mold, in Proceedings of 22nd BICTA Conference on Investment Casting,
Bath, 1995, p. 4
118. D. Duffey, A. Wexcoat, Totally new concept in water based binders, in Proceedings of 25th
BICTA Conference on Investment Casting, Cheltenham, 2001, paper 11
119. C.W. Park, S.H. Yoon, S.M. Oh, An EVS (electrochemical voltage spectroscopy) study for
the comparison of graphitization behaviors of two petroleum needlecokes. Carbon 38(9),
1261–1269 (2000)
120. H.G. Kang, J.K. Park, B.S. Han et al., Electrochemical characteristics of needle-coke refined
by molten caustic leaching as an anode material for a lithium-ionbattery. J. Power Sources
53(1), 170–173 (2006)
121. S.P. Leyland, R. Hype, P.A. Withey, The fitness for purpose of investment casting shells,
in Proceedings of 8th International Symposium on Investment Casting (Precast95), Czech
Republic, Brno, 1995, pp. 62–68
122. R. Hyde, S.P. Leyland, P.A. Withey et al., Evaluation of the mechanical properties of
investment casting shells, in Proceedings of the 22nd BICTA Conference, Bath, Sept 1995,
p. 7
123. W. Everhart, S. Lekakh, V. Richards, Corner strength of investment casting shells. Int. J. Metal
Cast. 7(1), 21–27 (2013)
124. D.M. Kline, Controlling Strength and Permeability of Silica Investment Casting Molds
(Missouri University of Science and Technology, US, 2010)
125. H.J. Mueller, Particle and pore size distributions of investments. J. Oral Rehabil. 13, 383–393
(1986)
126. F. Reza, H. Takahashi, N. Iwasaki et al., Effects of investment type and casting system on
permeability and castability of CP titanium. J. Prosthet. Dent. 104(2), 114–121 (2010)
127. M. Syverud, H. Hero, Mold filling of Ti castings using investments with different gas
permeability. Dent. Mater. 11(1), 14–18 (1995)
128. H. Matysiak, R. Haratym, M. Kbczyk, Gas flow through a multilayer ceramic mould in lost
wax foundry process. Arch. Foundry Eng. 9(2), 155–158 (2009)
129. C. Yuan, S. Jones, S. Blackburn, Development of a new ferrous aluminosilicate refractory
material for investment casting of aluminum alloys. Metall. Mater. Trans. A 43(13), 5232–
5242 (2012)Chapter 5
Filling and Solidification Process Control
of Large Castings
Jiao Zhang, Yongbing Dai, Jianbo Ma, Qing Dong, Yanfeng Han,
Taiwen Huang, and Guangyu Yang
Due to the overall large size, complex structure, significant difference of wall thick￾ness, and large proportion of thin-walled structure, the filling behavior and solidi￾fication process of large castings show different characteristics from conventional
precision castings. How to ensure the complete filling of the thin-walled structure
of the casting and to realize the balanced control of the solidification structure at
different structures is one of the technical difficulties in the precision forming of
large castings.
5.1 Melt Characteristics and Their Influence
on Solidification Structure and Properties
5.1.1 Effects of Compositional Fluctuation
on the Thermophysical Properties of Molten K4169
Alloy
The thermophysical properties of molten alloy, such as specific heat, viscosity,
surface tension, diffusion coefficient, molar volume, etc., are crucial during the
casting process, which affect not only the fluidity of the melt but also the solidi￾fication behavior. Numerical simulations have become one of the most important
methods of improving casting technology. To obtain accurate values of those ther￾mophysical properties is a matter of great concern for simulating the casting filling
and defect formation.
K4169 is a typical cast superalloy with excellent medium-temperature perfor￾mance, machinability, and welding performance. It has been widely used in important
assembling parts in terrestrial, aerospace, and seafaring engines. The main elements
of the chemical composition of K4169 alloy are Ni, Cr, Fe, Mo, Al, Ti, C, and Nb. It
has a wide allowable range in its nominal composition. The thermophysical proper￾ties of the melt will change when the composition is varied. The alloying elements
© Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
B. Sun et al., Precision Forming Technology of Large Superalloy Castings for Aircraft
Engines, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-6220-8_5
169170 J. Zhang et al.
may be at the upper or lower limit of the compositional range, which results in a
large number of possible compositional combinations. As a result, it is possible to
optimize the alloy composition from the perspective of casting process design. In
order to improve the alloy casting performance through optimizing the alloy compo￾sition, it is necessary to figure out how fluctuation influences the thermophysical
properties of melt. Experimental determination of the thermophysical properties
is a comprehensive, complex, and time-consuming task. At present, owing to the
development of computational material science and the richness of various alloy
databases, it is a common practice to calculate the thermophysical properties using
some thermodynamic software for phase diagram calculation, e.g. JMatPro.
Table 5.1 shows the variation trends of eight thermophysical parameters (i.e.
density, molar volume, specific heat, surface tension, viscosity, thermal conductivity,
diffusion coefficient, and thermal expansion coefficient) as the concentrations of
several alloying elements (Ni, Cr, Nb, Mo, Al, and Ti) increase from the lower to
the upper limits for molten K4169. These features were obtained on the basis of the
calculation results by the software JMatPro. The temperature is in the range from
1380 to 1500 °C. A fixed concentration of C, 0.04%, is used. The remainder is the
alloying element Fe. The rising () and falling arrows () in the table indicate the
trend of the corresponding thermophysical properties when the content of an element
increases from the lower to the upper limit, respectively (Note: The contents of other
elements always take the lower limits). Table 5.2 shows the fluctuation range for the
eight thermophysical parameters of molten K4169 alloy at 1400–1500 °C.
The liquidus temperature (LIQT) of the K4169 alloy is also greatly affected by
the composition. The calculated LIQT by JMatPro varies in the range from 1342 to
1380 °C, which is consistent with the experimental values reported in the literature [1–
4]. There are 64 types of combinations when the eight kinds of elements mentioned
above take the upper or lower limits, respectively. The concentrations of Nb, Cr,
and Ti greatly influence the LIQT. When one of them takes the upper limit, the
LIQT is about 10 °C lower than that when the chosen element takes the lower one.
Table 5.1 Variation trends of thermophysical properties of molten K4169 with increasing alloying
element (Ni, Cr, Nb, Mo, Al and Ti) concentrations from the lower to the upper limits
Element Ni Cr Nb Mo Al Ti
Mass fraction (wt.%) 50.055.0 17.021.0 4.45.4 2.83.3 0.30.7 0.651.15
Density      
Molar volume      
Average expansion coef      
Specific heat      
Viscosity      
Surface tension      
Thermal conductivity      
Diffusion coef      5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 171
The difference is about 33 °C between the LIQTs when all of them take the upper
limits and take the lower ones (Note that in this and the following cases, all of the
rest alloying elements take their lower limits when they are not considered in the
comparison study). The LIQT decreases about 3 °C when the concentration of Mo
(or Al) shifts from the lower to the upper limit. The LIQTs when both of Mo and
Al take the lower limits and take the upper ones show a difference of about 5 °C.
Increasing the contents of alloying elements such as Cr, Nb, Ti, Mo, Al, etc., can
lower the LIQT, for the alloy being closer to the eutectic composition.
The fluidity is mainly affected by the viscosity of the melt and the LIQT. Although
the viscosity increases with increasing Nb and Mo contents, as shown in Table 5.1,
the alloying elements in K4169 including Nb and Mo (except for Cr) should take the
upper limits, considering that lowering the LIQT is more favorable for improving
the fluidity. According to the thermodynamic calculations, the alloy with higher
Cr content tends to form body-centered α-Cr phase. The precipitation of α-Cr at
grain boundaries will reduce the impact toughness of the alloy [5]. Therefore, the Cr
content in the alloy should not take the upper limit, and it can be selected between
17.0 and 19.0, which is also advantageous for reducing the viscosity of the melt.
Table 5.2 Fluctuation range
of thermophysical properties
of molten K4169 at
1400–1500 °C
1400 °C 1500 °C
Density (g/cm3) 7.3670–7.5426 7.2880–7.4425
Molar volume
(cm3/mol)
7.7307–7.8214 7.8153–7.9771
Specific heat
(J/(gK))
0.7120–0.7259 0.7394–0.7536
Surface tension
(mN/m)
1786.86–1812.05 1742.02–1766.61
Viscosity (mPa·s) 8.0503–8.4743 6.5857–6.9242
Thermal
conductivity
(W/(m·K))
25.2603–27.4655 26.5448–28.8421
Diffusion coef.
(10−9m2/s)
0.9637–1.0144 1.2499–1.3141
Average expansion
coef. (10–6 K−1)
25.7999–27.4303 26.7551–28.3133172 J. Zhang et al.
5.1.2 Effect of Superheating Treatment on the Melt
of Nickel-Base Superalloy
5.1.2.1 Experimental Study of Superheating Treatment
The phase transition temperature of K4169 was measured under different super￾heating conditions by differential thermal analysis (DTA). The superheating
temperatures (SHT) of 1400, 1550, 1600, and 1680 °C were selected, and the
DTA curves of heating and cooling processes are shown in Fig. 5.1.
According to Fig. 5.1a, the LIQT of the K4169 alloy during the heating process
is 1349 °C and the solidus temperature (SOLT) is about 1270 °C. Figure 5.1b shows
that during the cooling process, when the SHT is 1400 °C, the γ phase nucleation
temperature is 1326 °C, and the MC carbide precipitation temperature is 1274 °C.
When the SHT is increased to 1550 °C, the nucleation temperature of the γ phase is
reduced from 1326 to 1284 °C, and the nucleation undercooling is increased from 23
to 64 °C. When the SHT is further increased to 1600 °C, the nucleation temperature
of the γ phase is 1301 °C and the nucleation undercooling is changed to 47 °C. When
Fig. 5.1 Effect of melt superheating treatment on the solidification process of K4169 superalloy
evidenced by a heating DTA curve, b cooling DTA curve, and c nucleation undercooling variation5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 173
the SHT is raised to 1680 °C, the nucleation temperature of the γ phase becomes
1249 °C and the nucleation undercooling becomes 101 °C. This phenomenon is
similar to the findings by Kolotukhin et al. [6], that is, the nucleation temperature
of γ phase tends to decrease firstly, followed by an increase, and finally decrease
again as the SHT continues to increase. Therefore, with increasing the SHT, the
nucleation undercooling of the K4169 alloy firstly rises, then declines, and finally
rises again, and the non-equilibrium SOLT range drops at first, then is raised and
finally drops once more. It is shown that the superheating treatment for the melt
affects the nucleation undercooling and non-equilibrium solidification temperature
intervals by changing the melt structure, which has an important influence on the
solidification structure and properties of the alloy.
With the development of solidification technology and cluster physics, researchers
have realized that there is a significant correlation between the solidification structure
and melt structure. The melt structure is affected by not only the composition but
also the thermal history. Liu et al. [7] studied the effect of melt homogenization
temperature on the grain size of superalloy In 738LC and found that a relatively low
homogenization treatment temperature is beneficial to grain refinement. Yin et al. [8,
9] studied the effect of melt superheating treatment on the grain size of M963 alloy
and found that when the SHT reached 1850 °C, a very fine equiaxed grain structure
was obtained. Therefore, the melt superheating treatment has an important effect on
the grain size, and the effect is closely related to the SHT and holding time. The
appropriate SHT and holding time can effectively refine the grains.
The preheating temperature of the mold shell in the thermal control solidifica￾tion (TCS) process is set between the solidus and liquidus, which greatly inhibits
the nucleation on the inner wall of the mold shell. Using TCS process, large nucle￾ation undercooling can be obtained after superheating treatment. The solidification
microstructure obtained by the combination of melt superheating and TCS process
is presented in Fig. 5.2.
According to Fig. 5.2, with increasing SHT of melt, the average grain size of
K4169 decreases firstly, followed by an increase, and finally decreases once again.
When the SHT is 1680 °C, the average diameter of grain is 82 μm. At the same
time, the dendritic structure changes to granular one. The shrinkage cavity is greatly
reduced with the decreasing of grain size.
The melt superheating treatment at a certain temperature results in the structural
transition of molten alloy, which affects the nucleation undercooling. The nucle￾ation rate and growth rate, during the process of metal crystallization, increase with
increasing the undercooling. The effect on the former is much more significant than
that on the latter, which leads to the grain refinement.
5.1.2.2 Molecular Dynamics Simulation
The structure of the nickel-base superalloy melt is undoubtedly very complicated due
to the existence of various alloying elements and their intricate interactions. There174 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.2 Grain and dendritic structure a–c, shrinkage cavity e–g of K4169 superalloy after melt
superheating treatment and their quantitative analysis results d, h
are a large number of carbide-based refractory particles in the initially melted nickel￾base superalloy. These particles are thermodynamically unstable and will dissolve
into the melt as the temperature increases. It has been reported that the carbides are
not completely dissolved when the SHT is 1500 °C and the undercooling does not
change significantly with increasing the carbon content [6]. Therefore, the carbide
particles are unlikely to be the nucleation site of the γ phase and the undercooling
change caused by the superheating treatment should be due to another reason.
Studies have shown that the structure factor of some superalloy melts (such as
M963) has a pre-peak in the low-q-value region at lower superheating temperature
[9]. The pre-peak disappears as the temperature increases; when the temperature
decreases again, the pre-peak appears once again. The ab initio molecular dynamics
(AIMD) simulations showed that when the concentration of Al in the Ni-base binary
alloy Ni1-xAlx is low, no obvious pre-peak is observed on the structure factor of the
melt. With the gradual increase of the Al content, the pre-peak gradually appears on5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 175
the structure factor and becomes very pronounced when the concentration of Al is
0.25 (x = 0.25) [10, 11]. Figure 5.3 shows the total and partial structure factors of
molten Ni1-xAlx with different Al concentrations at 1500 °C.
The bond angle distribution function (BADF) curves of molten Ni1-xAlx are
compared in Fig. 5.4. It can be seen that the BADFs of Ni–Ni-Al, Ni–Al-Ni, and Ni–
Al-Al triples are similar to that of Ni–Ni-Ni, i.e., the peak on the left is stronger than
the one on the right. However, the BADF of Al-Ni–Al is very different from those
of Ni–Ni-Ni, Ni–Ni-Al, Ni–Al-Ni, and Ni–Al-Al. The BADF curve of Al-Ni–Al has
a much significant peak at 105° and a shoulder or a relatively weak peak is present
near 72°. As the Al concentration increases from 0.102 to 0.25, the intensity of the
peak near 105° is only slightly weakened; the shoulder near 72° gradually becomes
apparent until it becomes a peak. The BADF curve of Al-Al-Al is different from that
of Ni–Ni-Ni and that of Al-Al-Al in pure Al melt. It has a strong peak around 100°
and two shoulders around 60° and 140°.
Fig. 5.3 Total a and partial b–d structure factors of Ni1−xAlx at 1773 K. The left and right triangles
in a are the XRD results from Ref. [8]; the insets in a and b are magnifications for Stotal (q)and
SNiNi (q) with the q value ranging from1.0 to 2.8 Å−1176 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.4 The bond-angle distribution functions of molten Ni1−xAlx for Ni–Ni–Ni a, Ni–Ni–Al b,
Ni–Al–Ni c, Ni–Al–Al d, Al–Ni–Al e, and Al–Al–Al f triples at 1773 K
The AIMD simulations showed that Ni atoms have the possibility to bond with
four Al atoms. As the Al concentration increases from 0.102 to 0.25, this possibility
gradually increases. As stated above, the position of the main peak of the BADF of
Al-Ni–Al is about 105°, which is very close to the bond angle of a methane molecule
(CH4), i.e., 109.471°. Therefore, an Ni atom and its four bonded Al atoms have a
chance to form a methane-like structure, as shown in Fig. 5.5a. When there is a large
amount of such methane-like structures, they may form an Ni–Al bond network which
is similar to the zinc-blende structure (see Fig. 5.5b). The Ni–Al bond network of
this distorted zinc-blende-like structure will cause a pre-peak on the structure factor
in the q value interval of 1.0–2.2 Å−1. The AIMD simulations also revealed that
the interaction between the unlike species in molten Ni1−xAlx, Ni1−xTix, Ni1−xTax,
and Ni1−xNbx is stronger than the ones between the same species. Molten Ni1−xTix,
Fig. 5.5 Methane-like
Ni–Al structure a and
zinc-blende-like Ni–Al
network b5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 177
Ni1−xTax, and Ni1−xNbx exhibit similar characteristics to molten Ni1−xAlx. That is
to say, as the concentrations of the solute elements gradually increase to 0.25, the
similar zinc-blende-like Ni-M (M = Ti, Ta, Nb) bond networks will be formed in
these melts too, as evidenced by the observable pre-peaks on their respective structure
factors [12]. When the temperature is raised to 1973 K, the pre-peak on the structure
factor of molten Ni0.75Al0.25 is still present.
Based on the AIMD simulations of molten Ni1−xAlx, Ni1−xTix, Ni1−xTax, and
Ni1−xNbx, it can be inferred that Ti, Ta, and Nb, though with relatively low contents
in the superalloy melt, will play a similar role as the one of Al. The concentration
of Al + Ti + Nb in the M963 alloy melt is about 16.28 at.%, and the structure
factor of molten Ni1−xAlx at this concentration should not have a significant pre￾peak. However, at the lower SHT, the structure factor of molten M963 alloy indeed
has a pre-peak [9]. It is conjectured that the solute elements such as Al, Ti, and Nb
may aggregate in the melt, which leads to some solute-rich zones to be formed. With
increasing the SHT, the pre-peak disappears, which indicates that the solute elements
(Al + Ti + Nb) are well-dispersed in the melt. The pre-peak appears again with
decreasing the SHT, which demonstrates that the solute-rich region appears again.
It can be speculated that some other types of superalloy melts (such as K4169 melt)
are also microscopically inhomogeneous, namely, there are solute-poor and solute￾rich zones in the melt at lower superheating temperatures. During the solidification
process, some of the solute-poor and/or solute-rich regions may be more susceptible
to nucleation. However, it is still unclear at present why the nucleation undercooling
of γ-phase in molten K4169 decreases again after 1600 and 1650 °C treatments (see
Fig. 5.1c), which calls for further studies.
5.1.3 Effect of Trace Elements on Fluidity and Solidification
Structure
5.1.3.1 The Influences of Trace Element Boron and Zirconium
on the Solidification Characteristic Parameters,
Microstructure, and Fluidity of the K4169 Alloy
Trace elements have significant effects on the solidification characteristics,
microstructure, and performance of superalloys [13, 14, 15]. Studying these effects
is critical for the control and optimization of alloy composition.
The solidification temperature interval is an important solidification parameter
and is directly related to the fluidity of the alloy. The solidification characteristic
temperatures of the K4169 alloy with different boron and zirconium contents are
determined using the DSC experiments. The results are shown in Fig. 5.6 and Table
5.3. The γ phase is the matrix, which occupies a large volume fraction. Conse￾quently, the initial melting temperature of the γ phase, being selected as the solidus
temperature, can well characterize the fluidity.178 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.6 The effects of boron a and zirconium b on the solidification process of K4169 by DSC
Table 5.3 The effect of boron on the solidification characteristic temperatures of K4169
B content (wt%) 0.0026 0.0048 0.0059 0.007
solidus temperature of the γ phase /°C 1295 1304 1316 1303
liquidus temperature /°C 1347 1349 1349 1346
solidification temperature interval/°C 52 45 33 43
According to Fig. 5.6 and Table 5.3, boron has little effect on the liquidus temper￾ature and the solidus temperature of the γ phase rises at first and then decreases
with increasing the boron content. When the boron content increases from 0.0026 to
0.0059 wt%, the temperature interval between the liquidus and solidus temperature
of γ phase is reduced from 52 to 33 °C. When the boron content is 0.0059 wt%,
the temperature interval is the smallest. When the boron content further rises to
0.007 wt%, the temperature interval increases once again to 43 °C. According to
Fig. 5.6 and Table 5.4, zirconium has little effect on the liquidus temperature. The
solidus temperature of γ phase increases firstly and then decreases. When the zirco￾nium content increases from 0.028 to 0.042 wt%, the solidification temperature
interval decreases from 52 to 31 °C. When the zirconium content is 0.042 wt%,
the temperature interval achieves the smallest. When the zirconium content further
grows to 0.049 wt%, the temperature interval is increased once again to 36 °C.
Table 5.4 The effect of zirconium on the solidification characteristic temperatures of K4169
Zr content (wt%) 0.028 0.035 0.042 0.049
solidus temperature of the γ phase /°C 1295 1307 1315 1310
liquidus temperature /°C 1347 1345 1346 1346
solidification temperature interval/°C 52 38 31 365 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 179
The study of Antony et al. [16] shows that, when 0.012 wt% boron is added to the
superalloy Ni-10Co-9Cr-9 W-5.5A1-3.5Ta-l.5Mo-l.5Ti, the solidification tempera￾ture interval reduces from 79 to 72 °C. It is consistent with the results discussed
previously. The wider the solidification temperature interval of the metal, the more
developed the dendrite grain, and thus the smaller the volume fraction of the
solid phase needed for the stopping of flow. Therefore, when the boron content
is 0.0059 wt%, the superalloy has a good fluidity.
With the progress of technology, the aviation industry is developing toward to
the high performance and low cost. Large-scale and thin-walled castings have great
advantages in overall casting performance and are thus widely used. Improving the
fluidity of superalloy melts is one of the effective methods to improve the casting
quality of large-scale and complex thin-walled castings. Fluidity refers to the flowa￾bility of the molten metal itself, which is related to the chemical composition, temper￾ature, impurity content, and physical properties of the molten metal. As an impor￾tant solidification characteristic, the fluidity of liquid metal is directly related to the
filling ability in the process of casting, which is especially important for the filling
of large-scale and thin-walled castings.
Generally, the fluidity of the liquid alloy and its filling ability are characterized by
two steps, i.e., casting it into a mold firstly and then measuring the streamline length
after solidification or the area of the thin portion after filling. Most of the fluidity
tests use gravity casting method, with only a small amount of tests using vacuum
casting method. Most of the channels are straight rods, or curved into a certain
shape. The common types of fluidity samples include radiation type (mainly used
for rubber molds), spiral models (mainly used for metal molds), vacuum samples
(by vacuum suction casting), U-shaped, stepped type, plate-shaped, disk type, and
so on. During the fluidity measurement, the mold conditions, casting conditions, and
channels should be same, so as to ensure the test results have good reproducibility
and accuracy.
The spiral flow model (as shown in Fig. 5.7) is one type of popular models that
have been used so far. It takes into account of the large-scale variation gradient and the
Fig. 5.7 The shape a and the size parameters (mm) b of the spiral flow model180 J. Zhang et al.
thin wall of castings. The spiral in the spiral model is formed in an involute manner,
which can be described by Eq. (5.1). The inside of the spiral plate is a cavity with a
rectangular or trapezoidal cross-section. The flow channel consists of three sections.
The area of the cross-section of the spiral channel in each section is determined by
the large hole outflow theory: the ratio of the cross-sectional area of the first section
to that of the second section is about 2:1. The cross-sectional area of the third section
is variable.
 X = 10(cos ϕ + ϕ sinϕ)
Y = 10(sin ϕ − ϕcos ϕ)(ϕ ≥ 0) (5.1)
In order to increase the application scope of the fluidity testing, and reflect the
fluidity of the alloy at different thicknesses, the length of each flow section can be
determined as, l1: l2: l3 = 1: 2: 4. Therefore, the length of the first section is 125 mm,
the second section 250 mm, and the third section 500 mm.
The theoretical filling length of the alloy in the spiral model can be calculated via
Eq. (5.2):
l = v
Fρ1
P

1
α1
+ x
λ +
√π · x
b2
√v

k L + C1

Tp − Tk

TL − Tm
, (5.2)
where, l is the length of the streamline, v is the average flow velocity of the liquid
metal in the cavity under the action of static head H, F is the area of the cross-section,
P is the circumference of the cross-section, and ρ1 is the density of the liquid metal.
In addition, the heat transfer coefficient of the mold is denoted as α1, x is the thickness
of the coating layer, λ is the thermal conductivity of the coating layer, b2 is the heat
storage coefficient of the mold, and k is the amount of solid phases at the front end of
the flow when the flow is stopped. L is the latent heat of the alloy, C1 is the specific
heat of the liquid metal, Tp is the casting temperature, Tk is the temperature when
flow stops, TL is the liquidus temperature, and T m is the temperature of the mold
shell.
The lengths of the first two sections can be converted into those with the thickness
of the last section (l

1 and l

2 in Eq. (5.3)). The sum of the (converted) lengths of the
three sections, calculated using Eq. (5.3), is employed to specify the fluidity.
l

= l

1 + l

2 + l3 = l1P1F3
F1P3
+
l2P2F3
F2P3
+ l3, (5.3)
where, l
 is the total streamline length after the lengths of the first and second sections
being converted into those with the thickness of the third section, F is the area of the
cross-section, and P is the circumference of the cross-section. The filled total length
is used to describe the fluidity of the superalloy at this thickness.5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 181
B content / wt.% Zr content / wt.%
Filling length / mm
Filling length / mm
Fig. 5.8 The fluidity test results of the K4169 superalloy depending on the contents of boron a and
zirconium b
This kind of mold model also has the advantages of low cost, convenient to
manufacture, easy to use, and widely used etc. The melts of the superalloy K4169
with different boron or zirconium contents have been cast into the mold under vacuum
with a same casting temperature of 1470 °C. Converting the lengths of the spiral
streamlines of the first two sections (the first section with the thickness of 8 mm,
the second one with the thickness of 5 mm) to those with the thickness of 1.8 mm
using Eq. (5.3), the total length can be obtained, which reflects the fluidity of the
superalloy K4169.
Figure 5.8 shows the measurements of the superalloy K4169 under different
contents of boron or zirconium. According to these figures, with increasing the boron
content, the fluidity of the alloy increases firstly and then decreases. When the boron
content is in the range 0.0048–0.0059 wt%, the filling length is about 50% longer
than that of the master alloy. When the boron content exceeds 0.0059 wt%, the filling
length decreases once again, but is still higher than that of the master alloy. With
rising the zirconium content, the filling length generally increases firstly and then
decreases, too. When the zirconium content is between 0.035 and 0.049 wt%, the
filling length is increased by 40–55% compared to the master alloy.
The effect of boron and zirconium on the fluidity is mainly due to the narrowing
of the solidification temperature interval. When temperature interval is wide, the
dendrites will be effectively developed. As a result, just with a small volume fraction
of the solid phase, the flow will be stopped [17]. Therefore, when the boron content
is 0.0059 wt% or when the zirconium content is 0.042 wt%, the alloy shows an
enhanced fluidity.
The Laves phase is brittle, which promotes the formation and propagation of
cracks in superalloys. In addition, a large amount of Nb will be consumed by the
Laves phase in the K4169 alloy, resulting in a reduction in the amount of γ” phase
(NbNi3) that is the main contributor to the strength. So, the Laves phase should be
as few as possible in the superalloy. The effect of different boron contents on the
morphology and content of the Laves phases are shown in Fig. 5.9. Laves phase in the
master alloy has two kinds of forms, one is the eutectic Laves phase and the other is182 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.9 The effect of boron content on the morphology a–d and content e of the Laves phase.
0.0026 wt% B a, 0.0048 wt% B b, 0.0059 wt% B c, 0.0070 wt% B d5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 183
the plate-like Laves phase. With the addition of boron, the morphology of the Laves
phases did not change significantly, but their amount and size are reduced. With
increasing the zirconium content, the amount of Laves phases is also significantly
reduced (see Fig. 5.10). Since the interdendritic region, where the Laves phase is
typically located, is the last solidified region of the K4169 alloy, these findings show
Fig. 5.10 The effect of zirconium content on the morphology a–d and content e of the Laves phase.
0.028 wt% Zr a, 0.035 wt% Zr b, 0.042 wt% Zr c, 0.049 wt% Zr d184 J. Zhang et al.
that the addition of boron and zirconium will lead to a significant change in the
solidification behavior of the last stage. It is generally believed that the enrichment
of boron and zirconium at the grain boundaries reduces the diffusion rate at the grain
boundaries and hinders the precipitation of the Laves phase.
5.1.3.2 Effect of Chemical Refinement on Solidified Grain Structure
of K4169 Alloy
The chemical method refers to the addition of chemical elements or compounds into
the molten metal or alloy, which can provide a large number of fine nucleation sites.
These well dispersed and suspended nucleation sites will lead to great improvement
of the nucleation rate and the remarkable refinement of grain size. These elements or
compounds are refiners, which can be added directly or be formed from the chemical
reacting of the added substances with the melt.
It is very important for the selection of chemical refiners without leading into new
inclusions. For superalloys, the principle of selecting the refiner includes [18]:
(1) No harmful elements; the alloying elements of the refiner are same to the
superalloy.
(2) In order to avoid the precipitation or floating of the refiner, the density difference
between the refiner and the molten alloy should be as small as possible.
(3) The crystal lattice of the refiner particles should well match to that of the matrix,
in order to reduce the interfacial energy between them, have good wettability
between the two, and promote the new phase in its epitaxial growth when the
alloy solidifies.
(4) Stable, and not easily dissolved in the melt or react with the alloying elements.
(5) Brittle, and the surface should be rough after crushing.
(6) Can improve the mechanical properties of the alloy (Table 5.5).
According to the above principles, researchers from Northwestern Polytech￾nical University selected several intermetallic compounds with the same compo￾nent elements as the master alloy. After the calculation of lattice mismatch degree,
the investigation of melting point, density, etc., two refiners were proposed, i.e.,
Co3FeNb2 and CrFeNb. All the component elements in these two refiners are included
in the K4169 superalloy. They can refine the grain without introducing inclusions
and worsening the performance.
Table 5.5 Crystal structure
and physical parameters of
the refiners [19]
Refiner Crystal
structure
Density
(gcm−3)
Melting
temperature
(°C)
Co3FeNb2 Hexagonal 8.8 1500
CrFeNb Hexagonal 8.2 >16505 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 185
Fig. 5.11 The effect of the refiner on the grain structure of the K4169 alloy under different
processing conditions. Tp = 1380 °C, Tm = 900 °C a, Tp = 1380 °C, Tm = 900 °C with refiner b,
Tp = 1380 °C, Tm = 1200 °C c, Tp = 1380 °C, Tm = 1290 °C with refiner d
Figure 5.11 shows the effect of the refiner on the grain structure of the K4169
alloy under different processing conditions. For conventional processing methods, the
solidification structure consists of equiaxed grains in the center and columnar grains
on the edge (see Fig. 5.11a). After adding refiner, the grains all become equiaxed ones
(see Fig. 5.11b) and the average grain size reduces from 4560 to 1230 μm. Under
the TCS process condition without refiner, the equiaxed grains are relatively coarse
(see Fig. 5.11c). After the addition of refiner, the grains are remarkably refined (see
Fig. 5.11d), with the average grain size being reduced from 3340 to 126 μm. When
the mismatch between the refiner and the substrate is less than 12%, the refiner has
an obvious refining effect. The γ matrix of K4169 is an FCC structure with a lattice
constant of 0.3586 nm. According to the two-dimensional lattice mismatch model,
the mismatches between the refiners, Co3FeNb2 and CrFeNb, and the matrix are
both less than 10%. For example, the mismatches between the (111) plane of γ phase
and the (0001) planes of the refiners (Co3FeNb2 and CrFeNb) are 4.45% and 3.34%,
respectively [19]. Acting as a nucleation site of the γ matrix, the refiner can increase
the nucleation rate and refine the grain. In general, the number of refiner particles
are 103 to 104 times of the number of grains. The number of particles is much more
than the actual number of grains. The rest particles, not acting as nucleation, are
enriched and segregated to the grain boundary during grain growth. They block the
grain growth by hindering the migration of grain boundary and atomic diffusion,
which also promotes grain refinement.
According to Fig. 5.11b–d, the refining efficiency when the mold is treated by
thermal control processing method is higher than that by the normal processing
method. In general, the alloy’s casting structure depends on the nucleation and crystal
growth conditions. The chilling effect, resulted from the large temperature difference
between the melt and the mold shell, lowering the nucleation free energy, leads to
the nucleation on the inner wall of the mold shell. When the temperature of the mold
shell is raised to the solidus temperature of the alloy, the chilling effect is weakened
and a large number of nucleation sites, no matter near or far from the edge, can initiate
nucleation simultaneously, resulting in a significantly much finer grain structure as
compared to that under the normal process [20].186 J. Zhang et al.
5.2 Simulation of Filling Process Based on Structural
Features of Large Castings
Hydraulic simulation has always been the main method of cavity filling process
simulation. However, as the actual filling process of the cast is accompanied by the
solidification process, the cavity section size, flow surface characteristics and melt
properties vary with time and location. Since the hydraulic simulation separates the
filling and solidification process, its simulation results may not correspond to the
actual situation. As a result, the simulation method of low-melting alloy as flow
medium and the finite element software simulation method have become the main
methods for simulating the filling process of complex castings.
Among them, low-melting alloy with similar solidification characteristics, lower
cost and lower melting point is used to simulate casting into transparent shell or
actual shell, and the filling and solidification process is analyzed by actual observa￾tion or destructive detection. Computer simulation of casting process is a modern
casting process research that has developed rapidly in recent decades. The filling
and solidification process of casting are simulated using finite element software. It is
of great significance to guide the design of casting process and improve the quality
of castings. Because superalloy is easy to oxidize and because its melting temper￾ature is high, casting production process test is difficult. Computer simulation of
casting process can be used to reduce the number of technical tests, shorten the trial
production period, and reduce the production cost.
5.2.1 Physical and Numerical Simulation of Filling Process
of Gravity Casting Low Melting Alloy
5.2.1.1 Physical Simulation
The experimental mold is made of quartz glass, as shown in Fig. 5.12a, and ZL102
alloy is selected as the simulation medium. In the casting process, in order to reduce
heat loss, the casting system is wrapped with aluminum silicate insulation. The
alloy casting temperature is 800 °C and the mold temperature is 20 °C. The filling
process of the alloy liquid is recorded by high-speed photography, and the relative
temperature field change of the alloy liquid filling process is obtained by an infrared
camera. The photographic equipment is the Phantom V12.1 high-speed camera of
the American VRI company. The temperature field measurement is performed by
the FLIR company’s SC7300 medium-wave thermal imaging camera, as shown in
Fig. 5.12b.
Figure 5.13 shows the fluid morphology at different times during the melt filling
process of ZL102 aluminum alloy. It can be seen that the impinging jet from the
gate is sprayed into the cavity after the alloy liquid enters the cavity, causing the
liquid surface protrusion above the inner gate to form a center wave. Along with the5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 187
Fig. 5.12 Experimental model and apparatus (provided by Professor Yang Guangyu from
Northwestern Polytechnical University) a quartz glass model b infrared camera
Fig. 5.13 Process of fluid morphology change with time during gravity filling process of aluminum
alloy188 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.14 The relative temperature field of gravity filling process in aluminum alloy
melt pouring, the filling gradually becomes smoother, the liquid level fluctuations
decrease, and it tends to be stable.
Further observation of the location of the vertical submerged flow can be found
that in the process of aluminum alloy melt filling liquid level raised position is not
always is opposite to the sprue position, but takes place in a certain offset to the
right. This is consistent with the numerical simulation results of the hydro-physical
simulation process and the high-temperature alloy melt filling process.
Figure 5.14 shows the relative temperature field changes of various parts of the
fluid during the gravity filling process of aluminum alloy melt. It can be seen that
the temperature field variation of the alloy liquid filling process in the lower part of
the model cavity is basically consistent with that of the numerical simulation result.
5.2.1.2 Numerical Simulation
Figure 5.15 shows the distribution of velocity field and temperature field at different
stages of aluminum alloy filling process under the calculated gravity condition. It
can be seen that the dimensions and boundary conditions of the numerical simulation
model of the low-temperature alloy are consistent with the physical simulation.
When the liquid fills the lower half of the cavity, the filling process of ZL102
aluminum alloy melt under gravity condition is basically similar to the corresponding
physical simulation process. At the initial stage of filling, the liquid flowing into
the mold cavity under the action of gravity tends to maintain its moving direction
and momentum due to the inertia effect, forming an undercurrent through the filled
area. The undercurrent continuously exchanges momentum with the surrounding
medium during the movement, and the result is that the undercurrent expands and
the average velocity decreases gradually. Under the action of static pressure differ￾ence, the velocity direction of some fluid changes and flows in all directions. After5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 189
Fig. 5.15 Velocity field and temperature field of aluminum alloy filling process under gravity
condition
encountering the mold wall, collision occurs. Due to momentum conservation, the
direction of fluid movement changes again, forming an eddy current area. It can be
seen from the figure that the central fluid always maintains a large flow velocity;
when it reaches the liquid surface, its velocity still maintains a large value, so that
the center of the free liquid surface is convex. In the whole process of mold filling,
a wide central jet zone is formed horizontally, with vortexes on both sides, and the
latter vortexes are obviously larger, and have not disappeared. Such a mold filling
flow state keeps the central fluid at a high temperature, which not only increases the
momentum exchange, but also increases the heat exchange in the high-temperature
jet zone and surrounding vortexes. It can be seen from the temperature distribution
in the figure that in the early stage of mold filling, the high-temperature jet zone of
the casting is not particularly obvious, that is, the transverse temperature gradient
remains at a small level. As the filling process continues, especially after passing190 J. Zhang et al.
through the variable cross section, the temperature of the central fluid is obviously
higher than the surrounding, and there is a large temperature gradient in the transverse
direction.
Due to the mutation of the cross section, when the alloy liquid flows through the
variable cross section, the area of the central high-speed jet area becomes larger due to
the continuity of the fluid. Subsequently, due to the increase of melt flow, momentum
and heat exchange always exist along the way, and the heat dissipation of the high￾temperature liquid in the thin-walled part is faster. As a result, both the temperature
of the leading liquid and the transverse temperature gradient of the casting decreases
significantly. Unlike the water simulation, thermal physical parameters of liquid alloy
melt are greatly influenced by temperature. With melt temperature decreasing, the
alloy liquid density, surface tension and viscous force are increased, so the impact of
the coupling temperature field after the jet encountered resistance increases gradually,
the free surface gradually leveled off, velocity decrease again. Due to the increase of
the viscous force, the size of the velocity boundary layer formed by the cavity wall
increases more obviously. At the later stage of the filling of the thin-walled part, the
alloy liquid in the velocity boundary layer near the cavity surface starts to solidify
as the temperature of the alloy liquid continues to decrease.
5.2.2 Mold Filling Experiment and Numerical Simulation
of Gravity Casting K4169 Alloy Feature Parts
Through numerical simulation and experimental simulation of low melting point
alloys, we have a certain understanding of the filling process of thin-walled speci￾mens and variable cross-section specimens. In order to verify the characteristics of
the filling process of high-temperature alloy thin-walled samples, the following is
a further experimental analysis of the actual pouring process of high-temperature
alloys.
5.2.2.1 Numerical Simulation
1. Influences of pouring temperature on filling rate
The pouring temperature has a great influence on the filling process. Higher pouring
temperature, better fluidity of alloy liquid and filling. Filling rate refers to the volume
ratio of filling liquid and cavity. In order to investigate the effect of pouring temper￾ature on filling rate, the gate area is 610.86 mm2 (the following are the same). The
pouring flow rate is 2 kg/s, the heat transfer coefficient is 1000 W m−2 K−1, and
the casting temperature is 800 °C. The initial pouring temperatures were 1380, 1450,
and 1550 °C respectively, then the numerical simulation was carried out.5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 191
According to the theory of casting formation [21], it is difficult to continue filling
when the solidification fraction of liquid alloy flow head reaches 20%. Figure 5.16
shows the effects of pouring temperature on filling of K4169 alloy sheet. The left
side of each pouring system is 1.5 mm sheet and the right side is 1 mm sheet. When
the solidification fraction of 20% appears at the front end of K4169 alloy solution
(according to Fig. 3.3, the corresponding temperature of K4169 alloy solution with
20% solidification fraction is 1350 °C), the filling area at 1450 °C is obviously
larger than that at 1380 °C, which indicates that the bottom-pouring melting die is
made. In the process of casting, the increase of pouring temperature of alloy liquid
is beneficial to filling of alloy melt. According to the calculation of the relationship
between the viscosity and temperature of K4169 alloy (see Fig. 3.6), it is found that
the increase of temperature is beneficial to the decrease of the viscosity of the alloy
liquid and the filling of the alloy liquid. These two aspects prove that increasing
pouring temperature is beneficial to filling K4169 alloy liquid. In addition, it can be
clearly seen in Fig. 5.16a that the filling of 1.5 mm sheet metal melt is smoother and
the filling area is larger than that of 1 mm sheet metal. Figure 5.16c is the filling ratio
of sheet metal with the pouring temperature of 1550 °C. It can be seen that when the
pouring temperature reaches 1550 °C, the alloy melt can completely fill the whole
sheet casting. From Fig. 5.16a, it can be seen that the main reason for the difficulty
of filling K4169 alloy is that there are some solidification fraction alloy liquid nodes
at the front end of the alloy liquid. According to the calculation, the temperature of
the alloy liquid corresponding to 20% solidification fraction is 1350 °C.
2. The influence of shell temperature on filling rate
The numerical simulation was carried out under the conditions of lower pouring
temperature of 1380 °C, heat transfer coefficient of 1000 W m−2 K·
−1, pouring flow
rate of 2 kg/s, and shell temperature of 700, 800, and 900 °C, respectively.
Fig. 5.16 The influence of pouring temperature on filling rate of K4169 sheet casting a 1380 °C
b 1450 °C c 1550 °C192 J. Zhang et al.
Figure 5.19 shows the effect of shell temperature on the temperature distribution of
liquid filling of K4169 alloy. It can be seen from Fig. 5.17 that when the temperature
of K4169 alloy liquid is 1350 °C, the solidification fraction of the alloy liquid reaches
20%, and filling becomes difficult. Figure 5.19 shows that for 1 mm thin plate (right),
when the shell temperature is 700 °C, the middle temperature of thin plate castings
has dropped to 1350 °C, which is easy to form defects such as insufficient pouring.
With the increase of shell temperature, the area of liquid alloy in thin-walled parts
below 1350 °C decreases. When the shell temperature is 800 °C, there is only a small
area of low temperature at the front of the liquid alloy during the filling process. When
the shell temperature is 900 °C, there is no temperature lower than 1350 °C in the
front of the liquid alloy during the filling process, which makes it easier to complete
the filling process. It can be seen that in the process of bottom injection investment
casting, the increase of shell temperature is beneficial to the increase of filling rate
(Fig. 5.18).
3. Summary
The effects of casting parameters such as pouring temperature and shell temperature
on the filling and solidification process of K4169 alloy melt in bottom casting were
studied using numerical simulations. The results are as follows:
(1) The increase of pouring temperature is beneficial to the filling of K4169 alloy
melt. When the pouring temperature is below 1550 °C, the relationship between
pouring temperature and filling ratio is linear. The increase of shell temperature
is beneficial to the filling of liquid alloy. When the shell temperature is below
900 °C, the relationship between shell temperature and filling rate is linear.
(2) According to the simulation results, the optimum technological parameters
of thin-walled castings with good filling were determined. When the casting
speed was 2 kg/s and 3 kg/s respectively, the casting temperature of thin-walled
castings with complete filling was 1550 °C or higher.
Fig. 5.17 The relationship
of K4169 alloy solid fraction
and temperature5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 193
Fig. 5.18 The relationship of K4169 alloy viscosity and temperature
Fig. 5.19 The effect of shell temperature on the temperature distribution of liquid filling of K4169
alloy. a 700 °C, b 800 °C, c 900 °C.
(3) For thin-walled castings with different thicknesses, casting parameters have
different effects on the filling rate and solidification characteristics. When the
thickness of thin-walled castings is 1 mm, the influence of casting parameters on
the filling of thin-walled castings is obvious. In the solidification process of the
castings, because the castings are thinner and the solidification speed is too fast,
the solidification characteristics of the castings have no obvious change with
the change of process parameters. The 1.5 mm thin-walled castings can obtain
excellent finished products by optimizing casting parameters. It shows that under194 J. Zhang et al.
gravity conditions, the filling and solidification process of large complex thin￾walled castings should be strictly controlled, but the forming of thinner thin￾walled castings is still not ideal.
5.2.2.2 Experimental Analysis of Thin-Walled Features
1. Pouring results of thin-walled feature parts of superalloy
The filling, solidification cooling rate, and solidification structure of thin-walled
feature parts of K4169 superalloy with different casting temperature and shell
preheating temperature and different thickness and size were studied using bottom￾casting investment casting process.
Superalloy K4169 is chosen as the sample, of which the size of thin-walled plate
are 2 mm × 1.5 mm × 1 mm. The bottom pouring system is adopted in the investment
casting.
There are two steps in the manufacture of shell, i.e., wax pattern preparation and
shell preparation. According to the need of casting system, the characteristic paraffin
parts are pressed and then bonded to the casting shape module. After wax mould
preparation, three single-hole ceramic blind pipes are bonded on the wax sheet to
facilitate the insertion of thermocouples during the pouring experiment. Temperature
monitoring of shell and K4169 melt filling and solidification process are carried out
in real time, as shown in Fig. 5.20.
In the experiment, the pouring temperature is 1550 °C, the preheating temperature
of the shell is 900 °C, and the pouring flow rate is 2 kg/s. The shape of 2 mm thin
plate castings obtained by pouring is shown in Fig. 5.21.
(1) The cooling rate curve of the shell.
Fig. 5.20 The positions of
thermocouples5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 195
Fig. 5.21 The shape of
2 mm thin plate
Fig. 5.22 The temperature
cooling curves at positions 1,
2 and 3 corresponding to the
shell in Fig. 5.22
Under the above pouring conditions, the temperature curves of the shell are recorded
by the black box furnace temperature tracker as shown in Fig. 5.22. The temperature
cooling curves at positions 1, 2, and 3 corresponding to the shell in Fig. 5.22 are
recorded, respectively, in the channels 1, 2, and 3 shown in the figure. The first peak
of the three curves is the initial temperature of the shell after it is removed from
the resistance furnace, which is about 900 °C. After 250 s, three temperature curves
increase sharply, indicating that the melt fills into the corresponding position of the
thermocouple in the shell at this moment. Through the order of steep increase of
curve and temperature, the sheet metal is filled from bottom to top. In order to verify
the regularity of temperature change, the above process was simulated using the
above parameters, and the temperature distribution was similar to the actual process.
In addition, the filling rate of K4169 at the thin plate is estimated to be about
0.1 m/s by the time difference between the steep increasing points of curve 1 and
curve 2 and the distance between positions 1 and 2 on the transverse shell.
The cooling curves of the shell at positions 1, 2, and 3 obtained in the numerical
simulation, as shown in Fig. 5.23, are in good agreement with the cooling curves196 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.23 Temperature curves of medium shell at positions 1, 2 and 3 are numerically simulated
of the shell obtained from the experiment. The results show that the selection of
thermal properties of alloy and shell is reasonable. Procast numerical simulation can
accurately reflect the cooling conditions of shell and castings in the casting process.
(2) The change of solidification structure in different parts of the gating system.
The grain size of 1.5 mm thin plate is analyzed for different parts of the casting
system, i.e., main runner, inner runner corner, bottom of thin plate, top of thin plate,
and cold compartment in casting, as shown in Figs. 5.24, 5.25, 5.26 and 5.27.
It can be seen from Fig. 5.24 that the grain size formed at the columnar main
runner is larger. Because it is close to the gate, the high-temperature alloy liquid
passes through for a long time, has a larger diameter, and solidifies quickly, which is
beneficial to the growth of dendrites. Figure 5.25 is a picture of grain structure at the
corner of 5 mm fan-shaped inner runner. It can be clearly seen that at 5 mm thickness
plate, the grain is still relatively large and about 2–3 large grains are formed in the
cross-section. At the transition point from 5 mm thickness plate to 1.5 mm thickness
plate, the grain size decreases gradually.
Figure 5.26a, b show the grain structure at, respectively, the bottom and top of a
1.5 mm thin plate. It is shown that the grain at the bottom of the thin plate is larger
than that at the top. It shows that the cooling speed of the top of the thin plate is faster
when the filling process of the thin plate is filled from the bottom to the top in turn.5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 197
Fig. 5.24 Grain structure at
main runner
Fig. 5.25 Grain structure at
the corner of inner runner
Fig. 5.26 Grain structure at the bottom and top of a 1.5 mm thin plate, respectively198 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.27 Grain size at the
front end of the cold barrier
The continuous heat conduction caused by melt passing near the inner runner at the
bottom of the sheet is beneficial to the growth of dendrites, resulting in a larger grain
size.
For the incomplete filling parts of 1.5 mm thick sheet, the grain structure at the
defect of cold barrier is analyzed, as shown in Fig. 5.27. The grain size at the front end
of the cold barrier is smaller, which indicates that the solidification rate of the melt
is too fast. The melt continuously dissipates heat after flowing through the cavity,
the temperature decreases drastically, the viscosity increases, the resistance caused
by surface tension increases, and the flow eventually stops. According to the theory
of casting formation [21], it is difficult to continue filling when the solid fraction of
liquid–liquid flow head reaches 20%. Compared with Figs. 5.26b and 5.27, it can be
seen that the grain size of the cold compartment is close to the top edge of the thin
plate.
2. The effect of wall thickness on filling rate and solidification structure of sheet
metal.
(1) The influence of thickness on filling rate of sheet specimen.
In the experiment, the castings obtained under the conditions of melt temperature of
1550 °C and shell preheating temperature of 900 °C are shown in Fig. 5.28. The thin
plates in the figure from left to right correspond to thicknesses of 2 mm, 1.5 mm,
and 1 mm, respectively. For 2 mm thin plate, as shown in Fig. 5.28a, the filling rate
of the casting basically reaches 100%. The top and both sides of the thin plate are
fully filled. No obvious defects such as cold barrier and shrinkage holes are observed
on the surface of the casting, and the surface is smooth. For 1.5 mm and 1 mm
thin sheets, as shown, respectively, in Fig. 5.28b, c, the filling integrity of casting
is gradually improved. The filling rate of 1.5 mm thin sheet is about 90%, and that
of 1 mm thin sheet is only about 30%. The surface of 1.5 mm and 1 mm thin plate
is not smooth and there are many cold insulation defects at the edge of the casting.5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 199
Fig. 5.28 Filling rate of sheet with different thickness and size
This shows that the thickness of the mold wall becomes smaller, and defects such as
insufficient pouring and cold isolation are easy to occur.
(2) Variation of grain size of sheet metal with different thickness.
The metallographic structure pictures of 2 mm, 1.5 mm, and 1 mm thin plate castings,
which correspond to the position 2 of the thin plate shown in Fig. 5.20, are shown in
Fig. 5.29. The typical dendrite structure in the solidified structure of the sheet can be
clearly seen in the figure. The dendrite distribution in the thin-walled parts is uniform.
Dendrites grow from the outside to the inside. It can be inferred that the dendrite
growth mode of thin-walled parts is from both sides to the center. Figure 5.29c shows
that the length of the main axis of the branch in a 1 mm thin plate accounts for more
than 60% of the thickness. The results are in good agreement with those observed
in Al-20%Cu alloy sheet under synchrotron radiation. The dendrite growth mode of
the sheet is from both sides to the center.
For the same condition, the grain structure obtained by cross-sectioning the thin
plate with different thickness and size are shown in Fig. 5.30. It can be seen from the
figure that the grain size of 1 mm thin plate is smaller. Because of the high cooling
Fig. 5.29 Metallographic structure of sheet with different thickness and size. a 2 mm b 1.5 mm
c 1 mm200 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.30 Grain structure of sheet metal with different thickness and size. a 1.5 mm b 2 mm c 1 mm
rate, the nuclei grow rapidly on the surface of the plate. The average number of grains
on the cross-section is about 2–3, as shown in Fig. 5.30c. With the increase of the
thickness and size of the sheet, the grain size becomes larger. As shown in Fig. 5.30a,
the average number of grains on the cross-section of 2 mm sheet is about 1–2. It can
be predicted that the cross-section of a single grain may occur under appropriate
conditions, whether it is 1 mm or thicker wall thickness.
3. The influence of pouring process parameters on filling rate and solidification
structure of thin-walled plate.
The main factors affecting the filling rate of melt and the solidification structure of
thin-walled plate in bottom casting of K4169 alloy are pouring temperature, pouring
speed, and shell temperature. When the gate position and gate size are designed,
the pouring speed becomes quantitative. Therefore, the pouring temperature and
shell temperature are studied through experiments. In this study, 1.5 mm thin-walled
castings were selected as the research object.
(1) The influence of pouring temperature on filling rate and solidification structure
of thin-walled plate.
a. Filling rate of thin-walled plate.
The characteristic parts of 1.5 mm K4169 alloy sheet were selected. The pouring
speed was 2 kg/s, the shell temperature was 800 C, and the pouring temperature
was 1380, 1450, and 1550 °C, respectively. The experimental results were shown in
Fig. 5.31. It can be seen from the figure that with the increase of pouring temperature,
the filling rate is improved obviously. When pouring temperature is 1550 °C, the
filling rate is 100%, which is consistent with the simulation results. In the process of
numerical simulation, when the solidification fraction of K4169 alloy liquid is 20%,5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 201
Fig. 5.31 Effect of pouring temperature on filling rate of K4169 alloy thin-walled parts
it just means that the joint here is easy to solidify first, which hinders the filling of
alloy liquid, but the simulation can still complete the filling. Figure 5.32 shows the
relationship between pouring temperature and filling rate of K4169 sheet casting. It
can be seen from the figure that the relationship between pouring temperature and
filling rate is basically linear. The higher the pouring temperature is, the larger the
filling rate is.
b. Solidified structure of thin-walled plate.
For thin-walled castings under medium casting condition, the feature points on the
castings (located at 2 midpoint of Fig. 5.20) are selected to obtain the metallographic
structure as shown in Fig. 5.33. It can be seen from the figure that the grain size
of the castings at 1550 °C is much larger than that of the castings at 1380 °C and
1450 °C. With the increase of pouring temperature, dendrite growth and grain growth
process in castings are advantageous and coarse grains are easy to form. At the same
Fig. 5.32 The relationship
between pouring temperature
and filling rate of K4169
alloy sheet casting202 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.33 Metallographic structure of thin-walled castings at different pouring temperatures
time, increasing pouring temperature to improve filling rate is not conducive to grain
refinement.
(2) The influence of shell temperature on filling rate and solidification structure of
thin-walled plate.
a. Filling rate of thin-walled plate
The characteristic parts of 1.5 mm K4169 alloy sheet were selected. The pouring flow
rate was 2 kg/s, the pouring temperature was 1450 °C, the shell temperature was 700,
800, and 900 °C, respectively. The experimental results were shown in Fig. 5.34. It
can be seen from the figure that with the increase of shell temperature, the filling rate is
obviously improved. When the pouring temperature is 900 °C, the filling rate reaches
100%.With the increase of the shell temperature, the solidification time of alloy liquid
at the main runner and the inner runner is prolonged, and the duration of the feeding
channel becomes longer, which is beneficial to the feeding of thin-walled castings
and reduces the formation of shrinkage holes in castings. This is basically consistent
with the simulation results, except that the pouring temperature needed to reach 100%
filling rate in numerical simulation is only 1380 °C but higher pouring temperature
is actually needed in experiments, which may be caused by deviation between the
Fig. 5.34 The effect of shell temperature on the filling rate5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 203
Fig. 5.35 Metallographic structure of thin-walled castings at different shell temperature
set parameters of shell thermal conductivity, ambient temperature, specific heat of
melt, and viscosity.
b. Solidification structure of thin-walled plate
For thin-walled castings under medium casting condition, the feature points on the
castings (located at 2 midpoint of Fig. 5.20) are selected to obtain the metallographic
structure as shown in Fig. 5.35. It can be clearly seen from the figure that the grain size
of the castings with the 900 °C preheating temperature of the shell is much larger than
that of the castings with the casting temperature of 700–800 °C. With the increase of
the shell preheating temperature, dendrite growth and grain growth processes in cast￾ings are facilitated and coarse grains are thus easy to form. It shows that in the casting
of high temperature alloy thin-walled castings, reducing the preheating temperature
of the shell is beneficial to grain refinement, but at the same time, incomplete filling
of the castings is easy to occur.
4. Filling and solidification process analysis of thin-walled castings.
(1) Analysis of surface tension and flow rate of liquid alloy in filling process of
thin-walled castings.
The stress analysis of the front end of the alloy liquid is carried out. As shown in
Fig. 5.36, the Laplace force produced by the surface tension σ is PL = 4 σ/δ (δ is
the wall thickness of the casting) and P is the differential pressure formed by the
alloy hydraulic head at the gate. In the filling process, if the resistance and gravity
of the casting and the alloy liquid are neglected, the resultant force of the front end
of the alloy liquid is P = P − 4σ/δ. For the front end of the alloy liquid at the
same height, P and σ are the same and the driving force of the alloy liquid filling is
mainly affected by the wall thickness. The smaller the wall thickness is, the smaller
the driving force is, and the more difficult the filling of liquid alloy is. This can explain
the filling rate of thin plates with different thickness sizes in Fig. 5.28. At the same
time, it can be concluded that increasing the pressure difference in the filling process
of liquid alloy is conducive to improving filling rate, which can be provided by the
counter-gravity pressure regulating casting technology. In addition, the formula of
liquid flow rate between thin-walled plates is given as Q = Wδ3
12η
∂P
∂x where W is the204 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.36 The force diagram
of the front end of alloy
liquid
width of thin-walled plates, δ is the thickness of castings, η is the viscosity of alloy
liquids, and ∂P
∂x is the pressure difference at the front end of alloy liquids [22]. Based
on this formula, it can be concluded that the thicker the thickness of thin plate, the
larger the filling flow rate of liquid alloy. Because the cooling speed of the sheet is
relatively high, especially the thickness and size of the sheet are too small, as shown
in Fig. 5.28b, it is easy for the alloy liquid to form laminated cold insulation defects.
(2) Analysis of heat transfer during solidification of thin-walled castings.
Because the thermal conductivity of ceramic mold is much smaller than that of K4169
alloy castings, and the wall thickness of the castings is larger than that of the castings,
the thermal resistance of the castings is much larger than that of the castings, and the
temperature gradient of the castings in solidification heat transfer is much larger than
that of the castings, which exceeds one or two orders of magnitude. The temperature
gradient in thin-walled castings can be neglected and the heat transfer during solidifi￾cation is mainly controlled by the thermal resistance of the casting. According to the
temperature distribution in the casting mold, the relationship between solidification
layer thickness M and time t is obtained by Fourier’s law [22]:
M = C
√
t5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 205
where C is the solidification constant. According to this formula, it can be seen
that the solidification thickness of thin-walled castings is proportional to the square
root of solidification time. The solidification constant C is affected by the physical
properties of the castings and metals, as well as the pouring temperature and the
initial temperature of the castings. For thin-walled castings, the smaller the wall
thickness is, the shorter the solidification time of castings, the shorter the filling time
and feeding time of liquid alloy, and more likely it is to cause insufficient pouring.
In conclusion, the main factors affecting the final filling volume of alloy liquid
in thin-walled castings are the thickness of thin-walled plate, filling speed, pressure
difference, pouring temperature, and mold temperature. To better facilitate the filling
of thin-wall casting alloy liquid per unit time, it is desired to have a larger thickness of
the thin plate, a faster filling speed, a greater pressure difference, and a higher pouring
temperature. Aiming at precise control of pouring temperature, it has become mature
in actual production. However, under the gravity condition, the pressure difference
is not easy to control, and under the impact of the alloy liquid in the pouring process,
the pressure is easy to fluctuate and the filling is unstable. In anti-gravity castings, the
filling pressure difference of the castings can be accurately controlled by adjusting the
gas pressure on the surface of the alloy liquid, so that the melt can be filled smoothly,
which is beneficial to the complete filling of thin-walled castings. In addition, the
pressure difference can be adjusted continuously during the solidification process of
the castings in pressure-regulated casting, which in theory benefits the melt feeding
in thin-walled castings and improves the solidification characteristics of the castings.
(3) Summary
The effects of different pouring temperature and shell preheating temperature
on filling, solidification cooling rate, and solidification structure of thin-walled
feature parts of K4169 high-temperature alloys with different thicknesses and sizes
were investigated by means of bottom-pouring investment casting under gravity
conditions. The results were then compared with the numerical simulations.
a. By adding thermocouples to different positions of the shell on the filling path
of the alloy liquid, not only the cooling condition of the shell and the casting
can be reflected, but also the filling speed of the alloy liquid can be calculated.
The cooling curve of the shell measured in the experiment is basically the same
as that obtained in the numerical simulation, which shows that the numerical
simulation can accurately reflect the cooling situation of the shell and the casting
points during the casting process.
b. Through comparative analysis of filling rate of thin-walled castings with different
thicknesses, it is found that when pouring at 1550 °C with a shell preheating
temperature of 900 °C, if the thickness of thin-walled plate is too small, it is easy
to solidify in some parts of the casting during filling and solidification, which is
not conducive to the complete filling of the castings.
c. The measurement results show that the pouring temperature and filling rate of
thin-walled samples basically hold a linear relationship. The higher the pouring206 J. Zhang et al.
temperature is, the higher the filling rate is. With the increase of the shell
temperature, the filling rate is also significantly improved.
d. The experimental results show that grain refinement and filling integrity are a pair
of technical contradictions. Therefore, systematic control of the pouring temper￾ature and shell temperature is the key to the casting process of high temperature
thin-walled castings.
5.3 Analysis of Solidification Microstructure Evolution
of Large Castings Using Synchrotron Radiation
The difficulty in filling and the shrinkage of thin-wall structures during gravity casting
have been long-lasting problems in the casting process. Although various pressure
casting methods have been successfully applied to mass production of thin-wall cast￾ings of light alloys [23, 24], the large complex thin-wall castings of high-temperature
alloy are still mainly produced by the traditional gravity casting. In general, the flowa￾bility of liquid metal can be increased by increasing the pouring temperature and shell
temperature, and the filling ability of thin-wall castings can be improved to a certain
extent by extending the solidification time. However, casting defects such as coarse
grains, shrinkage, porosity, and hot cracking, which can significantly reduce the
mechanical properties of castings, are more likely to be induced if using the above
methods. In previous studies, the effects of wall thickness, pouring temperature and
cooling rate on the microstructure of thin-wall castings have been fully explored.
The wall thickness has a great influence on the cooling rate. The cooling rate can
be sharply increased when reducing the wall thickness [25, 26], which reduces the
spacing of dendrite arms and the grain size. Studies have shown that the amount
of non-equilibrium eutectic will increase when the cooling rate is in the range of
0–1 K/s, while it will decrease when the cooling rate is in the range of 1–10 K/s
[27]. The grains are finer and more uniform at low superheat and grow nonlinearly
with increasing the temperature at medium superheat, which eventually changes to
a linear relationship with the temperature at high superheat [28].
Many methods are involved in the study of solidification structure on microscale.
The common methods include traditional metallographic experiment, transparent
organic alloy simulation, rapid cooling technology, computer simulation and in situ
synchrotron radiation X-ray imaging. Synchrotron radiation is a pulse light which
can be accurately controlled. It possesses many excellent properties such as contin￾uous spectrum from far infrared to X-ray, high intensity, high collimation, and high
polarization. Compared with other light sources, it has great advantages in many
frontier researches. Synchrotron radiation X-ray imaging is widely used in the study
of microstructure evolution during the solidification of metals since the appearance of
the third generation synchrotron radiation light source. Its advantages of in situ, real￾time, continuous fast imaging make it particularly suitable for the studies of dynamics
evolution. At present, researches on the alloy structure using synchrotron radiation5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 207
X-ray imaging are mainly focused on dendrite morphology and its growth kinetics,
solidification interface morphology, and its growth kinetics, phases in alloys, grains,
particle morphology and its growth kinetics, defect morphology and its evolution
dynamics, and so on.
The synchrotron radiation facilities in China include the first generation
synchrotron radiation source in Beijing, the second generation synchrotron radiation
source in Hefei, and the third generation synchrotron radiation source in Shanghai.
Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) was built and launched in 2009.
Its electron beam energy is 3.5Gev. It ranks the fourth in the world, following the
top three of Spring 8 in Japan (8Gev), APS (7Gev) in the United States, and ESRF
(6Gev) in the European Union. It can accommodate more than 60 line stations.
SSRF X-ray Imaging and Biomedical Application Beamline (BL13W1) is one of the
seven line stations built in the first batch. Imaging methods of microscopic computer
tomography, in-line phase contrast imaging and X-ray fluorescence imaging could be
provided for scientific researches in the fields of materials, paleontology, archaeology,
geophysics and so on.
5.3.1 Selection of Model Alloy and Preparation of Samples
for Synchrotron Radiation X-ray Imaging
For superalloys, owing to their high melting point, there are significantly strict
requirements for the experimental equipment. On the other hand, the composition
contrast of nickel-base alloys is small in solidification process. In order to obtain a
clear picture of the alloy structure, the incident light needs higher radiation inten￾sity and brightness. The current light source is difficult to achieve a short exposure
time, and a large time interval is unacceptable for the study of solidification process.
Therefore, a suitable model alloy is needed to replace K4169 alloy for the synchrotron
radiation X-ray imaging experiments.
The hypoeutectic Al-Cu alloy can be commonly used as the model alloy, due to
the following reasons.
(1) The melting point of the hypoeutectic Al-Cu alloy is lower, as shown in Fig. 5.37,
the temperature at the liquidus is in the range of 548–660 °C.
(2) The atomic weight of Cu is more than twice that of Al, so this alloy has a good
composition contrast.
(3) Both of the Al-Cu alloy and K4169 alloy are eutectic alloy. Above the liquidus,
the hypoeutectic Al-Cu alloy has only two phases of L + α, and the K4169 alloy
has two phases of L + γ. They have high similarity in solidification structure
and dendrite growth morphology, as shown in Figs. 5.37 and 5.38.
According to the features of typical thin-walled castings, two sample geometries
with wall thicknesses of 0.5 mm and widths of 2 mm and 5 mm were prepared.
As shown in Fig. 5.39, the Al-20 wt% Cu (melting point Tm = 600 °C) slice was
sandwiched by two Al2O3 sheets and sealed with a mixture of silica sol and Al2O3208 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.37 Phase diagram and solidification microstructure of the model alloy a Phase diagram of
Al-Cu alloy; b microstructure of the Al-20wt%Cu alloy
Fig. 5.38 Phase composition of K4169 alloy based on phase diagram by thermodynamic calculation
and thin-wall solidification structure. a Phase composition of K4169 alloy based on phase diagram
by thermodynamic calculation b thin-wall solidification structure
powders, which was then mounted on a U-tape quartz tube. The two quartz tube
branches were set along the two sides of the sample to permit cooling by passing
Ar gas through the tube. The X-ray radiography experiments were carried out in
a self-made vacuum resistance heating furnace. Before freezing, the samples were
heated to different beginning temperatures (BT) of 680, 700, 750, 800, and 850 °C,
respectively, in order to simulate different pouring temperatures and mold temper￾atures. After holding for 15 min at the BT to homogenize the melt, high-purity Ar
gas was introduced to the quartz tube from the bottom inlet at a constant flow rate of
8.51 m3 h−1 at 0.1 MPa pressure. The cooling rate was measured by an embedded
K-type thermocouple, as shown in Fig. 5.39.5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 209
Fig. 5.39 Schematic of the thin-walled sample and the cooling method
Fig. 5.40 The microstructure of the 2 mm sample under different beginning temperatures
The synchrotron X-ray phase contrast imaging experiments were performed at
BL13W of SSRF. The incident monochromatic X-ray energy used in all experiments
was 25 keV. The spatial resolution of all images was 7.4 × 7.4 μm2 pixel−1. The
exposure time for each frame was 0.5 s.
5.3.2 Dendrite Growth Kinetics
5.3.2.1 Dendrite Morphology at Thin-Walled Structure
Figure 5.40 shows the microstructure of the 2 mm sample, which consists of elongated
equiaxed grains. The dendritic arms intersect to form a dense network; the eutectic
phase is separated into a capillary network within the interdendritic spaces.210 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.41 Sequence of images showing the microstructural evolution of the 2 mm sample at
beginning temperatures of 680 °C or 800 °C
As shown in Fig. 5.41a, when solidification begins at 680 °C, equiaxed grains
nucleate at the chilled edges immediately after Ar gas is blown into the U-tape
quartz tube. Dendrite arms grow rapidly into elongated equiaxed grains towards
the center. Dendrite networks are formed in a few seconds, and the composition of
the residual interdendritic liquid approaches the eutectic point. Capillary channels of
characteristic sizes of 1–10μm are formed among the dense dendritic network. Under
the action of surface tension, this dense dendritic network prevents the melt from
flowing, which can then imped melt feeding from the neighboring areas. During the
solidification process, no obvious dendrite coarsening is observed. The solidification
structure is composed of elongated equiaxed grains.
When the initial solidification temperature increases to 800 °C, as shown in
Fig. 5.41b, the number of dendrites decreases significantly when grains nucleate
on the side wall. The dendrite arms of equiaxed grains extend from the sidewall
to the center to form elongated equiaxed grains. Generally speaking, the sidewall5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 211
Fig. 5.42 The microstructure of the 5 mm sample under different beginning temperatures. a 680 °C;
b 700 °C; c 750 °C; d 800 °C; e 850 °C
cooling has no effect on the central solidification for the 2 mm wall thickness spec￾imen. The starting temperature varies from 680 to 850 °C and the density of the
dendrite network does not change much.
At any beginning temperature, the structure of 5 mm thin-walled specimens is
completely composed of equiaxed grains (see Fig. 5.42). When solidification begins
at 680 °C (see Fig. 5.43a), a large number of fine equiaxed grains appear in a short
time from the sidewall to the center. Dendrite networks are so dense that the mush
zone is not large enough for feeding. When solidification begins at less than 750 °C,
the solidification structure is dense equiaxed grains (see Fig. 5.42a–b).
However, when solidification begins at more than 750 °C (see Fig. 5.43b), small
equiaxed grains formed in the central region of the sample float up under buoyancy.
Due to wall thickness, the cooling rate of specimen decreases, leading to a decrease in
the density of dendrite network and an increase in the dendrite gap. Obvious eutectic
zone can be seen (see Fig. 5.42c). When solidification begins at 800 °C, the dendrite
network becomes loose and large eutectic zones appear between the dendrites (see
Fig. 5.42d). When solidification begins at 850 °C, a large eutectic zone appears in
the center of the middle-lower part of the sample (see Fig. 5.42e). The solidification
structure of the 5 mm thin-walled specimens is greatly affected by the beginning
temperature: with the increase of the beginning temperature, the dendrite network
becomes loose gradually, and the eutectic structure gradually aggregates and join
into a large area in the center.212 J. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5.43 Sequence of images showing the microstructural evolution of the 5 mm sample at a
beginning temperature of 680 °C or 850 °C
The coarsening of dendrites can be caused by a slow solidification rate. Nucleation
still starts from the sidewall, and the dendrite growth toward the center is delayed by
the high temperature melt in the center. As mentioned previously, unlike the 2 mm
thin-walled specimens, the solidification structure of the 5 mm thin-walled specimens
is more sensitive to the initial melt temperature.
5.3.2.2 Thermal and Solute Fields
The microstructure morphology was found to mainly depend on the distribution of
thermal and solute fields. As mentioned above, the solidification microstructure of the
2 mm samples contains elongated grains. In contrast, the solidification microstructure
of the 5 mm samples contains normally shaped equiaxed grains.
Samples are extracted from the thin-walled structures, in which the heat dissipa￾tion occurring in the experiments along the direction perpendicular to the samples
is presumed to be equal to zero. With the vacuum environment of the experimental
setup, convective heat transfer on the samples’ surfaces can be set to zero. The Ar
gas cooling on both sides of the samples similarly renders the radiative heat transfer
to the sample surface negligible.
In general, the profile of the eutectic front is considered to be an isotherm because
eutectic has a fixed melting point. In our experiments, the shape of the eutectic
front is elucidated by the image subtraction method, as shown in Fig. 5.44a and b,
outlining the isothermal line of the cross-section of sample. The concave eutectic
profile indicates that the temperature at the center exceeds that of the sides, and a5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 213
Fig. 5.44 The eutectic front of the two geometries of thin-walled samples: a 2 mm sample; b 5 mm
sample; c Schematic of symmetrized isotherm
horizontal thermal gradient (GH > 0) exists from the side to the center. As the slope
along the isotherm varies continuously, the horizontal temperature gradient at each
point is different.
The effect of wall thickness on the temperature gradient of sidewall/center and
solidification time difference can be visually displayed by analyzing the cross-section
of the sample. If the solidification velocity of the solid phase is Vs, the concave
depth of isotherm is H, the cooling rate is Rc, and the wall thickness is W, then the
temperature difference from the surface to center (T) is:
T = RcH
Vs
(5.4)
The average horizontal temperature gradient GH is
GH = 2T
W (5.5)
The difference td in solidification time between the sidewall melt and the center
melt is
td = T
Rc
(5.6)
Table 5.6 shows that GH increases with increasing BT. Moreover, thinner walls
correlate to smaller GH values.
For the 2 mm sample, the Rc is relatively large, the GH is very small, and the td is
approximately 0.016–0.054 s, implying that the chilling effect influences the entire
section across the sample. In addition, the growth rate of the primary dendritic arms
with priority exceeds 1 mm s−1, indicating that the quick formation of the dendritic
network can form quickly and the dendrite network formation time is small (DNFT).
For the 5 mm sample, GH increases as Rc decreases. For BT of 800 °C or less, the
td is approximately 1.172–4.568 s. The melt near the sides solidifies first, and the
dendrites grow stepwise towards the central region (the growth rate of the dendritic214 J. Zhang et al.
Table 5.6 Rc, T, and GH of different beginning temperatures (BT) for the two geometries of
thin-walled samples
BT/ °C W = 2 mm W = 5 mm
Rc/Ks−1 T/ K GH / K mm−1 Rc/Ks−1 T/ K GH / K mm−1
680 2.48 0.0405 0.0405 1.68 1.9691 0.7876
700 2.08 0.0416 0.0416 1.04 2.1956 0.8782
750 1.49 0.0433 0.0433 0.69 3.1516 1.2606
800 1.16 0.0458 0.0458 0.50 3.8519 1.5408
850 0.87 0.0472 0.0472 0.33 5.1458 2.0583
arms with priority is approximately 200 μm s−1). Newly formed equiaxed dendrites
appear in the supercooled melt in front of the dendrite tips and the final solidified
microstructure consists of coarse equiaxed grains. As the BT reaches 850 °C, Rc
decreases dramatically, GH increases dramatically, and td reaches 15.593 s. The
newly formed equiaxed grains in the center float up as the structure solidifies because
of their lower density. Cu becomes concentrated after the formation and floating of
the equiaxed dendrites and during the dendrite coarsening process, which leads to
the formation of a bulk eutectic area at the center.
5.3.2.3 Influence of Wall Thickness on Filling and Feeding Abilities
The limiting factor in the production of thin-walled castings is the complete filling
and feeding of the thin-walled features. Increasing the pouring temperature and
mold temperature is a technique that has been widely used in the industry. The
dense dendritic network forming seriously impedes the melt flow and causes tiny
intercrystalline voids. With a wall thickness of 2 mm, simply increasing the pouring
temperature and mold temperature coarsens the microstructure and causes the aggre￾gation of the eutectic phase, both of which degrade the performance of cast alloys.
Here, the solidification process of the thin-walled structures is investigated deeply
to identify the factors which most greatly affect the filling and feeding process.
(1) Filling pressure and feeding pressure
The molten alloy is well known to be subjected to the viscous force F and Laplace
pressure P imposed by the mold’s inner surface during the pouring and filling
processes,
F = ηS
dv
dx (5.7)
where η is the kinematic viscosity coefficient of the melt, S is the contact area between
two flow layers, and dv/dx is the velocity gradient. η is closely associated with the5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 215
temperature; it decreases with increasing the melt temperature. F is independent of
the wall thickness.
P = 4σ
W (5.8)
where σ is the surface tension coefficient of the melt, which is determined by the
wetting relationship of the molten alloy and the mold wall. W is the wall thickness
of the casting, as established in the Introduction. P increases with decreasing W.
For thin-walled castings, properly increasing the pouring temperature, improving
the quality of the mold cavity’s surface, and imposing pressure can all facilitate the
filling process.
Upon the formation of dendrites, the space left for the melt decreases and the
resistance force increases accordingly. As the dendrites impinge upon each other,
the interdendritic space forms a capillary network. Under this condition, the flow of
the melt depends on the pressure gradient in the melt; the relationship between these
properties can be presented by the following equations.
When the molten alloy flows in the interdendritic space driven by a pressure P,
the maximum flow velocity V1 can be expressed using Darcy’s law:
V1 = k
η fl
∇ P (5.9)
where k is the permeability of the melt, fl is the liquid fraction, and ∇ P is the pressure
gradient. The velocity component of the molten alloy’s solidification shrinkage is
assumed to be V2, defined as:
V2 = Rc
GH
β (5.10)
where β is the solidification shrinkage rate. This represents the minimum velocity
of the melt necessary to accommodate solidification shrinkage. According to (5.8)
and (5.9), if V1 ≥ V2, microshrinkage will not form.
The microshrinkage-free conditions can be obtained by combining Eqs. (5.8) and
(5.9), which leads to
∇ P ≥ η fl Rc
kGH
β (5.11)
The relative ratios of ∇ P were calculated according to Table 5.6 for the two
sample geometries. For the 2 mm sample, the ratios of ∇ P were:
∇ P680 ◦C : ∇ P700 ◦C : ∇ P750 ◦C : ∇ P800 ◦C : ∇ P850 ◦C
= 1 : 0.817 : 0.562 : 0.414 : 0.301216 J. Zhang et al.
By comparison, the ratios of ∇ P for the 5 mm sample were:
∇ P680◦C : ∇ P700◦C : ∇ P750◦C : ∇ P800◦C : ∇ P850◦C = 1 : 0.556 : 0.257 : 0.152 : 0.075
The ratios between the feeding pressure of the 2 mm sample and the feeding
pressure of the 5 mm sample were:
∇ P2mm : ∇ P5mm|680◦C = 28.707
∇ P2mm : ∇ P5mm|700◦C = 42.221
∇ P2mm : ∇ P5mm|750◦C = 62.868
∇ P2mm : ∇ P5mm|800◦C = 78.049
∇ P2mm : ∇ P5mm|850◦C = 114.967
Increasing the BT can reduce the feeding pressure to some extent, making the
feeding process easier for thicker-walled structures. Decreasing the wall thickness is
vital for the success of the filling and feeding processes; this effect may increase by
orders of magnitude with minimal decreases in wall thickness.
(2) Filling time and feeding time
Filling and feeding are the two key stages for a successful casting. The filling ability
of a certain alloy at the thinnest part of the mold relates simultaneously to the pouring
temperature, mold temperature, and mold inner-surface properties. As all the mold￾related factors are defined in a given casting, the factor left to manipulate is the pouring
temperature. For high-quality castings, feeding must be specifically considered in
the design of the mold’s gating system. With hypoeutectic alloys, the solidification
process can be divided into two stages, i.e., dendrite formation and eutectic phase
solidification. Image analysis shows that the casting molding of thin-walled castings
can be divided into effective filling stage and eutectic phase solidification stage using
the formation of the dendritic network as a dividing point. The stage before dendritic
network formation is the effective filling stage. The dendrite network formation time
(DNFT) is equivalent to the effective filling time (for thin-walled castings). Then the
stage from the dendritic network formation to the “eutectic phase solidification” is
defined as the feeding period. Therefore, the feeding time (FT) is defined as the time
interval after DNFT and prior to freezing.
Figure 5.45a shows the DNFT of the two geometries of thin-walled samples at
different BT values. The experimental data can be described through fitting into the
exponential function y = axn. The magnitude of the exponent n reflects the sensitivity
of the DNFT to BT. When BT increases from 660 to 850 °C, the DNFT of 2 mm
samples increases by only a factor of 2.14; in contrast, the DNFT of 5 mm samples
increases by a factor of 6.36. Compared to the 5 mm sample geometry, the DNFT of
the 2 mm sample is less sensitive to BT.
Under the same conditions, the FT of the 2 mm sample increases by a factor
of 3.21 as BT increases, and by a factor of 4.5 for the 5 mm sample, as shown in5 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 217
Fig. 5.45 The different solidification stages’ dependence on the beginning temperature for the two
geometries of thin-walled samples. a Dendrite network forming time (DNFT); b feeding time (FT);
c ratios of FT/DNFT; and d ratios of DNFT5 mm/DNFT2 mm and FT5 mm/FT2 mm
Fig. 5.45b. For the 2 mm sample, in general, the sensitivity of FT to BT is stronger
than that of DNFT. For the 5 mm sample, the sensitivity of DNFT to BT is stronger
than that of FT.
This characteristics can be presented using the ratio of FT/DNFT for each sample
geometry at each BT, as shown in Fig. 5.45c. The ratio of FT/DNFT of the 2 mm
sample increases with increasing TB, but the ratio of the 5 mm sample decreases with
increasing BT. This indicates that even infinite increase in the pouring temperature
for a 2 mm thin-walled part will not improve the filling ability.
Figure 5.45d shows that the ratio of DNFT between the two geometries of samples
increases rapidly with increasing BT. However, the ratio of FT between the two
sample geometries remains constant with increasing BT. This indicates that the filling
time is sensitive to the wall thickness of castings and decreasing the wall thickness
will sharply reduce the filling ability.
As a result, increasing theBT alone cannot sufficiently improve the filling ability of
thin-walled castings. Limited by the heat resistance of the mold and the refinement
of the microstructure, the pre-heating temperature of the mold cannot be raised
arbitrarily. Castings with thin-walled parts would be of better quality if filled during
the “melt” stage. In other words, thin features require rapid filling. Increasing the
pouring temperature to promote the completion of the filling process before the218 J. Zhang et al.
formation of dendritic network is useful to gravity casting. However, achieving this
condition is quite difficult for a large and complex thin-walled casting. Therefore,
maintaining a high hydraulic pressure to facilitate the flow of the melt through the
interdendritic capillary network is necessary.
References
1. G.A. Knorovsky, M.J. Cieslak, T.J. Headley et al., Inconel 718: A solidification diagram. Metall.
Trans. A 20, 2149–2158 (1989)
2. M.J. Cieslak, T.J. Headley, G.A. Knorovsky et al., A comparison of the solidification behavior
of Incoloy 909 and Inconel718. Metall. Trans. A 21, 479–488 (1990)
3. Y.H. Xiong, A.M. Yang, P.J. Li et al., Investigation on grain structure refinement of superalloy
K4169. J. Aeronautical Mater. 21(3), 24–28 (2001)
4. T. Antonsson, H. Fredriksson, The effect of cooling rate on the solidification of Inconel718.
Metallurgical Mater. Trans. B 36, 85–96 (2005)
5. G.L. Wang, C.W. Wu, M.C. Zhang et al., The microanalysis of precipitation behavior of α-Cr
in Inconel 718. Rare Metal Mater. Eng. 31(1), 37–40 (2002)
6. E.V. Kolotukhin, G.V. Tyagunov, Crystallization of superalloys with various contents of carbon.
J. Mater. Process. Technol. 53, 219–227 (1995)
7. L. Liu, B.L. Zhen, A. Banerji, W. Reif, F. Sommer, Effect of melt homogenization temperature
on the cast structures of IN 738 LC superalloy. Scr. Metall. Mater. 30, 593–598 (1994)
8. F.S. Yin, X.F. Sun, J.G. Li, H.R. Guan, Z.Q. Hu, Effects of melt treatment on the cast structure
of M963 superalloy. Scripta Mater. 48, 425–429 (2003)
9. F.S. Yin, X.F. Sun, H.R. Guan, Z.Q. Hu, Effect of thermal history on the liquid structure of a
cast nickel-base superalloy M963. J. Alloy. Compd. 364, 225–228 (2004)
10. O.S. Roik, O.V. Samsonnikov, V.P. Kazimirov et al., Short and medium-range order in liquid
binary Al-Ni and Al-Co alloys. J. Mol. Liq. 145, 129–134 (2009)
11. J.B. Ma, S.H. Chen, Y.B. Dai et al., The local structure of molten Ni1−x Alx: An ab initio
molecular dynamics study. J. Non-Cryst. Solids 425, 11–19 (2015)
12. J.B. Ma. The local structure of molten Ni-based alloy: An ab initio molecular dynamics
study[D]. (Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2015)
13. P.J. Zhou, J.J. Yu, X.F. Sun, H.R. Guan, Z.Q. Hu, The role of boron on a conventional nickel￾based superalloy. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 491, 159–163 (2008)
14. Y.L. Tsai, S.F. Wang, H.Y. Bor, Y.F. Hu, Effects of Zr addition on the microstructure and
mechanical behavior of a fine-grained nickel-based superalloy at elevated temperatures. Mater.
Sci. Eng. A 607, 294–301 (2014)
15. J. Zhang, R.F. Singer, Effect of Zr and B on castability of Ni-based superalloy IN792.
Metallurgical Mater. Trans. A 35, 1337–1342 (2004)
16. K.C. Antony, J.F. Radavich, Solute effects of boron and zirconium on microporosity. Proceed￾ings of the third international symposium on superalloy 1976, (Claitor Publishing, Warrendale,
PA, 1976) pp. 137–146
17. W. Zhou, L. Liu, Z.Q. Jie et al., Effect of element B on fluidity and microporosity of K4169
superalloy. Rare Metal Mater. Eng. 43(12), 3082–3088 (2014)
18. L. Liu, T.W. Huang, Y.H. Xiong, A.M. Yang, Z.L. Zhao, R. Zhang, J.S. Li, Grain refinement
of superalloy k4169 by addition of refiners: cast structure and refinement mechanisms. Mater.
Sci. Eng. A 394, 1–8 (2005)
19. F. Wang, J. Zhang, T.W. Huang, L. Liu, H.Z. Fu, Preparation of inoculants used in superalloy
and analysis of the atomic matching models. J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 29, 387–392 (2013)
20. Z.Q. Jie, J. Zhang, T.W. Huang, H.J. Su, Y.F. Li, L Liu, W.C. Yang, H.Z. Fu, Enhanced grain
refinement and porosity control of the polycrystalline superalloy by a modified thermally￾controlled solidification. (Advanced Engineering Materials, 2016) pp. 1–75 Filling and Solidification Process Control of Large Castings 219
21. G.Y. An, Theory of Casting Forming [M] (China Machine Press, Beijing, 1990).
22. B.N. Lin, Z.J. Wei, Transfer Principles of Metal Hot Forming [M] (Harbin Institute of
Technology Press, Harbin, 2000).
23. M.R. Ghomashchi, A. Vikhrov, Squeeze casting: an overview. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 101,
1–9 (2000)
24. M. Wang, J.M. Zeng, W.D. Huang, Adjusted pressure casting technique for precision casting
of large-scale complicated & thin-wall components. Foundry Technol. 25(5), 353–358 (2004)
25. S.W. Kim, G. Durrant, J.H. Lee, B. Cantor, The effect of die geometry on the microstructure
of indirect squeeze cast and gravity die cast 7050 (Al-6.2Zn-2.3Cu-2.3Mg) wrought Al alloy.
J. Mater. Sci. 34, 1873–1883
26. K.M. Pedersen, J.H. Hattel, N. Tiedje, Numerical modelling of thin-walled hypereutectic ductile
cast iron parts. Acta Mater. 54, 5103–5114 (2006)
27. D. Eskin, Q. Du, D. Ruvalcaba, L. Katgerman, Experimental study of structure formation in
binary Al-Cu alloys at different cooling rates. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 405, 1–10 (2005)
28. J.B. Ferguson, T.K. Meysam, C.M. John, K.R. Pradeep, K. Cho, C.S. Kim, Predicting the effect
of pouring temperature on the crystallite density, remelting, and crystal growth kinetics in the
solidification of aluminum alloys. Metallurgical Mater. Trans. B 45, 1407–1417 (2014)Chapter 6
Prediction and Control of Casting
Defects in Large Castings
Jun Wang, Haiyan Gao, Xinhua Tang, Maodong Kang, and Yang Zhou
There are several characteristics of casting components with large scales: large shape
size, complex structures, large wall thickness variations, many locations of varying
sections and large portion of thin-wall area. In the process of casting, shrinkage
cavity, shrinkage porosity, inclusion, cold separation, and other casting defects are
easy to form, which seriously reduce the quality of castings and even lead to the
waste of castings, limiting the development of high-performance aero-engine. The
key to the development of large scale aero-engine castings contains the detection
technology of casting defects, the quantitative prediction of casting defects, and the
control and repair technologies of casting defects in large castings.
6.1 Detection Methods for Defects of Large Castings
6.1.1 Requirements of Castings Pre-treatment
X-ray detection method is mainly used to examine the existence of cracks, holes,
inclusions, and other defects in the casting. Before radiographic examinations, the
casting must undergo necessary pre-treatment. First, the sprue and riser of casting
needs to be cut off and polished. Secondly, the shell material on the surface of
castings must be removed to avoid their interference on the radiographic inspection
and identification. Finally, the surface quality of castings must be acceptable through
visual inspection.
6.1.2 Selection of X-ray Detection Technology
Considering conventional methods to perform nondestructive testing for large cast￾ings, the tube voltage should be maintained as low as possible to reduce X-ray
© Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
B. Sun et al., Precision Forming Technology of Large Superalloy Castings for Aircraft
Engines, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-6220-8_6
221222 J. Wang et al.
energy and meanwhile high enough to keep X-ray penetrating. Under this condition,
the absorption capacity of the irradiated casting is enhanced, which can increase the
black and white contrast of the defective and non-defective parts, thus improving the
sensitivity of the negative film. The contrast of X-ray negative film is related to the
type of film. The film commonly used for conventional industrial testing is AGFAC7
film manufactured by the GE company. The researchers compared the difference
in the effect of various types of films on the nondestructive testing by selecting
AGFAC7 and AGFAD3 specifications (AGFAC7:G3, medium grain size film and
AGFAD3:G1, particle size film). For thin-wall parts, high sensitivity AGFAD3 nega￾tive film is used to improve the resolution and reduce the omission ratio, as shown
in Fig. 6.1a. As the thickness of components increasing, the difficulty in detecting
minor defects increases, and the difference in detection ability between the two types
of films decreases, as shown in Fig. 6.1b. The selection principles of negative film of
large casting are as follows. The highly sensitive negative film is used for thin-wall
AGFAC7 (regular) AGFAD3(high sensitivity) 
(a) 
porosity 
porosity
AGFAC7 
AGFAD3 
(b) 
Fig. 6.1 Film for the nondestructive testing (AGFAC7 and AGFAD3)6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 223
parts to improve the detection accuracy, whereas the traditional film is used for thick
parts to reduce the cost.
6.1.3 Optimization of X-ray Detection Technology for Large
Castings
In order to overcome the shortcomings of the existing X-ray nondestructive testing
technology for large castings, researchers developed an X-ray testing tooling and
a testing method for round castings to reduce the omission ratio of casting defects
and to improve the stability of testing process, as shown in Fig. 6.2. The method
includes translation, turnover, rotation, and expansion devices. The method is to
adjust the turning bracket to the horizontal state by adjusting the turning handle and
locking the locating pin of the driven gear to fix the turning bracket. Placing the
casting to be tested horizontally on the main and driven pulley, and adjusting the
length of telescopic boom so that the main and driven pulley fix the casting to be
tested from 4 directions to the flip bracket. Pulling the tooling base to the bottom
of the X-ray detection probe, and locking the universal wheel through the universal
wheel lock buckle. Opening the driven gear locating pin, shaking the turning handle
to adjust the turning bracket to the predetermined detection angle, and locking the
driven gear locating pin. Opening the lock of the active pulley, rotating the casting
to be tested to the predetermined detection site by shaking the handle of the active
Fig. 6.2 X-ray testing
tooling for round castings224 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.3 Omniscan MX UT ultrasonic testing system
pulley, and locking the lock of the active pulley. Opening the probe for imaging and
film examination, and repeating the above operation to complete the 100% all-round
X-ray film examination of the complex ring precision casting.
6.1.4 Exploration of New Nondestructive Testing Methods
For the thick bulk of large complex thin-walled castings, it is difficult to determine
the depth of defects using the traditional X-ray detection. Ultrasonic phased array
technology refers to the interaction between ultrasonic wave and casting, which is
a technology of detecting macroscopic defects, measuring geometric characteris￾tics, detecting and characterizing the changes of organization structure and mechan￾ical properties based on the research of reflected, transmitted, and scattered waves.
It has significant advantages in the detection of thick parts of large castings. For
example, the phased array ultrasonic imaging system developed based on FPGA
(Field Programmable Gate Away) has a minimum delay of 20 ms and a detection
depth of 60 mm. The Omniscan MX UT ultrasonic testing equipment is shown in
Fig. 6.3.
6.2 Anatomy and Defect Analysis of Large Castings
In engineering practice, loose defects can be divided into macroscopic shrinkage
cavity and microscopic porosity according to their size [1]. The former is a fine pore
shrinkage that can be seen with naked eyes or a magnifying glass, whereas the latter6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 225
corresponds to the gathered or dispersed fine pores observed using a microscope
[2, 3]. The traditional X-ray nondestructive testing technology can only evaluate
in general the distribution of macroscopic shrinkage cavity and porosity defects,
cracks, inclusions, and other defects in the casting. It is impossible to accurately
conduct distribution of the micro-loose in the casting which is closely related to the
mechanical properties. Micro-porosity defects reduce not only the compactness of
the structure of large complex thin-walled castings, but also the mechanical properties
of the castings under service conditions, in particular, the fatigue properties [4–7],
resulting in the reduction in service life of components. Therefore, it is necessary
to conduct ontological anatomy of the castings to get the information of internal
defects.
Taking a certain type of rear casing casting as an example, the basic steps and
defect analysis methods of anatomy of large castings are illustrated in the following.
Firstly, the anatomical location is determined according to the structural charac￾teristics of the casting, including the main bearing parts of the casting (lifting lugs,
internal and external flanges, small boss et al.) and thin-wall parts with large area (the
outer circumferential torus and support plate). Under a metallographic microscope
with 100 magnification, the area percentage of micro-porosity defects in the area of
1 mm * 1 mm at the most severe position of micro-porosity defects is expressed as
the micro-porosity index (MPI), and the metallographic pictures of different defect
levels are shown in Fig. 6.4.
Due to the difference of solidification conditions in each parts of casting, the
micro-porosity index of large castings varies greatly. The micro-porosity distribution
of sampling at the lifting lug is shown in Fig. 6.5. It can be seen that the micro-porosity
index at the final solidification site of the lifting lug reaches 5.93 due to insufficient
riser feeding at the large lifting lug with a thickness of 23 mm.
A total of 107 samples were prepared for rear casing casting, 33 of which had
a micro-porosity index higher than 1. Nine samples were prepared from the thick
section of the 33 samples, accounting for 27.3% of the total. There were 12 samples
from the section of variable section, accounting for 36.4% of the total. There were 12
samples in the thin-wall parts with thickness less than 3 mm, accounting for 36.4%
of the total. It can be seen that the overall micro-porosity index of the thick parts of
turbine rear frame (TRF) castings is relatively small. However, many micro-porosity
defects existing in the variable-area parts and thin-walled parts with large area are
one of the bottleneck problems that restricts the manufacturing of large and complex
thin-walled TRF castings.
6.3 Structural Effects of Casting Defects
The structure of large castings is different and its local cooling conditions are also
different, which leads to a great difference in microstructure of castings. The analysis
of internal defects of a TRF casting shows that there is no apparent relationship226 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.4 Optical image of the micro-porosity and corresponding micro-porosity index (MPI). a MPI
= 0, b MPI = 0.5, c MPI = 1, d MPI = 2, e MPI = 4, f MPI = 5
between the micro-porosity index and the structural thickness of the casting, as
shown in Fig. 6.6.
However, there is an obvious relationship between the micro-porosity index and
the section thickness ratio (the ratio of sectional area to thickness) of the local struc￾ture of the casting, as shown in Fig. 6.7. When the ratio of the section and thickness
is less than 1000:1, the micro-porosity index is larger, indicating that the micro￾porosity defects are easy to form in the thick part of the casting. With the increase
of this ratio, the micro-porosity index decreases gradually. As a result, this section￾to-thickness ratio is inversely proportional to the micro-porosity index where it is
ranging from 1000:1 to 6000:1. However, when this ratio increases continuously to
10,000:1, a large number of micro-porosity defects appear again in large complex
thin-wall castings.
Figure 6.8 shows the relationship between the micro-porosity index and the
thermal-modulus of large complex thin-walled castings. The thermal-modulus of
castings is mainly between 0.3 and 0.9 mm and the micro-porosity index decreases
with the increase of the thermal modulus.6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 227
Fig. 6.5 Micro-porosity inside the lifting lug of the frame
Fig. 6.6 Relationship
between the micro-porosity
index and the thickness
0 10 20 30
0
2
4
6
Thickness/mm 
MPI 
6.4 Micro-porosity Defects in Large Castings
With the increasing demand of the high-quality advanced equipment, it is neces￾sary to reduce the internal defects of castings, especially the micro-porosity defects.228 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.7 Relationship
between the micro-porosity
index and the section
thickness ratio
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
0
2
4
6
Section thickness ratio 
MPI 
Fig. 6.8 Relationship
between the micro-porosity
index and the
thermal-modulus
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Thermal-modulus/mm 
MPI 
With the development of solidification theory and computer simulation capability
[8], mathematical modeling and quantitative prediction of micro-porosity become
possible.
6.4.1 Quantitative Prediction of Micro-porosity
Carlson K. et al. proposed a dimensionless micro-porosity criterion model based on
the classical Niyama criterion, which could predict the total micro-porosity volume
fraction formed in the solidification process only by knowing the temperature curve
of solid phase fraction and the total shrinkage rate of the alloy. The prediction results6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 229
of WCB steel and AZ91D magnesium alloy were in good agreement with the exper￾imental results [9]. Based on the dimensionless Niyama micro-porosity criterion and
by considering the trace gas precipitation, quantitative prediction of micro-porosity
of thin-wall parts of high-temperature alloy castings can be achieved.
6.4.1.1 Mathematical Model of Thin-Wall Micro-porosity Prediction
From the simulation of casting temperature field, it can be seen that the thin￾wall part of casting has the characteristics of near-directional solidification. There￾fore, a dimensionless micro-porosity prediction function can be derived using one￾dimensional directional solidification model. Darcy’s law of the system can be
expressed as follows:
f1V1 = −KdP
(μdx) (6.1)
where, f 1 is the liquid volume fraction, V1 is the liquid rate (shrinkage rate) in the
solid/liquid two-phase region (paste region), μ is the dynamic viscosity of the alloy,
P is melt pressure, and x is the spatial coordinate. Permeability K in the solid–liquid
two-phase region is determined by the Kozeny-Carman relationship:
K = λ2 f 3
1

(180(1 − f1)) (6.2)
where λ2 is the secondary dendrite spacing for the alloy.
The liquid and solid densities of the alloy are assumed to remain constant
throughout the solidification process. In this way, the total solidification shrinkage
of the alloy can be defined using the density, β = (ρs − ρ1)

ρ1. Then, the one￾dimensional mass conservation equation is simplified by using β. Through integral
calculation, it can be known that the contraction rate of the solid–liquid two-phase
region is constant, which can be expressed as V1 = −βL, where L is the solidification
rate. In addition, L can be expressed in terms of temperature gradient G

dT
dx
and cooling rate R

dT
dt
N, which allows the solidification contraction rate of the
solid–liquid two-phase region to be expressed as:
V1 = −βR

G (6.3)
After substituting Eqs. (6.3) into (6.2), we get:
d P
dx = μβR f1

(K G) (6.4)
As seen from Fig. 6.9, with the increase of solid phase fraction during solidifi￾cation, the melt pressure in the paste region will drop from liquid phase pressure
Pliq to a critical pressure Pcr, under which a micro-porosity defect will be formed.
Here, the critical pressure drop (value of liquid pressure minus critical pressure) is
defined as Pcr = Pliq − Pcr, where the liquid pressure is the sum of the system230 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.9 Schematic view of
the mushy zone during
solidification
environmental pressure and the partial liquid pressure; while the critical pressure is
related to the pressure balance when pores exist in a stable manner. The balance can
be expressed by Young–Laplace equation, Pcr = Pp – Pσ , where Pp is the internal
pressure and Pσ is capillary pressure. The capillary pressure can be calculated using
Pσ = 2σ/r0, where σ is the surface tension between micro-pores and surrounding
liquid. r0 is the initial radius of curvature when micro-porosity forms, which relates
to the thermo-physical properties, size, and local geometrical features of the micro￾porosity. For the pure solidification contraction without gas solubility in metal, the
internal pressure (generated only by the vapor of alloy elements) can be neglected.
Thus, the Young–Laplace equation can be simplified as6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 231
Pcr = −Pσ = −2σ/r0 (6.5)
From Eq. (6.5), it can be seen that the critical pressure is negative. During the
formation of micro-porosity, the surface tension has to be overcome firstly. Assuming
that the dynamic viscosity, temperature gradient, and cooling rate keep constant
during the formation of micro-porosity, we then integrate Eq. (6.4) from the critical
point to liquid zone, which leads to the following equation:
Pcr =

Pliq
Pcr
d P =

0
xcr
μβR f1
K G
dx =

Tliq
Tcr
μβR f1
K G
dx
dT
dT = μβR
G2

1
f1,cr
f1
K
d R
d f1
d f1
(6.6)
where xcr,Tcr, and f l,cr correspond to the position, temperature, and liquid phase
fraction, respectively, when the micro-porosity starts to form as the pressure decreases
to Pcr.
In order to normalize the integral value obtained from Eq. (6.6), a dimensionless
temperature θ is introduced as θ = (T − Tsol)/ΔTf , where ΔTf = Tliq − Tsol is
the temperature range of solidification, Tliq is the liquidus temperature, and Tsol is
the temperature at which the alloy solidifies completely. Meanwhile, substituting
Eq. (6.2) into (6.1), we can obtain:
Pcr = μβTf
λ2
2
R
G2 I

f1,cr  (6.7)
where
I

f1,cr 
=

1
f1,cr
180 (1 − f1)
2
f 2
1
dθ
d f1
d f1 (6.8)
The integral value in Eq. (6.8) can be calculated according to the solid phase￾temperature curve obtained from the thermo-physical properties of the alloys. The
square root of I (f l,cr) is defined as dimensionless Niyama criterion value (N∗
y ). After
rearranging Eq. (6.7), a new equation can be obtained:
N∗
y =

I

f1,cr 
= Gλ2
√Pcr μβTf R (6.9)
This dimensionless Niyama criterion considers not only the thermodynamic and
kinetic conditions for solidification (crystallization temperature range ΔTf , temper￾ature gradient G and cooling rate R) but also the thermo-physical properties of alloys
(the dynamic viscosity μ, overall solidification shrinkage ratio β) and the critical
pressure decrease ΔPcr at solid–liquid two-phase region. Assuming that during the232 J. Wang et al.
formation of the micro-porosity, local liquid flow will be ceased. Then the final micro￾porosity index f p is related to the liquid phase fraction f l,cr under critical pressure,
which can be expressed as:
fp = β fl,cr (6.10)
The advantage of this dimensionless criterion lies in that the micro-porosity index
can be quantified with the given solidification conditions and thermo-physical prop￾erties. According to Eqs. (6.7) to (6.10), the micro-porosity index can be expressed
as a function of the dimensionless Niyama value. For specific alloys, the dimension￾less Niyama value can be directly obtained from local solidification parameters and
thermo-physical properties of the alloys:
N∗
y = Gλ2
√Pcr μβTf R (6.11)
After the determination of the dimensionless Niyama value, the micro-porosity
index can be obtained from the N∗
y − f p function; besides, the spacing of secondary
dendrites λ2 can be quantitatively calculated using Fisher and Kurz’s theory:
λ2 = CλR−1/3 (6.12)
where Cλ is a constant that depends on the alloy system and can be acquired via
experimental fitting results.
6.4.1.2 Quantitative Prediction Functions for Micro-porosity in K4169
Superalloy Castings
During the prediction for dimensionless micro-porosity, thermo-physical calcula￾tion software package JMatPro is employed to calculate the thermo-physical prop￾erty parameters, including melt density-temperature curve, solid phase fraction￾temperature curve, melt dynamic viscosity, and crystallization temperature intervals,
etc. Then the functional relationship between the dimensionless Niyama value and
the micro-porosity index is deduced according to equations from (6.7) to (6.10).
The relationship between the temperature and solid phase fraction in K4169 super￾alloy calculated using JMatPro software is presented in Fig. 6.10. In order to simplify
the calculations, the relationship curve of dimensionless temperature and liquid phase
fraction is shown in Fig. 6.11.
Polynomial fitting is performed using the data curves to obtain the gradient in
Fig. 6.11. According to the structural features, the fitting is divided into 4 sections
on the curve. The results are shown as dotted lines in Fig. 6.11 and listed in Table
6.1. According to the fitting equations, the expression for dθ/df 1 can be obtained and
is then substituted it into Eq. (6.8), which leads to a 4-segment integral formula. In6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 233
Fig. 6.10 Relationship
between the solid fraction
and temperature
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
1050
1100
1150
1200
1250
1300
1350
1400
Temperature( )
Solid fraction,fs
Fig. 6.11 Relationship
between the liquid fraction
and dimensionless
temperature
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Dimensionless temperature,θ
Liquid fraction,fl
Table 6.1 The fitting
functions between liquid
fraction ( fL ) and
dimensionless temperature
(θ)
Liquid fraction ( fL ) Fitting functions
0.75248–1 θ = 0.23 + 1.65 fL − 1.22 f 2
L + 0.34 f 3
L
0.51169–0.75248 θ = −0.115+3.1 fL −3.3 f 2
L +1.344 f 3
L
0.14456–0.51169 θ = −0.4284 + 5.54 fL − 10.04 f 2
L +
9.32 f 3
L − 3.27 f 4
L
0–0.14456 θ = 3.25 fL − 32.84 f 2
L + 172.72 f 3
L −
300.82 f 4
L234 J. Wang et al.
the process of solving this integral equations, a corresponding I (f l,cr) value can be
determined for any given f l value. When the critical liquid phase fraction of K4169
superalloy is set to be in the range of 0–1 during the whole solidification process,
an f l,cr versus I (f l,cr) function curve can be established, as shown in Fig. 6.12.
Combining Eqs. (6.4), (6.5) and the function relations in Fig. 6.12, the f l,cr versus
I (f l,cr) function can be converted into the dimensionless N∗
y versus f p relation. In
order to reflect the functional relationship between them more directly, we can take
the log of N∗
y when plotting the graph, as shown in Fig. 6.13.
Therefore, for the predictions of micro-porosity in K4169 superalloy castings,
provided that the dimensionlessNiyama criterion N∗
y is calculated, the micro-porosity
index can be obtained from Fig. 6.13 and the predictions for micro-porosity index
of castings can be completed.
Fig. 6.12 Relationship
between the critical liquid
fraction and the integral
function
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
1E-3
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000 Integral,I(fl,cr)
Critical liquid fraction,fl,cr
Fig. 6.13 Relationship
between the dimensionless
Niyama criterion and the
microporosity index
01234
0
1
2
3
4
Microporosity index
Dimensionless Niyama criterion,log {Ny*}6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 235
6.4.2 Quantitative Prediction and Result Analysis of Thin
Wall Micro-porosity
According to the dimensionless micro-porosity criterion Eq. (6.11), the calculation of
dynamic viscosity, solidification shrinkage rate, temperature gradient, and secondary
dendrite spacing, etc. are needed. The dynamic viscosity of K4169 superalloy is
8.9 mPa·s according to JMatPro thermodynamic calculations and the corresponding
alloy density versus temperature curve is shown in Fig. 6.14.
From Fig. 6.14, it can be seen that the density of liquid phase is 7.47 g/cm3 and
solid phase density is 7.8 g/cm3. The calculated total solid shrinkage is 0.0428. The
solid–liquid phase temperature is determined using DSC, where the crystallization
temperature interval is calculated to be 150 °C, as shown in Fig. 6.15.
Fig. 6.14 The density curve
of K4169 superalloy at
different temperatures
0 300 600 900 1200 1500
7.4
7.6
7.8
8.0
8.2
Density (g/cm ) 3
Temperature (°C)
Fig. 6.15 The DSC curve of
K4169 superalloy
Temperature (°C)
0 400 800 1200
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
Heat flow/(mW/mg)
Fusion °C236 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.16 Relationship
between the cooling rate and
SDAS
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
30
40
50
60
70
80
SDAS(um)
Cooling rate ( )
The secondary dendrite spacing can be obtained through fitting the empirical
equations. As mentioned above, in the classical secondary dendrite spacing calcu￾lation Eq. (6.12), Cλ is a constant that is related to alloy compositions. Figure 6.16
presents the experimental results of the cooing rate and secondary dendrite spacing
of K4169 superalloy castings, which are fitted with a slope Cλ value of 4.8 × 10–5 m
(°C/s)1/3. The result will be used for calculations for the secondary dendrite spacing
of K4169 superalloy castings in later sections.
The temperature gradient and cooling rate are obtained based on the finite element
calculations. After the simulation of casting filling and solidification process are
completed, post-processing module Visual Cast is run and the temperature gradient
and cooling curve of different parts of the castings are determined. Then the cooling
rate can be obtained. The mesh and temperature field simulated using ProCast soft￾ware are shown in Fig. 6.17. From the simulation results of temperature field, it can
be seen that the solidification condition at thin-wall areas are close to the directional
solidification condition, which meets the application conditions of dimensionless
Niyama.
Figure 6.18 shows the results of thermocouple test at a certain point in the
casting part and the simulated cooling curve using ProCast, which are in good agree￾ment. Therefore, the temperature field is simulated in the subsequent cooling rate
calculations.
In addition, assuming that the liquid pressure is balanced with atmospheric pres￾sure below the liquidus temperature, the critical pressure drop is set to 0.1 MPa in
the calculation.
For quantitative predictions of the micro-porosity index in K4169 superalloy cast￾ings, firstly, the dimensionless N∗
y value need to be calculated according to Eq. (6.11)
and then the micro-porosity index can be obtained according to Fig. 6.10. Figure 6.19
presents the predicted results and experimental results of the micro-porosity index
for each characteristic position in the large complex thin-walled K4169 superalloy
castings, showing good agreement with each other. For example, Fig. 6.20 shows6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 237
(b) 
(c) 
(a) 
Fig. 6.17 The finite element mesh and temperature field for the casting: a mesh, b temperature
field, c geometry
Fig. 6.18 Comparison
between the experimental
and simulated cooling curve
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
950
1000
1050
1100
1150
Temperature( )
Time (s)
Simulation Experimental238 J. Wang et al.
0 4 8 12 16
0
1
2
Predictions 
Experimental
Modified
Position 
MPI 
Fig. 6.19 Experimental results and predictions at different positions of the characteristic casting
Fig. 6.20 Metallographic structure for MPI = 1.26
that the measured micro-porosity index of characteristic point 3 is 1.26, and the
dimensionless porosity prediction result is 1.25.
According to Campbell et al.[10], the melt is inevitably involved with oxide layers
during pouring process in the industrial vacuum furnace, forming double-layered
oxide films in castings, on which the micro-porosity is finally formed. However, this
dimensionless criterion function cannot predict the amount of bubbles involved due
to unreasonable pouring system design or the gas generated via reactions between
shell and the melt. Although the melt has been refined, the micro-porosity index6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 239
Table 6.2 The gas content in
the master alloy and casting Gas element Oxygen (O) Nitrogen (N) Hydrogen (H)
Master alloy (%) 0.0009 0.0040 0.00012
Casting (%) 0.0045 0.0030 0.00007
increases due to shell reactions or the aggregation and nucleation of trace vapor￾forming elements in the melt. Referring to the content of vapor-forming elements
in master alloys and superalloy castings, as shown in Table 6.2, it can be found that
the total content of vapor-forming elements in castings increases by 51% compared
with that in the master alloy.
At present, although it is difficult to quantify the proportion of trace vapor-forming
elements in the micro-porosity of large complex thin-walled castings, the influ￾ence of trace vapor-forming elements listed in Table 6.2 on the predicted results of
dimensionless micro-porosity based on solidification shrinkage can be investigated
using data fitting. Equation (6.13) shows the fitted relationship between predicted
and experimental results of micro-porosity in large complex thin-walled castings in
Fig. 6.16:
yex periment = n1 · yprediction + n2 (6.13)
where n1 and n2 are the coefficients related to the vapor phase elements in the alloys,
which are 1.05 and 0.18, respectively, in this study. Substituting the dimensionless
micro-porosity prediction results modified by Eq. (6.13) into Fig. 6.19, it is found
that the overall difference between the modified prediction and experimental results
is reduced.
Furthermore, there is a big difference between the experimental and predicted
results at characteristic point 12. This point is used to verify the applicability of
dimensionless micro-porosity criterion. The thickness at characteristic point 12 in
the casting is much higher than that of other points, which no longer meets the
directional solidification conditions. In fact, the macro-closed thermal section has
been formed at this point, indicating again that the dimensionless criterion model is
not suitable for forming thick parts of isolated molten pools.
6.4.3 Three-Dimensional X-ray Imaging of Micropores
The micropores in the casting usually have complex three-dimensional shapes. The
traditional metallographic method, which can only observe the section morphology
of micropores, is difficult to fully characterize the size, morphology, and distribu￾tion of the micropores. However, the shape, size, and distribution of the micropores
greatly affect the fatigue properties of castings [11]. With the advancement of detec￾tion methods in the field of materials research and the development of computer
technology, the characterization of micropores has received extensive attention. The240 J. Wang et al.
current characterization techniques can not only reveal the formation mechanism of
micropores in the solidification process of nickel-base superalloys, but also provide
solid data support for the study of the relationship between micropores and mechan￾ical properties. In particular, it provides a database for the fatigue life prediction of
the rear casing casting under the alternating load.
6.4.3.1 Spatial Distribution Characteristics of Micropores
It is an important trend to apply new technologies and methods to study micropores in
the field of materials science and engineering. Computed tomography imaging tech￾nology, which has the advantages of precise and three-dimensional visualization, has
been widely used in non-destructive testing of key castings for aviation. Industrial
CT uses the rays from different angles of the object to reconstruct the cross-sectional
image of the object. The tomographic image corresponds to the material, geometry,
composition, and density characteristics of the casting. By three-dimensional contin￾uous scanning of the casting, information such as the position, shape, and size of the
micropores can be obtained. In contrast to the traditional negative film technology,
industrial CT does not create structural overlap [12], which is helpful to study the
formation mechanism of micropores in castings.
According to the X-ray test results, the position of micropores on one hollow
strut of the casting is determined, then the wire cutting sampling is performed. In
industrial CT imaging, the sample is fixed to the translational and rotating stage of
the stepper motor for 3D scanning and reconstruction. The sampling position and
reconstruction result of the TRF casting are shown in Fig. 6.21.
In order to have a more intuitive study on the internal micropores morphology
of the casting, the grayscale threshold is set to segment the reconstructed three￾dimensional image, and the spatial distribution of micropores is shown in Fig. 6.22.
Fig. 6.21 Schematic diagram of sampling of one hollow strut from the TRF casting and 3D scanning
reconstruction6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 241
Fig. 6.22 Spatial distribution of micropores (Left: the section of the hollow strut and the sampling
position, Right: the reconstructed morphology of micropores)
The micro-porosity presents a “sponge” shape as a whole, with agglomerated micro￾pores and scattered micropores, which are mainly distributed on the inside of the
strut (near the sand core side).
In addition, the size distribution of the internal micropores of the TRF casting is
quantitatively counted. As shown in Fig. 6.23, it is found that with the increase of
the micro-porosity equivalent diameter, their number in the casting is reduced and
the semi-normal distribution characteristics are exhibited.
Fig. 6.23 Size distribution
of micropores242 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.24 Micropores index
on cross section
Figure 6.24 is the micropores exponential distribution curve from the sample
chuck to the middle of the sample. It is found that the micropores index on the
cross-section shows irregular waveform characteristics, which directly reflects the
complex shape of the micropores inside the casting appearance.
It can be seen from the above industrial CT test results that the micropores of the
thin-walled support plate of the rear casing casting is mainly distributed on the inner
side of the support plate near the inner sand core. The heat dissipation is slower at
this part, which is equivalent to the existence of the structural heat knot. And this part
belongs to the final solidification part, which eventually produces a lot of micropores.
This kind of micropores defect is different from the typical thin-walled micropores
defect. When designing the pouring system, the influence of the sand core should be
fully considered, and the design margin of the riser should be appropriately increased,
which can effectively suppress the occurrence of such microscopic loose defects.
6.4.3.2 Three-Dimensional Topography of Micropores
The high-energy and high-resolution synchrotron X-ray imaging technique makes it
possible to further characterize the finer structural features of the micropores inside
the casting. In order to characterize the fine structure of the micropores morphology
of large complex thin-walled castings, the high-resolution CT scan of the static
samples of K4169 superalloy castings is carried out using the synchrotron radiation
tomography of the Shanghai Light Source BL13W line station. Then the advanced
image processing technology is used to reconstruct the three-dimensional shape of the
micropores between the dendrites in the thick/thin-walled part of the TRF casting, as
shown in Fig. 6.25. In order to quantitatively describe the micropores morphology,
the micropores characteristic factor-length to diameter ratio is introduced and the
micropores of the thick-walled part of the casting is found to be “elliptical” with
an aspect ratio of about 1.53. The thin-walled portion of the casting has a flattened6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 243
Fig. 6.25 Three-dimensional morphology of micropores. a Thick-walled part b Thin-walled part
‘saddle shape’ with a length to diameter ratio of about 1.57. The quantitative charac￾terization of micropores, distribution, and morphology provides a basis for the study
of the formation of micropores defects in K4169 superalloy large-scale complex
thin-walled castings and its quantitative prediction.
6.4.4 Relationship Between Micropores and Mechanical
Properties
Superalloy castings usually have two usage states, standard heat treatment state and
hot isostatic pressure plus standard heat treatment state. The relationship between
casting defects and mechanical properties in the two states is constructed. In
particular, the relationship between microscopic porosity defects and mechanical
properties has a great theoretical significance and application value.
6.4.4.1 Effect of Micropores on Tensile Properties
Figure 6.26 shows the relationship between the micropores indices and tensile prop￾erties of standard heat treatment and hot isostatic pressing + standard heat treatment.
Although the tensile strengths of the standard heat treated and hot isostatic pressing +
standard heat treatment samples both decrease linearly with the increase of microp￾ores index, the tensile strength and micropores of the samples are different for the two
states. The degrees of correlation are different. The micropores index of the standard
heat treatment samples was reduced by 0.05, and the tensile strength was increased
by about 21 MPa. The micropores index of hot isostatic pressing + standard heat
treatment sample was reduced by 0.05, and the tensile strength was increased by
more than 130 MPa. The least squares method was used to fit the tensile strength
against the micropores index of the standard heat treatment samples. The result is
given as244 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.26 Relationship
between micropores and
tensile strength
UTSST = −433.3MI + 1104.4 (6.14)
RUTS,ST = −0.8741
In the equation above, UTSST is the tensile strength of the standard heat treatment
sample, MI is the micropores index, and RUTS,ST is the correlation coefficient.
The least squares method was used to fit the tensile strength and micropores index
of the hot isostatic pressing + standard heat treatment samples. The result is
UTSHIP + ST = −2694.7MI + 1064.5 (6.15)
RUTS,HIP + ST = −0.9795
In this equation, UTSHIP+ST is the tensile strength of the hot isostatic pressing +
standard heat treatment samples and RUTS,HIP+ST is the correlation coefficient.
Comparing the linear fitting results of the standard heat treatment with the hot
isostatic pressing + standard heat treatment samples, the absolute value of the corre￾lation coefficient of K4169 superalloy standard heat-treated samples is significantly
smaller than that of hot isostatic pressing + standard heat treatment samples. After
the standard heat treatment, there are still many Laves phase and large carbides
remaining in the castings, which not only reduce the tensile strength of the casting
but also reduce the impact of the micropores on the tensile strength. After the hot
isostatic pressing + standard heat treatment of the casting, the Laves phase and the
bulk carbide in the casting are effectively eliminated, with the degree of homogeneity
of the structure being improved. The absolute value of the correlation coefficient of
the hot isostatic pressing + standard heat treatment sample is close to 1, which shows
that the linear correlation between the tensile strength of the alloy and the micropores
index is higher in this state.6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 245
Fig. 6.27 Relationship
between micropores and
elongation after fracture
Regardless of the influence of the post-treatment state of the casting, the corre￾lation coefficient RUTS between the tensile strength and the micropores index of all
the samples in Fig. 6.26 is equal to −0.6085, which is much smaller than 1. This
indirectly shows that although the micropores is an important factor affecting the
tensile strength, it is not the only factor.
Figure 6.27 shows the relationship between the micropores index and the elon￾gation after fracture. It can be seen that with the increase of the micropores index,
the elongation after fracture of the standard heat treatment and hot isostatic pressing
+ standard heat treatment samples both decrease linearly. But there is a significant
difference in terms of the correlation between elongation and the micropores index
after fracture. The micropores index of the standard heat treatment sample is reduced
by 0.1, but the elongation after fracture is increased by about 3%. In addition, the
micropores of the hot isostatic pressure + standard heat treatment sample is reduced
by 0.01, but the elongation after fracture is increased by 3%. The least squares method
is then used to fit the elongation after fracture against the micropores index of the
standard heat treatment sample. The result is
ELST = −30.5MI + 18.8 (6.16)
REL,ST = −0.8929
where ELST is elongation after fracture of standard heat treatment castings and REL, ST
is the correlation coefficient.
The least squares method is also used to fit the elongation after fracture against the
micropores index of the hot isostatic pressure plus standard heat treatment samples.
The result is
ELHIP+ST = −344.2MI + 19.4 (6.17)246 J. Wang et al.
REL,ST = −0.9141
where ELHIP+ST is the elongation after fracture of hot isostatic pressing + standard
heat treatment and REL,ST is the correlation coefficient.
Comparing with the linear fitting results of standard heat treatment and hot
isostatic pressing plus standard heat treatment samples, the absolute values of the
correlation coefficient between the elongation after fracture and the micropores index
of the two groups are close to or more than 0.9, with a relatively small difference.
Even in the presence of a large amount of Laves phase and bulk carbides in the
standard heat treatment castings, the micropores index can strongly influence the
elongation of the casting.
The elongation after fracture and micropores of the samples treated by standard
heat treatment and hot isostatic pressing + standard heat treatment shows a good
linear correlation, in that the correlation coefficient of the elongation after fracture
and micropores index of all the sample REL = –0.8810 in Fig. 6.27. This further
shows that the elongation after fracture of the K4169 superalloy casting is closely
related to the content of micropores. The hot isostatic pressing, which can effectively
eliminate the micropores defects in the casting, greatly improves the elongation after
fracture of the alloy. The resulting microstructural changes have a relatively weak
effect on the elongation after fracture of the casting.
6.4.4.2 Effect of Micropores on Stress Rupture Property
The existence of micropores in the casting changes the internal stress distribution
of the casting under the action of permanent load and forms a crack source around
the smooth micropores of the surface, which then aggregates and grows to cause
fracture failure of the casting. Figures 6.28 and 6.29 respectively show the relation￾Fig. 6.28 Relationship
between high temperature
rupture life and micropores
index6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 247
Fig. 6.29 Relationship
between high temperature
rupture ductility and
micropores
ship between the stress rupture life, the endurance plasticity, and the micropores
under the standard heat treatment and hot isostatic pressing + standard heat treat￾ment at 650 °C/620 MPa. It can be seen that the standard heat treatment state and
the endurance plasticity decrease with the increase of the micropores index, with the
following linear fitting relationship
SR = 48.56 − 5.21MI (6.18)
EL = 9.42 − 1.35MI (6.19)
where SR is the stress rupture life and EL is the endurance plasticity. However, after
hot isostatic pressing + standard heat treatment, the micropores index is generally
small, but the stress rupture life and endurance plasticity change within a large range,
which is close to the hot isostatic pressing treatment but does not completely heal
the micropores.
6.4.4.3 Effect of Micropores on Fatigue Performance
The test sample taken from the TRF casting is processed as required and the
room temperature axial tension and compression control stress mode fatigue test
is performed. The test environment is a static air medium and the loading wave￾form is a triangular wave, together with an axial stress of 380 MPa in the control
mode. The stress ratio is −1 and the test frequency is 0.3 Hz. The number of fatigue
cycles (fatigue strength) before the sample fails is then recorded. Figure 6.30 shows
the metallographic morphology near the fracture of the fatigue specimen, in which
it is found that there is a fracture and a large number of micro-porosity defects248 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.30 Micropores morphology near the fracture (1 mm × 1 mm area). a Sample I b Sample II
Table 6.3 Fatigue life of the two samples as shown in Fig. 6.30
Sample No. I II
Fatigue life /cycles 36 405 >130 000
Micro-porosity index 12.27 0.47
near the sample I, but the micropores near the fracture of the sample II is less. The
corresponding quantitative micropores index and fatigue life are shown in Table 6.3.
6.5 Formation and Prediction of Laves Phase
The K4169 alloy has a severe segregation tendency during solidification due to its
high alloying degree and wide freezing temperature interval. Among the alloying
elements, niobium is the main segregation element, with 4.0%–6.4% mass concen￾tration in the matrix. During solidification, niobium may be enriched in the melt and
form harmful Laves phase via the L → γ + Laves eutectic reaction at the inter￾dendritic region, or even primary Laves phase. Since a large amount of Nb and
other strengthening elements are captured in the Laves phase, the solid solution Nb
element in the matrix is reduced. As a result, the solid solution strengthening effect
is reduced. The formation of Laves phase also simultaneously reduces the amounts
of γ and γ phase, weakening the effect of precipitation strengthening. Moreover,
the low-melting Laves phase is enriched between dendrites and on grain boundaries.
On one hand, the Laves phase is a favorable nucleation site of cracking, and a large
amount of interdendritic cracks are formed on the tensile fracture. On the other hand,
the Laves phase is prone to be a source of welding cracks, affecting the quality of
repair welding of castings.
It can be seen that the chemical segregation and the Laves phase formed during the
solidification process of K4169 alloy casts are two forms of the main defects, which
deteriorate the mechanical properties. Guo et al. studied K4169 alloy and found that
when the alloy contains high amounts of Laves phase, the room temperature tensile6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 249
strength and ductility of the alloy are decreased by 20% and 60%, respectively, and the
endurance life under 650 °C and 620 MPa is reduced by 60%. Therefore, the elimina￾tion of segregation and the suppression of the formation of harmful Laves brittle phase
are the key technical issues for the development and manufacturing of large-scale
complex thin-walled sloping turbines with K4169 nickel-based superalloy.
The formation of chemical segregation during solidification is the result of multi￾field and multi-scale coupling of macroscopic temperature field, solutal field, and
micro-dendritic growth process. These factors include solid back diffusion, liquid
finite diffusion, dendrite arm coarsening, dendritic tip supercooling, eutectic inter￾face supercooling, and so on. Although researchers have established analytical and
numerical models of micro-segregation with increasing solid fraction during solid￾ification based on the influence of solute redistribution, it is impossible, only based
on the study of solute distribution with single solidification conditions, to predict the
degree of segregation of TRF casings that have large scale and complex thin-walled
casting structures. Therefore, criteria and prediction methods for micro-segregation
degree of solidification process of different structured K4169 superalloy complex
structural castings are studied and established, which provides a basis for optimizing
and adjusting casting process design and is significantly important for guiding the
casting manufacturing of large scale complex structural components.
6.5.1 MSI Criterion of Micro-segregation Degree
According to the formation elements of Laves phase, the Laves phase is formed owing
to the high segregation of Nb and Mo elements during solidification of superalloys.
Therefore, the content and distribution of Laves phase produced by L → γ + Laves
eutectic reaction at the final stage of solidification is related to the segregation degree
of Nb and Mo elements, i.e., the solute concentration of Nb and Mo in mushy zone
of liquid phase. The evolution laws of Nb and Mo solute segregation depend on their
diffusion time and distance in liquid and solid phase.
According to the classical solidification theory, the microscale solute redistribu￾tion behavior and the resulting micro-segregation not only depend on the physical
properties of alloys (e.g. liquid phase diffusion coefficient Dl , solid phase diffusion
coefficient Ds, solute distribution coefficient k) and external process conditions such
as solidification rate v (or local solidification time t f ) and temperature gradient G, but
also are closely related to the dendrite growth mode, complex changes in solidifica￾tion dendritic morphology, and end effect of the solidification process the curvature
of dendrite tip. In recent years, researchers have studied the solidification character￾istics of composition changes of multi-component alloys, solid back diffusion, liquid
finite diffusion, dendrite arm coarsening, dendritic tip supercooling, eutectic interface
supercooling, solidification volume change. Based on these studies, some analytical
models and numerical models of micro-segregation in which the solute concentra￾tion increases with solid fraction during solidification are established. However, the
existing micro-segregation models for solute distribution are based on the change of250 J. Wang et al.
solute concentration with the increase of solid fraction during solidification process,
which can only indicate the interfacial concentration C∗
1 as a function of the solid
fraction fs, but cannot be used to determine the composition distribution of final
solid phase. Therefore, these existing models can only study the solute distribution
under a certain solidification condition; in addition, while the dynamic parameter of
solid fraction must be considered, the segregation degree under various factors of
different parts of a large-scale complex component cannot be determined.
The so-called segregation is due to the spatial concentration difference exerted
by different solubility and the mobility of solutes in the liquid and solid phase,
which is related to the law of solute atom motion on both sides of solid–liquid
interface. When the liquid phase flows are not considered, the solute segregation
during dendrite growth is mainly determined by solute diffusion flux on both sides
of the liquid–solid interface. If the solubility of the solute in solid phase is lower than
its solubility in liquid phase (k < 1), the solute will be discharged as the interface
advances. As the interface advances and the solute is continuously discharged, the
concentration in liquid phase at solid–liquid interface will decay away from the
maximum at solid–liquid interface in the light of the exponential law.
According to the definition of supersaturation in the solute diffusion processes,
the supersaturation 	 is the ratio of the amount of solute change C at the tip to the
equilibrium concentration difference C∗, which is given as
	 = C/C∗ = 
C∗
1 − C0

/C∗
1(1 − k) (6.20)
Supersaturation 	 represents the driving force for solute diffusion at the front of
solidification interface. According to the mathematical solution of parabolic diffusion
problem derived by Ivantsov in 1947, for the hemispherical crown dendrites, the
solution of diffusion equation indicates that the supersaturation 	 equals to the ratio
of the tip radius R of the dendrite to the characteristic diffusion distance δC (the
characteristic diffusion length indicates that the contained total solute within the
solute diffusion length equals to the total of solute contained in the infinite boundary
layer), i.e.
	 = R/δC (6.21)
where, δC = 2Dl/v. This dimensionless ratio is the Peclet, i.e., Pel = 	, therefore,
Pel = vR
2Dl
(6.22)
It can be seen that the Peclet number characterizes the driving force for diffusion,
which is determined by the supersaturation at the front of solid–liquid interface. If
only the radial diffusion is considered, the thickness of boundary layer around the
growing equiaxed grain equals to the radius of sphere, i.e. the solute diffusion length
at the end of dendrite approximately equals to the radius of sphere R. Therefore,
Eq. (6.22) can be expressed as,6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 251
Pel = vL
2Dl
(6.23)
Since the eutectic usually occurs during solidification process, the concentration
of liquid phase cannot increase continuously. In order to truly describe the chemical
distribution at the end of solidification, it is necessary to consider the back diffusion
in solid phase. According to the principle of mass conservation, the degree of back
diffusion of solute atoms in the solid phase depends on the dimensionless parameter
α, which is described as FOs and represents the proportionality between the thickness
of diffusion boundary layer in the solid phase δs(δs = 2Ds/v) and the system size
L, namely,
FOS = α = Dstf
L2 (6.24)
To dimensionally analyze the solute distribution during solidification, the widely
used Buckingham π dimensionless analysis theory in mathematical physics field is
applied. Based on the study of diffusion fluxes of liquid and solid solute atoms on
both sides of solid–liquid interface, and according to solute mass conservation, the
segregation index characterizing the degree of solute segregation during solidification
can be expressed as [13]
MSI = Pel
kFOs
(6.25)
where Pel = vL
2Dl
, FOs = Dst f
L2 . Substituting them in the Eq. (6.25), we can get
MSI = Pel
kFOs
= 1
2kDlDs
vL3
tf
= A ·
vL3
tf
(6.26)
where A = 1
2k Dl Ds is a physical parameter that depends on the material. The coef￾ficient A can be considered as constant for different structural parts on the same
component.
It can be seen from the Eq. (6.2) that the solidification conditions that affect the
segregation index MSI include solidification rate, characteristic diffusion distance,
and local solidification time. The segregation index increases with solidification rate
v and characteristic diffusion distance L, and decreases with local solidification time
t f . According to the dendrite growth theory, in general, the rate at which the solid–
liquid interface exits the solute is positively proportional to the dendrite growth
rate, and the discharged solute must diffuse out along the concentration gradient of
interface. Therefore, the larger growth rate makes the concentration gradient and
solute segregation index larger.
For the equiaxed dendrite grains in the supercooling melt, the average growth rate
v during the dendrite growth process is substituted for the dendrite instantaneous
velocity v, so252 J. Wang et al.
v = L
tf
(6.27)
where L is the characteristic diffusion distance. Consequently, the segregation index
MSI can be furtherly expressed as
MSI = Pel
kFOs
= 1
2kDlDs
L4
t
2
f
= A ·
L4
t
2
f
(6.28)
Local solidification time t f is the time required for a fixed point in the system to
start from solidification start to the end, which is the time from the dendrite tip to
the dendrite root. It can be seen that the local solidification time characterizes the
time for dendrite arms being in contact with liquid phase. According to Kattamis
and Flemings in 1965 and Feurer and Wunderdlin in 1977, the secondary dendrite
spacing λ2 was approximately changed with the cubic root of local solidification
time.
λ2 = 5.5(Mtf)
1/3 (6.29)
where M = 166· Dl ln Ceut
C0
	
m(1−k)(C0−Ceut),  is Gibbs–Thomson coefficient, andCeut is eutectic
composition.
It can be seen from the Eq. (6.29) that the longer the local solidification time is,
the larger the secondary dendrite spacing λ2 and the longer the dendrite arm is in
contact with liquid phase will be, and the more the solid phase solute atoms will be
back diffused, lowering the concentration gradient in solid phase and the degree of
segregation of solute and resulting in a decrease of the segregation index.
The secondary dendrite spacing λ2 after solidification of the metal is largely
determined by the solute diffusion field during dendritic growth. When back diffu￾sion occurs in the mushy zone during dendrite arms coarsening, it mainly occurs
between the secondary dendrite arms. For the equiaxed dendritic growth mode in the
supercooling melt, the secondary dendrites arm spacing λ2 is the characteristic length
of solute diffusion, which can largely reflect the local solidification time. Therefore,
the chemical segregation and the distribution of second phase are directly affected
by the secondary dendrite arm spacing, thereby affecting the microstructure and
mechanical properties of the casts. In general, the secondary dendrite arm spacing is
the diffusion length, i.e. L = λ2
2 .
Substitute into Eq. (6.28),
MSI = Pel
kFOs
= 1
32kDlDs
λ4
2
t
2
f
= A ·
λ4
2
t
2
f
, A = 1
32kDlDs
(6.30)
For column grains with directional solidification, the secondary dendrites are
limited, and the solute elements in mushy zone are mainly concentrated in the6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 253
primary dendrites, and their characteristic diffusion distance corresponds to half
of the primary dendrite arm spacing, i.e. L = λ1/2.
Substitute L = λ1/2 into Eq. (6.28),
MSI = Pel
kFOs
= 1
32kDlDs
λ4
1
t 2
f
= A ·
λ4
1
t
2
f
, A = 1
32kDlDs
(6.31)
6.5.2 Prediction of Micro-segregation at the Characteristic
Positions of Large Casting Using the MSI Criterion
Function
In recent years, researchers have studied the influence of solute distribution on solid￾ification properties of binary and multi-alloys, back diffusion of solid phase during
solidification process, limited diffusion of liquid, coarsening of dendrite arms and
supercooling of dendrite tips. Some analytical and numerical models of micro￾segregation with increasing solid fraction during solidification were established.
However, they are based on the study of solute distribution under single solidifi￾cation condition, which cannot be applied to predicting and determining the degree
of segregation under different couplings of different large-scale complex thin-walled
casts. The rear casing casts contain large-area hollow support plates, varying cross￾sections, lifting lugs, bosses and ring collars. The use of the MSI criterion function
to predict the degree of segregation at each characteristic structure is presented in
the following.
Firstly, the ProCast software is used to simulate the filling and solidification of the
casts, and the related temperature field and microstructure are obtained. The material
of large castings is nickel-base superalloy K4169 with a pouring temperature of
1500 °C and a preheating temperature of mold shells of 950 °C. Many parameters are
required when predicting segregation index, which can be divided into two categories:
one is the thermal physical parameters of the alloy, which belongs to the fixed value;
the other one is solidification parameter, which changes with the structure and process
conditions of the casts.
The thermal property parameters involved in the micro-segregation index MSI
include equilibrium partition coefficient, liquid phase diffusion coefficient Dl , and
solid phase diffusion coefficient Ds, which is assumed as a constant in solidifi￾cation interval. Passing the alloy composition of the cast into JMatPro thermody￾namic calculation software, it can be calculated by the thermophysical parameters
in JMatPro. The specific calculation procedures include:
1. By calculating the phase diagram of K4169 alloy by JMatpro software and
combine with relevant literatures, the thermophysical parameters used in the
calculation in this example can be obtained. The parameters are listed here:
 = 3.65 × 10−7 km, kNb = 0.48, D1,Nb = 3 × 10−9 m2 s−1, Ds,Nb = 2.82 ×
10−13 m2 s−1,C0,Nb = 4.3 wt.%,Ceut,Nb = 19.1 wt.%, m1 = −10.9, T1 =
1360 ◦C, Ts = 1180 ◦C.254 J. Wang et al.
2. The ProCast finite element software is applied to simulate the casting filling and
solidification process of castings, and the local solidification time t f of each part
of the casting was obtained.
3. The λ2 value of each structural part of the casts is calculated by using the
secondary dendrite spacing calculation module provided by ProCast software.
4. The local solidification time t f , secondary dendrite arm spacing λ2, and the
calculated thermophysical parameters by JMatPro are substituted into Eq. (6.30),
and the micro-segregation index MSI of structural parts of the complex structured
casts is calculated by ViewCast module in ProCast. According to the micro￾segregation index MSI of each structural part, the micro-segregation degree of
each part of casts are determined.
5. The prediction results are compared with the anatomical results. As shown in
Fig. 6.31, the quantitative metallographic statistic of the 12 parts of the casts
are compared with the predicted results. The comparison results are shown in
Fig. 6.32, where it can be seen that the prediction results are consistent with the
anatomical results. It shows that the larger micro-segregation index results in the
severer micro-segregation and the content of Laves phase formed at the end of
solidification would be higher.
Fig. 6.31 Castings used in the experiment
MSI 
Laves% 
Sites 
Laves content, % 
MSI 
Fig. 6.32 Comparison of the predicted MSI with the experimental results6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 255
6.6 Repair Welding Technology of Large Castings
6.6.1 Necessity of Repair Welding of Large Castings
Although precision casting technology for large structure is always in the progress
and development, there are still inevitably defects such as loose, porosity, inclusions
and cracks in castings. These defects can bring serious damages to the performance
and life of castings under high temperature service conditions and may even become
a major hidden trouble. They must be repaired by welding. In addition, there are
often some technological holes reserved in some thin-wall parts due to the needs of
forming technology in the process of precision forming of large complex thin-wall
castings. These technological holes also need to be repaired by welding to ensure
the structural and functional integrity of components.
6.6.2 Several Key Problems to Repair Welding of Defects
6.6.2.1 Welding Deformation Control of Thin-Walled Parts
The defect repair welding of thin-wall casting will undergo local welding heat
process. A large amount of residual stress and strain will be accumulated in the
weld as well as its surrounding area. Due to the weakness of rigid constraint in
the thickness direction of thin plate, if there is no external rigid constraint to the
workpiece in the local repair welding, the stress will be partially released and the
deformation will appear. The main form is wave deformation, which is the result of
the combined actions among the casting material characteristics, welding process
parameters, groove forms, and constraint conditions. If there is a rigid constraint, the
stress and strain will accumulate in the weld and its heat-affected zone (HAZ). When
the joint cannot withstand the large stress and strain, it will induce the generation of
crack defects. The key to suppressing welding deformation is to control the stress
and strain, and to prevent the welding deformation by using restraint technology, as
well as to ensure the joint not to crack due to the residual stress. Welding residual
deformation is the deformation that remains in the structure after welding. It includes
longitudinal contraction deformation, transverse contraction deformation, bending
deformation, angular deformation, and so on, among which longitudinal and trans￾verse contraction deformation is the main cause for other deformations. The main
factors that affect the longitudinal contraction deformation are cross-section area of
welds, welding seam length, welding energy input, and groove form, etc. The main
factors affecting transverse contraction deformation are welding energy input, weld
thickness, and groove form, etc.
The welding deformation of nickel-base superalloy sheet can be measured by
triangular method with laser. When an IN718 plate with thickness of 2 mm is welded256 J. Wang et al.
in a straight line along the center of the plate without constrain, and its stress is fully
released after cooling, the welding deformation is measured as shown in Fig. 6.33.
It can be seen from the Fig. 6.33 that, without constraint, the residual welding
deformation of the nickel-base superalloy plate is large, which generally presents the
deformation law that the middle part is concave along the weld width but is bulged
along the weld length. In addition, it is also accompanied by local random wave
deformation. Using thermal elastoplastic 3D-FEM method, the total welding defor￾mation of nickel-base superalloy sheet can be simulated and predicted. Figure 6.34
shows the finite element simulation grids for the welding straight along the center￾line of a nickel-base superalloy plate with thickness of 2.0 mm (For simplification,
only half of them are calculated according to the symmetry principle). The result of
simulation for the welding deformation is shown in Fig. 6.34b. It can be seen that as
an overall deformation in welding process, the welded plate begins to be concave in
Fig. 6.33 Welding deformation measuring results of a plate (2 mm)
Fig. 6.34 Thermal elastoplastic 3D-FEM welding process simulation. a straight weld simulation
grids of a plate; b straight weld deformation and thermal stress distribution on a plate; c simulation
grids for a circular weld of a hole; d weld deformation and thermal stress distribution of a hole on
a plate6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 257
the middle part of the straight weld joint along the weld width, and to be convex in
the middle part along the weld length. Figure 6.34c shows the calculation grids for
the simulation of welding a hole with diameter of 10 mm on a plate with thickness
of 2.0 mm (for simulating the repair welding of technological holes on thin-walled
castings). The simulated results of welding deformation are shown in Fig. 6.34d.
In the simulation above, the welding temperature field can be simulated according
to the varied welding parameters and process conditions. Thus, the influence on
welding deformation can be predicted for varied welding parameters (such as welding
current, welding speed), welding sequence, and the constraint. The corresponding
measures can be adopted to control the welding deformation in allowed range as
much as possible.
6.6.2.2 Control of Secondary Defects in Repair Welding
The so-called secondary defect refers to the welding defects such as pores, inclusions,
lack of penetration, undercut, and cracks found in the repaired weld zone and its HAZ
after the repair welding of a large thin-walled casting. In other words, the secondary
defects are found in the same place after the repair welding for the primary defects,
i.e., casting defects. The occurrence of secondary defects is related to many factors,
among which the key factors include casting material, structure, and welding process.
For large complex thin-walled IN718 alloy castings, many secondary defects may
occur during the repair welding process. Practical experience shows that most of them
are welding hot cracks, which is related to the high sensitivity of cracking for nickel￾base superalloy, as well as their structure characteristics. Therefore, how to control
the secondary defects in repair welding for nickel-base superalloy will be mainly
discussed in terms of the welding hot crack.
To study the sensitivity of welding hot crack of IN718 alloy sheet, fluorescence
detection and X-ray examination are carried after welding. It has been found that
there are mainly five types of welding hot cracks. (1) Longitudinal and transverse
cracks at the centerline of the weld; (2) HAZ cracks; (3) Mixed cracks composed
of transverse cracks and HAZ cracks in adjacent weld toe; (4) Arc crater cracks;
(5) Mixed cracks of the former weld bead arc crater cracks and the latter weld bead
solidification cracks in multi-layer welding. The position diagram of all kinds of
welding cracks are shown in Fig. 6.35.
According to the analysis of the cross-section of the weld, crack surface
morphology and composition analysis based on EDS, the longitudinal, transverse
and arc crater cracks are the solidification cracks, whereas the HAZ cracks are the
liquefied cracks. The solidification crack is also called the crystallization crack. The
nickel-base superalloys have different degrees of crystallization crack sensitivity.
The superalloys strengthened by solution have little sensitivity to the crystalliza￾tion crack. However, the precipitation strengthened superalloys with low Al and Ti
content (<4%) have medium sensitivity to the crystallization crack, while the precip￾itation strengthened superalloy with high Al and Ti content as well as the casting
superalloy have greater sensitivity to the crystallization crack. In addition, the state of258 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.35 Schematic diagram of welding hot crack
superalloy also affects its crack sensitivity. The alloy treated via homogenization has
less crack sensitivity than the alloy after aging. The alloy strengthened by solution
has less crack sensitivity than the alloy in flat state and cold rolling state. Because
after flat pressing and cold rolling, the strength and hardness of the alloy increase,
while the plasticity decreases. The same is true for aging treatment, which increases
the restraint degree and crack sensitivity of welding parts.
The solidification crack sensitivity for the precipitation enhanced nickel-base
superalloy can be presented with sensitivity index PSC as below:
PSC = 69.21w(T i) + 27.3w(N b) + 9.0w(Mo) + 300w(Si) − 55.3 (6.32)
The larger the PSC value is, the more likely it is to produce solidification cracks.
Liquation cracks in the HAZ near the weld may also be combined with solidification
cracks in the weld zone to form mixed cracks, as shown in Fig. 6.36. The phase with
Fig. 6.36 HAZ liquation crack and solidification crack in weld zone form mixed cracks6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 259
low melting point in the HAZ near the weld liquefies in welding heating process, and
then separates under the action of contraction stress and thermal stress in subsequent
cooling process. The liquid film is torn, and the crack is generated, and it then
propagates to the fusion line. According to the welding temperature field, the drop
of temperature in the melting zone near the fusion line lags behind that in the HAZ.
When the liquation crack in the HAZ extends to the partially melted zone (PMZ),
the crack front will induce cracking in the segregation region of the PMZ under
the combined action of additional stress, contraction stress and thermal stress. The
structure of PMZ is also dendritic and there is a chain Laves eutectic phase between
the dendrites, which partially melts in the welding process to form a liquid phase
with low melting point and high viscosity between the dendrites and the dendrite
axis. When the liquid film forms, it will separate under the action of contraction
stress, thermal stress, and crack tip stress, resulting in the expansion of the crack.
There are stratified segregation regions in the weld zone, as well as low melting point
liquid phase in these segregation regions during solidification. When the crack tip
approaches this solid–liquid coexisting region in the weld zone, the crack front stress
field, the contraction stress, and the thermal stress work together to induce cracking
in the weld zone and extend to the center of the weld. According to the initiation
and propagation mechanism of solidification crack, the propagation of solidification
crack in the weld zone is multi-dimensional, leading to a complex morphology of
the formed crack.
Another case is that the HAZ liquation crack initiates in the near weld zone and
expands to the PMZ and specimen surface. Meanwhile, the solidification crack occurs
in the weld zone near the fusion line, which mainly extends to the weld zone and
extends very closely to the fusion line. In this case, there are two cracks on both
sides of the fusion line. When they are close to each other, the tip strain zones of
the cracks are connected, resulting in a mixed crack. If their tip strain zones are not
connected, the two cracks keep separate in a certain distance, despite that the tips of
the two cracks can be relatively close.
The occurrence of HAZ liquation crack is closely related to the micro-segregation
of the base metal and the low melting point phase and its size, quantity, and distri￾bution. After homogenization heat treatment (1090 °C, 1 h) of the casting, the
amount and length of liquation cracks in the HAZ decrease significantly, as shown
in Fig. 6.37a, c. The content of the Nb-rich low-melting point Laves phases decrease
around the crack, as shown in Fig. 6.37b, d. The reason is that after homogenization
heat treatment, the segregation degree of the base metal decreases and part of the
low-melting point phases dissolve into austenite, resulting in a decrease in their size
and quantity. Since it is not easy to form continuous liquid film in the welding heat
process, the crack sensitivity thus becomes small under the same heat input condition.
Arc crater cracks often appear in the primary and secondary axes of columnar
dendrites, as shown in Fig. 6.38. Towards the finish of the welding process, the
welding torch moves to crater, arc stops to move along the welding direction, but only
moves in the vertical direction. The arc length is elongated and the heat transmitted
by arc to the molten pool decreases to zero. This will affect the flow behavior of the
liquid metal and the heat conduction direction of the molten pool. It is obvious that260 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.37 HAZ liquation crack in as-cast and homogenization treated (1090 °C, 1 h) IN718 alloy
a HAZ liquation crack in as-casted base material; b crack amplified for Fig. (a); c HAZ liquation
crack in homogenization treated base material; d crack amplified for Fig. (c)
Fig. 6.38 a Metallography of arc crater crack; b crack amplified for Fig. (a)
the columnar dendritic crystal grows from the crater edge to the center. During the
solidification of arc crater molten pool, dendrites in the mushy zone collide with each
other, forming a relatively independent micro-scale closed liquid zone, in which the
liquid viscosity is relatively large. In addition, the dynamic strain rate in arc crater
is relatively fast, thus producing large stress and strain. The effective cross-section6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 261
area at the arc crater is smaller than other areas of the weld bead, leading to larger
solidification contraction stress and thermal stress. Under the action of these stress
forces, Nb-rich and C-rich liquid film between dendrites is split to form arc crater
crack.
In multilayer and multi-pass welding, next welding pass covers last welding pass,
and some metals in the arc crater of last welding pass enter the weld bead of next
welding pass. It can be seen from the welding temperature field and the flow behavior
of the weld pool that the interlayer metal cannot fully and uniformly be mixed into the
weld bead of last welding pass. Some micro-sized areas are affected by the transfer
effect of molten metal composition in arc crater, and more micro-scale segregation
zones can be generated. When they are solidified, Nb-rich and C-rich liquid phase are
relatively more in the mushy region, which improves the sensitivity of solidification
crack in the next welding pass.
When the molten metal at the fusion line of last welding pass is adjacent to the
crater metal of next welding pass, under the action of cooling solidification and
contraction stress, the low-melting-point liquid film is split to form a new hot crack.
The strain field at the crack tip contacts with the strain field at the original crater
crack tip. These two cracks then join together to form a mixed crack. Another case
is that the Nb-rich low-melting-point eutectic at the arc crater of last welding pass
is liquefied under the heating action of next welding pass. When it is solidified, the
liquid film is torn to form a crack. This crack and the arc crater crack of last welding
pass expand to the weld bead of next welding pass under the action of thermal
stress and contraction stress, which induces a solidification crack to be initiated and
propagate and eventually form a mixed crack.
According to the results of hot crack sensitivity test of 718 alloy, the following
rules can be concluded:
(1) With the increase of welding line energy, the sensitivity of hot crack of 718
nickel-base superalloy increases.
(2) The degree of micro segregation in the alloy has a great influence on the sensi￾tivity of hot crack. The micro segregation for as-casted base metal is most
serious, thus the hot crack is most sensitive to occur. The micro segregation
for homogenization treated base metal is relatively small, and the sensitivity of
hot crack is lower. For the base metal in rolling state, there is almost no micro
segregation and the hot crack sensitivity is the minimum.
(3) Under the same original condition of base metal and welding line energy, the
hot crack sensitivity of multi-pass welding is greater than that of single-pass
welding, the hot crack sensitivity of component is greater than that of plate, and
the hot crack sensitivity of closed circular weld is greater than that of butt joint.
(4) In multi-pass welding, the arc crater of last weld bead is easy to induce the
crack in the next weld bead, which is the sensitive area of welding hot crack.
The casting defects will also remarkably increase the hot crack sensitivity.
According to the above rules, the hot crack in repair welding process can be
controlled using the corresponding technological measures, such as controlling the
welding line energy, homogenizing the casting before the repair welding, using single262 J. Wang et al.
pass welding as far as possible, or filling the arc crater at the end of welding. Hence,
the occurrence of welding crack can be effectively avoided.
6.6.2.3 Structure and Performance Control of Repair Welded Joint
Welding temperature field distribution and heating and cooling speeds are not control￾lable to some certain extent. The lamellar structure is likely to form in the weld metal
due to the micro segregation. When the segregation becomes serious, the eutectic
structure will be formed between the dendritic crystals. In welding HAZ, the grain
boundary is partially melted and the grains grow up, thus the microstructure and
mechanical properties of the weld and its HAZ are inevitably inhomogeneous. The
key to repair welding process is how to minimize the inhomogeneity of the structure
and properties of the welded joints.
Both the comparative test and practical experience show that the as-cast struc￾ture of the base metal with composition segregation has a great influence on the
microstructure and properties of the weld. The serious one will lead to the genera￾tion of cracks and other defects. Therefore, the homogenization treatment of a thin￾wall 718-alloy casting can reduce its micro segregation, improve the weldability
of base material, and reduce the sensitivity of welding hot crack. Figure 6.39a–d
comparatively show the structures of the welding joint and the PMZ for the as-cast
base metal and homogenization treated base metal, respectively. It can be seen that
the weld zone of joint is full of columnar dendrites and the dendrite arms are rela￾tively small, growing from the fusion line to the weld center with a strong direction.
The structural characteristics of base metal has a small effect on the weld area. The
segregation zone in the welding HAZ disappears and the precipitation phase between
dendrites decreases. They change from the dendrite structure to an equiaxial crystal
structure. However, there are more residual dendrite precipitation in the HAZ of the
as-cast base metal, with more dendrite structure characteristics being retained. The
PMZ of the joint is kept to be the dendrites structure. It is more obvious for the PMZ
of a welded joint for as-cast base metal. Comparing Fig. 6.39b and d, there are more
precipitates in the PMZ of a joint for as-cast base metal, especially more chain-typed
Laves with strong continuity. However, there are fewer precipitates in the PMZ of a
joint for homogenization treated base metal, with relatively weak continuity.
Figure 6.40 shows the relationship between the PMZ width of the welded joint and
the welding line energy. It can be seen that the PMZ width of joint increases with the
increase of welding line energy. The reason is that the distance between isothermal
surfaces of welding temperature field increases with the increase of welding line
energy. When the welding energy keeps the same, the PMZ of joints for as-cast base
metal is wider, whereas the PMZ of joints for homogenized base metal is narrower.
For two different microstructures of base metals, the temperature fields of the welding
joints are consistent when the line energy and the plate thickness are the same. The
width of PMZ depends on the micro distribution of alloy composition, as well as
on the melting point temperature difference between high-melting point phase and6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 263
Fig. 6.39 Microstructure of weld joint (2.4 kJ/cm) for as-casted and homogenization treated IN718
alloy. a Structure in joint of as-casted base metal; b Structure of PMZ in joint of as-casted base
metal; c Structure in joint of homogenization treated base metal; d Structure of PMZ in joint of
homogenization treated base metal (HAZ—welding heat affected zone; PMZ—partially melted
zone; WM—weld metal)
Fig. 6.40 Width of melted
zone in weld joint of
as-casted and
homogenization treated
2.8 mm thick IN718 alloy
plate welded with varied line
energies (2.4, 3.6, 4.8 kJ/cm)264 J. Wang et al.
low-melting point phase, such as the liquidus temperature of dendrite austenite and
the solid-phase temperature of low-melting point phase between dendrites
Since there are segregation zone and Laves phase in both the as-cast structure of
base metal and homogenized structure of base metal, the melting point of Nb-rich
interdendritic Laves phase is lower than that of the dendrite austenite. During the
welding process, the interdendrite segregation zone and the Nb-rich second phase
in PMZ are melted, while the dendrite austenite keeps as the solid state. The liquid
film forms between the dendrites, which is in the temperature range of solid–liquid
coexistence. The content of Nb in the low-melting point phase of the as-cast base
metal is higher than that of the homogenized base metal, and its melting point is
lower, so it liquefies at a lower temperature. The temperature range of solid–liquid
coexistence of the as-cast base metal is larger, which leads to a wider PMZ of the
weld joint than that of the homogenization treated weld joint after casting. In the
welding process, the low-melting point phase in PMZ forms less liquid film between
dendrites. The liquid film distribute in a small range of welding joint, and they are
not easy to be connected with each other. Thus, the sensitivity of welding hot crack
is low.
From the main difference between the hot crack characteristics of the welded
joints for as-cast and homogenized structures of base metal, it can be seen that the
improvement of PMZ microstructure in weld joint is due to the homogenization
treatment of the base metal. Therefore, homogenization of base metal after casting
is an important way to improve its weldability.
In addition to the influence of the microstructure of base metal on the microstruc￾ture and properties of the weld joints, the welding thermal process itself is also an
important factor that causes the inhomogeneous microstructure and properties of the
joints. It is mainly shown that under the action of welding temperature field, the
inhomogeneous composition and structure of welded joint appear, which lead to the
inhomogeneous joint performance.
The inhomogeneity of the composition in the weld is mainly manifested through
the micro segregation and macro segregation in the weld. The presence of composi￾tion segregation in the weld can be simply verified using the metallographic test of
a weld. The metallographic sample is cut parallel to the weld bead and its macro￾scopic morphology is characterized, as shown in Fig. 6.41. It can be seen that the
isothermal solidification line on welding pool presents a periodic composition segre￾gation along the welding direction. The reason for this feature is that when the molten
pool is solidified at a certain speed along the welding direction, there is solute element
segregation at the isothermal solidification front of the welding temperature field,
which is continuously pushed forward. When the elements are segregated to a certain
extent, the constituent super-cooling forms under the fluctuation of molten pool and
its temperature field, and the solidification thus occurs. As the alternative segregation
and solidification continue to repeat, the periodic macroscopic lamellar segregation
forms in the weld. Among them, the amount of second phase precipitation at A-1
adjacent to the weld fusion line is less than that of A-2. In addition, the amount of
second phase precipitation at B-1 in the weld center is less than that of B-2. The weld6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 265
Fig. 6.41 Lamellar segregation in weld metal (2.4 kJ/cm)
microstructure has the characteristics that the layered structure appears alternately,
namely, the lamellar segregation along the welding direction.
When the weld crystallizes, the columnar dendrites near the fusion line grow
first and move towards the center of the welding pool. The solute concentration in
the center of the welding pool gradually increases and finally the columnar crystals
form on both sides of the weld contact and solidify at the weld center, resulting in
macroscopic regional segregation, that is, the total amount of the second phase at B
is greater than that at A. In addition, due to the higher cooling rate at the weld center,
the dendrite microscopic segregation is small, that is, the second phase particles at
B are small, so is its continuity. In the crater area, the macroscopic and microscopic
segregation differences in the central and marginal areas are more serious. Further
quantitative segregation detection can be carried out by SEM combined with EDS.
On one hand, the inhomogeneity of weld structure is related to the structure state
of base metal and composition segregation of weld structure. On the other hand, it is
related to the gradient distribution of local temperature field generated by welding
thermal cycle. Figure 6.42 shows a typical weld joint for 1.8 mm thick 718-alloy
sheet in TIG welding. It can be seen that, under the action of welding temperature
field, different gradient structures are formed from the high temperature area to the
low temperature area in the weld joint. The weld center area is mixed with melted
base metal and filler metal, which is called the weld zone. Since 718-alloy is a
precipitate-hardened superalloy and since the weld metal underwent the melting and
solidification process, the original γ or γ phase, carbide phase, and boride phase
were all dissolved into the matrix equally, forming a single γ phase (i.e., Ni solution).
Due to the high cooling rate of the weld metal, the transverse dendrites are short,
whereas the dendrites along the spindle are very long. There is large composition
segregation between the dendrites and spindle, resulting in the production of eutectic
composition structure in the weld.266 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.42 Typical TIG weld joints of 718 alloy with a thickness of 1.8 mm
The fusion zone, or semi-melting zone, is the area where the liquid metal in the
molten pool begins to crystallize and grow on the semi-melted grain. The orientation
of original grain on the side of base metal is different from the growth direction of the
grain in liquid metal. Meanwhile the composition of the liquid metal is also different
from that of the base metal. These lead to sudden changes of composition, structure,
and performance in this area, which is a weak area in the welding joint. Although
the base metal near the fusion zone is not melted, it is affected by the thermal field of
welding temperature, which is thus called the heat-affected zone. In the thermal cycle
region, the periodic heating temperature gradient is large, resulting in the dissolution
of enhanced γ and γ phase and transformation of the carbide phase, which makes
the HAZ structure very complex.
To sum up, under the action of welding temperature field, the weld joints of super￾alloy are characterized by inhomogeneity of composition, structure, and performance
in the weld zone, fusion zone, and HAZ. All kinds of factors must be taken into
account to make the joint meets the requirements of casting.
6.6.3 Repair Welding Method and Process
6.6.3.1 Repair Welding Method
At present, the main methods to repair defects of nickel-base superalloy castings in
the world include fusion welding, laser cladding, self-spreading welding, brazing,
and transition liquid phase diffusion welding, etc. These repair-welding methods
have their own features. The most suitable method can be selected based on the
material properties, working temperature, and structural characteristics of superalloy
components. Among all the repair welding methods mentioned above, except the
fusion welding, most of them are mainly characterized by filling gaps. Therefore,
they are mainly applicable to repairing welding cracks of nickel-base superalloy
castings, especially for the repair welding cracks of superalloy blade. Laser cladding
can also repair welding the defects other than the cracks to a certain extent, but it6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 267
needs multilayer cladding and has low efficiency. Only fusion welding can be applied
to repair welding a variety of defect other than the crack defects. Because in nickel￾base superalloy castings, there are many types of casting defects, including loosen,
porosity, inclusions, cracks, etc. Once this kind of defects are found, it generally
needs to adopt the mechanical grinding method to remove these defects, even if it
is a crack defect, it also needs to clean the harmful impurities and oxidation film
in the crack by grinding method, in order to prevent the second defect. Therefore,
where the defect has been polished, it is usually necessary to fill in more filler metals,
which must be close to or consistent with the base metal in composition, structure
and performance, and form a solid metallurgical bond with the base metal. The filler
wire metal, matching the composition, structure, and performance of the base metal,
can be melted into the welding pool by fusion welding, so that the weld metal and the
base metal become a unity. If the brazing or the diffusion method is adopted, there are
differences in terms of structure and performance between the filler metal and base
metal after all. When the filler metal in the gaps is less, the joint performance can be
improved close to that of the base metal by diffusion process, however, when the filler
metal is very large in quantity, it is not possible to improve the joint performance by
diffusion with the base metal. In view of this, it is reasonable to choose fusion welding
to repair the defects of large thin-wall nickel-based superalloy castings. Among the
fusion welding methods, TIG welding is an economic and practical mainstream repair
welding method with the most stable welding quality, the most flexible operation,
and the easiest to achieve the equipment conditions. Therefore, the TIG welding
process will be mainly focused in followed introduction of welding process in this
chapter.
6.6.3.2 Repair Process with TIG Welding
In repair welding of large complex thin-wall castings, to ensure the welding quality,
the welding deformation and the welding hot crack sensitivity should be reduced,
thus the segregation of base metal and the welding heat input should be reduced.
To get a higher quality of repair welding, the following measures can be used, such
as homogenization heat treatment before welding, subsection welding with low line
energy input, control of inter-layer temperature, and removing each segmental arc
crater by polishing.
Due to the small thickness of thin-wall parts, the deformation is easy to be
produced during TIG welding. The main method is to control the welding heat input,
which is usually expressed as the line energy, namely, arc heat input per unit length
of weld. The calculation formula is:
q = IU
v
(6.33)
where, I—welding current (A), U—arc voltage (V), v—welding speed (mm/s), q—
line energy (J/mm).268 J. Wang et al.
According to the above equation, the line energy is related to the welding current,
arc voltage, and welding speed. In TIG welding, the welding power supply is from a
constant current source. If the arc length is constant, the arc voltage U is also constant.
In automatic welding or stable manual TIG welding, arc length is unchanged. There￾fore, the welding current and welding speed coordinate with each other to determine
the line energy per unit length in the welding seam. The higher the welding current,
the slower the welding speed, and the higher the line energy, and vice versa.
When the welding line energy is constant, the total heat input to welding joint
increases with the increase of weld length. To minimize welding deformation, the
overall heat input of welded joints should be minimized. Meanwhile, in order to
reduce the sensitivity of welding hot crack, the welding speed should not be too
high. As a result, it is necessary to reduce the welding current. However, when
welding with a low current, the welding pool becomes smaller and the amount of
filling metal deposition is limited, which lowers the welding efficiency.
Since the ambient temperature is generally lower than the welding temperature,
the joint is in an exothermic state during the welding process. The overall heat input
of the welded joint is shown as follows:
QW = ηqs − QC (6.34)
where, QW—overall heat input welding joint (J), η—welding arc heat efficiency,
s—weld length (mm), QC—heat transfer from welding joints (J).
Generally, η is the thermal efficiency of the arc-plasma to the molten pool of TIG
welding in the air, and its value is 0.7. However, in the arc welding with different
shielding gases, the shape of arc will change. For example, the first ionization energy
of helium atom is 2372.3 kJ/mol, and the argon atom is 1520.6 kJ/mol. According
to the principle of the minimum voltage for arc, when the shielding gas is helium,
the arc will contract, thus the arc radius is small, and the current density increases. It
can effectively increase the melting depth and reduce the arc heating area under the
same line energy, which is beneficial to the increase of deposition amount and the
control of welding deformation.
Increasing the heat dissipation of a joint during welding is also an effective method
to reduce the overall heat input. One of them is to increase the joint cooling rate,
such as the use of high thermal conductivity of copper gaskets and copper cooling
fixtures in the welding process, and water or other coolant can be used to increase the
joint cooling rate further. However, in this way, the joint is cooled while arc heating,
which will easily lead to the excessive gradient of joint temperature in space and
time, increase the strain rate of the joint and the crack sensitivity, thus it is limited
in use.
The second method is to use subsection welding and control the temperature
between each subsection, i.e., after the completion of a subsection welding, cooling
to a certain temperature and then welding the next subsection. The overall heat input
of welded joints in subsection welding is shown as follows:6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 269
QW = 
n
i=1

ηqsi − qi
C
 (6.35)
where, n—number of subsections of weld seam, si—weld length of each subsection
(mm), qc
i
—heat dissipation in cooling of each subsection (J).
If the cooling time of welds of the same length increases, the overall welding
heat input decreases, which is beneficial to the precise control of the cooling rate,
as well as to inhibiting welding deformation and hot crack sensitivity. However, the
influence of arc crater on the sensitivity of hot crack increases with the increase of the
joining area of the front and rear segments. Consequently, it is necessary to control
it by closing arc with slow-down current and polishing the arc crater after welding.
On this basis, pulse and waveform can be further used to control arc and to reduce
heat input for same welding deposition quantity. For repair welding of holes larger
than 10 mm diameter, homogeneous fillers of corresponding size and shape can be
prepared in advance and then placed in the hole to weld the gap between the filler and
the casting, which can help reduce the amount of welding deposition, the welding
deformation, and the probability of hot crack generation.
The repair welding for defect of 718 nickel-base superalloy thin-wall casting is
taken as an example to illustrate the repair process with TIG welding as bellow.
Due to the randomness and arbitrariness of the position and shape of the defect
in repair welding of 718 nickel-base alloy thin-wall casting, it is difficult to adopt
the automatic welding. Meanwhile, according to the characteristics of 718 nickel￾base alloy thin-wall casting components, it is necessary to adopt the welding with a
relatively low line energy and a stable process. Therefore, the most suitable welding
method is the manual TIG welding. It can also realize one-side welding with back
formation, which is an ideal method for defect repair welding of nickel-based alloy
thin-wall components.
(1) Repair welding equipment
TIG welders with good performance and good arc stability under low current
conditions are recommended, such as DA300P from OTC of Japan, INVERTIG
PRO digital 350/AC/DC from REHM of Germany, MagicWave2200 from
FRONIUS of Denmark, etc. These welders have excellent performance, pulsed
output current, and good maneuverability. They are suitable for the manual TIG
welding.
(2) Supplementary materials for repair welding
a. IN718 wire with diameter of 1.2 mm can be selected as filler material;
b. Pure argon (purity ≥ 99.99%) can be used as shielding gas (2 bottles are
needed, one for TIG welding, one for filling in thin-wall casting cavity).
(3) Welding tools
a. Head type protective mask with automatic color changing is recommended;
b. Protective clothing, shoes and gloves;
c. Diagonal cutting pliers for cutting filler wires.270 J. Wang et al.
d. Stainless steel wire brush for mechanical cleaning of the local surface before
welding;
e. Hammer (with a sharp head and a flat head) for peening the welding surface,
to reduce the surface stress and crack sensibility.
f. Pneumatic or electric milling cutter, grinding wheel, electric stainless steel
wire brush, used for grinding and cleaning groove before welding;
g. Acetone, cleaning cloth without gauze head, used for cleaning groove before
welding;
h. Electric heat blower for fast drying of water vapor and impurities in welding
area;
i. Strong light flashlight, used for observing the back of welding seam inside
cavity;
j. High temperature resistant aluminum foil tape, used for sealing other holes
on the cavity during repair welding, so as to fill argon into the cavity to
protect the back of welding seam;
k. Argon flow meters (2 sets), one set is used for TIG welding machine to
control the flow rate of shielding gas, and the other set is used for filling the
shielding gas into thin-wall casting cavity.
(4) Defect cleaning
a. Before welding, the defects (such as pores, inclusions, cracks, loose, etc.)
that need to be repaired should be grinded and removed by electric or
pneumatic milling cutter, grinding wheel and other mechanical processing
methods, until the defects are not visible to the naked eye;
b. For the parts where secondary defects are caused by the original repair
welding, the HAZ of the original welding bead should also be grinded off
while the secondary defects are removed.
c. After the defect is cleaned, the dye penetrant inspection method should be
adopted to ensure that the defect is thoroughly cleaned.
(5) Groove grinding
a. In order to ensure the one-side welding with back formation, the groove
angle of the welding site should be grinded to about 45° after the defect is
cleaned, and the groove direction should be a smooth transition without any
abrupt changes.
b. For the repair of technological holes larger than 10 mm in diameter, it is
recommended to add the same thick fillers in the center to reduce the amount
of filling and welding deformation. In addition, the bevel angle of fillers and
grooves should be grinded to more than 45°, and the gap between the two
should be controlled at about 2 mm, to ensure that the backside can be
thoroughly welded with single-side welding.
c. The casting surface within 20 mm of the welding zone from the groove shall
be cleanly grinded to avoid adhesion of molding sand, impurities, rust spots,
etc. Where possible, sand and impurities within 10 mm of the backside of
the welding zone should also be cleanly grinded.6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 271
(6) Groove cleaning
a. The welding groove and its adjacent area after mechanical grinding shall be
further cleaned by manual or electric stainless steels wire brush to remove
all oxide impurities and sand particles dropped by grinding;
b. Use acetone and cleaning cloth without gauze to wipe the groove and
surrounding area of the welding area and the filler wire (the filler wire should
be kept dry, and its surface should be free of oil, rust and other impurities).
c. When acetone is used to wipe the welding parts, the electric heat blower
can be used to blow the welding parts for a short time, to ensure that the
welding parts and the surrounding areas are free of any moisture absorbing
oxides, grease, water vapor, fingermarks, and other impurities that affect the
welding quality.
d. At present, there is still no effective methods to clean the back surface of
welding position of a small closed cavity, which may lead to impurities on
the back entering into the weld pool during welding, affecting the welding
quality.
e. Welding should be performed as soon as possible after cleaning in the above
way, in order to avoid absorbing moisture in the air on the cleaned surface.
f. The welding surroundings shall be kept dry and equipped with appropriate
ventilation and smoke exhaust devices to ensure the health and safety of
welders. However, during welding the shielding effect of argon gas on
the welding pool shall be prevented from being directly affected by the
ventilation.
(7) Repair welding process
a. In the welding process, high quality, nickel-base alloy filler wire should
be selected to mix with the casting, to improve the weld structure and
performance.
b. While welding, the back surface shall be protected by argon gas, of which
the main purpose is to prevent oxidation on the back of the joint and reduce
the impact of defects on the molten metal flow in the welding pool. For
cavity type thin-wall casting, high-temperature resistant aluminum foil tape
should be used to seal other technological holes being not repaired, and then
the pure argon should be inflated into the cavity to achieve back protection.
c. TIG welding with direct current electrode negative (DCEN) and small line
energy is adopted. The welding current should be between 40 and 80 A,
and arc should not swing during welding. Compared with large line energy,
the small line energy can reduce cracking tendency, but too small heat input
may lead to too large molten pool viscosity, affecting weld formation.
d. With the aid of the viscosity of molten metal in the welding pool, one-side
welding with back formation can be completed without gasket. It can be
welded from the edge of the groove to the central area or from one side of
the groove to the other.272 J. Wang et al.
e. Subsection welding can fully release the stress in the welding process,
control the temperature between layers, and reduce the tendency of hot
cracking. The welding time of each weld should not be too long, and it is
advisable not to exceed 5 min to prevent overheating of the weld.
f. After each segment is welded, the surface of the weld shall be gently peened
with a hammer immediately. Through vibration and peening, compressive
stress shall be applied on the surface of the weld to alleviate and reduce the
tensile stress in the solidification and cooling process of the weld, and reduce
the tendency of weld cracking. When the temperature drops to 300 °C, the
hammering can be stopped.
g. Interlayer temperature should be controlled during welding. After finishing
welding of every weld bead, one should stop for a moment, to avoid over￾heating in local area and to reduce deformation, or move to other parts to be
welded. After the weld cooling, one should go back to continue welding.
h. Arc ignition and arc extinguish points should be staggered with each other.
The arc should avoid extinguish on base material. Because the cracking
tendency at arc crater is large, the cracking sensitivity can be reduced by
avoiding arc extinguish in the defective structure and impurity of the base
metal.
i. Once a defect is found in the repair welding process, the welding shall be
stopped immediately. It can only be continued after the defect is polished.
6.7 Inhibition Effect of Hot Isostatic Pressure Technology
(HIP) on Defects of Large Casting
The structure of K4169 superalloy TRF castings are very complex, and it is difficult
to control during casting. Metallurgical defects are often found in the casting, e.g.,
microporosity, segregation and Laves phase, which are difficult to eliminate. The
existence of these defects deteriorates the properties of castings seriously, especially
the high-temperature rupture and fatigue properties, as well as reduces the reliability
of castings. Hot isostatic pressing (HIP) can not only eliminate pore defects such
as microporosity and macroporosity in castings effectively, but also improve the
microstructures and eliminate segregation and brittle phases of alloys.
6.7.1 Elimination of Microscopic Porosity by HIP
The HIP treatment process of K4169 superalloy is 1170 °C/140 MPa/4 h. After HIP
treatment, the porosity of the castings decreases significantly, and the microporosity
of the castings is improved considerably.
Table 6.4 shows the porosity of the castings before and after HIP, which indicates6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 273
Table 6.4 Porosity of K4169 alloy under different heat treatment conditions
Material status As-cast HIP state
Microporosity/% 1.4 0.12
that HIP can eliminate the void defects of the castings effectively and make the
castings well compact. The morphological changes of microporosity before and
after HIP are shown in Fig. 6.43.
The number of microporosity is expressed using the microporosity index, which
is equal to the percentage of the total area of micro-voids in the field of view to
the total area of observation. According to the national standard, the distribution of
microporosity before and after HIP treatment of castings is evaluated, as shown in
Table 6.5.
The results show that there are significant differences in terms of the size and quan￾tity of microporosity before and after HIP treatment. The as-cast specimens contains
a lot of microporosity, which are different in size, irregular in shape, and uniformly
dispersed on the surface of polished specimen. There is no obvious tendency of
aggregation. This indicates that the filling of liquid metal during casting process is
complete, but it is difficult to replenish at the later stage of solidification, as shown in
Fig. 6.43a. After HIP treatment, the matrix structure of the castings is compact and
uniform, and there is almost no visible microporosity under the optical microscope,
Fig. 6.43 Changing of microporosity before and after HIP. a As-cast b HIP state
Table 6.5 Microporosity Index of castings in different post-treatment states
Groups and post-processing status As-cast HIP state
Microporosity index Distribution interval 0.20–1.10 0–0.12
Average value 0.63 0.03274 J. Wang et al.
as shown in Fig. 6.43b. Comparing the microporosity index of the two kinds of spec￾imens, it can be concluded that the microporosity of the specimens treated by HIP
can be reduced by more than 90% compared with that of the as-cast specimens. In
order to further study the improvement of casting defects of superalloy by HIP, the
size distribution of microporosity in as-cast and HIP states was analyzed by image
processing software. The results are shown in Fig. 6.44.
Fig. 6.44 Perimeter distribution of microporosity before and after HIP a As-cast, Microporosity
size content distribution/μm, b HIP, microporosity size distribution/μm6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 275
The outer perimeter of the projection of microporosity in the field of view is used
to represent the size of microporosity. In as-cast specimens, the perimeter range of
microporosity is widely distributed in the range of 3–200 μm, which may be even
up to nearly 500 μm. Among them, the microporosities below 10 μm are very few.
The microporosities in the range of 10–50 μm are the most portion, accounting for
74%. With the increase of perimeter, the number of microporosities decreases. The
number of microporosities between 50 and 150 μm increases, accounting for about
20% of the total number, and only 4% of microporosities above 200 μm as shown
in Fig. 6.44a.
After HIP treatment, the number and total amount of microporosities in the matrix
of castings are significantly reduced. The circumference distribution of microporosi￾ties shifts to the left and narrows obviously, mainly in the region of 6–20 μm, and the
number of microporosities decreases with the increase of circumference. Microp￾orosities with circumference of less than 10 μm accounted for more than 50% of the
totality, while that with circumference of more than 20 μm accounted for only about
6%. Large-scale microporosities with circumference of more than 50 μm healed
completely as shown in Fig. 6.44b.
6.7.2 Elimination of Segregation and Laves Phase by HIP
As-cast structure of large complex superalloy castings has larger segregation zone
and higher Laves phase content as shown in Fig. 6.45.
Microstructure inhomogeneity is another unavoidable defect of as-cast
microstructures besides microporosity. The inhomogeneity of microstructures leads
to the decrease of mechanical properties. The standard heat treatment system
prescribed by the aviation standard is not enough to eliminate Laves phase. Usually,
HIP is used to eliminate Laves phase and reduce component segregation before
homogenization at 1095 °C.
As-cast microstructures of K4169 alloy are typical dendritic structures, the
dendritic trunk area is white and the interdendritic area is black as shown in Fig. 6.45a.
At higher magnification, a clear black “island” segregation zone can be seen, espe￾cially in the middle of the “island” structure, which is Nb-rich white block Laves
phase. Laves phase and segregation zone together constitute the interdendritic region,
and the skeleton particles are MC carbide phase.
Compared with the as-cast microstructures, standard heat treatment can not elimi￾nate Laves phase, and there are still obvious segregation zones as shown in Fig. 6.45b.
The volume fraction of Laves phase shows little decrease, and a large number of
needle-like delta phases are produced in the Nb-rich black segregation region around
the Laves phase, which is mainly due to the exclusion of Nb and Mo to the inter￾dendritic zone during solidification. Therefore, the Nb content in the interdendritic
region is relatively high with about 10 wt.%. Laves phase was formed by L → γ +276 J. Wang et al.
Fig. 6.45 Microstructure of K4169 Alloy under different heat treatment conditions. a As-cast,
b Aviation standard heat treatment, c HIP+ Aviation standard heat treatment
Laves eutectic reaction at the end of solidification. The Laves phase was enriched by
33 wt.% Nb, which was about 6 times of the original alloy composition. However,
the Nb element in the segregation area is still at a high level although it has been
reduced. The enrichment of Ni, Ti, and Nb in these segregation areas is conducive
to the nucleation and growth of the δ-Ni3Nb phase. A large number of acicular δ￾Ni3Nb phases were formed under standard heat treatment. However, due to the high
Nb concentration in Laves phase of K4169 alloy and due to the high activation energy
of Nb diffusion in K4169 alloy, the difficulty for homogenization treatment is obvi￾ously increased. Therefore, it is difficult to eliminate segregation of Nb elements
by standard homogenization treatment. The Laves phase is completely eliminated
after heat treatment + HIP and the eutectic characteristics tend to be invisible as
shown in Fig. 6.45c. Due to the different segregation degree of different structure
parts in large complex thin-walled castings, the elimination degree of segregation
is somewhat different. For the thin-walled part [see Fig. 6.46a], the Laves phase
and its associated segregation zone are largely eliminated and no acicular δ-Ni3Nb
phase is formed. However, with the increase of thickness, although the Laves phase
is completely dissolved in the matrix, the surrounding segregation zone still exists.
After HIP+ standard heat treatment, acicular δ-Ni3Nb phase is precipitated again in
the segregation region as shown in Fig. 6.46b.6 Prediction and Control of Casting Defects in Large Castings 277
Fig. 6.46 Elimination of segregation after HIP in thick and large parts. a HIP, b HIP plus standard
heat treatment
6.8 Future Development Trend of Casting Defect
Prediction and Control
With the development of computer, intelligent identification system, and non￾destructive testing technology, the inspection of large castings will develop towards
to automation, three-dimensional, intelligent, and refinement. Automatic recognition
and evaluation of casting defect types, grades, and spatial distribution will be real￾ized, and more and more attention will be paid to the detection and characterization
of micro-defects.
Computer-aided casting will proceed from macro-temperature field and shrinkage
prediction to microporosity and harmful phase prediction, eventually towards digital￾izing the whole casting process. With the development of artificial intelligence tech￾nology such as big data technology and machine learning, the prediction and control
of casting defects will be transformed. The technology of repairing and restraining
casting defects will be further developed, which is expected to break through the
difficult problems of repairing large castings.
References
1. P. Lee, A. Chirazi, D. See, Modeling microporosity in aluminum-silicon alloys: a review. J.
Light Met. 1(1), 15–30 (2001)
2. H. Zheng, W. Tian, J. Sun et al., Overview on porosity forming mechanism of spheroidal
graphite iron. Foundry 54(11), 1063–1065 (Chinese) (2005)
3. National Standards of the People’s Republic of China, Method for determination of grain size,
primary dendrite spacing and microporosity of Superalloy Castings. Vol. GB/T 14999.7-2010
(Chinese) (2010), pp. 1–14
4. C.D. Lee, Defect susceptibility of tensile strength to microporosity variation in as-cast
magnesium alloys with different grain sizes. Met. Mater. Int. 16(4), 543–551 (2010)278 J. Wang et al.
5. D.G.L. Prakash, D. Regener, W.J.J. Vorster, Effect of position on the tensile properties in
high-pressure die cast Mg alloy. J. Alloy. Compd. 470(1–2), 111–116 (2009)
6. C. Do Lee, Variability in the tensile properties of squeeze-cast Al–Si–Cu–Mg alloy. Mater. Sci.
Eng. Struct. Mater. Prop. Microstruct. Process. 488(1–2), 296–302 (2008)
7. C. Do Lee, Constitutive prediction on the variability of tensile properties due to microporosity
variation. Met. Mater. Int. 14(1), 15–20 (2008)
8. D.M. Stefanescu, Computer simulation of shrinkage related defects in metal castings—a review.
Int. J. Cast Met. Res. 18(3), 129–143 (2005)
9. K.D. Carlson, C. Beckermann, Prediction of shrinkage pore volume fraction using a
dimensionless Niyama criterion. Metall. Mater. Trans. A 40(1), 163–175 (2009)
10. J. Campbell, M. Tiryakio ˘glu, Bifilm defects in Ni-based alloy castings. Metall Mater Trans B
43B, 1–13 (2012)
11. P. Li, P.D. Lee, D.M. Maijer et al., Quantification of the interaction within defect populations
on fatigue behavior in an aluminum alloy. Acta Mater. 57(12), 3539–3548 (2009)
12. Y. Cao, Y. Xiong, Application of industrial computed tomography to testing complicated
castings. NDT, 24(8), 357–359 (Chinese) (2002)
13. L. Nastac, D.M. Stefanescu, Macrotransport-solidification kinetics modeling of Equiaxed
dendritic growth. Ii. Computation problems and validation on Inconel 718 superalloy castings.
Metall. Mater. Trans. A 27(12), 4075–4083 (1996)Chapter 7
Dimensional Precision Control of Large
Castings
Changhui Liu, Sun Jin, and Xinmin Lai
A turbine rear frame (TRF) is an important load-bearing component with a complex
shape in the aero-engine, which requires not only a high metallurgical quality but
also an extremely strict dimensional accuracy. For example, the accuracy of key
linear dimensions is CT4~CT6 [1] according to the tolerance requirements of the
ISO standard, which is very difficult to manufacture. However, the final casting
shape produced by investment casting is close to the final shape of the part, which
can be used directly or with little additional machining [2, 3]. Therefore, investment
casting has become the main method of aero-engine superalloy complex structural
components.
In recent years, with the continuous improvement of thrust-to-weight ratio, the
structure of key hot-end castings of aero-engine is becoming more and more inte￾grated, thin-walled, and complicated with variable cross-section (the maximum
outline size is 1.8 m, the minimum wall thickness is less than 2 mm, and the maximum
casting weight is 1000 kg [1]). It is also developing towards the integration of struc￾tural bearing capacity and gas diversion structure and function. This not only puts
forward the requirement of high bearing capacity for aviation castings but also poses
a new challenge to the dimensional accuracy of aviation castings. The deviation due
to deformation and the size mismatch lead to the poor qualification rate of the finished
products of large and complex thin-wall castings, the low service performance, and
the difficulty of ensuring the batch manufacturing ability. This is the bottleneck
issue that must be overcome in order to achieve the independent development of
the key parts of aero-engine. Therefore, the dimensional accuracy and dimensional
stability of complex thin-wall castings have become a common but difficult problem
in investment casting of aero-engine superalloy complex structures [2, 4, 5].
In this chapter, by studying the influence of complex processing parameters on the
overall accuracy of castings, the technical system of deviation detection, evaluation,
diagnosis, and control for large castings is constructed. The new theory of stream
of variation simulation of large castings is established, and new technologies and
methods such as quantitative analysis, process optimization, accurate detection, and
rapid diagnosis of large castings are formed. Therefore, the quality control of large
© Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
B. Sun et al., Precision Forming Technology of Large Superalloy Castings for Aircraft
Engines, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-6220-8_7
279280 C. Liu et al.
castings can be developed from qualitative analysis to quantitative control. It provides
new technologies and methods for casting precision control.
7.1 Main Variation Sources Affecting the Dimensional
Accuracy of Investment Castings
7.1.1 Analysis of Main Variation Sources in Wax Part
Production
7.1.1.1 The Main Variation Source Which Affects the Deformation
of the Wax Part
Through the deformation mechanism and performance test of wax materials, it is
found that the technological parameters of wax pressing stage can affect the proper￾ties of wax materials, which leads to the deformation of wax materials in the filling
process. In the process of wax pressing, there are many factors causing the dimen￾sional deviation of the wax die. First of all, the difference between the die of wax
pressing and the drawing of die design introduces the initial size error, which depends
on the manufacturing accuracy of die construction. In general, the die can be used
repeatedly for a long time after manufacturing, which allows the size error of the
die to be regarded as a systematic error. In the process of wax injection, the exhaust
property of the die will affect the filling of wax material, but the exhaust property of
the die is determined by the design. The influence caused by the exhaust property of
the die can be eliminated by modifying the die. The thermal conductivity of the die
will affect the cooling rate of the wax material and the thermal conductivity of the die
will be determined by the die material. When the mold material is determined, the
thermal conductivity of the die will be determined, such that the thermal conductivity
of the die will not introduce random error.
In the process of wax injection, we can set the parameters of wax pressing through
the wax pressing program, including holding pressure, holding time, melt tempera￾ture, wax injection speed, die temperature, die locking force and so on [6–8]. Through
the analysis of the deformation mechanism of wax materials in the process of wax
pressing, it can be seen that these parameters directly affect the properties of wax
materials and thus affect the deformation. In addition, these parameters will fluctuate
within a small range around the set value due to the instability of the wax compressor
system. Among them, as long as the die locking force is set at a reasonable level to
ensure that the upper and lower die of the die can be closely fitted, its fluctuation
will not cause the dimensional change of the wax die. The fluctuation of pressure
holding pressure, holding time, melt temperature, die temperature and so on can
directly affect the physical properties of wax in the filling process, which has an
effect on the solidification and cooling shrinkage of wax and finally introducing the7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 281
dimensional variation. Therefore, these processing parameters bring random error
and finally reflect the dimensional variation of the wax part.
7.1.1.2 Main Variation Sources Affecting the Deformation of the Wax
Part in the Storage Process
According to the analysis of the deformation mechanism of the wax part in the storage
stage, it can be seen that the storage temperature and storage time of the wax part
directly affect the deformation of the wax part. The deviation of storage temperature
and storage time also directly lead to the dimensional deviation caused by the final
wax part used in the preparation of shell. In the actual storage process, although
the wax part is stored in the environment of constant temperature and humidity,
the storage temperature will fluctuate slightly in different ranges according to the
different production conditions near the set temperature level. On the other hand,
the stored wax part will be used to manufacture the shell, and due to the production
progress, there will be some deviations in the storage time. Therefore, in the storage
stage of the wax part, storage time and storage temperature are the main random
factors in the storage process, which are the main variation sources affecting the
fluctuation of the wax part dimension.
In summary, the main variation sources of wax part dimension in the process of
mold preparation include dimensional deviation of die, holding pressure, holding
time, melt temperature, wax injection speed, storage temperature, storage time and
so on. After the dimensional deviation of the die is introduced, it will not change in
the process of wax die pressing in the future, which is the system error. In the process
of batch preparation of the wax part, the actual process parameters of each wax part
will be different, and the dimensional deviation of the final wax part will be random
due to the variation of process parameters.
7.1.2 Analysis of Main Variation Sources in Shell Production
The preparation process of the ceramic shell is the most time-consuming process
in the whole investment casting process. The preparation process of the whole
ceramic shell is shown in Fig. 7.1. Before removed, the wax pattern was first covered
completely by the slurry using the immersion method. In order to promote an even
coating, the pattern was rotated over a slurry dipping pool so that the redundant slurry
can drain from different points. Then using the rainfall method, a uniform distribution
of stucco was formed. The shell coating is categorized into three types: the surface
layer, the back layer, and the slurry sealing layer. After an adequate drying for the
shell, the patterns were then melted in a furnace so that only the unfired or green
shells are remained. The processing parameters such as the dewaxing temperature,
the dewaxing time, the dewaxing pressure, and the heating direction are set in the
dewaxing process. Before casting, the shell should be put into a furnace again. The282 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.1 The production process of ceramic shell
shell should be roasted by setting different heating rate, roasting temperature, and
holding time in order to increase the strength of the shell and avoid the fracture of
the shell introduced by the pressure of liquid metal in the pouring process.
Since the preparation process of the shell is very complex, many factors can affect
the deformation of the shell. Through the study of the properties and deformation
mechanism of the shell, combined with the test of the properties of the partial shell, it
can be seen that the physical properties of the slurry are basically determined by the
composition of the slurry. The composition and particle size determine the composi￾tion of the shell after drying, thus affecting the microstructure and thermal properties
of the shell. However, the thermal properties determined by the composition of the
material are basically stable. The immersion time, slurry coating time, stuccoing
time, stuccoing angle, drying time, drying temperature, environmental humidity,
dewaxing time, dewaxing pressure, dewaxing temperature, and heating rate are all
uncontrollable and likely to fluctuate during the whole preparation process of the
shell. These processing parameters are random. The random variations caused by
slurry coating time, stuccoing time and stuccoing angle are reflected in the unifor￾mity of the thickness and thickness of the shell. The thickness uniformity caused by
the geometric structure and riser of the shell and the position of the dewaxing port
is systematic, while the thickness uniformity caused by the processing parameters is
random. Therefore, the variation sources in the preparation stage of the shell can be
summarized as follows: the different thickness of the shell, the dewaxing time, the
dewaxing pressure, the dewaxing temperature, the roasting temperature, the holding
time, the heating rate and so on.7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 283
7.1.3 Analysis of Main Variation Sources in the Casting
Process
In the casting process, when the shell is started in the baking furnace, the alloy is
put into the crucible of the vacuum furnace, and the starting equipment is started
to melt the alloy. When the temperature of the melt of the alloy reaches the casting
temperature, the door of the roasting furnace is quickly opened. The shell and the
pouring cup are quickly transferred to the ingot buggy by a forklift. Then the outer
chamber is entered. The molten metal is injected into the shell through the runner.
After the casting is finished, the air is ventilated. When the door is opened, the ingot
buggy is withdrawn and the magnesium powder is sprayed. Finally, the casting is
transferred to the designated area by a forklift and the alloy is cooled and solidified
in the shell.
In the process of casting and solidification of the alloy, the alloy and the shell have
non-uniform heat exchange and complex mechanical action. Therefore, the thermal
properties of the shell have an important influence on the shrinkage of the alloy. In
addition, casting temperature, casting speed, and other processing parameters are
also the main factors affecting the shrinkage of the alloy, of which the fluctuations
will introduce random deviations.
7.2 Method for the Precision Control of Large-Scale
Castings
7.2.1 The Accurate Measurement for the Dimensional
Deviations of the Investment Casting Process
7.2.1.1 Method for Accurate Dimensional Deviation Detection
1. Measurement of key dimensions
The key dimensions, such as the inner and outer flange diameter, are required to
be measured effectively with high accuracy. According to the designed measure￾ment specification and the arrangement of functional measurement points, the three￾coordinate measurement machine is used (as shown in Fig. 7.2). The accuracy of the
measurement is 4.5 μm, which meets the measurement requirements.
2. Measurement of 3D dimensions
For complex castings, curved surfaces are often designed. There are some limitations
to evaluate its shape deviation by three-coordinate machines. Not only the measure￾ment is time-consuming but also the measurement results are not intuitive. For this284 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.2 Three-coordinate
measurement machine
Fig. 7.3 FARO laser scanner7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 285
reason, we use a FARO laser scanner, as shown in Fig. 7.3, as a full-size measure￾ment platform. Its measurement accuracy is 80 μm, which meets the requirements
of measurement.
3. Measurement of the inner cavity dimensions of the shell
In order to monitor the dimension change of the whole process, the inner cavity
dimensions of the shell must be measured. It is a great challenge to measure the
inner cavity dimensions of the shell. This problem can be solved using the industrial
computer tomography (CT) method [9]. The measurement accuracy is 25 μm. The
measurement process and the post-processing of measurement results for a sample
shell are shown in Figs. 7.4 and 7.5, respectively.
In order to analyze the dimension change of the whole process, the laser scanner
and industrial computer tomography are used in the investment casting process for
a sample. Its dimension deviations to the design dimensions of the die are shown in
Fig. 7.6.
Fig. 7.4 The measurement process for a sample shell
Fig. 7.5 The post-processing of measurement results for a sample shell286 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.6 Dimension
deviations (unit: mm) of the
measured point cloud model
relative to the CAD model. a wax, b ceramic shell and c casting part [10]7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 287
7.2.1.2 Optimization and Design of Dimensional Deviation Detection
System for Large-Scale Casting
During the deviation detection of each stage of the casting, the positioning mode influ￾ences the observability, the inheritance, and deviation detection. A good positioning
method should guarantee the quality of parts in the assembly process. Different posi￾tioning methods can have a great influence on the assembly quality of the same part.
The positioning mode can be divided into full positioning, incomplete positioning,
under positioning, and over positioning. The six degrees of freedom of the workpiece
being completely restricted is called full positioning. When the workpiece has dimen￾sional accuracy requirements in the three directions of x, y, and z, the positioning
method is generally adopted. When the processing requirement or the actual function
of the workpiece does not need to limit the six degrees of freedom of the workpiece,
the positioning method adopted at this time is incompletely positioned. According
to the processing requirement and the actual function of the workpiece, the restricted
degree of freedom is not limited, and the positioning mode is under-positioning.
Two or more positioning elements on the clamp limit the positioning mode of the
same degree of freedom of the workpiece as the over-positioning. When the parts
are over positioned, it may lead to the workpiece cannot be installed, resulting in
the deformation of the workpiece or positioning elements. However, the reasonable
use of over positioning can improve the position accuracy between the workpiece
positioning benchmarks and between the working surfaces of positioning elements.
For a specific positioning method, the quality of its positioning is usually deter￾mined based on engineering experience. At present, a quantitative representation
method is lacking. As shown in Fig. 7.7, there are three feasible positioning methods
for the same part. Empirically, the first one is the best and the third one is the worst.
However, there are some more complex positioning methods, the traditional expe￾rience cannot directly say the quality of the positioning method, so for the charac￾terization of the positioning method, we need a quantitative representation method,
using the calculation data to explain the quality of the positioning method.
For the ring parts in this paper, because the ring parts have the characteristics
of rotational symmetry, the general positioning method is axial and circumferen￾tial positioning (the second or third positioning method as shown in Fig. 7.7). The
traditional positioning deviation research is missing for this type of positioning. This
chapter is to solve the positioning problem of the ring.
Fig. 7.7 Three different positioning methods of the same part288 C. Liu et al.
1. Positioning stability analysis
(1) Stability index of positioning Jacobian matrix
Suppose a part is located by n locating points and the contact between the locating
point and the part can be regarded as point friction contact. The relationship between
the contact force F of the fixture and the workpiece and the torque Fe of the workpiece
is given as follows:
JF = Fe (7.1)
where J is the positioning Jacobian matrix. in the deterministic positioning, the
Jacobian matrix has a given form. It’s a transfer matrix. In the rigid body kinematics,
it mainly plays the role of transferring the positioning point deviation to the part
positioning deviation in the positioning process.
In the two-dimensional case:
Ji = 
−nix, −niy, niyxi − nixyi
 (7.2)
In the three-dimensional case:
Ji = 
−nix, −niy, −niz, 2(nizyi − niyzi), 2(nixzi − nizxi), 2(niyxi − nixyi)
 (7.3)
In these formulas, −→ni = (nix, niy, niz)T is the normal vector of location point i.
The general solution of Eq. (7.1) is as follows:
F = (I − J +J )λ (7.4)
where J + = J T (JJ T )−1 is the generalized inverse matrix of matrix J, I is the unit
matrix, and λ is an arbitrary vector.
In Eq. (7.4), F = J +Fe represents the cooperative force of the fixture used to
resist the external force and external torque, F = (I −J +J )λ is the internal force set
of zero space J. Internal force is released at the locating point to correct F, avoiding
the locating point moving at the contact point and causing no residual force and
moment on the part surface. According to Formula 7.4, a Gaussian sphere can be
established and its expression is F2 = 1. The Gaussian sphere can be mapped to a
hyperellipsoid in the workspace, which is called force hyperellipsoid. The equation
for this sphere is defined as follows:
FT (JJ T )
−1
F = 1 (7.5)
The principal axis of the ellipsoid is e1σ1, e2σ2, ··· , enσn, in which ei is the i-th
eigenvector of JJ T and σi is the i-th singular value of matrix J, that is, the length of
the i-th principal axis of the hyperellipsoid. Here, the product of all singular values
is defined as the Jacobian matrix stability parameter w, that is:7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 289
Fig. 7.8 Deterministic
positioning scheme of parts
w = σ1σ2 ··· σn (7.6)
It can be seen from the formula that this parameter is related to the position of the
contact point of the clamped part. Because det(JJ T ) = (σ1σ2 ··· σn)2 the Jacobian
stability index of the positioning can be expressed as:
w = 
det(JJ T ) (7.7)
(2) Stability and its influencing factors under deterministic positioning
Suppose that the part adopts the deterministic positioning scheme of 3-6-1 mode, as
shown in Fig. 7.8, the coordinates of main positioning points 1, 2, and 3 are respec￾tively:(x1, y1, 0),(x2, y2, 0), and (x3, y3, 0); the coordinates of secondary positioning
points 4 and 5 are (0, y4,z4), (0, y5,z5); the coordinates of positioning point 6 are
(x6, 0,z6).
According to Eq. (7.3):
J =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
0 0 −1 2y1 −2x1 0
0 0 −1 2y2 −2x2 0
0 0 −1 2y3 −2x3 0
−10 0 0 2z4 −2y4
−10 0 0 2z5 −2y5
0 −1 0 −2z6 0 2x6
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
(7.8)
Equation 7.8 can be written as follows:
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
00 0 2y1 −2x1 −1
00 0 2y2 −2x2 −1
00 0 2y3 −2x3 −1
−1 0 −2y4 0 2z4 0
−1 0 −2y5 0 2z5 0
0 −1 2x6 −2z6 0 0
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
=

0 A
B C 
(7.9)290 C. Liu et al.
where A =
⎡
⎣
2y1 −2x1 −1
2y2 −2x2 −1
2y3 −2x3 −1
⎤
⎦, B =
⎡
⎣
−1 0 −2y4
−1 0 −2y5
0 −1 2x6
⎤
⎦, C =
⎡
⎣
0 2z4 0
0 2z5 0
−2z6 0 0
⎤
⎦
It is obvious that J is invertible. From Eq. (7.6), it can be seen that the stability
index of the Jacobian matrix in this positioning method is:
w = AB = 8|(x2y3 + x3y1 + x1y2 − x2y1 − x1y3 − x3y2)(y5 − y4)| (7.10)
From geometry knowledge, we can get:

S = 1
2 (x2y3 + x3y1 + x1y2 − x2y1 − x1y3 − x3y2)
L = y5 − y4
(7.11)
where S is the area of a triangle composed of locating points 1, 2 and 3, and L is the
y-direction distance between locating points 4 and 5.
Therefore, the stability index of positioning Jacobian matrix can be simplified as:
w = 16SL (7.12)
From Eq. (7.12), it can be seen that the more dispersed the main positioning points
are, the larger the positioning triangle they form. The larger w is, the more stable the
positioning method is. The larger the distance of the second positioning point in the
y-direction is, the more stable the positioning method is.
(3) Stability comparison of different positioning modes for different structures
Since the established expression of the positioning stability coefficient has been
determined, the stability of different positioning methods under the same part is
compared. The selection of locating points on the main locating surface generally
follows that the locating points are scattered as far as possible to maximize the
triangle area formed by the locating points. Therefore, we only need to study the
two-dimensional positioning.
In the first case, as shown in Fig. 7.9, the coordinates of main positioning points 1
and 2 are (x1, y1), (x2, y2), respectively, and the coordinate of secondary positioning
point 3 is (x3, y3), The curvature of the primary and secondary locating surfaces are
0 and parallel to the coordinate axis.
According to Eq. (7.2), the Jacobian matrix of the positioning method is:
J1 =
⎡
⎣
0 −1 x1
0 −1 x2
1 0 −y3
⎤
⎦ (7.13)
According to Eq. (7.7), the Jacobian stability index of the positioning mode is as
follows:7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 291
Fig. 7.9 Positioning method
1
w1 =

det(J1J T
1 ) = x1 − x2 (7.14)
Equation 7.14 shows that the larger the x-direction distance between the
positioning points 1 and 2, the better the stability of the positioning method.
For the second case, as shown in Fig. 7.10, the coordinates of main positioning
points 1 and 2 are (x1, y1), (x2, y2) ,respectively, the coordinates of secondary posi￾tioning point 3 are (x3, y3), the curvature of secondary positioning surface is not 0,
and the curve equation is y = ax2 + bx + c.
According to Eq. (7.2), the Jacobian matrix of the positioning method is:
Fig. 7.10 Positioning
method 2292 C. Liu et al.
J2 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
0 −1 x1
0 −1 x2
−(2ax3 + b)( ϕ
|2a|
)1/3 ( ϕ
|2a|
)1/3 −( ϕ
|2a|
)1/3[x3 + y3(2ax3 + b)]
⎤
⎥
⎦ (7.15)
where ϕ is the curvature of the curve and the mathematical expression is ϕ = |2a|
[1+(2ax3+b)3/2]
.
According to Eq. (7.7), the Jacobian stability index of the positioning mode is as
follows:
w2 =

det(J2J T
2 ) = (x1 − x2)

1 −
 ϕ
2a
2/3
(7.16)
It can be seen from the geometric relationship that the tangent slope of positioning
point 3 is k = 2ax3 + b, so Eq. (7.16) can be simplified as:
w2 = (x1 − x2)

1 − 1
1 + k2

(7.17)
From Eq. (7.17), it can be seen that, for the positioning method of positioning
points on the arc surface, the larger the x-direction distance of positioning points 1
and 2, the better the stability of the positioning method. It also can be found that the
greater the slope of the tangent line at the position of positioning point 3 on the arc
surface, the better the stability.
For the third case, as shown in Fig. 7.11, the coordinates of main positioning
points 1 and 2 are (x1, y1), (x2, y2), respectively, and the coordinates of secondary
positioning point 3 are (x3, y3), the curvature of secondary positioning surface is not
0, and the curve equation is y = ax2 + bx + c.
According to Eq. (7.2), the Jacobian matrix of the positioning method is:
Fig. 7.11 Positioning
method 37 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 293
J3 =
⎡
⎣
A B Bx2 − Ay2
C D Dx2 − Cy2
1 0 y3
⎤
⎦ (7.18)
where, A = 2ax1 + b, B = 2ax2 + b is the slope of the tangent of the locating points
1 and 2 on the locating surface;
C = 2ax1y1 + y1b − x1
√A2 + 1 , D = 2ax2y2 + y2b − x2
√B2 + 1 (7.19)
According to Eq. (7.7), the Jacobian matrix of the positioning method is:
w3 =

det(J3J T
3 ) = 
A(y1 − y3) − B(y2 − y3) + (x1 − x2)2 (7.20)
From Eq. (7.20), it can be seen that under the positioning method 3, the stability
of the positioning mode is related to the x-direction distance of the positioning points
1 and 2 and the y-direction distance of the positioning points 1, 2 and 3, as well as
the shape of the position of the positioning point on the arc positioning surface.
Comparing the stability of the above three positioning methods, under the same
part structure, the positioning stability for different positioning methods are different.
Obviously, the stability of positioning method 3 is affected by the most factors, which
is also the most unstable. Therefore, when the main locating surface of the part is
an arc surface, the selection of the positioning method has greater stability to the
positioning of the part. When selecting the positioning method, it is suggested to
avoid the selection of the arc surface.
2. Optimized selection of positioning mode for ring parts
From the previous section, it is known that the quality of the positioning method is
manifested in the stability of positioning and the deviation transmission ability of
positioning. Next, for specific parts, the positioning method can be optimized.
The part illustrated in Fig. 7.12 is a flange part diagram, where AB is the outer
surface of the inner flange with the corresponding flange equation being x2+y2 = a2.
CD is the outer surface of the outer flange with the flange equation x2 + y2 = b2.
Due to the lack of positioning features on the part surface, the part adopts the axial
positioning. The manufacture accuracy of the AB surface is forced to improve during
the design process so that it can become the positioning surface which can limit the
movement of the outer flange in the radial direction. At the same time, in order to
limit the movement of the parts in the circumferential direction, a locating slot needs
to be opened under the outer flange. To achieve the best positioning quality, the width
of the positioning slot and the location of the positioning point on the AB surface are
calculated.
The quality of the positioning method can be determined according to the stability
of positioning and the error transmission ability of positioning. For this example, we
also consider these two aspects. Since the AB surface is the datum plane and has294 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.12 Flange parts
a large area, it is regarded as the main locating surface. Two locating points P1
and P2 are arranged on the AB surface. The whole part is symmetrical about the
y-axis. Empirically, when P1 and P2 are symmetrical, the positioning is relatively
stable. Thus, let the coordinates for P1 and P2 be (x, y) and (−x, y), respectively.
If the positioning point on the positioning slot is P3 (x3, y3), then the quality of the
positioning method under different positioning point arrangements can be measured
according to the theory of the first two sections.
According to Eq. (7.2), in this positioning mode, the positioning Jacobian matrix
can be expressed as:
J = −1
a
⎡
⎣
−x y −2xy
x y 2xy
a 0 ay3
⎤
⎦ (7.21)
(1) Positioning stability
According to Eq. (7.7), under the positioning mode, the positioning stability
parameters are:
w = 
det(J T J ) = a2
(y2
3 + 3) + 8x2
y2 (7.22)
The larger the w is, the better the stability of the positioning mode is. According
to Eq. (7.22), a larger y3 will lead to a larger value of 8x2y2 and hence a more
stable positioning mode. Since the locating point is on the surface AB, the equation7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 295
x2 + y2 = a2 is satisfied. As a result, when x = − √2
2 a, y = √2
2 a, 8x2y2 takes the
maximum value 2a4.
Thus, when the coordinate of P1 is (−
√2
2 a,
√2
2 a), the coordinate of P2 is
(
√2
2 a,
√2
2 a), the larger the y3 is, the better the stability of the positioning method
is.
(2) Degree of space freedom restriction
In this way, the ill-conditioned index of the Jacobian matrix is:
k = J  ·

J −1

 = 4

xy(y3 − 2y)
2 (7.23)
It is thus suggested that a smaller ill-conditioned index of the positioning Jaco￾bian matrix will lead to a smaller ill-conditioned degree of the positioning Jacobian
matrix. In addition, less distortion of the positioning method in the process of error
transmission will result in better positioning error transmission ability together with
a higher accuracy.
When y3 = 2y, the transmission ability of positioning error is the best when x
and y are determined. That is, when y3 = √2a, this positioning method is the best.
Under this condition, x3 = ±√b2 − 2a2. Thus, when the width of the positioning
slot is L = 2
√b2 − 2a2, the positioning method is the best. The selected positioning
method is shown in Fig. 7.13.
Fig. 7.13 Optimized positioning method of flange parts296 C. Liu et al.
7.2.2 Specification for Measurement Points and Functional
Dimensions of Complex System Casting
In the quality inspection process for the complex casting, the concept of functional
dimension (FD—Functional Dimension) was put forward and fully implemented by
Volkswagen in the 1990s. The appearance of the functional dimension system brings
great convenience for manufacturing dimension quality control and also provides
a new idea for the optimal design of the dimension detection system. The casting
function size is extracted from the general detection points of the casting, and it is
an optimization of the general checkpoints.
According to the functional requirements of casting products, a series of dimen￾sions that must be guaranteed and controlled can be put forward to ensure the quality
of these dimensions and the quality of products can meet the requirements. The
formation of a functional dimension is based on the information of measurement
points, such that the distribution of measurement points and the distribution of func￾tional dimensions are in pairs. The establishment of functional dimension can corre￾spondingly reduce the number of measurement points, i.e., remove the measurement
points with poor effect. In addition, it can reduce the measurement error caused
by positioning error, which is completed by the mathematical calculation between
measurement points. Finally, it can optimize the tolerance design of castings, orga￾nize the relevant measurement points according to their functions, and make the
measurement purpose clear and the detection system clear and intuitive.
In the measurement of small samples such as complex castings, a large number of
data cannot be obtained. Consequently, in order to detect and diagnose the measure￾ment error, there must be inheritance between the measurement data. The functional
dimension results in the inheritance between the measurement data. The benefits of
measurement points and functional dimensioning are as follows:
i. Make the measurement standardized, at the same time, according to the
list of functional dimensions, formulate the corresponding three-dimensional
measurement procedure, simplify the measurement operation, and improve the
measurement efficiency.
ii. The establishment of measurement points and functional dimensions can ensure
the real and effective measurement data.
iii. It can make the measurement data between parts have an inheritance, and further
make the implementation of accurate detection and fault diagnosis possible.
iv. Provide data support for the establishment of a failure mode database.
The functional dimension and measurement point are interrelated, and the selec￾tion of measurement points is determined according to the product function. In other
words, the functional dimension can determine the layout of the measurement point.
In addition, the functional dimension is expressed by measurement point, so the
layout of the measurement point can optimize the corresponding functional dimen￾sion. The relationship between functional dimensions and measurement points is
shown in Fig. 7.14.7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 297
Fig. 7.14 Relationship between measurement points and functional dimensions
The targets of measurement points and functional dimensions of large and
complex castings are as follows:
i. Formulate normative measurement points and functional dimension documents
ii. Unify the measurement method and formulate the corresponding CMM measure￾ment procedure.
7.2.2.1 Selection of Measurement Information
The specific point selection method for the support plate is as follows.
Establish a feature surface with a specific radius and take points on the intersection
line between the feature surface and the support plate surface, as shown in Fig. 7.15.
The specific point selection method of the flange is as follows.
Starting from the center of the circle, make the tangent plane at a fixed angle and
take points on the intersection line of the tangent plane and the flange, as shown in
Fig. 7.16.
Fig. 7.15 Sampling method for measurement points of the large casting support plate298 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.16 Sampling method for flange measurement points of large castings
7.2.2.2 Naming of Measurement Points and Functional Dimensions
Each measurement point and functional dimension have corresponding names. The
naming method of measurement point and functional dimension is as follows.
Nomenclature of measurement points: points in different areas of the part are
represented by different numbers. The specific rules are as follows:
• Outer flange: A
• Inner flange: B
• Support plate: C
• Lifting lugs and others: D
• Outflow channel: E
• Inner runner: F.
After grouping, the parts are divided into 12 parts. Each part is replaced by capital
letters A, B, …, L. Due to different features on the parts, the types of points are
different. For different types of points, different letters are used. The rules are as
follows:
• Hole center point: H
• The point on face: S
• Center point of threaded hole: W
• Edge point: E.
The number of points in each area starts from 001 and ends at 999. The points of
lifting lugs and related feature holes are named directly without area. The order of
point naming is as follows. The first lifting lug on the right is 1 part and the selection
order of points is clockwise, from top to bottom. Figure 7.17 illustrates the meaning
of each element of the point designation.
Function dimension naming method: Function dimension is represented by the
capital letter F, different functional groups are represented by different letters, and
the number of function dimensions of each function group starts from 001 to 999,
with specific rules as follows.7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 299
Fig. 7.17 Naming of
measurement points
Fig. 7.18 Function
dimension naming
• Diameter and related dimensions: D
• Roundness: R
• Flatness: F
• Surface profile: P
• Position: L.
For the areas where functional dimensions exist, different numbers are used to
represent them. The specific rules are as follows:
• Outer flange: A
• Inner flange: B
• Support plate: C
• Lifting lugs and others: D
• Outflow channel: E
• Inner runner: F.
Figure 7.18 shows the meaning of each part of the functional dimension
designation.
7.2.2.3 Design and Optimization of Measurement Points
and Functional Dimensions of Large Thin-Walled Castings
According to the characteristics of large-scale, thin-walled and varying cross-section
of large-scale thin-walled ring casting, combined with the functional requirements of
the product and the requirements of the design drawings, the setting of the functional
dimensions of the research object is shown in Fig. 7.19.300 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.19 Functional dimension design of large thin wall ring casting
According to the functional dimension design shown in the figure, combined with
the actual measurement and verification of feasibility, a total of 238 sets of functional
dimensions are set.
For each group of functional dimensions, there are corresponding measurement
points to characterize them. Combined with the design functional dimensions of
products and the design and functional requirements of products, there are 5000
initial measurement points in total. The design of the measurement points of the
support plate is shown in Fig. 7.20.
Too many measurement points will lead to the reduction of measurement effi￾ciency and the excessive loss of measurement machines. For the same type of
measurement points, the number of measurement points should be reduced as much
as possible in order to meet the requirements of product measurement quality. Once
Fig. 7.20 Measurement
point design of the support
plate7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 301
the number of measurement points is appropriately reduced, the measurement points
need to be optimized. The optimization methods include correlation analysis, relia￾bility analysis, function dimension accuracy analysis, etc. These methods have been
described in detail in the literature and will not be described here. Figure 7.21 is an
example of a correlation analysis of measurement points in the outer channel of the
large casting support plate. The correlation of measurement points A, B, C and D is
shown in Table 7.1.
It can be seen from the data in the table that the correlation between measurement
point B and measurement point C is the highest, which indicates that the similarity
between the two points is the highest of the four points. Because of this, either point
B or point C should be deleted during the process of arranging measurement points.
Through a series of optimizations, after the initial measurement points are
screened and reset, the optimization results are shown in Table 7.2. The quality
information of the whole part can be learned by reading the information about the
fixed measurement points.
Fig. 7.21 Correlation
analysis of measurement
points of the outer channel
Table 7.1 Correlation analysis results of measurement points in the outer channel
A B C D
A 1
B 0.9178 1
C 0.9142 0.9798 1
D 0.8500 0.9380 0.9485 1
Table 7.2 Optimization results of the number of measurement points
Optimization of
pre-measurement points
Optimized measurement
point
Optimization rate (%)
Flange 156 120 23.07
Support plate 3600 2172 39.67
Runner 984 624 36.58302 C. Liu et al.
7.2.3 Rapid Diagnosis of Error Sources in the Casting
Process
7.2.3.1 Rapid Diagnosis of Error Mode in the Casting Process
In the production and assembly process of ring parts, the parts are usually clamped
and positioned according to the 3-2-1 principle. The traditional 3-2-1 positioning
method usually follows the following principles:
i. Three locating points are selected in the normal direction of the largest plane of
the part, and the distribution of the three points is scattered as far as possible;
ii. Select two locating points in the second plane of the part, and the distance
between the two points should be as long as possible;
iii. Select a locating point in the minimum plane of the part.
For a workpiece, when a set of positioning scheme is determined, all the posi￾tioning points will not move and rotate when they are in contact with the fixture.
This positioning method is called deterministic positioning. On the basis of deter￾ministic positioning, the Jacobian matrix of the positioning method can be obtained
by analyzing the constraint equation of the positioning point and then deriving the
constraint equation. After obtaining the Jacobian matrix, through the Taylor series
expansion, a series of mathematical processing is carried out to clarify the rela￾tionship between the deviation of the positioning point and the deviation of the
measured part. That is, the positioning deviation of the part caused by the determin￾istic positioning mode can be calculated. The deviation analysis method based on
the deterministic positioning is called the deterministic positioning deviation anal￾ysis algorithm. Because of its calculation simplicity, high precision, and that fact
that it can be used to analyze the dimensional deviation of the positioning process of
complex parts, the deterministic positioning deviation analysis algorithm has become
a common algorithm in the field of deviation analysis, which has been widely used
in the research of assembly quality control problems in the fields of automobile,
aircraft, high-speed train, and other mechanical fields.
For the ring parts, they usually have the characteristics of rotational symmetry. In
general, axial and circumferential positioning will be used for positioning, which can
match and confirm the parameters given in the design drawings well, and at the same
time more conform to the requirements of the structure, so the design of positioning
fixture is relatively simple. The positioning method of general annular parts is shown
in Fig. 7.22.
In Fig. 7.22, the main positioning surface is perpendicular to the paper surface,
controlling the movement of the part in the Z direction and the rotation in X and
Y direction. The reference surface controls the movement of the part in X and Y
directions, which is actually equivalent to limiting the axial movement of the part.
The positioning slot controls the rotation of the part around the Z-axis, which is
actually equivalent to limiting the circumferential movement of the part. Due to the
special structure of the ring part and the selection of the positioning method, in order7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 303
Fig. 7.22 Positioning method of annular parts
to meet the quality accuracy requirements of the part after forming, the positioning
process should pay special attention to the axial movement and the circumferential
rotation of the part. The axial movement of the part will affect the accuracy of the
inner circle diameter and the roundness of each circle after forming, while the angular
rotation will affect the coaxiality after forming.
Generally speaking, dimensions can be divided into linear and angular dimen￾sions. For the ring parts, because of the particularity of its rotational symmetry
structure, the angular dimension has a great influence on its assembly quality accu￾racy, while the deterministic positioning deviation analysis algorithm is based on the
Cartesian coordinate system, describing the state of linear dimension, which cannot
directly and clearly represent the state of the angular dimension of the parts. Even if
the linear dimension and the angular dimension can be transformed into each other,
the calculation results will deviate due to the coupling of the coordinate system and
the calculation process will be relatively complex.
The main content of this section is to solve the problem of how the traditional
deterministic positioning deviation analysis algorithm can represent more clearly the
angular dimension with better application to the ring parts [11].
1. The establishment of the diagnosis and analysis model of definite positioning
deviation in the two-dimensional polar coordinate system
The coordinate system composed of poles, polar axis, and polar diameter in the plane
is called the polar coordinate system. A point O in the plane is called the pole. A
ray Ox from O is called the polar axis. Then take a length unit, usually, the specified
angle is positive in the counterclockwise direction. In this way, the position of any
point P in the plane can be determined by the length ρ of the line OP and the angle
θ from OX to OP. If there is an ordinal pair (ρ, θ), it is called the polar coordinate of304 C. Liu et al.
P point, which is recorded as P (ρ, θ). ρ is called as the polar diameter of P point, θ
is called as the polar angle of P point. When ρ ≥ 0, 0 ≤ θ < 2 π, every point in the
plane has a unique polar coordinate except the pole O, where the pole diameter is
zero and the pole angle is arbitrary. If we remove the above limitation, every point
on the plane has numerous sets of polar coordinates. In general, if (ρ, θ) is the polar
coordinate of a point, then (ρ, θ + 2n π) is the corresponding polar coordinate, where
n is an arbitrary integer. When polar coordinates are used for some curves on the
plane, the equation is relatively simple. The calculation will also be relatively simple
and fast.
Polar coordinate system and the Cartesian coordinate system can be mutually
converted, and the specific conversion formula is

x = ρ cos θ
y = ρ sin θ (7.23)
In order to establish the model of definite positioning analysis in the polar coordi￾nate system, the vector representation in the polar coordinate system must be definite.
As shown in Fig. 7.23, to represent vector AB in the polar coordinate system, we can
formulate it according to the basic mathematical relationship:
−→AB = −→AC + −→CB (7.24)
Fig. 7.23 Vector
representation in polar
coordinates7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 305
According to the triangle relationship:
−→AC = −→OA · θ ·
−→θ (7.25)
−→CB = −→OA − −→OB = ρ · −→ρ (7.26)
Then the vector AB can be expressed as:
−→AB = −→OA · θ ·
−→θ + ρ · −→ρ (7.27)
According to the above four formulas:

Niρ = ρ · −→ρ
Niθ = −→OA · θ ·
−→θ (7.28)
It can be seen from Eq. (7.28) that the representation of vector AB in polar
coordinates is related to the coordinates of its endpoints A and B.
Through the transformation of this coordinate form, the expression of the posi￾tioning normal vector of the analysis algorithm of definite location deviation in polar
coordinates can be obtained. This is also the basis of the analysis model of the definite
positioning deviation in the polar coordinate system.
2. The establishment and solution of the algorithm model of definite positioning
deviation analysis in the two-dimensional polar coordinate system
(1) Model building
For ring parts, the drawing size is mostly represented by length and angle, so the
deviation direction of most key control dimensions is the radius, and the indepen￾dent variables and control variables of the deterministic positioning analysis model
established in a Cartesian coordinate system do not have a one-to-one correspon￾dence. It needs a lot of work on error decomposition and synthesis when solving.
This process involves a lot of coordinate transformations. Because of the traditional
rounding data processing method, the rounding error [3, 4] will be brought in the
calculation process. For this type of problem, the performance of the traditional deter￾ministic algorithm is not good either in terms of calculation accuracy or calculation
complexity. In contrast, the use of the polar coordinate system will make deviation
calculation more intuitive, which can solve the above problems well.
The specific polar coordinate introduction process is as follows.
As shown in Fig. 7.24, the coordinate system oxy is the global coordinate system
and the coordinate system o
x
y is the local coordinate system.
For location point i: r

i = (x

i
, y

i
)r

= (x

, y

), where (x

i
, y

i
) is the coordinate of
the point i in the coordinate system o

x

y

, nT
i is the normal vector of the curve at the
location i, then the tangent equation at the location i is:306 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.24 Polar coordinate
system transformation and
part deterministic
positioning model
nT
i (r

− r

i) = 0 (7.29)
Let ox denote the original polar coordinate system, o

x

denote the new polar
coordinate system. Then the coordinate of pole o

in system ox is (ρ0, θ0). The
coordinate of any point P in system o

x

is (ρ
, θ
). The coordinate in system ox
is (ρ , θ ). The angle between the two polar axes is ϕ. The coordinate of point P in
system oxy is (x, y) = (ρ cos θ, ρ sin θ). The coordinate in system o

x

is (x
, y
) =
(ρ
cosθ
, ρ
sinθ
). The coordinate of point o

is (x0, y0) = (ρ0 cos θ0, ρ0 sin θ0).
It is easy to know from geometric relations that

x = x

cos ϕ − y

sin ϕ + x0
y = x

sin ϕ − y

cos ϕ + y0
(7.30)
The transformation formula of polar coordinates is obtained as

ρ
cos θ = ρ cos(θ + ϕ) − ρ0 cos(θ0 + ϕ)
ρ
sin θ = ρ sin(θ − ϕ) − ρ0 sin(θ0 − ϕ) (7.31)
The polar coordinates of 6–29 are treated as
nT
i =

ρ
cosθ
−ρ
i
cosθ
i
ρ
sinθ
−ρ
i
sinθ
i

= 0 (7.32)
Substituting (7.31) into (7.32) we can obtain the spatial motion equation of work￾piece positioning point in the polar coordinate system from moving coordinate system
to the fixed coordinate system:7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 307
φ(i) = nT
i

ρ cos(θ + ϕ) − ρ0 cos(θ0 + ϕ) − ρ
i cos θ
i
ρ sin(θ − ϕ) − ρ0 sin(θ0 − ϕ) − ρ
i sin θ
i

= 0 (7.33)
In the case of 3-D, only three points of positioning are needed to meet the
positioning requirements. Then the total positioning constraint equation is:
φ(q) = (φ1, φ2, φ3) (7.34)
Let Ri = (ρi, θi) and R = (R1, R2, R3), then formula (7.10) can be written as
φ(q, R) = 0 (7.35)
Equation (7.35) is a deterministic positioning model in a polar coordinate system.
It describes the relationship between positioning point deviation and assembly devi￾ation. Given positioning deviation R, assembly deviation q can be known. Here
ρ is the deviation of the polar direction, representing the radius deviation.
The total differential form of Eq. (7.35) is:
∂φ
∂q
q + ∂φ
∂R
R = 0 (7.36)
Let ∂φ
∂q = J
q = −J −1 ∂φ
∂R
R (7.37)
J is Jacobian matrix, Ji =

∂φi
∂ρ , ∂φi
∂θ , ∂φi
∂ϕ 
J = (J1, J2, J3), and φR = ( ∂φi
∂ρi
, ∂φi
∂θi
), the
derivation of each parameter can be obtained by φi:
∂φi
∂ρ0
= −Niρ cos(θ0 − ϕ) − Niθ sin(θ0 − ϕ) (7.38)
∂φi
∂θ0
= Niρρ0 sin(θ0 − ϕ) − Niθρ0 cos(θ0 − ϕ) (7.39)
∂φi
∂ϕ = Niρ[ρ sin(θ − ϕ) − ρ0 sin(θ0 − ϕ)]
+ Niθ [ρ0 cos(θ0 − ϕ) − ρ cos(θ − ϕ)] (7.40)
∂φi
∂ρ = Niρ cos(θ − ϕ) + Niθ sin(θ − ϕ) (7.41)
∂φi
∂θ = −Niρρ sin(θ − ϕ) + Niθρ cos(θ − ϕ) (7.42)308 C. Liu et al.
Substituting the formulas above into Eq. (7.37), we can get the positioning
assembly deviation of the parts after the definite positioning. Assuming that the
manufacturing deviation of the parts is q

, the assembly deviation of the parts is
S = q + q

= −J −1 ∂φ
∂RR + q

. The polar radius and polar angle are used as
parameters to express the model.
(2) Error analysis
When the key control dimension is the radial direction deviation, the flow of the
traditional deterministic analysis method and the improved deterministic analysis
method in the assembly of the ring parts is shown in Figs. 7.25 and 7.26, respectively.
It can be seen from the figure that the key control dimensions on the design drawing
of ring casting are mostly characterized by length and angle. In this section, the polar
Fig. 7.25 Traditional deterministic positioning algorithm for wax mold assembly process of ring
casting
Fig. 7.26 Deterministic positioning algorithm for wax mold assembly process in polar coordinates7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 309
coordinates are introduced into the deterministic positioning deviation analysis algo￾rithm to reduce the steps of drawing information processing, error decomposition
and synthesis, which makes the calculation process simpler with higher efficiency.
It can be seen from the literature that the rounding error generated in the calculation
process has a geometric progression growth relationship with the calculation steps.
Because of the simplification of the calculation, the improved deterministic posi￾tioning deviation analysis algorithm effectively reduces the rounding error caused
by rounding in the calculation. In this section, the introduction of polar coordinates in
the deterministic positioning analysis model for the wax mold assembly will reduce
or even eliminate the influence of rounding errors caused by rounding on the accu￾racy of calculation results in the calculation process of wax mold assembly deviation
analysis.
If the maximum absolute error in the calculation is  (the relative error is δ) and
the error introduced in the data processing is k (the relative error is δk ), then k
(δk ) must be a micro error of  (δ) to ensure that the error caused by data processing
does not significantly affect the measurement error.
As mentioned above, the error in data processing is caused by rounding. As a result,
its maximum absolute error is half of the last significant digit of the calculation result.
If the calculation result A has a total of m significant digits, and the number power
of the first digit is 0, then the number power of the last digit is (−m + 1), then the
maximum relative error δk introduced in data processing is:
δk = 0.5 ∗ 10(−m+1)
/A (7.43)
The first number of A is usually between 1 and 9, so the fluctuation range of δk
caused by rounding is 
0.5 ∗ 10−m, 0.5 ∗ 10(−m+1)

.
It can be seen from the literature that the rounding error generated by rounding
in the calculation process has a geometric progression growth relationship with the
calculation steps, so the relative error of N calculation steps is:
δkn = 1 − (1 − δk )
n (7.44)
Because the precision of large thin-walled ring casting is not higher than CT6,
according to the casting precision class table, we can know that m = 2, which suggests
that the range of relative error caused by rounding is between 0.5 and 5%. The
accuracy of the model in this section can be increased by 5–10% compared with that
of the traditional deterministic positioning analysis model, which is very important
for precision casting.
3. Case study and validation
As shown in Fig. 7.27, the positioning points P1 and P2 control the radial movement
of the parts, and the positioning point P3 controls the rotation of the parts. The posi￾tioning deviation of P1 and P2 is 0.2 mm. Along the radius direction, the coordinates
of the positioning points are given in the figure. Under different steering errors, the
radial deviation and steering deviation of MP is calculated.310 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.27 Simple part
positioning model
The positioning Jacobian matrix J of parts in Cartesian coordinates and polar
coordinates are as follows:
JC =
⎡
⎣
0.866 0.5 0
0.866 −0.5 17.32
0 −1 62.785
⎤
⎦ (7.45)
JP =
⎡
⎣
−1.1547 0 −11.4943
−1.1547 0 11.4943
0.0046 0.1654 0.7929
⎤
⎦ (7.46)
When the angular deviation is 0.2 rad, the deterministic positioning deviation matrix
obtained in the polar coordinate system is:
q =
⎡
⎣
−0.0866
0.0441
−0.0087
−0.0866
−0.0393
0.0087
0
0.1163
0
⎤
⎦ (7.47)
The columns of the matrix represent the influence of location points P1, P2,
and P3 on the positioning deviation of parts, and the rows of the matrix represent
the influence of location points on the parameters of ρ,θ,ϕ. It can be seen from
the definite positioning deviation matrix that the deviation of location point P1 and
location point P2 has the same effect on the radial positioning deviation of the part. In
addition, the deviation is smaller than that of the location point itself, which proves
that the errors offset each other in the process of positioning error transmission. It
also proves the correctness of the selection of the main positioning surface. When the
radial accuracy of the parts is high, the accuracy requirements of the main positioning
point P1 and P2 should be paid more attention.7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 311
Table 7.3 Calculation results of the conventional model and the proposed model under different
tolerances
Results\Deviation 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1
Conventional
model
ρ −0.173 −0.173 −0.173 −0.173 −0.173
θ 0.1155 0.2368 0.3513 0.4687 0.5853
The proposed
model
ρ −0.173 −0.173 −0.173 −0.173 −0.173
θ 0.1167 0.2374 0.3536 0.4699 0.5862
The deviation of positioning point P3 has no influence on the radial direction of
the part but has a great influence on the circumferential direction of the part, which
is related to the control function of the positioning point itself. When the accuracy
of the circumferential direction of the part is high, the accuracy requirements of
secondary positioning point P3 should be paid more attention.
From Table 7.3, it can be seen that the calculation results of the traditional model
and the proposed model in this section are basically the same, which verifies the
correctness of the proposed model. Meanwhile, from the error rate, it can be seen
that when using the deterministic positioning deviation analysis model under the
polar coordinate system to analyze the ring parts, the calculation accuracy has been
improved. The efficiency has also been improved correspondingly in the calculation
process.
Figure 7.28 is the assembly of a typical flange. Take wax block 1 as the research
object. The radius of the inner flange is 1 dm, the radius of the outer flange is 8 dm, the
polar axis is ox axis, and the whole flange is assembled by four wax blocks. P1, P2,
and P3 are positioning points with coordinates of (2,π/6), (2, −π/6), (6,π/12),
respectively. P1 and P2 control the centering direction, whereas P3 controls the
Fig. 7.28 Flange assembly model312 C. Liu et al.
direction perpendicular to the polar axis. MP is the measurement point and the corre￾sponding coordinate is (4,π/6). The assembly deviation of measurement points in
the direction of the flange radius is solved by the method of deterministic posi￾tioning deviation analysis. Three coordinate measurement points of wax block 1
under different tolerances are given in Table 7.4.
According to the model in this paper, the corresponding Jacobian matrix J = ⎡
⎣
−1.47 2.9064 1.0936
−1.47 −2.9069 −1.0931
−0.5594 10.6515 −7.55
⎤
⎦
Figure 7.29 shows the comparison of the calculation results of the positioning
deviation of this model and the traditional deterministic positioning analysis model
using different tolerances. The data show that the calculation results of this model
are more accurate than those of the traditional deterministic positioning algorithm
and are close to the three coordinate measurement values. It can be seen from the
calculation results that the larger the positioning error is, the larger the assembly
deviation is.
Table 7.4 Three coordinate measurement points of the wax block
X (Tolerance
0.2)
Y (Tolerance
0.2)
Z (Tolerance
0.2)
X (Tolerance
0.5)
Y (Tolerance
0.5)
Z (Tolerance
0.5)
1 −666.929 392.220 −430.732 −668.098 396.291 −431.062
2 −648.038 260.208 −430.781 −648.067 263.678 −431.109
3 −657.811 159.329 −430.853 −658.141 157.799 −431.185
Fig. 7.29 Comparison of assembly deviation results of different models7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 313
7.2.3.2 Case Studies for the Rapid Diagnosis of Large Casting Error
Source
1. Optimal selection of wax pattern location for large castings
The bottom and top views for a large thin-walled ring casting wax block are shown
in Fig. 7.30.
It can be seen that due to the large dimension and thin wall, it is difficult to
find suitable positioning features to limit the freedom of wax block. In this case,
two schemes can be adopted for positioning. One is that due to the high precision
of the outer plane design of the inner flange, according to the “6-6-1” positioning
principle, two positioning points are arranged on the outer plane of the inner flange
to limit the radial freedom of the wax block. In the aspect of freedom limitation
in the circumferential direction, it can be located through the positioning slot. The
other scheme is to use the outer flange section as the main locating surface and use
the assembly relationship between the parts to limit the circumferential degrees of
freedom, and then set a locating point on the outer plane of the inner flange to limit
the radial degrees of freedom of the wax block. Both of them are feasible in practice.
Next, through the quantitative representation of positioning, the stability and error
transferability of the two positioning methods will be compared and analyzed, and
the better positioning method will be selected. The two positioning methods are
shown in Fig. 7.31. Information of the two positioning methods is listed in Table 7.5.
In order to compare the quality of positioning methods, the stability parame￾ters and pathological index of positioning Jacobian matrix need to be calculated.
According to the information on positioning points given in Table 7.4, the results
can be calculated by combining Eqs. 7.22 and 7.23. The specific calculation results
are listed in Table 7.5.
Fig. 7.30 Bottom view and top view of large thin wall ring casting314 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.31 Two positioning methods
Table 7.5 Positioning information of two positioning methods
Locating points x y n
Positioning method 1 P1 −137.177 137.177 (0.7071, 0.7071)
P2 137.177 137.177 (−0.7071, 0.7071)
P3 −120.63 500 (0.9659, −0.2588)
Positioning method 2 P1 0 194 (−0.2588, 0.9659)
P2 −20 480 (1, 0)
P3 −20 520 (1, 0)
It can be seen from Table 7.6 that the stability parameter of positioning method 1
is larger than that of positioning method 2, which suggests that the stability of method
1 is better than that of method 2. Meanwhile, the pathological index of positioning
Jacobian matrix of positioning method 1 is smaller than that of positioning method
2, which indicates that the error generated by method 1 in the process of error
transmission will be relatively small. However, it can be seen from the data that
the ill-conditioned index of the Jacobian matrix of the two positioning methods is
Table 7.6 Comparison of stability parameters and pathological index of the Jacobian matrix of
two positioning methods
w k
Positioning method 1 23.147 50.332
Positioning method 2 14.927 50.5157 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 315
virtually the same, which also explains why both methods are commonly used in
practice. According to the comparison of the two indexes, positioning method 1 is
better than positioning method 2.
In order to verify the correctness of the conclusion, this section uses the commer￾cial deviation analysis software VSA to analyze the deviation of the radius on the
wax block flange of the two positioning methods. In this case, the other information
such as the deviation of the measurement point, the deviation of the fixture and so on
are consistent. The specific modeling process and information are shown in Fig. 7.32,
and the deviation analysis results of the two cases are shown in Table 7.7.
Fig. 7.32 VSA deviation analysis model and related information
Table 7.7 VSA analysis results of two positioning methods
Object Mean ±3σ
Positioning method 1 Inner flange radius 194 ±0.427
Outer flange radius 536 ±0.702
Circle radius of the support plate 251 ±0.533
Positioning method 2 Inner flange radius 194 ±0.828
Outer flange radius 536 ±1.0818
Circle radius of the support plate 251 ±0.9903316 C. Liu et al.
It can be seen from the results in Table 7.7 that the positioning deviation caused by
positioning method 1 in the assembly process is less than that of positioning method
2, which confirms the correctness of the current conclusions. It can also be seen from
this example that in the process of optimal selection of positioning mode, not only
the limitation of positioning points on degrees of freedom but also the stability of
positioning method is very important, which must be considered.
2. Shape and position tolerance evaluation of the wax block for large castings
(1) Roundness evaluation of the wax mold for large castings
Roundness error is caused by the assembly inconsistency between wax blocks.
There are two main reasons for roundness deviation in the process of casting flange
assembly. They are the spacing inconsistency between wax blocks in the assembly
process and the wax block deviation. Therefore, in order to calculate the roundness
deviation of castings, it is necessary to determine the deviation value of the wax block
where each measurement point is located. It can be seen from the previous section
that in order to obtain the roundness deviation of the research object, the radial devi￾ation of each point must be known. The radial deviation of the measurement point
can be obtained according to Eq. (7.37). The fixture positioning error is ±0.5 mm,
and the wax mold manufacturing error is ±0.2 mm.
The deviation of the measurement point is considered into the coordinates of the
ideal measurement point. According to the basic elements of the least square method
of roundness, it can be calculated as follows:
⎧
⎨
⎩
a = 2
60
(ρ + ρi + ρ
i) cos θi = 1.178
b = 2
60
(ρ + ρi + ρ
i)sin θi = 0.581
ρ0 = 1
n
(ρ + ρi + ρ
i) = 1.533
, (1 ≤ i ≤ 60) (7.48)
It can be seen from Eq. (7.41) that the roundness error of the least square method
for the outer flange of large thin-walled ring casting is 1.643.
The roundness deviation of each method can be obtained by setting different
search nodes, and then the roundness of root mean square can be calculated to
obtain the roundness value of large-scale thin-walled ring casting. The calculation
results of each roundness of different search nodes are shown in Table 7.8. It can
be seen from the data in the table that there is no significant difference between the
roundness calculation results of the research object and the actual three-coordinate
measurement value using the roundness error search optimization algorithm given
in this section, which shows that the current model can make an accurate prediction
of the roundness error for the large thin-walled ring casting and provide a reliable
error source diagnosis.
According to the accuracy control requirements of roundness, the measurement
points should be optimized accordingly. When the number of different measurement
points is selected, the calculation results of the relative error value of roundness error
are shown in Table 7.9.
The relative error value of roundness is defined as:7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 317
Table 7.8 Roundness calculation results of the outer flange of large thin-walled ring casting
Search points Appraising
method
Roundness error Root roundness of
mean square
Three coordinate
measurement value
s = 3 Least square
method
1.643 1.6493 1.657
Minimum area
method
1.561
t = 100 Minimum
circumscribed
circle method
1.724
Maximum
inscribed circle
method
1.665
s = 4 Least square
method
1.643 1.6501
Minimum area
method
1.582
t = 200 Minimum
circumscribed
circle method
1.702
Maximum
inscribed circle
method
1.653
U = (fact − fthero)/fthero × 100% (7.49)
where U represents the relative error value of roundness, fact represents the actual
value of roundness, and fthero represents the theoretical value of casting roundness.
From Table 7.10 and Fig. 7.33, it can be seen that when the number of measure￾ment points is between 20 and 30, the increase of the measurement accuracy is the
fastest, with the relative error decreasing to about 10%. Therefore, when measuring
the roundness, the number of measurement points can be reduced to between 20
and 30 correspondingly. This provides a basis for the optimization of roundness
measurement points for the large ring castings.
(2) Evaluation of angle distribution uniformity of support plate for the wax block
Theoretically, the support plates of the large thin-walled ring casting should be
completely and evenly distributed, which is beneficial to the rotational and aerody￾namic properties of the casting. However, in the process of the wax mold assembly,
due to the errors in the assembly process and due to the influence of human factors,
the angular deviation of the support plate is inevitable. This kind of deviation has a
great influence on the quality of parts, which needs to be avoided as much as possible.
To evaluate the angular deviation of the support plate of the wax mold, we can use
the parallelism error evaluation model in this paper. The following is the specific
process of model analysis to locate the angular deviation of parts.318 C. Liu et al.
Table 7.9 Measurement point information and radial deviation of the outer flange
X Y Z Radial deviation
1-1 −267.15 462.717 20.917 1.722
1-2 −275.35 476.92 25 1.763
1-3 −283.55 491.123 16.35 1.746
6-1 0 534.3 20.917 1.831
6-2 0 550.7 25 1.822
6-3 0 567.1 16.35 1.859
6-1 267.15 462.717 20.917 1.542
6-2 275.35 476.92 25 1.648
6-3 283.55 491.123 16.35 1.562
4-1 462.717 267.15 20.917 1.73
4-2 476.92 275.35 25 1.77
4-3 491.123 283.55 16.35 1.892
5-1 534.3 0 20.917 1.886
5-2 550.7 0 25 1.873
5-3 567.1 0 16.35 1.692
6-1 462.717 −267.15 20.917 1.707
6-2 476.92 −275.35 25 1.724
6-3 491.123 −283.55 16.35 1.706
7-1 267.15 −462.717 20.917 1.628
7-2 275.35 −476.92 25 1.652
7-3 283.55 −491.123 16.35 1.593
8-1 0 −534.3 20.917 1.556
8-2 0 −550.7 25 1.548
8-3 0 −567.1 16.35 1.637
9-1 −267.15 −462.717 20.917 1.558
9-2 −275.35 −476.92 25 1.637
9-3 −283.55 −491.123 16.35 1.611
10-1 −462.717 −267.15 20.917 1.543
10-2 −476.92 −275.35 25 1.537
10-3 −491.123 −283.55 16.35 1.505
11-1 −534.3 0 20.917 1.661
11-2 −550.7 0 25 1.647
11-3 −567.1 0 16.35 1.766
16-1 −462.717 267.15 20.917 1.598
16-2 −476.92 275.35 25 1.546
16-3 −491.123 283.55 16.35 1.5527 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 319
Table 7.10 Calculation results of relative roundness errors of castings under different measurement
points
The number of
measurement
points
The outer circle
of the inner
flange
Connecting circle
of the support plate
Inner circle outer
flange
The outer circle
of the outer
flange
5 16.33 18.28 22.43 25.86
10 15.58 16.64 19.23 22.15
15 13.96 15.25 17.94 18.26
20 12.49 13.33 14.67 14.96
25 9.88 10.86 11.2 11.9
30 8.24 8.93 9.8 10.63
35 7.69 8.28 8.67 9.66
40 7.33 7.73 7.92 8.87
Fig. 7.33 Relationship between different measurement points and roundness of castings
For the ring part, the positioning method 1 is selected for positioning, and the
angular deviation generated by the measurement point of the support plate during
the positioning process can be calculated according to Eq. (7.37). The specific infor￾mation and deviation information of measurement points on support plate 1 is shown
in Table 7.11.320 C. Liu et al.
Table 7.11 Calculated value and the measured value of angle deviation of the large casting support
plate
Calculation deviation
(degree)
Measurement
deviation (degree)
Deviation
percentage (%)
Support
plate 6—support
plate 3
0.264 0.28 5.7
Support
plate 6—support
plate 4
0.103 0.11 5.9
Support
plate 4—support
plate 5
−0.128 −0.12 6.7
Support
plate 5—support
plate 6
−0.644 −0.66 2.4
Support
plate 6—support
plate 7
0.046 0.05 8
Support
plate 7—support
plate 8
−0.158 −0.17 7.05
Support
plate 8—support
plate 9
0.057 0.06 5
Support
plate 9—support
plate 10
0.156 0.17 8.2
Support
plate 10—support
plate 11
0.159 0.17 6.3
Support
plate 11—support
plate 12
1.216 1.27 4.23
Support
plate 16—support
plate 1
2.301 2.36 2.5
Support
plate 1—support
plate 2
0.159 0.17 6.3
From the calculation results in Table 7.12, it can be seen that the deviation calcu￾lation of the model in this paper is not much different from the actual measurement
value, which shows that the current model can be used to predict and diagnose these
errors very well. In addition, it shows that it is effective to use the angular deviation
to measure the angle uniformity of the support plate.7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 321
Table 7.12 Measurement point information and angular deviation of support plates
X Y Z Angular deviation
1 −359.767 334.998 −20.1 0.255
2 −360.034 334.843 −20.2 0.243
3 −360.538 334.553 −20.5 0.257
4 −361.038 334.264 −21 0.255
5 −361.357 334.08 −21.5 0.246
6 −361.636 333.919 −22 0.263
7 −361.908 333.762 −22.5 0.264
8 −362.172 333.609 −23 0.262
9 −362.681 333.315 −24 0.26
10 −364.053 332.523 −27 0.255
11 −366.172 331.3 −33 0.257
12 −367.563 330.497 −39 0.245
13 −368.514 329.948 −45 0.262
14 −369.143 329.585 −51 0.238
15 −369.455 329.404 −57 0.267
16 −369.494 329.382 −60 0.265
17 −369.455 329.404 −63 0.262
18 −369.338 329.472 −66 0.265
19 −369.143 329.585 −69 0.267
20 −368.868 329.743 −72 0.253
21 −368.514 329.948 −75 0.249
22 −368.079 330.198 −78 0.258
23 −367.039 330.799 −84 0.259
24 −365.982 331.41 −90 0.273
25 −364.924 332.02 −96 0.269
26 −363.866 332.631 −102 0.273
27 −362.809 333.242 −108 0.268
28 −362.28 333.547 −111 0.262
29 −361.751 333.852 −114 0.255
30 −361.575 333.954 −115 0.259
31 −361.487 334.005 −115.5 0.258
32 −361.399 334.056 −116 0.276
33 −361.311 334.107 −116.5 0.265
34 −361.222 334.157 −117 0.263322 C. Liu et al.
3. Study on the transfer law of assembly deviation of large casting wax block
According to the analysis model of definite positioning deviation in a polar coordinate
system for the ring parts, it can be seen that the transfer rule of deviation in wax block
assembly process of large thin-walled ring castings is affected by many factors such as
fixture positioning accuracy, wax block manufacturing accuracy, positioning mode,
and assembly mode. The content of this section is to study the influence degree and
the law of different influencing factors on the deviation transfer in the assembly
process through the deviation analysis model.
(1) Fixture positioning accuracy
Under different fixture positioning accuracy, the assembly deviation of each flange
of large thin-walled ring casting is analyzed and solved, and the result is shown in
Fig. 7.34.
From Fig. 7.35, it can be seen that the fixture deviation and assembly deviation are
nearly linear. The larger the fixture deviation is, the larger the assembly positioning
deviation is. At the same time, because the diameter of the outer circle of the outer
flange is the largest, when the fixture deviation is the same, the deviation of the outer
circle of the outer flange is also the largest among the different flanges. Therefore, in
the design process of the fixture, it is necessary to consider the auxiliary positioning,
Fig. 7.34 Relationship between the roundness of each flange and assembly accuracy7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 323
Fig. 7.35 Relationship between diameter deviation and manufacturing accuracy of the inner circle
of the inner flange
clamping, and other measures to control the deviation of the flange with a large
diameter.
(2) Wax block manufacturing accuracy
Under different wax block manufacturing accuracy, the relationship between the
inner diameter deviation of the inner flange and manufacturing accuracy is studied
through deviation analysis and the results are shown in Fig. 7.35.
It can be seen from Fig. 7.35 that as the manufacturing accuracy of wax mold
decreases, the deviation value also increases. Therefore, controlling the manufac￾turing accuracy of wax mold is also an effective way to control the assembly accuracy
of the wax mold.
(3) Assembly method
In this section, the assembly deviation of each flange diameter under the different
assembly modes of a single block and two pairs of wax mold assembly are compared,
and the results are shown in Fig. 7.36. From left to right, the midpoint in the figure
represents the diameter of inner circle of upper inner flange, outer circle of upper
inner flange, inner circle of upper outer flange, outer circle of upper outer flange,
inner circle of lower inner flange, outer circle of lower inner flange, inner circle
of lower outer flange, and straight diameter of outer circle of lower outer flange,
respectively.
From Fig. 7.36, we know that the deviation of the assembly method after two
bonding is significantly smaller than that of the single block assembly. This is due to324 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.36 Relationship between flange diameter deviation and assembly method
the mutual coupling of the positioning modes during the assembly of the two pairs,
which leads to a decrease of the deviation.
7.2.4 Variation Stream Modeling and Process Optimization
7.2.4.1 Dimensional Variation Stream Modeling of Investment Casting
Process Based on State Space Method
In most cases, the final dimensions of the wax mold and the casting, which are
constrained by the core and the mold, are determined by the viscoelasticity of the
wax mold, the viscoplastic creep of the shell, and the plastic deformation of the
alloy. The mold design becomes more difficult because of the complex shape of the
casting and the precise dimensional accuracy requirements. The requirement of the
casting to the dimensional accuracy cannot be met when the deformation lows for
the wax mold, the shell, the metal material, and the casting are not mastered. In order
to improve the precision of the final casting, the variation transfer and accumulation
in the manufacturing process must be taken into account, and the whole process
variation transfer model of the complex casting system must be established, which
can then enable us to realize the description and control of the dimensional variation
in the whole process of the complex investment casting [12].7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 325
1. Determination of State vector
The investment casting process (ICP) is a process involving multiple stages to produce
the final casting product, that is, it is a complex multistage manufacturing process
(MMPs). In the ICP, the linear dimensions, such as length, width, radius and so on,
change at each stage After wax injection, the wax will shrink and thus the dimension
of a wax part is smaller than that of the part die. When the shell is fired before casting,
the inner dimension of the shell will expand. At the casting stage, the solidification
of the metal leads to the contraction of the dimension directly. If the dimension
of a casting part is rejected, then the heat treatment for the dimension is needed.
Therefore, the final linear dimension and dimensional variation of final parts depend
on the cumulative and transitive effects of the linear contractions or expansions in
every individual stage.
In order to study the linear dimensional change in the whole ICP and develop a
mathematical model to describe it, the dimensions of the part at different stages can
be written by:
X (k) = (x1(k), x2(k), ··· , xm(k))T , k = 1, 2, 3 ··· n (7.50)
where xj(k) is the j-th key control dimension of the part at state k, which is the k-th
stage in the ICP, and m is the total of the key control dimensions.
Definition 1 State vector: A state vector is defined to represent the dimensional
variations of the part to the theoretical value or target value in different stages.
According to Eq. (7.1), it is described as:
X (k) = (x1(k), x2(k), ··· , xm(k))T (7.51)
where xj(k) describes the j-th dimensional variation at state k.
2. Determination of Process Parameter Vector
(1) Analysis of factors affecting dimensions
The dimensional changes in ICP result from the multi-field coupling, in particular,
the thermo-mechanical coupling in each stage. It is also affected by time-dependent
processes such as viscoelastic deformation of the wax, viscoplastic creep, and plastic
yield of the shell and alloy. The material properties and process parameters determine
the dimension in each stage directly and their variations lead to the dimensional
variations in the individual stage. At each stage, the variation of parameters generates
a dimensional variation, which is transferred to the next stage. Hence, the dimensional
variations at a current stage are not only controlled by the variations of the parameters
in this stage but also affected by the accumulated variations transmitted from previous
stages. As the geometrical dimension of the part going through all the ICP, a stream
of geometrical dimension flow, as well as an associated flow of variation, will be
generated. Here, it is named as the Dimensional Variation Stream (DVS) for the ICP.326 C. Liu et al.
In order to identify the process parameters that affect the dimension of the part
processed by ICP, an Ishikawa cause-effect diagram is constructed, as shown in
Fig. 7.4. The Ishikawa cause-effect diagram depicts that the following process
parameters may affect the dimensional stability of the part in different stages.
i. People-based variables: laziness, fatigue, and absent-mindedness, all of which
may occur in the whole ICP.
ii. Wax characteristics-based variables: thermal conductivity, the composition of
the wax, rheology, and viscosity.
iii. Die based variables: venting, material, and durability.
iv. Wax injection-based variables: packing pressure, holding time, injection
velocity, and temperature.
v. Wax cooling-based variables: cooling time, the thermal conductivity of the die,
and the ambient temperature of the die.
vi. Wax storage-based variables: ambient temperature, time, and humidity.
vii. Coating- and stuccoing-based variables: the sum of the layers, uniformity of
the thickness, and slurry viscosity.
viii. Shell drying based variables: ambient temperature, time, and humidity.
ix. Material characteristics of the shell-based variables: deformability, perme￾ability, and composition.
x. Dewaxing-based variables: temperature, external pressure, heat input direction,
and heating speed.
xi. Roasting-based variables: temperature, heating speed, and soaking time.
xii. Material characteristics of the metal-based variables: thermal conductivity,
melting point, rheology, and composition.
xiii. Geometric characteristics-based variables: uniformity of the dimension and
Gating and Risering system.
xiv. Casting-based variables: temperature, casting velocity, and retention time.
It is worth mentioning that there are many variables that affect the final dimensions
of the casting, and this Ishikawa cause-effect diagram just depicts main factors which
affect the final dimensions of the casting (Fig. 7.37).
Fig. 7.37 Ishikawa cause-effect diagram of dimensional stability of casting7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 327
(2) Process Parameter Vector
In this section, a State Space Model will be developed to describe the DVS for the
ICP. It is a mathematical model that links the key control dimensions with key control
variables (process parameters) and expresses the complex production stream and data
stream involved in modeling and analysis of variation together with its propagation in
the whole ICP. Hence, the process parameter vector and process parameter variation
vector should be defined rigorously.
Definition 2 Process parameter vector: In the ICP, when the material is selected, the
dimensions of the part in each stage mainly depend on different process parameters
on the corresponding stage. Accordingly, the process parameter vector is defined as
uj(k) = (αj.1(k), αj.2(k), ··· , αj.l(k))T (7.52)
where j is the order number of the dimension and αj.i(k) represents the i-th process
parameter which affects xj(k) at stage k (such as packing pressure, temperature,
and holding time at wax injection stage, as Fig. 7.4 illustrated), and l is the total
number of process parameters at stage k.
With the definition of the process parameter vector, the process parameter variation
vector at the current stage k can be given as
uj(k) = (αj.1(k), αj.2(k), ··· , αj.l(k))T (7.53)
where αj.i(k) is the variation of the process parameter to the target value.
3. State Space Equation
The linear dimension of the ICP changes as a result of the linear contractions or
expansions that occur in every individual stage. In order to describe the relative
dimensional difference between the current and the previous stages, the following
definition is adopted.
Definition 3 Dimensional change rate (DCR) is defined as the following relationship.
sj(k) = xj(k)
xj(k − 1) × 100%, k = 1, 2, 3 ··· n (7.54)
where k is the order number of process stage in the ICP, sj(k) is the DCR of the k-th
stage for xj(k), and xj(k) represents the j-th actual linear dimension in the k-th stage,
such as width, length, and radius and so on.
According to Eq. (7.54), xj(k) can be represented by xj(k − 1) as
xj(k) = sj(k).xj(k − 1) (7.55)328 C. Liu et al.
As for xj(k), a functional relationship between DCR and process parameters
always exists. This is because process parameters determine the dimension in each
stage and their variations lead to the dimensional variations directly in each individual
stage. The implicit function between DCR and process parameters is represented as
Eq. (7.55) so that the model of the ICP for dimension variation can be conducted.
sj(k) = fk.j(uj(k)) (7.56)
Here, fk.j(uj(k)) is a vector function related to the process parameter vector uj(k).
According to the variation definition, the variation of xj(k) can be expressed by:
xj(k) = xj(k) − xt
j(k) (7.57)
where xt
j(k) is the target value of the j-th dimension at stage k.
Based on the Eqs. (7.55) and (7.57), one of the dimensional variations of the part
at stage k can be described as
xj(k) = sj(k).xj(k − 1) − s
t
j(k).xt
j(k − 1) (7.58)
where st
j(k) is the target value of DCR to the j-th dimension when the process
parameter vector gets the target value.
According to Eq. (7.56), if fk.j(uj(k)) is derivable at the point ut
j
(k), the Taylor
series expansion of Eq. (7.9) can be given as
xj(k) = fk.j(ut
j(k)).xj(k − 1) + xt
j(k − 1).f

k,j
(ut
j(k)).uj(k) + h(uj(k))
(7.59)
In this equation,
f

k.j
(ut
j(k))=

∂f k.j(ut
j
(k))
∂αj.1(k) ,
∂f k.j(ut
j
(k))
∂αj.2(k) , ··· ,
∂f k.j(ut
j
(k))
∂αj.l(k)

(7.60)
h(uj(k)) = r(uj(k)).(xt
j(k − 1) + xj(k − 1))
+ f

k.j
(ut
j(k)).uj(k).xj(k − 1) (7.61)
where ut
j
(k) is the target value of the process parameter vector and r(uj(k)) is the
higher-order remainder term of uj(k).
Considering the fact that there are some random factors affecting the whole
procedure, such as people-related factors (laziness, fatigue, and absent-mindedness),
Eq. (7.59) can be written as:
xj(k) = fk.j(ut
j(k)).xj(k − 1) + xt
j(k − 1).f

k,j
(ut
j(k)).uj(k)
+ h(uj(k)) + ϕj(k) (7.62)7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 329
In order to simplify the form of Eq. (7.62), it can be rewritten as
xj(k) = aj(k).xj(k − 1) + bj(k).uj(k) + wj(k) (7.63)
where
aj(k) = fk.j(ut
j(k)) (7.64)
bj(k) = xt
j(k − 1).f

k,j
(ut
j(k)) (7.65)
wj(k) = h(uj(k)) + ϕj(k) (7.66)
Due to the fact that there are different key dimensions in each stage, Eq. (7.63)
can be rewritten in a matrix form:
X (k) = A(k).X (k − 1) + B(k).U(k) + W(k) (7.67)
In Eq. (7.67), A(k) and B(k) are diagonal matrices, U(k) is the control vector,
and W(k) is a noise vector, which are given by:
A(k) =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
a1(k)
a2(k))
...
am(k)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
m×m
(7.68)
B(k) =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
b1(k)
b2(k)
...
bm(k)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
m×ml
(7.69)
U(k) =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
u1(k)
u2(k)
.
.
.
um(k)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
ml×1
(7.70)
W(k) =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
w1(k)
w2(k)
.
.
.
wm(k)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
m×1
(7.71)330 C. Liu et al.
Here, the coefficient matrices A(k) and B(k) are determined by the process param￾eter vector. The former describes the impact of the variation transition from stage k-1
to stage k, called system matrix, and the latter represents the impact of the process
parameter variation on the dimensional variations. On the other hand, U(k) is the
control vector, which includes the process parameter variations. W(k) is the noise
term, which represents the imperfections in the modeling, such as the lack of repre￾sentation of the random factors at stage k, the disregard of the higher-order remainder
term of uj(k).
According to the linear control theory, the relationship between the k-th state
vector and control vectors at different stages can be expressed as:
X (k) = φ(n, 0).X (0) +n
k=1
φ(n, k).B(k).U(k) + W(k) (7.72)
where the state transition matrix φ(·, ·) is adopted from linear control theory and
defined as:
φ(n, i) = A(n − 1)A(n − 2)... A(i)for n > i and φ(i, i) = I (7.73)
4. Observation Equations
During the measurement, the measurement noise is inevitable. If all the key control
dimensions are directly measurable, the j-th measured value of the variation can be
written as
yj(k) = xj(k) + vj(k) (7.74)
Therefore, the observation equation can be expressed by:
Y (k) = X (k) + V(k) (7.75)
where Y (k) is an observed vector related to all the measured value at stage k and
represents the information of X (k), which dimension is m×1. V(k) represents the
measurement noise, they are given by:
Y (k) =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
y1(k)
y2(k)
.
.
.
ym(k)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
m×1
(7.76)7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 331
V(k) =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
v1(k)
v2(k)
.
.
.
vm(k)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
m×1
(7.77)
According to Eq. (7.72), the observation equation can be rewritten as:
Y (k) = φ(n, 0)X (0) +n
k=1
φ(n, k).B(k).U(k) + W(k) + V(k) (7.78)
5. Quantitative calculation of the Stream of Variation for the whole process
(1) Design of feature parts
In this section, for the purpose of making a good interpretation of the state space
modeling process, a simple case is adopted, which is the ICP of a rectangular-shaped
specimen. The dimensions of the die are 400 ± 0.01 mm, 100 ± 0.01 mm, and 2.5
± 0.01 mm (as illustrated in Fig. 7.38).
Figure 7.1 shows that the whole ICP consists of so many stages. In this case,
main stages such as wax injection, wax cooling, and storage, the roasting of the
Fig. 7.38 The dimension of
the specimen332 C. Liu et al.
shell and casting are abstracted, and other stages such as coating and stuccoing, shell
drying, and dewaxing are neglected owing to the reason that the dimensions of the
part experiences little changes in these stages. When setting up the state space model
of these abstracted stages, some empirical formulas or fitting formulas in others’
previous studies are applied.
(2) Variation Modeling
Die: The dimensions of the die are the initial dimensions of the part. The thickness
of the specimen is selected and according to the machining accuracy, the tolerance
of the die is ±0. 01 mm that is looked at the variation range of stage 1. Since only
one dimension is selected, the state vector degenerated into one dimension and the
order number j can be deleted in all the stages. The dimension x(0) is 2.5 and the
state vector degenerate as x(0) = ±0.01.
Wax injection: In this stage, a series of experiments are conducted using
KCRO17B material. The details are described in Appendix. The process parame￾ters include mold temperature (α1(1)), melt temperature (α2(1)), packing pressure
(α3(1)), and holding time (α4(1)), while other parameters maintain constant. As a
result, the process parameter vector can be written as
u(1) = (α1(1), α2(1), α2(1), α4(1))T (7.79)
The Response Surface Methodology analysis is used to model the relation￾ship between these controlled parameters and the DCR via regression models. The
regression model is developed as
f1(u(1)) = 0.776684357 − 1.352023 × 10−3 × α1(1) + 6.336718 × 10−3
× α2(1) − 1.897728 × 10−3 × α3(1) − 6.65351 × 10−5
× α4(1) + 1.375 × 10−5 × α1(1)α2(1)m + 2 × 10−6
× α2(1)α3(1) + 1 × 10−6 × α1(1)α4(1) + 2.1375 × 10−5
× α2(1)α3(1) − 2.875 × 10−6 × α2(1)α4(1) − 3.5 × 10−7
× α3(1)α4(1) + 1.00982 × 10−5 × α1(1)
2 − 4.5636 × 10−5
× α2(1)
2 + 2.69825 × 10−6 × α3(1)
2 − 2.70175 × 10−6 × α4(1)
(7.80)
According to the experiment, the target value of the process vector ut
(1) is
(30, 74, 25, 5)T and a(1) is 0.989346.
Wax cooling and storage: In this stage, the study results of Bonilla et al. [13] is
used directly. According to their study, the relationship between storage time (α(2))
and the DCR can be rewritten as:
f2(u(2)) = 0.996281α(2)
−0.0025 (7.81)7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 333
Fig. 7.39 Measured linear thermal expansion for the shell mold (Snow 1995)
In this case, only storage time is considered, and which unite is minute. Suppose
the wax part will be used to make a shell as a core 180 min late after injection. Then
a(2) is 0.98343.
Shell roasting: The main determinant of shell expansion is roasting temperature,
which can be seen from the study of Sabau and Porter [14]. From Snow’s study (as
illustrated in Fig. 7.39), roasting temperature (α(3)) is the main variable affecting the
dimensional variation of the shell. In addition, the relationship between the roasting
temperature and the DCR at the heating process of the shell is given by
f3(u(3)) = 0.99995 + 1.42454 × 10−6
α(3) − 1.70489 × 10−9
α(3)
2 (7.82)
By setting the target temperature to be 1200 °C, a(3) is then determined to be
0.997783.
Coasting: Since the shell is much stiffer than the melting steel, the effects of the
contraction of the shell to the dimension of the casting are insignificant and can be
neglected at casting contraction stage. Based on the study of Sabau and Porter [14],
the thermal expansion of 17.4 PH alloy in the 20–1360 °C temperature range are
obtained through experiments (as illustrated in Fig. 7.40).
From these results of this previous work, the final cooling temperature (α(4)) is
the main variable and an abrupt expansion at approximately 265 °C during cooling is334 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.40 Measured linear thermal expansion for 17-4PH alloy on heating and cooling (Adrian S.
Sabau and Wallace D. Porter, 2008)
shown. Using the result of the linear thermal expansion in the 20–265 °C temperature
range, a regression model is obtained:
f4(u(4)) = 0.99818 + 4.432027 × 10−5
α(4) − 7.33681 × 10−7
α(4)
2
+ 6.88197 × 10−9
α(4)
3 − 2.62351 × 10−11α(4)
4
+ 3.0152 × 10−14α(4)
5
, (20 ≤ α(4) ≤ 265) (7.83)
If the final cooling temperature is set to 25 °C, then the target value of a(4) would
be 0.998972.
(3) Simulation
Since the process parameter vectors (ut
(k)) at every stage are set up, and fk (u(k)) at
different stages are obtained via experiments or some previous works, if the process
parameter vectors at each stage (the inputs) are set up, the variation simulation can
be carried out.
A group of process parameter variation ranges are shown in Table 7.13, based on
which the target thickness (xt
(k)) and variation range (x(k)) can be calculated via
Eqs. (7.55) and (7.63), respectively. These results are also shown in Table 7.13.
In this simulation, the worst case is considered, that is, the limiting values of
process parameter variations at every stage are taken into account to maximize the part
variation range such that all the probable values are covered. From this simulation,
the changes of the nominal dimension of the thickness and the variation range of7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 335 Table 7.13 The simulation of variation range Stage NO./k Stage Process parameter vector/ut
(k)
Process parameter variation vector
u(k)
a(k) xt
(k) b(k) x(k)
α1(k) α2(k) α3(k) α4(k) α1(k) α2(k) α3(k) α4(k)
0 Die 2.5
±0.01
1 Wax
injection
30 74 25 5 ±0.3
±0.74
±0.25
±0.05 0.989346 2.473365 8.16E
−004 0.0013
−3.07e
−004
−7.13e
−004
±0.011213
2 Wax
storage
180
±20 0.98343 2.432381
−3.38E
−05
±0.011703
3 Shell
roasting
1200
±20 0.999204 2.430445
−6.49E
−06
±0.011823
4 Casting 25
±2.5 0.998972 2.427947 4.6E
−05
±0.011926336 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.41 The dimensional changes and the variation range
each stage can be seen in Fig. 7.41. Figure 7.42 shows us the accumulation and
transmission of linear dimension variation of the thickness.
7.2.4.2 Sensitivity Analysis and Optimization of Process Parameters
The response surface methodology (RSM), introduced by Box and Wilson [15],
is very effective to quantify the relationship between multiple inputs and obtained
responses surfaces [16]. Consequently, it has been widely used in different fields to
evaluate and improve the quality of products or process parameters [17–19], espe￾cially injection molding process. Chuang et al. discussed the variation of warpage
and the tensile stress properties depended on process parameters via the Taguchi
approach and RSM [20, 21].
A genetic algorithm, as a random search algorithm without limitation in the search
space to optimize the real-world problem, is developed by Holland. Largely because
of Goldberg’s [22] studies, it has been widely applied to solving complex optimization
problems. Changyu et al. [23] proposed an integrated artificial neural network and
the GA method to optimize the injection modeling process. However, these studies
just focus on the plastic injection molding process. With the thickness of the final
casting wall required thinner and the accuracy requirements for higher in the ICP,7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 337
Fig. 7.42 The accumulation and transmission of the variation range
the quantitative investigation about the interaction of the process parameters on the
shrinkage of the thin-walled wax part is increasingly important.
In this study, a Box-Behnken design based on RSM was applied to designing
the experiments [24]. Four process parameters of mold temperature, melt temper￾ature, packing pressure, and holding time with three levels for each factor were
selected to investigate their effects on the dimensional shrinkage variation of a thin￾walled wax part in the injection process. Then, the regression model was obtained
by implementing the RSM analysis and the validity and accuracy of the model were
confirmed through the analysis of variance (ANOVA). Furthermore, the significant
factors to the dimension shrinkage were found out and their contribution was calcu￾lated. Finally, the optimization of process parameters was carried out by GA and the
desirability function respectively. These two predicted optimum injection conditions
were compared and validated with experimental results.
1. RSM-GA method
(1) Response surface methodology
As a statistical approach, RSM integrates the design of experiment (DOE) technique
and regression analysis. With its advantage to describe the multi-input problem, it is
very effective to find the best range of design space for performance. The quadratic
response surface is always described as338 C. Liu et al.
y = b0 +n
i=1
bixi +n
i=1
biix2
i +n
i<j
bijxixj (7.84)
where b0, bi, and bij are coefficients of the linear term, quadratic term, and interactive
term, respectively, and n is the number of design variables.
The basic steps of RSM consist of the determination of the controlled parameters
and response, DOE, regressive model construction, analyses of variance (ANOVA),
and confirmation tests.
(2) The GA Approach
In order to find the global optimization or nearly optimal solution, GA is commonly
adopted to solve complex non-linear problems on the basis of a randomized search
and Darwin’s theory of survival of the fittest. It simulates biological evolution by
natural selection. In general, a set of potential solutions (i.e., chromosomes) is
randomly generated and comprises a population. The GA operators such as selec￾tion/reproduction, crossover, and mutation are performed at each step based on
different criteria [25] that the next generations (i.e., offsprings) can be created from
the parent population. Moreover, due to the elitism, the genetic drift is reduced and
the number of individuals that can survive to the next generation is guaranteed.
In order to make up the next generation, the selection operator selects the solutions
to build up a breeding pool. In this work, the roulette wheel method was used such
that weaker genes stand a chance to be selected, as they might contain some good
features [25]. The main purpose of the selection is to choose better parents for the
next generation.
Subsequently, the parts of two-parent solutions are mixed by the crossover oper￾ator so that two different offspring solutions are created. Crossover fraction specifies
the fraction of the next generation that is produced by crossover. The fraction value
ranges between 0 and 1. Generally, a crossover operator is applied on the chromosome
with single-point, two-point, or scattered crossover approaches, and the crossover
fraction is larger than 0.5. In this study, the scattered crossover approaches were used.
The mutation operation makes some small random changes in the solutions, main￾taining the diversity of the population to prevent premature convergence to a local
optimum solution. In this study, a uniform mutation is used.
The outline of the above optimization algorithm is given in Fig. 7.43. The
optimization scheme of RSM-GA model is summarized as follows:
i. Based on RSM design and experiment, a correct and reasonable RSM model is
obtained.
ii. Generating an initial population of chromosomes (candidate solutions to the
problem) from the first generation via the combined RSM-GA model.
iii. Calculating the fitness F(x) of each of the chromosomes in the population
iv. Creating a population for the next generation by genetic operations (crossover
and mutation). These operations are applied to the chromosomes in a formal
generation with the probabilities based on their fitness.7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 339
Fig. 7.43 The basic procedure of the optimization scheme based on the combined RSM-GA
v. Generating a new generation of injection conditions. This algorithm is repeated
to breed the next generation.
vi. Repeating the above steps until the termination criterion has been satisfied.
2. Design of Experiments
(1) Materials and equipments
In this study, a crystalline wax named KC4017B that was manufactured by Kindt￾Collins was used. Table 7.14 lists its fundamental physical properties. The experi￾ments were carried out on the MPI55 injection molding machine, with the technical
capability of a maximum injection rate of 350 cm3/s, a maximum injection pressure340 C. Liu et al.
Table 7.14 The basic
physical property of
KC4017B
Properties Specification
Ring and Ball softening point 148 °F ≈ 64.4 °C
Penetration 450 gm load 17.2 dmm; 100 mg
load 3.8 dmm
Ash content (ICI1.0) <0.015%
Filler content ≈32%
Specific gravity 1.002
Flow test (ICI2.0) >50%@44 °C
Viscosity (Brookfield
thermosel Spindle)
160 °F ≈ 71 °C 680 100;
170 °F ≈ 76 °C 480 100;
180 °F ≈ 82 °C 350 100;
Expansion 48 °C 2.7%; 60 °C 5.3%; 72 °C
6.7%;
of 70 bar, nozzle diameter of 10 mm and a maximum clamp force of 100 tons, and
the experimental parameters can be adjusted via a control program.
(2) Measurement of shrinkage
In order to investigate the effects of process parameters on the wax products in the wax
injecting process, a simple case is adopted, which is a rectangular-shaped specimen.
All the dimensional variations have been evaluated in terms of linear changes in the
thickness of the specimen. The dimensions of the die were 400, 100, and 2.5 mm.
In this study, the shrinkage is defined as:
S = L
L0
(7.85)
where L0 is the dimension of the cavity and L is the dimension of the wax part
after injection. All the dimensional variations have been evaluated in terms of linear
change of the thickness in the A, B, C, D, E and F locations, which were, respectively,
10, 95, 200, 295, and 390 mm away from the gate (as illustrated in Fig. 7.44). In this
experiment, a CMM with 0.1 um resolution was used, and the mean of the shrinkage
of the five different locations was taken as the shrinkage of the thickness of the
specimen.
(3) Experimental scheme
The series of experiments were carried out to figure out the relative influence of the
injection molding conditions on the dimensional stability of the wax pattern. To this
end, process parameters, which includes mold temperature (Td ), melt temperature
(Tm), packing pressure (P) and holding time (t), were investigated and selected as
inputs and other parameters were maintained constant. Then the shrinkage of the
thickness of the specimen was considered as responses. The process factors and
factor levels of the injection molding conditions are listed in Table 7.15. The coded7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 341
Fig. 7.44 The geometry of
the die and wax pattern
Table 7.15 Experimental factors and factor levels
Levels of
experiments
Mold
temperature/(°C)
Melt temperature
/(°C)
Packing pressure
/(bar)
Holding time /(s)
1 30 74 35 15
0 25 72 30 10
-1 20 70 25 5
value +1, 0, −1 represented a high level, middle level, low level of the factors,
respectively. The coded variables are calculated as
A = Td − Td0
Td
, B = Tm − Tm0
Tm
,C = P − P0
P , D = t − t0
t (7.86)
where A, B, C, and D are the coded values of the factors Td , Tm, P, and t, respectively.
Td0, Tm0, P0, and t0 are the values of mold temperature, melt temperature, packing
pressure, and holding time at zero level, respectively.\DeltaTd ,\DeltaTm, P, and t
are the intervals of Td , Tm, P, and t, respectively.342 C. Liu et al.
The experiment plan, generated in accordance with faced Box-Behnken design,
consists of 30 runs. The factorial portion is a full factorial design with all combina￾tions of the parameters at three levels. All the corresponding results of the shrinkage
are given in Table 7.16.
Table 7.16 Results of experimental runs
Runs. Factors Response (Shrinkage)
A B C D
1 0 0 0 0 0.98503
2 1 -1 1 1 0.9832
3 0 0 0 0 0.98503
4 1 -1 1 −1 0.98423
5 0 0 0 −1 0.9862
6 0 0 1 0 0.98487
7 −1 −1 −1 −1 0.9846
8 0 0 0 0 0.98503
9 1 −1 −1 1 0.98463
10 1 0 0 0 0.98707
11 1 1 1 1 0.98643
12 0 −1 0 0 0.9837
13 0 0 0 0 0.98503
14 −1 1 −1 1 0.98533
15 1 1 1 −1 0.98857
16 0 0 0 1 0.9846
17 0 1 0 0 0.98687
18 −1 0 0 0 0.98437
19 −1 1 1 1 0.98387
20 1 1 −1 −1 0.98906
21 −1 −1 1 1 0.98093
22 −1 −1 −1 1 0.98317
23 1 −1 −1 −1 0.98697
24 −1 1 −1 −1 0.9872
25 0 0 −1 0 0.9862
26 0 0 0 0 0.98503
27 −1 1 1 −1 0.9858
28 1 1 −1 1 0.98747
29 −1 −1 1 −1 0.9832
30 0 0 0 0 0.985037 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 343
Fig. 7.45 Multinomial fitting of Experimental data
3. Result discussion and optimization
(1) RSM model
In this section, Design Expert 8.0.6 is used to fit the mathematical model. Design
Expert is one of the most commonly used experimental design software, which inte￾grates many functions, such as experimental design, data fitting, variance analysis,
model suitability detection and so on. After importing the experimental data into
Design Expert, the polynomial fitting is selected in the model fitting term, as shown
in Fig. 7.45. Finally, the fitted mathematical model can be viewed in the model fitting
results, as shown in Fig. 7.46.
The response equations in terms of coded facts and actual facts are depicted as
follows:
S = 0.776684357 − 1.352023 × 10−3 × Td
+ 6.336718 × 10−3 × Tm − 1.897728 × 10−3 × P
− 6.65351 × 10−5 × t + 1.375 × 10−5 × TdTm + 2 × 10−6
× TdP + 1 × 10−6 × Td t + 2.1375 × 10−5 × TmP
− 2.875 × 10−6 × Tmt − 3.5 × 10−7 × Pt + 1.00982
× 10−5 × T2
d − 4.5636 × 10−5 × T2
m + 2.69825 × 10−6
× P2 − 2.70175 × 10−6 × t
2 (7.87)344 C. Liu et al.
Fig. 7.46 RSM model
(2) ANOVA Results
In order to compare the residual variance with the term variance, the “Model F value”
is calculated from a model mean square which is divided by a residual mean square.
If the factors do not have any significant effects on the response, the ration will be
closed to 1. On the contrary, the “Model P Value” smaller (less than 0.05) the effect
of the terms in the model is more significant on the response. On the other hand, as a
test to compare the model variance with the residual variance, the “F Value” on any
individual factor terms should be not close to 1, which means the variances are close
to the same and the effects of the term on the response are insignificant. Furthermore,
if a “P Value” of any model terms is less than 0.05, the effect on the response of the
individual terms is a significant effect on the response.
The ANOVA results of the shrinkage are shown in Table 7.17. The “Model F
value” of 48.58 with a “Model P value” of less than 0.0001, implies the model is
significant. The “Model P Value” of A, B, C, D are all less than 0.0001, which means
that they are significant for the response. The model term BC is also significant for its
“Model P Value” 0.0279 is less than 0.05. In contrast, other terms are not significant,
since all of their “Model P Values” are more than 0.05.
Furthermore, in order to test the rationality and acceptability of the model, an
investigation about the correlation coefficients (R2), the adjusted R-squared (Adj.R2),
the predicted R-squared (Pr ed.R2), and the Adequate Precision is indispensable.
They are explained by Eq. (7.88)7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 345
Table 7.17 Analysis of variance table
Source Sum of Squares df Mean Square F- value P-value Prob >
F
Model 8.39E−05 14 6E−06 48.57794 <0.0001 Significant
A 2.04E−05 1 2.04E−05 165.222 <0.0001
B 3.75E−05 1 3.75E−05 303.5434 <0.0001
C 1.02E−05 1 1.02E−05 82.38963 <0.0001
D 1.46E−05 1 1.46E−05 118.1155 <0.0001
AB 3.02E−07 1 3.02E−07 2.450614 0.1383
AC 4E−08 1 4E−08 0.324048 0.5776
AD 1E−08 1 1E−08 0.081012 0.7798
BC 7.31E−07 1 7.31E−07 5.922181 0.0279
BD 1.32E−08 1 1.32E−08 0.107138 0.7479
CD 1.23E−09 1 1.23E−09 0.009924 0.9220
AA 1.65E−07 1 1.65E−07 1.337746 0.2655
BB 8.63E−08 1 8.63E−08 0.699417 0.4161
CC 1.18E−08 1 1.18E−08 0.095509 0.7615
DD 1.18E−08 1 1.18E−08 0.095758 0.7612
Residual 1.85E−06 15 1.23E−07
Lack of Fit 1.85E−06 10 1.85E−07
Pure Error 0 5 0
Cor total 8.58E−05 29
R2 = 1 −
 SSresidual
SSresidual + SSmodel 
(7.88)
where SS is the abbreviation of “Sum of Squares”.
Adj.R2 = 1 −
SSresidual
dfresidual   SSresidual + SSmodel
dfresidual + dfresidual  (7.89)
In the above equation, df is the abbreviation of the degree of freedom.
Pr ed.R2 = 1 −
 PRESS
SSresidual + SSmodel 
(7.90)
where PRESS is the sum of squares of the predicted data.
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
Adeq. Pr ecision = max(
∧
Y ) − min(
∧
Y )

∨
 ∧
Y

∨
 ∧
Y

= pσ2
n
(7.91)346 C. Liu et al.
where p is the number of model parameters (including intercept and any block coef￾ficients), δ2 is the residual mean square from ANOVA table, and n is the number of
experiments
The ability of the correlation coefficients (R2) is to measure the amount of variation
of the model to the experimental data. It should be as close to 1 as possible. The
difference between the adjusted R-squared measurement the amount of variation
around the mean and the predicted R-squared measurement the amount of variation
in new data should be within 0.20. The Adequate Precision, a signal-to-noise ratio,
comparing the range of the predicted values at the design points to the average
prediction error, should be greater than 4 if the model discrimination is adequate.
In this study, the correlation coefficient R2 = 0.97842 is close to 1, so the model is
reasonable and acceptable. The “Pred R-Squared” of 0.958279 is in good agreement
with the “Adj R-Squared” of 0.874245. “Adeq Precision” with a ratio of 33.48089
indicates an adequate signal. In conclusion, this model can be used to explore the
design space.
(3) Sensitivity Analysis of process parameters
According to the results of ANOVA, a sensitivity analysis for process parameters
on the dimensional shrinkage variation can be conducted. The results are shown
in Fig. 7.47. It clearly shows that the most significant factor is melt tempera￾ture (B), followed by mold temperature, holding time, and packing pressure. Their
contribution percentages are 43.67%, 23.77%, 16.99% and 11.85%, respectively.
The effects of mold temperature and melt temperature on the dimension shrinkage
variation while keeping the packing pressure at 25 bar and holding time at 5 s are
shown in Fig. 7.48a. When the mold temperature increases from 20 to 30 °C and
the melt temperature increases from 70 to 74 °C, the dimension shrinkage variation
increases. Figure 7.48b shows the effects of packing pressure and holding time on
0.0000%
5.0000%
10.0000%
15.0000%
20.0000%
25.0000%
30.0000%
35.0000%
40.0000%
45.0000%
50.0000%
A B C D AB AC AD BC BD CD AA BB CC DD
Fig. 7.47 The sensitivity of factors (coded factors) on the shrinkage7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 347
Fig. 7.48 a Response surface and contour plot of the shrinkage between the effect of packing
pressure and holding time at 25 bar and 5 s, respectively. b Response surface and contour plot of
the shrinkage between the effect of mold temperature and melt temperature at 30 °C and 74 °C,
respectively
the responses while keeping the mold temperature at 30 °C and melt temperature at
74 °C. It clearly indicates that by decreasing the packing pressure and holding time,
the shrinkage is maximized.
(4) Regression Models Adequacy Check
In order to confirm that all relevant information from the experimental data has been
used by the mathematical predictive models, the regression model adequacy should348 C. Liu et al.
be checked. Figure 7.49 shows the results of the actual value and predicted value of
the experiment run.
According to the residual analysis, if the distribution of residuals is normally
distributed, the adequacy of the mathematical predictive model is sufficient. The
normal probability plot (Fig. 7.50) clearly shows that the points in experiments
follow a straight line, which indicates that residuals follow a normal distribution.
Furthermore, as a testing tool of the assumption of constant variance, the plot of
the residuals versus the ascending predicted response values (Fig. 7.51) is a random
scatter, which revealed that any unusual structure and obvious pattern do not exist for
the reason that the plot is a random scatter. It tests the assumption of constant variance.
These imply that the regression models proposed are adequate and there is no reason
to suspect any violation of the independence or constant variance assumptions.
(5) Optimization of Process parameters based on GA.
In this study, GA is adopted to find the optimal process parameters for the minimal
shrink of the thin-wall wax part, namely, the shrinkage should be as close to 1 as
possible. Therefore, the GA optimization task is to minimize the objective function:
f (z) = −S (7.92)
where
z = (Td , Tm, P, t) (7.93)
The varied range of the process parameters is:
0.98
0.982
0.984
0.986
0.988
0.99
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
Shrinkage
Actual value
Predicted value
Fig. 7.49 The actual value and the predicted value of the experiment runs7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 349
Design-Expert?Software
Shrinkage
Color points by value of
Shrinkage:
0.98906
0.98093
Internally Studentized Residuals
Normal % Probability
Normal Plot of Residuals
-3.00 -2.00 -1.00 0.00 1.00 2.00 3.00
1
5
10
20
30
50
70
80
90
95
99
Fig. 7.50 Normal probability plot for the residual of shrinkage
Design-Expert?Software
Shrinkage
Color points by value of
Shrinkage:
0.98906
0.98093
6
Predicted
Internally Studentized Residuals
Residuals vs. Predicted
-3.00
-2.00
-1.00
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
0.98 0.98 0.98 0.99 0.99 0.99
Fig. 7.51 Studentized residual plot for the predicted of shrinkage
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
20 ◦C ≤ Td ≤ 30 ◦C
70 ◦C ≤ Tm ≤ 74 ◦C
25bar ≤ P ≤ 35bar
5s ≤ t ≤ 15s
(7.94)350 C. Liu et al.
Table 7.18 GA parameters set-up
Parameter Value at the following level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Population size 30 60 90
Crossover rate 0.7 0.8 0.9
Mutation rate 0.01 0.1 0.2
Because the GA solution may be sensitive to its set-up, 27 experiments were
performed to represent the combination of different levels for population size,
crossover rate, and mutation rate, as shown in Table 7.18. The values in Table 7.18
are based on computational experiences and the corresponding literature review.
There were no significant differences in these 27 GA experiments. The effects
of population size and crossover rate on the shrinkage are not significant, but the
mutation rate exhibits a significant influence. The evolution of generations is shown
in Figs. 7.52 and 7.53 for mutation rates of 20% and 1% respectively. Table 7.19
shows the corresponding values for the GA and injection parameters. It is verified
that high mutation rates create offspring that push parameter values to the bounds.
0 20 40 60 80 100
-0.99
-0.989
-0.988
-0.987
-0.986
-0.985
-0.984
-0.983
Generation
Fitness value
Best: -0.98939 Mean: -0.98898
Best fitness
Mean fitness
Fig. 7.52 Variation of shrinkage with number of generations (mutation rate, 0.2)7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 351
0 20 40 60 80 100
-0.99
-0.989
-0.988
-0.987
-0.986
-0.985
-0.984
Generation
Fitness value
Best: -0.98938 Mean: -0.98938
Best fitness
Mean fitness
Fig. 7.53 Variation of shrinkage with number of generations (mutation rate, 0.01)
Table 7.19 Effect of mutation rate on the values of the injection parameters
Value at the following levels
Level 1 (Fig. 7.9) Level 2 (Fig. 7.10)
GA parameters
Population size 60 60
Crossover rate 0.8 0.8
Mutation rate 0.2 0.01
Mean shrinkage 0.98898 0.98938
Injection parameters
Mold temperature (°C) 29.998 29.868
Melt temperature (°C) 73.958 73.903
Packing pressure (Pa) 25.156 25
Holding time (s) 5.227 5.09352 C. Liu et al.
References
1. M. Sun, Investment Casting. (Beijing Institute of Technology Press, 2009)
2. L. Zhigang, History and development trend of investment casting industry in China. Casting
61(4), 347–356 (2012)
3. L. Zhang, Theory and Practice of Near Net-shape Investment Casting (National Defense
Industry Press, 2007)
4. Lamei Cao, Xing Tang, Yong Zhang et al., Progress of advanced near net-shape investment
casting technology of superalloys. J Aeronaut Mater 26(3), 238–243 (2006)
5. B. Jiang, Practical Casting Technology (Liaoning Science and Technology Publishing House,
2008)
6. M. Guo, Moldflow Analysis on Big-sized Injection Molding Parts of Composite Materials and
Their Optimization of Process Parameters (Zhejiang University of Technology, 2012)
7. Chao Luo, Kan Long, Qiang Wang, Application of CAE technology into injection molds. Coal
Min. Mach. 32(5), 195–197 (2011)
8. Xiaoping Chen, Yun Wang, Hu Shugen et al., Optimization of injection molding processing
based on the flow simulation technology. Mach. Des. Manuf. 2, 68–69 (2005)
9. Q. Gao, Y. Chang, Q. Liang, Development of industrial computed tomography. Mod. Sci.
Instrum. (4):5–8 (1993)
10. C. Liu, S. Jin, X. Lai, et al., Influence of complex structure on the shrinkage of part in investment
casting process[J]. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 77(5–8), 1191–1203 (2015)
11. C. Liu, S. Jin, X. Lai, J. Luo, B. He, F. Li, The assembly variation modeling for the rear casing
wax part based on polar coordinate[C], in ASME 2015 International Manufacturing Science
and Engineering Conference, Am. Soc. Mech. Eng. V001T02A083-V001T02A083 (2015)
12. C. Liu, S. Jin, X. Lai, et al., Dimensional variation stream modeling of investment casting
process based on state space method[J], in Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical
Engineers, Part B: J. Eng. Manuf. 229(3), 463–474 (2015)
13. W. Bonilla, S.H. Masood, P. Iovenitti, An Investigation of Wax Patterns for Accuracy
Improvement in Investment Cast Parts[J]. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 18(5), 348–356 (2001)
14. A.S. Sabau, W.D. Porter, Alloy shrinkage factors for the investment casting of 17-4PH stainless
steel parts. Metall. Mater. Trans. B 39, 317–330 (2008)
15. G.E.P. Box, K.B. Wilson, On the experimental attainment of optimum conditions. J. Roy. Stat.
Soc.: Ser. B (Methodol.) 13(1), 1–38 (1951)
16. R.H. Myers, D.C. Montgomery, C.M. Anderson-Cook, Response Surface Methodology:
Process and Product Optimization using Designed Experiments (Wiley, 2016)
17. V. Beal, P. Erasenthiran, N. Hopkinson, P. Dickens, C. Ahrens, Optimisation of processing
parameters in laser fused H13/Cu materials using response surface method (RSM). J. Mater.
Process. Technol. 174(1), 145–154 (2006)
18. L. Wu, K.-L. Yick, S.-P. Ng, J. Yip, K.-H. Kong, Parametric design and process parameter
optimization for bra cup molding via response surface methodology. Expert Syst. Appl. 39(1),
162–171 (2012)
19. S. Rajakumar, V. Balasubramanian, Establishing relationships between mechanical properties
of aluminium alloys and optimized friction stir welding process parameters. Mater. Des. 40,
17–35 (2012)
20. M.T. Chuang, Y.K. Yang, Y.H. Hsiao, Modeling and optimization of injection molding process
parameters for thin-shell plastic parts. Polym.-Plast. Technol. Eng. 48(7), 745–753 (2009)
21. C.P. Chen, M.T. Chuang, Y.H. Hsiao et al., Simulation and experimental study in determining
injection molding process parameters for thin-shell plastic parts via design of experiments
analysis. Expert Syst. Appl. 36(7), 10752–10759 (2009)
22. D.E. Goldberg, J.H. Holland, Genetic algorithms and machine learning (1988)
23. C. Shen, L. Wang, Q. Li, Optimization of injection molding process parameters using combi￾nation of artificial neural network and genetic algorithm method. J. Mater. Process. Technol.
183(2–3), 412–418 (2007)7 Dimensional Precision Control of Large Castings 353
24. C. Liu, S. Jin, X. Lai, D. Wang, Y. Wang, Experimental study of injection conditions for a
thin-walled wax pattern using response surface methodology[C], in Applied Mechanics and
Materials, Vol. 607, pp. 185–192, (Trans Tech Publications, 2014)
25. C. Reeves, J.E. Rowe, Genetic Algorithms: Principles And Perspectives: A Guide to GA Theory
(Springer Science & Business Media, 2002)Chapter 8
Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting
Process
Anping Dong, Dafan Du, Hui Xing, and Guoliang Zhu
With the continuous advancement of the aviation and aerospace industry, higher
requirements are desired for the structure and size of casting parts, e.g., lightweight,
holistic, and precision. In line with this development trend, the demand for precision
forming of complex thin-walled casting parts is getting stronger and stronger. Defects,
such as porosity, cold shut, and misrun for thin-walled casting parts, are easy to form
during the filling process with a fast cooling rate that cannot guarantee the fluidity
and feeding ability of the liquid metal. Besides, the larger Laplace force and viscous
force caused by the thinner thickness of the mold cavity wall may influence the flow
state of the front edge of the liquid metal during the filling process of the casting
parts, which has a great impact on the precision forming of these thin-walled casting
parts. Therefore, it becomes more and more important to explore new technologies
of precision forming for complex thin-walled casting parts. Especially, the precision
investment casting under anti-gravity condition has gradually become a research
hotspot. The anti-gravity precision casting mainly includes low-pressure casting,
counter pressure casting, adjusted pressure casting, etc. The study of low-pressure
casting and counter-pressure casting has been relatively mature, whereas the adjusted
pressure casting is mainly limited to the casting of light alloys such as aluminum and
magnesium, which has not been applied in superalloy casting.
© Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
B. Sun et al., Precision Forming Technology of Large Superalloy Castings for Aircraft
Engines, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-6220-8_8
355356 A. Dong et al.
8.1 Overview of Adjusted Pressure Precision Casting
Technology for Complex Thin-Walled Casting Parts
8.1.1 Casting Method of Complex Thin-Walled Casting Parts
8.1.1.1 Complex Thin-Walled Casting Parts of Aluminum Alloys
In the early stage, complex thin-walled casting parts of aluminum alloys were mostly
produced using sand mold gravity casting. The filling of liquid metal completely
depends on gravity, and the filling speed is relatively slow and difficult to control.
There are too many uncontrollable factors in the casting process. The dimensional
precision of sand mold and sand core, resulting in a low surface finish. As a result,
the quality of the casting parts is poor. There are many defects such as slag, porosity,
shrinkage cavity, surface cracks, and shrinkage porosity, which can severely limit the
production. After multiple studies and research, it was decided to solve the quality
problems of complex thin-walled casting parts of aluminum alloy by adopting more
advanced casting method [1].
During the World War II, the Britain Birmingham Cast Aluminum Co., Ltd.
successfully developed the aero-engine cylinder block casting parts using the low
pressure casting technology, which attracted a great attention of the casting industry
in the world and motivated many countries to begin the study of anti-gravity casting
method of aluminum alloys [2].
Recently, developed countries/regions such as Europe and the United States have
been widely using anti-gravity casting technology to produce complex thin-walled
casting parts of aluminum alloys with complex structure and excellent performance,
which can be used in key parts such as aircraft and space shuttles, engine and cabin
of cruise missiles, the engine of high-performance armored vehicles, and high-end
electronic equipment. The resulting performance and dimensional precision exceed
that of alloy forging parts and sheet metal parts of the same type [3].
8.1.1.2 Complex Thin-Walled Casting Parts of Magnesium Alloys
Compared with aluminum alloys, magnesium alloys are chemically very active.
The liquid metal is easy to be oxidized in the filling process, and the generation
of shrinkage porosity and shrinkage cavity will increase the contact area between
magnesium alloy and the environment, making it vulnerable to electrochemical corro￾sion. Besides, the density of magnesium alloy is low, the crystallization temperature
interval is large, and the feeding channel is easy to be blocked, which leads to
the generation of defects such as shrinkage porosity and shrinkage cavity in the
casting parts. The casting of magnesium alloys is much more difficult than that of
aluminum alloys. The traditional gravity casting method is difficult to satisfy the
growing demand for complex thin-walled casting parts of magnesium alloys [4–6].8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 357
Fig. 8.1 Typical precision casting parts of magnesium alloy used in aero-engine [4]
At present, there are two main forming methods of complex thin-walled casting parts
of magnesium alloy: die casting and anti-gravity casting.
The anti-gravity casting technology of magnesium alloy has emerged recently.
Compared with die-casting technology, the anti-gravity casting method becomes
more and more popular in the field of complex thin-walled casting parts of magnesium
alloy because its characteristics of filling, solidification, and forming process under
pressure are controllable. Developed countries in Europe and the United States have
developed the integrated gas protection technology of magnesium alloys melting,
transportation, and anti-gravity casting through in-depth research on the casting tech￾nology of complex thin-wall casting parts of magnesium alloys. The mass production
of complex thin-wall anti-gravity casting parts of magnesium alloy is achieved by
using the advanced process equipment integrated with computer-aided process design
methods. Figure 8.1 shows typical precision casting parts of magnesium alloy used
in aero-engine [4].
8.1.1.3 Complex Thin-Walled Casting Parts of Titanium Alloys
Complex thin-walled casting parts of titanium alloy exhibit typically features such
as large overall dimensions, thin wall, complex structure with high precision require￾ments, together with strong chemical activity at high temperature and a wide crys￾tallization temperature range. As a result, they are difficult to produce using the
conventional casting method. At present, the centrifugal casting process is often used
to produce the casting parts which have the characteristics of high metal utilization
and fine structure, with a relatively low cost [7–10]. The centrifugal casting method is
relatively mature in China. Chen Yuyong, et al. of Harbin Institute of Technology has
successfully prepared Ti-Al-Zr alloy parts by centrifugal casting method (as shown
in the Fig. 8.2) [11].
Although the forming problems during the complex thin-walled casting of tita￾nium alloys can be solved using the centrifugal casting method [10, 11], the existence
of centrifugal force leads to the uneven distribution of chemical composition of the358 A. Dong et al.
Fig. 8.2 Complex
thin-walled casting parts of
titanium alloy used in the
engine [11]
casting parts, which makes the metallurgical quality, microstructure, and mechanical
properties of the casting parts location-dependent. To get better quality casting parts,
researchers began to explore to produce thin-walled casting parts of titanium alloy
by using anti-gravity casting.
The anti-gravity casting technology was first applied successfully to the preci￾sion casting of TiAl alloy by Noda [12], who obtained the turbine with excellent
performance. The maximum rotation speed of the turbine can break through the
limit of the traditional one. Researchers from Harbin Institute of Technology of
China [13, 14] investigated the influence of various process parameters and process
factors on the casting quality of complex thin-walled casting parts of titanium alloy,
put forward the corresponding casting plan, and completed the preparation of small
complex thin-walled casting parts. Compared to the previous method, the casting
parts perform some advantages: higher density, lower composition segregation, finer
structure, fewer shrinkage cavity, no interface reacts, and lower cost. This technique
reflecting the advantages of the anti-gravity casting method in titanium alloy casting.
8.1.1.4 Complex Thin-Walled Casting Parts of Superalloys
Complex thin-walled casting parts of superalloys are widely used in the aerospace
industry. According to the requirements of aero-engine that is the core equipment and
the heart of aircraft. The combat capability and transportation capacity of military
aircraft depend on the design and manufacturing level of the aero-engine. To improve
the performance of the aircraft, it is necessary to reduce the weight as much as possible
and to improve the thrust specific and structural efficiency. 70–80% of the realization
of this high-performance engine technology depends on the material and structure
that are manufactured using the thin-walled casting parts, such as the turbine rear
frame (TRF), the pre-swirl nozzle, the floating wall tile of the engine combustion
chamber, the pre-diffuser case, the turbine interstage case and so on. The integral
precision casting technology has become the mainstream route of the manufacturing
technology of aero-engine structural parts.8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 359
At present, large complex thin-walled precision casting parts of superalloy has
been successfully applied to many kinds of military and civil engines such as CFM56
series, JT90D, PW4000, RB211, EJ200, etc. [15]. In 1984, Howmet Company applied
the integral casting technology of K4169 superalloy to the production of the exhaust
guide ring of a high-pressure compressor of the CFM56 engine, and successfully
manufactured the ring complex casting parts with diameter more than 500 mm. The
integral casting of the compressor case and combustion chamber shell of the engine
was completed on this basis [16]. After that, many large-scale complex thin-walled
fine-grained integral casting parts were completed using MX fine-grained casting
process and the complex thin-walled casting parts of superalloy were successfully
applied to the diffusion cases of a rocket engine, such as the CF680 engine turbine rear
frame of superalloy with casting parts size more than 1000 mm [17]. GE Company
and PCC Company also have a very high level in the field of large-scale complex
thin-walled casting parts superalloy. They have been able to produce complex engine
cases with a diameter of more than 1100 mm, a minimum wall thickness of less than
2 mm, and a large number of hollow support plates with different structures.
Currently, the superalloy precision casting technology of China is relatively back￾ward, and the early structural parts of the superalloy case have adopted the technology
of “Plate Bending Forming-Forging Rough Machining-Welding Machining Form￾ing”. This process involves many processing procedures and a long manufacturing
cycle, with a low material utilization rate and high manufacturing cost. Besides, it
is easy to cause serious deformation of components due to many and dense welds
and it is difficult to control the deformation and defects in the heat-affected zone
of the welding site, which is easy to cause poor rigidity of the overall structure.
In recent years, some research institutes, such as Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
have carried out a lot of studies on the integral precision casting parts of large-scale
complex thin-walled components of superalloy and have made certain progress. In
the past, gravity casting was used to develop such casting parts. Because the thin￾walled area of casting parts is getting larger, the structure is becoming more and
more complex, and the surface quality requirements are getting better. The design
of the casting system under the gravity casting process has certain limitations, the
yield is only 20%, and some complex structures of casting parts are prone to quality
defects such as shrinkage porosity, shrinkage cavity, deformation, and size out of
tolerance. The weight of the alloy used in the casting system is about 4 times that
of the casting itself, which greatly increases the manufacturing cost of the casting.
It is thus urgent to develop new technologies and equipment to solve the casting and
forming problems of this kind of superalloy components.360 A. Dong et al.
8.1.2 Precision Forming Technology of Adjusted Pressure
Casting
The adjusted pressure casting is a complex thin-walled casting forming technology
based on the traditional anti-gravity casting technology. In 1987, Prof. Yaohe Zhou
and Jianmin Zeng proposed a method of adjusted pressure casting based on anti￾gravity differential pressure casting to solve the problem of complex thin-walled
casting forming. In addition to the advantages of traditional anti-gravity casting
technology, it also has its unique characteristics. First of all, vacuum degassing shall
be carried out before mold filling and the negative pressure shall be maintained for
a period, which is conducive to the gas precipitation in the liquid metal, making the
liquid metal purer and removing the gas and water adsorbed on the mold surface
to prevent defects. Secondly, when filling, negative pressure filling can avoid the
phenomenon of aspiration and air entrainment of liquid metal, and there is no blocking
effect of air back pressure in the cavity on filling, which not only enhances the filling
ability but also maintains the stability of filling. Consequently, this stable filling
process provides favorable conditions for the sequential solidification of casting
parts. Finally, after filling, the liquid metal solidifies under positive pressure, which
prevents the liquid metal from flowing back and is conducive to the feeding of the
liquid metal. Meanwhile, this positive pressure solidification environment reduces
the occurrence of shrinkage porosity and shrinkage cavity, restrains the precipitation
of residual gas to reduce the formation of vacuum defects, improves the density of
the casting, and results in a good performance of the casting parts. The advantages
of adjusted pressure casting improve the strength and plasticity of the casting parts
and change the microstructure and properties of the casting parts, which is suitable
for the forming of complex thin-walled casting parts with a thickness of 1–5 mm.
Additionally, due to the effect of vacuum degassing and negative pressure filling,
the exhaust volume of the mold is very low during the filling process, which reduces
the requirements for the permeability of the mold. Moreover, the pressure difference
between the upper and lower chambers follows the principle of the minimum pressure
difference and the effective pressure difference on the mold is not very large. As a
result, the strength of the mold is not required to be high. In this way, the adjusted
pressure casting has strong adaptability to the mold, which can be applied to various
casting methods such as metal mold casting, sand mold casting, and investment
casting to produce complex, thin-walled and integral metal casting parts that are
difficult to be poured by other methods, to solve the filling problem in the pouring
of complex thin-walled casting parts.
The main part of the adjusted pressure casting device is shown in Fig. 8.3, which
mainly includes two isolated pressure chambers with controllable gas pressure and
the control equipment for regulating the pressure. The upper and lower pressure
chambers are connected with the positive pressure and negative pressure control
system, and the positive pressure and negative pressure are controlled at the same
time. Figure 8.4 shows the pressure variation curve with time in the whole process
of adjusted pressure casting.8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 361
Fig. 8.3 Schematic diagram of adjusted pressure casting equipment for aluminum alloys: 1 Pressure
tank 2 Positive pressure control system 3 Upper pressure chamber 4 Casting mold 5 Negative
pressure control system6 Vacuum tank 7 Molten metal 8 Holding furnace 9 Lower pressure chamber
Set value
Ture value
Pressure (KPa) 
Time (S)
Fig. 8.4 Curve of pressure versus time during adjusted-pressure cast
As a kind of anti-gravity casting technology used in the precision casting of
complex thin-walled casting parts of aluminum and magnesium alloys, the adjusted
pressure casting has a great advantage in solving the problem of thin-walled casting.
At present, with the further development of major equipment such as aero-engine,362 A. Dong et al.
aerospace vehicle, and ground gas turbine in China, the demand for large-scale
complex ultrathin-walled components are increasing. Adopting the gravity casting
method for casting parts with wall thickness greater than 1.5 mm, through the special
design of the casting system, the area of the thin-walled area less than 100 × 100 mm
can be achieved. If the area of the thin wall is further enlarged, there will be looseness,
incomplete filling, cold shut, and other casting defects. However, for the thin-walled
casting parts with wall thickness less than 1.5 mm, it is difficult to complete the entire
filling of the melt in the thin-walled area by adopting the gravity casting process, even
if the area is slightly less than 100 mm × 100 mm. Therefore, it is very necessary
to explore and establish the adjusted pressure casting device and technology for the
complex thin-walled casting parts of the superalloy.
Pressure change in the upper and lower chambers during the adjusted pressure
casting process where P1 is the upper chamber pressure and P2 is the lower chamber
pressure.
Based on the processing characteristics of adjusted pressure casting, the physical
properties, fire resistance, pressure regulating, and casting system of superalloy must
be considered comprehensively if the process is used for the precision casting of
superalloys.
(1) The density of superalloy is about three times that of aluminum alloy. It is
necessary to solve the problem of metal liquid filling under external pressure.
Superalloys need more pressure during the filling process. However, due to the
difference in physical properties between the superalloy and light metals such as
aluminum and magnesium, there will be the backpressure caused by the Laplace
effect when the superalloy melt rises along the riser, together with the impact
effect of liquid alloy on the inside of the shell. As a result, we should seek
solutions from two aspects of dynamics and hydrodynamics.
(2) The casting temperature of superalloy is about 1500 °C, which is much higher
than that of common aluminum and magnesium alloys. This raises higher
requirements for the riser and other refractories used in the adjusted pressure
casting. For example, the riser should use special materials with high thermal
shock resistance to replacing the traditional graphite pipe or cast iron pipe,
to avoid the erosion and thermal shock of the riser during the rising process
of liquid alloy. For superalloy sealing, the engagement between the upper and
lower tanks adopts the snap ring type, which is fastened under the action of the
hydraulic pump and sealed by the silica gel sealing ring embedded in it.
(3) The melting process of superalloy should be carried out under a high vacuum
condition, which is another important feature different from the adjusted pres￾sure casting of aluminum and magnesium alloys. At present, the aluminum alloy
adjusted pressure casting device adopts the structure of upper and lower tanks.
There is a partition in the middle to separate the upper and lower pressure tanks.8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 363
The shell and riser are baked and preheated in an external oven and then put into
the upper-pressure tank. If the superalloy also adopts this design, the vacuum
degree will be greatly affected during the installation of the riser and the shell.
Inert gas protection should be considered in the design to avoid more casting
defects because of strong oxidation.
(4) Requirements for shell: in common precision casting, the choice of shell material
and dip-coating process plays a decisive role in the surface quality and internal
quality of casting parts. In particular, the surface layer and back layer slurry
and the composition and physical properties of the molding sand have a crucial
impact on the quality of casting parts. The application of these materials is
required to be higher by the adjusted pressure precision casting, and the shell is
required to bear higher pressure. Generally, the packing pressure of the adjusted
pressure casting is about 0.6–1.0 Mpa.
(5) Special design of casting system: the key of adjusted pressure casting is to
obtain the differential pressure so that the liquid metal can smoothly reach the
complex ultrathin wall area and complete the filling procedure. It is undoubtedly
a significantly important topic on how to design a reasonable casting system and
to choose the appropriate casting parameters to realize the smooth filling of metal
and the specific solidification sequence.
8.2 Adjusted Pressure Casting Equipment of Superalloys
In the 1980s, Prof. Yaohe Zhou and Jianmin Zeng established the principle prototype
of the adjusted pressure casting in the School of Materials Science and Engineering of
Northwestern Polytechnic University, and operated it and produced on a small scale
under laboratory conditions for a long time. As early as around 2002, the automation
controlled adjusted pressure casting engineering application equipment was devel￾oped by Weidong Huang, Wanqi Jie, Qitang Hao, etc., and the mass production was
carried out in AVIC Jiangxi Hongdu Aviation Industry Group Company Ltd. Jianfei
Sun of Harbin Institute of Technology had also carried out the development and
technology research of the integrated equipment of adjusted pressure/differential
pressure/low pressure and developed various types of integrated casting equipment
of anti-gravity adjusted pressure/differential pressure for many research institutions
and production enterprises. At present, the adjusted pressure casting technology
has been successfully applied to the engineering production of aluminum alloy and
magnesium alloy casting parts. Based on the principle of generality and technolog￾ical advantages of the adjusted pressure casting technology, and the research and
development requirements for large complex thin-walled casting parts in key indus￾tries such as aerospace and ground gas turbine in recent years, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University with the assistance of Shanghai Huizhong Electric Furnace Co., Ltd. and
Prof. Jianfei Sun’s research group of Harbin Institute of Technology, has designed
and manufactured the superalloy precision casting voltage regulating device.364 A. Dong et al.
Figure 8.5 is the schematic view of a device of superalloy adjusted pressure
casting. The adjusted pressure casting device is composed of the upper and lower
chamber vacuum pressure tanks, induction heating device, vacuum system, riser,
pressure control device, and other main components. The device can control not
only the positive pressure but also the negative pressure. The device includes two
isolated chambers with independent and controllable internal air pressure and control
equipment for gas pressure regulation. The upper and lower cavities are separated by
a partition, while the isolation between the two cavities and the external environment
is ensured at the same time. An induction heating coil and a crucible are installed
in the lower pressure chamber to melt and hold the superalloy liquid. The power is
regulated by the medium frequency power supply and thermocouple to control the
temperature of the alloy liquid. The shell is placed in the upper tank, one end of the
shell opening is facing down and connected with the riser, and the bottom end of
the riser is inserted into the molten metal liquid level. The upper and lower pressure
chambers are respectively connected with the pressure control system through pipes,
and the precise control of the air pressure in the pressure chamber from negative
pressure to positive pressure is realized by leading the gas into or out of each pressure
chamber. Figure 8.6 is the picture of the device.
Electric chain hoist, 500Kg 
Fig. 8.5 Schematic diagram of the superalloy adjusted pressure casting equipment: 1 Medium
frequency power supply 2 The main body of adjusted pressure casting furnace 3 Lifting vehicle 4
Pneumatic control system 5 Vacuum line 6 Vacuum tank8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 365
Fig. 8.6 Adjusted pressure
precision casting equipment
of complex thin-walled
superalloy parts
8.2.1 Structural Design
The lower pressure tank is of flat sandwich structure, and the material is 16 MnR
special steel for pressure vessel. The structural pressure is designed and manufactured
according to 1.0 MPa pressure. The lower tank is equipped with an electromagnetic
induction heating coil and crucible. The upper-pressure tank is of dome-roof struc￾ture, and the material is 16 MnR special steel for pressure vessel. The structural
pressure is the same as the lower pressure tank, and the shell is placed in the upper
tank. The intermediate partition is mainly used to isolate the upper and lower pres￾sure tanks, place the riser and the shell. The material of the intermediate partition is
16 MnR special steel for pressure vessels. The riser hole in the center of the interme￾diate partition is provided with the connecting thread for installing the sealing plate
flange, which is used for the sealing during the equipment commissioning. The upper
and lower pressure tanks and intermediate partitions are clamped by a movable joint
screw rod. When installing the mold and riser, we use the chain hoist to lift the upper
tank.366 A. Dong et al.
8.2.2 Pneumatic Control and Seal Design
In the process of adjusted pressure casting, the vacuum degree and sealing of the upper
and lower tanks are the key control parameters of the pressure regulating device.
Consequently, it is difficult to accurately control the pressure difference between
the upper and lower pressure tanks. To solve this problem, the upper and lower
seal chambers are connected through pipelines with the vacuum pressure control
device and the protective gas pressure control device, and the gas storage tank of
the protective gas pressure control device is connected with sensors, all of which are
connected with the control system.
The liquid metal is pressed smoothly into the mold cavity by the inert gas or
compressed air that has been fully dried and filtered. Through the air distribution
mechanism, the gas enters the upper and lower pressure chambers, respectively, and
the pressure of the lower chamber is fed to the casting through the infusion pipe. The
pressure of the upper chamber acts on the mold to ensure that at the same time of
solidification under high pressure, the force on the mold shell itself is very small.
The initial pressure in the cavity before filling should be considered comprehen￾sively according to the mold material, the complexity of the casting structure, and
the physical parameters of the superalloy. If the air permeability of the mold is poor
and if the structure of the casting is complex, the initial pressure should be taken as a
relatively low value; otherwise, it should be taken as a relatively high value. o meet
this requirement, the pressure distribution in the system shall meet:

d P1/dt = d P2/dt
P1 = P2 + P (8.1)
where P1 is the lower chamber pressure value, P2 is the upper chamber pressure
value, P is filling pressure, and t is filling time.
The initial pressure in the cavity before filling should be considered comprehen￾sively according to the mold material, the complexity of the casting structure, and
the physical parameters of the superalloy. If the air permeability of the mold is poor
and the structure of the casting is complex, the initial pressure should be taken as a
relatively low value; otherwise, it should be taken as a relatively high value.
The seal between the upper and lower tanks is O-ring. The seal between the riser
and the middle partition as well as between the mold and the riser depends on the
seal of graphite packing, fire-resistant cotton, and the mold itself (pressing iron). The
density of superalloy is large, the pressure required by the adjusted pressure casting
is large, and the equipment manufacturing is difficult. To solve this problem, the
way of increasing large capacity gas storage tank and short-time three-dimensional
pressurization is adopted. According to the principles of fluid mechanics and thermo￾dynamics, combined with the coupling phenomenon of filling process parameters,
the filling equation under the condition of adjusted pressure casting is given as
P˙(t) = P · α
R · ρ · C · ln
Tρ − T0

Tl − T0
 (8.2)8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 367
where α is pressure speed, P(t) is pressure function, P is pressure difference, Tρ is
casting temperature, T0 is mold temperature, T1 is liquidus temperature of the alloy,
C is the specific heat of alloy, and R is 0.5 times the wall thickness of the casting
parts.
8.2.3 Design of Riser
In the structure of the riser, the first thing is to ensure that the liquid metal flow in
the riser is laminar, so the filling speed and time of anti-gravity casting should be
reasonably selected. The filling time and speed can be determined according to the
size and shape parameters or experience of the casting parts. When the filling time
and speed are determined, the radius of the riser can be determined using
R =
 V
tvt (8.3)
where R is the radius of the riser, V is the volume of mold, v is filling speed, and t is
filing time.
In most anti-gravity castings, the outlet area of the riser is larger than the calculated
value to ensure smooth filing and the outlet of the riser matches the cast gate. At
present, the inner diameter of the riser tube commonly used in the pressure regulating
casting of Al-Mg alloy is generally (60–80) mm, and the diameter at the outlet is
generally greater than 30 mm. If the alloy has a high melting point, the riser should be
thicker. For superalloys with a high melting point, the diameter of the riser should be
larger than the calculated value to avoid the blockage caused by the rapid solidification
of the melt.
The top of the riser is tapered to facilitate the backflow of the molten metal. The
area of the riser outlet is the area of the straight runner. It should be larger than
the maximum thermal joint area of the casting to ensure that the casting is fully
compensated. In order to ensure the smooth flow of the molten metal, the ratio of
the pressure between the molten metal surface in the crucible to the riser tube is
preferably controlled at 20 –45.
As for the material selection of the riser tube, the pouring temperature of the super￾alloy pressure regulating casting is up to about 1500 °C, which requires that the riser
tube has good thermal shock resistance and high-temperature corrosion resistance.
Ordinary alumina corundum tubes cannot meet the technical requirements. There￾fore, a special refractory material of Si3N4 combined with SiC is planned to be used
in the superalloy pressure regulating casting device. This material has good thermal
shock resistance, high-temperature flexural strength, wears resistance, together with
a series of advantages such as low linear expansion rate and high thermal conduc￾tivity. The short-term use temperature can reach 1600 °C. Table 8.1 list the physical
properties of the material.368 A. Dong et al.
Table 8.1 The physical properties of the special refractory material of Si3N4 combined with SiC
Name of product Si3N4 combined with SiC
Composition (%) Si ≥72.0
Si3N4 ≥22.0
Fe2O3 ≤0.3
Apparent porosity (%) ≤16.0
Bulk Density (g/cm3) 2.68
Compressive strength at room temperature (Mpa) ≥180.0
Flexural strength (Mpa) Room temperature ≥45.0
1400 °C ≥55.0
Thermal conductivity (W/mK) 650 °C 19.5
1000 °C 17.2
Temperature coefficient α/(cm2/s) 650 °C 0.064
1000 °C 0.053
Linear expansion coefficientα/K−1 30–1000 4.02 × 10–6 (K−1)
30–1100 4.02 × 10–6 (K−1)
8.2.4 Main Parameters of Superalloy Pressure Regulating
Casting Device
(a) Maximum temperature: 1650 °C; intermediate frequency power: 60 KW; inter￾mediate frequency voltage: 375 V; heating frequency: ~4000 Hz; crucible
capacity: 20 kg.
(b) Multi-line air inlet, the minimum pressure required for the lower tank of the
filling molten metal: 0.05 MPa, the pressure of the lower tank at the end of
filling is 1.0 MPa, and the pressure of the upper tank during solidification and
filling is 0.8 MPa.
8.3 Process Design of Pressure Regulating Casting
8.3.1 Selection of Casting Solidification Mode
The choice of the solidification mode of the casting is the guide for the determi￾nation of casting parameters. Only after the solidification mode of casting is deter￾mined can the casting system be determined. The choice of casting solidification
method relies on many factors, such as the casting structure (shape, wall thick￾ness, and distribution complexity), casting properties (thermal conductivity, thermal8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 369
storage coefficient, wall thickness), casting alloy properties (crystallization tempera￾ture interval, thermal conductivity), Shrinkage rate), the external environment during
casting (casting method, pressure, gravity, and whether there is forced cooling), etc.
For superalloy castings under the condition of anti-gravity pressure regulated
casting, the molten metal is poured from the bottom to top during casting, so the
solidification mode of the casting should generally be top-down, and the gate finally
solidifies, which is the sequential solidification method.
8.3.2 Design of Superalloy Pressure Regulating Casting
Pouring System
During the anti-gravity pressure regulating the casting process, in addition to the
requirements of sequential solidification of the casting system, it should also ensure
that the molten metal flows smoothly and removes the slag. Meanwhile, the casting
system should improve production efficiency, save molten metal, and be easy to
remove the riser after pouring. There are four main types of anti-gravity casting
gating systems:
(1) Thick wall and box castings: For thick wall or box castings, several internal
runners are often used to ensure the short filling process and can also play a role
of shrinkage.
(2) Cylinder castings: The diameter of cylinder castings can vary significantly. For
castings with a diameter of less than 400 mm, one riser is enough. For cylinders
with a diameter of more than 400 mm, however, two risers are often used.
The molten alloy liquid enters the gate sleeve through the riser tube, fills the
confluence ring, and then enters the cavity from the gap-type inner runner.
(3) Casting system with a thick underside and a larger casting area: When it is
difficult to place multiple casting runners in this type of casting, a riser tube can
be used to branch into the casting.
(4) Large and complex thin-walled ring and collar structure: In recent years, due
to the rapid growth in the application of this structure in key industries such
as aerospace and gas turbines, more and more attention has been paid to the
research of such large and complex thin-walled ring and ring structure castings.
8.3.3 Design of Molten Metal Surface Pressure Process
Parameters for Pressure Regulating Casting
According to the technical principle of pressure regulating casting and the control
requirements of the equipment, the parameters such as the ascending speed,
ascending pressure, filling speed, filling pressure, solidification pressure, solidifi￾cation pressure time, and the pouring temperature must be determined.370 A. Dong et al.
8.3.3.1 Lifting Speed and Lifting Pressure
Ascending speed refers to the flow speed of the molten alloy in the riser tube. One
of the important characteristics of anti-gravity casting is that the molten alloy flows
smoothly during the ascent and filling process, which is not likely to cause turbulence.
Lifting pressure refers to the pressure when the molten alloy reaches the outlet
of the riser tube or the bottom of the cavity. At the beginning of lifting, the molten
metal in the riser tube and the crucible are on the same level, and the molten metal
in the riser tube can be raised only by a small increment of pressure on the liquid
surface of the crucible. As shown in Fig. 8.7, during the lifting process, when the
liquid level in the crucible drops by H, the height of the liquid level in the riser
tube is,
h =
	d1
d2

2
H (8.4)
If H = H + h =

1 +
	d1
d2

2

H (8.5)
According to P = ρgh, it can be known that the liquid lift pressure required at
this time is,
Plif t = KρgH = K ρH
1033.6 × 0.098 (8.6)
Fig. 8.7 Schematic diagram
of the calculation of the
pressure to elevate the liquid
level during the anti-gravity
casting8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 371
In the above equation, Plift is the gas pressure acting on the molten metal surface
(MPa); K is the resistance coefficient, generally 1.0–1.5, lower limit for thick wall
castings, upper limit for thin wall castings; ρ is the density of molten metal (g/cm3);
H is the distance (cm) between the molten metal level in the riser tube and the molten
metal level in the crucible; 0.098 is conversion coefficient between kg/cm2 and MPa;
1033.6 is pressure conversion unit.
The resistance coefficient K includes the backpressure of the gas in the cavity,
the friction between the alloy and the inner wall surface of the mold, the friction
in the molten alloy, the resistance of the surface oxide film, the resistance of the
alloy to decrease in temperature and the viscosity to increase, and so on. Therefore,
the resistance coefficient is related to the height of the casting, wall thickness, mold
material, pouring temperature, exhaust conditions of the mold, and alloy composition.
It can be seen from Eq. (8.6) that with the progress of the liquid lifting process,
the required liquid lifting pressure increases continuously. When the liquid lifting
ends, the liquid level in the crucible drops, and the liquid lifting pressure required
reaches the maximum, i.e.,
Plif t = Kρg

1 +
	d1
d2

2

H × 0.098
1033.6 (8.7)
where d1 is the diameter of the crucible (m), d2 is the diameter of the riser tube (m),
and H is the distance (m) between the nozzle of the riser tube and the unpressured
free liquid level in the crucible.
8.3.3.2 Filling Speed
Filling velocity refers to the rising velocity of molten metal in the mold cavity, which
is one of the important technical parameters of counter casting. When the section area
of the riser outlet is fixed, the filling speed depends on the increasing speed of the gas
pressure acting on the surface of the molten alloy. The faster the pressure speed is,
the faster the mold filling speed is. On the contrary, the slower is the pressure speed,
the slower the filling speed of the molten alloy is. It is very important to choose the
filling speed reasonably in the pressure regulating casting. If the mold filling speed
is too fast, the molten alloy will be splashed and billow when it enters the mold
cavity, resulting in oxidized slag inclusion and porosity defects. On the other hand, if
the filling speed is too slow, the casting may have cold insulation and under-casting
defects.
8.3.3.3 Pressure Rate
The pressure rate is determined by the thickness of the casting wall, the complexity
of the casting, and the cooling rate of the mold. For thick-walled simple parts, filling372 A. Dong et al.
a bit slower is also not likely to produce cold insulation and under-casting defects.
However, for complex thin-wall castings, if the mold filling speed is too slow and
the cooling rate of the mold shell is relatively high, defects such as cold insulation
and under-casting are likely to form.
8.3.3.4 Filling Pressure
Filling pressure refers to the gas pressure required when the metal liquid rises to the
top of the mold cavity during the filling stage. The filling pressure can be calculated
according to Eq. (8.7), except that “H” in the equation should now correspond to the
distance between the top of the casting and the free liquid level without pressure in
the crucible.
8.3.3.5 Solidification Holding Pressure
The solidification holding pressure refers to the boosting value provided to crystallize
the casting under a larger pressure. The purpose of crystallization pressurization is to
make the casting solidify at a higher pressure, improve the shrinkage ability, increase
the microstructure density of the casting, and reduce casting defects. On the premise
that the shell strength is high enough, the higher the solidification holding pressure
is, the more favorable the filling is, and the denser the casting is.
However, the method of increasing the holding pressure is not suitable in all
cases. The crystallization pressure is related to casting type, casting structure, and
other factors. For example, the crystallization pressure of low-pressure casting in
wet sand mold should not be too high. Excessive pressure will not only affect the
surface finish and geometric dimensions of the casting but also seriously lead to sand
adhesion and expansion defects. Another example is the casting of thin wall metal
castings. Since the casting heat dissipates quickly in thin wall metal castings, the
molten alloy will soon solidify after filling the mold cavity. In this case, even if the
solidification pressure is increased, the shrinkage effect is small.
8.3.3.6 The Holding Time
The holding time refers to the time required from the maximum holding pressure
of the molten metal to the complete solidification of the casting under constant
pressurization. During this period, the molten alloy in the cavity will complete the
transformation from liquid to solid. If the holding time is not long enough, the
solidification of the casting in the mold cavity will not be filled and porosity and
shrinkage defects will be formed. Besides, when the molten alloy in the casting mold
and spout is not fully solidified, the pressure on the liquid surface of the crucible is
removed prematurely and the unsolidified alloy liquid will fall back to the crucible,
causing the casting to be “hollow” and discarded. If the holding time is too long,8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 373
the solidification length of the casting sprue will increase and extend into the riser
tube, resulting in the reduction of the metal liquid flowing back into the crucible.
This will further affect the separation between the riser tube and the shell and will
even damage the seal ring at the middle separator in the worst cases. The selection of
casting holding time should consider many factors, such as casting wall thickness,
structure, alloy composition, casting temperature, and shell cooling conditions, etc.
In the actual casting production, the holding time is often determined empirically.
The holding time can be calculated by the following equation:
√t = K (tmelt − tmold )bV
L + 
t f illing − tmelt 
gγ S (8.8)
where K is the specific heat coefficient, tmelt is the melting point of alloy (°C), tmold
is the average temperature of mold during pouring (°C), tfilling is filling temperature
(°C), b is heat storage coefficient of mold, V is volume of casting, L is the latent heat
of crystallization, C is the heat capacity of the molten metal (kJ/(kg • K)), γ is the
specific gravity of the metal after solidification, S is the surface area of the casting
(m2), and t is the holding time (h).
When the casting process parameters such as alloy material, mold material, and
pouring temperature are determined, Eq. (8.8) can be converted to:
t = const ×
	V
t

2
(8.9)
It can be seen from the above equation that under the conditions determined by
the casting process, the holding time of the casting is only related to the structure of
the casting itself.
8.3.4 Pouring Temperature and Mold Temperature
The pouring temperature and mold temperature can directly influence the forming
and crystallization structure of the casting, which should be as low as possible on the
premise of ensuring the casting forming. If the pouring temperature and mold temper￾ature are too high, the molten alloy will heavily aspirate in a non-vacuum environ￾ment, which will tend to the reduction of mechanical properties due to the shrinkage
and coarse crystallization structure. On the other hand, if the pouring temperature and
mold temperature are too low, the shrinkage tendency will be reduced, but the molten
alloy flow performance will be reduced, and the filling capacity will be reduced as
well. Therefore, reasonable pouring temperature and mold temperature should be
selected according to the characteristics of the casting, the types of alloy materials
and molds, and the cooling and heat dissipation conditions. The pouring temperature
and shell temperature of thin-walled parts should be higher to facilitate the filling374 A. Dong et al.
and forming of metal melt; the pouring temperature and mold temperature of thick
wall parts can be slightly lower to reduce shrinkage.
The pouring temperature of anti-gravity casting is generally 10–20 °C lower than
that of gravity casting. Under the condition of ensuring complete filling, the lower
the pouring temperature is, the better the casting properties are.
8.4 Melt Filling and Solidification Under Pressure
8.4.1 Effect of Pressure Regulating Casting Method on Mold
Filling Capacity of the Alloy
Mold filling capacity refers to the fluidity of molten metal under the influence of
casting mold, casting temperature, casting speed, and other factors, namely, the ability
of the liquid metal to fill the casting mold and obtain the complete and accurate casting
shape. The main factors influencing the filling capacity of liquid metal include:
(1) the fluidity of liquid metal; (2) casting conditions; (3) filling conditions of cast
mold; (4) casting structure, etc. The improvement of liquid metal fluidity is of great
significance to reduce the inner defects of castings (such as underwatering, cold
insulation, porosity, etc.).
The filling capacity of molten metal is also affected by the filling speed (pouring
speed) [18–20]. The faster is the filling speed, the less heat is dissipated by the
molten metal in the mold cavity. The higher is the temperature, the better the flow
performance can achieve. However, a filling speed too high may cause molten metal
entrapment, spatter, etc., affecting the casting quality. In the filling process of pres￾sure regulating casting method, the flow of liquid metal is controlled by adjustable
pressure, and the filling speed of liquid metal can be changed in real-time by selecting
different boost speeds at different stages, thus effectively controlling the filling cavity
of liquid metal.
Meanwhile, during the filling process of the pressure regulating casting method,
the backpressure in the shell is low, the resistance during the filling process of the
liquid metal is small, and the possibility of gas entrainment in the casting is reduced.
Consequently, a higher boosting speed can be selected to filling the mold. Also,
the flow and heat preservation ability of molten metal can be further improved and
the filling ability of the molten metal improves at the same time, leading to a more
complete and clearer casting contour shape [21–24].
Jiang et al. [25] concluded that there was a linear relationship the filling capacity of
the molten metal with boost velocity, pouring temperature, gas pressure, and cavity
vacuum. For a 3 mm-thick thin wall plate, the relationship among its filling capacity,
boost speed, pouring temperature, gas pressure, and cavity vacuum is
L = −192.405 + 0.406T + 3.381Q + 733.333PV + 450Pg (8.10)8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 375
where L represents the filling length, T, Q, PV, and Pg represent, respectively, pouring
temperature, boost speed, cavity vacuum, and gas pressure.
However, it should be noted that the thickness of the casting wall will also have a
certain impact on the filling process [10]. Under the action of pressure difference p,
the molten metal fills the cavity layer by layer along the anti-gravity direction. The
filling speed of pressure regulating casting method is generally fast, with the increase
of wall thickness, the filling process appears obvious reverse filling characteristics,
which affects the filling process. While the superalloy density is relatively high, the
casting quality is more easily affected by the wall thickness.
8.4.2 Effect of Pressure Regulating Casting
on the Solidification Process of Casting
Solidification is one of the most important processes in casting. The change of the
solidification process will have different effects on casting structure and properties.
As for the pressure regulating casting, the adjustment of pressure in different tech￾nological stages will certainly affect the solidification process, thus changing the
structure and performance of the casting.
Conventional pressure has almost no effect on the surface energy of the crystal.
According to the classical nucleation theory, the effect of pressure on the nucleation
rate and growth rate of the alloy crystal can be deduced as [26]:
I(P)
I(P0) = exp
G
(P0) − G
(P)
RT (8.11)
U(P)
U(P0) = exp
G(P0) − G(P)
RT (8.12)
where I (P)/I(P0) represents the influence of pressure on the nucleation rate and
U(P)/U(P0) represents the influence of pressure on the crystal growth rate. G
(P)
and G(P) are the nucleation activation energy and growth activation energy of
the alloy, respectively, under standard conditions; G
(P0) and G(P0) are the
nucleation activation energy and crystal growth activation energy of the alloy under
pressure, respectively.
When the pressure is large enough, the presence of pressure will lower the nucle￾ation activation energy, reduce the difficulty of crystal nucleation, and thus increase
the crystal nucleation rate. At the same time, the presence of pressure will increase
the density of molten metal, inhibit the diffusion of the heteroatom in the alloy, and
increases the activation energy of atomic diffusion. The increase of the diffusion
activation energy will reduce the diffusion ability of the atoms and then reduce the
crystal growth rate, leading to the refinement of the crystal grains. At the same time,376 A. Dong et al.
the decrease of the atomic diffusion ability of the atoms will affect the solute redis￾tribution during the solidification process of the alloy and reduce the segregation of
the elements. Under the effect of pressure, the grains may undergo elastic or plastic
deformation, which can promote the melt to flow between the solidified dendrites,
improve the ability of the liquid metal to shrink, and change the shape and distribution
of the metal structure [27].
A large number of experimental results [28–32] show that the structure and perfor￾mance of pressure casting castings are significantly better than gravity casting. For
Al alloy [30], the tensile strength was increased by 8–10%, and the elongation was
increased by more than 50%.
To improve the microstructure and nucleation rate of the casting, it is necessary
to study how to maximize the pressure value during solidification.
8.4.3 Effect of Pressure Regulating Casting Method on Alloy
Casting Defects
For alloys with a large solidification interval, the casting can easily form microscopic
porosity, shrinkage porosity, and shrinkage cavity, which can seriously affect the
performance of the casting.
For the improvement of the filling ability of castings, people usually consider the
driving force and resistance to filling. The main driving force of shrinkage includes
the surface tension of molten metal, static pressure generated by its gravity, and
additional pressure on the liquid surface. The resistance to the shrinkage mainly
includes the viscous friction force encountered when the molten metal flows, the
local resistance generated by the intergranular channel and the gravity of the liquid
metal itself, etc.
Based on the analysis of the force involved in the flow of molten metal, the
shrinkage and relaxation criterion can be obtained [33]:
GSC√PSC
√PSC
< KC (8.13)
In this equation, Gsc, Rsc, and Psc correspond to the temperature gradient, cooling
rate, and pressure of the critical solid rate, respectively. Kc is the critical value of the
shrinkage criterion. When the calculated value is greater than Kc, shrinkage is not
easy to occur; when the calculated value is less than Kc, shrinkage is easy to occur.
With the same process condition, the temperature gradient and cooling rate at
each position of the casting do not fluctuate significantly. As a result, the tendency of
shrinkage of the casting is mainly affected by the pressure. Increasing the pressure
can improve the filling capacity of the molten metal, which theoretically reflects the
advantages of the pressure regulating casting method in solidification and filling.
Increasing the pressure holding pressure will improve the filling speed and filling8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 377
ability of the casting, resulting in denser and more uniform microstructure, effectively
reducing the content of micro-porosity in the casting.
Also, negative pressure is maintained in the pressure chamber during the initial
stage of pressure regulating casting to reduce the possibility of gas entrapment,
porosity, oxidation, and other defects in the casting, and to reduce the tendency of
casting cracks, achieving the purpose of improving the reliability of parts.
While the superalloy pressure regulating casting technology has not been proposed
for a long time in China, the design and understanding of the casting process need
more exploration. But we believe that with the development of theory and equipment,
superalloy pressure regulating casting technology will form a complete technical
system and achieve low cost, high reliability, and high qualified rate production.
8.5 Examples of Pressure Regulating Casting for Complex
Thin-Walled Castings
Nickel-base superalloy K4169 was selected as the raw material for precision casting.
At present, the wall thickness of large complex thin-wall castings of superalloy
is mainly concentrated in 1–2 mm. In order to improve the applicability of large
complex thin-wall superalloy castings fabricated by the pressure regulating casting,
1 mm or 2 mm thin plates were used as the main design features of the casting.
For thin plate castings without a riser, inclined pouring is beneficial to reducing
the impact of alloy liquid level fluctuations on the quality of the casting. But in the
investment casting method, the strength of the 1 mm-thick wax mold is not sufficient,
so the reinforcement plate is needed. It is easy to cause the wax molded formation
or break during the dipping process if the wax mold is set obliquely. As a result, it is
placed vertically. The feature structure is shown in Fig. 8.8.
One piece of 100 × 100 × 1 mm thin plate is placed on the right side of the feature
piece and 5 mm-thick wax plates were used around the thin plate as reinforcement
plate. Two pieces of thin plate with a tilt of 100 × 100 × 2 mm on the right side, with
a dip of 15°, connected with the runner through a 10 mm lug, and define the farthest
part of the thin plate from the runner as the top, and the bottom near the runner.
The size of the runner is 150 × 50 × 30 mm. The larger size and thickness ensure
that the molten metal in the runner can flow back to the crucible after the solidification
of the sheet casting, which can lower the production cost. A dark riser is provided at
the top of the wax mold to preserve the contaminated molten metal and to improve
the metallurgical quality of the sheet castings. A tapered boss is set at the top of the
wax mold, which is convenient to cooperate with the riser.
The casting mold is made up of a fused quartz shell and the casting alloy is K4169.
The thermal conductivity between the casting and the mold is selected empirically.
The mold heat dissipation coefficient is 1000 W/m2K. The casting is strictly insulated
with thermal insulation cotton except for the riser part and the heat conduction of
the riser tube is air cooling.378 A. Dong et al.
BoƩom Top 
Top 
BoƩom
Fig. 8.8 3D model of feature parts
8.5.1 Pressure-Regulating Precision Casting of Superalloy
Characteristic Parts
8.5.1.1 Experiment Scheme
According to the actual capacity of the pressure adjusting casting equipment, the
process parameters for the experiment are chosen as follows. The casting tempera￾ture was 1560 °C, the shell preheating temperature was 955 °C, the boost velocity
was set as 3, 4, and 5 kPa/s, and the crystallization holding pressure was 300 KPa
to investigate the influence of the boost velocity on the casting structure and perfor￾mance. Based on the boost speed of 5 KPa/s, the pressure of 100 and 600 KPa were
selected for the experiment to study the effect of crystallization pressure on casting
structure and performance.
To compare the mold filling capacity of the molten metal under different casting
methods, a gravity comparison experiment was prepared. Considering the cooling
condition of the mold shell, the casting temperature of gravity casting was 1560 °C,
the preheating temperature of the mold shell was 850 °C, and the filling time of the
mold cavity was 5 s to observe the filling conditions of different thickness plates.
The selection of process parameters of pressure regulating casting experiment is
listed in Table 8.2.8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 379
Table 8.2 The process parameters of pressure regulating casting experiment
Number Boost
velocity/(kPa/s)
Differential
pressure/kPa
Crystallization holding
pressure/kPa
Holding time/s
1 3 90 300 300
2 4 90 300 300
3 5 90 300 30
4 5 90 100 300
5 5 90 600 300
8.5.1.2 Effects of Process Parameters on Mold Filling of Castings
Figures 8.9, 8.10, and 8.11 show the filling conditions of thin plate castings under
different process parameters. It can be seen that the 1 mm-thick thin plate cast the
gravity casting method reveals the worst filling ability and only a small amount of
molten metal flows into the cavity, whereas the 2 mm-thick thin plate is filled. For
pressure regulating casting, when the boost velocity is low, there is a large amount of
cold insulation and insufficient pouring defects in the 1 mm-thick thin plate. However,
the defects can be effectively controlled by increasing the boost velocity. Similarly,
the 2 mm-thick thin plate is filled.
For the filling process of thin plate castings, the Laplace force produced by the
surface tension hinders the flow of the molten metal and affects the filling quality
of the casting. At the same time, Molten metal dissipates heat quickly and the flow
capacity decreases rapidly, which leads to the formation of defects such as cold
insulation and insufficient pouring.
Under gravity condition, the driving force of filling which is determined by the
pouring position of molten metal is gravity; the filling force of adjusted pressure
casting is gas pressure, which can be adjusted as required. For a 1 mm sheet, it is
Fig. 8.9 The pressure curve of the adjusted-pressure cast. a 3 kPa/s, b 4 kPa/s, c 5 kPa/s380 A. Dong et al.
(a) (b) (c) 
Fig. 8.10 Filling condition of 2 mm thin plate samples under different gas flowrate: a 3 kPa/s,
b 4 kPa/s, c 5 kPa/s
Fig. 8.11 Filling condition of gravity casting samples a 1 mm, b 2 mm
difficult for gravity casting to provide sufficient driving force, resulting in the poor
filling condition. However, adjusted pressure casting can effectively control the filling
process and guarantee the filling quality of castings by changing the gas flow rate.
8.5.1.3 Metallographic Analysis of Castings
In the adjusted pressure casting process of superalloys, the selection of different
technologies affects the filling and solidification process of castings and has a certain
impact on the casting structure. At the same time, the cooling rate and solidification
time are different in different parts, which will lead to different structures at different
locations.8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 381
Figure 8.12 is metallographic of casting microstructure. It can be seen that the alloy
matrix is white γ’ phases and a large number of black “island” segregation zones are
distributed in the dendrite matrix. A certain amount of fine network structure exists
inside the “island” structure, which can be judged as the precipitated Laves phase.
Besides, there are particle MC carbides in the segregation zone.
Alloying elements continuously segregate after the formation of the casting
matrix. If the content of Ti, Mo, Nb, and other elements are greater than their satu￾rated solubility in Laves phases, the supersaturated Laves phases will precipitate
between dendrites or grain boundaries as the casting temperature decreases, forming
the brittle Laves phases as shown in the figure.
Figure 8.13 shows the distribution of microstructures at different positions of a
2 mm sheet sample. It can be seen that fine equiaxed grains form at the top. Equiaxed
grains with increased grain size are in the center part and uniformly oriented columnar
grains are in the bottom.
Fig. 8.12 Metallograph of the casting
Fig. 8.13 Distribution of microstructures of 2 mm sheet sample at different positions a bottom,
b middle, c top382 A. Dong et al.
Fig. 8.14 Grain structure of 1 mm sheet sample
Figure 8.14 shows the microstructure distribution of a 1 mm sheet sample along
the metal flow direction. Similar to the microstructure of the case of 2 mm, the
microstructure transits from fine equiaxed grains to uniformly oriented columnar
grains, but grains are finer.
During the filling process, as the contact time between the molten metal flow
front and the mold is longer, the temperature drops obviously and the solidification
time is shorter. The top position of the sheet mold experiences faster heat dissipation
and possesses lower temperatures. The melt nucleates a lot under the strong cooling
effect of the mold, forming a non-directional fine and dense equiaxed grain structure.
As the solidification layer moves towards the sprue, the heat dissipation capacity of
molten metal decreases and the temperature gradient tends to be smooth. As the
temperature decreases continuously, the melt begins to nucleate and grow. Since
there is no obvious heat dissipation direction during solidification, the microstructure
is composed of non-directional equiaxed grains. However, due to a small degree of
supercooling, there are fewer nucleation cores in the melt and the resulting grain
structure is relatively coarse. The bottom of the sheet is connected to thick runners
and the cooling rate is slow and the solidification time is long. Grains in the central
equiaxial region extend and grow in one direction, which is parallel to the direction
of heat flow and towards the casting system.
Figure 8.15 shows the relationship between the average grain size of the 2 mm
sheet sample and its horizontal height under the same process parameters. For conve￾nient comparison, only the representative central part is selected for analysis. As can
be seen from the figure, the height has little influence on the 2 mm sheet sample
and the central structure is all equiaxed coarse grains at different heights, with no
significant changes in grain size.8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 383
Experiment Number
Average grain size (mm)
Top
BoƩom
Fig. 8.15 Average grain size versus the height of 2 mm sheet sample
Figure 8.16 shows the trend of the average grain size with a height of 1 mm
sheet sample. Similar to the microstructure of 2 mm one, the microstructure which
is composed of large equiaxed grains is relatively stable without an obvious change
in the grain size.
During the adjusted pressure casting process, the metal flow is controlled by
the pressure difference, and the filling process is stable without obvious spatter or
turbulence. The temperature distribution of molten metal in the casting system is
Experiment Number
Average grain size (mm)
Top
BoƩom 
Fig. 8.16 Average grain size versus the height of 1 mm sheet sample384 A. Dong et al.
relatively uniform without obvious temperature jump. The temperature difference is
small while filling different height sheets and its impacts on the casting microstructure
are small. Therefore, there are no significant changes in the casting microstructures
at different heights.
8.5.1.4 Influence of Adjusted Pressure Casting on Casting Structure
The grain size plays an important role in determining the casting performance. The
increase of grain size will reduce the plasticity and toughness of the material, lowering
the medium temperature strength and low-cycle fatigue performance. However,
grains with too small sizes will reduce creep and fracture properties. Therefore,
it is of great significance to study the effect of different casting process parameters
on the grain size of castings.
(1) Influence of thickness on castings
Figure 8.17 shows the metallographic structure of 1 and 2 mm sheet castings. The
sampling site is the center of the sheets. The adjusted pressure casting process param￾eters are a pressuring rate of 3 kPa/s and a crystallization holding pressure of 300 kPa.
It can be seen that the solidification structures of different thickness sheets are similar
and the grains are composed of a large number of cross dendrite structures. The
dendrites have different directions and there is no uniform distribution, which is
consistent with the heat dissipation condition. The grain size in the 2 mm sheet
sample is larger than the 1 mm one.
For all experimental groups, the grains at the center of different thickness sheets are
statistically calculated: the average grain diameter in 2 mm sheet sample is 1.22 mm,
with a grain size of about M-9.5, while the average grain diameter in the 1 mm one
is 0.64 mm, with a grain size of about M-12, showing a grain size change by more
than 40%.
Figure 8.18 shows the cross-section metallographic of different thickness sheets.
(a) (b)
Fig. 8.17 Microstructure of 1 mm and 2 mm sheet samples: a 1 mm, b 2 mm8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 385
(a) (b)
Fig. 8.18 Grain structure of different thickness sheet samples: a 2 mm, b 1 mm
The process parameters and sampling sites are consistent with Fig. 8.16. As can be
seen from the figure, the grain size in the 1 mm sheet sample is relatively small, with
an average of 2 –3 grains in the cross-section, while the grain size in the 2 mm one
is relatively coarse and the number of grains in the cross-section becomes 1–2.
With the decrease in thickness of the casting, the modulus of the sheet and the
solidification time are continuously reduced and the cooling rate of the melt becomes
faster. Thus, the supercooling degree at the solid–liquid interface increases, the energy
fluctuation required for nucleation decreases, and the formation rate of the nucleation
cores increases. As the number of nucleation cores increases, the grain size decreases
accordingly.
(2) Influence of gas flow rate on castings
Figure 8.19 shows the metallographs of 2 mm sheet samples with different gas flow
rates of 3 KPa/s, 4 KPa/s, and 5 KPa/s, respectively. It can be seen that the central
grains of the casting are still equiaxial with the increase of gas flow rate, but the size
gradually increases.
The average grain size of each sample was measured and the average value was
calculated. The trend of the average grain size with the gas flow rate is shown in
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 8.19 Grain structure of different gas flow rate in 2 mm sheet samples: a 3 KPa/s; b 4 KPa/s;
c 5 KPa/s386 A. Dong et al.
Gas flow rate (KPa/s)
Average grain size (mm)
Fig. 8.20 Average grain size versus gas flow rate of sheet samples
Fig. 8.20. For a 1 mm sheet sample, the average grain diameter is 0.58 mm when
the gas flow rate is 3 KPa/s; the average grain diameter is 0.63 mm when the gas
flow rate is 4 kPa/s; the average grain diameter is 0.71 mm when the gas flow rate is
5 kPa/s, and the grain size changes by more than 15%. For a 2 mm sheet sample, the
average grain diameter is 1.1 mm when the gas flow rate is 3 kPa/s; the average grain
diameter is 1.2 mm when the gas flow rate is 4 kPa/s; the average grain diameter is
1.42 mm when the gas flow rate is 5 kPa/s, and the grain size changes by about 29%.
In the adjusted pressure casting process, the gas flow rate determines the mold
filling speed of molten metal. When the gas flow rate rises, the time spent on the
mold filling process is shortened. As a result, the contact time of the molten metal
with the mold is shorter and the temperature drop is smaller during filling. In this
way, the solidification time of molten metal is extended, leading to solidification
crystals stay at the growing stage for a long time and the grain size becomes larger.
For 1 mm sheet samples that experience a cooling rate significantly higher than that
of the 2 mm one, the change in solidification time caused by the change of gas flow
rate is small, and the degree of grain coarsening is reduced.
(3) Influence of crystallization holding pressure on castings
Figures 8.21 and 8.22 show the metallographs of 2 mm and 1 mm sheet samples,
respectively, under different crystallization holding pressures. The crystallization
pressures considered are 100, 300, and 600 kPa. As can be seen from the two
figures, the grain morphology in the center of the casting remains unchanged with the
increase of crystallization pressure, but the grain size of 2 mm sheet samples gradually
decreases, while the grain size of the 1 mm one does not change significantly.8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 387
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 8.21 Grain structure of different crystallization pressure in 2 mm sheet samples: a 100 kPa;
b 300 kPa; c 600 kPa
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 8.22 Grain structure of different crystallization pressure in 1 mm sheet samples: a 100 kPa;
b 300 kPa; c 600 kPa
The trend of grain size with the crystallization pressure of different samples is
shown in Fig. 8.23. For 1 mm sheet samples, the curve is nearly flat and the grain
size reduction is less than 15%. For 2 mm ones, when the crystallization pressure
increases from 100 to 300 KPa, the grain size changes significantly with a reduction
of more than 30%. And when the crystallization pressure further increases, the grain
size continues to decrease up to about 30%.
During the solidification process of adjusted pressure casting, the molten metal
on the casting surface shrinks after solidification and an air gap will form between
the casting surface and the mold. The heat transfer capacity of the air gap directly
influences the cooling rate of castings, thus affecting the solidification process. The
increase in crystallization pressure leads to an increase in the pressure and density
of the gas in the air gap, which results in an increment of the gas heat conduc￾tion capacity. As a consequence, the heat dissipation speed of the casting increases,
leading to the change of the casting grain size.
The filtration capacity of molten metal caused by pressure can be expressed by
G = K P
μL
Ft (8.14)388 A. Dong et al. Average grain size (mm)
CrystallizaƟon pressure (KPa)
Fig. 8.23 Average grain size versus crystallization pressure of sheet samples
In the above equation, G is the metal volume filtered into the shrinkage under
pressure, P is the pressure difference applied to the molten metal, L is the depth
of the filtration, t is the filtration time, K is the permeability coefficient, μ is the
dynamic viscosity coefficient, and F is the filtration area.
The increase of crystallization pressure will improve the filtration effect of molten
metal, making the incompletely solidified metal flow into the interdendritic channel.
If the dendrite skeleton of the solidified part has low strength, it may be broken by
the flow of interdendritic molten metal, which increases the number of nucleation
sites and thus refines the grain structure.
Besides, the solidification temperature and supercooling degree of the alloy will be
increased under the crystallization holding pressure and the crystal grains of castings
will be refined.
However, the inert gas source of the equipment affects the crystallization holding
pressure and gas flow rate; it takes a long time to reach the prescribed pressure. For
a 1 mm sheet sample, the molten metal is completely solidified before the pressure
reaches a high level. As a result, it is less affected by the crystallization holding
pressure, and the grains are hardly refined.
8.5.1.5 Influence of Casting Process on the Secondary Dendrite
Spacing of Castings
The secondary dendrite arm spacing (SDAS) refers to the distance between the
secondary dendrite arms, whose size directly affects the mechanical properties of
castings, as well as the composition segregation of alloys. At the same time, the8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 389
distribution of the second phase and the distribution of micro shrinkage cavity and
porosity are also influenced by SDAS, which is one of the important factors affecting
the quality of the casting. The relationship between the SDAS and the cooling rate
and the local solidification time of the casting can be expressed by the following
equation:
λ2 = at 1
2
f = bR− 1
2 (8.15)
In this equation, R is the cooling rate and tf is local solidification time.
It can be known from Eq. (8.15) that the secondary dendrite arm spacing decreases
with increasing the cooling rate or decreasing the local solidification time.
During the growth of dendrites, there is a certain degree of solute enrichment
in the liquid phase beside dendrite arms. The solute concentration changes with the
change of the secondary dendrite arm radius. The larger the dendrite arms, the higher
the solute concentration in the surrounding liquid phase. Because secondary dendrite
arms have different radii, there is a certain concentration gradient in the solute, which
tends to promote diffusion from coarse dendrite arms to fine dendrite arms along the
direction of the concentration gradient, whereas the solvent has a diffusion tendency
in the opposite direction. This tendency will cause the dissolution of fine dendrite
arms and the growth of coarse dendrite arms. With the decrease of cooling rate and
the increase of local solidification time, alloys remain in the solid–liquid two-phase
region for a longer time. As a result, the dendrite coarsening process proceeds more
fully and the secondary dendrite arm spacing also increases.
(1) Influence of position on the secondary dendrite arm spacing of castings
Figure 8.24 shows the distribution of dendrites at different positions of the 2 mm
sheet sample. The experimental process parameters for this group are chosen as a gas
flow rate of 5 KPa/s and a crystallization holding pressure of 300 KPa. It can be seen
from Fig. 8.24 that the dendrites are gradually refined along the flow direction of the
molten metal and the arrangement direction tends to be disordered. The dendrites at
the top of the sheet are densely arranged and the direction of them is not obvious.
However, the dendrites at the bottom are relatively coarse and arranged in the same
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 8.24 The dendrite morphology in different positions of 2 mm sheet samples: a bottom,
b middle, c top390 A. Dong et al.
direction. As a whole, the secondary dendrite arms pacing gradually decreases along
the molten metal flow direction. Because of the lower temperature at the edge of the
mold and the faster heat dissipation, the secondary dendrite arm spacing at the top
of the sheet is finer than the center. However, the bottom of the sheet is connected to
the thick casting system, and the temperature drops slowly. It is the last solidification
part of the sheet and the secondary dendrite arm spacing is relatively large.
Figure 8.25 shows the trend curve of the secondary dendrite arm spacing at
different positions along the flow direction of the molten metal. It can be seen that
as the thickness decreases, the secondary dendrite arm spacing in the center of the
casting tends to decrease. The maximum difference between the average SDAS of
the 1 mm sheet sample and the 2 mm one is about 50% and the difference between
the SDAS of different thicknesses decreases with the increase of the gas flow rate.
While the distribution of the secondary dendrite arm spacing is similar at different
heights, there is a certain change in the secondary dendrite arm spacing at different
gas flow rates.
For castings, the thicker is the wall, the smaller the heat dissipation area is per
unit volume and the slower the cooling rate is. Consequently, the dendrite coarsening
occurs more thoroughly during solidification and a large number of fine dendrites
melt as well as coarse dendrites grow, which lead to larger secondary dendrite arm
spacing.
However, the increase of gas flow rate will increase the temperature of molten
metal when it enters the sheet cavity, which reduces the difference in solidification
time between sheets of different thickness and alleviates the problem of different
SDAS caused by different cooling rates. Secondary dendrite arm spacing (mm) 
Experiment Number
Top
BoƩom 
Top
BoƩom 
Fig. 8.25 Secondary dendrite arm spacing versus the height of 1 and 2 mm sheet samples8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 391
Because the height difference between different sheets of the same casting is
small, the filling speed of the molten metal is fast and the filling interval between
different heights is small. Meanwhile, the thickness of runners is large, which has a
better heat preservation effect on the molten metal, and the temperature difference
is small when the molten metal reaches the entrance of the sheet metal of different
heights. The heat dissipation conditions at the corresponding positions of different
heights are the same and the cooling speed is similar, leading to little changes of the
secondary dendrite arm spacing with a height variation.
(2) Influence of gas flow rate on the secondary dendrite arm spacing of castings
Figure 8.26 shows how the secondary dendrite arm spacing changes with the gas
flow rate. It can be seen that the secondary dendrite arm spacing decreases as the gas
flow rate increases.
When the gas flow rate changes, the time for molten metal to reach the cavity
changes and the temperature of the molten metal and the shell changes as well, both
of which lead to variation in the cooling and solidification process of molten metal,
affect the cooling rate and the temperature gradient and then cause the change of
secondary dendrite spacing.
Due to the long cooling time of the mold before casting, the change in filling time
caused by the gas flow rate is relatively short and the change of mold temperature
is small, while the temperature of molten metal during filling is greatly affected by
the filling time. Therefore, the increment of the molten metal temperature is higher
than that of the mold shell when the gas flow rate increases. As a consequence, the Secondary dendrite arm spacing (mm) 
Gas flow rate (KPa/s)
Fig. 8.26 Secondary dendrite arm spacing versus gas flow rate of sheet samples392 A. Dong et al.
CrystallizaƟon pressure (KPa)
Secondary dendrite arm spacing (mm) 
Fig. 8.27 Secondary dendrite arm spacing versus crystallization pressure of sheet samples
temperature gradient between the two increases, which is beneficial to the refinement
of the secondary dendrite arm spacing of the casting.
(3) Influence of crystallization holding pressure on the secondary dendrite arm
spacing of castings
Figure 8.27 shows the variation of the secondary dendrite arm spacing with the crys￾tallization holding pressure. It can be seen from the figure that when the crystallization
pressure increases, the secondary dendrite arm spacing decreases.
The increase of crystallization pressure improves the increase of pressure and
density of the air gap, which results in the increment of the gas thermal conductivity
and thus accelerates the cooling rate of castings. It can be seen from Eq. (8.15) that
increasing the cooling rate will lead to a decrease in the secondary dendrite arm
spacing of castings.
It can be known from Eq. (8.14) that the existence of crystallization pressure will
force the molten metal to flow for feeding, reduce the concentration gradient of the
solute in the liquid phase, and change the solute distribution in the liquid phase at the
front of dendrite growth. This will affect the growth speed of dendrites and promote
the secondary dendrite arm to grow, leading to the refinement of secondary dendrites.
Meanwhile, the increase of the crystallization pressure will enhance the ability of
filtration and promote the flow of the molten metal along capillary channels between
dendrites. This flow will generate a certain shear force on secondary dendrite arms. If
the strength of secondary dendrite arms is insufficient, plastic deformation, bending,
and even fracture will occur, thereby increasing the secondary dendrite arm spacing.
Besides, the release of latent heat of crystallization may cause the fusing of fine
dendrite arms, which increases the secondary dendrite spacing to a certain extent.8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 393
The change of the final secondary dendrite arm spacing is due to the superposition
of these effects. Because the influence of crystallization pressure on the cooling rate
of the casting is dominant, the secondary dendrite arm spacing of the final casting
decreases with crystallization pressure increasing.
However, since the equipment is affected by an inert gas source, the speed of
crystallization holding pressure is limited and it takes a long time to reach the prede￾termined pressure. Therefore, when the pressure increases to 600KPa, the secondary
dendrite arm spacing of the 2 mm sheet sample is not obvious. For 1 mm one, the
molten metal is completely solidified before the pressure reaches a high enough level.
As a result, it is less affected by the crystallization pressure and the refinement degree
of secondary dendrite arm spacing is low.
8.5.1.6 Influence of Casting Process on the Hardness of Castings
Mechanical properties are the ultimate embodiment of casting quality and the most
important assessment standard. After analyzing the influence of the casting process
on the structure of castings, the relationship between the casting process and mechan￾ical properties of castings is further studied. Because the sheet itself is thin, it is easy
to deform in the cleaning process. As a result, it is hard to machine the tensile samples
and the hardness property of sheet castings is investigated. The hardness is an impor￾tant standard for investigating the mechanical properties of alloys. Meanwhile, the
measurement method is simple and can be easily converted to mechanical properties
such as strength. Table 8.3 list the average hardness measured at different positions
of the as-cast alloy.
(1) Study on Hardness of Castings at Different Positions
Figure 8.28 shows the hardness distribution of the castings at different locations.
The process parameters are a boosting speed of 3 kPa/s and a crystallization holding
pressure of 500 kPa. It can be seen from the figure that the hardness is less affected by
the change in vertical height, and the hardness is continuously increasing along the
direction of metal liquid flow, and the rising trend is similar under different process
parameters. The hardness of a 1 mm thick sheet is higher than that of a 2 mm thick
sheet. Different process parameters reflect this situation.
Due to the slight difference in the vertical height of the casting and the rapid filling
speed of the metal liquid, conditions of the metal liquid, such as the temperature and
element distribution when they reach thin plates of different heights, are not much
different and the shell temperature at different locations is the same. Besides, there
are no major differences in the heat dissipation environment and element distribution
and consequently, the hardness is less affected by changes in vertical height.
However, the heat dissipation conditions of the shell along the direction of the
molten metal flow are different. The average microstructure parameters such as the
average grain size and the secondary dendrite spacing of the casting are reduced,394 A. Dong et al.
Table 8.3 Average hardness of castings at different positions
No Thickness (mm) Vertical position Horizontal position (flow direction of molten
metal)
Bottom
hardness
Center hardness Top hardness
1 1 328 348 359
2 top 307 319 337
2 bottom 304 320 342
2 1 335 378 393
2 top 316 338 362
2 bottom 318 330 367
3 1 348 392 409
2 top 330 347 375
2 bottom 325 344 369
4 1 370 409 432
2 top 360 374 394
2 bottom 363 380 410
5 1 334 357 376
2 top 316 328 365
2 bottom 318 324 357
BoƩom Middle
PosiƟon
Top
Hardness (HV)
Top
BoƩom 
Fig. 8.28 Average hardness versus position of 1 and 2 mm sheet samples8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 395
which results in a certain change in the hardness and increases in the direction of the
molten metal flow.
The thermal conditions of castings with different thicknesses are different. The
1 mm thick sheet has a relatively small average grain size and secondary dendrite
spacing, resulting in an increment in its hardness. The 2 mm thick plate has a relatively
long solidification time, and the element segregation and oxidation are more serious,
which reduces its mechanical properties to a certain extent.
(2) Effect of boosting speed on casting hardness
Figure 8.29 shows the hardness distribution of castings at different boosting speeds.
It can be seen from the figure that the hardness of castings increases with the boosting
speed and the rising trend of castings with different thicknesses is similar. From the
previous analysis, it can be known that the increase of the boosting speed will reduce
the secondary dendrite spacing of the casting, whereas the decrease of the secondary
dendrite spacing will improve the mechanical properties of the casting and make the
casting hardness increase.
(3) Effect of crystal holding pressure on casting hardness
Figure 8.30 shows the hardness distribution of castings under different holding pres￾sures. It can be seen from the figure that the casting hardness increases with the
holding pressure. From the previous analysis, it can be known that the increase of
the holding pressure will reduce the average grain size and the secondary dendrite
spacing of the casting, thereby improving the mechanical properties of the casting.
Gas flow rate (KPa/s) 
Hardness (HV)
Fig. 8.29 Average hardness versus gas flow rate of K4169 of sheet samples396 A. Dong et al. Hardness (HV) 
CrystallizaƟon pressure (KPa)
Fig. 8.30 Average hardness versus crystallization pressure of K4169 of sheet samples
8.5.2 Simulation Study on Regulating Casting of Superalloy
Floating Wall Tiles
8.5.2.1 Floating Wall Flame Tube
With the continuous advancement of the aviation industry, the requirements for the
performance of aviation engines are becoming higher and higher. One of the most
important performance indicators of an aero-engine is the weight-to-weight ratio,
and increasing the temperature of the combustion chamber of the engine is a major
measure to increase the weight-to-weight ratio. In the breakthrough of the push
ratio of the combustion chamber of the engine from 8 to 10, the temperature of the
combustion chamber was increased by 200 °C, which is mainly achieved through
the gas atomization of the head of the flame tube, the composite cooling of the wall
surface, and the floating wall structure design technology. The floating wall structure
flame tube was first developed by Pratt & Whitney, which has been used in V2500
engines, F119 military engines, and PW4000, PW6000, PW8000, and other civil
engines. Rolls-Royce has also adopted a floating wall structure design on a variety
of civilian engines. At present, the structural design of the floating wall flame tube
has become the mainstream design of advanced engine flame tubes in Europe and
the United States.
The main design feature of the floating wall flame tube is to separate the load￾bearing component from the heat bearing component of the flame tube, in order to
form a double-walled structure. The interior is a floating wall (heat bearing compo￾nent). The floating wall generally adopts the circumferential direction and diameter.8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 397
Fig. 8.31 a Floating wall of the combustion chamber, b Pad unit
The division of the grid format is composed of a certain number of floating tiles and is
fixed on the outer load-bearing components. The block structure allows appropriate
gaps between the tiles, which allows the tiles to have a certain degree when being
heated. The expansion space reduces thermal stress at high temperatures. The flame
tube structure and tiles are shown in Fig. 8.31.
Based on this structure and due to the different cooling methods used, the floating
wall tile has a variety of structural designs. The current mainstream is the impact
+ dense hole divergent gas film cooling structure, or completely covered gas film
cooling, which is to design a large number of regularly arranged dense microporosity
on the surface of the arc-shaped floating wall tile. The holes are inclined at a certain
angle along the airflow direction. On the one hand, the cold air outside the floating
wall can directly cool the floating wall by impact and can flow into the microholes,
forming a continuous protective air mold on the inner wall of the floating wall. The
floating wall of this structure design has the advantages of lighter weight and higher
cooling efficiency, etc., and has a wide range of applications in the current advanced
engine combustion chamber.
The shape of the floating wall tile is obtained by dividing the curved surface of
the flame tube by circumferential and radial cutting. Since the curved surface of the
flame tube is an approximately conical surface, the tile obtained in this way has a
certain radian and is an arc-shaped strip. But the arcs on the upper and lower sides of
the arc-shaped bar are not the same, and the length is slightly different. As a result,
the four corners of the arc-shaped bar are not right angles. The floating wall tile
itself does not bear the load. Due to the requirements of weight reduction, its wall
thickness is thin, which is easy to hang on the bearing component. There are five
column bolts on the thin wall surface to connect with the bearing component. The
middle bolt mainly plays a positioning role. Floating wall tile impact and dense hole
divergent air film cooling structure. It is an arc-shaped strip with a size of about 150
× 60 mm. The five-column bolts are distributed diagonally. The wall thickness of
the tile is required to be 1.2 mm and densely packed, the number of microporosity398 A. Dong et al.
is 200, the diameter is 1 mm, and the concave sides near the upper and lower edges
have elongated protrusions with a height of 1 mm.
8.5.2.2 Simulation Analysis of the Filling Process
Figure 8.32 shows the optimized floating wall tile of the casting system model. The
casting system is provided with a boss for placing the gate, the total height is about
220 mm, and the estimated filling time is 3.5 s. When filling, the maximum pressure
parameter is set to 25 kPa and the characteristic of boosting speed during filling is
the increase of castings.
Figure 8.33 shows the simulation results of the filling process of the casting.
(1) Enter the runner. After the molten metal enters the sprue, it keeps rising smoothly
and there is no turbulence. When it reaches the supporting round rod, a small
amount of molten metal enters the round rod.
(2) Reach the gate. The molten metal reaches the gate and enters the upper thick
frame of the casting under the combined effect of gravity and filling pressure.
The metal liquid entering the cavity from the lower round rod is only concen￾trated in the thick frame of the lower edge due to gravity, flows to both sides
of the frame, and does not enter the thin-walled cavity of the casting, which
successfully prevents the metal liquid flow from converging inside the casting.
Fig. 8.32 Casting system model after optimization8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 399
Fig. 8.33 Simulation of the casting filling process: a 2.0169 s b 2.2843 s c 2.4025 s d 2.5129 s
e 2.6423 s f 2.7162 s g 2.9055 s
(3) Thin-wall filling. After entering the gate, the metal liquid stays for a while at
the thick frame, and then enters the thin-walled area of the casting under the
driving force of the mold. It flows in a fan shape from the gate and the liquid
flow is relatively stable. The molten metal at the lower edge still gathers in the
thick frame and flows to both sides, which does not enter the casting cavity.
(4) Side border drainage. The fan-shaped metal liquid continues to flow downward
and there will be a certain hindrance when passing through the column.When the
metal liquid flow in the upper frame reaches the side, it starts to flow downward,
which is faster than the liquid flow in the thin-walled cavity. The speed of the
flow complements it. The metal liquid in the bottom frame does not change
much.
(5) The upper and lower parts of the liquid metal flow merge. At 2.6423 s, the
middle part of the upper fan-shaped liquid flow and the lower liquid flow merge
at the lower edge of the thin-walled area of the casting, which is located outside
the required casting. The liquid flow on both sides also reached the bottom at
this time. After the metal on the side edge entered the thin-walled area slightly, it
merged with the fan-shaped liquid flow. Since the thin-walled area was expanded
outward in the design of the new casting system, the convergent area is still
outside the required casting.
(6) The final confluence point of the liquid flow in the thin-walled cavity. Located
outside the casting, only the cylinder and riser are not filled.
(7) Filling is completed. The filling was completed at 2.9055 s.400 A. Dong et al.
8.5.2.3 Simulation Analysis of Solidification Process
After the filling is completed, the casting system begins to solidify after a while.
Figure 8.34 is the solidification process of the new casting system.
At 6.0457 s after the completion of filling, some parts of the thin-walled area
of the casting showed zero points in the fraction of the solid phase, indicating that
in these parts the molten metal has begun to solidify. Compared with the previous
casting system, the starting solidification time of the new casting system is delayed
by nearly 3 s, so that the pressure during solidification can be raised higher, which
prevents the casting from solidifying at a lower pressure. The places where the casting
begins to solidify are randomly distributed in thin-walled areas, and these areas can
be compensated for the surrounding thick parts.
After the filling is completed at 46,000 s, the thin-walled part of the casting is
solidified, all of which are grayish-white. Meanwhile, the solid phase fraction of the
thick frame and riser around the casting is about 50%, and the sprue and sprue gate
has not started to solidify.
After the filling is completed at 281.0000 s, the casting has completely solidified
except for the flow gate part. The solidification time of the flow gate part is slower
compared to the other casting part, which may cause the casting part to have more
shrinkage holes near the gate part.
After the filling is completed at 2996.0000 s, the casting system was completely
solidified.
The simulation of the solidification process shows that the casting system can also
meet the requirements of sequential solidification. The thin wall of the casting is first
solidified and the freezing point is randomly distributed. The entire thin wall begins to
solidify at the same time and the solidification is completed almost simultaneously.
Compared with the solidification process of gravity, the main force during anti￾gravity solidification is the applied pressure and the metal liquid is subjected to more
Fig. 8.34 Simulation of solidification process: a 6.0457 s b 46.0000 s c 281.0000 s d 2996.0000 s8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 401
uniform force during solidification. Therefore, the island-like areas where the thin￾walled areas begin to solidify are almost randomly distributed. Thin-walled regions
are also solidified almost simultaneously. Such thin-walled grain size and secondary
dendrite spacing are more likely to obtain relatively uniform results. There is a clear
difference in the solidification of the thin-walled areas of gravity casting.
8.5.2.4 Simulation Analysis of Defects
Figure 8.35 shows the shrinkage distribution. The shrinkage in the figure is mainly
concentrated in the corner of the column riser and thick frame and the part where the
metal liquid enters. In comparison, the casting itself does not have many shrinkage
defects. Figure 8.36 shows the distribution of thermal nodes. The distribution of
thermal nodes is consistent with the shrinkage distribution, most of which are concen￾trated on the pouring system. Figure 8.37 shows the distribution of microscopic
shrinkage probability based on the Niyama criterion. Compared to other parts of the
casting system, the Niyama criterion value of the casting part is lower, indicating
that there is still a greater possibility of microscopic shrinkage.
According to related works of literature, for thin-walled castings with large differ￾ences in wall thickness, the critical value of the Niyama criterion for thin-walled areas
and other areas are not the same. Currently, there is no reliable unified method for
determining this critical value. In fact, due to the existence of interdendritic flow
supplementation, the micro-constriction in the thin-walled area predicted by the
Niyama criterion is likely to be condensed by the post-solidified thick metal liquid
and transferred to the thick portion.
Fig. 8.35 Distribution of
shrinkage402 A. Dong et al.
Fig. 8.36 Distribution of hot
spot
Fig. 8.37 Niyama criterion
distribution of
micro-segregation/(°C·s)1/2
cm−1
From the shrinkage distribution of anti-gravity casting, the pouring system does
make a role in the feeding effect of the micro-shrinkage of casting thin walls. More￾over, compared to the high incidence of shrinkage in gravity casting, the incidence
of shrinkage in anti-gravity casting has decreased significantly, mostly below 0.2.
8.5.2.5 Simulation Analysis of Macro-Segregation
In the M951 alloy, in addition to the matrix Ni element, the most important elements
are Cr, Co, and Al, whose compositions are 9 wt.%, 5 wt.% And 5.9 wt.%, among8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 403
Fig. 8.38 Macro-segregation of Cr, Co and Al: a Cr/wt.%, b Co/wt.% and c Al/wt.%
which Cr, Co are the main elements to strengthen the high-temperature oxida￾tion resistance of the alloy and Al is the main strengthening element of the high￾temperature mechanical properties of the alloy. As a high-temperature alloy, M951
has a wide temperature solidification range and is prone to component segregation.
Figure 8.38 shows the macro-segregation of three elements in the simulation. It
can be seen that the solute partition coefficients of the three elements in the alloy
are all less than 1, and the content of the element contained in the alloy in the first
solidification region is extremely poor, and the element solidification occurs in the
solidified part. In the thin-walled area of the casting, due to the fast solidification,
the solute can only diffuse to a certain extent in the thin-walled area, and there
is no time to communicate with the thick frame and the runner. Therefore, during
the solidification of thin-walled casting, there are fewer solute elements in some
areas, while in the other area, such as the red area shown in the Fig. 8.38, there is
element enrichment. This situation divides the required casting part into two parts, the
compositions of which exhibit great difference, implying possibly a significant effect
on the casting. Compared with the macro-segregation of gravity casting, the thin wall
of anti-gravity casting is more uniform and almost solidified due to the applied force,
and the elements have not diffused. There are both element-rich regions and element￾depleted regions at the thin walls. Almost all these elements of gravity casting are
enriched in the pouring system.
In addition, it is found that the behaviors of Cr and Al are consistent in macroseg￾regation, and their distribution on the casting is almost the same. The distribution of
Co is similar to the former.
8.5.2.6 Simulation Analysis of Micro-Segregation
The microstructure of the casting has a direct impact on the performance of the
casting. Numerical simulation analysis gives the grain size and secondary dendrite
spacing distribution map of each part of the casting system. Figure 8.39 shows the
grain size distribution of the casting system. As can be seen from the figure, the404 A. Dong et al.
Fig. 8.39 Distribution of
grain size/μm
grain size of the thin-walled part and the thick frame of the casting are completely
different. There are two band-shaped regions in the middle of the thin wall. The grain
size is about 1,600 μm. In the thick frame and runner section, the grain size exceeded
3,000 μm, and the grains were significantly coarse. Grain sizes from fine to coarse
are consistent with the solidification sequence of the casting system. Generally, the
grain size of anti-gravity casting is smaller than that of gravity casting, and it is more
uniformly distributed in the thin-walled area of the casting.
Figure 8.40 shows the distribution of secondary dendrite spacing. It is shown
that the secondary dendrite spacing at the thin wall of the casting is much smaller
than that of the thick frame and runner. In the middle of the thin-walled region, the
Fig. 8.40 Disruption of
secondary arm spacing/μm8 Advanced Adjusted Pressure Casting Process 405
secondary dendrite spacing reached a minimum of 26 μm. The closer is to the edge,
the larger the secondary dendrite spacing gets and the value of the secondary dendrite
spacing of almost the entire thin-walled region is below 50 μm. At the edge of the
thin-walled area, the value of the secondary dendrite spacing increases sharply and
the secondary dendrite spacing of the thick frame and the runner are all larger than
100μm. Compared with the gravity casting condition, the secondary dendrite spacing
of the casting obtained by gravity casting is significantly reduced, slightly more than
half of that. Simulation analysis shows that the use of pressure-regulated precision
casting technology to form superalloy floating wall tiles has obvious advantages
compared to the gravity casting.
References
1. Z.W. Chen, Q.T. Hao, W.Q. Jie, Study on counter-gravity casting of complex thin wall A357
alloy castings%A357. Casting 053(012), 988–991 (2004)
2. B. Mondal, S. Kundu, A.K. Lohar et al., Net shape manufacturing of intricate components of
A356/SiC composite through rapid prototyping integrated investment casting. Mater. Sci. Eng.
A 498(1), 37–41 (2008)
3. R.Z. Hong, Research for foundry process of complicate thin-wall aluminum alloy castings.
Mater. Eng. 07, 47–48 (2000)
4. Y.Z. Lu, Y.H. Wei, X.Q. Zeng et al., Development of the forming process for casting magnesium
alloys. Casting 07, 383–387 (2000)
5. S.M. Xiong, Research progress of magnesium alloy die casting forming technology. Aeronaut.
Manuf. Technol. 02, 32–35 (2006)
6. Z. Liu, The latest research progress of magnesium alloy casting forming. Prog Mater China
02, 10–15 (2011)
7. Y.G. Zhou, W.D. Zeng, X.Q. Li et al., Toughening mechanism of titanium alloy under high
temperature deformation. Acta Metall. Sinica 01, 45–48 (1999)
8. X. Xue, L. Xu, Numerical simulation and prediction of solidification structure and mechanical
property of a superalloy turbine blade. Mater. Sci. Eng. 499(1), 69–73 (2009)
9. S. Wang, P. Guo, L. Yang, Centrifugal precision cast TiAl turbocharger wheel using ceramic
mold. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 204(1), 492–497 (2008)
10. J.R. Wood, P.A. Ruso, M.F. Welter et al., Thermomechnical processing and heat treatment of
Ti-6Al-2Sn-2Zr-2Mo-Si for structure applications. Sci. Eng. A 243(1), 109–118 (1998)
11. S.L. Xiao, Y.Y. Chen, H.Y. Zhu et al., Recent advances on precision casting of large thin wall
complex castings of titanium alloys. Rare Metal Mater. Eng. 35(5), 678–681 (2006)
12. T. Noda, Application of cast gamma TiAl for automobiles. Intermetallics 6(7), 709–713 (1998)
13. W.Q. Liu, Study on Bottom Injection Vacuum Casting of TA15 Alloy (Harbin Institute of
Technology, Harbin, 2010).
14. X.C. Ye, Basic Research on Bottom Injection Vacuum Casting Technique for Small Thin-Walled
Alloy Parts (Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 2010).
15. S. Misha, R. Ranjana, Reverse solidification path methodology for dewaxing ceramic shells in
investment casting process. Mater. Manuf. Process 25(12), 1385–1388 (2010)
16. J. Zhang, Z.H. Zhang, Magnesium Alloy and Its Application (Chemical Industry Press, Beijing,
2004).
17. W.H. Chen, R.Z. Chen, Development of aerospace investment casting technology. J. Aeronaut.
Mater. 01, 57–69 (1992)
18. X.F. Yu, G.Z. Zhang, X.Y. Wang et al., Non-equilibrium microstructure of hyper-eutectic Al-Si
alloy solidified under super high pressure. J. Mater. Sci. 34, 4149–4152 (1999)406 A. Dong et al.
19. Z. Liu, Z.G. Wang, Y. Wang et al., Study on pressure filling and solidification process of
Magnesium alloy. Chin. J. Mater. Res. 13(6), 641–644 (1999)
20. D.F. Zhang, Z.T. Fan, H.B. Wu et al., Filling ability of magnesium alloys in the lost foam casting
(LFC) with vacuum and low pressure. Special-Cast Non-Ferrous Alloys 25(2), 115–117 (2005)
21. L. Yan, M. Wang, Z.F. Shan et al., Research on filling capacity of adjusted pressure casting of
magnesium alloys. Foundry Technol. 26(10), 914–915 (2005)
22. Z.B. Zhou, J.S. Li, H.C. Kou et al., Effects of processing parameters on filling behavior of
thin-walled casting in low pressure casting. Special-Cast Non-Ferrous Alloys 28(1), 23–25
(2008)
23. X. Dong, N. Huang, S. Wu, Newly developed vacuum differential pressure casting of thin￾walled complicated Al-alloy castings. China Foundry 2(2), 102–107 (2005)
24. Z.L. Wang, Influence of gas in mold cavity on mold-filling capacity for thin-walled aluminum
alloy castings. Foundry 61(7), 768–773 (2012)
25. W.M. Jiang, Z.T. Fan, D.J. Liu, Influence of process parameters on filling ability of A356
aluminum alloy in expendable-patterns hell casting with vacuum and low pressure. Int. J. Cast
Metal. Res. 25(1), 52 (2012)
26. G.X. Liang, E.D. Wang, S.Y. He et al., Microstructure characteristics of aluminum alloy under
pressure solidification. Ordnance Mater. Sci. Eng. 15(1), 15 (1992)
27. B. Tang, Z.T. Fan, Z. Zhao et al., Effects of pressure field on structure and properties of loot
foam casting ZL101 alloy. Special-Cast Non-Ferrous Alloys 29(7), 629–641 (2009)
28. G.F. Mi, S.Y. Zeng, Effect of solidification condition on secondary dendrite arm spacing of the
A357alloyundercounter-pressure casting. J. Wuhan Univ. Technol. Mater, 119–122 (2009)
29. R.W. Gregorutti, J.E. Grau, C.I. Elsner, Microstructural mechanical and electrochemical char￾acterization of biomaterial ASTM F745castbyvacuum. Mater. Sci. Technol. 28(6), 742–747
(2012)
30. Q. Yan, H. Yua, Z. Xua, Effect of holding pressure on the microstructure of vacuum counter￾pressure casting aluminum alloy. J. Alloys Compd. 501, 351–357 (2010)
31. S. Shendye, B. King, P. McQuay, Mechanical properties of counter gravitycastIN718. TMS
124, 133 (2005)
32. B.W. Xiong, Q. Zaho, Effects of sample thickness on microstructures and mechanical properties
of A357alloy. Int. J. Cast Metal. Res. 25(6), 374–378 (2012)
33. Y.J. Wang, Counter gravity casting technology of aluminum alloy. Foundry Technol. 25(5),
361–362 (2004)Index
A
Additive manufacturing, 9
Adjusted pressure casting, 7, 14, 29, 355,
360–366, 379, 380, 383, 384, 386,
387
B
Baking, 6, 7, 17, 104, 117, 283
Bending strength, 127, 147, 150
Boost velocity, 374, 378, 379
C
Casting process, 3, 7–10, 12, 14, 16–18, 20,
24–26, 29, 33–35, 41, 42, 47, 51, 56–
58, 60–62, 68, 73, 94, 97, 102, 108,
114, 118, 120, 142, 169, 170, 186,
194, 196, 205, 206, 249, 273, 277,
281, 283, 285, 302, 324, 325, 355–
357, 359, 362, 369, 373, 377, 384,
388, 393
Centrifugal casting, 24, 25, 43, 357
Ceramic shell, 6, 18, 101, 102, 108–113,
115–118, 120, 122, 123, 127, 131,
133, 135, 137, 138, 140, 143–145,
147–149, 151–154, 156–161, 281,
286
Ceramic shell casting, 101, 104, 114
Ceramic slurry, 101, 123, 131, 132, 134, 143
Computer Tomography (CT), 20, 28, 207,
240, 242, 285
Cooling rate, 16, 17, 38, 56–58, 61, 104, 194,
195, 200, 205, 206, 208, 213, 229,
231, 236, 265, 268, 269, 280, 355,
371, 372, 376, 380, 382, 385–387,
389–393
Core deflection, 89, 92
Counter-gravity casting, 26, 27
Crack, 3, 42, 61, 103, 104, 106, 112, 113,
122, 136, 137, 140, 142, 149, 150,
152, 155, 156, 158, 181, 221, 225,
246, 248, 255, 257–262, 264, 266–
270, 356, 377
Critical wall thickness, 40
D
Deformation, 5–7, 10, 16, 17, 20, 29, 36,
37, 39, 42, 44, 59–62, 67, 70, 72,
78, 80, 82–88, 90–92, 94, 96, 97,
102–104, 106, 108–110, 112, 113,
115, 117, 118, 122, 129, 142, 149,
159, 161, 255–257, 267–270, 272,
279–282, 287, 324, 325, 359, 376,
392
δ phase, 275, 276
Dendrite growth, 13–15, 199, 201, 203, 207,
210, 212, 249–251, 392
Deviation flow, 27
Dewax, 4, 37, 48, 49, 103, 106, 110, 111,
114–116, 122, 123, 129, 137, 145,
147, 150, 152, 153, 155–157, 281,
282, 326, 332
3D-FEM, 256
Dimension accuracy, 7, 8, 18, 61–64, 301
Dimensionless micro-porosity criterion,
228, 235, 239
Directional solidification, 49, 105, 229, 236,
239, 252
E
Error source, 7, 29, 302, 313, 316
© Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
B. Sun et al., Precision Forming Technology of Large Superalloy Castings for Aircraft
Engines, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-6220-8
407408 Index
F
Fatigue properties, 37, 225, 239, 272
Feeding, 5, 7, 44, 45, 48, 49, 51, 53, 54, 57,
58, 92, 202, 205, 210, 211, 214, 216,
217, 225, 355, 356, 360, 392, 402
Filling, 5, 7, 9, 10, 12–14, 16–18, 25, 26,
29, 37, 38, 41, 42, 44–46, 49, 51–
53, 55, 56, 68, 69, 71, 72, 74, 80–82,
88, 91–93, 103, 115, 119, 124, 153,
158, 169, 179–181, 186–196, 198–
206, 214–217, 236, 253, 254, 262,
266, 268–270, 273, 280, 355–357,
360, 362, 363, 366–376, 378–380,
382–384, 386, 391, 393, 398–400
Finite Element Modeling (FEM), 15
Fluidity, 24, 71, 73, 118, 132, 133, 136, 169,
171, 177, 179–181, 190, 355, 374
G
Gating system, 29, 41–48, 51, 52, 56, 57, 97,
196, 216, 369
Grain refinement, 13, 16, 17, 118, 173, 185,
202, 203, 206
Grain structure, 9, 173, 184, 185, 196–200,
382, 385, 387, 388
Gravity casting, 14, 24–26, 43, 51, 179,
186, 190, 205, 206, 218, 356–362,
367, 369, 370, 374, 376, 378–380,
401–405
H
Heat Affected Zone (HAZ), 255, 257–260,
262, 263, 266, 270
Holding pressure, 69, 81, 91–93, 280, 281,
372, 376, 378, 379, 384, 386, 388,
389, 392, 393, 395
Holding time, 69, 140, 142, 160–162, 173,
280–282, 326, 327, 332, 337, 340,
341, 346, 347, 351, 372, 373, 379
Homogenizing, 261
Hot Isostatic Pressing (HIP), 11, 37, 243–
247, 272–277
I
Investment casting, 2–4, 6, 8, 9, 11, 16,
18, 19, 23–26, 29, 33–37, 41–43, 48,
49, 51, 55, 59–63, 67–69, 71–73, 88,
94–97, 101–106, 108, 111, 112, 114,
116–118, 120, 123, 134, 145, 159,
192, 194, 205, 279, 281, 285, 324,
325, 355, 360, 377
K
K4169 alloy, 2, 16, 169, 170, 172, 173,
177, 181, 183–185, 190–193, 200–
202, 204, 207, 208, 248, 253, 273,
275, 276
L
Laves phase, 15, 16, 29, 181–184, 244, 246,
248, 249, 254, 259, 264, 272, 275,
276, 381
Linear expansion coefficient, 103, 119, 159–
161, 368
Lost-wax casting, 3, 4
M
Macro segregation, 264, 402, 403
Melt structure, 13, 25, 29, 173
Melt superheat, 172–174
Micro-porosity, 225–232, 234, 235, 238,
239, 247, 377
Micro-Porosity Index (MPI), 49, 225–228,
232, 234, 236, 238
Microscopic porosity, 224, 243, 272, 376
Micro-segregation, 249, 253, 254, 259, 403
Micro-Segregation Index (MSI), 249, 251–
254
Microstructure, 10, 15, 16, 25, 29, 56, 109,
110, 113, 127, 135, 136, 138–141,
146, 151, 161, 173, 177, 206, 208,
209, 211, 212, 214, 217, 225, 252,
253, 262–265, 272, 275, 276, 282,
358, 360, 372, 376, 377, 381–384,
393, 403
Modulus, 21, 48, 77–79, 226, 228, 385
Mold filling, 9, 57, 72, 74, 189, 190, 360,
371, 372, 374, 378, 379, 386
Molecular dynamic simulation, 173, 174
N
Niyama criteria, 10, 57, 58, 228, 231, 234,
401
Non-Destructive Testing (NDT), 20, 28, 29,
240, 277
Numerical modeling, 249, 253
Numerical simulation, 8–10, 13, 17, 41, 56,
60, 61, 72, 74, 80, 81, 84, 85, 88, 89,
97, 169, 186, 188, 190–192, 195, 196,
200, 202, 205, 403Index 409
P
Partially Melted Zone (PMZ), 259, 262–264
Permeability, 12, 102, 103, 105, 110–112,
115, 117–119, 122, 129–131, 136–
138, 140, 153–159, 215, 229, 326,
360, 366, 388
Phase field, 14, 15
Porosity, 5, 7, 9, 10, 15, 16, 20, 22, 42, 44,
45, 53, 55, 57–59, 103, 113, 131, 138,
139, 154–158, 206, 221, 225, 238,
255, 267, 272, 273, 355, 356, 359,
360, 368, 371, 372, 374, 377, 389
Positioning, 25, 63, 92, 93, 287–296, 302–
316, 319, 322, 324, 397
Pouring system, 7, 45, 56, 63, 67, 191, 194,
238, 242, 369, 401–403
Pouring temperature, 14, 16, 17, 51, 52, 55–
57, 60, 104, 190–192, 194, 200–202,
205, 206, 208, 214–217, 253, 367,
369, 371, 373–375
Pouring time, 47, 52, 57
Precision casting, 2–4, 9, 11, 17, 19, 25,
29, 72, 90, 97, 112, 115, 123, 132,
169, 224, 255, 309, 355, 357–359,
361–363, 365, 377, 378, 405
R
Rapid prototyping, 9, 23, 43, 114, 116
Repair welding, 248, 255, 257, 261, 262,
266, 267, 269–272
Residual stress, 9, 61, 80, 83, 88, 110, 255
Rheological properties, 17, 69, 73, 80, 134,
135
S
Secondary Dendrite Arm Spacing (SDAS),
16, 236, 252, 254, 388–393
Segregation index, 251–253
Shrinkage, 7, 9, 10, 15, 16, 37, 45, 55, 57–64,
67–70, 73, 81, 83–87, 91, 94–97, 103,
110, 113, 142, 145, 159–162, 173,
174, 198, 202, 206, 215, 221, 224,
225, 228, 229, 231, 235, 239, 277,
280, 283, 337, 340, 342, 344, 346–
351, 356, 358–360, 369, 372–374,
376, 388, 389, 400–402
Shrinkage compensation rate, 62, 63, 94, 97
Sintering, 4, 9, 103, 106, 109, 113, 114, 116,
117, 123, 137–139, 142, 149, 155,
157–162
Slurry, 48, 49, 101, 102, 106, 108, 109,
111–114, 117–121, 123–126, 131–
137, 140, 143, 145, 150, 152, 281,
282, 326, 363
Solidification defects, 5–7, 12, 15, 16, 22, 27
Solidification process, 6, 10, 12–16, 27, 37,
49, 50, 56, 169, 172, 177, 178, 186,
192–194, 203, 205, 207, 210, 214,
216, 228, 229, 234, 236, 240, 248–
251, 253, 254, 265, 375, 376, 380,
387, 391, 400
Solidification structure, 12–17, 25, 27, 38,
169, 173, 177, 185, 194, 196, 198,
200, 202, 203, 205–208, 210–212,
384
State space equation, 327
Stress rupture properties, 21, 246
Stuccoing, 106, 121, 122, 282, 326, 332
Superalloy, 1–3, 5, 7, 11, 13–20, 24–27, 29,
33, 34, 36, 37, 40, 41, 48, 54, 55, 118,
169, 172–174, 177, 179–181, 184,
186, 194, 207, 232, 234–236, 239,
240, 242–244, 246, 249, 253, 255–
258, 261, 265–267, 269, 272, 274,
275, 279, 355, 358, 359, 362–369,
375, 377, 378, 380, 396, 405
Superheating treatment, 172–174
Synchrotron radiation, 12, 13, 21, 28, 29, 49,
199, 206, 207, 242
T
Temperature field, 7–10, 14, 27, 42, 56, 58,
61, 72, 86, 117, 186, 188–190, 229,
236, 237, 249, 253, 257, 259, 261,
262, 264–266, 277
TIG welding, 265, 267–271
Titanium alloys, 16, 26, 115, 357, 358
Tolerance design, 7, 17, 26, 29, 296
Turbine Rear Frame (TRF), 1, 4, 5, 7, 11, 25,
34, 37, 38, 51, 52, 63, 118, 123, 225,
240–242, 247, 249, 272, 279, 358,
359
U
Undercooling, 15, 172–174, 177
V
Virtual manufacturing, 8, 11, 23410 Index
W
Wax injection, 36, 41, 44, 49, 60–63, 67–69,
71, 72, 74, 80, 92, 280, 281, 325–327,
331, 332, 335
Wax material, 67–70, 75, 77, 80, 81, 91, 153,
280
Wax pattern, 4, 6, 7, 17, 18, 29, 36, 37, 41,
44, 49, 59, 61–64, 67, 69, 70, 72, 80,
81, 87–90, 102, 113, 122, 127–129,
143, 153, 194, 281, 313, 340, 341
Weld joint, 257, 263–266
Weld metal, 262, 263, 265, 267
X
X-ray detection, 221, 223, 224
X-ray imaging, 12, 21, 206, 207, 242
