Progress in Precision Agriculture
Davide Cammarano
Frits K. van Evert
Corné Kempenaar   Editors
Precision 
Agriculture: 
ModellingProgress in Precision Agriculture
Series Editor
Margaret A. Oliver, Soil Research Centre, University of Reading, Berkshire,
Berkshire, UKThis book series aims to provide a coherent framework to cover the multidisciplinary
subject of Precision Agriculture (PA), including technological, agronomic, eco￾nomic and sustainability issues of this subject. The target audience is varied and
will be aimed at many groups working within PA including agricultural design
engineers, agricultural economists, sensor specialists and agricultural statisticians.
All volumes will be peer reviewed by an international advisory board.Davide Cammarano • Frits K. van Evert
Corné Kempenaar
Editors
Precision Agriculture:
ModellingEditors
Davide Cammarano
Department of Agroecology, iClimate,
Centre for Circular Bioeconomy (CBIO)
Aarhus University
Tjele, Denmark
Frits K. van Evert
Agrosystems Research
Wageningen University & Research
Wageningen, The Netherlands
Corné Kempenaar
Agrosystems Research
Wageningen University & Research
Wageningen, The Netherlands
ISSN 2511-2260 ISSN 2511-2279 (electronic)
Progress in Precision Agriculture
ISBN 978-3-031-15257-3 ISBN 978-3-031-15258-0 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG 2023
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by
similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, SwitzerlandPreface
This book is part of a series on Precision Agriculture established by Springer with
Margaret Oliver as the series editor. We believe this is the first book that addresses
specifically the question of how crop growth modeling can be used in precision
agriculture. The separate domains of crop growth modeling and precision agriculture
share an interest in understanding and managing arable crops to achieve profit and
productivity with minimal negative impacts on the environment. During the past two
to three decades, crop modelers have focused almost exclusively on evaluating the
impact of climate change. Precision agriculture scientists and engineers have focused
on identifying management zones using data from remote sensing, soil sensors, and
yield monitors. But only a few scientists and engineers have been working on using
crop growth models for precision agriculture. This book aims to highlight these
efforts and encourage collaboration between crop growth modelers and precision
agriculture scientists.
The seeds for this book were sown at the European Conference on Precision
Agriculture which took place 8–11 July 2019 in Montpellier (France) (with many
presentations about sensors but very few about crop growth modeling) when Mar￾garet Oliver invited Davide Cammarano and Frits van Evert to work on this book.
Corné Kempenaar joined soon after. This book describes how models can be used to
monitor crops and soils in precision agriculture and how simulation outcomes can be
used to support farmers’ decisions. The book aims to provide useful information to
graduate-level professionals that want to broaden their knowledge of precision
agriculture; to scientists who want to learn about using academic knowledge in
practical farming; and to farmers, farm consultants, and extension workers who want
to increase their understanding of the science behind some of the commercial
software available to the farming community. Therefore, the book has three parts.
Part I provides an introduction to modeling and precision agriculture. Part II explores
the state-of-the-art in modeling for precision agriculture, with chapters focusing on
the major processes in precision agriculture: water use, nitrogen, and other amend￾ments, together with weeds, pests, and diseases. Part III contains a number of short
vvi Preface
chapters that each describe a commercial, model-based service that is currently
available to farmers.
We thank the authors and the series editor for working with us in preparing this
book during a period in which we all faced difficulties due to the coronavirus
pandemic.
West Lafayette, Denmark Davide Cammarano
Wageningen, The Netherlands Frits K. van Evert
Wageningen, The Netherlands Corné KempenaarContents
Part I Modelling for Precision Agriculture
Introduction .............................................. 3
Frits K. van Evert, Davide Cammarano, and Corné Kempenaar
Process-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions
for Site-Specific Decision Support in Crop Management ............. 25
K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
Models in Crop Protection ................................... 49
Giorgia Fedele, Federica Bove, and Vittorio Rossi
Development and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision
Agriculture ............................................... 75
Jotham Akaka, Aurora García-Gallego, Nikolaos Georgantzis, Clive Rahn,
and Jean-Christian Tisserand
Part II State of the Art
Process-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics ......... 105
Davide Cammarano, Fernando E. Miguez, and Laila Puntel
Modelling Soil Water Dynamics ............................... 129
Marius Heinen
Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era ............................... 153
Annamaria Castrignanò and Antonella Belmonte
Data Assimilation of Remote Sensing Data into a Crop
Growth Model ............................................ 185
Keiji Jindo, Osamu Kozan, and Allard de Wit
viiviii Contents
Part III Case Studies
Adapt-N® (Yara International) ................................ 201
Harold van Es, Rebecca Marjerison, and Muhammad Barik
Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management ...................... 209
Robert Gunzenhauser
xarvio® Digital Farming Solutions ............................. 223
Manuel Nolte, Andreas Tewes, and Holger Hoffmann
WatchITgrow ............................................. 229
Isabelle Piccard, Anne Gobin, Sven Gilliams, Laurent Tits,
and Jürgen Decloedt
Precision Agriculture in Rice Farming .......................... 239
Satoshi Iida
AgSkyNet: Harnessing the Power of Sky and Earth for Precision
Agriculture ............................................... 251
Suryakant Sawant, Sanat Sarangi, and Srinivasu Pappula
Dacom Precision Agriculture System ........................... 263
Frenk-Jan Baron and Lud Uitdewilligen
Akkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms
for Precision Agriculture .................................... 269
Thomas H. Been, Corné Kempenaar, Frits K. van Evert,
Idse E. Hoving, Geert J. T. Kessel, Willem Dantuma, Johan A. Booij,
Leendert P. G. Molendijk, Fedde D. Sijbrandij, and Koen van Boheemen
Index . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 295Part I
Modelling for Precision AgricultureIntroduction
Frits K. van Evert, Davide Cammarano , and Corné Kempenaar
1 Rationale
Modern agriculture is in many ways a success story. The number of people in the
world has increased markedly during the last 200 years, and it is projected to reach
about 9.8 billion by 2050 (Fig. 1a), while the productivity of many crops from the
beginning of the Green Revolution has kept up until now (Fig. 1b). As a result of
these two opposing trends, the prevalence of undernourishment is at a historic low
and still decreasing (Fig. 1). Of course it remains to be seen if these trends can
continue in the face of more frequent exceptional climate events (IPCC, 2021), the
coronavirus pandemic and breakout of war.
The increases in productivity have been possible because of a number of con￾tributing factors ranging from technical to socioeconomic. From a technical point of
view, plant breeding, better crop rotation and fertilization, mechanization of most
field operations and crop protection against pests and diseases have helped to
increase yields (Aggarwal et al., 2019). From a socioeconomic point of view,
many governments also started to support agricultural research, as well as education
for farmers and extension services, to ensure that the knowledge produced by
research can be used in practice. There were also many systemic changes, such as
F. K. van Evert (✉) · C. Kempenaar
Agrosystems Research, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, The Netherlands
e-mail: frits.vanevert@wur.nl
D. Cammarano
Department of Agroecology, iClimate, Centre for Circular Bioeconomy (CBIO),
Aarhus University, Tjele, Denmark
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_1
34 F. K. van Evert et al.
Fig. 1 Patterns of (a) population growth from 1700 to a projected growth in 2100. The blue line
shows the continuous patterns, while the red dots report the world’s population at given points in
time. The data from 1700 to 2100 were from (https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/population?
time=1500), while the world’s population from 2010 to 2100 were downloaded from https://
ourworldindata.org/future-population-growth; (b) crop unit yield of maize (MZ, blue line), rice (RI,
yellow line), soybean (SB, dark green line), wheat (WH, orange line) and the world’s population
growth (black line) from 1960 to 2020. The data on crop yields were obtained from https://www.
fao.org/faostat/en/#data, while the world’s population data were from https://ourworldindata.org/
grapher/population?time=1500..latest
subsidies on fertilizers, the establishment of cooperative banks, the development of
road networks and the opening of borders as in the European Union.
Even when several technological innovations helped to increase yield, it may be
possible to attribute yield increases to specific factors (Fig. 2). However, in most
cases, socioeconomic and technical factors interact to determine yield, together with
decision-making (e.g. farmers’ decisions on when to plant and how much fertilizer to
apply). However, as the wheat yield trend in Australia shows (Fig. 2), recent climate
extremes can still cause deviation from a long-term trend no matter what the level of
technology. This is something to consider in future planning because it is likely that
climate extremes will be more frequent and affect yield (IPCC, 2021).
At the same time, modern agricultural practices are having a large negative
impact on the environment. The use of large amounts of fertilizers has led to
problems with nitrate leaching to groundwater, phosphates causing eutrophication
of surface water and a rise in greenhouse gas emission (during production of
fertilizers as well as during crop production) from the whole farming sector. For
some specific issues (e.g. nitrate in groundwater), the European Union (EU) has
regulated the amount of organic and inorganic nitrogen farmers can apply in specific
areas deemed nitrate vulnerable zones (NVZs) to limit the environmental impacts of
fertilization (EU, 1991).
In addition, crop protection agents affect more than just the pests and diseases that
are targeted. Chemical crop protection agents can also affect nontarget insects, birds
and mammals, as can herbicides used to control weeds (Voltz et al., 2022).Introduction 5
Fig. 2 A modified Australian wheat yield patterns from 1860 to 2022 from Angus (2001). The data
from 1860 to 2000 were extracted from Angus (2001), while those from 2000 to 2022 were obtained
from ABARES (2022)
The common practice of having rotations with only a few different crops grown in
large fields is an important contributing factor to a reduction in biodiversity.
Finally, the use of heavy machinery leads to loss of soil structure and increased
soil compaction (Hamza & Anderson, 2005). Among other things, this means that
the soil has difficulty absorbing rainwater which in turn may lead to surface runoff
and erosion.
All the above factors could be exacerbated by the predicted changes in climate
patterns and extremes. Therefore, for agriculture to be economically profitable and
minimize environmental effects, it must become more sustainable. Digital agricul￾ture is one of the novel scientific fields that may help to make agriculture more
sustainable. Precision agriculture (PA) is a branch of this which could benefit from
the insight gained from such new discipline. Precision agriculture is one of the
technologies (among breeding, agronomy and so on) that can help to make agricul￾ture more sustainable from an economic and environmental point of view. And
accounting for dynamic interactions between soil-plant-atmosphere-crop manage￾ment with crop growth models can support decision-making in precision agriculture.
Figure 3 shows how the links between deterministic crop growth models, machine
learning and other technologies in PA can help sustain the upward trend of
technology.6 F. K. van Evert et al.
Fig. 3 A theoretical diagram that draws from the work of Angus (2001) in which the value of
introducing new technologies can be reduced by projected changes in the climate
2 Crop Modelling
A model is a simplified representation of a part of reality. Models are used to
understand and manage our surroundings and can take many different forms. For
example, it is a model if one expresses in poetic language the fact that including a
legume crop in the rotation leads to higher yields.1 Another example of a model is a
linear (or curvilinear) regression relationship between the amount of manure applied
and crop yield. A model can also take into account time, for example, when a curve
is used to relate crop nitrogen uptake to the number of days since emergence
(Steltenpool & van Erp, 1995).
In this book we concern ourselves primarily with complex dynamic models.
These models describe discrete event systems, continuous state systems (differential
equations) and hybrid continuous state and discrete event systems. A foundational
theory of dynamic systems and models is available (Zeigler, 1976; Zeigler et al.,
2000).
Crop simulation models, or crop growth models, are a formal representation of
mathematical algorithms that describe the interaction of crops with the environment
(Jones et al., 2003; Van Ittersum et al., 2003). Crop models are dynamic models
(time is a factor) and usually simulate daily (or hourly, depending on the models)
interactions between the soil, plant, weather and crop management. They are
constructed with many subroutines that simulate specific processes (e.g. crop phe￾nology, soil organic carbon and so on) that are then interrelated. Therefore, crop
growth models comprise a mix of simple empirical and mechanistic subroutines.
1
The Georgics, by Virgil. For example, https://gutenberg.org/ebooks/232Introduction 7
Table 1 The main category of input data needed for running a crop simulation model
Input Common input among crop models
Weather Solar radiation, maximum and minimum temperature, rainfall
Soil Clay, silt, sand; organic carbon, nitrogen
Management Planting date, density and depth; fertilizer (or irrigation) appli￾cation date and amount; fertilizer type (usually for nitrogen only)
Boundary conditions
(or initial conditions)
Value of soil water and nitrogen at the start of the simulation
(usually prior to sowing)
They require a certain number of inputs to be able to run as highlighted in Table 1;
although the number of those inputs depends on the complexity of the crop model.
Furthermore, when inputs are not available, they are usually estimated. Kersebaum
et al. (2015) classified the amount of detail needed in terms of input data and for
model calibration.
Nevertheless, crop models have been used in different branches of research to
extrapolate experimental agronomic information beyond field experimentation and
to test and assess climate impacts and changes (Asseng et al., 2015, 2019; Rötter
et al., 2016). In recent years crop models have been included in frameworks and
support systems that also include economics and human behaviour (Cammarano
et al., 2020).
Crop modelling is not new; it started in the 1960s in the Netherlands under De
Wit (Van Ittersum et al., 2003) as a mathematical relationship was developed
between biomass growth and solar radiation. Since then, the number of modelling
schools and modelling approaches has grown until we have now reached a point of
having multiple models for simulating the same crops. For example, there are about
30 wheat crop models, 19 for maize and 13 for rice (www.agmip.org).
The key processes simulated in those models are development, growth, yield,
nutrient and water uptake. For each of these processes, external environmental
factors control the main processes. Phenological development, which simulates the
passage through different stage of the plant’s life, like flowering or maturity, is
generally controlled by air temperature and day length, and crop growth by solar
radiation and temperature. The external factors for nutrient and water supply are
rainfall, irrigation, temperature and nutrient supply.
The majority of crop models utilize De Wit’s (Van Ittersum et al., 2003) concept
to simulate crop growth. First, in a potential production situation, crop growth is
limited only by light, temperature and the crop’s genetics. Water-limited production
takes place when in addition to the above, growth is limited at least part of the time
by the availability of water; nitrogen-limited production takes place when growth is
limited by the availability of nitrogen. In order to simulate water- and nitrogen￾limited production, rainfall, irrigation, nutrient supply and soil conditions need to be
known.
Another advantage of the use of crop models is that they can extrapolate the
interactions between plant-soil-agronomy through time. In this instance, crop growth
simulations with historical long-term weather data should not be interpreted as trying8 F. K. van Evert et al.
to simulate a particular year; rather, this kind of simulation can help to increase our
understanding of the crop’s sensitivity to different weather patterns in a given area
(e.g. what is the probability of crop failure because of heat stress).
Despite being considered ‘point-based’ models, crop models have been applied at
different spatial scales. For instance, at the global level, they have been used to
quantify the effects of climate change on crop production (Elliott et al., 2015;
Jägermeyr et al., 2021) and the values of adaptation (Asseng et al., 2019). At the
regional level, they have been coupled with economic modelling to predict how
climate change affects rates of poverty (Cammarano et al., 2020). Other applications
are their use in gene-based modelling and to design crop ideotypes for better crop
adaptation to the future climate (Bustos-Korts et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2012).
3 Precision Agriculture
It could be argued that the earliest farmers already engaged in precision agriculture.
If you are farming for subsistence on a small piece of land, and the work is done by
hand, then by definition, you are working with a great level of precision, for
example, removing weeds close to the crop plants and applying fertilizer where it
counts the most. This precision was lost with the advent of mechanization, when
manufactured fertilizer and crop protection agents were applied uniformly over large
areas.
Modern precision agriculture was initially developed, from a theoretical point of
view, in the early 1980s with the aim of understanding factors that lead to spatial
variation in crop growth within a field and how to manage it. However, PA was not
very popular until technologies such as global navigation satellite systems (GNSS),
remote sensing and better agricultural equipment (e.g. variable-rate application,
yield monitors) became widely available after 2000. Despite an increase in popular￾ity, the adoption among farmers is still not widespread (Lowenberg-DeBoer &
Erickson, 2019).
There have been many definitions of precision agriculture, but the International
Society of Precision Agriculture (ISPAG, www.ispag.org) recently defined it as:
Precision Agriculture is a management strategy that gathers, processes and analyzes tempo￾ral, spatial and individual data and combines it with other information to support manage￾ment decisions according to estimated variability for improved resource use efficiency,
productivity, quality, profitability and sustainability of agricultural production.
Nowadays precision agriculture, pushed by new data analytical tools and better
high-resolution images, is generating a lot of data which are often used in models in a
‘black box’ situation. It is not that straightforward to assume that a given drone/
satellite image represents nutritional stress without understanding what is happing at
the soil-plant interface and how weather affects this relationship (Colaço & Bramley,
2018; Colaço et al., 2021).Introduction 9
4 Use of Models in Precision Agriculture
In precision agriculture the goal of models has been to understand and explain the
spatial variation of crop growth or yield (as mapped by drones, satellites, yield
monitoring) and to help address the management decisions related to the site-specific
input application (Basso et al., 2001). A variety of modelling approaches has been
used in precision agriculture. Of particular interest are regression models, simple
dynamic models, crop growth models, digital twins and machine learning.
4.1 Regression Models
The models that were first used in precision agriculture were not crop growth
models, but much more simple decision rules that related a measurement on the
crop or the soil to a specific action. They are still used successfully for developing
functional relationships between agronomic input and yield. Several manufacturers
market a sensor that measures crop reflectance in two or more wavebands and use
this approach to derive an immediate rate for a side dressing of nitrogen. Such a
system can be delivered in a single package, it bypasses the need for a data
infrastructure, and it addresses an important problem, namely, the over-use of
nitrogen fertilizers.
Nitrogen uptake and plant reflectance values are affected by factors other than soil
nitrogen supply (Colaço & Bramley, 2018); therefore normalization procedures like
well-fertilized reference strips, non-N-fertilized strips, and relative yield are usually
used to gain understanding. In addition, over the years, researchers have developed
relationships between sensor readings and nitrogen rates to determine the optimal
amount of nitrogen. This was done by developing a variety of indicators like the NSI
(nitrogen sufficiency index) and INSEY (in-season estimated yield) or the relation￾ship between chlorophyll meter readings, grain yield and chlorophyll index as
reviewed by Samborski et al. (2009).
A major limitation of the use of such algorithms, however, is that they can be
highly site- and year-specific and it could be difficult to extrapolate them to other
genotypes, soils and environments. Ransom et al. (2019) evaluated statistical and
machine learning (ML) algorithms for including soil and weather information to
improve N recommendation tools for maize.
Puntel et al. (2019) identified static and dynamic variables that affect the algo￾rithms for the economic optimal rate of nitrogen and found that some static variables
(e.g. soil depth) and some dynamic ones (e.g. number of days with precipitation
>20 mm, residue amount, soil nitrate at planting and heat stress around silking)
helped in improving such algorithms.
Over the years, however, successful commercial products were developed using
this type of approach (Samborski et al., 2009; Tremblay et al., 2011). An example of10 F. K. van Evert et al.
a successful application of such models using a combination of remote sensing and
nitrogen response is with the passive or active remote sensors and algorithms
developed for linking crop N response to the normalized difference vegetation
index (NDVI) (Butchee et al., 2011; Holland et al., 2004, 2012; Scharf et al., 2011).
The Yara N-Sensor provides a real-time variable rate of N for different crops
(e.g. wheat (Triticum aestivum L.), oilseed (Brassica napus L.), barley (Hordeum
vulgare L.) and maize (Zea mays L.)) given the crop-specific algorithms developed.
The advantage of the system is that the prediction of N uptake in real time enables a
correction for N on the go. However, this system does not provide absolute recom￾mendations but focused on applying more fertilizer where the crop does not grow
well (Jasper et al., 2009; Reusch, 2003).
Another agronomic practice that has been optimized through the use of models is
herbicide application. Pre-emergence herbicides are applied to the soil between
sowing and emergence of the crop to kill weeds in the topsoil layer. The amount
of herbicide needed to control the weeds depends on the clay and organic matter
contents of the soil. These soil properties can be estimated with measurements of
apparent electric conductivity of the soil. Thus, the rate of soil herbicide application
can be derived from an instantaneous measurement of the soil (Kempenaar et al.,
2014) in the same way that a measurement of crop reflectance can be used to
determine a rate of nitrogen application. The above technology when used for
variable-rate application of herbicide for potato haulm killing (PHK) results in a
reduction of herbicide use of up to 50% compared to a uniform rate application
(Kempenaar et al., 2004, 2008, 2017).
Several approaches have been proposed for irrigation, and those that fit the scope
of this chapter are the thermal-based algorithms for scheduling irrigation based on
canopy temperature, such as the crop water stress index (CWSI) (Jackson et al.,
1981, 1988) and the time-temperature threshold (TTT) (Wanjura et al., 1992, 1995).
The latter index was used to set up automatic irrigation on cotton and to automate the
amount of irrigation for soybean (O’Shaughnessy & Evett, 2010; Peters & Evett,
2008).
A good overview of the differences between statistical and process-based crop
models is discussed in Lobell and Asseng (2017).
4.2 Simple Dynamic Models
A dynamic model takes time into account, and in its simplest form, with thermal time
as one of the independent variables, has been successful in recommending the rate of
N for side dressing in potatoes (Booij et al., 2017; Van Evert et al., 2012). Soil
nitrogen supply in the Netherlands varies widely from year to year and from field to
field. Therefore, the standard practice of applying the recommended amount of N
around planting frequently results in either an over- or undersupply of N. A recom￾mendation system was developed where some N is applied at planting, and then
around 1 July, a simple dynamic model is used to determine how much N the cropIntroduction 11
would have taken up in the absence of N limitation. The ideal amount of N is then
compared with the actual amount of N measured by canopy reflectance; the differ￾ence between the two numbers is applied as side dress N. This system maintains
yield and reduces N on average by 15% (van Evert et al., 2012; Kempenaar et al.,
2017).
4.3 Crop Growth Models
An important limitation of the N side dress system for potatoes mentioned above is
that it does not consider nitrate leaching, mineralization of organic matter and other
processes that influence the availability of N in the soil. For example, after several
weeks with limited rain, the side dress system will recommend a large rate of N for
side dressing even though crop growth is limited by lack of water and not nitrogen.
This is where crop growth models become useful.
One of the advantages of running a crop model in precision agriculture is that they
take into account the effect of climate variation at each point in space as highlighted
in the scientific literature (Basso et al., 2021; Batchelor et al., 2002; Cammarano
et al., 2021; Maestrini & Basso, 2018; Martinez-Feria & Basso, 2020; Paz et al.,
1999; Puntel et al., 2018; Thorp et al., 2008). Basso et al. (2001) demonstrated how
to minimize the technical costs for running a crop model in the precision agriculture
context.
Early efforts to use complex dynamic models in PA include EPIPRE (Zadoks,
1981), GOSSYM/COMAX (McKinion et al., 1989) and Tipstar (Jansen, 2008;
Jansen et al., 2003). Those early efforts were difficult to implement because of the
limited processing power of early computers which meant that it required hours or
even days of runtime to obtain a result. The practical application of these models was
also limited by obstacles related to acquisition, storage and distribution of the
relevant crop, soil and farm management data needed to run the models.
Batchelor and Paz (1997) and Paz et al. (1998, 1999) then used two crop models
to evaluate how the spatial variation of soil moisture affects crop yield. Thorp et al.
(2008) developed a prototype of a decision-support tool based on a crop growth
model to use in precision agriculture. Their aim was to let a crop growth model
simulate a homogeneous unit of land to improve understanding of the effect of
spatiotemporal variation on crop growth and development and to adopt better site￾specific management. The research was based on the concept of defining homoge￾neous management zones, a common theme in PA which has been subjected to
extensive scientific work (Nawar et al., 2017). Basso et al. (2001) integrated the
information from remote sensing with a crop growth model to identify management
zones and have an improved understanding of the causes leading to the variation in
yield. An improved approach was adopted by Cammarano et al. (2021) using a
farmer’s field and demonstrated that the use of crop models can help to identify the
cause of spatial variation in yield but also to quantify the effects of soil and weather
on crop quality.12 F. K. van Evert et al.
McNunn et al. (2019) used a crop growth model to predict site-specific subfield
optimum seeding density and N rates based on publicly available data sources. They
also used the modelled outputs to estimate the environmental footprint in terms of N
leaching and greenhouse gas emissions. This example shows how a crop growth
model can aid the estimation of economically optimal rates of N by also taking into
account the dynamic interactions of the N cycling and how it affects the environ￾ment. Nowadays the advances in computing technologies and digital data of soil and
weather have simplified the use of crop models (from simpler crop models to more
mechanistic ones). For example, a global simulation study on the effect of climate
change on wheat and maize production made in the early 1990s (Rosenzweig &
Parry, 1994) produced an overall message that is comparable to current research
(Elliott et al., 2015; Jägermeyr et al., 2021; Müller et al., 2019). Given that the same
crop models were run, the main technical differences between the two studies were
the speed and computational capability and the availability of input with a finer
spatial resolution of the crop models (see the global figures of the two studies).
Therefore, simple ‘apps’ and technological progress (computers and data) have led
to an interest in full-fledged crop models as showcased in Part III of this book.
4.4 Digital Twins
Recently there has been interest in using crop growth models as a digital twin. A
digital twin (DT) is a model of a physical object with emphasis on (1) the connection
between the real-world object and its virtual counterpart and (2) the use of real-time
data from sensors to keep the model synchronized (Grieves, 2014). DTs are widely
used in engineering and the concept has recently started to receive attention in
agriculture (Pylianidis et al., 2021; Van Evert et al., 2021).
While DT is not a new research field, the integration of crop growth models in DT
is still in development. There are only a few examples on how crop growth models
can benefit from DT. The integration of sensor information to help to improve model
simulations is being developed for field crops as well as for livestock (Van Evert
et al., 2021).
4.5 Machine Learning
Another expanding research field is machine learning (ML) applied to PA. Machine
learning is a field of computer science comprising algorithms that give the computer
the ability to learn without explicit programming (Samuel, 1959). To simplify the
ML approach, the steps can be divided into three parts: (I) input data, (II) building
the model and (III) generalization (which is like a crop model evaluation, e.g. testing
the model with dataset not used for training the model).Introduction 13
Ransom et al. (2019) used an ML algorithm to improve a simple regression model
for optimizing N fertilization. But ML algorithms are also suited to analysing the
output from real-time sensors, such as the data from soil moisture and weather
sensors. Machine learning has potential for estimating soil properties as reported
in an extensive review by Nasirahmadi and Hensel (2022) and other research where
maps of the apparent electrical conductivity of bulk soil were used together with
some targeted soil samples to estimate soil properties spatially. However, if the
interest is, for example, the conservation of soil organic carbon, ML might fail to
predict the dynamic changes of organic carbon and how soil type, weather and
human management affect it. In this case, a dynamic soil carbon model would be
more suited than ML because it takes into account explicitly the effect of microbial
activities and the role of different fractions of soil organic carbon.
Crop yield estimation is another field that has been extensively studied in which
ML has been applied (Nasirahmadi & Hensel, 2022). Although there is potential in
this area for ML, yield prediction using remote sensing and simple regression has
also produced satisfactory results (Bean et al., 2018; Puntel et al., 2019; Raun et al.,
2005). An issue with yield prediction is that ML models, once tested and trained in a
given environment/crop/soil/year, cannot be applied easily in other contexts
(or other years) because they are highly site-specific. The main limitation, in this
case, is not ML per se but the agronomic understanding as to why yield prediction is
needed. It has often been reported that the integration of ML and remote sensing
improves yield, quality and agronomic management. However, in most cases yield
prediction is done too late when farmers cannot do anything to correct eventual
problems. It is important that scientists using ML for yield prediction should be
aware of the agronomic implications of their applications.
On pest-disease and weed recognition, ML has shown considerable potential in
applicability with images from digital cameras and the application of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) (Alibabaei et al., 2022). A high accuracy (about 99%) has
been reported with respect to manual procedures that might make future applications
of ML in weed-disease detection profitable. But it has also been reported that the
accuracy depends strongly on the quality of training datasets and that overtraining
the ML models could also hamper the approach (Alibabaei et al., 2022; Nasirahmadi
& Hensel, 2022).
Machine learning applied to irrigation has been shown to improve the optimiza￾tion of irrigation water while minimizing the use of resources (e.g. water and
electricity). In particular, the increased number of sensors deployed in the field has
made ML algorithms robust, but this is also their main limitation in applicability
because of the associated costs for the farmers.
5 Chapters of the Book
The book contains three parts. Part I gives a broad overview of precision agriculture,
modelling and issues related to the use of models in agricultural practice. Part II
explores the state-of-the-art modelling for precision agriculture. Part III contains a14 F. K. van Evert et al.
series of short chapters that each describe a commercial, model-based service that is
currently available to farmers.
In Part I, Kersebaum and Wallor (chapter “Process-Based Modelling of Soil–
Crop Interactions for Site-Specific Decision Support in Crop Management”) discuss
the use of process-based models for soil-crop interactions and how those modelling
approaches can help to describe the spatiotemporal dynamics of soil-crop-atmo￾sphere relationships. Knowledge about within-field spatial variation of temporally
stable soil properties can be used to make timely and spatially adapted management
decisions. In chapter “Models in Crop Protection” Fedele, Bove and Rossi describe
different modelling approaches for crop protection, focusing on process-based
approaches. It is interesting to note that the crop growth modelling community is
working closely with the crop protection community to include these approaches in
the crop growth models (Bregaglio et al., 2021; Donatelli et al., 2017). The chapter
also discusses how the plant disease models can be used to improve decision-making
in integrated pest management because they can be used to analyse complex
relationships among factors and improve tactical decision-making and strategic
management. Chapter “Development and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in
Precision Agriculture” (Akaka, Gallego, Georgantzis, Rhan and Tisserand) dis￾cusses adoptions and limitations of model-based practices in PA. In particular, the
authors explore those issues from a scientific point of view and a sociocultural point
of view. They introduce the concept of ‘co-creation’ and conclude that this is
important: users need to be involved from the start. Scientifically we are able to
create very sophisticated models, but their adoption is somewhat lagging behind. A
model for application in PA should also take into account stakeholders’ needs and
address their relevant questions.
Part II starts with the chapter “Process-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen
Dynamics” (Cammarano, Miguez and Puntel), which gives an overview of the
modelling approaches used to simulate soil and plant nitrogen. The chapter is a
non-exhaustive description of nitrogen modelling (which are often subroutines to
more complex crop models), but it gives the reader an idea of the complexity of
process-based crop growth models. The authors describe two case studies in which
crop growth models are used in a spatial context to optimize nitrogen management
through an improved understanding of the soil-plant-weather-agronomy interac￾tions. The chapter by Heinen (chapter “Modelling Soil Water Dynamics”) describes
the theory and application of different water modelling approaches. The author
describes the main theory of water movement and how those models can be used
to predict current and projected changes in soil water content. The chapter also
consider how to model the spatial variation of soil processes and properties. In
chapter “Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era”, Castrignanò and Belmonte introduced the
topic of data fusion in precision agriculture. They highlight how geostatistical
models can be useful in data fusion for PA applications. The authors discuss the
implications of spatial and/or temporal autocorrelation and the effect of different
supports on agricultural operations. Keiji, Kozan and De Wit (chapter “Data
Assimilation of Remote Sensing Data into a Crop Growth Model”) follow with a
discussion on the assimilation of remote sensing data into a crop growth model. TheIntroduction 15
chapter gives an overview and history of data assimilation between remote sensing
and crop growth models. Then it points out the potential and limitations of such an
approach and how current technologies might facilitate such integration.
Part III comprises a series of chapters describing model-based solutions available
for farmers from commercial companies. Each chapter is organized in a structured
way in which the contributors introduce their solution and give a brief generic
overview of the technology, application, benefits and any additional information.
In this section, we have contributions from Adapt-N ® (Yara International) which
demonstrates how their process-based solution is developed into a commercial tool
for optimizing N fertilization. Granular Agronomy’s software also deals with the
spatial optimization of N fertilization in which a crop growth model is used to
estimate N requirements. The Xarvio ® Digital Farming Solutions illustrates how
their crop model is integrated in their digital farming platform and also describes a
case study on how to integrate model output into agronomic decision-making. The
Kubota Corporation discussed their Kubota Smart Agri System used for precision
farming and autonomous unmanned agricultural machinery with a working example
on a rice transplanter with automatic steering, a combine harvester with an automatic
operating assistance function and a fully autonomous tractor. The TSC Research and
Innovation described the AgSkyNet platform used to provide growers with infor￾mation during crop growing and post-harvest. They discuss case studies of solutions
for integrated pest assessment, crop growth simulation to estimate yield and to assess
the severity of effects of stubble burning and pesticide residue detection. The Dacom
Farm Intelligence highlights their information system and how it is used to connect
data and models and how that information is processed to make informed decisions
on crop protection, crop growth, irrigation and precision agriculture decisions.
Finally, farmmaps, a platform made for precision agriculture, comprises multiple
models (for potato, soil water dynamics, late blight infection and nematode man￾agement) and can be used to identify field and within-field agronomic management
solutions. The user interface of farmmaps is explicitly designed with farmers in
mind in order to facilitate uptake of the platform.
6 Current State of Modelling for Precision Agriculture
and Work Needed
Please recall that PA is ...a management strategy that gathers...and
analyzes...data...to support management decisions. This simple statement can
break down in several places. In many cases there is a lack of sensors for some
applications of precision agriculture. For example, it is currently not possible to
measure potato tuber size and weight in the field in the same way that aboveground
biomass can be measured. It may also be the case that a suitable actuator (such as a
precision planter, spreader or sprayer) is not available. For example, few farmers
today own a sprayer with section control. In this book we focus on the16 F. K. van Evert et al.
transformation of data into agronomic advice that can be relayed to an actuator. In
the market this step is often left unspecified. You can see this in the many soil and
crop sensors that are marketed today for more sustainable nutrient use or crop
protection, but that lack models for making agronomic advice and an application
rate prescription map. They leave this decision to the expertise of the user or their
advisor. This hampers the adoption of precision agriculture. Successful applications
of precision agriculture consist of three parts: data, decisions and actuators. A chain
is only as strong as its weakest link.
It is starting to be recognized that successful application of precision agriculture
requires that knowledge on PA technology and decision-support models are com￾bined in order to develop and align the three components of a precision agriculture
application. In the Netherlands, this is done, e.g. on the National Field Lab Precision
Agriculture (www.proeftuinprecisielandbouw.nl) and Farm of the Future (www.
farmofthefuture.nl). These are partnerships that are supported by the national gov￾ernment and which involve farmers, companies and scientists. All relevant parties
are brought together to integrate technologies and know-how into fully functional
applications. This approach is also applied in international projects in Brazil (Soy￾bean Brazil NL2
) and Japan (TTADDA3
). Precision agriculture is all about cooper￾ation and integration.
6.1 Data
Access to data is a major obstacle for the application of model-based technologies in
precision agriculture. Both technical and socioeconomic obstacles exist.
From a technical point of view, it can be noted that a large number of farm
management information systems (FMIS) is on the market, including systems
offered by the major tractor companies. However, there is no easy way to transfer
data from one FMIS to another or combine data from two FMIS. Some of the major
manufacturers offer application programmer’s interfaces (APIs) built around the
data model of their system, but the difficult task of translating from the source data
model to the target data model is left to the user. A generic approach is taken by
AgGateway, a non-profit consortium with more than 100 members, whose Agricul￾tural Data Application Programming Toolkit (ADAPT)4 proposes a unified data
model which can exchange data between any two FMIS. The Open Ag Data
2
https://www.wur.nl/nl/Onderzoek-Resultaten/Onderzoeksprojecten-LNV/Expertisegebieden/
kennisonline/Smart-technology-for-soybean-production.htm
3 https://www.wur.nl/nl/onderzoek-resultaten/onderzoeksprojecten-lnv/expertisegebieden/
kennisonline/transition-to-a-data-driven-agriculturen-ttadda-for-a-new-dutch-japanese-potato-circu
lar-value-chain-.htm
4
https://adaptframework.org/Introduction 17
Alliance5 and DKE agrirouter6 are similar efforts. Several vocabularies and data
standards have been available for many years (Agro-XML,7 EDI-Teelt++8
), but they
have not gained widespread acceptance.
Interoperability of equipment is another technical barrier frequently encountered
by farmers (Van Evert et al., 2018). Connections between machines typically use the
ISO 11783 (ISOBUS)9 standard which defines the communication between agricul￾tural machinery and also the data transfer between these machines and farm software
applications. Unfortunately, the standard leaves room for interpretation so that in
practice many incompatibilities arise when farmers buy equipment from different
manufacturers. Competition between commercial providers precludes in many cases
the formation of successful networks.
Social and legal issues related to agricultural data include data ownership,
exchange, control and security (Kritikos, 2017). Farmers are often hesitant to share
data because of social and legal challenges stemming from the wide range of actors
involved in the farm data chain and the fragmented and uneven character of the data
ecosystem. While it is clear that farmers’ personal data is protected by current
personal data regulations,10 the ownership of equipment-generated data raises con￾cerns among farmers and other agricultural stakeholders. Most companies state that
farmers own the data they produce, but when they are aggregated with other farmers’
data companies will consider the aggregated data their property. For example,
measuring yield with a drone or a combine harvester yields data that are not personal
(and therefore not protected), but may nevertheless give an indication of farm
income (which is protected, personal data). Farmers may also waive data ownership
rights by signing service agreements that they have not read (Rasmussen, 2016) or
which are imposed on them unfairly because they are the weaker party.11
Data security in agriculture and privacy implications resulting from a security
breach are a major concern for the digitization process of agriculture. The large
number of devices and connections used in precision agriculture renders the com￾plete system vulnerable, and the users of such systems should be aware of these and
obtain protection.
Data-based decision tools can bring benefits to farming, but ethical questions
must be asked about the consequences of changes in power relations between
farmers and the other stakeholders that may follow the introduction of modelling
in precision agriculture. Mepham’s ethical matrix (Mepham, 2005) has been
5
https://openag.io/
6
https://my-agrirouter.com/en/
7
www.agroxml.de
8
https://www.agroconnect.nl/
9
https://www.isobus.net/isobus/
10The Data Protection Directive (95/46/EC). From 25/05/18: The General Data Protection Regu￾lation (GDPR) (Regulation (EU) 2016/679).
11Bertolo, S. Building a European Data economy. EIP-AGRI Workshop. Bratislava,
4–5 April 2017.18 F. K. van Evert et al.
proposed as a tool to examine ethical questions (well-being, autonomy and fairness)
in agriculture and biomedical practice. An ethical issue is that in some cases data are
provided by citizens (farmers), yet the information primarily benefits the commercial
actors. Another ethical issue is that individual farmers may not be able to make the
investments that are necessary to reap the benefits of data-based tools. The organi￾sation of farmers around data cooperatives that collect and sell data can be a solution
for ensuring smallholder farmers also benefit from the data economy.
Finally, farmers may be willing to exchange their data if they see the benefit and
understand the risks (Van Evert et al., 2018). To this end, a consortium of agricul￾tural associations has developed the EU Code of Conduct on agricultural data
sharing.12
6.2 Models
Combining models and data provide useful information for farmers. The benefits of
digital twin technology will only be realized if a sensible combination of model
calibration, model initialization and data assimilation is used. If that is done, it will
enable high-quality fertilizer recommendations and in a broader sense better agro￾nomic management. The main limitation is not the data analysis or the computational
capability, but rather a critical and improved understanding of what we need and can
obtain from the model. Farmers have specific agronomic needs and any technology
(remote sensing, modelling, etc.) needs to be adapted to answer those questions. The
third section of this book shows clearly that it is possible to use crop growth models
in precision agriculture, but in the basic and applied research field, it seems that this
issue is less developed.
There is often a diffidence towards crop models (e.g. arguments used against
them are that they are too hard to use or they require too many data) which is
sometimes due to users’ limited knowledge of the agricultural system (soil-plant￾atmosphere or agronomy per se) rather than the limitation of the models.
Another practical issue to solve in the near future is the frequency of data that are
needed to drive/parameterize/calibrate a crop model during data assimilation. Now￾adays it is possible to obtain very detailed data at high spatial and temporal resolutions
from drones and satellites. However, does a crop model need all those data? Can the
same accuracy be obtained with less data? This is not a trivial question because it
might affect the willingness of farmers to adopt new technologies.
Finally, despite the models used (crop growth models or ML), it is important to
translate the data into agronomic decisions. It is possible that models and modelling
approaches used to estimate yield or grain quality are applied too late during the
growing season, which makes the utility of those simulations less relevant because it
might be too late to correct for any deficiency. Identifying the right time is therefore
12 https://www.cema-agri.org/images/publications/brochures/EU_Code_of_conduct_on_agricul
tural_data_sharing_by_contractual_agreement_2020_ENGLISH.pdfIntroduction 19
important. In addition to that, applied research should focus on involving farmers
and agronomists in the design of the experimental approach because they are the
ones working on those issues on a daily basis.
6.3 Actuation
Actuation is not the biggest bottleneck, even though many farmers do not own
precision application equipment. But, the next generation of machines, the new
generations of farmers cultivating the land and better data analytics linking sensors
and machinery will enable further actuation of digitalization.
In some contexts, for example, in developing countries, actuation is occurring at a
fast pace (MaMo, 2019). Rather than the modelling per se, it is the actuation of
digital and precision agriculture that is happening because in most cases the farmers
are young and open to new technologies and therefore their main entry point is
digital agriculture (e.g. smart phone usage in agricultural management).
7 Conclusion
Crop growth models have great potential to be of benefit in precision agriculture. A
combination of models and data from sensors (i.e. DT) can generate information to
support farmers’ management decisions. When a suitable crop growth model is not
available or does not offer the required functionality, statistical techniques like ML
can be used instead.
The greatest bottleneck is represented by data availability, usage and quality.
Farmers are weary to invest in collecting the real-time (or near real-time) data needed
to run simulations as long as the transformation of these data into agronomic decision is
uncertain. Acceptance of models by farmers and other practitioners is also a bottleneck
in many cases. Lack of trust in models and feeling overwhelmed by complexity play a
role. This points to the need for better connections between researchers, extension
workers, farmers and advisors to leverage the benefits of data and modelling.
Further Reading Models: the Agricultural Model Intercomparison and Improvement Project
( ) contains information and papers about crop modeling activities at different
scales and for different purposes. Some specific websites such as ,
dssat.net/, and
Research/Facilities-Tools/Software-models-and-databases/WOFOST.htm contain information
about specific crop growth models.
Precision agriculture: The International Society of Precision Agriculture’s webpage
ispag.org/) contains links to scientific publications from the scientific Journal Precision Agriculture
and additional material.
(https://
https://www.wur.nl/en/Research-Results/Research-Institutes/Environmental￾https://www.apsim.info/ https://
https://agmip.org/
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.20 F. K. van Evert et al.
References
ABARES, A.B.o.A.a.R.E.a.S. (2022). Australian crop report.
Aggarwal, P., Vyas, S., Thornton, P., Campbell, B. M., & Kropff, M. (2019). Importance of
considering technology growth in impact assessments of climate change on agriculture. Global
Food Security, 23, 41–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2019.04.002
Alibabaei, K., Gaspar, P. D., Lima, T. M., Campos, R. M., Girão, I., Monteiro, J., et al. (2022). A
review of the challenges of using deep learning algorithms to support decision-making in
agricultural activities. Remote Sensing, 14, 638.
Angus, J. F. (2001). Nitrogen supply and demand in Australian agriculture. Australian Journal of
Experimental Agriculture, 41, 277–288. https://doi.org/10.1071/EA00141
Asseng, S., Ewert, F., Martre, P., Rötter, R. P., Lobell, D. B., Cammarano, D., et al. (2015). Rising
temperatures reduce global wheat production. Nature Climate Change, 5, 5. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nclimate2470
Asseng, S., Martre, P., Maiorano, A., Rötter, R. P., O’Leary, G. J., Fitzgerald, G. J., et al. (2019).
Climate change impact and adaptation for wheat protein. Global Change Biology, 25, 155–173.
https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14481
Basso, B., Ritchie, J. T., Pierce, F. J., Braga, R. P., & Jones, J. W. (2001). Spatial validation of crop
models for precision agriculture. Agricultural Systems, 68, 97–112. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0308-521X(00)00063-9
Basso, B., Martinez-Feria, R. A., Rill, L., & Ritchie, J. T. (2021). Contrasting long-term temper￾ature trends reveal minor changes in projected potential evapotranspiration in the US Midwest.
Nature Communications, 12, 1476. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-21763-7
Batchelor, & Paz. (1997). The role of water stress in creating spatial yield variability in soybeans. In
Proceedings of the 9th integrated crop management conference.
Batchelor, W. D., Basso, B., & Paz, J. O. (2002). Examples of strategies to analyze spatial and
temporal yield variability using crop models. European Journal of Agronomy, 18, 141–158.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1161-0301(02)00101-6
Bean, G. M., Kitchen, N. R., Camberato, J. J., Ferguson, R. B., Fernandez, F. G., Franzen, D. W.,
et al. (2018). Improving an active-optical reflectance sensor algorithm using soil and weather
information. Agronomy Journal, 110, 2541–2551. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2017.12.0733
Booij, J. A., Van Evert, F. K., van Geel, W. C. A., Kroonen-Backbier, B. M. A., & Kempenaar,
C. (2017). Roll-out of online application for N sidedress recommendations in potato. EFITA.
Available online at http://library.wur.nl/WebQuery/wurpubs/fulltext/445495
Bregaglio, S., Willocquet, L., Kersebaum, K. C., Ferrise, R., Stella, T., Ferreira, T. B., et al. (2021).
Comparing process-based wheat growth models in their simulation of yield losses caused by
plant diseases. Field Crops Research, 265, 108108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2021.108108
Bustos-Korts, D., Boer, M. P., Malosetti, M., Chapman, S., Chenu, K., Zheng, B., et al. (2019).
Combining crop growth modeling and statistical genetic modeling to evaluate phenotyping
strategies. Frontiers in Plant Science, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.01491
Butchee, K. S., May, J., & Arnall, B. (2011). Sensor based nitrogen management reduced nitrogen
and maintained yield. Crop Management, 10, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1094/CM-2011-0725-
01-RS
Cammarano, D., Valdivia, R. O., Beletse, Y. G., Durand, W., Crespo, O., Tesfuhuney, W. A., et al.
(2020). Integrated assessment of climate change impacts on crop productivity and income of
commercial maize farms in Northeast South Africa. Food Security, 12, 659–678. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12571-020-01023-0
Cammarano, D., Basso, B., Holland, J., Gianinetti, A., Baronchelli, M., & Ronga, D. (2021).
Modeling spatial and temporal optimal N fertilizer rates to reduce nitrate leaching while
improving grain yield and quality in malting barley. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture,
182, 105997. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.105997Introduction 21
Colaço, A. F., & Bramley, R. G. V. (2018). Do crop sensors promote improved nitrogen manage￾ment in grain crops? Field Crops Research, 218, 126–140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2018.
01.007
Colaço, A. F., Richetti, J., Bramley, R. G. V., & Lawes, R. A. (2021). How will the next-generation
of sensor-based decision systems look in the context of intelligent agriculture? A case-study.
Field Crops Research, 270, 108205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2021.108205
Donatelli, M., Magarey, R. D., Bregaglio, S., Willocquet, L., Whish, J. P. M., & Savary, S. (2017).
Modelling the impacts of pests and diseases on agricultural systems. Agricultural Systems, 155,
213–224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2017.01.019
Elliott, J., Müller, C., Deryng, D., Chryssanthacopoulos, J., Boote, K. J., Büchner, M., et al. (2015).
The global gridded crop model intercomparison: Data and modeling protocols for Phase
1 (v1.0). Geoscientific Model Development, 8, 261–277.
EU, E.U. (1991). Council Directive 91/676/EEC of 12 December 1991 concerning the protection of
waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources. In Union, E. (Ed.), p. 8.
Grieves, M. (2014). Digital twin: Manufacturing excellence through virtual factory replication.
White paper, 1–7.
Hamza, M. A., & Anderson, W. K. (2005). Soil compaction in cropping systems: A review of the
nature, causes and possible solutions. Soil and Tillage Research, 82, 121–145. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.still.2004.08.009
Holland, K. H., Schepers, J. S., Shanahan, J. F., & Horst, G. L. (2004, July 25–28). Plant canopy
sensor with modulated polychromatic light source. In Proceedings of the 7th international
conference on precision agriculture and other precision resources management. Hyatt
Regency.
Holland, K. H., Lamb, D. W., & Schepers, J. S. (2012). Radiometry of proximal Active Optical
Sensors (AOS) for agricultural sensing. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth
Observations and Remote Sensing, 5, 1793–1802. https://doi.org/10.1109/jstars.2012.2198049
IPCC, I.P.o.C.C. (2021). Climate change 2021: The physical science basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. In V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S. L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud,
Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M. I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J. B. R. Matthews, T. K.
Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, & B. Zhou (Eds.). Cambridge University Press.
Jackson, R. D., Idso, S. B., Reginato, R. J., & Pinter, P. J., Jr. (1981). Canopy temperature as a crop
water stress indicator. Water Resources Research, 17, 1133–1138. https://doi.org/10.1029/
WR017i004p01133
Jackson, R. D., Kustas, W. P., & Choudhury, B. J. (1988). A reexamination of the crop water stress
index. Irrigation Science, 9, 309–317. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00296705
Jägermeyr, J., Müller, C., Ruane, A. C., Elliott, J., Balkovic, J., Castillo, O., et al. (2021). Climate
impacts on global agriculture emerge earlier in new generation of climate and crop models.
Nature Food, 2, 873–885. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-021-00400-y
Jansen, D. M. (2008). Beschrijving van TIPSTAR: hét simulatiemodel voor groei en productie van
zetmeelaardappelen (Nota 547). Research International. Available online at http://edepot.wur.
nl/27135.Plant
Jansen, D. M., Davies, J. A., & Steenhuizen, J. W. (2003). Testen van Tipstar in de praktijk (Report
244). Plant Research International.
Jasper, J., Reusch, S., & Link, A. (2009). Active sensing of the N status of wheat using optimized
wavelength combination: Impact of seed rate, variety and growth stage (pp. 23–30). JIAC.
Jones, J. W., Hoogenbom, G., Porter, C. H., Boote, K. J., Batchelor, W. D., Hunt, L. A., et al.
(2003). The DSSAT cropping system model. European Journal of Agronomy, 18, 31.
Kempenaar, C., Groeneveld, R. M. W., & Uenk, D. (2004, August 31–September 2). An innovative
dosing system for potato haulm killing herbicides. In Proceedings of the XII international
conference on weed biology (pp. 511–518).22 F. K. van Evert et al.
Kempenaar, C., Achten, V. T. J., Van Evert, F. K., Van der Lans, A. M., Olijve, A. J., Van der
Schans, D. A., et al. (2008). Biomassa-afhankelijk doseren van gewasbeschermingsmiddelen.
Gewasbescherming, 39, 177–182.
Kempenaar, C., Hejting, S., & Michielsen, J. M. (2014). Perspectives for site specific application of
soil herbicides in arable farming. In 12th International Conference on Precision Agriculture
(ICPA).
Kempenaar, C., Been, T., Booij, J., van Evert, F., Michielsen, J.-M., & Kocks, C. (2017). Advances
in variable rate technology application in potato in the Netherlands. Potato Research, 60,
295–305. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11540-018-9357-4
Kersebaum, K. C., Boote, K. J., Jorgenson, J. S., Nendel, C., Bindi, M., Frühauf, C., et al. (2015).
Analysis and classification of data sets for calibration and validation of agro-ecosystem models.
Environmental Modelling and Software, 72, 402–417.
Kritikos, M. (2017). Precision agriculture in Europe: Legal, social and ethical considerations.
European Parliamentary Research Service. https://doi.org/10.2861/278
Lobell, D. B., & Asseng, S. (2017). Comparing estimates of climate change impacts from process￾based and statistical crop models. Environmental Research Letters, 12, 015001. https://doi.org/
10.1088/1748-9326/aa518a
Lowenberg-DeBoer, J., & Erickson, B. (2019). Setting the record straight on precision agriculture
adoption. Agronomy Journal, 111, 1552–1569. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2018.12.0779
Maestrini, B., & Basso, B. (2018). Drivers of within-field spatial and temporal variability of crop
yield across the US Midwest. Scientific Reports, 8, 14833. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-
32779-3
MaMo, M. M. P. (2019). Byte by byte: Policy innovation for transforming Africa’s food system with
digital technologies.
Martinez-Feria, R. A., & Basso, B. (2020). Unstable crop yields reveal opportunities for site￾specific adaptations to climate variability. Scientific Reports, 10, 2885. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-020-59494-2
McKinion, J. M., Baker, D. N., Whisler, F. D., & Lambert, J. R. (1989). Application of the
GOSSYM/COMAX system to cotton crop management. Agricultural Systems, 31, 55–65.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0308-521X(89)90012-7
McNunn, G., Heaton, E., Archontoulis, S., Licht, M., & VanLoocke, A. (2019). Using a crop
modeling framework for precision cost-benefit analysis of variable seeding and nitrogen
application rates. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems, 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.
2019.00108
Mepham, B. (2005). Bioethics: An introduction for the biosciences. Oxford University Press.
Müller, C., Elliott, J., Kelly, D., Arneth, A., Balkovic, J., Ciais, P., et al. (2019). The global gridded
crop model intercomparison phase 1 simulation dataset. Scientific Data, 6, 50. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41597-019-0023-8
Nasirahmadi, A., & Hensel, O. (2022). Toward the next generation of digitalization in agriculture
based on digital twin paradigm. Sensors, 22, 498.
Nawar, S., Corstanje, R., Halcro, G., Mulla, D., & Mouazen, A. M. (2017). Chapter four –
Delineation of soil management zones for variable-rate fertilization: A review. In D. L. Sparks
(Ed.), Advances in agronomy (pp. 175–245). Academic Press.
O’Shaughnessy, S. A., & Evett, S. R. (2010). Canopy temperature based system effectively
schedules and controls center pivot irrigation of cotton. Agricultural Water Management, 97,
1310–1316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2010.03.012
Paz, O. J., Batchelor, D. W., Colvin, T. S., Logsdon, S. D., Kaspar, T. C., & Karlen, D. L. (1998).
Analysis of water stress effects causing spatial yield variability in soybeans. Transactions of the
ASAE, 41, 1527–1534. https://doi.org/10.13031/2013.17284
Paz, J. O., Batchelor, W. D., Babcock, B. A., Colvin, T. S., Logsdon, S. D., Kaspar, T. C., et al.
(1999). Model-based technique to determine variable rate nitrogen for corn. Agricultural
Systems, 61, 69–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0308-521X(99)00035-9Introduction 23
Peters, R. T., & Evett, S. R. (2008). Automation of a center pivot using the temperature-time￾threshold method of irrigation scheduling. Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering,
134, 286–291. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9437(2008)134:3(286)
Puntel, L. A., Sawyer, J. E., Barker, D. W., Thorburn, P. J., Castellano, M. J., Moore, K. J., et al.
(2018). A systems modeling approach to forecast corn economic optimum nitrogen rate.
Frontiers in Plant Science, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00436
Puntel, L. A., Pagani, A., & Archontoulis, S. V. (2019). Development of a nitrogen recommenda￾tion tool for corn considering static and dynamic variables. European Journal of Agronomy,
105, 189–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2019.01.003
Pylianidis, C., Osinga, S., & Athanasiadis, I. N. (2021). Introducing digital twins to agriculture.
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 184, 105942. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.
2020.105942
Ransom, C. J., Kitchen, N. R., Camberato, J. J., Carter, P. R., Ferguson, R. B., Fernández, F. G.,
et al. (2019). Statistical and machine learning methods evaluated for incorporating soil and
weather into corn nitrogen recommendations. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 164,
104872. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2019.104872
Rasmussen, N. (2016). From precision agriculture to market manipulation: A new frontier in the
legal community. Minnesota Journal of Law, Science & Technology, 17, 489–516.
Raun, W. R., Solie, J. B., Stone, M. L., Martin, K. L., Freeman, K. W., Mullen, R. W., et al. (2005).
Optical sensor-based algorithm for crop nitrogen fertilization. Communications in Soil Science
and Plant Analysis, 36, 2759–2781. https://doi.org/10.1080/00103620500303988
Reusch, S. (2003). Optimisation of oblique-view remote measurement of crop N-uptake under
changing irradiance conditions.
Rosenzweig, C., & Parry, M. L. (1994). Potential impact of climate change on world food supply.
Nature, 367, 133–138. https://doi.org/10.1038/367133a0
Rötter, et al. (2016). Analysis of crop yield variability and yield gaps for maize and wheat in diverse
climatic zones.
Samborski, S. M., Tremblay, N., & Fallon, E. (2009). Strategies to make use of plant sensors-based
diagnostic information for nitrogen recommendations. Agronomy Journal, 101, 800–816.
https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2008.0162Rx
Samuel, A. L. (1959). Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers. IBM Journal
of Research and Development, 3, 210–229. https://doi.org/10.1147/rd.33.0210
Scharf, P. C., Shannon, D. K., Palm, H. L., Sudduth, K. A., Drummond, S. T., Kitchen, N. R., et al.
(2011). Sensor-based nitrogen applications out-performed producer-chosen rates for corn in
on-farm demonstrations. Agronomy Journal, 103, 1683–1691. https://doi.org/10.2134/
agronj2011.0164
Steltenpool, J. A. N., & van Erp, P. J. (1995). Schatting van de actuele N-opname door aardappelen.
Meststoffen, 1995, 45–50.
Thorp, K. R., DeJonge, K. C., Kaleita, A. L., Batchelor, W. D., & Paz, J. O. (2008). Methodology
for the use of DSSAT models for precision agriculture decision support. Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture, 64, 276–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2008.05.022
Tremblay, N., Bouroubi, M. Y., Vigneault, P., & Belec, C. (2011). Guidelines for in-season
nitrogen application for maize (Zea mays L.) based on soil and terrain properties. Field Crops
Research, 122, 273–283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2011.04.008
Van Evert, F. K., Booij, R., Jukema, J. N., Ten Berge, H. F. M., Uenk, D., Meurs, E. J. J., et al.
(2012). Using crop reflectance to determine sidedress N rate in potato saves N and maintains
yield. European Journal of Agronomy, 43, 58–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2012.05.005
Van Evert, F. K., Wolters, S., Van Boheemen, K., & Van Dijk, C. (2018). Final report on research
results, research projects and industry solutions. Deliverable 1.6 of the Horizon 2020 project
“Smart-AKIS”. Available online at https://www.smart-akis.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/
Report-on-Research-Results-Research-Projects-and-Industry-Solutions.pdf. Accessed
22 Apr 2022.24 F. K. van Evert et al.
Van Evert, F. K., Berghuijs, H. N. C., Hoving, I. E., De Wit, A. J. W., & Been, T. H. (2021). A
digital twin for arable and dairy farming. In J. Stafford (Ed.), Precision agriculture ’21
(pp. 919–925). Wageningen Academic Publishers.
Van Ittersum, M. K., Leffelaar, P. A., Van Keulen, H., Kropff, M. J., Bastiaans, L., & Goudriaan,
J. (2003). On approaches and applications of the Wageningen crop models. European Journal of
Agronomy, 18, 201–234.
Voltz, M., Guibaud, G., Dagès, C., Douzals, J.-P., Guibal, R., Grimbuhler, S., et al. (2022).
Pesticide and agro-ecological transition: Assessing the environmental and human impacts of
pesticides and limiting their use. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 29, 1–5.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-17416-3
Wanjura, R. D., Upchurch, R. D., & Mahan, R. J. (1992). Automated irrigation based on threshold
canopy temperature. Transactions of the ASAE, 35, 1411–1417. https://doi.org/10.13031/2013.
28748
Wanjura, F. D., Upchurch, R. D., & Mahan, R. J. (1995). Control of irrigation scheduling using
temperature-time thresholds. Transactions of the ASAE, 38, 403–409. https://doi.org/10.13031/
2013.27846
Zadoks, J. C. (1981). EPIPRE: A disease and pest management system for winter wheat developed
in the Netherlands. EPPO Bulletin, 11, 365–369. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2338.1981.
tb01945.x
Zeigler, B. P. (1976). Theory of modelling and simulation. Wiley.
Zeigler, B. P., Praehofer, H., & Kim, T. G. (2000). Theory of modeling and simulation (2nd ed.).
Academic Press.
Zheng, B., Chenu, K., Dreccer, M. F., & Chapman, S. C. (2012). Breeding for the future: What are
the potential impacts of future frost and heat events on sowing and flowering time requirements
for Australian bread wheat (Triticum aestivum) varieties? Global Change Biology, 18,
2899–2914. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2012.02724.xProcess-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop
Interactions for Site-Specific Decision
Support in Crop Management
K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
Abstract Spatial variation within fields influences soil water, nutrient and crop
growth dynamics. Depending on climatic conditions, spatial patterns of yield are
often not stable over time because weather conditions favour different processes
from year to year. The same holds for rapidly fluctuating soil processes like water
and nitrogen dynamics, while other soil properties remain relatively stable over a
few years. Estimation of an appropriate irrigation or fertilizer amount in relation to
site-specific yield expectations is essential to optimize water or nutrient use effi￾ciency. On the other hand, farmers’ aims are often in conflict with the interest of
water suppliers to keep nutrient loads below the drinking water standard. Process￾based agro-ecosystem models can help to reflect the spatio-temporal dynamics in
soil–crop–atmosphere relations to transcribe spatial within-field variation of tempo￾rally stable soil properties into timely and spatially adapted management decisions.
Keywords Crop growth · Nitrogen · Yield variation · Nitrate leaching
1 Introduction
Soil properties often vary considerably across landscapes and within fields influenc￾ing soil water, nutrient and crop growth dynamics. Spatial variation of soil properties
are determined by soil genesis, surface topography, land use history and previous
and current management (Moore et al., 1993; Trangmar et al., 1985; Pennock &
Frick, 2001; Manning et al., 2001; Kersebaum, 1995). Furthermore, topography and
hydrology of agricultural fields influence crop growth and biomass production
(e.g. Timlin et al., 1998; Kravchenko & Bullock, 2000, 2002; Reuter, 2004; Si &
K. C. Kersebaum (✉)
Leibniz Centre for Agricultural Landscape and Land Use Research (ZALF), Müncheberg,
Germany
e-mail: ckersebaum@zalf.de
E. Wallor
University of Applied Science Eberswalde, Eberswalde, Germany
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_2
2526 K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
Farrell, 2004; Basso et al., 2009; Martinez-Feria & Basso, 2020) through topo￾graphic shading (Reuter et al., 2005), capillary rise (Kersebaum & Nendel, 2014;
Bormann, 2012) or oxygen deficiency caused by topographic wetness
(Kersebaum et al., 2002; Martinez-Feria & Basso, 2020). Figure 1 shows examples
of relevant elements which cause spatial variation in crop production and their
effects on the main processes in the soil–crop interaction.
During the last two decades, technical solutions have been provided within the
framework of precision agriculture (PA) to consider these spatial patterns for site￾specific management. The aim is to improve productivity and nutrient use efficiency;
reduce pollution to the environment, enabling high yields at suitable locations and
avoid over-fertilization in zones with unfavourable conditions for plant growth.
From the practical aspect, farmers look for management zones, which have a
more or less stable behaviour relative to other parts of the field and a similar response
to management. Methods have been described to identify such management zones,
which are based on the analysis of multi-year yield maps (e.g. Stafford et al., 1999;
Heermann et al., 2003; Nawar et al., 2017). Spatial patterns that are stable in time can
often be observed under conditions where one factor (e.g. water availability) is
dominantly limiting. In temperate regions, water can be the limiting factor on field
sites with low water-holding capacity, but may also favour these sites in wet years,
where oxygen deficiency occurs in heavier clay soils due to excessive rainfall.
Spatial yield patterns are often not stable over time because weather conditions
favour different processes from year to year (e.g. Stafford et al., 1999; Kersebaum
et al., 2005b; Maestrini & Basso, 2018). Interaction between the temporal dynamics
of soil water and nutrients and their spatial variation results in a pronounced
temporal change in the range of their spatial representativeness (Greminger et al.,
1985; Wendroth et al., 1999). Hence, at different times of the year with diverging
soil water status, variable characteristic spatial patterns of soil water determine crop
growth patterns across the field. Depending on whether it is a rather dry or wet year,
different underlying characteristics affect the spatial variation of crop production and
grain yield (Timlin et al., 1998; Kaspar et al., 2003; Delin & Berglund, 2005; Li
et al., 2019). Kumhálová et al. (2011) found a significant relation between yield and
crop nutrient concentration with topography. However, the correlation coefficients
between flow accumulation and yield were weak for the wetter years and strong for
the drier years.
Figure 2 shows a subjective assessment of some key effects on variables and
processes caused by different spatial properties for two different annual weather
situations. The diversity of responses between the two contrasting weather condi￾tions indicates why spatial pattern in crop yield may be stable or not across years.
However, the uncertainty of these subjective assessments is high, and seasonal
weather will vary gradually among the assumed extremes. This makes an assessment
of the spatio-temporal behaviour difficult to predict just from expert knowledge. To
integrate and understand the various interactions between processes and to quantify
how crops grow in response to weather, soil and management early crop models
were developed in the 1960s pioneered by the work of de Wit (1965) and Monteith
(1965). Presently, a range of models of differing degrees of model complexity withProcess-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions for Site-Specific... 27
Property Origin of variability Processes affected
Topography Geology
Sedimentation
Erosion
Irradiation
Soil and canopy 
temperature
Wind exposition
Lateral water and 
matter movement
Hydrology
Hydrology Groundwater 
distance
Interflow
Surface runoff
Tile drainage
Capillary rise
Plant available 
water
Water logging 
Wetness
Oxygen deficiency
denitrification
Texture Geology
Sedimentation
Erosion
Soil genesis
Water holding 
capacity
Cation exchange 
capacity
Rooting depth
Plant available 
water
SOM turnover
N mineralization
Leaching
Denitrification
Organic matter Carbon/nitrogen 
balance
Lateral movement /
erosion
Soil climate
C and N 
mineralization
Cation exchange 
capacity
Nutrient and 
pollutant retention
Biological activity
Nutrient release
Infiltration
Water holding 
capacity
Plant available 
water
Fig. 1 Spatial properties on a field or landscape scale, their origin and effect on different processes28 K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
Site property 
Impact 
Relief position Groundwater Texture SOM 
Hill Foot N slope S slope Shallow Deep Sand Loam Clay High Low 
Impact 
Irradiation ↑ ↑ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↑ ↑ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ↗ ↗ ↙ ↙
Soil temperature ↑ ↕ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↑ ↑ ↓ ⃝ ↑ ⃝ ↑ ⃝ ↙ ↗ ↓ ↗ ↑ ↑ ↓ ↓
ETa ↗ ⃝ ↑ ↙ ↙ ⃝ ↗ ⃝ ↑ ⃝ ↓ ⃝ ↓ ↙ ↑ ↗ ↗ ⃝ ↗ ⃝ ↙ ⃝
Soil moisture ↓ ↙ ↗ ↑ ↗ ⃝ ↘ ⃝ ↑ ↗ ↓ ⃝ ↓ ↙ ↑ ↗ ↑ ↑ ⃝ ↗ ⃝ ↙
Rooting depth ↙ ↙ ↗ ↗ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ↙ ↗ ⃝ ↙ ↙ ↑ ↗ ↗ ↙ ↗ ⃝ ↙ ⃝
Plant avail. water ↓ ↙ ↑ ↗ ⃝ ⃝ ↙ ⃝ ↑ ↗ ↓ ↙ ↓ ↓ ↑ ↑ ↓ ↙ ↗ ⃝ ↙ ⃝
Runoff/erosion ↗ ↑ ↓ ↓ ↗ ↗ ↗ ↗ ⃝ ↗ ⃝ ⃝ ↓ ↓ ↙ ↗ ↗ ↑ ↙ ↙ ↗ ↗
Deep percolation ↓ ↙ ↗ ↑ ↙ ↗ ↙ ⃝ ↗ ↑ ↙ ↓ ↗ ↑ ↓ ↓ ⃝ ↗ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝
N leaching ↙ ⃝ ⃝ ↑ ↙ ⃝ ↙ ↗ ↙ ↗ ↑ ↗ ↑ ↑ ⃝ ↓ ↙ ↓ ↗ ↗ ↙ ↙
N mineralization ↙ ↙ ↑ ↗ ↙ ↓ ⃝ ↗ ↑ ↗ ↙ ⃝ ↓ ↙ ↗ ⃝ ⃝ ↙ ↑ ↗ ↓ ⃝
Denitrification ↓ ↙ ↑ ↗ ↙ ↓ ⃝ ↗ ↑ ↗ ⃝ ↙ ↓ ↓ ⃝ ↗ ↗ ↑ ⃝ ↗ ↙ ⃝
Crop phenology ↗ ⃝ ↙ ↓ ↙ ↓ ↑ ↗ ↗ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ↗ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝ ↗ ↙ ↗ ⃝ ⃝ ⃝
Plant growth ↓ ↗ ↑ ↙ ↗ ↙ ↙ ↗ ↑ ↕ ↙ ⃝ ↓ ↙ ↗ ↑ ↗ ↙ ↗ ↑ ↙ ↗
Red = hot/dry year; blue= cold/wet year; ↑ = higher/faster; ↓ = lower/slower; ↗= slightly higher/faster; ↙ = slightly lower/slower; 
↕ = direction depend on other factors; ⃝ = no significant effect 
Fig. 2 Subjectively estimated impacts of different site properties on processes for cold/wet and
hot/dry seasonal conditions
emphasis on different research questions, crops or regions are available (Ewert et al.,
2015). While statistical models aim to use empirical relations among different input
variables without considering the temporal behaviour of the system’s state variables,
process-based agro-ecosystem models simulate the most relevant processes in soil–
crop–atmosphere system simultaneously and consider their multiple interactions.
These models are usually developed as one-dimensional models, which operate at a
plot scale with well-defined site properties. The overlay of different property maps
can be used to create multiple pedons or ecotopes. These can form units of homo￾geneous properties, which can be simulated to reflect the spatial variation of crop
responses within a field or regions.
Zones of similar crop responses delineated as uniform management zones
(UMZs) are an integral part of the decision process at the farm level, especially for
nitrogen fertilization. For the farmer, it is important to apply an appropriate amount
of fertilizer corresponding to the site-specific yield expectations to increase nutrient
use efficiency. From the aspect of water protection, of paramount interest are the
nutrient concentration of seepage water and appropriate management limitations,
which are required to maintain groundwater quality. The latter requires a long-term
assessment of fertilization effects on the average nitrogen concentration to determine
site-specific fertilizer limitations to meet the drinking water standard (Kersebaum
et al., 2005b).
This chapter describes the general concept of process-based agro-ecosystem
models and their potential to be applied in PA to support spatio-temporal manage￾ment decisions. Examples are provided to demonstrate that integrated modelling of
crop growth interactions with soil water and nutrient dynamics can be a valuable tool
for such assessments using spatially variable site conditions and long-term
weather data.Process-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions for Site-Specific... 29
2 General Character of Process-Based Agro-ecosystem
Models
Process-based agro-ecosystem models consider the most relevant processes in soil–
crop–atmosphere systems and their interactions. Usually, the soil–plant–atmosphere
continuum is subdivided into compartments and sub-compartments. For instance,
crops are separated into organ compartments and soil profiles into layers of defined
thickness. Changes within a compartment are the result of energy or matter inputs
and outputs across the compartment boundaries following the principle of energy or
matter balance. A central characteristic of a process-based dynamic model is that
they simulate changes within a compartment in time increments using the status at
the beginning of the time step. Changes during the time step are simulated as the
result of multiple processes in parallel considering various fluxes, transformations
and energy, water and matter balances. Consequently, dynamic systems depend on
their history because a state variable results from its previous status, which affects
the processes involved during the time step. For example, the water content and
nitrate concentration in a soil compartment at the start of a time step determines how
much water and nitrogen can be taken up by plants from this compartment or
determines if additional water, e.g. from rainfall, entering the compartment just
fills up the water content in the compartment or if a certain amount of water and
nitrogen flow to deeper compartments. Therefore, a dynamic model requires a
definition of the initial status of a state variable, which is usually measured at one
or several points across a field. For instance, without any knowledge of the initial
water contents in the soil compartments, the input of precipitation to the surface
becomes meaningless since it is not possible to calculate a balance for the next time
step or a wrong assumption of the initial conditions might have serious consequences
for other processes, e.g. germination of crop seeds. Figure 3 provides a simplified
scheme of a process-based model for plant–nutrient dynamics in a soil–crop system.
Several models exist to simulate soil–crop interactions, which differ in their
approaches to handle different processes. For water dynamics, two main approaches
are commonly used: a more mechanistic approach based on the Richards equation
and a more functional approach, which defines the capacity of a layer to store water
against gravity and how much water is available to plants. The mechanistic approach
simulates water flow along a potential gradient using soil water pressure heads and
functions to describe the dependence of water conductivity on water content or
pressure head. Estimation of soil water characteristics (water content vs. pressure
head and water conductivity vs. pressure head) is laborious, and they are spatially
very variable in the field; therefore, the so-called pedotransfer functions are some￾times used to derive these functions from easily available soil information, e.g. soil
texture. The functional capacity approach, also called tipping bucket approach, is
often used and seemed appropriate to be used at the field as well as the regional scale
because model parameters are more robust and can be derived easily from basic soil
information (Addiscott & Wagenet, 1985). The required capacity parameters for
water-holding capacity (field capacity or upper drain limit) and lower limit of plant30 K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
Time
step
time Meteorological input
(temperature, precipitation, radiation)
Input 
for each time step
Soill Cropl
Parti￾tioning
Net￾assimilation
Crop
phenology
Phenol.
stage
Leaf
(area)
Ear /
beet
Stem
Water/
nutrient
Root
length
Radiation
adsorption
Evapotrans￾piration
Water
content Organic
matter
Water
flux
Nutrient
release
Soluble
nutrient Nutrient
leaching
Water /nutrient
uptake
Fig. 3 Simplified scheme of interactive processes in the soil–crop system represented in process￾based agro-ecosystem models
extractable water (wilting point) can be derived from soil texture information or
simply by measuring soil water content in soil a few days after rainfall or after longer
dry periods.
For crop models, two main approaches are applied. The radiation use efficiency
(RUE) approach transforms incoming and adsorbed radiation into biomass produc￾tion, while the photosynthesis minus respiration approach determines gross carbon
(C) assimilation from photosynthesis and calculates separately the amount of C loss
by crop respiration. Crop models are either designed for a specific crop or follow a
generic approach. The latter uses the same model structure and defines different
crops by using crop-specific parameter files. Crop parameters can be divided into
crop-specific and genotype-specific parameters. Parameters have to be calibrated
using detailed data on crop phenology, biomass partitioning to crop organs, leaf area
and other crop state variables. Once calibrated, the model can be applied to the same
crop or cultivar to evaluate the validity of the parameters on independent data sets.
Data requirements for calibration are higher than for evaluation. A guide of which
data are required for both is provided by Kersebaum et al. (2015).
Regarding nitrogen dynamics, some models simulate only nitrogen processes,
while others couple nitrogen to carbon mineralization. Models also differ in the
number of pools with different decay behaviour and in the complexity to simulate
the various processes of N-dynamics, e.g. denitrification and NH4 volatilization.
Table 1 gives an overview of selected integrated soil–crop models and their main
characteristics for the processes implemented, which were developed for different(continued)
Process-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions for Site-Specific... 31 Table 1 Characteristics of selected crop models and their requirements for meteorological data input Model reference Light to biomassa Yield formationb Crop phenologyc Crop stressd Soil watere ETf Soil organic matterg Input weather variablesh APSIM Keating et al. (2003) RUE Prt, B, (Gn) T, DL, V W, N, A,
H
C PT CN, P(3), B R, Tx, Tn, Rd
CROPSYST
Stöckle et al. (2003)
RUE HI, B T, DL, V W, N, H C/R PM N, P(4) R, Tx, Tn, Rd, RH,
W
COUPMODEL
Jansson and Moon (2001)
RUE Prt, B
T W, N
R PM CN, P(2) R, Ta, Rd, RH, W
DAISY
Abrahamsen and Hansen
(2000)
P-R Prt T, DL, V W, N, H
R PM CN, P(6), B R, Tx, Tn, Rd, e,
RH, W
DSSAT/CERES
Jones et al. (2003)
RUE HI, B, Gn T, DL, V W, N
C PT CN, P(4), B R, Tx, Tn, Rd
DSSAT/IXIM
Lizaso et al. (2011)
P-R Gn T, DL W, N, H
C PT CN, P(2), B R, Tx, Tn, Rd
DSSAT/Cropsim
Hunt and Pararajasingham
(1995)
RUE Prt T, DL, V W, N
C PT CN, P(4), B R, Tx, Tn, Rd
EPIC
Williams et al. (1989)
RUE HI T, V W N, H
C PM, PT,
O
N, P(5), B R, Tx, Tn, Rd, RH,
W
EXPERT-N
Biernath et al. (2011)
RUE/P- R Prt, B, Gn T, DL, V W, N
R PM CN, P(3),
B R, Tx, Tn, Rd, RH,
W
HERMES
Kersebaum (2011)
P-R Prt T, DL, V, O W, N, O,
(H)
C, CR PM, PT,
O
N, (P2) R, Tx, Tn, e, Rd,
RH,
W
MAIZESIM
Kim et al. (2012)
P-R HI, Prt T, DL W, N, H
R P, O N, P(1), B R, Tx, Tn, Rd, RH,
W
MONICA
Nendel et al. (2011)
P-R Prt T, DL, V W, N, O,
H
C, CR PM CN, P(6),
B R, Tx, Tn, Rd, RH,
WTable 1 (continued)
Model reference
Light to
biomassa
Yield
formationb
Crop
phenologyc
Crop
stressd
Soil
watere ETf
Soil organic
matterg
Input weather
variablesh
RZWQM2
Sadhukhan et al. (2019)
RUE HI, B, Gn T, DL, V W, N, H
R SW CN, P(1), B R, Tx, Tn, Rd, RH,
W
SALUS
Basso et al. (2010)
RUE Prt, HI T, DL, V W, N, H
C PT CN, P(3),
B
R, Tx, Tn, Rd
SIMPLACE-Lintul
Gaiser et al. (2013)
RUE Prt T, DL W, N, H
C PM,
HAR
CN,P(7), B R, Tx, Tn, Rd, RH,
W
Sirius
Jamieson et al. (1998)
RUE Prt, B T, DL, V W, N
C P, PT N, P(2) R, Tx, Tn, Rd, e, W
SPACSYS (3D)
Wu et al. (2007)
P-R Prt T, DL,
V W, N
R PM CN,P(4), B R, Tx, Tn, Rd, RH,
W
STICS
Brisson et al. (2003)
RUE B, Gn T, DL, V, O W, N,
H
C P, PT,
SW
N, P(3) R, Tx, Tn, Rd, e, W
aRUE Radiation use efficiency, P-R Gross respiration minus respiration bHI fixed harvest index,
B total above ground biomass, Gn number of grains, Prt partitioning during reproductive phase c
T temperature, DL photoperiod (daylength),
V vernalization,
O water/nutrient stress effects d
W water limited,
N nitrogen limited,
H heat stress,
O oxygen limited (aeration deficit) e
C capacity approach,
R Richards approach, CR capacity approach with capillary rise fPM Penman-Monteith, PT Priestley-Taylor,
P Penman, SW Shuttleworth-Wallace, HAR Hargreaves,
O other ET formula options gCN coupled carbon and nitrogen turnover,
N nitrogen net mineralisation, P(x) number of soil organic matter (SOM) pools,
B microbial biomass pool h
R precipitation, Tx daily maximum temperature, Tn daily minimum temperature, Rd global radiation, RH relative humidity,
W wind speed, e vapor pressure
deficit
32 K. C. Kersebaum and E. WallorProcess-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions for Site-Specific... 33
purposes. Additionally, the required daily meteorological input data are listed. Some
models can be configured by the user, e.g. different formulae for potential evapo￾transpiration or the user can select if a mechanistic or a simpler model approach for
water should be used.
At the field and regional scales, the majority of applied models are vertical
one-dimensional models which do not consider lateral fluxes. In principle, they are
point models and can be applied to spatially variable conditions simulating multiple
soil columns in parallel. However, a few models exist that simulate, at least partly,
processes in two or three spatial dimensions (e.g. Timlin et al., 2001; Wu et al., 2007;
Ward et al., 2018; Roy et al., 2019), which are mostly limited to the single crop or
crop row scale.
Depending on their complexity and purpose, models have different input require￾ments. In general, all models require data inputs for meteorological variables, soil
properties and management data.
3 Modelling Spatial Variation
In the simple case of a flat field, spatial processes are dominantly in the vertical
direction. To consider spatial variation within a field, spatial information on soil
properties is required as an input for agro-ecosystem models. Spatial soil information
is usually provided by soil maps of different scales. However, conventional soil
maps are primarily not dedicated to provide data for modelling. Conventional soil
classification and mapping are often based on principles of soil genesis and include
some generalization to group combinations of stable soil properties to a specific soil
type (Kempen et al., 2012). Delineated soil map units are considered representative
for that specific soil type; however, it is well known that there is considerable spatial
variation of properties within the units that is mostly disregarded. Furthermore, the
input required by models is more related to functional properties of soils (Stoorvogel
et al., 2015). Therefore, delineated soil map units and functional diversity,
e.g. derived from multiyear yield maps, often do not coincide. This limits the use
of conventional soil maps in PA (Stoorvogel et al., 2015). Precise knowledge of soil
properties and their spatial distribution at the field scale is still limited (Adamchuk
et al., 2004; Schmidhalter et al., 2008; Geesing et al., 2014). Conventional soil
sampling by augering or digging profiles at a relatively small spatial resolution for
spatial investigation is costly and time-consuming. However, applied at a low
resolution capturing the contrasting areas of a field, they are required as basis of
modern techniques of digital soil mapping (DSM). This includes identification of
spatial relations using variogram analysis and geostatistical interpolation such as
kriging and linking auxiliary data to observed soil properties by co-kriging. Proximal
sensing enables information about soil properties to be obtained at much higher
spatial resolution to generate quasi-continuous property maps. Stoorvogel et al.
(2015) provide an excellent overview of the various opportunities to obtain soil
spatial data.34 K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
Fig. 4 Scheme of intersecting multiple spatial patterns of input variables, weather data, and initial
conditions to translate spatial information into a model based spatio-temporal dynamic for specific
spatial outputs and decision support
Modelling requires the overlay of spatial patterns of the various soil properties
relevant in determining yield, such as texture, organic C and N and related model
parameters such as water-holding capacity, plant available water or C and N pools to
form units of their combination for modelling, which show consistent functional
responses (Basso et al., 2009). Figure 4 shows schematically how models can be
used to transfer spatial information of relatively stable soil information to a spatio￾temporal dynamic state variable, e.g. soil water content.
As described previously, dynamic process-based models require an initial status
to start simulation and temporally variable inputs of controlling variables such as
weather and management. Since some of the state variables show strong spatio￾temporal dynamics, initialization should be ideally during a phase when spatial
patterns are governed by other more stable soil properties. Soil water content, for
example, can be initialized during winter in humid environments when soils are
usually at field capacity or in summer in arid or semi-arid regions, when soils are
depleted of moisture and are close to wilting point (Kersebaum et al., 2019). Spatial
measurements of soil water during these periods can also be used to derive the spatial
patterns of the above-mentioned capacity parameters.
Although modern sensor techniques can provide spatial patterns of soil properties
at a high resolution, not all differences in soil properties create a significant differ￾ence in model outputs depending on the model sensitivity. Therefore, some cluster￾ing or classification for each individual state variable used as model input might be
advisable based on a sensitivity analysis of the model applied.Process-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions for Site-Specific... 35
4 Site Sensitivity of Agro-ecosystem Models
A large number of agro-ecosystem models have been developed and used for risk
assessment studies in agricultural production, e.g. under climate change. These
models differ in complexity and functionality to simulate and predict the major
physiological processes that determine crop growth and yield and their responses to
environmental and management factors. Models come with an inherent prediction
error when used to predict the response of crop growth and soil water flux dynamics
to climatic conditions such as changing seasonal rainfall patterns, rising tempera￾tures and elevated atmospheric CO2 concentrations.
Depending on the climate conditions, crop models are mostly responsive to plant
available water (Aggarval, 1995; Pachepsky & Acock, 1998; Wassenaar et al.,
1999), especially under conditions of temporal dry spells. However, models do not
respond equally to variable soil conditions as demonstrated on a regional scale by
Hoffmann et al., 2016 or by Wallor et al. (2018) for spatially variable field data sets.
Differences in model responses are related to (i) processes considered by the models;
(ii) functions to transfer basic soil information into model parameters,
e.g. pedotransfer functions; (iii) response functions, which determine how crop
growth is affected by limiting factors; and (iv) different assumptions or interpreta￾tions on boundary conditions.
Hydrological boundary conditions, e.g. the presence of a shallow groundwater
table, can have a considerable influence on water availability (Bormann, 2009,
2012). Depending on soil texture, additional water can be supplied to the root
zone when a shallow groundwater level is present. However, not all models are
able to consider capillary rise (Kimball et al., 2019). While models using a mech￾anistic approach for water dynamics based on the Richards equation are principally
able to simulate capillary rise, only a few models using a tipping bucket approach
can consider this by simplified algorithms and empirical data (Kersebaum & Richter,
1991). However, information of groundwater level is often not very precise and
models using the Richards equation might be too sensitive in relation to the
uncertainty of the available data. Even more complicated to handle are lateral fluxes
due to surface runoff, interflow or groundwater flow, which would require 3D
approaches and an enormous effort to obtain the required input data (e.g. Egea
et al., 2015). Simplified approaches such as the use of topographic wetness index can
be applied to modify parameters of one-dimensional models (Kersebaum et al.,
2002).
Response to dry and wet soil conditions vary among models. While not all
models include algorithms for oxygen deficiency underwater logging, the response
to drought is mostly considered by models. However, the response functions for
water stress in crop models may differ depending on the climatic conditions for
which the model was originally developed since critical thresholds for limitations on
water uptake depend on climatic conditions. Wallor et al. (2018) showed that models
developed primarily under semi-arid to arid conditions might overreact to moder￾ately dry conditions in a temperate climate zone. Water balance models commonly
include plant water stress functions (e.g. Feddes et al., 1978), where critical limits of36 K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
soil water supply can be adapted according to the vegetation characteristics.
Although it is commonly acknowledged that root water uptake is defined by water
potential gradients and hydraulic resistances in the soil–plant system (Steudle &
Peterson, 1998), this principle is rarely included in models (Cai et al., 2017). In many
crop models, the root water uptake is described as a sink term in the soil compart￾ments without solving water flow mechanistically towards roots. Vertical distribu￾tion of water uptake is typically assumed to be proportional to root length densities
and local water availability. The parameters and concepts used in these models are to
a large extent empirical. Feddes et al. (2001) showed that the onset of water stress in
crops varies depending on the evaporative demand of the atmosphere resulting in an
onset at larger water contents under high evaporative demand compared to moderate
vapour pressure deficit. Empirical relations implemented in models may include
inherently the conditions under which the models were primarily developed. There￾fore, applying models to spatially variable data under climate conditions different
from their origin revealed that consistency between soil water simulations and crop
yield estimation are sometimes weak.
Figure 5 shows the relation between deviations of three models on soil water
contents at 60 locations in a field in Germany and the related differences in yield
prediction (Wallor et al., 2018). While model AS (APSIM) developed in Australia
showed a very steep yield relation with a pronounced response of crop yields to
moderate water deviations, model CO (COUP) developed in Scandinavia showed
relative small yield deviations although soil water was generally overestimated.
Model HE (Hermes) showed consistent water and yield simulations with only
moderate deviation at most locations since it was developed under similar
conditions.
Fig. 5 Deviations between simulated and observed soil water contents in the root zone of a
heterogeneous field and their relation to model deviations from observed crop yields for three
different models (AS APSIM, CO COUPMODEL, HE HERMES). (Data from Wallor et al. 2018)Process-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions for Site-Specific... 37
Wallor et al. (2018) showed that subsoil information, especially under water￾limited conditions, is indispensable to get a realistic simulation of spatial crop
growth patterns, which has been emphasized earlier by several authors. McDonald
et al. (2013) demonstrated that subsoil properties restricting rooting depth can limit
water use and yield in many Australian soils. The strong impact of subsoil water
availability at and after heading for wheat yield formation was emphasized by Baier
and Robertson (1968). Kirkegaard et al. (2007) quantified the beneficial effect of
available subsoil water even under moderate water stress at an efficiency of
59 kg ha-1 grain yield per mm subsoil water uptake and concluded that relatively
small amounts of subsoil water can be highly valuable to grain yield. However,
obtaining subsoil information requires considerable sampling effort, and it is also
less easily detectable by proximal sensors.
Another relevant source of differences among models is the different consider￾ation of root distribution and related water and nutrient uptake (Wu & Kersebaum,
2008). While few models use two- or three-dimensional root distribution (Wu et al.,
2007; Postma et al., 2008; Bingham & Wu, 2011), the majority use one-dimensional
vertical approaches. Vertical root penetration and distribution might be considered
using empirical functions of different shape (Wu & Kersebaum, 2008) related to the
phenological development of the crops and may consider soil temperature and or
bulk density to modify the vertical exploration of the root zone. While soil temper￾ature can be modelled using daily weather input and soil properties, bulk density
usually needs to be determined in the field. Additionally, it may vary with time.
5 Examples of Model Use for Precision Agriculture
5.1 Identification of Site-Specific Management Using
Long-Term Simulations
Knowledge of the spatial patterns within a field is critical not only to farmers for
potential variable–rate applications but also for water managers to control water
body pollution. Selection of homogenous zones within the field to run crop models
with site-specific input can be useful to understand and predict better the impact of
weather, soil and landscape characteristics on spatial and temporal patterns of crop
yields to enhance resource use efficiency at field level. Stable zones may be managed
using a zone-specific management strategy, selected before the season, often called
strategic (Basso et al., 2011). Crop simulation models can be applied in simulating
the crop response to irrigation and crop management (Delgoda et al., 2016). They
provide the opportunity to evaluate the benefit of several precision management
strategies, e.g., irrigation, as they reduce the need for time-consuming field exper￾iments (Jones et al., 2003).
Site-specific response curves, e.g. for fertilizer input, can be derived from virtual
fertilization experiments through running crop models with site-specific input and
calibrated over long-time weather and yield records (Basso et al., 2011).38 K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
Additionally, the long-term simulations provide information on yield potentials to
derive realistic yield goals, cost-benefit calculations and related environmental
impacts, which can be used for multi-criteria optimization of sustainable manage￾ment practice. DeJonge et al. (2007) investigated the effect of variable–rate irrigation
management on maize production in Iowa using the CERES-maize model. They
compared crop yields for a period of 28 years under simulated scenarios of no
irrigation, scheduled uniform irrigation and precision irrigation. Thorp et al. (2008)
described a methodology for applying the Decision Support System for
Agrotechnology Transfer (DSSAT) crop growth model in analysing variable–rate
management practices including irrigation on crop growth and yield.
5.2 Inverse Modelling to Derive Unknown Properties
Estimating soil properties at a high resolution might be too expensive if traditional
soil sampling and laboratory methods are applied. However, use of crop yield maps
from several years can be used to estimate yield-relevant model parameters by
inverse modelling. The diversity of individual responses of zones to the variation
in inter-annual weather creates a footprint based on different limiting factors in each
year. This can be used to optimize soil properties by matching simulated yield with
yield map data. Timlin et al. (2001) and Morgan et al. (2003) used a simple water
balance model that uses the relative transpiration ratio to calculate relative yield from
available water in the soil profile. Soil water-holding capacity was optimized to
match the spatial pattern of relative yields to the observed yield map. Florin et al.
(2011) derived an inverse meta-model from the APSIM model using neural networks
to estimate soil available water capacity (AWC) from available yield data. Alterna￾tively, remote sensing data of NDVI may be used (Araya et al., 2016). He et al.
(2021) derived plant available water (PAWC) using the APSIM model to simulate
wheat yield on synthetic soils with contrasting PAWC and climates. The simulated
results were used to develop an empirical model to relate simulated yield to PAWC
(He & Wang, 2019). The empirical model was used inversely to predict PAWC from
observed crop yield. However, the number of seasons required to achieve a certain
identifiability of relevant parameters and to reduce equifinality may depend on the
strength of limiting factors under a given environment.
5.3 Operational Use for Site-Specific Management
Operations
There are several options to use process-based simulation models for operational
decisions. Irrigation is a typical application for models in PA since crops are quite
sensitive to water supply and deficits require quick action to avoid water stress. The
advantage of using a well-calibrated model is that it may use weather forecast data toProcess-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions for Site-Specific... 39
predict the risk over a range of a few days of probable water deficiency and to assess
the amount required in advance. However, extensive calibration and validation are
required to establish model accuracy (Adeyemi et al., 2017).
Simulation models can be linked to real-time soil or plant sensors and weather
data to determine daily irrigation requirements of crops. For example, the simulation
framework VARIwise is capable of real-time decision support in precision irrigation
(McCarthy et al., 2010). It can incorporate real-time data input from field sensors in
arriving at irrigation decisions. The combination of different sensor inputs into the
simulation framework enables adaptive decision support with the system being able
to readjust irrigation decisions based on plant feedback and also explore optimal
control strategies.
The application of simulation models for variable-rate fertilization of nitrogen is
much more challenging and complex since many processes and interactions have to
be considered. Moreover, inter-annual variation in N demand and supply hamper the
use of average response functions. Additionally, fertilizer recommendation at the
time of N application has to cover the future demand of crops within a field for the
next few weeks or even months. Since weather forecasts presently provide reliable
predictions for 3–5 days, model predictions have an inherent uncertainty. Basso
et al., 2011 derived tactical recommendations based on N response curves derived
from long-term simulations of management zones with different yield expectations
by combining them with current seasonal observations, e.g. the available soil water
in the root zone at the time of N dressing. Assuming recent production costs and
grain prices, the simulations helped identify an optimal N rate for each of the zones
based on agronomic, economic and environmental sustainability of N management.
Real-time applications of process-oriented simulation models for tactical N
fertilization in PA are rare so far. Kersebaum and Beblik (2001) tested real-time
application of the HERMES model for entire field recommendations for winter
cereals in Germany. They used subsequent applications of the model during the
growing season by combining actual current weather with typical site-specific
weather from long-term weather data for prediction. Nitrogen fertilizer application
was split into four doses per season. The general scheme of the procedure is shown in
Fig. 6.
The scheme was tested for several years across Germany (Kersebaum & Beblik,
2001) and also in China (Michalczyk et al., 2014), and in comparison with
measurement-based N fertilization recommendations, they showed better nitrogen
use efficiency than the other methods. Real-time model application for PA consid￾ering within-field variability showed on average a reduction in variable N rates of
40 kg N ha-1 compared to measured soil mineral N combined with in-season
recommendations of a proximal crop N sensor (Kersebaum et al., 2003, 2005a).
However, an inherent uncertainty of the prediction remains because of inter-annual
weather variation. The site-specific uncertainty for N recommendations on winter
wheat was estimated using long-term simulations for a heterogeneous field
(Kersebaum et al., 2007). A maximum difference of 48 kg N ha-1 between
contrasting (wet and dry) weather scenarios was estimated for the prediction.
Among different sites, the uncertainty increased with reduced buffer capacity of40 K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
Fig. 6 Scheme of model-based fertilizer recommendations with HERMES. I day of recommenda￾tion, II calculated date, when N deficit occurs, III predicted date of predefined development stage for
next fertilization. (Kersebaum et al., 2007, modified)
the soil, expressed as water-holding capacity in the root zone. Of the four applica￾tions from the whole growing season, the first showed the smallest absolute varia￾tion, while the last application (at flowering) had the greatest variation. The smaller
difference between the scenarios at the first fertilizer application showed that these
recommendations were more dependent on the previous weather than on the predic￾tion. In contrast, water availability during the grain filling phase had a significant
influence on the model recommendation resulting in differences of 20 to 30 kg N ha￾1 between the scenarios for the third and fourth applications. While N recommen￾dations are mostly oriented to consider the N demand of the crop, modelling also
offers the opportunity to estimate limitations of fertilizer application to consider
water protection goals (e.g. EU nitrate directive; EEC, 1991 or EU Water Frame￾work Directive; EC, 2000) in nitrate vulnerable zones (NVZs) to meet drinking
water standards of groundwater resources (Kersebaum et al., 2005b; Basso et al.,
2016). Nitrate vulnerable zones are areas of land that drain into water at risk of
pollution, e.g. tile-drained areas, which represent shortcuts for surface water pollu￾tion or land over groundwater aquifers, which are not protected by almost imper￾meable layers (Kersebaum et al., 2006).Process-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions for Site-Specific... 41
While process-oriented modelling has some advantages to estimate variable–rate
fertilizer applications, a combination of available sensor techniques together with
remote sensing and weather forecasts provide opportunities to reduce uncertainties
of each tool and opens new chances for better site-specific management (Morari
et al., 2021).
6 Conclusions
Process-oriented simulation models provide various opportunities to analyse and
explain spatial patterns of crop growth. However, they require detailed site infor￾mation such as soil properties, hydrological boundary conditions and weather data at
sufficient spatial and temporal resolution. While traditional soil maps often do not
match model requirements, new techniques like proximal soil and crop sensing can
be used in combination with modelling to derive spatially variable management
recommendations for precision agriculture. This requires their implementation in a
decision support framework that combines the different tools and implements
different targets to achieve greater sustainability through variable-rate applications
in Precision Agriculture.
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
References
Abrahamsen, P., & Hansen, S. (2000). Daisy: An open soil–crop–atmosphere system model.
Environmental Modelling and Software, 15, 313–330.
Adamchuk, V. I., Hummel, J. W., Morgan, M. T., & Upadhyaya, S. K. (2004). On-the-go soil
sensors for precision agriculture. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 44(1), 71–91.
Addiscott, T. M., & Wagenet, R. J. (1985). Concepts of solute leaching in soils: A review of
modelling approaches. Journal of Soil Science, 36, 411–424.
Adeyemi, O., Grove, I., Peets, S., & Norton, T. (2017). Advanced monitoring and management
systems for improving sustainability in precision irrigation. Sustainability, 8(3), 353.
Aggarval, P. K. (1995). Uncertainties in crop, soil and weather inputs used in growth models:
Implications for simulated outputs and their applications. Agricultural Systems, 48, 361–384.
Araya, S., Lyle, G., Lewis, M., & Ostendorf, B. (2016). Phenologic metrics derived from MODIS
NDVI as indicators for plant available water-holding capacity. Ecological Indicators, 60,
1263–1272.
Baier, W., & Robertson, G. W. (1968). The performance of soil moisture estimates as compared
with the direct use of climatological data for estimating crop yields. Agricultural Meteorology,
5(1), 17–31.
Basso, B., Cammarano, D., Chen, D., Cafiero, G., Amato, M., Bitella, G., Rossi, R., & Basso,
F. (2009). Landscape position and precipitation effects on spatial variability of wheat yield and
grain protein in southern Italy. Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science, 195, 301–312.42 K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
Basso, B., Cammarano, D., Troccoli, A., Chen, D., & Ritchie, J. T. (2010). Long-term wheat
response to nitrogen in a rainfed Mediterranean environment: Field data and simulation analysis.
European Journal of Agronomy, 33, 132–138.
Basso, B., Ritchie, J. T., Cammarano, D., & Sartori, L. (2011). A strategic and tactical management
approach to select optimal N fertilizer rates for wheat in a spatially variable field. European
Journal of Agronomy, 35, 215–222.
Basso, B., Dumont, B., Cammarano, D., Pezzuolo, A., Marinello, F., & Sartori, L. (2016). Envi￾ronmental and economic benefits of variable rate nitrogen fertilization in a nitrate vulnerable
zone. Science of the Total Environment, 545–546, 227–235.
Biernath, C., Gayler, S., Bittner, S., Klein, C., Högy, P., Fangmeier, A., & Priesack, E. (2011).
Evaluating the ability of four crop models to predict different environmental impacts on spring
wheat grown in open top chambers. European Journal of Agronomy, 35, 71–82.
Bingham, I. J., & Wu, L. (2011). Simulation of wheat growth using the 3D root architecture model
SPACSYS: Validation and sensitivity analysis. European Journal of Agronomy, 34, 181–189.
Bormann, H. (2009). Analysis of possible climate impacts of climate change on the hydrological
regimes of different regions in Germany. Advances in Geosciences, 21, 3–11.
Bormann, H. (2012). Assessing the soil texture-specific sensitivity of simulated soil moisture to
projected climate change by SVAT modelling. Geoderma, 195, 73–83.
Brisson, N., Gary, C., Justes, E., Roche, R., Mary, B., Ripoche, D., Zimmer, D., Sierra, J., Bertuzzi,
P., Burger, P., Bussière, F., Cabidoche, Y. M., Cellier, P., Debaeke, P., Gaudillère, J. P.,
Hénault, C., Maraux, F., Seguin, B., & Sinoquet, H. (2003). An overview of the crop model
STICS. European Journal of Agronomy, 18, 309–332.
Cai, G., Vanderborght, J., Couvreur, V., Mboh, C. M., & Vereecken, H. (2017). Parameterization of
root water uptake models considering dynamic root distributions and water uptake compensa￾tion. Vadose Zone Journal, 17, 160125.
de Wit, C. (1965). Photosynthesis of leaf canopies. Wageningen Inst Biol Chem Res Field
Crops Herb.
DeJonge, K. C., Kaleita, A. L., & Thorp, K. R. (2007). Simulating the effects of spatially variable
irrigation on corn yields, costs, and revenue in Iowa. Agricultural Water Management, 92,
99–109.
Delgoda, D., Malano, H., Saleem, S. K., & Halgamuge, M. N. (2016). Irrigation control based on
model predictive control (MPC): Formulation of theory and validation using weather forecast
data and AQUACROP model. Environmental Modelling and Software, 78, 40–53.
Delin, S., & Berglund, K. (2005). Management zones classified with respect to drought and
waterlogging. Precision Agriculture, 6, 321–340.
EC (European Community). (2000). Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council establishing a framework for the Community action in the field of water policy. Official
Journal, L327, 1–73.
EEC (European Economic Community). (1991). Council Regulation (EEC) No. 2092/91 on
organic production of agricultural products and indications referring thereto on agricultural
products and foodstuffs. Official Journal, L198, 1–15.
Egea, G., Díaz-Espejo, A., & Fernández, J. E. (2015). Numerical simulation of soil water dynamics
as a decision support system for irrigation management in drip-irrigated hedgerow olive
orchards. In J. Stafford (Ed.), Precision agriculture ’15 (pp. 503–510). Wageningen Academic
Publishers.
Ewert, F., Rötter, R. P., Bindi, M., Webber, H., Trnka, M., Kersebaum, K. C., Olesen, J. E., van
Ittersum, M. K., Janssen, S., Rivington, M., Semenov, M. A., Wallach, D., Porter, J. R., Stewart,
D., Verhagen, J., Gaiser, T., Palosuo, T., Tao, F., Nendel, C., et al. (2015). Crop modelling for
integrated assessment of risk to food production from climate change. Environmental Modelling
and Software, 72, 287–303.
Feddes, R. A., Kowalik, P. J., & Zaradny, H. (1978). Simulation of field water use and crop yield
(Simulation monograph). Pudoc.Process-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions for Site-Specific... 43
Feddes, R. A., Hoff, H., Bruen, M., Dawson, T., de Rosnay, P., Dirmeyer, P., Jackson, R. B., Kabat,
P., Kleidon, A., Lilly, A., & Pitman, A. J. (2001). Modeling root water uptake in hydrological
and climate models. Bulletin of the American Meteorological, 82, 2797–2809.
Florin, M. J., McBratney, A. B., Whelan, B. M., & Minasny, B. (2011). Inverse meta-modelling to
estimate soil available water capacity at high spatial resolution across a farm. Precision
Agriculture, 12, 421–438.
Gaiser, T., Perkons, U., Küpper, P. M., Kautz, T., Uteau-Puschmann, D., Ewert, F., Enders, A., &
Krauss, G. (2013). Modeling biopore effects on root growth and biomass production on soils
with pronounced subsoil clay accumulation. Ecological Modelling, 256, 6–15.
Geesing, D., Diacono, M., & Schmidhalter, U. (2014). Site-specific effects of variable water supply
and nitrogen fertilization on winter wheat. Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil Science, 177,
509–523.
Greminger, P. J., Sud, K., & Nielsen, D. R. (1985). Spatial variability of field-measured soil-water
characteristics. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 49, 1075–1082.
He, D., & Wang, E. (2019). On the relation between soil water holding capacity and dryland crop
productivity. Geoderma, 353, 11–24.
He, D., Oliver, Y., & Wang, E. (2021). Predicting plant available water holding capacity of soils
from crop yield. Plant and Soil, 459, 315–328.
Heermann, D. F., Diker, K., Buchleiter, G. W., & Brodahl, M. K. (2003). The value of additional
data to locate potential management zones in commercial corn fields under center pivot
irrigation. In J. Stafford & A. Werner (Eds.), Precision agriculture ’03. Proceedings 4th
European conference precision agriculture (pp. 279–284). Wageningen Academic Publishers.
Hoffmann, H., Zhao, G., Asseng, S., Bindi, M., Biernath, C., Constantin, J., Coucheney, E.,
Dechow, R., Doro, L., Eckersten, H., Gaiser, T., Grosz, B., Heinlein, F., Kassie, B. T.,
Kersebaum, K. C., Klein, C., Kuhnert, M., Lewan, E., Moriondo, M., et al. (2016). Impact of
spatial soil and climate input data aggregation on regional yield simulations. PLoS One, 11(4),
e0151782.
Hunt, L. A., & Pararajasingham, S. (1995). CROPSIM-wheat – A model describing the growth and
development of wheat. Canadian Journal of Plant Science, 75, 619–632.
Jamieson, P., Semenov, M., Brooking, I., & Francis, G. (1998). Sirius: A mechanistic model of
wheat response to environmental variation. European Journal of Agronomy, 8, 161–179.
Jansson, P.-E., & Moon, D. S. (2001). A coupled model of water, heat and mass transfer using
object orientation to improve flexibility and functionality. Environmental Modelling and Soft￾ware, 16, 37–46.
Jones, J. W., Hoogenboom, G., Porter, C. H., Boote, K. J., Batchelor, W. D., Hunt, L. A., Wilkens,
P. W., Singh, U., Gijsman, A. J., & Ritchie, J. T. (2003). The DSSAT cropping system model.
European Journal of Agronomy, 18, 235–265.
Kaspar, T. C., Colvin, T. S., Jaynes, D. B., Karlen, D. L., James, D. E., & Meek, D. W. (2003).
Relationship between six years of corn yields and terrain attributes. Precision Agriculture, 4,
87–101.
Keating, B. A., Carberry, P. S., Hammer, G. L., Probert, M. E., Robertson, M. J., Holzworth, D.,
Huth, N. I., Hargreaves, J. N. G., Meinke, H., Hochman, Z., McLean, G., Verburg, K., Snow,
V., Dimes, J. P., Silburn, M., Wang, E., Brown, S., Bristow, K. L., Asseng, S., et al. (2003). An
overview of APSIM, a model designed for farming systems simulation. European Journal of
Agronomy, 18, 267–288.
Kempen, B., Brus, D. J., Stoorvogel, J. J., Heuvelink, G. B. M., & de Vries, F. (2012). Efficiency
comparison of conventional and digital soil mapping for updating soil maps. Soil Science
Society of America Journal, 76, 2097–2115.
Kersebaum, C. (1995). Application of a simple management model to simulate water and nitrogen
dynamics. Ecological Modelling, 81, 145–156.
Kersebaum, K. C. (2011). Special features of the HERMES model and additional procedures for
parameterization, calibration, validation, and applications In L. R. Ahuja & L. Ma (Eds.),
Methods of introducing system models into agricultural research. Advances in agricultural
systems modeling series 2 (pp. 65–94). ASA CSSA SSSA.44 K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
Kersebaum, K. C., & Beblik, A. J. (2001). Performance of a nitrogen dynamics model applied to
evaluate agricultural management practices. In M. Shaffer, L. Ma, & S. Hansen (Eds.), Model￾ing carbon and nitrogen dynamics for soil management (pp. 551–571). CRC Press.
Kersebaum, K. C., & Nendel, C. (2014). Site-specific impacts of climate change on wheat
production across regions of Germany using different CO2 response functions. European
Journal of Agronomy, 52, 22–32.
Kersebaum, K. C., & Richter, J. (1991). Modelling nitrogen dynamics in a soil-plant system with a
simple model for advisory purposes. Fertilizer Research, 27, 273–281.
Kersebaum, K. C., Reuter, H. I., Lorenz, K., & Wendroth, O. (2002). Modelling crop growth and
nitrogen dynamics for advisory purposes regarding spatial variability. In L. J. Ahuja, L. Ma, &
T. A. Howell (Eds.), Agricultural system models in field research and technology transfer
(pp. 229–252). Lewis Publishers.
Kersebaum, K. C., Lorenz, K., Reuter, H. I., Wendroth, O., Giebel, A., & Schwarz, J. (2003). Site
specific nitrogen fertilisation recommendations based on simulation. In J. Stafford & A. Werner
(Eds.), Precision agriculture. Proceedings 4th European conference on precision agriculture,
Berlin (pp. 309–314). Wageningen Academic Publishers.
Kersebaum, K. C., Lorenz, K., Reuter, H. I., Schwarz, J., Wegehenkel, M., & Wendroth,
O. (2005a). Operational use of agrometeorological data and GIS to derive site specific nitrogen
fertilizer recommendations based on the simulation of soil and crop growth processes. Physics
and Chemistry of the Earth, 30, 59–67.
Kersebaum, K. C., Reuter, H. I., Lorenz, K., & Wendroth, O. (2005b). Long term simulation of soil/
crop interactions to estimate management zones and consequences for site specific nitrogen
management considering water protection. In J. Stafford (Ed.), Precision agriculture ’05.
Proceedings 5th European conference on precision agriculture, Uppsala, Schweden
(pp. 795–802). Wageningen Academic Publishers.
Kersebaum, K. C., Matzdorf, B., Kiesel, J., Piorr, A., & Steidl, J. (2006). Model-based evaluation of
agro-environmental measures in the federal state of Brandenburg (Germany) concerning N
pollution of groundwater and surface water. Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil Science, 169,
352–359.
Kersebaum, K. C., Reuter, H. I., Lorenz, K., & Wendroth, O. (2007). Model-based nitrogen
fertilization considering agro-meteorological data. In T. W. Bruulsema (Ed.), Managing crop
nitrogen for weather. Proceedings of the Soil Science Society of America; Symposium on
integrating weather variability into nitrogen recommendations, 15 November 2006,
Indianapolis, IN (pp. 1–9). IPNI.
Kersebaum, K. C., Boote, K. J., Jorgenson, J. S., Nendel, C., Bindi, M., Frühauf, C., Gaiser, T.,
Hoogenboom, G., Kollas, C., Olesen, J. E., Rötter, R. P., Ruget, F., Thorburn, P. J., Trnka, M.,
& Wegehenkel, M. (2015). Analysis and classification of data sets for calibration and validation
of agro-ecosystem models. Environmental Modelling and Software, 72, 402–417.
Kersebaum, K. C., Wallor, E., Lorenz, K., Beaudoin, N., Constantin, J., & Wendroth, O. (2019).
Modelling cropping systems with HERMES – Model capability, deficits, and data requirements.
In O. Wendroth, R. J. Lascano, & L. Ma (Eds.), Bridging among disciplines by synthesizing soil
and plant processes (Advances in agricultural systems modeling, Vol. 8, pp. 103–126). ASA,
CSSA, and SSSA.
Kim, S.-H., Yang, Y., Timlin, D. J., Fleisher, D. H., Dathe, A., Reddy, V. R., & Staver, K. (2012).
Modeling temperature responses of leaf growth, development, and biomass in maize with
MAIZSIM. Agronomy Journal, 104, 1523–1537.
Kimball, B. A., Boote, K. J., Hatfield, J. L., Ahuja, L. R., Stöckle, C., Archontoulis, S., Baron, C.,
Basso, B., Bertuzzi, P., Constantin, J., Deryng, D., Dumont, B., Durand, J.-L., Ewert, F., Gaiser,
T., Gayler, S., Hoffmann, M. P., Jiang, Q., Kim, S.-H., et al. (2019). Simulation of maize
evapotranspiration: An inter-comparison among 29 maize models. Agricultural and Forest
Meteorology, 271, 264–284.Process-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions for Site-Specific... 45
Kirkegaard, J. A., Lilley, J. M., Howe, G. N., & Graham, J. M. (2007). Impact of subsoil water use
on wheat yield. Australian Journal of Agricultural Research, 58(4), 303–315.
Kravchenko, A. N., & Bullock, D. G. (2000). Correlation of corn and soybean grain yield with
topography and soil properties. Agronomy Journal, 92, 75–83.
Kravchenko, A. N., & Bullock, D. G. (2002). Spatial variability of soybean quality data as a
function of field topography: I. Spatial data analysis. Crop Science, 42(3), 804–812.
Kumhálová, J., Kumhála, F., Kroulík, M., & Matějková, S. (2011). The impact of topography on
soil properties and yield and the effects of weather conditions. Precision Agriculture, 12,
813–830.
Li, Y., Guan, K., Schnitkay, G. D., DeLucia, E., & Peng, B. (2019). Excessive rainfall leads to
maize yield loss of a comparable magnitude to extreme drought in the United States. Global
Change Biology, 25, 2325–2337.
Lizaso, J. I., Boote, K. J., Jones, J. W., Porter, C. H., Echarte, L., Westgate, M. E., & Sonohat,
G. (2011). CSM-IXIM: A new maize simulation model for DSSAT version 4.5. Agronomy
Journal, 103, 766–779.
Maestrini, B., & Basso, B. (2018). Predicting spatial patterns of within-field crop yield variability.
Field Crops Research, 219, 106–112.
Manning, G., Fuller, L. G., Eilers, R. G., & Florinsky, I. (2001). Soil moisture and nutrient variation
within an undulating Manitoba landscape. Canadian Journal of Soil Science, 81(3), 449–458.
Martinez-Feria, R. A., & Basso, B. (2020). Unstable crop yields reveal opportunities for site￾specific adaptations to climate variability. Scientific Reports, 10, 2885.
McCarthy, A. C., Hancock, N. H., & Raine, S. R. (2010). VARIwise: A general-purpose adaptive
control simulation framework for spatially and temporally varied irrigation at sub-field scale.
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 70, 117–128.
McDonald, G. K., Taylor, J. D., Verbyla, A., & Kuchel, H. (2013). Assessing the importance of
subsoil constraints to yield of wheat and its implications for yield improvement. Crop & Pasture
Science, 63, 1043–1065.
Michalczyk, A., Kersebaum, K. C., Roelcke, M., Hartmann, T., Yue, S. C., Chen, X. P., & Zhang,
F. S. (2014). Model-based optimisation of nitrogen and water management for wheat–maize
systems in the North China Plain. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems, 98, 203–222.
Monteith, J. (1965). Light distribution and photosynthesis in field crops. Annals of Botany, 29,
17–37.
Moore, I. D., Gessler, P. E., Nielsen, G. A., & Peterson, G. A. (1993). Soil attribute prediction using
terrain analysis. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 57, 443–452.
Morari, F., Zanella, V., Gobbo, S., Bindi, M., Sartori, L., Pasqui, M., Mosca, G., & Ferrise,
R. (2021). Coupling proximal sensing, seasonal forecasts and crop modelling to optimize
nitrogen variable rate application in durum wheat. Precision Agriculture, 22, 75–98.
Morgan, C. L. S., Norman, J. M., & Lowery, B. (2003). Estimating plant-available water across a
field with an inverse yield model. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 67, 620–629.
Nawar, S., Corstanje, R., Halcro, G., Mulla, D., & Mouazen, A. M. (2017). Chapter four—
Delineation of soil management zones for variable-rate fertilization: A review. Advances in
Agronomy, 143, 175–245.
Nendel, C., Berg, M., Kersebaum, K. C., Mirschel, W., Specka, X., Wegehenkel, M., Wenkel,
K.-O., & Wieland, R. (2011). The MONICA model: Testing predictability for crop growth, soil
moisture and nitrogen dynamics. Ecological Modelling, 222, 1614–1625.
Pachepsky, Y., & Acock, B. (1998). Stochastic imaging of soil parameters to assess variability and
uncertainty of crop yield estimates. Geoderma, 85(2), 213–229.
Pennock, D. J., & Frick, A. H. (2001). The role of field studies in landscape-scale applications of
process models: An example of soil redistribution and soil organic carbon modeling using
CENTURY. Soil and Tillage Research, 58(3), 183–191.
Postma, J. A., Jaramillo, R. E., & Lynch, J. P. (2008). Towards modeling the function of root traits
for enhancing water acquisition by crops. In L. R. Ahuja, V. R. Reddy, S. A. Saseendran, &
Q. Yu (Eds.), Response of crops to limited water: Understanding and modeling water stress
effects on plant growth processes (pp. 251–276). ASA-CSA-SSSA.46 K. C. Kersebaum and E. Wallor
Reuter, H. I. (2004). Spatial crop and soil landscape processes in a loess landscape with respect to
relief information [Ph.D. thesis]. University Hannover, Horizonte 16, Der Andere Verlag,
Tönning, p. 286.
Reuter, H. I., Kersebaum, K. C., & Wendroth, O. (2005). Modelling of solar radiation influenced by
topographic shading––Evaluation and application for precision farming. Physics and Chemistry
of the Earth, 30(1–3), 143–149.
Roy, P. C., Guber, A., Abouali, M., Nejadhashemi, A. P., Deb, K., & Smucker, A. J. M. (2019).
Simulation optimization of water usage and crop yield using precision irrigation. In K. Deb,
E. Goodman, C. A. Coello Coello, K. Klamroth, K. Miettinen, S. Mostaghim, & P. Reed (Eds.),
Evolutionary multi-criterion optimization (Lecture notes in computer science) (Vol. 11411,
pp. 695–706). Springer.
Sadhukhan, D., Qi, Z., Zhang, T., Tan, C. S., Ma, L., & Andales, A. A. (2019). Development and
evaluation of a phosphorus (P) module in RZWQM2 for phosphorus management in agricul￾tural fields. Environmental Modelling and Software, 113, 48–58.
Schmidhalter, U., Maidel, F. X., Heuwinkel, H., Demmel, M., Auernhammer, H., Noack, P. O.,
et al. (2008). Precision farming—Adaptation of land use management to small scale heteroge￾neity. In P. Schröder, J. Pfadenhauer, & J. C. Munch (Eds.), Perspectives for agroecosystem
management (pp. 121–200). Elsevier.
Si, B. C., & Farrell, R. E. (2004). Scale-dependent relationship between wheat yield and topo￾graphic indices: A wavelet approach. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 68(2), 577–587.
Stafford, J. V., Lark, R. M., & Bolam, H. C. (1999). Using yield maps to regionalize fields into
potential management units. In P. C. Robert, R. H. Rust, & W. E. Larson (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 4th conference on precision agriculture (pp. 225–237). ASA-CSSA-SSSA.
Steudle, E., & Peterson, C. A. (1998). How does water get through roots? Journal of Experimental
Botany, 49, 775–788.
Stöckle, C., Donatelli, M., & Nelson, R. (2003). CropSyst, a cropping systems simulation model.
European Journal of Agronomy, 18, 289–307.
Stoorvogel, J. J., Kooistra, L., & Bouma, J. (2015). Managing soil variability at different spatial
scales as a basis for precision agriculture. In R. Lal & B. A. Stewart (Eds.), Soil-specific farming:
Precision agriculture (Advances in soil science, pp. 37–71). CRC Press.
Thorp, K. R., DeJonge, K. C., Kaleita, A. L., Batchelor, W. D., & Paz, J. O. (2008). Methodology
for the use of DSSAT models for precision agriculture decision support. Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture, 64, 276–285.
Timlin, D. J., Pachepsky, Y., Snyder, V. A., & Bryant, R. B. (1998). Spatial and temporal variability
of corn grain yield on a hillslope. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 62, 764–773.
Timlin, D., Pachepsky, Y., Walthall, C., & Loechel, S. (2001). The use of a water budget model and
yield maps to characterize water availability in a landscape. Soil and Tillage Research, 58,
219–231.
Trangmar, B. B., Yost, R. J., & Uehara, G. (1985). Application of geostatistic to spatial studies of
soil properties. Advances in Agronomy, 38, 65–91.
Wallor, E., Kersebaum, K. C., Ventrella, D., Bindi, M., Cammarano, D., Coucheney, E., Gaiser, T.,
Garofalo, P., Giglio, L., Giola, P., Hoffmann, M. P., Iocola, I., Lana, M., Lewan, E., Maharjan,
G. R., Moriondo, M., Mula, L., Nendel, C., Pohankova, E., et al. (2018). The response of
process-based agro-ecosystem models to within-field variability in site conditions. Field Crops
Research, 228, 1–19.
Ward, N. K., Maureir, F., Stöckl, C. O., Brooks, E. S., Painter, K. M., Yourek, M. A., & Gasch,
C. K. (2018). Simulating field-scale variability and precision management with a 3D hydrologic
cropping systems model. Precision Agriculture, 19, 293–313.
Wassenaar, T., Lagacherie, P., Legros, J. P., & Rounsevell, M. D. A. (1999). Modelling wheat yield
responses to soil and climate variability at the regional scale. Climate Research, 11(3), 209–220.Process-Based Modelling of Soil–Crop Interactions for Site-Specific... 47
Wendroth, O., Pohl, W., Koszinski, S., Rogasik, H., Ritsema, C. J., & Nielsen, D. R. (1999). Spatio￾temporal patterns and covariance structures of soil water status in two Northeast-German field
sites. Journal of Hydrology, 215, 38–58.
Williams, J., Jones, C., Kiniry, J., & Spanel, D. (1989). The EPIC crop growth-model. Transactions
of the ASAE. American Society of Agricultural Engineers, 32, 497–511.
Wu, L., & Kersebaum, K. C. (2008). Modeling water and nitrogen interaction responses and their
consequences in crop models. In L. R. Ahuja, V. R. Reddy, S. A. Saseendran, & Q. Yu (Eds.),
Response of crops to limited water: Understanding and modeling water stress effects on plant
growth processes (Advances in agricultural systems modeling 1) (pp. 215–249).
ASA-CSA-SSSA.
Wu, L., McGechan, M. B., McRoberts, N., Baddeley, J. A., & Watson, C. A. (2007). SPACSYS:
Integration of a 3D root architecture component to carbon, nitrogen and water cycling – Model
description. Ecological Modelling, 200, 343–359.Models in Crop Protection
Giorgia Fedele, Federica Bove, and Vittorio Rossi
Abstract A plant disease model is a simplified representation of the relationships
between pathogens, crops, and the environment that cause the development of
epidemics over time and/or space. This chapter describes the different modelling
approaches, focusing on fundamental (process-based) models for application in crop
protection. The development of process-based dynamic models consists of four
steps: (i) definition of the intended use of the model; (ii) conceptualization of the
system; (iii) development of the mathematical framework; and (iv) model evalua￾tion. Plant disease models now have a key role in supporting the decision-making
process in integrated pest management (IPM). The advantages of using models in
IPM are linked to their ability to process and analyze complex information and to
provide outputs supporting decision-making at strategic and tactical levels. In
particular, simulation models can support strategic decision-making, and predictive
models can assist growers in making tactical decisions. Finally, the chapter briefly
considers how different models can be combined with the aim of helping growers to
make correct and objective decisions about crop protection.
1 Introduction to Plant Disease Models and Modelling
Approaches
1.1 What Is a Model?
A model is a simplified representation of a system (de Wit, 1993; Edminister, 1978;
Forrester, 1997; Zadoks, 1971), and a system is a limited part of reality containing
G. Fedele · V. Rossi (✉)
Department of Sustainable Crop Production, Facoltà di Scienze Agrarie, Alimentari e
Ambientali, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Piacenza, Italy
e-mail: vittorio.rossi@unicatt.it
F. Bove
Horta srl, Piacenza, Italy
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_3
4950 G. Fedele et al.
interrelated elements (Rabbinge & de Wit, 1989). In the context of crop protection, a
plant disease model is a simplified representation of the relationships between
pathogens, crops, and environment that cause the development of epidemics; these
relationships involve a large number of interactions occurring at different levels of a
hierarchy over time and/or space (Rossi et al., 2010).
As a simplification of reality, a model cannot capture all aspects of the system of
interest. Consequently, all models have some inaccuracy or incompleteness
(Madden et al., 2007), which are accounted for by the definition of model boundaries
(i.e., the spatial and temporal conditions, as well as practical constraints, under
which the system is observed), and assumptions and/or simplifications made in
accordance with the purpose of the modelling exercise (Mulligan & Wainwright,
2013). Simplifications and boundaries require thoughtful consideration, and thus,
expertise.
The dualism between model complexity and simplicity is important (Christie
et al., 2011). Addition of detailed process descriptions, with increased numbers of
variables and parameters, may support a theoretical or biological point of view in
that it will more completely describe the complex interactions within the system. The
added details, however, may not necessarily improve model performance. A parsi￾monious model is usually one with the greatest predictive power and the least
process complexity (Wainwright & Mulligan, 2004). Although complexity may
make the model more accurate, it may also make the model less manageable
(Kranz & Hau, 1980). Thus, simplicity should be strived for in developing a
model but not at the cost of model performance.
In general, models are used to summarize the essential features of the observa￾tions or measurements of interest, and their use enables inferences to be made about
large host populations based on more limited direct information (Madden et al.,
2007).
1.2 Types of Models and Modelling Approaches
There are different types of models for different modelling objectives. In plant
pathology, models have been developed with the following objectives: (i) to under￾stand epidemiological processes and to describe and compare plant disease epi￾demics as well as their components; (ii) to relate epidemics to crop losses; (iii) to
predict plant disease patterns under different crop protection or climatic scenarios;
(iv) to support decision-making for management of plant disease; (v) to integrate
current knowledge and to identify gaps in knowledge; (vi) to explore hypotheses that
cannot be tested in practice to provide a framework for future research; and (vii) to
provide an intuitive hands-on analysis of agricultural systems for educational pur￾poses (Campbell & Madden, 1990; Gilligan, 1985; Madden et al., 2007; Norton
et al., 1993; Savary & Willocquet, 2014; Shoemaker, 1981; Van Maanen & Xu,
2003). Different types of models require different modelling approaches, whose
main features are briefly described in the following sections.Models in Crop Protection 51
1.2.1 Qualitative vs. Quantitative Models
Models can be either “qualitative” or as “quantitative.” A qualitative model repre￾sents some essential aspects of reality in a theoretical way, without the use of
equations, mathematics, or statistics; descriptions of disease cycles are examples
of qualitative models (Madden et al., 2007). A quantitative model uses mathematical
notations, symbols, and rules to describe a system and the relationships between
variables and the parameters that govern the system (Madden et al., 2007). There￾fore, a quantitative model is a mathematical model that can consist of a single
function or a complex system of functions (Madden et al., 2007).
1.2.2 Deterministic vs. Stochastic Models
Mathematical models can be “deterministic” or “stochastic.” A deterministic model
is characterized by variables determined by model parameters and by sets of
previous states of these variables (Renard et al., 2013); the model then provides a
single solution (or model output) at each run. Because this type of model does not
account for the effects of data uncertainty or variability, changes in model outputs
are solely due to changes in model components or inputs (Xu & Ridout, 1996).
Stochastic models account for random variability in model parameters and/or inputs
and thereby provide multiple solutions at each run (Lehoczky, 1990).
1.2.3 Empirical vs. Fundamental Models
Mathematical models can also be “empirical” or “fundamental” (Madden & Ellis,
1988).
Empirical models (also referred to as correlative or data-based models) describe
the behaviour of a system on the basis of observations, without reference to cause￾and-effect relationships. These models have the potential to provide a good repre￾sentation of a set of observed data without taking into account the underlying
biological mechanisms (molecular, biochemical, population, etc.) (Madden et al.,
2007). This lack of relationships makes empirical models easy to develop but weak
in accuracy, knowledge, and robustness, so that they require validation and adapta￾tion when used in areas or scenarios different from those in which they were
developed (Rossi et al., 2010). It is important to note that new approaches, like
artificial neural networks, big data, machine learning, and artificial intelligence, are
all empirical. These approaches, which do not require the understanding of complex
mechanisms of the pathosystem, use statistics to predict trends by relating patterns
with the data supplied. All of these models learn from the experience that is provided
in the form of data; the more the experience, the better the model. These empirical
models, however, are limited by the range of their input data, i.e., they can only
predict results within that range.52 G. Fedele et al.
Fundamental models (also referred to as explanatory, theoretical, mechanistic, or
process-based models) aim to understand how the system works in terms of the
underlying processes and the influencing variables (Wainwright & Mulligan, 2004).
The development of fundamental models begins with theory, hypothesis, and bio￾logical and epidemiological knowledge of the system to be modelled and of the
processes involved (Madden et al., 2007). Fundamental models explain the relation￾ships between the elements of a system based on what is known about how the
system works in relation to the influencing, external variables (Wainwright &
Mulligan, 2004). Because fundamental models analyze components of the epidemic
and their changes over time as influenced by external variables, they are dynamic
(Teng et al., 1980). These models are based on the assumption that the state of the
system can be characterized quantitatively at every moment and that changes in the
system can be described with mathematical equations (Rabbinge & de Wit, 1989).
Distinction between empirical and fundamental models, however, can be fuzzy
because empirical models can have a fundamental basis, and fundamental models
usually have empirical elements (Madden & Ellis, 1988). Moreover, there are
models that combine fundamental and empirical approaches (Park et al., 1997).
1.2.4 Simulation vs. Predictive Models
Process-based models can be further defined as “simulation” or “predictive” models.
Simulation has been defined as the art of building mathematical models and the
study of their properties (Rabbinge & de Wit, 1989); predictive involves the
estimation of how the system performs in unknown situations.
Simulation models are often concerned with the theoretical understanding of
generic features of epidemic development; they quantify the effects of specific
events on epidemic development and allow the identification of problems by
distinguishing between cause and effect (Van Maanen & Xu, 2003). Simulation
models address specific questions (Zadoks & Rabbinge, 1985). They are often
developed to identify the key factors that determine the behaviour of pathosystems
to provide disease management options, to quantify the potential efficacy of those
options, and to provide a framework for future research (Savary & Willocquet,
2014). Because they allow the numerical integration of data coming from experi￾ments on biological processes, simulation models also enable a numerical visuali￾zation of knowledge gaps. Another use of this kind of model is the mobilization of
available knowledge to explore the system’s behavior. The characteristics of simu￾lation models make them useful for exploring possible future scenarios (e.g., effects
of climate change). Simulation models are also effective educational tools, because
they provide an intuitive analysis of systems.
Predictive models are mainly developed to predict the behaviour of a pathosystem
in the real environment, as affected by a set of external variables, which can be either
measured (e.g., weather data) or forecast (e.g., weather forecasts) (Campbell &
Madden, 1990; De Vallavieille-Pope et al., 2000; Madden & Ellis, 1988). In
modelling, the terms “forecast” and “forecasting” are sometimes reserved forModels in Crop Protection 53
estimates of values at specific future times, while the term “prediction” is used for
more general estimates, for instance, to find the value of the target attribute for
unknown past or current situations (Camase, 1996).
1.3 A Brief History of Plant Disease Modelling
Models combining environmental data and plant and disease characteristics have
been developed since the middle 1900s. The early plant disease models were
developed following an empirical approach (Waggoner, 1960) and consisted of
simple rules, graphs, or tables showing relationships between particular components
of the disease cycle (e.g., infection and sporulation) and the concomitant weather
conditions (Baldacci, 1947; Mills, 1944). Dynamic modelling of plant disease
epidemics began in the early 1960s with the conceptualization of the temporal
progress of diseases by Van der Plank (1960, 1963) and then by Zadoks (1971).
After these “milestones,” the interest switched to mechanistic models (Fry & Fohner,
1985; Teng, 1985). In 1969, for instance, Waggoner and Horsfall developed a model
of early blight epidemics in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) and potato (Solanum
tuberosum L.) caused by Alternaria solani and a model of southern corn leaf blight
caused by Helminthosporium maydis (Waggoner et al., 1969) to investigate the
effects of weather and cultural conditions on disease development. Several plant
disease models have been developed more recently, with major effort directed at
modelling diseases affecting certain cropping systems (e.g., wheat, Triticum
aestivum L.; potato; and soya bean – Glycine max L.) in relation to scientific,
economic, and social factors (De Wolf & Isard, 2008; Fedele et al., 2020).
Rather than being used for practical crop protection, plant disease models unfor￾tunately remained primarily as research tools for many years (Butt & Jeger, 1985; De
Wolf & Isard, 2008; Krause & Massie, 1975); reasons for the infrequent use of
models in practical crop protection were recently considered by Rossi et al. (2019).
In the last decade, the imbalance between the number of models developed and
deployed has decreased with an increase in research directed toward evaluation and
practical application of disease models and especially of predictive models (De Wolf
& Isard, 2008; Van Maanen & Xu, 2003). The increase in the practical application of
models for disease prediction is closely linked with the advances in weather mon￾itoring and automatic data processing. In addition, there is the ongoing development
of information technologies and the Internet, so that models become components of
“decision tools” supporting the knowledge-based management of harmful organisms
(Rossi et al., 2019). The most advanced decision tools, in which plant disease models
are key components, are represented by the decision support systems (DSSs) (Rossi
et al., 2019), i.e., computerized information systems that support both daily opera￾tional decision-making and long-range strategic decision-making (Rossi et al., 2012;
Sonka et al., 1997).54 G. Fedele et al.
2 Development of Process-Based Models
The development of mechanistic, dynamic models for plant diseases involves the
following steps: (i) definition of the intended use of the model; (ii) conceptualization
of the system; (iii) development of a mathematical framework; and (iv) model
evaluation. In this chapter, we do not consider the details of model development
(which have been described previously), but we focus on those aspects of develop￾ment that are relevant for crop protection models.
2.1 Definition of the Intended Use of the Model
A precise definition of the intended use of a model is crucial for its practical use
(Kranz & Royle, 1978; Sutherst, 1993; Wainwright & Mulligan, 2004). The crop
protection problem to be addressed should be clearly identified; the involvement of
the people who will use the model (e.g., growers, advisors, and policy makers) may
help to delineate the problem to be addressed and define its boundaries (Rossi et al.,
2010, 2019; Wainwright & Mulligan, 2004).
A main objective for the development of crop protection models is disease
prediction (Campbell & Madden, 1990), at both “strategic” and “tactical” levels
(Shoemaker, 1981). Strategic use of a model concerns the model’s involvement in
those decisions that affect the entire life cycle of a crop, i.e., on whether to apply
measures for disease prevention and/or suppression (e.g., the choice of the cultivar,
the training system, irrigation, and mechanization level). Tactical use of a model
involves those decisions limited to the current season, i.e., whether and when to
apply plant management and protection actions (Power, 2007; Rossi et al., 2010;
2012). Estimation of the risk that a crop will develop a disease in relation to
environmental and agricultural factors is based on the concept of ecological and
economic justification (Nutter, 2007). Models able to predict the time of disease
outbreak, the risk of infection, and the risk of epidemic development allow users to
identify the optimal timing and frequency for the implementation of disease man￾agement options (Plant & Mangel, 1987; Rossi et al., 2019).
2.2 Conceptualization of the System
Once the aim of the model has been defined, the second step is conceptualization of
the system of interest. In plant pathology, this includes the host crop, the pathogen,
the environment, natural enemies or limiters, human interventions (cultural prac￾tices), and their multiple interactions. Conceptualization begins with definition of the
system boundaries: (i) how many and which elements are involved (e.g., host crop
processes, such as growth and development; infection processes; environmentalModels in Crop Protection 55
effects on processes; etc.); (ii) the size of the system (e.g., one plant, 1 cm2
, a crop,
etc.); and (iii) time characteristics (i.e., time frame and time step).
Conceptualization requires a deep knowledge and understanding of the processes
involved in the system. This knowledge can be acquired through a careful review of
the literature. Systematic literature reviews, which are well-established in the field of
medicine, are useful for identifying, appraising, and synthesizing research-based
evidence and for presenting that evidence in an accessible format (Mulrow, 1994).
This systematic and explicit approach minimizes bias, facilitates critical appraisal,
and provides reliable findings from which conclusions can be drawn (Antman et al.,
1992; Oxman & Guyatt, 1993). Model conceptualization helps modelers to organize
epidemiological knowledge in order to identify knowledge gaps, to make assump￾tions or simplifications, and to design specific experiments.
The system structure can finally be organized in a relational diagram through
“systems analysis,” which was first proposed by Forrester (1961) and was subse￾quently developed by others (e.g., de Wit, 1993; Rossi et al., 2008; Savary &
Willocquet, 2014). Systems analysis involves the following basic elements: state
variables, rates, flows, intermediate and auxiliary variables, coefficients, constants,
switches, external variables, and driving functions that link external variables to the
system. A state variable represents the status of the system, which changes in time
and space and determines the dynamics of the system. State variables can be
measured in terms of the number of individuals or the amount of matter (i.e., number
of insects, number of spores, number of lesions on leaves, etc.). A rate represents the
“speed” at which a state variable changes. Rates control flows, which represent an
increase (inflow) or a decrease (outflow) of contents of the state variables. Coeffi￾cients or parameters are constant or variable, e.g., they may change through model
runs or according to the influence of a driving function. External factors are those
that are outside the boundaries of the system but that influence the system by
affecting driving functions: in plant pathology, external factors are mainly environ￾mental variables such as temperature, rain, relative humidity, etc. Switches have
been introduced more recently into systems analysis, and they account for logical
operators such as “if condition =, <, or > x then go to y else go to z” (Rossi et al.,
2008; 2010). Computer programs can help to organize the system’s structure and the
relationships among components of the model. There are several programs and kinds
of software, e.g., the STELLA® program (Isee Systems, 2005), that enable devel￾opers to encode models and to conceptualize systems.
A basic system structure for plant disease epidemics follows the concepts
established by Van der Plank (1963) and Zadoks (1971) and compartmentalizes
the main stages of the host-plant tissue during an epidemic, i.e., healthy (H), latent
(L), infectious (I), and post-infectious (R) compartments. For the development of a
model flowchart that focuses on a polycyclic disease caused by an airborne pathogen
that produces lesions on foliage, for example, state variables would be the number of
host sites changing from H–L–I–R during an infection cycle (Fig. 1). Because
categories of host-plant sites are nonoverlapping, the following equation applies:56 G. Fedele et al.
H L I R
RI Trans Rem
Fig. 1 Example of an H–L–I–R model flowchart drawn using the STELLA® software. Plant sites
evolve from healthy (H) to latent (L), infectious (I), and post-infectious (R) categories through rates
of infection (RI), transfer (Trans), and removal (Rem)
N = H þ L þ I þ R,
where N is the total number of sites in the system. A detailed example of an H–L–I–
R model that was developed with STELLA® was provided by Savary and
Willocquet (2014).
2.3 Development of the Mathematical Framework
Once the model structure has been conceptualized and system size, time frame, and
time step have been defined, the model is then mathematically encoded. A frame￾work of equations must be developed by either analytical or numerical integration.
The differences between these two approaches are explained in detail by Savary and
Willocquet (2014).
As an example of analytical integration of the equation framework, the model in
Fig. 1 can be encoded through linked differential equations:
dH=dt = - βIH
dL=dt = βIH–θL
dI=dt = θL–αI
dR=dt = αI
where β is a disease transmission rate and θ and α are constant rates of progress from
the latent to infectious and from the infectious to post-infectious compartments,
respectively (Madden et al., 2007; Segarra et al., 2001).
The rate of change in the number of infected sites (x) can be written as follows:
dx=dt = dL=dt þ dI=dt þ dR=dt
The definition of the mathematical framework of a system, and, specifically, of
the quantitative relationships between the components of the model, is based on
previously published or specific experimental data. Functions can be used to identifyModels in Crop Protection 57
the mathematical relationship that best explains the data. This procedure is called
“model fitting.” If a general function is known to describe a specific process (e.g.,
latency or infectiousness), the model equation can be parameterized to achieve the
best possible fit to the data (Camase, 1996; Rossi et al., 2010). This procedure is also
referred to as “model calibration” (Pascual et al., 2003).
2.4 Model Evaluation
Model evaluation includes model verification and model testing (Teng, 1981).
Model verification consists of inspecting the internal consistency of the model by
determining whether its structure and equations perform as expected. Model testing
includes the following several steps: (i) validation; (ii) sensitivity analysis; and (iii)
judgment of utility (Camase, 1996; Rossi et al., 2010). The validation process helps
to determine whether the model is useful and relevant with respect to the defined
purpose.
For predictive models, validation is mainly carried out by comparing the pre￾dictions of the model with observations (i.e., from scouting or experiments).
Through this procedure, it is possible to evaluate the accuracy of the model as the
ratio between the number of predictions and the real observations. Another model
characteristic to be evaluated is its robustness, i.e., its capability to perform well
across the entire range of environmental conditions driving the model (Pascual et al.,
2003). For validation of these kinds of models, Bayes’ theorem (Yuen & Hughes,
2002) can be useful in evaluating the sensitivity (or true positive rate) and the
specificity (or true negative rate) of a predictor.
For simulation models, validation can be performed by comparing the simulated
output (e.g., epidemic development) with the actual (a priori) overall pattern of the
system.
Sensitivity analysis of a model is conducted to determine whether the model
performs as intended and to identify model components that are “sensitive,” i.e., that
greatly affect model behavior (Savary & Willocquet, 2014). This analysis is usually
performed by changing the values of input variables and evaluating the consequent
changes in model outputs (Rossi et al., 2010). When a large variation in a parameter
value causes only a small change in output, that parameter can be excluded from the
model or its measurement can be simplified. Frey and Patil (2002) assigned sensi￾tivity analysis methods to three classes of model: mathematical, statistical, and
graphical. Other classifications of sensitivity analysis have also been described
(Camase, 1996; Cullen & Frey, 1999; Papastamati & Van Den Bosch, 2007; Saltelli
et al., 2000).
As the last step in model evaluation, judgment of utility consists of determining
the added value of using the model for the defined purpose compared with the
current practice. For instance, judgment of utility might involve comparison of the
number of applications of fungicide spray and the disease intensity resulting from58 G. Fedele et al.
treatments that follow the model vs. (i) treatments that follow the standard grower’s
fungicide schedule or (ii) an unsprayed control (Caffi et al., 2010).
3 Models for IPM
Plant disease models have assumed a key role in supporting the decision-making
process in integrated pest management (IPM) (Rossi et al., 2019), which aims to
protect crops against harmful organisms and to reduce the use of chemicals to levels
that are economically and ecologically justified, thereby reducing and minimizing
the risks for humans and the environment (Ehler, 2006). The advantages of using
models in IPM are linked to their ability to process and analyze complex information
and to provide output in support of the decision-making process (Rossi et al., 2019).
3.1 Decision-Making in IPM
Decision-making is a cognitive process resulting in the selection of an action among
several alternative actions: every decision-making process produces a final choice
(March, 1994), which can be strategic, tactical, or operational (Conway, 1984;
McCown, 2002; Rossi et al., 2012).
Strategic decisions concern the selection of long-term measures, at both the farm
and crop level (e.g., crop rotation and variety sown, respectively), for disease
prevention and/or suppression. Tactical decisions are made day-by-day (or within
a day) and concern whether, when, and which plant protection actions are required at
the crop level. Operational decisions are made by the person responsible for
implementing daily management actions at the crop level; for example, that person
must select spray volume, sprayer speed, and spray timing during the day and must
modify those selections when environmental conditions change (e.g., an increase in
wind speed or the occurrence of unexpected rain during spraying).
Models can support both strategic and tactical decisions, but operational deci￾sions are usually made in too short a time to benefit from mathematical models.
Nevertheless, there are IT tools that can be used for some operational decisions, such
as determining the optimal setting of the sprayer for each specific intervention
(Anselmi & Legler, 2021).
3.2 Strategic Disease Management
Strategic decisions are focused on cultural practices concerning crop health, hygiene
measures, and the selection of host genotypes that are resistant or tolerant to
pathogens.Models in Crop Protection 59
They include but are not limited to the following: (i) choice of crop species and
cultivars; (ii) choice of crop type (open field or protected cultivation, uniform or in
consociation, etc.) and rotational schemes; (iii) elimination of inoculum reservoirs,
not only from inside the field but also from the entire farm; (iv) choice of times and
types of soil preparation and of planting dates; and (v) choice of cropping methods
that may last some years (like the training system and plant density in orchards) or
that may require depreciation allowances for equipment (like equipment needed for
subsoil or sprinkler irrigation).
Strategic decision-making can be supported by simulation models. González￾Domínguez et al. (2020) recently developed a general example of a simulation model
that predicts the effect of the main crop management actions (actions commonly
recommended in IPM) on plant disease epidemics. Simulation models represent a
source of information on the benefits of strategic actions, providing a system to
measure their effects, usually measured over a long time scale (e.g., years).
3.2.1 A First Example: Epidemics of Grape Downy Mildew
Bove et al. (2020a) developed a process-based simulation model with the aim of
quantitatively synthesizing the literature available for the grapevine (Vitis vinifera
L.)-downy mildew (Plasmopara viticola) pathosystem and of providing a tool to
help strategic decisions for disease management. The model (Fig. 2) includes the
main processes involved in the epidemics on both leaves and grape clusters, from
inoculum mobilization to disease multiplication on foliage. Inoculum mobilization
involves the rate of primary infections (RPI) as a function of the onset date (OD), the
duration of inoculum mobilization (PD), and the inflow of primary infections (P).
Disease multiplication on foliage reflects the rate of infection (RI) of healthy sites
(HS) and the rates at which infections on leaves become latent (L), infectious (I), and
removed (R). The RI is also affected by the linkage between disease on foliage and
disease on clusters; disease on clusters occurs at a rate of cluster infection (RCI), a
rate at which healthy clusters (HC) become diseased (DC). The model also includes
host dynamics, i.e., crop development (DVS), growth (RG), physiological senes￾cence (RSEN), and disease-induced senescence (RRDS).
The model was used to investigate the behavior of the pathosystem as affected by
climate change (Bove et al., 2020b) and resistant varieties (Bove et al., 2021). For the
latter purpose, 4 components of partial resistance, i.e., infection efficiency (RRIE),
latency period (RRLP), sporulation (RRSP), and infectious period (RRIP), were
integrated into the model for 16 grapevine varieties, for which the parameter values
for components of partial resistance had been measured previously in laboratory
experiments (Bove & Rossi, 2020).60 G. Fedele et al.
I
SEN SENR
HS
DC
HC
R I L
DVS
DVS
RRS RRS
DVS
TOTSITES
RRDS
CCS
PD
RRSmax
CCSmax
RcV
RSENR
RcOPT
RcA
RcW
RI
Rtrans Rrem
Rc
D
COFR
RPI
OD
P
RcT
RCI
H
COFRC
TC
RG
RRG
Smax
RSEN
LP IP
Fig. 2 Flowchart of the grapevine downy mildew (Plasmopara viticola) simulation model devel￾oped by Bove et al. (2020a). The diagram uses the symbols developed by Forrester (1961). The core
of the structure of the model is based on Zadoks (1971), with sites on foliage evolving from healthy
(HS) to latent (L), infectious (I), and removed (R). The rate of infection of leaves (RI) depends on
primary (P) and secondary infections (Rc and I). Infectious sites on the foliage (I) are the only
source of infection of grape clusters, and the rate of cluster infections (RCI) is regulated by the leaf￾to-cluster disease transmission coefficient (TC); grape clusters can be healthy (HC) or diseased
(DC). The structure incorporates host (canopy) growth (RG), physiological senescence (RSEN),
and physiological senescence compounded by disease-induced senescence (RSENR)
3.2.2 A Second Example: Effect of Biocontrol on Epidemic Development
Fedele et al. (2020) developed a model that simulates the effect of any BCA
(biocontrol agent) on the daily progress of a foliar disease (Fig. 3). The model
considers seven categories of plant tissue: (i) healthy and susceptible to infection
(HS); (ii) affected by the pathogen and infectious, i.e., can generate new, secondaryModels in Crop Protection 61
Hr HS I R
Ib Rb Hb
HbSUM
RI
HbSUM
h
HbSUM
Path POnset
COFRHr
STARTBCA
PDur
STARTBCA
COFR
STARTBCA
COFR
RCOLH STARTBCA
HbSUM
BCA
BCAOnset
BCADur
COFRHr
K
COFRR
STARTP
RCOLI
COFRi
RR
RCOLR
RRS RRG
RCOLHr BMORh BMORi BMORr
E
RRES
RSUS
RG
RSEN
Fig. 3 Simplified flowchart of the model for biocontrol agents (BCAs) developed by Fedele et al.
(2020). The core of the model is based on a classic susceptible infected–removed (SIR) model, with
tissue evolving from healthy–susceptible (HS) to infectious (I) and removed (R). The rate of
infection of tissue (RI) depends on primary (STARTP) and secondary infections (I). The rate of
resistance induction by a BCA (RRES) depends on BCA application (STARTB) and the total
amount of healthy–susceptible tissue (HS). The rate of BCA colonization (RCOLH, RCOLI,
RCOLR, RCOLHr) depends on BCA application (STARTB) and the total amount of tissue
colonized by the BCA (BSUM). The structure incorporates host growth (RG) and physiological
senescence (RS)
infections (I); (iii) affected by the pathogen and removed, i.e., no longer infectious
(R); (iv) healthy and colonized by the BCA and protected from the pathogen through
induced host resistance (Hr); (v) healthy and colonized by the BCA and protected
from the pathogen by competition or antibiosis (Hb); (vi) infectious and colonized
by the BCA, i.e., unable to generate new infections (Ib); and (vii) removed and
colonized by the BCA (Rb). The amount of HS increases over time as a consequence
of plant growth or decreases as a consequence of senescence (which is relevant for
those diseases in which the senescent plant tissue is no longer susceptible to
infection). For host-pathogen dynamics, the rate of infection (RI) determines the
flow from HS to I, and the rate of removal (RR) determines the flow from I to R. For
pathogen-BCA dynamics, introduction of the BCA generates outflows from HS to
Hb, a state of the host that cannot be infected, i.e., a state that prevents the flow from
H to I. The model considers that this outflow can be caused by BCAs that induce
resistance in the host tissue and/or that prevent infection due to competition and/or
antibiosis through the following rates: RRES, rate of induced resistance by BCA;
RCOLHr, rate of colonization of Hr by BCA; RCOLH, rate of colonization of HS by62 G. Fedele et al.
BCA; RCOLI, rate of colonization of I by BCA; and RCOLR, rate of colonization of
R by BCA. Because induction of resistance in the host tissue is transitory, the model
considers that the Hr tissue reverts to HS and becomes susceptible to infection
according to the rate at which induced resistance declines (RSUS), or according to
the rate of BCA mortality (BMOR), which determines the rate at which plant tissue
colonized by BCA reverts to BCA-free tissue.
Rates depend on the characteristics of the pathogen, host plant, and BCA and are
influenced by the weather conditions that affect the processes underlying the
dynamics of both the pathogen (i.e., infection and infectiousness) and the BCA
(i.e., growth and survival capability). Specifically, BCA efficacy is affected by four
factors: (i) BCA mechanism of action; (ii) timing of BCA application with respect to
timing of pathogen infection (preventative vs. curative); (iii) temperature and mois￾ture requirements for BCA growth; and (iv) BCA survival as influenced by temper￾ature and moisture.
The model can be used to simulate, as a screening tool, the environmental
responses and survival capability of BCA candidates during their selection and
formulation. In addition, the model can be used to predict the efficacy of BCAs
under different scenarios of weather conditions and application timings.
3.3 Tactical Disease Management
Tactical decisions focus on control actions aimed at reducing the progress of
epidemics. They include (i) fungicide sprays (application times, products, and
dosages) or alternative methods aimed at pathogen control (BCA application or
eradication) and (ii) cultural practices that regulate crop growth and canopy density
(e.g., fertilization, irrigation times and rates, weed control, etc.) (Rossi et al., 2019).
Predictive models provide information that can help growers make tactical decisions.
3.3.1 A First Example: Prediction of Secondary Infections of Grape
Downy Mildew
Brischetto et al. (2020) developed a model that produces warnings about the
occurrence of secondary infections by Plasmopara viticola and that predicts the
relative severity of such infection. The model assesses the main biological and
epidemiological processes involved in secondary infections by P. viticola and is
organized into three compartments: (i) sporulation; (ii) dispersal and deposition of
sporangia; and (iii) infection.
The model begins when the first seasonal downy mildew (DM) lesions appear in
the vineyard; once DM lesions appear, the model assumes that lesions will be present
throughout the season and that these lesions may produce sporangia under suitable
conditions. The first step in the model consists of “sites with visible DM lesions”
(Fig. 4). Sites can be either DM-free or occupied by a DM lesion, and the latter canModels in Crop Protection 63
Sites with visible
DM lesions
Sites with DM lesions
bearing sporangia
Dose of sporangia
on DM lesions, D'
Sites DM-free
Sites DM-free with
sporangia on surface
Dose of available
sporangia, D''
Sites with latent
DM lesions
Relative infection severity,
SEV
LES
SPO
SPOR
D & DR
MOR'
D'
D'' INFR
MOR''
MP Tmp SPO
n
INF = 1 WP
Twp
VPD
Fig. 4 Relational diagram of the model developed by Brischetto et al. (2020) predicting secondary
infection cycles of Plasmopara viticola
be either a visible non-sporulating or sporulating lesions. Sites with DM lesions
produce sporangiophores and sporangia when weather conditions are favorable as
regulated by a switch (SPO) (Fig. 4). If SPO = 1, then lesions advance to the second
step in the model, i.e., “sites with DM lesions bearing sporangia”; if SPO = 0, in
contrast, lesions remain at the first step (i.e., they remain non-sporulating).
When lesions begin producing sporangia, they continue sporulating for a sporu￾lation period, during which the relative “dose of sporangia on DM lesions” (D′) is
calculated through a sporulation rate (SPOR). As the sporulation period ends, the
dose of sporangia progressively diminishes because the sporangia still attached to
sporangiophores may die according to a mortality rate (MOR’). After being detached
from sporangiophores on sporulating DM lesions, sporangia are dispersed into the
air, and some of them are deposited on DM-free sites. The model calculates the
relative “dose of available sporangia” on DM-free sites (D”) through a dispersal rate
(D) and a deposition rate (DR). This dose of sporangia, however, progressively64 G. Fedele et al.
diminishes because the sporangia detached from sporangiophores can die under
unfavorable conditions (Blaeser & Weltzien, 1979) according to a mortality rate
(MOR”).
When there are viable sporangia on DM-free sites and conditions are favorable
for infection, as regulated by a switch (INF), sites become latently infected. The
relative infection severity of each infection period is finally calculated by an infec￾tion rate (INFR).
The model was evaluated against observed data (collected over a 3-year period in
a vineyard) for its accuracy to predict periods with no sporangia or periods with
peaks of sporangia, so that growers can identify periods with no/low risk or high risk.
The model was able to identify periods in which the DM risk was nil or very low. It
may therefore help growers to avoid fungicide sprays when not needed and lengthen
the interval between two sprays, i.e., it will help growers to move from calendar￾based to risk-based fungicide schedules for the control of P. viticola in vineyards.
3.3.2 A Second Example: Prediction of Stem Rust Infections on Wheat
Salotti (2021) developed a plant-focused model for the epidemics of Puccinia
graminis f. sp. tritici, the causal agent of stem (or black) rust, on wheat (Fig. 5).
Although the pathogen goes through five spore stages in its life cycle, the model
H L I R
Start
LP
INOCP
Rtrans
IP
S
Rcmod
COFR
RcOPT
Rc
DS
Onset
S
RI Rrem
Fig. 5 Flowchart of stem rust of wheat (Puccinia graminis f. sp. tritici) developed by Salotti
(2021). The diagram uses the symbols developed by Forrester (1961). The core of the model
structure is based on Zadoks (1971), with sites evolving from healthy (H) to latent (L), infectious (I),
and removed (R). The onset of the epidemic depends on primary infection (INOCP, Onset). The
progress of the epidemic depends on secondary infections (RI, Rc, and I). The model’s core operates
with a daily time stepModels in Crop Protection 65
focuses on uredospores, which are the main spores responsible for disease in the
major wheat-growing areas (Roelfs, 1985).
The core of the model’s structure is based on the epidemiological model devel￾oped by Zadoks (1971), in which the crop is considered to consist of a large but finite
number of infection sites (i.e., fractions of the host tissues where an infection may
take place and where a lesion may develop) that have equal dimensions and equal
chances of being infected.
An infection site has one of the following mutually exclusive conditions:
(i) healthy (H); (ii) latent (L), where symptoms of stem rust are not visible; (iii)
infectious (I), visible lesions producing spores; and (iv) removed (R), lesions that are
older and nonsporulating. Sites becoming infected, with a rate of infection (RI), flow
from healthy to latent. Latent sites become infectious at the end of a latency period
(LP), and infectious sites become removed at the end of an infectious period (IP).
The transitions from L to I and from I to R are regulated by the rate of transfer
(Rtrans) and the rate of removal (Rrem), respectively. At the beginning of model
calculations, the whole crop is healthy (i.e., H = 1), and the model represents the
flow from one state to the next as a proportion of H (i.e., on a 0 to 1 scale). The
unlimited growth of the epidemic is confined by a correction factor for removals
(COFR), which is calculated based on H and diseased sites (S = I + L + R).
Stem rust epidemics are initiated by a single inflow of infections (INOCP), which
represents the primary inoculum (uredospores in the atmosphere) that is deposited on
host tissues by rain and that cause infection under favorable wetness and temperature
conditions. Secondary spread of the disease is governed by RI, which was modelled
as a function of I, COFR, and a daily multiplication factor (Rc). The model has a
daily time step, with the exception of infection, which is calculated hourly.
The model was evaluated against field data for its ability to predict primary
infections (nine epidemics) and disease progress (six epidemics) during the growing
season. Overall, the model showed good accuracy and specificity in predicting
primary infections and was reliable, accurate, and robust in predicting seasonal
dynamics of stem rust epidemics. It follows that the model could help growers
schedule fungicide treatments to control P. graminis f. p. tritici infections.
3.4 Multi-modelling for Decision-Making
Although plant disease models are important tools for IPM, decision-making
requires additional information. For example, information is needed on
(i) susceptibility of the plant to the disease, (ii) the residual efficacy of previous
protection measures, (iii) selection of the most appropriate plant protection product
and its dose, and (iv) the suitability of environmental conditions for fungicide
application. This multi-criteria decision process requires a multi-modelling approach
that includes models for plant disease, for plant growth and development (with
consideration of disease resistance), and for the effects of fungicides (Rossi et al.,
2012).66 G. Fedele et al.
An example of a multi-modelling approach to determine whether a fungicide
application against P. viticola is necessary was provided by Rossi et al. (2014); the
approach included models that predict the risk of primary and secondary infections
(Caffi et al., 2013; Rossi et al., 2008), a model that predicts grapevine phenology
(Cola et al., 2014), and a model that predicts the residual protection provided by the
last fungicide application (Caffi & Rossi, 2018).
3.4.1 Modelling the Host Plant
Plant growth is the increase in size and weight of plants or plant parts. The amount of
host tissue directly affects disease progress because the quantity of host tissue
available for infection determines the “carrying capacity” or maximum potential
disease. Host dynamics can be predicted by crop growth models. For instance, the
grapevine growth model developed by Cola et al. (2014) calculates daily the plant
phenological stages, the formation and unfolding of leaves, leaf area development,
total cluster fresh weight (i.e., yield), and the source-sink balance given as the leaf
area-to-yield ratio.
In the grapevine growth model (Fig. 6), global solar radiation (GSR) is converted
into photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) determined by the canopy light
interception rate; PAR is used to estimate the absorbed photosynthetically active
radiation (APAR). The canopy light interception rate is a function of canopy
dimensions (phenological stage), which depends on air temperature (T) and
vineyard-specific characteristics such as geographical position, aspect, slope, and
between-row and in-row vine spacing (solar position). The rate of photosynthesis,
which is a function of the atmospheric CO2 concentration, is used to estimate the
daily potential gross CO2 assimilation (GASS) based on the APAR. The potential
net assimilation (PNA), defined as dry matter available for plant growth and storage
replenishment, is determined by the rate of losses (respiration losses) associated with
conversion of primary photosynthates into structural plant matter. The daily final
production of dry matter (DMI FIN) is determined by limitation rates to PNA due to
thermal and water resources (thermal limitation and water limitation, respectively).
The DMI_FIN is partitioned into roots, leaves, stems, and clusters based on pheno￾logical stage. Final grape yield, expressed as “cluster fresh weight” is obtained by
converting the DMI_FIN inflow into “clusters fresh weight” using a constant water
dilution factor (water input).
The model can be used to predict the beginning of grapevine susceptibility to
DM, because stomata are not functional in leaves before they unfold (Allègre et al.,
2007), and unfolded leaves are therefore not susceptible to P. viticola infection
through stomata (Gessler et al., 2011). The model can also be used to determine the
duration of fungicide activity after treatment, because leaf unfolding and leaf area
development directly influence the dilution of the fungicide on and inside the host
(see Sect. 3.4.1).PAR
APAR
GASS
PNA
PNA TL
DMI FIN
ETR
ET0
Cluster Fresh Weight
(yield)
Root Leaves Stems Clusters
Dry matter
Phenological
stage
Canopy light interception Solar
Position
Solar
Position
GSR
Water limitation
AirCO2
Concentration
WS
RH
Canopy
interception
Dry matter partitioning
T
RR
Thermal limitation
Respiration Losses
Photosynthesis
Water input
Phenological
stage
GSR
Fig. 6 Simplified version of the model flowchart developed by Cola et al. (2014) describing the
cascade of matter triggered by the photosynthetic process. The driving variables inserted in black
circles are the weather inputs: global solar radiation (GSR), air temperature (AT), relative humidity
(RH), precipitation (RR), and wind speed (WS)68 G. Fedele et al.
3.4.2 Modelling the Effects of Fungicides
Information on the duration and degree of pre- or post-infection activity (i.e.,
preventive or curative) or on the eradicant activity of fungicides and how those
activities are affected by weather and plant-related variables made it possible to
develop models that realistically incorporate the effects of fungicide on the dynamics
of plant disease epidemics (Pfender, 2006).
Caffi and Rossi (2018) developed a model that predicts the decline in fungicide
efficacy after application based on weather conditions (which affect the drying, rain￾fastness, and rainfall tenacity of the fungicide) and plant growth and development.
This model incorporates the complexity of the model of Arneson et al. (2002),
which includes two compartments: (i) a fungicide concentration compartment,
which predicts the dynamics of fungicide residue on the plant tissue on a daily
basis after application as influenced by fungicide characteristics, weather conditions,
and plant growth, and (ii) a fungicide efficacy compartment, which predicts the
effect of the fungicide residue. The daily fungicide residue concentration is esti￾mated based on the following factors: (i) reduction of the initial fungicide concen￾tration, which is a function of the physical mode of fungicide action, i.e., fungicide
activity in relation to the host-pathogen interactions (e.g., pre- or post-infection
activity) and of fungicide localization on or within the plant (i.e., protectant or
penetrant); (ii) rainfall wash-off, which applies only to non-penetrant fungicides
and is a function of the amount of precipitation and fungicide susceptibility to wash￾off by rainfall; and (iii) dilution due to plant growth, which is a function of plant
biomass and is estimated separately for non-penetrant and penetrant fungicides.
3.4.3 Combining Models
Model outputs can be combined by expert systems, i.e., software that is developed
for a particular purpose and that provides solutions similar to those that would be
provided by human experts (Gonzalez-Dominguez et al., 2016; Patterson, 2004). In
crop protection, expert systems are used mainly to help growers to make correct and
objective decisions, regardless of their level of expertise.
The fuzzy control system (FCS) developed by Gonzalez-Dominguez et al. (2016)
is an example of an expert system for the sustainable management of vineyards.
With the information provided by the previously mentioned models that predict
grapevine phenology, the risk of P. viticola infection, and residual fungicide pro￾tection, the FCS was able to reproduce expert reasoning regarding the decision to
apply a fungicide against P. viticola in a vineyard. The FCS was tested by comparing
the scheduling of copper fungicides against P. viticola in 18 organic vineyards of
Italy determined by a panel of 5 experts vs. the FCS. The FCS was able to reproduce
the expert reasoning with an overall accuracy (on a scale from 0 to 1) of 0.992.Models in Crop Protection 69
4 Conclusions and Perspectives
The rational control of organisms that harm plants is a goal of IPM and is funda￾mental for ensuring agricultural productivity while maintaining economic and envi￾ronmental sustainability. The high degree of complexity of making decisions linked
to IPM requires careful evaluation of the benefits and costs, both economic and
environmental, associated with each management action. Population dynamics and
epidemiological models predicting the dynamics of harmful organisms have
assumed a key role in supporting decision-making (at strategic, tactical, and oper￾ational levels) in pest management. The advantages of using models in IPM are
linked to their ability to process and analyze complex information and to provide
output supporting the decision-making process.
Models often concentrate on a single problem (e.g., a single disease), but farmers
need to cope with a broad range of problems (e.g., multiple pests and their interac￾tions with cropping practices) (Magarey et al. 2002). Decision-making for the IPM
of plant disease depends on several risk factors: (i) the risk of disease or infection, as
indicated by plant disease models; (ii) susceptibility of the host to the disease, as
indicated by plant growth models; and (iii) the residual efficacy of previous fungi￾cide applications, as indicated by fungicide models. The use of an FCS (Gonzalez￾Dominguez et al., 2016) allows the integration of all of these risk factors. It uses
information provided by multiple models (including those concerning the host, the
pathogen, and management) to determine whether a fungicide application is needed
to control a disease in the field; it expresses combinations of the risk algorithms as
“if-then” rules, resulting in simple output such as “treatment or no-treatment.”
Once it has been determined that a plant protection product should be applied, and
once the plant protection product is selected, farmers need to know how much and
when the product should be applied. Systems for defining the product dose and when
environmental conditions are suitable for application are therefore needed to com￾plete the decision-making process (Caffi & Rossi, 2018). For these purposes,
methods for crop-adapted spray applications (Gil & Escolà, 2009; Walklate &
Cross, 2010) and for choosing the best moment of the day to apply a treatment
(Bouma, 2003) have been developed.
A multi-modelling approach and the use of expert systems have been
implemented into decision support systems (DSSs) to help farmers solve complex
problems while reducing the time and resources needed for analyzing the available
information and for selecting the best solution (Narayana Reddy & Rao, 1995).
Advances in information and communication technologies have made it possible to
incorporate models into DSSs and to deliver these systems to farmers. For imple￾mentation of IPM, farmers must have access to reliable, user-friendly, accessible,
and up-to-date decision tools that are adaptable to the farmer’s specific conditions
(Rossi et al., 2019).
One example of a widely used DSS is vite.net® (Rossi et al., 2014), which is
intended for vineyard managers. The DSS has two main components: (i) an inte￾grated system for real-time monitoring of vineyard data (air temperature and70 G. Fedele et al.
humidity, soil temperature and moisture content, plants, pests, and diseases); and
(ii) a web-based tool that uses advanced modelling techniques to analyze these data
and then provides up-to-date information for vineyard management as alerts and
decision supports; the decision about fungicide application remains with the users.
This DSS has the following characteristics: (i) holistic treatment of crop manage￾ment problems (including pests, diseases, fertilization, canopy management, and
irrigation); (ii) conversion of complex decision processes into simple and easy-to￾understand “decision supports”; (iii) easy and rapid access via the Internet; and
(iv) two-way (push-and-pull) communication between users and providers that make
it possible to consider context-specific information. The use of the DSS has made it
possible to maintain yields and grape quality while reducing pesticide usage by as
much as 50%. The DSSs increase farmer profits (Pertot et al., 2017) and enhance the
environmental and social sustainability of grape production systems (Metral et al.,
2013).
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
References
Allègre, M., Daire, X., Héloir, M. C., Trouvelot, S., Mercier, L., Adrian, M., & Pugin, A. (2007).
Stomatal deregulation in Plasmopara viticola-infected grapevine leaves. The New Phytologist.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2006.01959.x
Anselmi, A., & Legler, S. E. (2021). Un’app innovative per la taratura delle irroratrici. Informatore
Agrario, 2, 46.
Antman, E. M., Lau, J., Kupelnick, B., Mosteller, F., & Chalmers, T. C. (1992). A comparison of
results of meta-analyses of randomized control trials and recommendations of clinical experts:
Treatments for myocardial infarction. Journal of the American Medical Association. https://doi.
org/10.1001/jama.1992.03490020088036
Arneson, P.A., Oren, T.R., Loria, R., Jenkins, J.R., Goodman, E.D., Cooper, W.E., 2002.
Applescab Model Description. www.scientificsocieties.org/APS/AppleScab/Applescab_
Manual.pdf.
Baldacci, E. (1947). Epifitie di Plasmopara viticola (1941–46) nell’Oltrepó Pavese ed adozione del
calendario di incubazione come strumento di lotta. Atti Ist Bot Lab Crittogam, VIII, 45–85.
Blaeser, M., & Weltzien, H. C. (1979). Epidemiologische studien an Plasmopara viticola zur ve
rbesserung der spritzterminbestimmung. Zeitschrift fur Pflanzenkrankheiten und
Pflanzenschutz. Journal of Plant Diseases and Protection, 86, 489–498.
Bouma, E. (2003). GEWIS, a weather-based decision support system for timing the application of
plant protection products. Bulletin OEPP/EPPO Bulletin, 33, 483–488.
Bove, F., & Rossi, V. (2020). Components of partial resistance to Plasmopara viticola enable
complete phenotypic characterization of grapevine varieties. Scientific Reports. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-020-57482-0
Bove, F., Savary, S., Willocquet, L., & Rossi, V. (2020a). Designing a modelling structure for the
grapevine downy mildew pathosystem. European Journal of Plant Pathology, 157, 251–268.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-020-01974-2
Bove, F., Savary, S., Willocquet, L., & Rossi, V. (2020b). Simulation of potential epidemics of
downy mildew of grapevine in different scenarios of disease conduciveness. European Journal
of Plant Pathology, 158, 599–614. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-020-02085-8Models in Crop Protection 71
Bove, F., Savary, S., Willocquet, L., & Rossi, V. (2021). Modelling the effect of partial resistance
on epidemics of downy mildew of grapevine. European Journal of Plant Pathology. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10658-021-02367-9
Brischetto, C., Bove, F., Languasco, L., & Rossi, V. (2020). Can spore sampler data be used to
predict Plasmopara viticola infection in vineyards? Frontiers in Plant Science, 11, 1–12. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2020.01187
Butt, D. J., & Jeger, M. J. (1985). The practical implementation of models in crop disease
management. In C. A. Gilligan (Ed.), Mathematical modelling of crop disease (pp. 207–230).
Academic.
Caffi, T., & Rossi, V. (2018). Fungicide models are key components of multiple modelling
approaches for decision-making in crop protection. Phytopathologia Mediterranea, 57,
153–169. https://doi.org/10.14601/Phytopathol
Caffi, T., Rossi, V., & Bugiani, R. (2010). Evaluation of a warning system for controlling primary
infections of grapevine downy mildew. Plant Disease, 94, 709–716. https://doi.org/10.1094/
PDIS-94-6-0709
Caffi, T., Gilardi, G., Monchiero, M., & Rossi, V. (2013). Production and release of asexual
sporangia in Plasmopara viticola. Phytopathology. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-04-12-
0082-R
Camase, 1996. Register of agro-ecosystems models DLO research institute for agrobiology and soil
fertility, .
Campbell, C. L., & Madden, L. V. (1990). Introduction to plant disease epidemiology. Wiley.
Christie, M., Cliffe, A., Dawid, P., & Senn, S. (2011). Simplicity, complexity and modelling,
simplicity, complexity and modelling. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119951445
Cola, G., Mariani, L., Salinari, F., Civardi, S., Bernizzoni, F., Gatti, M., & Poni, S. (2014).
Description and testing of a weather-based model for predicting phenology, canopy develop￾ment and source-sink balance in Vitis vinifera L. cv. Barbera. Agricultural and Forest Meteo￾rology, 184, 117–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2013.09.008
Conway, G. R. (1984). Pest and pathogen control: Strategic, tactical, and policy models. Wiley.
Cullen, A., & Frey, C. (1999). Probabilistic techniques in exposure assessment, in. Plenum Press.
De Vallavieille-Pope, C., Giosue, S., Munk, L., Newton, A. C., Niks, R. E., Ostergard, H., Pons￾Kuhnemann, J., Rossi, V., & Sache, I. (2000). Assessment of epidemiological parameters and
their use in epidemiological and forecasting models of cereal airborne diseases. Agronomie.
https://doi.org/10.1051/agro:2000171
de Wit, C. T. (1993). Philosophy and terminology. In P. A. Leffelaar (Ed.), On system analysis and
simulation of ecological processes (pp. 3–9). Kluwer Academic Publishers. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-94-011-4814-6_1
De Wolf, E. D., & Isard, S. A. (2008). Disease cycle approach to plant disease prediction. Annual
Review of Phytopathology, 45, 203–220. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.phyto.44.070505.
143329
Edminister, E. D. (1978). Concepts for using modeling as a research tool (Technical ed). U.-
S. Department of Agriculture.
Ehler, L. E. (2006). Integrated pest management (IPM): Definition, historical development and
implementation, and the other IPM. Pest Management Science. https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.1247
Fedele, G., Bove, F., González-Domínguez, E., & Rossi, V. (2020). A generic model accounting for
the interactions among pathogens, host plants, biocontrol agents, and the environment, with
parametrization for Botrytis cinerea on grapevines. Agronomy, 10. https://doi.org/10.3390/
agronomy10020222
Forrester, J. W. (1961). Industrial dynamics. M. I. T.Press.
Forrester, J. W. (1997). Industrial dynamics. The Journal of the Operational Research Society, 48,
1037–1041. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.jors.2600946
Frey, H. C., & Patil, S. R. (2002). Identification and review of sensitivity analysis methods, in: Risk
analysis. https://doi.org/10.1111/0272-4332.0003972 G. Fedele et al.
Fry, W. E., & Fohner, G. R. (1985). Construction of prediction models I: Forecasting disease
development. In C. A. Gilligan (Ed.), Advances in plant pathology (pp. 161–178). Academic.
Gessler, C., Pertot, I., & Perazzolli, M. (2011). Plasmopara viticola: A review of knowledge on
downy mildew of grapevine and effective disease management. Phytopathol. https://doi.org/10.
14601/Phytopathol_Mediterr-9360
Gil, E., & Escolà, A. (2009). Design of a decision support method to determine volume rate for
vineyard spraying. Applied Engineering in Agriculture, 25, 145–151.
Gilligan, C. A. (1985). Introduction. In C. A. Gilligan (Ed.), Advances in plant pathology (Math￾ematical modelling of crop disease) (Vol. 3, pp. 1–10). Academic.
Gonzalez-Dominguez, E., Caffi, T., Bodini, A., Galbusera, L., & Rossi, V. (2016). A fuzzy control
system for decision-making about fungicide applications against grape downy mildew.
European Journal of Plant Pathology, 144, 763–772. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-015-
0781-x
González-Domínguez, E., Fedele, G., Salinari, F., & Rossi, V. (2020). A general model for the
effect of crop management on plant disease epidemics at different scales of complexity.
Agronomy, 10. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy10040462
Isee Systems, Inc. (2005). STELLA. System thinking for education and research. Available online:
https://www.iseesystems.com/
Kranz, J., & Hau, B. (1980). Systems analysis in epidemiology. Annual Review of Phytopathology.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.py.18.090180.000435
Kranz, J., & Royle, D. (1978). Perspectives in mathematical modelling of plant disease epidemics.
In P. Scott & A. Bainbridge (Eds.), Plant disease epidemiology (pp. 111–120). Blackwell
Scientific Publications.
Krause, R. A., & Massie, L. B. (1975). Predictive systems: Modern approaches to disease control.
Annual Review of Phytopathology, 13, 31–47.
Lehoczky, J. (1990). Statistical methods. In D. Heyvan & I. M. Sobe (Eds.), Stochastic models.
Elsevier Science Publishers.
Madden, L. V., Ellis, M.A. (1988). How to develop plant disease forecasters, In: Experimental
techniques in plant disease epidemiology. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-95534-1_14
Madden, L. V, Hughes, G., van den Bosch, F., 2007. The study of plant disease epidemics. The
American Phytopathological Society. https://doi.org/10.1094/9780890545058
Magarey, R. D., Travis, J. W., Russo, J. M., Seem, R. C., & Magarey, P. A. (2002). Decision
support systems: Quenching the thirst. Plant Disease, 86(1), 4–14.
March, J. G. (1994). Primer on decision making: How decisions happen. Simon and Schuster.
McCown, R. L. (2002). Changing systems for supporting farmers’ decisions: Problems, paradigms,
and prospects. Agricultural Systems, 74, 179–220.
Metral, R., Gary, C., Fortino, G., Delière, L., Hoffmann, C., Per- tot, I., Colombini, A., Mugnai, L.,
Duso, C., Rossi, V., & Caffi, T. (2013). Ex-post assessment of IPM solutions tested in
experimental stations and farms and updates of database of alternatives to pesticides and IPM
solutions. In Deliverable 6.1, project PURE “pesticide use-and-risk reduction in European
farming systems with integrated Pest management” (FP7–265865). Available at http://www.
pure-ipm.eu/node/319. (accessed on 02/01/17) (p. 85).
Mills, W.D. (1944). Efficient use of sulfur dusts and sprays during rain to control apple scab.
Cornell Extension Bulletin, 630, 4.
Mulligan, M., & Wainwright, J. (2013). Modelling and model building. In Environmental model￾ling: Finding simplicity complex (2nd ed., pp. 7–26). https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781118351475.ch2
Mulrow, C. D. (1994). Systematic reviews: Rationale for systematic reviews. British Medical
Journal, 309, 597. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.309.6954.597
Narayana Reddy, M., & Rao, N. H. (1995). GIS-based decision support Systems in Agriculture.
National Academy of Agricultural Research Management.
Norton, G. A., Holt, J., & Mumford, J. D. (1993). Introduction to pest models. In G. A. Norton &
J. D. Mumford (Eds.), Decision tools for Pest management (pp. 89–99). CAB International.Models in Crop Protection 73
Nutter, F. W. (2007). The role of plant disease epidemiology in developing successful integrated
disease management programs. In: General concepts in Integrated Pest and Disease Manage￾ment. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-6061-8_3
Oxman, A. D., & Guyatt, G. H. (1993). The science of reviewing research. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1993.tb26342.x
Papastamati, K., & Van Den Bosch, F. (2007). The sensitivity of the epidemic growth rate to
weather variables, with an application to yellow rust on wheat. Phytopathology. https://doi.org/
10.1094/PHYTO-97-2-0202
Park, E. W., Seem, R. C., Gadoury, D. M., & Pearson, R. C. (1997). DMCAST: A prediction model
for grape downy mildew development. Viticulture and Enology Science, 52, 182–189.
Pascual, P., Stiber, N., & Sunderland, E. (2003). Draft guidance on the development, evaluation,
and application of regulatory environmental models. US Environmental Protection Agency.
Patterson, D. W. (2004). Introduction to artificial intelligence and expert systems. Prentice-Hall.
Pertot, I., Caffi, T., Rossi, V., Mugnai, L., Hoffmann, C., Grando, M. S., Gary, C., Lafond, D.,
Duso, C., Thiery, D., et al. (2017). A critical review of plant protection tools for reducing
pesticide use on grapevine and new perspectives for the implementation of IPM in viticulture.
Crop Protection, 97, 70–84.
Pfender, W. F. (2006). Interaction of fungicide physical modes of action and plant phenology in
control of stem rust of perennial ryegrass grown for seed. Plant Disease. https://doi.org/10.
1094/PD-90-1225
Plant, R. E., & Mangel, M. (1987). Modeling and simulation in agricultural pest management. SIAM
Review. https://doi.org/10.1137/1029043
Power, D. J. (2007). A brief history of decision support systems. Decision Support Systems.
Rabbinge, R., & de Wit, C. T. (1989). Systems, model and simulation. Tetrahedron Letters, 23,
4461–4464.
Renard, P., Alcolea, A., & Ginsbourger, D. (2013). Stochastic versus deterministic approaches. In
Environmental modelling: Finding simplicity in complexity (2nd edn). https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781118351475.ch8
Roelfs, A. P. (1985). Wheat and rye stem rust, in: Diseases, distribution, epidemiology, and control
(pp. 3–37). Academic.
Rossi, V., Caffi, T., Giosuè, S., & Bugiani, R. (2008). A mechanistic model simulating primary
infections of downy mildew in grapevine. Ecological Modelling. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolmodel.2007.10.046
Rossi, V., Giosuè, S., & Caffi, T. (2010). Modelling plant diseases for decision making in crop
protection. Precision Crop Protection – The Challenge and Use of Heterogeneity, 241. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-9277-9
Rossi, V., Caffi, T., & Salinari, F. (2012). Helping farmers face the increasing complexity of
decision-making for crop protection. Phytopathologia Mediterranea, 51, 457–479. https://doi.
org/10.14601/Phytopathol_Mediterr-11038
Rossi, V., Salinari, F., Poni, S., Caffi, T., & Bettati, T. (2014). Addressing the implementation
problem in agricultural decision support systems: The example of vite.net®. Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture, 100, 88–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2013.10.011
Rossi, V., Sperandio, G., Caffi, T., Simonetto, A., & Gilioli, G. (2019). Critical success factors for
the adoption of decision tools in IPM. Agronomy. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy9110710
Salotti, I. (2021). Development and validation of a mechanistic, weather-based model for
predicting Puccinia graminis f. sp. tritici infections and stem rust development in wheat.
Doctoral thesis: “Development of epidemiological models for wheat and legumes in crop
rotation”.
Saltelli, A., Tarantola, S., & Campolongo, F. (2000). Sensitivity analysis as an ingredient of
modeling. Statistical Science. https://doi.org/10.1214/ss/1009213004
Savary, S., & Willocquet, L. (2014). Simulation modeling in botanical epidemiology and crop loss
analysis. Plant Health Instructor. https://doi.org/10.1094/phi-a-2014-0314-0174 G. Fedele et al.
Segarra, J., Jeger, M. J., & Van den Bosch, F. (2001). Epidemic dynamics and patterns of plant
diseases. Phytopathology. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO.2001.91.10.1001
Shoemaker, R. A. (1981). Changes in taxonomy and nomenclature of important genera of plant
pathogens. Annual Review of Phytopathology. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.py.19.090181.
001501
Sonka, S. T., Bauer, M. E., & Cherry, E. T. (1997). Precision agriculture in the 21st century:
Geospatial and information technologies in crop management. National Academy Press.
Sutherst, R. (1993). Role of modelling in sustainable pest management. In S. Corey, D. Dall, &
W. Milne (Eds.), Pest control and sustainable agriculture (pp. 66–71). CSIRO.
Teng, P. S. (1981). Validation of computer models of plant disease epidemics: A review of
philosophy and methodology/Zuverlässigkeit von Computermodellen für Epidemien von
Pflanzenkrankheiten: Ein Überblick über Grundgedanken und Methodik. Zeitschrift für
Pflanzenkrankheiten und Pflanzenschutz/Journal of Plant Diseases and Protection, 88, 49.
Teng, P. S. (1985). A comparison of simulation approaches to epidemic modeling. Annual Review
of Phytopathology. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.py.23.090185.002031
Teng, P. S., Blackie, M. J., & Close, R. C. (1980). Simulation of the barley leaf rust epidemic:
Structure and validation of BARSIM-I. Agricultural Systems. https://doi.org/10.1016/0308-
521X(80)90001-3
Van der Plank, J. E. (1960). Analysis of epidemics. In H. JG & C. EB (Eds.), Plant pathology: An
advance treatise (Vol. 3, pp. 229–289). Academic.
Van der Plank, J. E. (1963). Plant diseases: Epidemics and control. Academic.
Van Maanen, A., & Xu, X. M. (2003). Modelling plant disease epidemics. European Journal of
Plant Pathology, 109, 669–682. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1026018005613
Waggoner, P. E. (1960). Forecasting epidemics. In H. JG & D. AE (Eds.), Plant pathology, an
advanced treatise (pp. 291–313III). Academic.
Waggoner, P. E., & Horsfall, J. G. (1969). E.P.I.D.E.M.: A simulator of plant disease written for a
computer. Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin USA, 698.
Waggoner, P. E., Horsfall, J. G., & Lukens, R. J. (1969). A simulator of southern corn leaf blight
(Bulletin of the Connecticut agricultural). Wiley.
Wainwright, J., & Mulligan, M. (2004). Environmental modeling finding simplicity in complexity.
Wiley.
Walklate, P. J., & Cross, J. V. (2010). A webpage calculator for dose rate adjustment of orchard
spraying products. Aspects of Applied Biology, 99, 359–366.
Xu, X. M., & Ridout, M. S. (1996). Analysis of disease incidence data using a stochastic spatial￾temporal simulation model. Aspects of Applied Biology, 46, 155–158.
Yuen, J. E., & Hughes, G. (2002). Bayesian analysis of plant disease prediction. Plant Pathology.
https://doi.org/10.1046/j.0032-0862.2002.00741.x
Zadoks, J. C. (1971). Systems analysis and the dynamics of epidemics. Phytopathology, 61,
600–610.
Zadoks, J. C., & Rabbinge, R. (1985). Modelling to a purposed. In C. A. Gilligan (Ed.), Advances in
plant pathology (Mathematical modelling of crop diseases) (Vol. 3, pp. 231–244). Academic.Development and Adoption of Model-Based
Practices in Precision Agriculture
Jotham Akaka, Aurora García-Gallego, Nikolaos Georgantzis, Clive Rahn,
and Jean-Christian Tisserand
Abstract Decision-making in agriculture becomes increasingly challenging as
farmers seek to meet agronomic, environmental and compliance goals. There is an
increasing amount of data available to help reach these goals, and decision-making
can be supported by computer-based DSSs. Unfortunately, not all DSS are adopted
or contribute to efficient farming. The reasons for non-adoption are not easy to find,
as such failures are often not reported in the literature, hindering the process of
learning from our mistakes. In this chapter we attempt to identify some of the causes
of failure and propose strategies to overcome them. This involves a mix of many
years of experience in model development, improving fertilizer use and more recent
studies from social sciences on adoption. It is challenging for natural and social
scientists to work together towards understanding the processes in creating model￾based solutions in precision farming. In the past, social scientists have concentrated
on the behavioural reasons for (non)adoption of model-based practices (MBPs), but
it is impossible to improve the usability of even the best scientific model as it is too
late after it has been developed. Natural scientists have also developed excellent
research models of no use to practitioners. To avoid such mismatches, all stake￾holders, particularly potential users, must be involved from the beginning and at all
stages in the process. Simultaneously, natural and social scientists must work
together to create models suitable for the farmer. In conclusion, co-creation is
important and users need to be involved from the start. A model must be designed
to take account of stakeholder needs, address relevant questions and provide appro￾priate answers with minimal data requirements in a user-friendly way. Models must
identify and respond to the social and individual-level phenomena which lead to a
number of well-documented biases that influence behaviour and attitudes.
J. Akaka (✉) · A. García-Gallego
Department of Economics, Universitat Jaume I, Castelló de la Plana, Spain
N. Georgantzis · J.-C. Tisserand
Burgundy School of Business, Lyon, France
C. Rahn
Crop Centre, School of Life Sciences – University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_4
7576 J. Akaka et al.
1 Introduction
Technological progress, efficient use of knowledge and advanced data analysis have
led to the development of many informatics applications to assist users in many
sectors of society in their everyday decision-making. Examples are GPS (global
positioning system)-assisted route choice, leisure choice, consumption and produc￾tion. However, these tools are not used extensively in agriculture. Explanations
sought for this limited use can be classified under two broad categories: solution￾specific and user-specific. The existing approaches of identifying factors affecting
the adoption of model-based practices (MBPs) have often been one-sided, mainly
due to a lack of effective interaction between researchers with a technical focus and,
on the other hand, social scientists with a human behaviour focus. The solution￾focused approaches have not addressed cases of failure sufficiently, due to a natural
preference for promoting the use of successful solutions. User-specific approaches
have identified various social and behavioural factors that affect the adoption of
MBPs. The probable causes of poor adoption are factors that influence decision￾making on a personal level, such as behavioural, social and other idiosyncratic
factors. We present a case study demonstrating how user behaviour affects the
adoption of decision support systems (DSSs) on the farm.
Several authors have advocated that the development of MBPs can be seen as a
viable pathway to provide farm managers with evidence-based recommendations
and in the long run increase innovation and reduce wastage (Fountas et al., 2005;
McCown et al., 2009; Thorburn et al., 2011). Over the last three decades, several
MBPs have been developed, but current usage statistics show they are not as
effective as predicted in terms of their use in real-life scenarios. For instance,
Aubert et al. (2012) showed that work practices are important factors when it
comes to adopting innovations, deviating from mainstream theories of technology
acceptance and innovation diffusion theories. Often, developers optimize their
MBPs to work with specific types of weeds, crops or scenarios, whereas farmers
prefer a more polyvalent MBP. In essence, farmers prefer to have a wider view,
whereas the MBPs currently present in the market have a narrow scope in terms of
their application (Rossi et al., 2014). In other studies, Van Meensel et al. (2012)
claim that some MBPs are overwhelmingly complex. Furthermore, their terminol￾ogy and functions are not only unsuitable but also irrelevant to the end user. In
general, MBPs are developed according to the rate of technological advancement
instead of responding to existing demand for the product. This mismatch between
what farmers want and what is currently in the market is partly explained by
common technology acceptance models which focus on the perceived usefulness,
but fail to factor in the environment when evaluating the uptake of MBPs. From the
examples above, it is seen that there is an obvious gap between research and
implementation.
Poor implementation of MBPs also accounts for the low uptake among farmers.
This occurs when a tool is not fully utilized due to technical limitations of the
technology and user attitude towards the same. In such cases, the tendency not toDevelopment and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 77
adopt is due to farmers’ perception that the technology is difficult to use and useless.
Behavioural factors such as farm characteristics, farmer’s age and education level,
high costs (Aubert et al., 2012; Pierpaoli et al., 2013) and a steep learning curve
(Kutter et al., 2011) influence farmers’ intentions to adopt.
Other research also cites inadequate information on how farmers make decisions
in the field that limits the adoption of MBP. Research on decision-making processes
are largely based on rational assumptions instead of empirical research from data
where the farmer makes decisions in their natural setting (Gray et al., 2009).
Moreover, in some cases, input from farmers is not considered in the development
and implementation stages. Relevant literature cites that participatory-based
approaches in the adoption of sustainable agricultural technologies are more bene￾ficial than cases where farmers are not involved in development and implementation
of MBPs. Studies that involve farmers making decisions about their daily farming
practices show promising results in the usefulness of MBP as a tool for better
decision-making (Lindblom et al., 2013).
Lastly, there is a mismatch between the features of MBPs and what farmers want.
In many cases, farmers’ needs are not considered when developing MBPs. Parker
and Sinclair (2001) claim the degree of involvement of farmers in the design and
development of MBP can determine their success or failure. Involving stakeholders
and social learning is key for the successful development of agricultural MBPs (Van
Meensel et al., 2012). Therefore there is a need to develop MBPs that not only give
farmers access to the most relevant information but also involve them in the design
and implementation phases of MBPs.
Figure 1 illustrates the factors that potentially affect the process of developing
models to support farm practices.
In much of the literature, the problems of model adoption have been analysed at
the end-user level. At this stage, it is too late to improve the adoption of a poorly
developed model. Good models will engage all stakeholders starting at the design
stage, so that the role of the tool is relevant and applicable to the final users. One of
the most important stakeholders are the funders. Funders are important in the
Fig. 1 Relevant factors in every step of developing MBPs. (Rahn, 2004, 2013)78 J. Akaka et al.
development stage but must also play a part in supporting delivery, deployment and
maintenance. Otherwise, the models will have a limited life. This is more challeng￾ing in the agricultural sector where the number of users (and thus revenue) is limited
compared to wider fields such as accounting packages.
Some models are useful tools to improve scientific understanding where the end
users are other scientists. However, the models directed to farmer use must be
appropriately designed with end-user involvement at all stages (Woodward et al.,
2008) to ensure that their outcomes are relevant and are driven by readily available
data. Delivery and deployment must be supported by trusted enthusiasts, such as
researchers, and end users that may have been in the original development team but
could also be in the cohort of early adopters or initial testers.
This chapter aims to provide insight on factors which affect adoption of MBPs.
The aim is to understand which technical and behavioural factors should be consid￾ered when developing models for decision support in farming. Box, 1979 said ‘all
models are wrong but some are useful’. Our aim is to encourage development of
useful model-based practices.
In Sect. 2 we give an overview of the literature on MBPs and derive qualitative
observations on all phases of the technical development and implementation of
MBPs. Likewise, social factors are addressed in Sect. 3. In Sect. 4, behavioural
economics is introduced as a method to quantify the influence of various factors that
influence adoption or non-adoption of agricultural MBPs. This approach is further
described by a case study in Sect. 5. Finally, we draw conclusions in Sect. 6.
2 Design, Development and Delivery of MBPs
2.1 Design
The Problem: Stakeholder Engagement
A model must be well designed to take account of stakeholders’ needs to address a
relevant question and provide appropriate answers with minimal data requirements
in a user-friendly way. Such models need defined objectives, scope and scale.
Models can have diverse purposes which suit different groups of stakeholders. At
one extreme there are models which could be used to improve scientific understand￾ing with an end-user group of other scientists and at the other extreme models that
would benefit farm practice. Here, we focus on those models which are designed to
provide advice on management practices to overcome problems in agricultural
activities aimed at the production of food.
Once the problem has been identified, questions need to be asked to refine it, and
science needs to be available to address it. In some cases, solutions may be relatively
easy to solve by following laid down protocols. Complex problems that depend on
varying soil or meteorological factors are more likely to benefit from the develop￾ment of models. These problems might relate to the control of pests, diseases, weedsDevelopment and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 79
and the application of fertilizer. Some models may be on-board farm machinery to
make decisions on inputs based on crop sensors as they move across the field. Others
may be office-based to provide decisions on farm practices at a field scale. Increas￾ingly, there is potential to use AI (artificial intelligence) and self-learning tools to
integrate multiple sources of information to better inform practice (Columbus,
2021).
The decision to devise an MBP could come from a range of stakeholders. Where
there are environmental concerns, the sponsoring stakeholder may be the govern￾ment. For pest, disease and weed control, the sponsors may include government,
levy or commercial companies. For any MBP to be effective, end users should be
involved at an early stage to ensure their needs and concerns are considered for the
greatest chance of adoption. The developers are likely to be researchers in univer￾sities or applied research units. Some developers, especially those concerned with
software, may be unaware of the practical constraints in agriculture. So, there needs
to be a mix of the stakeholders at the design stage to avoid mismatches in develop￾ment. Developers need to be sure that there is sufficient scientific understanding to
support model development. Farmers need to be sure that the relevant question is
being asked and that the output decisions are applicable in the field. Mistakes made
at this stage are not easy to recover from and could result in poor model uptake.
Scope and Scale: Field/Farm
Models may be used at a field scale or farm scale. Models designed to look at a
particular problem such as how much fertilizer should be applied or pest disease or
weed control are likely to be at a field scale. Farm-scale models are likely to be used
for crop and financial management. Also, they are likely to record and report on farm
activities for compliance with food quality and traceability protocols, environmental
and ecosystem service audits. Models may be used to decide on immediate field
decisions, while others may be run in ‘what if’ mode to decide on farm management
strategies. Additionally there is an increasing demand for farm-scale systems to
integrate with blockchain systems involved with traceability and logistics.
The scope of models can be diverse, with some tailored to specific crops,
countries or climatic zones. It is important to define the scope of the model at an
early stage of the project. The scope of a model may change over time. Williams
et al. (2013) commented that the simplifications for pastoral systems in the Overseer
model may limit the model’s suitability for use in more complex arable and
horticultural rotations.
Model Life Cycle: The Funding Model
Funding is vital for the development and sustainability of any DSS. Some policy￾based models may be wholly funded by governments. Some large-scale models such
as those developed for climate change may get sustained funding, but long-term
funding for agricultural models is less likely. Models designed for field- and farm￾scale issues may be funded by both government and commercial sources. In all
cases, for a model to survive beyond the lifetime of the initial development, thought
needs to be given to how the model in use can be supported (Fig. 2)80 J. Akaka et al.
Fig. 2 All stages of the model life cycle need sufficient financial support. (Rahn, 2004, 2013)
Many models have sunk after initial development. Experiences of such failures
are rarely published, so there is a danger of repeating the same mistakes. In some
cases, models die after key researchers leave full-time employment. Models will
need funding to deliver them to the end users as well as support their maintenance as
errors in programming or science will generally be found. Science will develop with
time, so revisions will need to be funded. Changes in the platform such as the
operating system (e.g. Windows, Android or Apple Mac) will also drive the need for
revision.
2.2 Development
Throughout the model’s life cycle, the project must accommodate stakeholders’
inputs (e.g. scientists and potential users) and adapt with developing science to
provide timely, effective and efficient management strategies. To achieve this, it is
important to identify the main factors for successful development of an agricultural
DSS. Good project management brings on board all stakeholders. This sets the stage
for developing sound insights into the outputs needed to inform decisions that
support timely change in farm practices.
Data
Given the amount of data available, it may be taxing to the modeller to collect, store
and analyse this information. The aim is to use the appropriate data to explain a
particular situation. Therefore, certain data types, such as field conditions where the
crop is grown, soil properties or even meteorological data are required for different
decisions. In other cases, the context can be specific to one type of crop. Information
on the planting season, pesticide and fertilizer inputs can be collected for certain
crops. The multiplicity of farming contexts implies that different models are needed
for different scenarios. Perhaps, a significant drawback of having many independent
models is the risk that similar data may need to be entered several times to suit the
needs of each model. Technologies such as integrated pesticide management (IPM)
allow for a combination of several MBPs for different pests across multiple geo￾graphical locations. This allows for better management and organization; fastDevelopment and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 81
loading speeds; ease in implementing changes and updates; and better support. The
data could also be divided according to the context, such as the field in which the
crop is sown, information on soil properties and meteorological data. Other crop￾specific data can include sowing dates, pesticide and fertilizer inputs. Conventions
such as the EU-funded project IPM Decisions (https://www.ipmdecisions.net/) facil￾itate better integration of inputs and outputs of models developed to provide decision
support. In the future, field-scale models will need to deliver data to other parts of the
management system responsible for environmental and ecosystem service audits.
Meteorological data may be sourced from the internet or from localized weather
stations. Some DSS tools may need to be supported by weather forecasts. It is
important that the meteorological data needed to run the models should be available,
preferably from local or government sources. However, the acquisition of data might
be costly when it is not available for certain locations. Some models may need crop
and soil data from sensors or field visits to operate. The way in which data is relayed
to the models must be considered at an early stage to increase their ease of use.
Ease of Use
According to the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis, 1989), the perceived
ease of use and usefulness have a direct influence on individual behaviour through
the intention to adopt technologies. The perceived ease of use determines the
perceived usefulness because the easier it is to use a technology, the greater the
perceived usefulness. In other words, the perceived ease of use is the subjective
evaluation of effort required to use the system. Other research on behavioural
decision-making shows that individuals try to minimize the effort used when
performing tasks (Payne et al., 1993). Systems that are easy to use are useful and
therefore more likely to be adopted.
Past research in the fields of information systems and psychology shows the
importance of individual beliefs about computerized systems on the perceived ease
of use (Davis, 1989; Doll & Ajzen, 1992). In behavioural decision theory, anchoring
and adjustment heuristics influence the perceived ease of use and the adoption.
Individuals often use general information (the anchor) when there is no specific
knowledge. When new information becomes available, the decision is adjusted
accordingly, but they still rely on this anchor. Based on these findings, it is expected
that potential users anchor their perception of the ease of use of a novel system on the
basis of their beliefs about computers and computerized systems. However, as they
become familiar with the system, their perception of the perceived ease is adjusted
according to the experience gained from direct use. In addition to improving
computer system design characteristics to increase perceived ease of use, it is equally
important to consider the importance of individual behaviour, heuristics and
experience.
Ideally, all the individual models integrate into a farm system model, which logs
activities carried out at the field scale. This data is useful in information audit for
regulatory, ecosystem service inputs and feedback on MBPs to improve decision￾making. Then, it may be possible for farm management models to support various82 J. Akaka et al.
individual models by integrating them into the whole farm system. Additionally,
there is increasing demand for integrating farm and blockchain systems involved
with traceability of food and logistics.
Such frameworks allow the addition of new tools into the system as new
problems and science develop. It is common for individual companies to have
their own in-house styles that are important for their competitive advantage, which
may pose a problem. For example, Windows, Android and Apple operating systems
are tailored for different market segments and are rarely interoperable.
The design of the interface is critically important. The ability to enter data on a
single screen without having to switch between multiple windows is valuable. The
ability of users to review input data and correct any errors before model runs is
desirable. If the process of data entry involves multiple steps, repetition or contains
hidden menus, it is likely to be difficult to use.
Output screens should be easy to read and interpret, possibly having a simpler
first screen but also provide further information on the inputs required as an option.
Thought should be given on how the outputs are communicated to managers and
farm equipment. For instance, disease or pest models must be able to signal warnings
on crops that need to be sprayed. Others may need output that can be read by other
models or tools on the farm. For example, if a model recommends that a crop be
sprayed, it is helpful to identify appropriate pesticides for use. Afterwards, an
automatic order can be placed with a supplier. A job note could be raised informing
contractors or staff of pending work to do. Finally, after the job has been done, a
record is filed for the cropping record on the whole farm system as part of the
traceability needed by the consumers of the harvested product.
Simply updating a model does not always mean that it is easier to use. The DOS
(disk operating system) version of WELL_N (Rahn et al., 1996), a fertilizer predic￾tion model for field vegetables, was easier to use than the later Windows versions.
The latter was easier on the eye but involved data entry into multiple windows,
difficult to review and correct before the model ran. In this instance, there was
insufficient contact between the programmers and users to rectify this problem.
Additionally, the inclusion of hints and context-specific help screens can help the
users to operate the model. The provision of contact details for help and assistance
from a real person via a helpline or email address is useful. Such contact also
provides developers with information for debugging and introducing new features
in future revisions.
In any computerized system, it is important to understand and incorporate user
needs in the development of the system. This has a long-term impact on the success
and continuous use of many computerized systems. Ji et al. (2018) showed that
customising the user interface according to the user’s cognitive response and
behaviour significantly improved usability and satisfaction among 200 users.
If it takes more than a few attempts to run a new model, the motivation to
persevere with it and the enthusiasm to use similar technology in the future decline.
Again, the involvement of the end users at an early design stage is necessary to
develop a user interface that is ‘fit for purpose’. Additionally, during development,Development and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 83
panels and workshops with potential users can identify differences between what is
offered and end user needs.
Testing for Release
Modelling is an intellectually rewarding endeavour. Sharing the outcome of this
work will encourage debate and may lead to further development of the model.
Models that will be used for decision support must be well-tested before they are
used in practice. No model is ever going to be completely free of errors, so when is it
good enough to be released? Project deadlines may push one to release a model
earlier. However, is it better to release a beta version early, or a fully tested version
later, given that ‘buggy’ software may not be trusted by customers? These errors can
arise from the software hosting the model or the model itself.
A trial version of the main DSSs can be made available before it is fully adopted
(Doss, 2003). A study by Adesina and Zinnah (1993) identified that the perception of
the characteristics of modern rice varieties had a significant effect on the decision to
adopt them. It is vital that before the introduction of any new technology to farmers,
they should be involved in the evaluation to determine how suitable the technology
is to their circumstances (Sinja et al., 2004).
Model-based software may provide incorrect results, broadly speaking, for two
reasons. First, the model itself may be an inaccurate representation of the decision
problem. Second, the software hosting the model could contain errors. Statistical
tests can assess models for robustness and complexity (Smith et al., 1996). However,
a model may still be useful even if it fails some of these tests. Absolutely precise
models are rare because of limitations in the field. For instance, fertilizer application
rates that are smaller than can be practically applied are not useful.
Models can be inaccurate in different ways. For example, they can be biased:
simulated values are systematically higher (or lower) than observed values (Fig. 3a).
This suggests that the model captures the important processes but has been param￾eterized incorrectly. Models can be adrift in predicting the timing of certain events
(Fig.3b), for example peaks of simulated N mineralization, or pest populations. A
pest model that predicts high population density ahead of observed peaks in
Fig. 3 Examples of failures in model prediction (Rahn, 2004). Simulated = solid line, mea￾sured = point (a) Bias in a model r
2 = 1. (b) Model showing timing error r
2 = 0.2584 J. Akaka et al.
population density would be wrong in theory, but such a model would still provide a
benefit if correcting actions could be applied in the field to avoid peak infestation.
A DSS should be determined to be suitable, i.e. simple to operate and give advice
that is beneficial. The above should be achieved without data requirements that
cannot be met by practitioners. The research model underlying WELL_N (Rahn
et al., 1996) was circulated and tested in the field by an advisory body ADAS
(Agricultural Development and Advisory Service) before the decision support
system itself was released. During testing, the DSS was operated by experienced
advisors, which allowed errors to be identified and reported to the programming
team. A standard dataset was used to test subsequent versions of the model. A wide
range of cropping scenarios was generated to identify errors. It was discovered that
the biggest problems were related to programming errors rather than to model
concepts.
Sensitivity analysis can be used to identify inputs and parameters that have
profound effects on model outputs (de Wit, 1982; Rahn et al., 2001). In the case
of WELL_N, nitrogen recommendation was identified. Sensitivity analysis is an
important element of testing the model described above.
2.3 Delivery
It’s pointless developing models that improve farm practice if they are not delivered
effectively. At the design stage, having some insight into the delivery strategy is
beneficial. Initial stakeholders’ and early adopters’ support in the delivery of MBPs
is vital.
Additionally, the five principles of marketing and other aspects of relational
marketing (i.e. the relationship between the developers and users) also apply
(Alajoutsijärvi & Tikkanen, 2000). Importantly, it is all about marketing the benefits
of using the MBPs and not the practices/tools themselves.
Product: Benefits
A vital question for the stakeholder is whether using the model provides a benefit. In
nitrogen modelling, the most obvious benefits to consider are a reduction in the
amount (and cost) of fertilizer used as well as a reduction in environmental pollution.
Even though such benefits are important to scientists, they might be insignificant to
growers. Specifically, does the business become more competitive? In the end, a
model will only be used if it adds value to the production process as a whole. The
‘value chain’ (Porter, 1985) in Fig. 4 shows various areas where value can be added
and where a higher profit margin can be achieved. A grower may use a model to
demonstrate compliance with good agricultural practice, thereby boost marketing of
the produce and thereby increase the profit margin. Using a model can also improve
operations and logistics by optimizing purchase and use of fertilizers. Quality and
storability (i.e., value) of produce may be increased by targeted fertilizerDevelopment and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 85
Fig. 4 Porter’s (1985)
value chain – areas where
contributions can be made to
improve margin
applications. If the benefits of using DSSs can be demonstrated, it is likely that
stakeholders will be interested (Rahn, 2004).
Price
There are different strategies of pricing DSSs. Some can be free; some may be
provided as part of a package with a commitment to purchase pesticides and fertilizers
or sold independently at a premium. However, in specialized industries, such as
horticulture, the chances of recovering the cost of development are small. Nonethe￾less, it is possible to recover the costs of maintenance and revision. Regardless, if the
price exceeds the perceived benefits, it is likely the DSS will not be purchased. A
subscription model which involves online support may be more beneficial. There are
many textbooks that go into this subject area in great detail, but our objective is to
highlight how pricing strategies affect adoption and longevity of DSSs.
Placement: Where to Release
Another important question is where the model might be placed. The DSSs can be
distributed in many places, for example onboard computers in tractors, phones, on the
cloud, etc. Each option has its advantages and disadvantages. In cloud-based distribu￾tion, the system is easier to control and upgrade but relies on users having reliable
Internet that is more accessible in the office than in the field. Other complex models
may need to be run by consultants on behalf of the farmers as part of a farm
management contract. Pest and disease models may benefit from centralised systems
as they can easily access national monitoring data. The need to use data from yield, soil,
moisture and fertility maps dictates the appropriate platform for a particular model.
The location of data has implications on security and run time. Offline systems
can run without an Internet connection. However, distribution, upgrading and
updating can be difficult. They are also prone to problems on computers that
might stop the models from operating and are related to specific machines where
user support is important.
Promotion and People: Getting the Message Across
It is important to identify the appropriate mix of methods to promote access and use.
Initial stakeholders and early adopters can make a significant contribution to the
process. Model champions should be used to spearhead the process. Field-scale
demonstration of use and benefits of a model by early adopters will be seen by their86 J. Akaka et al.
peers and neighbours. Publications in the farming press and blogs will all help.
Farmers can be invited to workshops and trained to use the models. The mix between
group and one-to-one methods will depend on many factors (Rahn, 2013).
An important distinction should be made between advertising/promotion cam￾paigns on the one hand, and informative demonstration sessions on the other. A
recent paper by Akaka et al. (2021) has shown that while farmers’ trust in a given
DSS increases with exposure to demonstration sessions, advertising has the opposite
effect, hindering the users’ trust.
Key in getting the messages across and helping the users to use the models is
contact with the developers by email, phone or blog:
1. To help users run the models.
2. To identify revisions that may need to be made to the model interfaces and core
model.
Challenges of Getting the Message Across for Fertilizer Management:
An Example in China
China’s farming landscape is very different to that in Europe. For example, there are
910,000 small-scale farmers in Beijing alone. Such a large number of clients is hard
to reach via individual advisory visits. A project from the School of Oriental and
African Studies (SOAS) at the University of London identified a different approach
(Smith, 2015). This project assembled a team of social and biological scientists in the
UK and China to study what influences farmer behaviour with respect to fertilizer
recommendations (Bellarby et al., 2017; Smith et al., 2015). A farmer’s neighbours
had a greater influence on decisions pertaining to fertilizer use than advisers (includ￾ing those from fertilizer companies), in Zea mays, Triticum aestivum and greenhouse
vegetable cropping systems. The national recommendation system of China Agri￾culture University (Zhang et al., 2009) was little used.
As neighbours can be important in the diffusion process, innovators and early
adopters can be used to influence small groups of farmers. Figure 5 shows a modified
Rogers innovation curve. Innovators and early adopters can be the first growers to
test out the new practices, providing demonstrations locally for others to see and
follow. On-farm and context-specific demonstrations are crucial for bridging the
chasm between early adopters and the early majority.
Early adopters are keen to benefit from a new system and can be persuaded to
modify their behaviour by discussion. An advisory service can maintain contact with
this small group without undue effort. Early adopters are well aware of the critical
constraints to production, and it is advantageous to involve them when designing
new recommendation systems. Early adopters also play a role in demonstrating the
benefits of a new recommendation system to their neighbours at a meaningful scale.
Some practitioners will not be convinced even by such demonstrations and will only
use the new system when legislation such as the Nitrate Directive (EU, 1991) in
Europe is put in place (Rahn, 2018).Development and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 87
Fig. 5 Modified innovation adoption curve. (Rahn, 2018; Rogers, 1962)
3 Social Factors Affecting Adoption of MBPs
Technical aspects are often blamed for low adoption of MBPs, but it is important to
identify how individual attributes contribute to the low adoption of MBPs. Follow￾ing such concerns, the social determinants of adoption of new farming practices have
been extensively documented (Kuehne et al., 2017). This chapter organizes and sorts
the adoption factors of farming technology (Feder & Umali, 1993; Kuehne et al.,
2017). Conventionally, decision-making process theories identify three main factors:
farmer, technological, and institutional characteristics (Meijer et al., 2015). A review
by Kumar et al. (2018) named five main factors: the source of information, features
of the technology, economic factors, farm characteristics, institutional and
sociodemographic factors. We present a revised analytical framework outlining the
interactions between end-user characteristics and structural performance features of
assessed MBPs in the decision-making process involving technological adoption by
users at the farm. Other decision-making processes include a psychological process
in addition to the factors identified above. As suggested by Davis (1989) in the
technology acceptance model, technology acceptance and usage is determined by
the perceived usefulness and the perceived ease of use. Perceived usefulness is utility
gained from improving one’s work performance due to the use of a certain technol￾ogy, whereas perceived ease of use is related to the effort required to use a certain
technology (Davis, 1989; McDonald et al., 2016).
The decision to adopt new technologies is often seen as an interaction of
individual attributes: risk, uncertainty, incomplete information, institutional factors
and infrastructure (Uaiene, 2011). Social networks and learning also have an effect
on the decision to adopt innovative technologies (Uaiene, 2011). The determinants
identified in the literature depend on the technology under investigation and location
(Bonabana-Wabbi et al., 2002). In this study, these factors are categorized into
demographic, societal and farm characteristics.88 J. Akaka et al.
3.1 Demographic Factors
Individual characteristics and the social environment have been identified to have a
significant influence on adoption. Such characteristics include education, age and
gender (Keelan et al., 2009; Mignouna et al., 2011). Education has a positive influence
on the decision to adopt new technologies. Higher education levels increase the ability
to obtain, process and use information in the adoption of new technology (Lavison,
2013; Mignouna et al., 2011). Higher educational attainment influences attitudes and
thoughts, making users open-minded, rational and well-positioned to analyse the
benefits of a new technology (Waller et al., 1998). Therefore, innovations can be
introduced and adopted easily by such users (Adebiyi & Okunlola, 2013). However,
another study by Uematsu and Mishra (2010) reported a negative influence of formal
education towards adopting genetically modified crops.
Age has also been identified as a determinant in the adoption of new technologies in
agriculture. Research shows that older farmers are more knowledgeable and experi￾enced when evaluating technologies compared to younger farmers (Kariyasa & Dewi,
2013; Mignouna et al., 2011). At the same time, other studies report a negative
relationship between age and the adoption of technology. According to Mauceri
et al. (2007) and Adesina and Zinnah (1993), older farmers are more risk-averse and
avoid long-term investments. However, younger farmers are often risk-seeking and
more inclined to experiment with new technologies. In a study by Alexander and Van
Mellor (2005) in the adoption of genetically modified maize varieties, adoption
increased with age for younger farmers as they gained experience and increased their
stock of human capital, but declined with age for farmers closer to retirement. Gender
roles have also been extensively investigated, and researchers report mixed results on
the role of gender in technology adoption (Bonabana-Wabbi et al., 2002). A study by
Doss and Morris (2000) on the impact of gender in technology adoption did not identify
any significant effects of gender on the probability of adopting improved maize
varieties in Ghana. Rather, adoption depends on access to land, labour and other
resources. However, if males had greater access to these resources, then the benefits
of the technologies will benefit women to a lesser degree.
3.2 Societal Factors
Being part of a social group facilitates the accumulation of social capital. Conse￾quently, trust and information exchange grow in such situations (Mignouna et al.,
2011). In these groups, there are opinion leaders who can influence how social
groups behave. Successful adoption of technologies in the presence of such individ￾uals hinges on gaining their trust and support by providing them with information
about new environmental management approaches to disseminate in their groups.
Farmers in the same social networks learn about new technologies from each
other. According to Uaiene (2011), social network effects are important forDevelopment and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 89
individual decisions. In the context of agricultural innovations, it is common for
farmers to share data and learn from each other. The amount of data or knowledge
accessible to each group, a linear combination of individual input (static externali￾ties) and available knowledge (learning externalities), is a key driver of productivity.
Even though many researchers report that social groups have a positive influence on
adoption, others report that they can be detrimental to technology adoption
evidenced by free-riding behaviour because some members tend to benefit from
positive learning externalities at a minimal cost.
In the same generation agricultural networks, seasoned farmers contribute more
towards the accumulation of available knowledge than their amateur counterparts.
New and inexperienced farmers are more likely to benefit from the accumulated
knowledge in the social group in comparison to their contribution, leading to free￾riding behaviour. However, under the same assumptions listed above, today’s
generation of farmers are more productive than previous generations because they
can access knowledge faster. Thus, older farmers tend to free ride in mixed gener￾ation networks.
A study by Foster and Rosenzweig (1995) on the adoption of Green Revolution
technologies in India reported that not only learning externalities (e.g. diffusion of
information, social learning, spillovers) within social networks increased the profit￾ability of adoption, but also there was evidence of free-riding by other farmers on
their neighbours’ experimentation with the new technology. Bandiera and Rasul
(2006) report that learning externalities generate opposite effects. The greater the
experimentation with new technologies, the more advantageous it is to join such
social networks. At the same time, it was easier to free-ride others’ experimentation
as farmers can rely on other members to gain experience and later increase the usage
as it becomes profitable to them. Stemming from the outcome of these contradictory
effects, network effects are positive at low rates of adoption but negative at high rates
of adoption.
Acquisition of information about a new technology enables farmers to learn about
the existence, effective use and, eventually, its adoption. Farmers will only adopt the
technology they are aware of. As farmers accumulate information about a
technology’s performance, their assessment changes over time from subjective to
objective (Bonabana-Wabbi et al., 2002; Caswell et al., 2001). The accumulated
information does not automatically lead to adoption because farmers may perceive
and evaluate the technology differently from scientists (Uaiene, 2011).
Access to extension services provides the farmer with information about the
existence, use and benefit of new technologies through extension agents. They
connect developers to farmers and reduce transaction costs incurred when passing
on specialized information about the new technology.
According to Mohamed and Temu (2008), access to finance eases adoption by
increasing the capability to cope with risk (Simtowe & Zeller, 2006), avoid
suboptimal strategies and take on riskier investments with larger rewards. In some
countries, female-headed households have reduced access to credit facilities com￾pared to their male counterparts. In the long term, gender effects lead to low adoption
due to reduced ability of female households to acquire these technologies (Muzari90 J. Akaka et al.
et al., 2012), which must be addressed through appropriate policies (Simtowe &
Zeller, 2006).
3.3 Farm Size
Farm size affects and in turn is affected by other factors influencing adoption
(Lavison, 2013). For instance, some DSSs can be scale-dependent because of the
size of the farm, i.e. some are suited for big or small farms, but not both (Bonabana￾Wabbi et al., 2002). Other studies have reported a positive correlation between farm
size and the adoption of agricultural technologies (Mignouna et al., 2011; Uaiene,
2011). Larger farms can dedicate a part of their land to experiment with new farming
technologies compared to smaller farms (Uaiene, 2011). More so, heavy machinery
needs big spaces to reach economies of scale and maintain profitability (Feder et al.,
1995). On the contrary, other studies report a negative correlation between farm size
and the adoption of agricultural technologies. Smaller farms are better suited to adopt
technologies that aim to minimize input, land and labour. Greenhouse technologies
and zero-grazing substitutes increased agricultural output for minimal input (Harper
et al., 1990; Yaron et al., 1992). After all, large-scale farming is riskier because of the
high cost of equipment, capital and inputs. Other studies have reported a neutral
correlation between farm size and the adoption of new farming technologies. Samiee
et al. (2009) reported that farm size did not influence the adoption of IPM.
Other studies have also reported that farm size does not influence IPM adoption
(Bonabana-Wabbi et al., 2002; Grieshop et al., 1988; Ridgley & Brush, 1992;
Samiee et al., 2009; Waller et al., 1998). Dissemination may take place indepen￾dently of farming scale. Kariyasa and Dewi (2013) report that larger farms had no
significant effect on the probability of adopting Integrated Crop Management Farmer
Field School. Perhaps, it is best to consider extent instead of total farm size. Total
farm area facilitates comparison of productivity realized from using new technology
(Lowenberg-DeBoer, 2000). This makes it easier to compare productivity gains
among farmers with different farm sizes.
4 Behavioural Approaches to the Adoption of Models
for Precision Farming
Novel tools and methods may not be adopted by farmers due to a variety of reasons
leading to a mismatch between the solutions offered and the needs these are
supposed to satisfy. Technical aspects of the tools and solutions are often blamed,
assuming that the decision-making process of the potential adopter is flawless.
However, behavioural economics provides strong evidence that humans are affected
by social- and individual-level phenomena which lead to a number of well-Development and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 91
documented biases. In fact, non-adoption of innovative agricultural methods has
been observed even in successful novel solutions (Abedullah & Qaim, 2015; Villano
et al., 2015). It is, therefore, interesting to connect the literature on individual and
social features of human decision-making with the biases that influence the decision
to adopt a given method or a model-based practice.
In what follows we provide a list of idiosyncratic characteristics and individual or
collective behavioural biases as determinants of the match or mismatch between
farmers’ needs and the solutions offered to them.
4.1 Risk Attitudes
Risk attitudes are among the most prominent features of individual behaviour,
identified in early literature (Feder, 1979) as a possible idiosyncratic barrier to the
adoption of new technologies. Despite a long series of paradigm changes and
developments since the seminal theory of expected utility theory by von Neumann
and Morgenstern (1944), the term ‘risk attitudes’ is still often confused with or
limited to the property of ‘risk aversion’, namely, decision-makers’ preference for
options with less dispersion of possible outcomes, other things being equal. Several
authors (Barham et al., 2014; Barham et al., 2015) have hypothesized that risk
aversion makes a farmer hesitant to adopt new methods or innovative decision
support tools. Using the risk aversion parameters estimated for farmers, the reverse
path has also been explored, determining the optimal levels of inputs in herbicide
management problems (Pannell, 1991, 1995). However, from a theoretical point of
view, risk aversion could be expected to create incentives both towards and against
adoption decisions (a ‘Jekyll and Hyde’ effect) when the new solutions or methods
considered could provide more safety towards climate or yield uncertainty. There￾fore, the existing findings reported on the effects of risk aversion on adoption may
have been less salient than they really are, given that the aforementioned second
(adoption-enhancing) effect of risk aversion has not been modelled so far. A general
theoretical model which considers both roles of risk aversion on adoption decisions
does not exist. This constitutes an important gap in the existing approaches.
Following evidence against the expected utility theory and critique by Allais
(1953), the attribution of risk attitudes and, thus, risk aversion to the curvature of the
decision-maker’s utility function was shown to be insufficient to accommodate a
plethora of other phenomena observed in decision-making under uncertainty. Kah￾neman and Tversky’s (1979) prospect theory opened the way to a whole range of
new terms and phenomena, leading people to evaluate uncertain prospects in very
different ways from that suggested by the simple mathematical expectation of the
‘lottery’ of possible outcomes. Among such terms, reference points, loss aversion
and probability weighting were shown to play an important role in decision-making
under uncertainty.
Probability weighting denotes the tendency of decision-makers to distort proba￾bilities in a way that leads to overestimation of low probabilities and underestimation92 J. Akaka et al.
of high ones. Loss aversion is the behavioural pattern leading to a greater decrease
from a loss than the utility increase from a gain of the same size. Finally, determining
a reference point (current earnings, aspiration level, subsistence level, etc.) makes it
possible for all outcomes to be classified as gains and losses, leaving a further degree
of freedom to prospect theory by allowing risk aversion or risk seeking to vary across
the two domains. A consequence of the freedom to consider different reference
points has revealed the importance of framing decisions as gains or losses,
depending on the reference point adopted. The plethora of studies on risk aversion
contrasts with the scarcity of studies accounting for these phenomena, which when
neglected can lead to severe underestimation of the role of risk attitudes in farming
decisions. Recently, Bontemps et al. (2021) presented a study on French farmers,
showing that the use of a more complete specification of prospect theory (cumulative
prospect theory) with a joint consideration of reference points, loss aversion and
probability weighting raised the percentage of pesticide use decisions explained
through risk attitudes from 4% to 19%. In other words, the whole spectrum of
aspects captured by recent theories of risky decision-making is necessary for a
reliable explanation of farmers’ adoption decisions.
Spatial dependence. When considering the determinants of adoption decisions,
socioeconomic factors have already obtained some attention, but most approaches
have focused on a small subset of isolated drivers and barriers. While the term
‘socioeconomic’ refers to both individual and collective characteristics of the
decision-makers and their social environment, adoption of probability models focuses
mostly on farmers’ individual characteristics and to a much lesser extent no commu￾nity features and norms. Areal et al. (2012) and Ambali et al. (2019, 2021) present a
joint consideration of individual and collective (geographically clustered) risk atti￾tudes which partly determine Nigerian farmers’ decisions to adopt new rice varieties.
The evidence provided there suggests that risk attitudes may have evolved in similar
ways among populations exposed to similar climatic conditions. It has also been
argued that farmers’ risk attitudes could have evolved differently from other groups
(Iyer et al., 2020). Therefore, the farmers’ natural environment can be a determinant of
risk attitudes, which in their turn determine their decisions. The interplay among
different behavioural drivers and the co-evolution of farming and societal character￾istics needs to be jointly and exhaustively taken into account when explaining the role
of the human decision-making processes in tool and technique adoption decisions.
Clustering of decisions by geographical location could simply be an effect of imitation
of others in a community, leading to herding behaviour, but this is a more general
aspect of human behaviour beyond risky decisions, which are discussed below.
4.2 Behavioural Factors Beyond Risk Attitudes
The growing field of experimental economics and economic psychology has pro￾duced a long list of behavioural biases which systematically affect decision-making
in all domains of human life, including agriculture. Some of these are discussed
below.Development and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 93
Anchoring refers to the choice of the default or status quo option more frequently
than would be optimal. Holst et al. (2015) prove that farmers’ decisions do suffer
from this behavioural bias. Imitation of successful others and herding makes an
individual choose according to the choice of the majority. While herding in financial
markets, including those for agricultural commodities (Apergis et al., 2020), there is
little systematic evidence on this phenomenon, which seems central to the way
farmers face new methods and new MBPs. This behavioural bias increases the
inertia of a community, making it less prone to adopting new methods and
decision-support tools. This brings us to the importance of social norms. Hillenbrand
and Miruka (2019) defined these as collective beliefs or expectations one has about
the behaviour of others in a reference group. Such norms moderate the beliefs of a
farmer regarding what others consider correct, important or successful, including the
transmission of information and advice among others in the community. An impor￾tant aspect of social norms regards the dimension of gender which should be dealt
with well beyond the usual ‘demographic approach’. As Hillenbrand and Miruka
(2019) observe, gender and gender norms determine, to a large extent, the possibility
of a fair share of the benefits from agriculture and farming innovations, as well as the
changing context of labour relations in agriculture.
Finally, other demographic variables have been shown to affect a farmer’s
propensity to adopt model-based practices in precision farming. Among such vari￾ables, the most common in the literature are age and education. Also, the farmers’
access and type of exposure (advertising, demonstrations) to a given solution matter,
as reported by Akaka et al. (2021). Their dataset is partly used in the next section to
estimate the model discussed to give a simple demonstration of the quantitative
methodology that can be adopted to study farmers’ adoption decisions as a function
of their individual characteristics.
5 An Empirical Approach to Research on Adoption
of Models
The growing literature on behavioural economics has pointed out that the complex￾ity of human behaviour can only be studied by taking into account all the aforemen￾tioned behavioural and socioeconomic factors jointly. While useful for pilot results
and further design of more systematic approaches, qualitative methods expecting
users to guess their own motivations through experience and introspection have
failed to provide a complete picture of the underlying relations that hinder or
facilitate the match between solutions and needs. Quantitative analysis of extensive
surveys may reveal unexpected barriers and drivers of adoption decisions, beyond
what is detected by each user from their own experience.
In what follows, we discuss the results from a subsample of an ongoing survey in
the framework of IPM Decisions whose analysis offers insights on the drivers and
barriers in a user’s decision to adopt a DSS. At the same time, the approach is used as94 J. Akaka et al.
Table 1 Percentage of
responses related with the
variables under study
Age Type of farm
18 to 25 7.38% Conventional 40.74%
25 to 35 25.50% Integrated 29.63%
35 to 50 27.52% Organic 9.26%
50 to 60 29.53% Biodynamic 0.67%
60 or more 10.07% Not indicated 20.37%
Education Farm size
Vocational 40.27% Under 5 ha 10.07%
Bachelor 27.52% 5 to 10 ha 2.68%
Masters 17.45% 10 to 30 ha 18.12%
PhD 4.70% 30 to 60 ha 14.09%
Others 6.71% Over 60 ha 54.36%
Access to high-speed Internet
Under 20 K 21.48% No 10.00%
20 to 25 K 20.81% In the office only 38.00%
35 to 50 K 20.13% Also in the fields 52.00%
50 to 75 K 12.08%
Over 75 K 22.15%
Gender Already tried using a DSS
Male 80.00% Yes 60.00%
Female 19.00% No 24.00%
Not indicated 1.00% Not indicated 16.00%
Akasska et al. (2021)
an example of behavioural models whose role is crucial in the diagnosis of barriers to
adoption, especially focusing on the user’s point of view. We present first the data
collected to analyse the variables that shape the probability for a farm manager to use
a DSS. We conducted a questionnaire survey that was administered in 11 different
European countries, eliciting numerous personal and farm-specific characteristics
relevant to the adoption of DSSs. A total of 107 European farmers answered the
questionnaire. The questionnaires were collected during a period of 6 months which
ended in March 2020. Table 1 shows the main descriptive statistics of the sample
regmontharding the profile of the farmers and the characteristics of the farm.
Econometric Analysis
To identify potential avenues for improving DSS, we did an econometric analysis of
the data collected. The purpose of this analysis was to identify the appropriate
statistical model allowing us to measure the impact of the different variables that
we have collected on the farmers’ adoption rate of DSSs. We propose a model where
we hypothesize that the characteristics of the farmer as well as of the farm and farm
equipment influence the decision to use DSSs. Considering the binary nature of our
dependent variable (i.e. using or not using DSSs), we use a logit model to perform
this analysis. The model is specified as follows:Þ
Explanation of variable
Development and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 95
P ið Þ = 1
1 þ exp - β0 - X1,iβ1 - X2,iβ2 - ... - X15,iβ15 ð , ð1Þ
where P(i) is the probability for farmer i to use DSSs, Xj, i is the value of variable j for
subject i and βj is the parameter to be estimated that captures the specific impact of
variable j on the probability for a farmer to use a DSS. Table 2 presents the
explanatory variables of the model, while Table 3 presents the results of the model.
In the first column, the farm size and the willingness to pay to use a DSS both
show a positive and significant effect on the rate of DSS use ( p < 0.01). Managers of
the largest farms (i.e. total surface area) are more likely to use DSSs, all other
parameters remaining equal. Also, the probability of using a DSS increases with
the willingness to pay for one.
Other personal characteristics of the manager of the farm do not significantly
affect the adoption rate. The level of education only shows a positive and significant
effect ( p < 0.1). Regarding the characteristics of the farm, vegetable producers are
significantly more likely to use DSS than other types of producers ( p < 0.05). This
might be explained by the fragile nature of some vegetables faced with diseases. On
the other hand, flower growers are significantly less likely to use DSSs than other
types of producers.
Column 3 (see Table 3) shows that some farm characteristics influence managers’
trust in DSS. Managers of integrated and biodynamic farms tend to show a
Table 2 Explanatory variables of the model
Personal
characteristics
Variable
symbol
Age X1 Age of farmer in years
Education X2 Highest degree obtained among five categories
Gender X3 Dummy variable = 1 if male
Income X4 Net income in euros
Need IT teaching X5 Dummy variable = 1 if teaching needed
Farm
characteristics
Dummy variable = 1 if animals in the farm
Animal X6
Arable crops X7 Dummy variable = 1 if arable crops in the farm
Flowers X8 Dummy variable = 1 if flowers in the farm
Orchards X9 Dummy variable = 1 if orchards in the farm
Vegetables X10 Dummy variable = 1 if vegetables in the farm
Vineyard X11 Dummy variable = 1 if vineyard in the farm
Farm size X12 Size of the farm in hectares
Biodynamic X13 Dummy variable = 1 if biodynamic farm
Conventional farm X14 Dummy variable = 1 if conventional farm
High-speed
internet
X15 Dummy variable = 1 if high-speed internet in the office and
in the field
Akaka et al. (2021)96 J. Akaka et al.
Table 3 Binomial logit and ordered logit estimates with DSS adoption rate (first column) and trust
(second column) as endogenous variables in two separate regression analyses
DSS use Marginal effects Trust in DSS
Age 0.1530(0.2638) 0.0292(0.0503) -0.0534(0.1978)
Education 0.5880*(0.3015) 0.1120*(0.0574) 0.0534(0.2225)
Gender (male) -0.0174(0.9761)
Farm size 1.0590***(0.3518) 0.2020***(0.0678) 0.3910*(0.2273)
Income -0.1850(0.2403) -0.0353(0.0458) -0.1760(0.1630)
Arable crops -0.2580(0.6789) -0.0492(0.1295) -0.1720(0.5059)
Animals -1.1200(1.0769) -0.2130(0.2029) -0.2730(0.9750)
Orchards 0.3820(0.9550) 0.0729(0.1823) -0.8370(0.6805)
Vegetables 3.0470**(1.1949) 0.5810***(0.2184) 0.1980(0.6600)
Flowers -2.5950*(0.1.5727) -0.4940*(0.2923) 1.0010(1.1375)
Vineyards 0.5760(0.7783)
Integrated farm 0.7430*(0.4060)
Biodynamic farm 3.8190**(1.7438)
Legislative requirement 0.5610(0.7013) 0.1070(0.1338) -0.1890(0.5400)
High Speed Internet 1.1570*(0.5995) 0.2200**(0.1095)
Need IT teaching -0.8950(0.5967) -0.1710(0.1103) 0.4480(1.0182)
Willingness to pay 1.9550***(0.6517) 0.3730***(0.1184)
Already used DSS -0.2740(0.4152)
Exposed to marketing -2.6730**(1.1000)
Exposed to demonstrations 1.7610*(1.0298)
_cons -6.1200***(1.9185) 4.063***(1.2981)
N 107 107 106
Akaka et al. (2021)
Standard errors to the nearest 4 dp in parenthesis. Significance level: *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05 and
***p < 0.001
significantly higher level of trust towards DSSs (respectively, p < 0.1 and p < 0.05).
Also, managers of larger farms tend to trust DSS more ( p < 0.1). Interestingly,
results regarding the type of communication managers have been exposed to show
how DSS is advertised matters. While farm managers that have been exposed to
simple advertising show a significantly lower level of trust toward DSS ( p < 0.1),
farm managers who attended regular demonstrations trust DSS significantly more
( p < 0.05).
The characteristics of the farm manager have a very limited impact on the
decision to use DSSs. The age, gender, income, and need of IT teachings do not
influence it. Only the degree of the farm manager shows a significant impact
( p < 0.1), with a higher degree associated with a higher probability to use DSSs.
Regarding the farm characteristics, the size of the farm as well as the type of
cultivated product are relevant in explaining the probable use of DSSs. Results show
that a larger farm size is associated with a significantly higher probability of using
DSSs ( p < 0.01) and that farms cultivating vegetables are significantly more likely
to use DSSs ( p < 0.05). It is also interesting to note that farmers managingDevelopment and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 97
conventional farms compared to those managing organic, biodynamic and integrated
farms are less likely to use DSSs ( p < 0.1).
The analysis above demonstrates how behavioural research can be used to
identify statistically significant drivers and barriers of adoption of a given DSSs,
using econometric modelling of trust and the decision to adopt any given DSS as a
function of various personal characteristics, farm-related features and how farmers
learn about DSS through demonstration and advertising. For behavioural and social
scientists interested in identifying the determinants of adoption of DSSs, all the
significant findings identified above would be difficult if not impossible to identify
using other qualitative methods such as in-depth interviews. Users may not be aware
of the effect of each of these factors in their own adoption decisions. Hypothetical
bias and misjudgement of one’s own preferences contribute to higher levels of bias
that call for calibration in future research. In particular, studies designed to compare
statistically identified effects based on qualitative methods and self-reported percep￾tions collected through qualitative methods must pay attention to possible sources of
bias and put measures in place to minimize them.
6 Discussion
In our analysis, MBPs can boost farm productivity by supporting decision-making at
the farm. We addressed the issue of adoption at various stages of the model’s
development, coupled with an overview of the relevant socio-behavioural factors
influencing farmers’ decision to adopt MBPs. This multidisciplinary approach
emphasises the need for a duplicitous perspective not only for addressing the
problem of adoption but also contributing to ongoing research on agricultural
DSSs. Furthermore, it demonstrates the importance of involving various stake￾holders at all stages of the MBP’s lifecycle with a focus of understanding the
interaction between the technical and farmer behaviour in the adoption of DSSs.
In our study, we acknowledge that this chasm can be caused by either technical or
end-user limitations, or both. Sometimes, a well-designed model is not adopted
because there was no co-creation between various stakeholders and end users. It is
possible that failure to adopt is due to technical reasons. For instance, models may be
inaccurate because of incorrect representation of the problem, or they are out of
synchronization with the decision-making process. In agriculture, such complexity
necessitates collaboration between social and natural scientists to identify causes of
failure. More importantly, it is necessary to know how to avoid such problems in the
first place. Unfortunately, we cannot learn from mistakes made in the past as cases of
failure are rarely published. Failure can occur at any point in the design, develop￾ment or deployment process. If poor decision support is provided by poorly devel￾oped models, they will fail. Paradoxically, a good solution can fail if it is
unappealing, useless and unsupported after it is released.
To address these problems, we must shift our perspective on the roles of key
stakeholders at different stages of development. Indeed, farmers are experts in their98 J. Akaka et al.
own right, and scientists must capture different aspects of the farmer and incorporate
it into various phases of the model life cycle. MBPs may become more appealing as a
result of this shift in perspective, which focuses on co-creation among various
stakeholders. Finally, because (1) the individual farmer makes the decision to
adopt and (2) decision-making in agriculture is complex and context-dependent,
factors influencing adoption must be examined from a social, behavioural and
technical standpoint to increase uptake.
Even though co-creation has the potential to simultaneously facilitate interaction
between multiple scientific fields and involve a wide range of stakeholders, it is far
from a panacea for increasing MBP adoption. Coordinating stakeholders with
differing viewpoints and levels of expertise can be difficult. Similarly, at various
stages of the co-creation process, it is difficult to reach a consensus on whose input
has more weight at each phase. In this case, the best course of action is to devise a
formula for determining the best input for each stage and to resolve any conflicts that
arise along the way. Experimentation can help farmers deal with risk and uncertainty
in the long run, as well as contribute to increased adoption of MBPs.
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
References
Abedullah, S. K., & Qaim, M. (2015). Bt cotton, pesticide use and environmental efficiency in
Pakistan. Journal of Agricultural Economics, 66, 66–86.
Adebiyi, S., & Okunlola, J. O. (2013). Factors affecting adoption of cocoa farm rehabilitation
techniques in Oyo state of Nigeria. World Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 9(3), 258–265.
Adesina, A., & Zinnah, M. (1993). Technology characteristics, farmers’ perceptions and adoption
decisions: A Tobit model application in sierra Leona. Agricultural Economics, 9(4), 297–311.
Akaka, J., Tisserand, J-C., García-Gallego, A. & Georgantzis, N. (2021). Decision support systems
adoption in pesticide management (Working Paper 2021/8). Economics Department,
Universitat Jaume I, Castellón.
Alajoutsijärvi, K., & Tikkanen, H. (2000). Customer relationships and the small software firm: A
framework for understanding challenges faced in marketing. Information & Management,
37(3), 153–159.
Alexander, C., & Van Mellor, T. (2005). Determinants of corn rootworm resistant corn adoption in
Indiana. AgBioforum, 8(4), 197–204.
Allais, M. (1953). Le comportement de l’homme rationnel devant le risque: critique des postulats et
axiomes de l’école Américaine. Econometrica, 21, 503–546.
Ambali, O.I., Areal, F. J. & Georgantzis, N. (2019). The role of spatial dependence in risk
preference: Evidence from Nigeria. Sixth International Conference of the African Association
of Agricultural Economists (AAAE), September 23–26, 2019, Abuja, Nigeria 295871.
Ambali, O. I., Areal, F. J., & Georgantzis, N. (2021). Roles of risk preferences and spatial
dependence in decisions to adopt improved rice technology. Sustainability, 13, 5943.
Apergis, N., Christou, C., Hayat, T., & Saeed, T. (2020). U.S. Monetary policy and herding:
Evidence from commodity markets. Atlantic Economic Journal, 48(3), 355–374.
Areal, F. J., Balcombe, K., & Tiffin, R. (2012). Integrating spatial dependence into stochastic
frontier analysis. Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 56, 521–541.Development and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 99
Aubert, B. A., Schroeder, A., & Grimaudo, J. (2012). IT as an enabler of sustainable farming: An
empirical analysis of farmers’ adoption decision of precision agriculture technology. Decision
Support Systems, 54, 510–520.
Bandiera, O., & Rasul, I. (2006). Social networks and technology adoption in Northern Mozam￾bique. The Economic Journal, 16(514), 869–902.
Barham, B. L., Chavas, J. P., Fitz, D., Ríos-Salas, V., & Schechter, L. (2014). The roles of risk and
ambiguity in technology adoption. Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organization, 97,
204–218.
Barham, B. L., Chavas, J. P., Fitz, D., Ríos-Salas, V., & Schechter, L. (2015). Risk, learning, and
technology adoption. Agricultural Economics, 46, 11–24.
Bellarby, J., Siciliano, G., Smith, L. E. D., Xin, L., Zhou, J., Liu, K., Jie, L., Meng, F., Inman, A.,
Rahn, C., Surridge, B., & Haygarth, P. M. (2017). Strategies for sustainable nutrient manage￾ment: Insights from a mixed natural and social science analysis of Chinese crop production
systems. Environmental Development, 21, 52–65.
Bonabana-Wabbi, J., Taylor, D. B., Bertelsen, M., & Mcguirk, A. (2002). Assessing factors
affecting adoption of agricultural technologies: The case of Integrated pest Management
(IPM) in Kumi District. Virginia Tech.
Bontemps, C., Bougherara, D., & Nauges, C. (2021). Do risk preferences really matter? The case of
pesticide use in agriculture. Environmental Modeling and Assessment, Forthcoming, 26(4),
609–630.
Box, G. E. P. (1979). Robustness in the strategy of scientific model building. In R. L. Launer &
G. N. Wilkinson (Eds.), Robustness in statistics (pp. 201–236). Academic.
Caswell, M., K. Fuglie, Ingram, C., Jans, S., & Kascak, C. (2001). Adoption of agricultural
production practices: lessons learned from the U.S. department of agriculture area studies
project. (Resource Economics Division, Economic Research Service, Agriculture Economic
Report No.792). U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC.
Columbus L. (2021). 10 ways AI has the potential to improve agriculture. In: 2021 https://www.
forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2021/02/17/10-ways-ai-has-the-potential-to-improve-agricul
ture-in-2021/
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information
technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319–339.
de Wit, C. T. (1982). Simulation of living systems. In F. W. T. Penning de Vries & H. H. van Laar
(Eds.), Simulation of plant growth and crop production (Vol. 86, pp. 3–8).
Doll, J., & Ajzen, I. (1992). Accessibility and stability of predictors in the theory of planned
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63(5), 754–765.
Doss, C. R. (2003). Understanding farm-level technology adoption: Lessons learned from
CIMMYT micro surveys in Eastern Africa. CIMMYT.
Doss, C. R., & Morris, M. L. (2000). How does gender affect the adoption of agricultural
innovations? Agricultural Economics, 25(1), 27–39.
EU. (1991). Directive concerning the protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from
agricultural sources (91/676/EEC). The Council of The European Communities Brussels.
Feder, G. (1979). Pesticides, information, and pest management under uncertainty. American
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 61(1), 97–103.
Feder, G., & Umali, D. L. (1993). The adoption of agricultural innovations. A review. Technolog￾ical Forecasting and Social Change, 43(3–4), 215–239.
Feder, G., Just, R. E., & Zilberman, D. (1995). Adoption of agricultural innovations in developing
countries: A survey. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 33(2), 255–298.
Foster, A. D., & Rosenzweig, M. R. (1995). Learning by doing and learning from others: Human
capital and technical change in agriculture. Journal of Political Economy, 103(6), 1176–1209.
Fountas, S., Blackmore, S., Ess, D., Hawkins, S., Blumhoff, G., Lowenberg-Deboer, J., &
Sorensen, C. G. (2005). Farmer experience with precision agriculture in Denmark and the US
Eastern Corn Belt. Precision Agriculture, 6, 121–141.100 J. Akaka et al.
Gray, D. I., Parker, W. J., & Kemp, E. (2009). Farm management research: A discussion of some of
the important issues. Journal of International Farm Management, 5(1), 1–24.
Grieshop, J. I., Zalom, F. G., & Miyao, G. (1988). Adoption and diffusion of integrated pest
management innovations in agriculture. Bulletin of the Entomological Society of America,
34(2), 72–79.
Harper, J. K., Rister, M. E., Mjelde, J. W., Drees, B. M., & Way, M. O. (1990). Factors influencing
the adoption of insect management technology. American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
72(4), 997–1005.
Hillenbrand, E. & Miruka, M. (2019). Gender and social norms in agriculture: A review. In A. R.
Quisumbing, R. S. Meinzen-Dick, & J. Njuki (Eds.), 2019 Annual trends and outlook report:
Gender equality in rural Africa: From commitments to outcomes (Chapter 2, pp. 11–31).
Holst, S., Hermann, D., & Musshoff, O. (2015). Anchoring effects in an experimental auction – Are
farmers anchored? Journal of Economic Psychology, 48, 106–117.
Iyer, P., Bozzola, M., Hirsch, S., Meraner, M., & Finger, R. (2020). Measuring farmer risk
preferences in Europe: A systematic review. Journal of Agricultural Economics, 71(1), 3–26.
Ji, H., Yun, Y., Lee, S., Kim, K., & Lim, H. (2018). An adaptable UI/UX considering user’s
cognitive and behavior information in a distributed environment. Cluster Computing, 21,
1045–1058.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica, 47, 263–291.
Kariyasa, K., & Dewi, Y. A. (2013). Analysis of factors affecting adoption of integrated crop
management farmer field school (ICM-FFS) in swampy areas. International Journal of Food
and Agricultural Economics, 1(2), 29–38.
Keelan, C., Thorne, F., Flanagan, P., Newman, C., & Mullins, E. (2009). Predicted willingness of
Irish farmers to adopt GM technology. AgBioforum, 12(3–4), 394–403.
Kuehne, G., Llewellyn, R., Pannell, D. J., Wilkinson, R., Dolling, P., Ouzman, J., & Ewing,
M. (2017). Predicting farmer uptake of new agricultural practices: A tool for research, extension
and policy. Agricultural Systems, 156, 115–125.
Kumar, G., Engle, C., & Tucker, C. (2018). Factors driving aquaculture technology adoption.
Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 49(3), 447–476.
Kutter, T., Tiemann, S., Siebert, R., & Fountas, S. (2011). The role of communication and
co-operation in the adoption of precision farming. Precision Agriculture, 12(1), 2–17.
Lavison, K. R., (2013). Factors influencing the adoption of organic fertilizers in vegetable produc￾tion in Accra. Thesis submitted for the Master of Philosophy Degree in Agribusiness, University
of Ghana, Legon.
Lindblom, J., Rambusch, J., Ljung, M., & Lundstrom, C. (2013). Decision-making in agriculture—
Farmers’ lifeworld in theory and practice. 21st European Seminar on Extension Education
(ESEE13).
Lowenberg-DeBoer, J. (2000). Comment on site-specific crop management: Adoption patterns and
incentives. Review of Agricultural Economics, 22(1), 245–247.
Mauceri, M., Alwang, J., Norton, G., & Barrera, V. (2007). Effectiveness of integrated pest
management dissemination techniques: A case study of potato farmers in Carchi, Ecuador.
Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics, 39(3), 765–780.
McCown, R. L., Carberry, P. S., Hochman, Z., Dalgliesh, N. P., & Foale, M. A. (2009).
Re-inventing model based decision support with Australian dryland farmers: Changing inter￾vention concepts during 17 years of action research. Crop and Pasture Science, 60(11),
1017–1030.
McDonald, R., Heanue, K., Pierce, K., & Horan, B. (2016). Factors influencing new entrant dairy
farmer’s decision-factors influencing new entrant dairy farmer’s decision-making process
around technology adoption. Journal of Agricultural Education and Extension, 22, 163–177.
Meijer, S. S., Catacutan, D., Ajayi, O. C., & Sileshi, G. W. (2015). The role of knowledge, attitudes
and perceptions in the uptake of agricultural and agroforestry innovations among smallholder
farmers in sub-Saharan Africa. International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability, 13(1),
40–54.Development and Adoption of Model-Based Practices in Precision Agriculture 101
Mignouna, D. B., Manyong, V. M., Rusike, J., Mutabazi, K. D. S., & Senkondo, E. M. M. (2011).
Determinants of imazapyr-resistant maize technologies and its impact on household income in
Western Kenya. AgBioforum, 14(3), 158–163.
Mohamed, K. S., & Temu, A. E. (2008). Access to credit and its effect on the adoption of
agricultural technologies: The case of Zanzibar. Savings and Development, 32, 45–89.
Muzari, W., Gatsi, W., & Muvhunzi, S. (2012). The impacts of technology adoption on smallholder
agricultural productivity in sub-saharan Africa: A review. Journal of Sustainable Development,
5(8), 69–77.
Pannell, D. J. (1991). Pests and pesticides, risk and risk aversion. Agricultural Economics, 5(4),
361–383.
Pannell, D. J. (1995). Optimal herbicide strategies for weed control under risk aversion. Review of
Agricultural Economics, 17(3), 337–350.
Parker, C., & Sinclair, M. (2001). User-centred design does make a difference. The case of decision
support systems in crop production. Behaviour and Information Technology, 20(6), 449–460.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The adaptive decision maker. Cambridge
University Press.
Pierpaoli, E., Carli, G., Pignatti, E., & Canavari, M. (2013). Drivers of precision agriculture
technologies adoption: A literature review. Procedia Technology, 8, 61–69.
Porter, M. E. (1985). Competitive advantage (p. 37). New York Free Press.
Rahn, C. R. (2004). The use of models to optimise production of field vegetable crops with minimal
impact on the environment. Acta Horticulturae, 654, 81–88.
Rahn, C. R. (2013). The challenges of knowledge transfer in the implementation of the nitrates
directive. In D’Haene, K., Vandecasteele, B., De Vis, R., Crappé, S., Callens, D., Mechant, E.,
Hofman, G., De Neve, S. (Eds.), NUTRIHORT (nutrient management, innovative techniques
and nutrient legislation in intensive horticulture for an improved water quality) proceedings,
Ghent, pp. 9–15.
Rahn, C. R. (2018). Challenges of devising nitrogen recommendation systems for open field
vegetables. Proceedings V international symposium on ecologically sound fertilization strate￾gies for field vegetable production, Beijing May 2015. Acta Horticulturae, 1192, 11–20.
Rahn, C. R., Greenwood, D. J., & Draycott, A. (1996). Prediction of nitrogen fertiliser requirement
with HRI WELL_N computer model. In Proceedings of 8th nitrogen workshop, Ghent, 5-8
September 1994 (Progress in nitrogen cycling studies) (pp. 255–258). Kluwer.
Rahn, C. R., Mead, A., Draycott, A., Lillywhite, R., & Salo, T. (2001). A sensitivity analysis of the
prediction of the nitrogen fertiliser requirement of cauliflower crops using the HRI WELL_N
computer model. The Journal of Agricultural Science, 137, 55–69.
Ridgley, A. M., & Brush, S. (1992). Social factors and selective technology adoption: The case of
integrated pest management. Human Organization, 51(4), 367–378.
Rogers, E. M. (1962). Diffusion of innovations (1st ed.). Free Press.
Rossi, V., Salinari, F., Poni, S., Caffi, T., & Bettati, T. (2014). Addressing the implementation
problem in agricultural decision support systems. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture,
100, 88–99.
Samiee, A., Rezvanfar, A., & Faham, E. (2009). Factors influencing the adoption of Integrated Pest
Management (IPM) by wheat growers in Varamin county, Iran. African Journal of Agricultural
Research, 4(5), 491–497.
Simtowe, F., & Zeller, M. (2006). The impact of access to credit on the adoption of hybrid maize in
Malawi: An empirical test of an agricultural household model under credit market failure. 2007
second international conference, August 20–22, 2007, Accra, Ghana 52076, African Associa￾tion of Agricultural Economists (AAAE).
Sinja, J., Karugia, J., Baltenweck, I., Waithaka, M.M., Miano, M.D., Nyikal, R., & Romney, D.,
(2004). Farmer perception of technology and its impact on technology uptake: The case of
fodder legume in Central Kenya Highlands. 2004 Inaugural Symposium, December 6–8, 2004,
Nairobi, Kenya 9543, African Association of Agricultural Economists (AAAE).102 J. Akaka et al.
Smith, L. (2015). PPM-Nutrients: Policy and practice for management of nutrients. Available
online at https://www.soas.ac.uk/cedep/research/ppm-nutrients/. Accessed 14 Dec 2021.
Smith, J., Smith, P., & Addiscott, T. (1996). Quantitative methods to evaluate and compare soil
organic matter (SOM) models. In P. Powlson, P. Smith and J. Smith (Eds.), Evaluation of soil
organic matter models (NATO ASI, 1(38): 181–200).
Smith, L., Siciliano, G., Inman, A., Rahn, C., Bellarby, J., Surridge, B., Haygarth, P., Xin, L.,
Guilong, Z., Ji, L., Zhou, J., Meng, F. & Burke, S., (2015). Delivering improved nutrient
stewardship in China: The knowledge, attitudes and practices of farmers and advisers (SAIN
policy brief 13). UK-China Sustainable Agricultural Innovation Network (SAIN).
Thorburn, P. J., Jakku, E., Webster, A. J., & Everingham, Y. L. (2011). Agricultural decision
support system facilitating co-learning. International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability,
9(2), 322–333.
Uaiene, R. N. (2011). Determinants of technology adoption in Mozambique. In 10th African crop
science conference proceedings, Maputo, Mozambique, 10–13 October 2011 (p. 375) ref. 10.
Uematsu, H., & Mishra, A. K. (2010). Can education be a barrier to technology adoption?
Agricultural & Applied Economics Association 2010 AAEA 38.
Van Meensel, J., Lauwers, L., Dempen, I., Dessein, J., & Van Huylenbroeck, G. (2012). Effect of a
participatory approach on the successful development of agricultural decision support systems:
The case of Pigs2win. Decision Support Systems, 54(1), 164–172.
Villano, R., Bravo-Ureta, B., Solis, D., & Fleming, E. (2015). Modern rice technologies and
productivity in the Philippines: Disentangling technology from managerial gaps’. Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 66, 129–154.
Von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton
University Press.
Waller, B. E., Casey, W., Hoy, J. L., Henderson, B. S., & Welty, C. (1998). Matching innovations
with potential users, a case study of potato IPM practices. Agriculture, Ecosystems and
Environment, 70(2–3), 203–215.
Williams, R., Brown, H., Dunbier, M., Edmeades, D., Hill, R., Metherell A., Rahn C., & Thorburn
P. (2013). A critical examination of the role of Overseer in modelling nitrate losses from arable
crops. Available online at http://flrc.massey.ac.nz/workshops/13/Manuscripts/Paper_Wil
liams_2013.pdf. Accessed 14 Dec 2021.
Woodward, S. J. R., Romera, A. J., Beskow, W. B., & Lovatt, S. J. (2008). Better simulation
modelling to support farming systems innovation: Review and synthesis. New Zealand Journal
of Agricultural Research, 51(3), 235–252. https://doi.org/10.1080/00288230809510452
Yaron, D., Dinar, A., & Voet, H. (1992). Innovations on family farms: The Nazareth region in
Israel. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 74(2), 361–370.
Zhang, F. S., Chen, X. P., & Chen, Q. (2009). Fertilizer application guideline for main crops of
China. Chinese Agricultural University press.Part II
State of the ArtProcess-Based Models and Simulation
of Nitrogen Dynamics
Davide Cammarano , Fernando E. Miguez, and Laila Puntel
Abstract This chapter illustrates how some process-based models simulate the nitro￾gen dynamics. There are many crop simulation models available in the literature and
some of the simulated nitrogen processes included in the crop growth models might
differ. The aim of this chapter is to give readers who are less familiar with the simulation
of nitrogen processes an overview on how crop models handle N balance. In addition,
two case studies are presented to illustrate the application of crop simulation models for
N management in different agro-environmental conditions.
1 Introduction
Food supply needs to be increased by about 70% by 2050 in order to meet global
food demand. This has to be achieved by considering the following constrains:
(i) producing on the same (or less) amount of agricultural land; (ii) reducing the
negative environmental footprint associated with agronomic practices in terms of
groundwater pollution and greenhouse gas emissions while keeping farming eco￾nomically viable; and (iii) producing in a changing climate (Cammarano et al., 2016;
Davis et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2021).
Nitrogen (N) is one of the most important factors affecting crop production and
the environment. Since the green revolution, grain yield for cereal crops has
increased with a combination of better agronomic management and improved
genetics and N inputs from synthetic fertilizers (Raun & Johnson, 1999). In terms
D. Cammarano (✉)
Department of Agroecology, iClimate, Centre for Circular Bioeconomy (CBIO),
Aarhus University, Tjele, Denmark
e-mail: davide.cammarano@agro.au.dk
F. E. Miguez
Department of Agronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, USA
L. Puntel
Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, USA
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_5
105106 D. Cammarano et al.
of N fertilization, deciding on the appropriate rate of N application is challenging
because this decision is made at the beginning of the growing season. The amount
depends on future crop needs and soil N mineralization rates, which are, in turn,
controlled by the weather and edaphic conditions and are unknown at the time
(Mandrini et al., 2021). In addition, the optimal amount of N varies within a field
due to the spatial variation caused by crop-soil interactions and among years due to
the effects of rainfall and temperature (Basso et al., 2011b). Given the dynamics of
cropping systems, on-farm N use efficiency tends to be low (30–40%) (Cassman &
Dobermann, 2022), which naturally results in 60–70% of N fertilizer not being used
by the crop (Angus, 2001; Coskun et al., 2017). The N not used by crop is not all lost
because some is stabilized in soil organic matter or forms complexes with soil
minerals. The rest of this N is effectively lost and causes known environmental
problems, such as N leaching from the rootzone and greenhouse gas emissions in the
form of nitrous oxide (N2O), which impairs water quality and contributes to GHG
emissions, respectively. Increasing sustainability of agriculture, and in particular of
N fertilization, is a priority of many governmental agendas (Dalgaard et al., 2014;
EU, 1991; Mandrini et al., 2021).
The interactions between crop genotype and agronomic management affect the
spatial agronomic management of N, which is complicated by the impacts of climate
variability, extreme events, and climate change. In addition, for some crops, the
trade-off between environmental and economic sustainability is complicated by the
need to achieve grain quality production standards. For example, Cammarano et al.
(2021) demonstrated that optimizing the two-way trade-off (economic and environ￾mental) of spring barley requires considerations of grain quality, not just yield. These
quality standards are in place to ensure its end-use in the malting and distilling
industry.
Different approaches have been proposed in the development of N management
recommendations (Morris et al., 2018). Among the main ones are: the yield goal, soil
nitrate test, the maximum return with respect to N fertilization, defining management
zones within the field, proximal and remote sensing, N-rich strip treatment, and
checkerboards of N spatially distributed within a field (Bundy & Andraski, 1995;
Cammarano et al., 2021; Franzen et al., 2016; Jin et al., 2019; Puntel et al., 2018;
Raun et al., 2005; Solie et al., 2012; Stanford, 1973).
Results of crop yield response to site-specific N management have been contra￾dictory, which highlights the challenge of considering the spatial and temporal
interactions of soil-plant-atmosphere-management interactions. In this context,
yield maps from yield monitors are analyzed and interpreted for making agronomic
management decisions based on the observed variation. However, most studies that
aim at understanding the optimal N application are conducted over a limited time
span (e.g., 3–4 years or less) and therefore cannot fully capture the temporal and
spatial interactions of the soil-plant-atmosphere system. In fact, Basso, Ritchie, et al.
(2011b) stated that while the spatial maps of soil and crop properties are easy to
derive with modern tools, temporal variation has not received enough attention.
Mandrini et al. (2021) showed how the N management strategy made by considering
the variation in interannual weather with a combination of field data and cropProcess-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics 107
simulation modelling achieved the best results. In their study, they demonstrated that
such a methodology would reduce the mean N-leaching by 12.7% with no changes
to profit with respect to the typical N management done by local services. Measuring
soil N has been among the most important agronomic practice and cannot be easily
replaced by other types of data. A potential for replacing in-situ measurements is the
use of crop simulation models (described in chapter “Process Based Modelling of
Soil–Crop Interactions for Site Specific Decision Support in Crop Management”)
which are becoming a common modelling tool in precision agriculture research
related to N management.
Despite their limitations, crop models offer the chance to integrate field data
(limited in time and in the quantity of variables) with temporal simulations of the
soil-plant-atmosphere-management interactions. And to conduct “what-if” simula￾tions to explore alternative management scenarios or evaluate the sensitivity of a
cropping system to climatic events. Given that the modelling of water dynamics has
been described in chapter “Modelling Soil Water Dynamics”, in this chapter, the
focus will be on the simulation of N dynamics. There are many crop simulation
models available in the literature (Asseng et al., 2013), and some of the N processes
included in the crop growth models might differ. However, the aim of this chapter is
to give readers who are less familiar with the simulation of N processes an overview
on how crop models handle N balance. In addition, two case studies are presented to
illustrate the application of crop simulation models for N management in different
agro-environmental conditions.
2 Modelling Nitrogen
In this section, we provide an overview of generic modelling of N dynamic simu￾lation in the soil-plant system. It is a non-exhaustive review, and its aim is to simplify
and illustrate the concepts beyond some of the main modelling approaches adopted
by most crop models. An important point of clarification is that N simulations in crop
models are not designed to work in isolation (e.g., as a stand-alone model), but they
are components of a more complex relationship involving simulating water and
energy balances, crop development, and growth processes as affected by weather,
soil, genotype, and agronomic management.
2.1 Nitrogen Dynamics in the Soil (Supply)
Crop plants use only inorganic N, which regardless of the source is considered as
inorganic N. Nitrogen mineralization, which is a microbiological process involving
the conversion of organic to inorganic forms (Fig. 1), is independent of plant needs.
There are several environmental and edaphic factors affecting the rates of mineral￾ization, as well as root exudates and plant uptake. When N is not taken up by crops, it108 D. Cammarano et al.
Fig. 1 Simplification of the dynamic soil processes that are simulated in most crop simulation
models
can be lost through several processes—mainly leaching, denitrification, and volatil￾ization (Fig. 1). Nitrification, the oxidation of ammonium (NHþ
4 ) to nitrates (NO -
3 )
happens under aerobic conditions, and the main limiting factors are the substrate
NHþ
4 , oxygen, soil pH, and temperature. Denitrification is the reduction of NO -
3 to
gaseous products such as NO, N2O, and N2 and is a microbial process occurring
under anaerobic conditions. It is mainly affected by soil organic carbon content, soil
aeration, temperature, and pH.
The main factors affecting N supply to crop plants considered by most modelling
approaches are: (i) concentration of mineral N at the root depth (in terms of nitrate-N
and ammonium-N); (ii) root length and density; (iii) the maximum N uptake per unit
root length; and (iv) available soil water content (Godwin & Singh, 1998).
Crop simulation models have generally been coded and built by accounting for
soil N and carbon (C) cycling in a simple but effective way. The simplicity of soil
N models is related to the fact that measuring or calibrating for too many parameters
is difficult; therefore, models of soil N that require less input are generally preferred.
The required inputs also have to be easy to derive and measure. The models of soil
N dynamics are generic enough that, given the right inputs, they can work on a
diversity of soils and yet provide acceptable simulations of the underlying processes.
The DSSAT (Decision Support System for Agrotechnology Transfer) crop model
(Hoogenboom et al., 2019) utilizes two sub-routines for simulating soil organic
matter dynamics: the Godwin-Singh model which was based on the PAPRAN model
(Seligman & Van Keulen, 1981) and the CENTURY model (Parton et al., 1988).
Godwin and Singh (1998) described how the PAPRAN model was adapted within
the DSSAT framework, and the link with the CENTURY model and its underlying
assumptions/equations are described in Gijsman et al. (2002) and Porter et al. (2010).
The movement of nitrates (NO -
3 ) to different soil layers is related to the flow of
water. The water flow in DSSAT is based on the tipping bucket approach, and the
volume of water moving from a given layer (L) to the one below is calculated as aProcess-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics 109
flux (FLUX). The NO -
3 lost from a given layer (Nout) is calculated as function of
the water that is drained and the one that is left in the current layer as:
Nout = SNO3 Lð Þ FLUX Lð Þ=½SW Lð Þ DLAYR Lð Þþ FLUX Lð Þ , ð1Þ
where SNO3(L) is the content of NO -
3 in the current layer N (expressed as kg
N ha-1
), SW(L) is the volumetric soil water content of layer L, and DLAYR(L) is the
depth of the given layer (Fig. 2a). The leaching from one layer to the one below will
continue until, in a given layer L, the NO -
3 concentration falls below 1 μg NO -
3 g-1
soil.
The model also simulates the upward movements of NO -
3 and urea as water
evaporates from surface layers, but this movement is mainly simulated for the upper
soil layers and is very small overall due to the small volume of moving water
(Godwin & Singh, 1998). The upward movement of N (Nup) as a function of the
upward flux (FLOW) is calculated as:
Nup = SON3 Lð Þ FLOW Lð Þ=½SW Lð Þ DLAYR Lð Þ FLOW Lð Þ : ð2Þ
The N fertilizer is partitioned between urea, NO -
3 , and ammonium (NHþ
4 Þ
depending on the type of fertilizer used. While the mineralization process involves
the release of mineral N from the decay of organic matter, the immobilization
involves the transformation of inorganic compounds into organic forms due to
microbial processes (Porter et al., 2010). Overall, the model considers such pro￾cesses and a balance between them; for example, if crop residues are added, and have
a large C:N ratio, then there could be net immobilization for a given period of time,
and only when soil carbon is used for respiration does the net mineralization resume
(Godwin & Singh, 1998). This way of simulating N dynamics is not too dissimilar
from the Agricultural Production Systems sIMulator (APSIM) soil N sub-routine
(Holzworth et al., 2014).
The nitrification subroutine and partition of organic matter pools were modified in
the PAPRAN model implemented in DSSAT. Additional modifications were made
Fig. 2 Schematic representation of how the plant nutrient fluxes are simulated for (a) DSSAT and
(b) CropSyst110 D. Cammarano et al.
to temperature and water subroutines in order to adapt it to the DSSAT framework
(Hoogenboom et al., 2019). In this model, the mineralization and immobilization
simulate the decay of two types of organic matter: (i) fresh organic matter (FOM)
which consists of crop residues (and/or green manure), and it is divided into three
pools such as carbohydrate (20%), cellulose (70%), and lignin (10%), with values
that can be changed by the user, and (ii) a stable or humic fraction (HUM). Since the
model considers the effects of crop residues, the user should state the amount of crop
residues and its C:N ratio, as well as an estimate of root residue from the previous
crop. The other input is the soil organic carbon for each layer (OC) because it is used
to calculate HUM and the N associated with the HUM (HUMN) pool. Regarding the
FOM, the three fractions have decay constants determined under nonlimiting con￾ditions of 0.8, 0.05, and 0.0095, respectively. Given that effects of soil temperature
(TF), water content (WF), and residue compositions (RF) will impact such
non-limiting conditions in the soil, the model includes some modifying factors
(0–1) to take this into account. Detailed information on these multipliers (TF, WF,
and RF) are given in Godwin and Singh (1998). Briefly, the WF is determined from
the SW(L) relative to its lower limit (LL) and drain upper limit (DUL). These will
affect N processes such as ammonification, nitrification, and denitrification (Fig. 3a).
This model simulates the potential rate of nitrification and the 0 to 1 factor that
reduces this potential rate. The potential rate of nitrification is a Michealis-Menten
kinetic function that depends on NHþ
4 concentration and not on soil type. The
nitrification capacity index is calculated with the aim of considering the lag phase
on nitrification in conditions during the previous two days which were not optimal
for nitrification. The Michealis-Menten equation is used to calculate the following:
RNTF = ½  A  40  NH4ð Þ L
½  NH4ð Þþ L 90  SNH4ð Þ L , ð3Þ
where RNTF is the rate of nitrification (kg N ha-1 d-1
), NH4(L) is the ammonium-N
concentration in a given layer (μg N g soil-1
), and SNH4(L) is the NHþ
4 content in
Fig. 3 The two coefficients, water content (WF) and residue compositions (RF), as considered
within DSSAT. (Adapted from Godwin & Singh, 1998)    ð Þ
Process-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics 111
the layer L (kg N ha-1
). The A is an indicator that considers the factors discussed
above and is calculated as
A = min RP2, WF, TF, PHN ð Þ, ð4Þ
where RP2 is a 0 to 1 index for the nitrification potential based on the immediate past
(Godwin & Singh, 1998), WF is the index discussed above (Fig. 3a), TF is the
temperature factor for the rate of nitrification, and PHN is the factor for the effect of
soil pH on rates of nitrification.
The DSSAT–CENTURY subroutine, on the other hand, contains three soil
organic matter (SOM) pools (SOM1: microbial or active material; SOM2: recalci￾trant substance, decomposed SOM1; SOM3: inert matter, and two FOM (metabolic
litter which is easily decomposed, and structural litter which is recalcitrant fresh
residue). The model estimates the fraction of soil SOM3 (stable fraction of C) in
three different ways described in Porter et al. (2010), but they essentially comprise
(i) direct input from the user; (ii) a field history which is based on a procedure
developed by Basso et al. (2011a) to represent the effects of given management
scenarios on the stable C fraction; and (iii) using a regression equation to estimate the
stable C as:
StableC = 0:0015  ð Þþ Clay þ Silt 0:069, ð5Þ
where stable C (SOM3), clay, and silt are expressed as g soil component/100 g soil.
In this approach the ratre of decomposition for each organic matter pool depends first
on order rate constants adjusted for temperature, soil water, agronomic management,
and soil texture; it is calculated as follows:
dC
dt = - kt  C, ð6Þ
kt = k0 TF WF MF TexF, 7
where C is organic C in the decomposing pool (kg ha-1
), t is the daily time step, k0, kt
are the base and the modified rate constants (day-1
), TF is the temperature factor
(Fig. 4a), WF is the water factor (Fig. 4b), MF is the management factor, and TexF is
the texture factor.
In APSIM the organic matter is divided into the BIOM pool which is the labile
fraction, a HUM pool, which is similar to the “slow” pool in the CENTURY model,
and the rest is considered to be an inert pool. Overall, the flow among pools is
modelled as carbon, and following the C:N ratio of the receiving pool, the N flows
are derived. The user-defined input of the C:N ratio for the organic carbon can vary
for each soil layer, and the C:N ratio of the FOM can also be modified. Like DSSAT,
the decomposition of these pools follows a first-order calculation with rate constants
and modifier (factors from 0 to 1) as a function of temperature and water for a given
layer. The underlying assumptions for mineralization and immobilization are not too112 D. Cammarano et al.
Fig. 4 The two coefficients, temperature factor (TF) and water content (WF) as considered within
DSSAT–CENTURY model. (Adapted from Porter et al., 2010)
dissimilar to the CERES model. In APSIM the flows are represented in terms of the
proportion of carbon retained from the system (as efficiency coefficients) and the
amount of retained carbon that is synthesized in the BIOM pool. At the beginning of
the simulation, the HUM and BIOM carbon in each soil layer are calculated from the
user-defined inputs (Organic Carbon, Finert, Fbiom). For example, the inert pool is
simply calculated as:
Intertc = Finert  Organic C: ð8Þ
Decomposition of the fresh organic matter (FOM) is calculated as:
FOM dec = Fpool  decay rate  WF  TF  CNF, ð9Þ
where the Fpool is the fraction consisting of carbohydrate, cellulose, and lignin;
decay rate is the decay rate of each fraction; and WF, TF, and CNF are the water,
temperature, and C:N ratio factors, respectively. They range between 0 and 1 and
like DSSAT they are calculated in a similar manner.
The rates of nitrification rates are calculated using the Michealis-Menten
approach with a slight modification from the CERES approach:
Potential Rate = Nitrificationpot  NH4ð Þ L
NH4ð Þþ L NH4ð Þ L halfpot  : ð10Þ
Like the CERES approach, soil pH, temperature, and water reduce the potential
rate as in Eq. (4).
In other modelling approaches such as CropSyst (Stöckle et al., 2003), soil
mineral N is simulated as separate budgets for NO -
3 and NHþ
4 . In the model, the
simulated N processes include transformations, ammonium sorption, symbiotic
N fixation, crop N demand, and crop N uptake (Stöckle et al., 2003). Soil
N transformations (net mineralization, nitrification, and denitrification) andProcess-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics 113
ammonium sorption are derived from the methodology developed by Stockle and
Campbell (1989) where soil layers are divided into nodes where there is a transfer of
mass and energy through them like an electric analog (Fig. 2b). The first node (Node
0) is the height at which weather data are measured; Node 1 is the zero-plane
displacement height within the crop canopy; Node 2 is the soil surface, while the
other nodes are the different soil depths. The transfer of heat and water through this
system will not be described here, and interested readers might refer to Stockle and
Campbell (1989). The N changes due to microbial activities are assumed to happen
within the upper 30 cm of the soil; in this particular subroutine, they include net
mineralization, nitrification, and denitrification. These are calculated as irreversible
first-order kinetics (Stockle & Campbell, 1989) in which the change of N as s
function of time is calculated as:
dN=dt = - KN, ð11Þ
where dt is a given time interval and K is a rate constant. The net mineralization of
organic matter to NHþ
4 , defined as the difference between mineralization and
immobilization, is calculated as:
M = M0 1 - exp ð Þ - KM Δt h i   F f ps   ð12Þ
where M is the mineralized N (kg N m-2
) at time Δt (s) under optimum water
content, M0 (kg N m-2
) is the potentially mineralizable N at the beginning of
Δt, F( fps) is a factor that is function of soil water content, and KM is the rate constant
of the mineralization (s-1
) and is calculated as function of the absolute soil
temperature as:
KM = exp 17:753 - 6350:5
Ts þ 273  =ð Þ 604, 800 , ð13Þ
where Ts is the soil temperature (°C) and a soil temperature of 35 °C is considered an
upper threshold. Soil nitrification (Nnit), which is the amount of NHþ
4 converted into
NO -
3 at a time Δt, is calculated as follows:
Nnit = NHþ
4ai 1 - exp ð Þ - KNΔt h i   F f ps  , ð14Þ
where NHþ
4ai is the available amount of NHþ
4 that undergoes conversion at the
beginning of Δt. The water factor (F( fps)) uses the same concept illustrated above,
but the model’s parameters for its calculation differ as shown in Stockle and
Campbell (1989). Finally, denitrification (Nden; kg NO3m-2
) is calculated as:
Nden = Nden,0 1 - exp ð Þ - KDΔt h i, ð15Þwhere K (s-1
) is the denitri cation rate constant and like the others is then adjusted
ð Þ
114 D. Cammarano et al.
D fi
for temperature and water effects and Nden, 0 is the available amount of NO -
3 for
denitrification at the beginning of Δt. The N balance at each node for NHþ
4 and
NO -
3 is derived as:
dNnit=dt = Flux IN - Flux OUT þ Mineralization - Nitrification
- Transport to Rizosphere ð16Þ
dNden=dt = Flux IN - Flux OUT þ Nitrification - Denitrification
- Transport to Rizosphere 17
2.2 N Dynamic in Plants (Demand)
Nitrogen in plants is found in many organs such as leaves, stems, grain, and roots. In
the leaves, N is needed because of its role in the metabolic and structural functions in
plants. In the plant tissue, N regulates growth (and to some extent development), but
in the stem there is a given amount of N that is used as structural N. In the grain, N is
stored as protein, and for some crops (e.g., barley, wheat), it has implications
regarding its subsequent industrial use. The roots have N stored in proteins and
enzymes to facilitate the water and N update from the soil to the plant.
The main component of N simulation in plants is the calculation of N demand, its
accumulation, distribution among organs, translocation to grain, and the calculation
of N factors affecting photosynthesis and growth processes.
Crop N demand is driven by changes in biomass for the various plant components
and the N concentration in different plant components. To estimate N concentration,
crop simulation models use the concept of minimum (Nmin), critical (Ncrt), and
maximum (Nmax). The Nmin is structural N and cannot be re-translocated; Ncrt is
the minimum N that a plant tissue needs to maintain it and it drives N demand, and
Nmax is the maximum N concentration that allows a given tissue to accumulate more
N than needed up to a given maximum threshold (Gregory et al., 1979). There are
some slight changes in the way different models define those limits, but as an overall
concept, it is rather conservative. For example, Stockle and Debaeke (1997) pointed
out how four main crop simulation models use the relationship between plant N% as
function of crop growth stage, fraction of the growth cycle, thermal time, and
aboveground biomass to create the functional relationship of the N curves. These
concentrations have given thresholds that vary with the different growth stages and
different organs of the plants (Fig. 5).
Typically, it is assumed that N has little or no effect on crop phenology and only
under very extreme conditions is phenology affected by N stress. Crop models do not
account for the effects of N stress on phenology, although the APSIM model
(Holzworth et al., 2014) has included an N stress factor that can be used in the
future to consider N effects on phenology. This stress factor on phenology ( fph) isProcess-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics 115
Fig. 5 Conceptualization of the relationship between N concentration at different growth stages for
the maximum N (Nmax; full line), critical N (Ncrt; dashed line), and minimal N (Nmin; dot-dash line).
This relationship will be different for (i) different X-axis variables and (ii) for different plant organs
(stem, leaf, grain)
calculated as the difference between the actual N concentration of an organ (Nact) and
its Nmin and Ncrt as:
f ph = NpheX
leaf
Nact - N min
Ncrt  f Nstem - N min
, ð18Þ
where Nphe is a multiplier for considering the effects of N deficit on phenology and it
is a parameter with a default value of 1.5 and fNstem is a factor equal to 1 for stem and
it is a relationship between leaf Ncrt and the CO2 concentration of the leaf. Currently,
it is set to 1 as it has no effect. The fph can affect the calculation of thermal time and
the reaching of a particular growth stage hence impacting phenology.
Leaves are the organs that require the most N, and any N deficit will limit the leaf
area expansive growth processes. Under N stress, leaf area development is affected,
causing an increase in specific leaf weight because leaf dry matter accumulation is
less affected (Grindlay, 1997). The amount of N that is translocated in seed during
the grain filling period is a function of the N accumulated in leaves and stem prior to
this growth stage.
One modelling approach (mostly used in CERES-type of models) simulates the
effects of N shortages through the calculation of some N reduction factors (Nf) that
affect growth, and they are calculated from the ratio of actual to optimum N content
(Godwin & Singh, 1998). This, in turn, will limit the leaf expansive growth
processes, accelerate leaf senescence and the rate of photosynthesis, and is calculated
as follows:
Nf = 1 - ð Þ Ncrt - Nact
ð Þ Ncrt - N min
: ð19Þ
Several modelling approaches use different methods to calculate such stressors,
but in the end they all affect biomass accumulation, the rate of leaf appearance and116 D. Cammarano et al.
expansion, and grain filling. For example, in APSIM these stressors are calculated
using the same functions as Eq. (1) (except for grain N), but where the first
multiplicator (Nphe) differs among them.
In the CERES-like approach, the N demand comprises two components: (i) the
deficiency N demand (DND) which is the N required to reach Ncrt in the current
actual aboveground biomass and (ii) growth N demand (GND) which is the
N required to reach Ncrt in the current potential aboveground biomass (ABGpot).
The GND is calculated as follows:
GND = ABGpot  Ncrt: ð20Þ
The potential N supply (Nsup) is calculated for each soil layer and is a function of
root length density, soil water content, and root distribution. The total plant
N demand (Ndem) of the crop takes into account (1) shoot growth demand (SDem);
(2) shoot deficiency N demand (SDef); (3) root growth N demand (RDem); and
(4) root deficiency N demand (RDef) so that:
Ndem = SDem þ SDef þ RDem þ RDef: ð21Þ
The demand for N for each plant organ (e.g., leaf, stem) attempts at maintaining a
level of organ N within the Ncrt. Such demand is the sum of the demands from
previous biomass that needs to reach Ncrt in addition to the N required to keep Ncrt for
the day on which biomass is produced. This is calculated for each organ of the plant.
For example, in APSIM for given organs (e.g., leaves, stem), the N demand (Ndem) is
implemented as follows:
Ndem,crt = ð Þ ΔQoNcrt
f pht
þ f nð Þ Ncrt - Nact if Ncrt > Ncrt,o and Qo > 0, ð22Þ
NDdem, max = ð Þ ΔQoN max
f pht
þ f nð Þ N max - Nact if N max > Ncrt,o and Qo > 0, ð23Þ
where ΔQo is the dry matter growth of a given organ (e.g., leaves), Qo is the green
dry matter of the organ, fpht is the soil water stress factor affecting biomass, and fn is a
parameter set at 0.0001.
The actual N uptake (Nact) is calculated by considering supply and demand
simulated separately and then using the minimum of Ndem and Nsup in both
APSIM and CERES models.
Jamieson and Semenov (2000) developed a method where N demand depends on
the need to keep a given N concentration in new leaves (on an area base)—this will
cause leaves to become thicker if there is not enough N for expansion; this method
was also implemented in Soltani and Sinclair (2012). The stems act as reserves for
extra N between Nmin and Ncrt. During the vegetative stage, the daily N uptake
(N content) is calculated as a function of the needs of leaves and stems. The Ndem is
calculated as follows:Process-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics 117
Ndem = ð Þ GLAI  Ncrt,leaf þ ð Þ GST  Ncrt,stem , ð24Þ
where GLA is the daily increase in leaf area index (LAI) and GST is the daily
increase of stem dry matter. A factor accounting for N deficiencies in development at
the early stages was added by Soltani and Sinclair (2012).
Grain N is simulated in several ways depending on the modelling approaches as
reviewed in Rezaei et al. (2022). The simpler approach employs a harvest index
approach in which it is assumed that the N harvest index increases linearly with
thermal time from zero at the beginning of grain filling to a maximum N rate as a
function of thermal accumulation. The other approach is a source-sink type of
model. Overall, grain N is the result of the accumulation of N and carbohydrates in
the grain. These are accumulated independently, and they are controlled by the
potential rate of kernel growth and actual supply and are affected by air temperature.
3 Case Studies
3.1 Case Study 1: A Mediterranean Environment
Mediterranean environments are characterized by erratic rainfall patterns which
affect the amount of water stored in the soil, crop production, and N fertilization
strategies (Angus & Herwaarden, 2001). There is a balance between the water stored
in the soil prior sowing, the fallow rainfall, and the growing season rainfall. All are
important components for wheat production, but mismanagement of sowing time
and N fertilization can alter their importance in determining optimal yield levels
(Basso et al., 2011b). Nitrogen demand by wheat crops growing in such environ￾ments is often high in the late winter/spring, a period when expansive growth
processes are high and when it difficult to match crop N demand with soil
N supply (Sadras & Angus, 2006).
This case study shows how a calibrated crop simulation model can predict the
spatial variation of durum wheat (Triticum turgidum, var. Durum; cultivar Duilio)
yield in a field and how it is used to predict the weather-agronomy-soil interactions.
The study was carried out on a 12-ha field in Foggia, Italy (41° 27′ 47″ N, 15° 30′
24″ E; 80 m a.s.l.), during 5 years of wheat monoculture (2005/2006; 2006/2007;
2007/2008; 2008/2009; 2009/2010). The N fertilization consisted of one application
at sowing of 25 kg N ha-1 as diammonium phosphate and a second one at tillering
with 65 kg N ha-1 as urea. Long-term weather data were recorded at an on-site
station from 1953 to 2018 for daily solar radiation, minimum and maximum air
temperature, and rainfall. The crop model DSSAT CERES-wheat (Hoogenboom
et al., 2019) was calibrated to use with the dataset of Basso et al. (2010) from a long￾term N fertilization trial with 0 and 90 kg N ha-1
. Once calibrated, the DSSAT￾CERES model wheat was evaluated on an independent dataset; these were the data
from the 12-ha field above mentioned (Fig. 6).118 D. Cammarano et al.
Fig. 6 Soil texture of the 100 points located on the 12-ha field in Foggia (Italy)
The long-term rainfall is shown in Fig. 7. Overall, the monthly cumulative rainfall
showed a decrease in August, but the main trend was steady with a slight increase
from 1953 to 2018 for January, February, and March. These 3 months are also the
key periods for durum wheat growing in this region because the second
N application is made in February/March. The results of the model’s calibration
and evaluation using the N trial experiment is shown in Table 1. The calibration of
the DSSAT-wheat model showed RMSE values were in accord with ones reported in
the literature; in addition, this calibration dataset had information on plant N% and
on soil water content, which is information not often available to modelers.
Evaluation of the crop simulation model showed that the root mean square error
(RMSE) was relatively small as a field average and was spatially and inter-annually
variable, as shown in Fig. 8. Three growing seasons (2006, 2009, and 2010) had
RMSEs above 1000 kg DM ha-1
. The simulated wheat yield is shown in Fig. 8b.
The long-term wheat mean was 4000 kg DM ha-1 with evident spatial patterns
across the field, with the top and bottom portions of the field showing higher values
and the central section with lower values. A previously published study showed the
map of soil resistivity for the field and identified the middle of the field having
compacted soil and lower yields (Basso et al., 2012), which accords with the
temporal patterns of simulated yield for that field section.
3.2 Case Study 2
The second case study is from a farmer’s field in Scotland (UK) with spring barley
(Hordeum vulgare L.; Cultivar Concerto) as the main cash crop. In such environ￾ments, spring barley is important for the distilling and brewing industry because itProcess-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics 119
Fig. 7 Monthly cumulative rainfall from 1953 to 2017 for Foggia (Italy)
can be used for whisky or beer production (Cammarano et al., 2021). The grain N%
requested by the industry is rather strict as it is tied with the requirement for malting;
for example, an optimal grain N% range in the UK is between 1.45 and 1.85%
(a range in which farmers are also paid a premium) (UK Malt, 2021).
The optimal grain N% range is rather narrow and can be adjusted by modifying
sowing dates, genotypes, plant density, and fertilizer rates. For such a type of use,
spring barley is usually sown in March/April and fertilized around sowing/emer￾gence although it has been found that N rate has more effect on quality than timing
(Overthrow, 2005).
To optimize the N fertilization strategy that maximize this three-way trade-off
(quality-profit-environmental sustainability) long-term experiments are needed to
account for the weather-soil-agronomy interactions.
Historical yield maps for this farm were available for 6 years and were used to
define management zones using the algorithms developed by Maestrini and Basso
(2018). Additional details on how management zones were defined are reported in
Maestrini and Basso (2018) and Cammarano et al. (2021). Four yield stability zones
were defined in the field as high (HYZ)-, medium (MYZ)-, low (LYZ)-, and unstable
(UYZ)-yield zones. Figure 9 shows the spatial yields from overlaying the 6 years of
yield maps (Fig. 9a), the temporal variation (Fig. 9b), the four yield stability zonesTable 1 Results of the model’s calibration using the dataset from Basso et al. (2010) from Foggia,
Italy
Treatment Variable Units Simulated Observed
Standard deviation
observation RMSEa
0 N Biomass (kg DM
ha-1
)
872 1045 108.7 826
0 N Biomass 4135 2876 389.0
90 N Biomass 1426 1912 187.4
90 N Biomass 5805 4868 140.4
0 N Plant N (%) 2.68 3.01 0.17 0.42
0 N Plant N 1.52 1.84 0.29
90 N Plant N 3.11 2.71 0.17
90 N Plant N 1.79 2.37 0.51
0 N LAI – 0.50 0.74 – 0.47
0 N LAI 1.33 1.07
0 N LAI 1.57 1.79
90 N LAI 0.77 1.42
90 N LAI 2.17 2.70
90 N LAI 2.44 3.14
0 N Soil water (%) 0.27 0.26 0.01 0.006
0 N Soil water 0.22 0.22 0.01
0 N Soil water 0.17 0.17 0.01
0 N Soil water 0.07 0.07 0.01
90 N Soil water 0.28 0.28 0.02
90 N Soil water 0.23 0.23 0.02
90 N Soil water 0.17 0.15 0.02
90 N Soil water 0.07 0.06 0.01
0 N Yield (kg DM
ha-1
)
1314 1173 161 99
90 N Yield 1981 1986 190
a
Root mean square error
Fig. 8 Results of the (a) spatial evaluation of the DSSAT CERES-wheat model for the 5 years of
observed spatial yield data; in the inset there are the field average values of the model comparison;
and (b) mean simulated wheat dry yield for the 1953–2018 continuous simulations and top-right
(insert) the coefficient of variation of simulated yieldProcess-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics 121
Fig. 9 Spatial distribution of the (a) yield and (b) temporal variation obtained from overlaying
6 years of spatial yield maps; (c) the yield stability zones obtained using the Maestrini and Basso
(2018) methods and the corresponding points where soil and plant samples were taken (adapted
from Cammarano et al. (2020)); and (d) the sampling points overlaid on the NDVI map taken
3 weeks after N fertilization (high-yield zone: blue dots; medium-yield zone: green dots;
low-yield zone: yellow dots; unstable-yield zone: red dots)
(Fig. 9c), and the overlay of the sampling points for each zone with the NDVI map
taken 3 weeks after N fertilization (Fig. 9d). At each point soil samples (0–90 cm)
and plant samples were collected during the growing season. Soil physical and
chemical properties, as well as soil initial conditions in terms of water and N, were
recorded 1 month prior sowing; additional details are reported in Cammarano
et al. (2021).
The DSSAT-barley crop model was used as described in Cammarano et al. (2019)
and Cammarano et al. (2021). The overall evaluation is summarized in Table 2 for
the main properties.
Results of soil texture show how the soil physical structure differs within the field
and at depth for the different points. The soil has a loamy texture for the first 30 cm
and then varies between clay and sandy loam for other points in the field at 60 cm.
For the lowest soil layer, examine the soil type ranged between c lay and sandy loam
with a wider spread of textural class among the points which is also reflected in the
changes in soil bulk density as illustrated in Cammarano et al. (2020).
For the growing season of 2018, rainfall was very low for this type of environ￾ment; this is becoming increasingly common and could have practical implications
for N management and grain N quality in the future (Cammarano et al., 2019). The
growing season rainfall (Fig. 10) was low or negligible during the vegetative stage.122 D. Cammarano et al.
Table 2 Regression equation parameters between observed and simulated data and root mean
square error (RMSE) used for evaluating the goodness of fit of the simulations
Treatment Unit a
* b+ R2** n++ RMSE￾SWC 0–0.3 m (m3 m-3
) -0.08 1.30 0.68 115 0.04
SWC 0.3–0.6 m (m3 m-3
) 0.03 0.94 0.64 115 0.03
Total soil N (kg N ha-1
) 56.36 0.67 0.49 115 58.06
Plant N (%) 104.57 -16.13 0.79 47 0.31
Plant aboveground biomass (kg DM ha-1
) -235.19 0.91 0.69 115 1229.11
Grain yield (kg DM ha-1
) 1765.38 0.44 0.60 23 600.7
Grain N (%) 0.56 0.55 0.35 4 0.06
*
Intercept; +
slope; **coefficient of determination; ++number of values; root mean square error
The interaction between N uptake from the soil and the amount of water held in the
soil profile affected the growth of spring barley for that particular growing season.
By flowering the LYZ and UYZ did not take up the residual soil N, which was later
lost due to more frequent rainfall (Fig. 10).
To identify the optimal N management scenario a series of “what-ifs”
N management scenarios were set up with the crop model using a long-term weather
series (1984–2017) with the weather data obtained from the UKCP09: Gridded
observation datasets (MetOffice, 2019). For this setup, a series of N fertilization
amounts was selected based on previous experimental evidence on spring barley in
Scotland (Overthrow, 2005). Ten N fertilizer amounts were simulated starting from
20 kg N ha-1 to 200 kg N ha-1 with a 20 kg N ha-1 increase. The rationale for
setting up such long-term simulations was because we wanted to quantify the effects
of weather on soil-agronomy interactions and highlight the response of the three-way
trade-off to different N management strategies. The simulation setup done in this
way allows us to account for the probability of weather events that can happen in the
near future (e.g., a dry year like 2018 was also observed in the past and might occur
again in the near future).
A detailed account of the calculation and demonstration of the three-way trade-off
is described elsewhere for each of the management zones (Cammarano et al., 2021).
Figure 11 showed that in Year 2 the conditions of high N leaching and low profit
were simulated for the field in which 100 kg N ha-1 would optimize the trade-off.
4 Conclusions
In conclusion, there are several approaches for simulating soil and plant N dynamics,
and there is not a universal one. Several attempts are being made by the global crop
modelling community to compare and improve modelling routines (e.g., see
AgMIP). Conceptually, with a crop model that can be applied in a precision
agriculture context, the compromise is to have a model that (i) requires a few inputs;
(ii) the inputs are easy to obtained by the user; (iii) can work on a range of soil types;Process-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics 123
Fig. 10 Experimental observations of (a) total soil N (0–30 cm) for the four different yield stability
zones (high-yield zone: blue line and dots; medium-yield zone: green line and dots; low-yield zone:
yellow line and dots; unstable-yield zone: red line and dots) and (b) volumetric soil water content at
0–30 cm. For both figures the secondary Y-axis represents the cumulative monthly rainfall (light
blue bars)
and (iv) can simulate the fate of residues of different compositions. Ultimately, the
desired crop model requires reliable simulations of the processes involved. Signif￾icant breakthroughs in improving the simulation of soil N dynamics are still lacking,
and that is due to the following:
(a) The lack of interdisciplinarity in studying the overall system. For example, the
crop modelling temperature routines were compared and improved by working
with researchers, breeders, crop physiologists, and crop modelers. This leads to
tangible results from which the scientific community benefited (Alderman et al.,
2013; Asseng et al., 2015; Maiorano et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017).124 D. Cammarano et al.
Fig. 11 Relationship between the mean marginal net return (GBP ha-1
) and soil N leaching
(kg N ha-1
). The intensity of the color represents the different levels of grain N% with the grey
color being the optimum grain N % content of 1.5%. Each dot represents a given N fertilizer level
(b) Testing it in limited time frames (usually 2–4 years) is not enough to elucidate
detailed mechanisms.
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
References
Alderman, P. D., Qulligan, E., Asseng, S., Ewert, F., & Reynolds, M. P. (2013). Proceedings of the
workshop modelling wheat response to high temperature. CIMMYT.
Angus, J. F. (2001). Nitrogen supply and demand in Australian agriculture. Australian Journal of
Experimental Agriculture, 41, 277–288. https://doi.org/10.1071/EA00141
Angus, J. F., & van Herwaarden, A. F. (2001). Increasing water use and water use efficiency in
dryland wheat. Agronomy Journal, 93(2), 290–298. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2001.
932290x
Asseng, S., et al. (2015). Rising temperatures reduce global wheat production. Nature Climate
Change, 5, 5. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2470
Asseng, S., et al. (2013). Uncertainty in simulating wheat yields under climate change. Nature
Climate Change, 3, 827. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1916. https://www.nature.com/
articles/nclimate1916#supplementary-information
Basso, B., Cammarano, D., Troccoli, A., Chen, D., & Ritchie, J. T. (2010). Long-term wheat
response to nitrogen in a rainfed Mediterranean environment: Field data and simulation analysis.
European Journal of Agronomy, 33, 132–138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2010.04.004
Basso, B., Fiorentino, C., Cammarano, D., Cafiero, G., & Dardanelli, J. (2012). Analysis of rainfall
distribution on spatial and temporal patterns of wheat yield in Mediterranean environment.
European Journal of Agronomy, 41, 52–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2012.03.007Process-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics 125
Basso, B., Gargiulo, O., Paustian, K., Robertson, G. P., Porter, C., Grace, P. R., & Jones, J. W.
(2011a). Procedures for initializing soil organic carbon pools in the DSSAT-CENTURY model
for agricultural systems. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 75, 69–78. https://doi.org/10.
2136/sssaj2010.0115
Basso, B., Ritchie, J. T., Cammarano, D., & Sartori, L. (2011b). A strategic and tactical manage￾ment approach to select optimal N fertilizer rates for wheat in a spatially variable field. European
Journal of Agronomy, 35, 215–222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2011.06.004
Bundy, L. G., & Andraski, T. W. (1995). Soil yield potential effects on performance of soil nitrate
tests. Journal of Production Agriculture, 8, 561–568. https://doi.org/10.2134/jpa1995.0561
Cammarano, D., Basso, B., Holland, J., Gianinetti, A., Baronchelli, M., & Ronga, D. (2021).
Modeling spatial and temporal optimal N fertilizer rates to reduce nitrate leaching while
improving grain yield and quality in malting barley. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture,
182, 105997. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.105997
Cammarano, D., et al. (2019). Rainfall and temperature impacts on barley (Hordeum vulgare L.)
yield and malting quality in Scotland. CropM, ft_macsur, 241, 107559. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.fcr.2019.107559
Cammarano, D., Holland, J., & Ronga, D. (2020). Spatial and temporal variability of spring barley
yield and quality quantified by crop simulation model. Agronomy, 10, 393. https://doi.org/10.
3390/agronomy10030393
Cammarano, D., et al. (2016). Uncertainty of wheat water use: Simulated patterns and sensitivity to
temperature and CO2. CropM, ft_macsur, 198, 80–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2016.
08.015
Cassman, K. G., & Dobermann, A. (2022). Nitrogen and the future of agriculture: 20 years
on. Ambio, 51, 17–24. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-021-01526-w
Coskun, D., Britto, D. T., Shi, W., & Kronzucker, H. J. (2017). Nitrogen transformations in modern
agriculture and the role of biological nitrification inhibition. Nature Plants, 3, 17074. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nplants.2017.74
Dalgaard, T., et al. (2014). Farming systems models for regional scale impact assessment in
Europe – Case studies of N-losses and greenhouse gas emissions. Aarhus University.
Davis, K. F., Downs, S., & Gephart, J. A. (2021). Towards food supply chain resilience to
environmental shocks. Nature Food, 2, 54–65. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-020-00196-3
EU. (1991). Council Directive 91/676/EEC of 12 December 1991 concerning the protection of
waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources.
Franzen, D., Kitchen, N., Holland, K., Schepers, J., & Raun, W. (2016). Algorithms for in-season
nutrient management in cereals. Agronomy Journal, 108, 1775–1781. https://doi.org/10.2134/
agronj2016.01.0041
Gijsman, A. J., Hoogenboom, G., Parton, W. J., & Kerridge, P. C. (2002). Modifying DSSAT crop
models for low-input agricultural systems using a soil organic matter–residue module from
Century. Agronomy Journal, 94, 462–474. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2002.4620
Godwin, D. C., & Singh, U. (1998). Nitrogen balance and crop response to nitrogen in upland and
lowland cropping systems. In G. Y. Tsuji, G. Hoogenboom, & P. K. Thornton (Eds.), Under￾standing options for agricultural production. Kluwer Academic Publisher.
Gregory, P. J., Crawford, D. V., & McGowan, M. (1979). Nutrient relations of winter wheat:
1. Accumulation and distribution of Na, K, Ca, Mg, P, S and N. The Journal of Agricultural
Science, 93, 485–494. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021859600038181
Grindlay, D. J. C. (1997). REVIEW towards an explanation of crop nitrogen demand based on the
optimization of leaf nitrogen per unit leaf area. The Journal of Agricultural Science, 128,
377–396. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021859697004310
Holzworth, D. P., et al. (2014). APSIM – Evolution towards a new generation of agricultural
systems simulation. CropM, 62, 327–350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.07.009
Hoogenboom, G., et al. (2019). The DSSAT crop modeling ecosystem. In K. J. Boote (Ed.),
Advances in crop modeling for a sustainable agriculture. Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.19103/AS.2019.0061.10126 D. Cammarano et al.
Jamieson, P. D., & Semenov, M. A. (2000). Modelling nitrogen uptake and redistribution in wheat.
CropM, ft_macsur, 68, 21–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4290(00)00103-9
Jin, Z., Archontoulis, S. V., & Lobell, D. B. (2019). How much will precision nitrogen management
pay off? An evaluation based on simulating thousands of corn fields over the US Corn-Belt.
CropM, ft_macsur, 240, 12–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2019.04.013
Maestrini, B., & Basso, B. (2018). Predicting spatial patterns of within-field crop yield variability.
CropM, ft_macsur, 219, 106–112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2018.01.028
Maiorano, A., et al. (2016). Crop model improvement reduces the uncertainty of the response to
temperature of multi-model ensembles. CropM, ft_macsur, 202, 5–20.
Mandrini, G., Bullock, D. S., & Martin, N. F. (2021). Modeling the economic and environmental
effects of corn nitrogen management strategies in Illinois. CropM, ft_macsur, 261, 108000.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2020.108000
MetOffice, U. (2019) UKCP09 gridded observation datasets. https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/
climate/uk/data/ukcp09. Accessed 24 May 2019.
Morris, T. F., et al. (2018). Strengths and limitations of nitrogen rate recommendations for corn and
opportunities for improvement. Agronomy Journal, 110, 1–37. https://doi.org/10.2134/
agronj2017.02.0112
Overthrow, R. (2005). Nitrogen management in spring malting barley for optimum yield and
quality (Report #367. Home Grown Cereals Authority (HGCA)). Daglingworth Cirencester.
Parton, W. J., Stewart, J. W. B., & Cole, C. V. (1988). Dynamics of C, N, P and S in grassland soils:
A model. Biogeochemistry, 5, 109–131. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02180320
Porter, C. H., Jones, J. W., Adiku, S., Gijsman, A. J., Gargiulo, O., & Naab, J. B. (2010). Modeling
organic carbon and carbon-mediated soil processes in DSSAT v4.5. Operational Research, 10,
247–278. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12351-009-0059-1
Puntel, L. A., et al. (2018). A systems modeling approach to forecast corn economic optimum
nitrogen rate. Frontiers in Plant Science, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00436
Raun, W. R., & Johnson, G. V. (1999). Improving nitrogen use efficiency for cereal production.
Agronomy Journal, 91 , 357 – 363. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj1999.
00021962009100030001x
Raun, W. R., et al. (2005). Optical sensor-based algorithm for crop nitrogen fertilization. Commu￾nications in Soil Science and Plant Analysis, 36, 2759–2781. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00103620500303988
Rezaei, E. E., Rojas, L. V., Zhu, W., & Cammarano, D. (2022). The potential of crop models in
simulation of barley quality traits under changing climates: A review. Field Crop Research, 286.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2022.108624
Sadras, V. O., & Angus, J. F., (2006). Benchmarking water-use efficiency of rainfed wheat in dry
environments. Australian Journal of Agricultural Research, 57, 847–856
Seligman, N. G., & Van Keulen, H. (1981). PAPRAN: A simulation model of annual pasture
production limited by rainfall and nitrogen. In M. J. Frissel & J. A. Van Veen (Eds.), Simulation
of nitrogen behaviour of soil-plant systems (pp. 192–220). Pudoc Wageningen.
Solie, J. B., Monroe, A. D., Raun, W. R., & Stone, M. L. (2012). Generalized algorithm for
variable-rate nitrogen application in cereal grains. Agronomy Journal, 104, 378–387. https://doi.
org/10.2134/agronj2011.0249
Soltani, A., & Sinclair, T. R. (2012). Modeling physiology of crop development, growth and yield.
CABI. https://doi.org/10.1079/9781845939700.0000
Stanford, G. (1973). Rationale for optimum nitrogen fertilization in corn production. Journal of
Environmental Quality, 2, 159 – 166. https://doi.org/10.2134/jeq1973.
00472425000200020001x
Stockle, C. O., & Campbell, G. S. (1989). Simulation of crop response to water and nitrogen: An
example using spring wheat. Transactions of the ASAE, 32, 66–0074. https://doi.org/10.13031/
2013.30964
Stockle, C. O., & Debaeke, P. (1997). Modeling crop nitrogen requirements: A critical analysis.
European Journal of Agronomy, 7, 161–169. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1161-0301(97)00038-5Process-Based Models and Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics 127
Stöckle, C. O., Donatelli, M., & Nelson, R. (2003). CropSyst, a cropping systems simulation model.
European Journal of Agronomy, 18, 289–307. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1161-0301(02)00109-0
Tian, X., Engel, B. A., Qian, H., Hua, E., Sun, S., & Wang, Y. (2021). Will reaching the maximum
achievable yield potential meet future global food demand? Journal of Cleaner Production,
294, 126285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126285
UK Malt. (2021). The Maltsers’ Association of Great Britain. http://www.ukmalt.com. Accessed
Jul 2021.
Wang, E., et al. (2017). The uncertainty of crop yield projections is reduced by improved
temperature response functions. Nature Plants, 3, 17102. https://doi.org/10.1038/nplants.
2017.102Modelling Soil Water Dynamics
Marius Heinen
1 Introduction
The International Society of Precision Agriculture defined precision agriculture as
follows: ‘Precision Agriculture is a management strategy that gathers, processes and
analyzes temporal, spatial and individual data and combines it with other informa￾tion to support management decisions according to estimated variability for
improved resource use efficiency, productivity, quality, profitability and sustainabil￾ity of agricultural production’ (www.ispag.org). Bouma (2007) stated more con￾cisely that precision agriculture aims at adjusting and fine-tuning land and crop
management to the needs of plants within heterogeneous fields. Besides a reactive
approach, using yield maps and sensors, Bouma (2007) also promotes the proactive
approach in which simulation models for plant growth and soil processes can be used
to predict optimal timing of management practices. The attention required for crop
modelling is evident, as high yields of good quality mean a good profit for the
farmers. This profit can be increased if the use of resources, such as fertilizers, land
management practices and irrigation water, is minimized. Minimizing the use of
resources means that we are at the cutting edge. For example, we are balancing
between adding too much or too little water and fertilizers. This requires good
knowledge on the interaction of soil–water–plant–atmosphere processes. Crop
modelling is discussed in chapter “Process Based Modelling of Soil–Crop
Interactions for Site Specific Decision Support in Crop Management” of this book,
and here we will focus on modelling the dynamics of water in soils. Modelling
nutrient dynamics in soils is discussed in chapter “Process-Based Models and
Simulation of Nitrogen Dynamics” of this book; see also Heinen et al. (2020a).
M. Heinen (✉)
Wageningen Environmental Research, Wageningen, The Netherlands
e-mail: marius.heinen@wur.nl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_6
129130 M. Heinen
2 Water Movement in Soils
2.1 Law of Conservation of Matter
Water movement in soil always obeys the law of conservation of matter or the law of
continuity, here written as (Fig. 1)
∂θ
∂t = - ∇  ð Þ θv - Sw = - ∇  q - Sw, ð1Þ
where θ is the volumetric water content (L3
L-3
), t is time (T), ∇ is the divergence
operator (L-1
), v is the velocity of the water (LT-1
), q = θv is the volumetric water
flux density (L3
L-2 T-1
) and Sw is the volumetric sink strength for water (L3
L-3 T-1
),
for example root water uptake. In general, all dependent variables in this section, such
as θ, q and Sw, are functions of the independent variables x, y, z and t, where x and y are
the horizontal coordinates (L) and z is the vertical coordinate (L), taken positive
downwards. For convenience, the spatial and temporal functional dependency is
omitted from the notation. Note that here we consider only a sink term, but sources
could also be introduced in Eq. (1).
2.2 Darcy–Buckingham
For saturated porous media, Darcy (1856) experimentally obtained that q is propor￾tional to the gradient in water potential. Buckingham (1907) extended Darcy’s law to
partially saturated porous media. With the water potential expressed as a head
equivalent, the Darcy–Buckingham equation is given by
Fig. 1 The change in water
content is due to the
difference between
incoming and outgoing
water fluxes and a sink term 
Modelling Soil Water Dynamics 131
q = - Kð Þθ ∇H = - Kð Þθ ∇ h - zg , ð2Þ
where K is the hydraulic conductivity (LT-1
) of the porous medium, ∇ is the gradient
operator (L-1
) and H is the hydraulic head (L) being the sum of the pressure head
h (L) and the gravitational head zg (L) (the minus sign in front of zg results from
z taken positive downwards). The direction of flow is opposite to the gradient in total
head, which explains the minus sign in Eq. (2). The dependent variables K, H and
h are functions of x, y, z and t as defined above.
2.3 Richards Equation
Richards (1931) combined the Darcy–Buckingham equation and the continuity
equation to obtain the governing partial differential flow equation for water in porous
media. For variably saturated, heterogeneous, isotropic, rigid, isothermal soils and
incompressible water, the Richards equation is
∂θ
∂t = ∇  ð Þ Kð Þθ ∇hð Þθ - ∂Kð Þθ
∂z - Sw: ð3Þ
Note that the Richards equation contains three dependent variables (θ, h, K) which
are assumed to be mutually related. This will be described further in Sect. 4. In fact,
such closed-form relationships must be known in order to solve Eq. (3). Since the
mutual (θ, h, K) relationships appear to be (highly) non-linear, the Richards equation
is a non-linear partial differential equation and has to be solved numerically. In soil–
crop modelling for situations where water movement in the soil is dominantly in the
vertical direction only, the Richards equation in one dimension is given by
∂θ
∂t = ∂
∂z
Kð Þθ hð Þθ
∂z
  - ∂Kð Þθ
∂z - Sw, ð4Þ
where the first term on the right-hand side describes the variation of the vertical
water flux density with depth, the second term refers to the contribution of gravity
and the third term is the sink term. One-dimensional approaches are no longer valid
when typical multidimensional situations need to be studied, such as studying the
extent of the wetted soil underneath a dripper in drip-irrigated crops or simulating
flow patterns around a drainage pipe.
2.4 Difference with Tipping-Bucket
In some crop–soil models, water in soil is modelled by the so-called tipping-bucket
approach. This approach assumes that the water content in each soil layer varies132 M. Heinen
between two typical values, and when its maximum value is reached, the excess
water is added to the next soil layer. Such an approach has the disadvantage that
upward movement of water is not possible (although some workarounds have been
proposed) and near-saturated conditions are not simulated (unless its maximum
water-holding capacity is set at near saturation). Buttler and Riha (1992) and
Verburg (1996) showed that both the tipping-bucket approach and the Richards
approach can predict soil water contents satisfactorily. However, this does not
guarantee that all other water balance components are predicted equally well
(Verburg, 1996). For example, Shelia et al. (2017) showed that subsequently
calculated crop growth differed when based on tipping-bucket or Richards soil
water calculations, especially under water-limited conditions. Boote (2008) stated
that a tipping-bucket model works satisfactorily when the soil water-holding prop￾erties are well-known and when the root distribution and rooting depth are predicted
accurately. However, Scanlon et al. (2002) said that this approach is inherently more
approximate than soil water movement simulations based on the Richards equation.
In general, the soil water fluxes calculated by tipping-bucket models are not accurate
enough to quantify solute transport (Van Dam et al., 2004). Because of its limita￾tions, the tipping-bucket approach is not advocated when studying or modelling
situations for precision agriculture. Each of the two approaches has its own advan￾tages and disadvantages, which, according to Shelia et al. (2017), should be tested in
future studies. In cases where not enough data are available to parameterize the
Richards approach, and data needed for the tipping-bucket approach are present, one
could decide to use the tipping-bucket model.
2.5 How to Solve Richards Equation?
As for ordinary differential equations, also for non-linear partial differential equa￾tions, the initial and boundary conditions need to be known to solve the problem
and in our case also the constitutive relationships between θ–h–K. These conditions
and relationships will be elaborated in the next sections. Even with known initial and
boundary conditions, in most cases, solution of the Richards equation cannot be
obtained analytically. Therefore, the governing flow equation for water in soils must
be done with numerical techniques. It goes beyond the scope of this chapter to
describe these techniques in detail. In general, the Richards equation can be solved
by a finite difference, a finite element or a control volume approach (Wang &
Anderson, 1982; Patankar, 1980). All these methods subdivide the soil in small
layers or elements, and for each of these, the Richards equation is set up. This results
in a set of N equations for N layers/elements. These equations contain the unknown
values of the pressure head in space and time, coefficients and known quantities.
This system can be represented by the following matrix notation:
Ax = b, ð5Þwhere A is the coef cient matrix, x is the vector containing the unknown values for
Modelling Soil Water Dynamics 133
fi
h and b is the vector containing known quantities. For typical one-dimensional
models where the soil is divided into horizontal layers, A is a typical tri-diagonal
matrix, so that Eq. (5) can be solved easily using a tri-diagonal solver (Press et al.,
1992). In other cases, alternative solvers are needed, for example an incomplete
Cholesky conjugate gradient method (Meijerink & Van Der Vorst, 1977). One
important issue is the conservation of mass during the numerical solution procedure.
Celia et al. (1990) proposed an iterative scheme for the mixed θ–h Richards equation
(Eq. 4) which explicitly takes into account that mass is conserved.
3 Boundary and Initial Conditions
Solving the Richards equation requires starting values for the unknown pressure
head (initial condition) and requires information on what applies at the boundaries of
the isolated system that is being modelled. The initial condition is given by
h zð Þ ; t = 0 = h0ð Þz : ð6Þ
Note that for simplicity we consider in this section a one-dimensional situation,
but this can be easily extended to two or three dimensions.
Mathematically, we can consider three types of boundary conditions (e.g.
McCord, 1991): the first type or Dirichlet condition refers to a known status
(pressure head) at the boundary:
h zð Þ = zΓ; t > 0 = hΓ; ð7Þ
the second type or Neumann condition refers to a known flux perpendicular to the
boundary:
∂ðh - zÞ
∂z ð Þ z = zΓ; t > 0 = qΓ; ð8Þ
and the third type or Cauchy boundary conditions is a combination of the former
two. The subscript Γ refers to a boundary. In practice, soil models make use of the
first two types, which may be either constant or variable in time. For example, a
Dirichlet bottom boundary condition can be used if the groundwater level is used as
input. It may also be used temporarily at the soil surface if water is ponding there.
The Neumann or flux condition typically refers to input and output fluxes at the soil
surface resulting from rainfall, irrigation and soil evaporation. Flux boundary con￾ditions at the bottom of a soil column can be used if seepage fluxes are known, or in
case free drainage is considered (i.e. q = K). For one-dimensional models, there are
no boundary conditions at the vertical planes along the soil layers (no-flow bound￾ary). For two- or three-dimensional models, boundary conditions must also be134 M. Heinen
supplied at all vertical boundaries to fully define the problem. In two- and three￾dimensional studies, often lines (planes) of symmetry are considered to minimize the
total volume of soil to be considered, and no-flow (Neumann) conditions apply at
these lines of symmetry.
Some one-dimensional models mimic the exchange with lateral elements, such as
drains and ditches with an additional sink term in the Richards equation. In this way,
these models approximate the true two- or three-dimensional character of water
movement from and towards these structures by this sink term. However, when one
is interested to determine flow paths around drains and ditches, one must use
multidimensional simulations models.
4 Constitutive Hydraulic Properties of Soils
Another requirement in order to solve the Richards equation is to provide informa￾tion on the constitutive relationships between the main state variables: volumetric
water content θ, pressure head h and hydraulic conductivity K. The relationship θ(h)
is known as the water retention characteristic, and K(h) or K(θ) is the hydraulic
conductivity characteristic. These can be measured on intact soil samples in the
laboratory (e.g. Dane & Topp, 2002; their Sections 3.3–3.6). From those measure￾ments it appears that both relationships are highly non-linear. Over the years many
analytical functional relationships have been proposed to describe such measured
relationships. Leij et al. (1997) compared several closed-form relationships. Some
relationships appear to be special cases of a more universal expression (Raats, 1992;
Heinen & Bakker, 2016). There are two expressions that are used widely in scientific
literature. These are the water retention characteristic described by Van Genuchten
(1980):
Seð Þ h = θð Þ h - θr
θs - θr
= 1
1 þ j j αh n  m ð9Þ
and the hydraulic conductivity characteristic described by Mualem (1976; Van
Genuchten, 1980):
K Sð Þe = KsSe 1 - 1 - S1=m
e
   m 2
, ð10Þ
where Se is the effective degree of saturation (dimensionless), θr is the(asymptotic)
residual water content (L3
L-3
), θs is the water content at saturation (L3
L-3
), Ks is the
hydraulic conductivity at saturation (LT-1
), α is a curve shape parameter (L-1
) and
n, m and λ are dimensionless curve shape parameters. The Mualem equation as used
here is only valid under the restriction m = 1–1/n. With the help of the RETC model,
the parameters can be easily obtained based on measured data (Van Genuchten et al.,Modelling Soil Water Dynamics 135
Fig. 2 Examples of (a) water retention and (b) hydraulic conductivity characteristics for four
different soil types (weak loamy, fine sand, light loam, moderately heavy clay and peat; soils B2,
B7, B11, O17 from Heinen et al., 2020b)
1991). As these two models are often used, databases exist where the parameters for
different soils (soil layers) can be obtained. This can be either parameters obtained
for individual soil samples, or averaged parameters for multiple soil samples of the
same type, or estimates based on pedo-transfer functional relationships. Examples of
such databases are: UNSODA (Nemes et al., 2001), ROSETTA (Schaap et al.,
2001), HYPRES (Wösten et al., 1999) and Staring series (Heinen et al., 2020b).
Figure 2 provides examples of water retention and hydraulic conductivity curves
according to the Mualem–Van Genuchten (MvG) models for four soils.
5 Example 1: Simulated Infiltration Versus Analytical
Solution
One of the crucial aspects in modelling soil water movement is the proper handling
of the water input from rainfall or irrigation. The conditions in the soil will determine
whether or not the water flux density at the soil surface can handle the rate of arrival
of rain or irrigation water. Once the soil is unable to handle this input, the excess
water will build up at the soil surface (ponding), and excess of this ponded water
layer will then move along the soil surface to lower parts and into ditches (runoff).
Runoff is unwanted because it may cause erosion and transport sediment and solutes
(e.g. nutrients, pesticides, herbicides) from the soil surface into surface waters.
Therefore, it is of great importance that soil models describe the infiltration process
at the soil surface adequately. One way to test a soil simulation model for this is to
check its behaviour either against observations or against known solutions of the
flow process. As said before, analytical solutions of the Richards equation are rare.
However, for the special case where the water retention and hydraulic conductivity136 M. Heinen
a) b)
Fig. 3 Comparison between simulated (symbols) and analytical solution for water infiltration in a
two-layer soil for case A of Srivastava and Yeh (1991): (a) pressure head as a function of depth and
time (h) and (b) cumulative outflow at the bottom as a function of time
characteristics are described by exponential functions, analytical solutions can be
obtained. Such exponential relationships may not describe measured data well, but
in essence they show similar behaviour: a sigmoidal-shaped retention curve and a
fast decreasing conductivity relationship. Figure 3 shows the strong correspondence
between numerically simulated h(z; t) and q(z = -200 cm; t) profiles as a function of
time in a layered soil and the analytical solution of Srivastava and Yeh (1991). The
simulations were performed with SWAP (Kroes et al., 2017) in which the required
exponential relationships were included for this purpose. Such a comparison pro￾vides confidence in the implementation of the numerical solution. SWAP was also
tested against an analytical solution of Basha (1999) which also includes an expres￾sion for the time of start of ponding. Here again a very good correspondence was
obtained (data not shown; see Heinen et al., 2021).
6 Root Water Uptake
The Richards equation given above includes a sink term Sw (Eq. 3). Although several
sinks (or sources) can be considered, here we focus specifically on root water uptake
because this forms the link towards coupled soil water–plant production modelling.
It is clear that the drier the soil (more negative pressure heads), the more the plant
roots will suffer from possible drought stress. Reduced uptake of water means that
the plant can no longer fulfil the transpiration demand, which then causes the plant to
start closing the stomata. When this occurs, the respiration rate of the crop is
negatively affected, which results in reduced photosynthesis and thus reduced
growth. Therefore, it is crucial to know whether or not roots can take up water atModelling Soil Water Dynamics 137
the required transpiration rate. Root water uptake is a complicated process since it
depends on how easily water can move towards the individual roots (depending on
soil hydraulic properties), where the roots are located (root length density, spatial
distribution, fraction of root wall in contact with soil), how the plant regulates root
distribution (more or less root mass production, locating roots in optimal soil
regions), what the conductance of the root is (plant property) and how the plant
compensates water uptake. Compensation means that if part of the root system
cannot fulfil its contribution to the total demand, roots in more favourable conditions
might take up extra water to compensate. Because of this complexity, it is not
surprising that there are two ways to model root water uptake: (i) simplified or
macroscopic models and (ii) more process-oriented or microscopic models. De
Willigen et al. (2012) stated: ‘Usually, the choice of a one-dimensional model for
the sink term is justified by the uniform horizontal distribution assumed for root
location and soil moisture. The three-dimensional root architecture is then simplified
by means of a root-specific property to distribute the transpiration within the soil–
root domain: root length, root surface, and root mass densities have been proposed
(Feddes & Raats, 2004). Simple models include one-dimensional vertical profiles of
root properties, but two- or three-dimensional models also exist in which the full root
spatial distribution has to be defined (e.g. Vrugt et al., 2001). A specific type of three￾dimensional sink term also exists in which the full three-dimensional architecture is
explicitly accounted for (Javaux et al., 2011)’. It goes beyond the scope of this
chapter to provide an in-depth summary of all possible root water uptake models that
are available in scientific literature. Here we provide two examples, one for a
simplified model and one for a microscopic model.
A well-known macroscopic model is that named after Feddes (e.g. Feddes et al.,
1978). The root system is considered to be distributed in a specific way with depth;
this can be either uniformly, linearly decreasing or exponentially decreasing.
According to this distribution, the total potential transpiration rate is relatively
distributed in the same way as the relative root distribution. For convenience here,
we consider the one-dimensional situation, but this can be easily applied in two or
three dimensions. The required uptake from each numerical soil layer is then given
by
Spot,i = Lrv,i
Z zr
0
Lrv,idz
Tp, ð11Þ
where Lrv,i is the root length density for layer i (L L-3
), zr is the rooting depth (L) and
Tp is the potential transpiration rate (LT-1
). Actual root water uptake is computed
depending on the magnitude of the soil pressure head according to
Sact,i = Spot,iαð Þ hi , ð12Þwhere S is the actual root water uptake from layer i (L3
L-3 T-1
), S is the
138 M. Heinen
Fig. 4 The root water
uptake reduction function
α(h) as a function of soil
water pressure head
act,i pot,i
demand for root water uptake from layer i (L3
L-3 T-1
) and α is the Feddes reduction
function shown in Fig. 4. The sum of all Sact,i equals the actual transpiration rate Tact
(L T-1
).
It is clear that this approach has no intrinsic compensation included. Several
approaches have been published in the literature (see, e.g., Heinen, 2014a, b) to
introduce compensation either at the start of this calculation or to apply it at the end.
For example, Bouten et al. (1992) introduced water content scaling in Eq. (11), so
that relatively more water is taken up in wet layers and less in more dry layers. An
example of redistribution afterwards is the compensation model of Jarvis (1989)
which states that if the total reduction in water uptake is less than some critical value,
full compensation occurs; otherwise this compensation decreases linearly. Note that
in this latter approach, all layers contribute in this compensation mechanism, even
layers that were already suffering from drought.
Microscopic root water uptake models are often based on an analysis of flow of
water towards the root. This means that gradients in pressure head around the root
are taken into account. Because this flow is radially contracting towards the root, the
gradients perpendicular to the root may become large. De Willigen and van
Noordwijk (1987) analysed this process and showed that the water status around a
root can be described well as an analytical expression in terms of the matric flux
potential. The matric flux potential (Raats, 1970) is the integral of the hydraulic
conductivity. Furthermore, in this concept, the flow of water from the bulk soil
around the root towards the soil–root interface is matched with the flux of water
across the root wall into the root xylem by introducing the root water potential in the
root system (Fig. 5).
Two fluxes are considered: the first water flux is water movement from the bulk
soil towards the root–soil interface (the rhizosphere, denoted by rs) and is given by
q1 = ΔzLrvπfð Þρ ϕbulk - ϕrs  , ð13Þ
and the second water flux is the water movement from the rhizosphere into the root
xylem and is given by!!
ð Þ
Modelling Soil Water Dynamics 139
Fig. 5 Conceptualization of the microscopic root water uptake model; see text for further
explanation
q2 = ΔzLrvKRð Þ hR - hrs , ð14Þ
where Δz is the length section of the root considered, for example the thickness of the
soil layer in a numerical simulation model (L); Lrv is the root length density (L L-3
);KR
is the root conductance (L T-1
); hR is the root water pressure head (considered uniform
inside the whole root system) (L); hrs is the pressure head at the soil–root interface; ϕrs
is the matric flux potential at the soil–root interface (related to hrs) (L2 T-1
); ϕbulk is the
matric flux potential of the bulk soil surrounding the root, i.e. determined from the
average pressure head in the soil (L2 T-1
), and f(ρ) is a function accounting for the
geometric conditions and is given by
fð Þ ρ = R1=R0 = 0:5 1 - 3ρ2
4 ρð Þ 2 - 1 þ
4 ln ½  ρ
ρð Þ 2 - 1 2
 - 1
, ð15Þ
where ρ = R1/R0 is the scaled radial distance (dimensionless), R0 is the root radius
(L) and R1 is the radial distance to where the soil surrounding each root is present,
with R1 determined by Lrv according to R2
1 = πLrv - 1
:
When hR is decreasing, it is likely that at lower values the actual root water uptake
will be less than the required root water uptake. For example, the following transpi￾ration reduction function could be applied (Campbell, 1991):
Tact = Tpot 1 þ
hR
hR,1=2
   a - 1
, ð16Þwhere h is the root water pressure head when T = 0.5T (L) and a is a
140 M. Heinen
R,1/2 act pot
dimensionless shape parameter. The solution for root water uptake is found by
equating q1 = q2 = Tact. If multiple layers of roots are present, one can set up
these equations for each layer, resulting in a set of equations which, because of the
non-linear character of the equations, has to be solved iteratively. A slightly alter￾native approach was used by De Jong van Lier et al. (2008).
De Willigen et al. (2012) showed how the macroscopic Feddes approach and the
two microscopic models differ in predictions of root water uptake. They also showed
that these differences vary with soil type. In the above microscopic model, it is
assumed that roots are in full contact with the soil. De Willigen et al. (2018) provided
an analysis when roots are in partial contact with soil.
7 Additional Phenomena: Processes
Although the Richards equation (Eq. 3) is regarded as the state-of-the-art way of
describing water movement in soils, it still has some restrictions. Other assumptions
were also made, for example, regarding the uniqueness of the closed-form, consti￾tutive hydraulic properties, and we considered only root water uptake as the single
sink or source term in the governing flow equation. Here we give a very brief
overview of aspects not regarded in the above.
Hysteresis
The closed-form, constitutive relationships for water retention and hydraulic con￾ductivity characteristics are mostly assumed to be unique. However, it appears that
this relationship differs from conditions when the porous medium is drying out or
wetting up. This phenomenon is called hysteresis and is caused by the varying pore
diameters (the so-called ink-bottle effect), differences in advancing and receding
water-air meniscus, entrapped air, thermal gradients and swelling and shrinking
(Hillel, 1980; Feddes et al., 1988). The relationships θ(h) and K(h) are known to
be hysteretic (Miller & Miller, 1956). According to Topp (1969), the relationship
K(θ) shows negligible hysteresis; therefore, it is preferred to K(h). For describing
hysteresis in the θ(h) relationship, various models have been proposed in the
literature (e.g. Mualem, 1984; Jaynes, 1984; Viaene et al., 1994). In general, these
models require knowledge about the so-called main drying and main wetting
envelop curves. These models can then calculate any intermediate so-called scan￾ning curves if the medium is subject to alternate drying and wetting conditions. The
majority of studies determine only the main drying curve and disregard hysteresis.
According to Kool and Parker (1987), the main wetting curve can be described well
by the same relationship as the MvG model described above. They stated that both
curves share the same parameter values, except for α, which should be greater for the
main wetting curve than for the main drying curve. As a first guess, they proposed a
ratio of αwet/αdry = 2. In soil that is not too coarse, hysteresis will be small. It isModelling Soil Water Dynamics 141
important in coarser soils, with extreme hysteresis occurring in coarse horticultural
substrates (e.g. Heinen & Raats, 1999; Otten et al., 1999).
Swelling–Shrinking
As stated, the Richards equation is valid only for rigid soils. Therefore, it cannot be
applied for soils that are subject to substantial swelling and shrinking, especially
when macropores or cracks result from shrinking; these need special attention (see
next issue).
Macropores and Cracks
Macropores and cracks may form in soils under shrinking conditions. Macrofauna
such as deep-burrowing earthworms (e.g. Lumbricus terrestris or Aporrectodea
longa) may also form biopores. These gaps differ from the porous structure of the
soil matrix; therefore, water movement will differ from the theory underlying the
Richards equation. Beven and Germann (1982, 2013) reviewed approaches in
macroporous soils. They concluded that, thus far, no consistent and coherent theory
exists to consider water movement in soils with macropores. They stated that four
approaches are used most often in the literature: (1) adapt K near saturation; (2) the
soil consists of two continuums: one immobile phase and the other mobile phase and
is described according to the Richards–Darcy model with exchange between the two
continuums; (3) the soil comprises two conductivity domains each described by their
own Richards–Darcy equation (dual-permeability) and (4) the soil comprises two
porosity domains (dual-porosity) in which preferential flow in the macropores is
described either by simple filling or by a kinematic wave equation, also with
exchange between the soil matrix and macropores.
Modifications in Soil Hydraulic Property Description
Several authors have proposed modifications of existing descriptions of the hydrau￾lic properties. These include adding an air-entry value in θ(h) which also affects K(θ)
(e.g. Vogel et al., 2000; Schaap & Van Genuchten, 2006; Ippisch et al., 2006) or
simply changing K near saturation. The MvG model, like many others, is based on
the underlying assumption that the pore-size distribution function is uni-modal.
Some soils may show, however, multimodal pore-size distributions. Or one could
mimic the presence of small macropores by a multimodal approach. Durner (1994)
and Priesack and Durner (2006) introduced bimodal expressions for the MvG model.
Drainage
Some soils have drains installed for removing excess water, or sometimes they are
used to supply soils with water (adaptive drainage; subirrigation). In
multidimensional models drains can be introduced as holes in the domain with
boundary conditions applying at their walls (e.g. De Vos et al., 2000). Alternatively,
drains can be mimicked with nodes for which the hydraulic conductivity is adapted
according to the Vimoke–Taylor concept (Heinen, 2014b). In one-dimensional
models, true flow towards drains cannot be considered. However, drains can then
be considered as an additional sink term in the Richards equation, and flow towards
(or from) drains can then be described as a resistance function. In this way several
drainage levels can be considered, for example drainage towards shallow trenches,142 M. Heinen
drain pipes, edge of field ditches and drainage towards larger open water bodies. See
Kroes et al. (2017) for more alternatives as, for example, implemented in the SWAP
model.
Other Crop Stress Factors Originating in Soils
Above we described drought stress causing reduction in root water uptake, which
may then cause a reduction in crop growth. Two other phenomena can be distin￾guished that can also cause reduction in root water uptake (functioning of the root
system) and thus a reduction in crop growth. Roots need oxygen for their respiration.
When soils become too wet for prolonged periods, the air content and thus the
oxygen content in the air-filled pore space may become limiting. Roots will no
longer function optimally, and they will not be able to take up water at the required
rate. Above, in the description of root water uptake, we provided an example of the
Feddes reduction function. There, reduction under wet conditions can be considered
by introducing the so-called h1 and h2 parameters (Fig. 4). Bartholomeus et al.
(2008) provided a more mechanistic approach to consider oxygen stress.
The second major phenomenon is salinity stress. When the soil solution becomes
more saline, roots can no longer take up water easily due to osmotic effects. In fact,
the root wall can be regarded as a membrane, and thus we have to consider the
osmotic potential in the soil and root, next to the soil, and root water pressure heads.
A microscopic approach will define some salinity reduction function, for example, as
proposed by Maas and Hoffman (1977), and add this reduction in Eq. (12) (multi￾plicative). Alternatively, the osmotic potential can be added in the microscopic
description of root water uptake (e.g. Dalton et al., 1975; Heinen, 2001).
Water-Influenced Processes
So far, we have considered the soil water balance per se. We have shown the link to
crop models through the exchange of information between crop water demand and
water availability in the soil. There are, however, more links between soil water
balance terms and other processes. It goes beyond the scope of this chapter to
describe these in detail. In brief, these are:
• Solute transport: Solute transport in soils is often described by the classical
advection (or convection) – dispersion/diffusion equation. Here information is
needed on the volumetric water content θ and the water flux density q. For more
detail, the reader is referred to Heinen et al. (2020a), for example. When model￾ling solute transport, there are several sources and sinks for solutes to be consid￾ered. These are often sub-models by themselves. Examples are: denitrification,
nitrification and mineralization. In these sub-process descriptions, the process is
governed by environmental conditions such as the volumetric water content, soil
temperature and soil pH. Examples of soil water reduction functions for θ for
denitrification can be found in Heinen (2006). Similar expressions hold for the
other processes.
• Soil temperature: Soil temperature is determined by the heat conductivity and
heat capacity of the soil. These are determined by heat properties of the compo￾nents present in soil: soil particles, organic matter, soil water and soil air.Modelling Soil Water Dynamics 143
Therefore, θ is needed when soil temperature is considered. In the above we
stated that the Richards equation assumes isothermal transport, so that soil
temperature is assumed not to influence water movement. Theories exist for
non-isothermal water movement or temperature-dependent water vapour trans￾port, but these are not considered here (see, e.g., Ten Berge, 1987; Saito et al.,
2006; Jansson & Karlberg, 2011).
8 Soil–Water Simulation Models
In soil science research, many simulation models are being used that include
soil water movement; we will not mention them all. In 2014, the International Soil
Modelling Consortium was formed with the aim to integrate and advance soil
systems modelling, data gathering and observational capabilities (https://soil￾modeling.org/). This site gives a list of models that relates to, amongst others, soil
physics and hydrology. Some examples are (in alphabetical order) APSIM￾SWIMv2.1 (Verburg et al., 1996), APSIM-WEIRDO (Brown et al., 2018), COUP
(Jansson & Karlberg, 2011), DAISY (Hansen et al., 1990), FUSSIM-2D (Heinen &
De Willigen, 1998, 2001; Heinen, 2001), HYDRUS-1D (Šimůnek et al., 2009),
HYDRUS-2D/3D (Šimůnek et al., 2018), MACRO (Larsbo & Jarvis, 2003),
RZWQM (Malone et al., 2004) and SWAP (Kroes et al., 2017; Van Dam et al.,
2008).
9 Example 2: Water Content in the Root Zone Predicted
from Ensemble Weather Forecasts
Precision agriculture, or smart farming, means that plants (or animals) get precisely
the treatment they need. For example, with respect to fertilization, much attention is
given to the 4R concept – right amount, right source, right place and right time – and
technology is used to realize such. This should also be taken into account for water
with agriculture being the largest consumer of water worldwide. Irrigation is com￾mon practice in (semi-)arid regions, and combined with technology this can be called
precision irrigation. Simulation models can help in understanding and investigating
the relationship between crop water requirement (demand) and soil water availabil￾ity. Here we present an example in which the soil water content in the rootzone is
simulated based on weather forecasts. This provides insight into the forthcoming
changes in water availability and can be used in decision-making by farmers when
the next irrigation event for a certain field is required.
For this purpose we used the soil–water–plant–atmosphere model SWAP–
WOFOST (Kroes et al., 2017). Based on atmospheric conditions, the Penman–
Monteith evapotranspiration is calculated including the required crop information
(such as LAI) that comes from the crop model WOFOST. The soil water balance144 M. Heinen
Fig. 6 Simulated time course of water content in the root zone (0–30 cm below soil surface) for two
periods during the summer of 2018. The blue line refers to simulations based on actual historic
weather data, and the red line is the median of all 51 predictions based on the ensemble weather
forecasts and is surrounded by the 20–80% confidence interval based on all 51 predictions
simulation can determine what the actual water uptake will be given the circum￾stances. Consequently, the crop model will determine to what extent actual crop
growth will be less than potential crop growth if root water uptake is limiting. The
atmospheric conditions are not restricted to historic data, but forecasts of rainfall,
radiation, temperature, wind speed and humidity can also be used. Each day, the
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) provides ensem￾ble weather forecasts, i.e. a series of 51 realizations of weather forecasts for the
coming 15 days. These can be used in forecast simulations to calculate the time￾course of water content in the root zone. By running all realizations of the ensemble
forecast provides insight into the spread of the predicted water contents in the root
zone. Figure 6 shows two examples of the simulated time-course of water content in
the root zone (0–30 cm below soil surface) including the 20–80% confidence
interval, referring to two periods in the dry summer of 2018 in the south of the
Netherlands.1 The situation refers to a potato field. Local soil information was used
to parameterize the model; historic weather data were obtained from the nearby
(approximately 20 km) Royal Dutch Meteorological Institute (KNMI), with rainfall
replaced by locally measured rainfall in an automatic rain gauge. Ensemble weather
1
This example refers to part of the work done the project OPERA as part of the joint Water-JPI/
FACCE-JPI work programme WaterWorks2015. We thank the EU and the Ministry of Economic
Affairs (the Netherlands), CDTI (Spain), MINECO (Spain), ANR (France), MIUR (Italy), NCBR
(Poland) and WRC (South Africa) for funding, in the frame of the collaborative international
consortium OPERA financed under the ERA-NET Cofund WaterWorks2015 Call. This
ERA-NET is an integral part of the 2016 Joint Activities developed by the Water Challenges for
a Changing World Joint Programme Initiative (Water JPI). Details can be found in reports available
at http://opendata.waterjpi.eu/dataset/opera-operationalizing-the-increase-of-water-use-efficiency￾and-resilience-in-irrigationModelling Soil Water Dynamics 145
forecasts were obtained from ECMWF through a paid-for contract with KNMI.2 The
farmer performed seven irrigations in total. From a hindcast analysis, it appeared that
irrigations were performed when the model predicted that water content in the root
zone was about 50–60 mm. The increases in water content in Fig. 6a are the result of
two irrigations (not of equal amount). For this first graph, the 20–80% confidence
interval around the median (red) line is very small until day 12 in the future. From
then onwards the confidence interval increases, which is due to the wide spread in
predicted rainfall in the 51 ensemble weather forecasts. In Fig. 6b the two increases
at days -5 and - 1 are due to irrigations. The predicted time course of water content
in the root zone decreases only slowly, and the spread of the ensemble forecasts was
small for all 15 days. The slow decrease indicates that during this period the
predicted rainfall was slightly lower than the predicted transpiration. Suppose that
a proper threshold for irrigation is when the root zone water content decreases below
50–60 mm, then it follows from the analysis performed on August 19 that no
irrigation will be needed in the forthcoming 15 days.
This example might not be very useful for farmers in (semi-)arid regions, where
the water input from rain, especially in summer, is insufficient by definition, and
irrigation is the main source of water. Then irrigation is practised on a daily basis.
Farmers in more humid regions are currently facing the first major changes due to
climate change. During summer prolonged dry periods might now be experienced,
and additional irrigation is required. Often this is necessary every few days, and
decisions have to be made as to when and which field needs irrigation. In these
circumstances, farmers can benefit from additional information of the predicted time
courses of available water in the root zone.
10 Spatial Variation
Soils are heterogeneous at many different scales: from the distribution of soils across
the landscape down to microscopic pore networks and the molecular structure of
biogeochemical interfaces. Consequently, observed flow rates of water, gases and
solutes or the dynamics of state variables, such as volumetric water content, tem￾perature, and biological activity, typically depend on the scale of observation
(Vereecken et al., 2016).
One of the important aspects in precision agriculture is the aim to adapt to
spatially variable conditions. For example, fertilizer application is reduced in those
parts of the field where the native N-content is higher than average. This chapter
focuses on water movement in soils, and we have explained the major processes,
constitutive relationships, initial and boundary conditions. In particular, the consti￾tutive relationships between volumetric water content, pressure head and hydraulic
2
The ensemble weather forecasts were obtained for research purposes only, and refer to their use in
the OPERA project.146 M. Heinen
conductivity are determined by the soil properties. These latter are generally spa￾tially variable within a field. Clearly, the vertical spatial variation is dominated by the
presence of different soil layers (horizons). Such heterogeneity is often taken into
account. Soil structure and soil texture and the hydraulic properties may also vary in
horizontal direction. Horizontal variation can in principle be taken as input in 2D and
3D simulation models. The user needs to specify the constitutive relationships to use
for each grid cell in the model. For example, Mallants et al. (1996) measured the
water retention and hydraulic conductivity characteristics along a transect and
determined for each location the parameter of the MvG relationships. Based on
their data, they concluded that Ks is extremely variable (coefficient of variation, CV,
at maximum 897%), θr and α were moderately variable (max. CV of 156%), and θs
and n were weekly variable (maximum CV of 27%). These data were used to
determine probability density functions and auto- and cross-variograms to determine
spatial dependence and coregionalization, respectively. Such information can then
be used to generate multidimensional input for multidimensional models.
Another type of soil heterogeneity is due to structural changes resulting from soil
tillage, for example. In a modelling study with three ‘virtual’ soils, Schlüter et al.
(2012) investigated the effect of a loosely aggregated seed bed, a plough pan and
local compaction in the wheel tracks, including subscale variation (according to the
so-called Miller scaling (Miller and Miller, 1956)). They also investigated the
difference between the multidimensional modelling results with a one-dimensional
model simulation in which each layer was assigned ‘effective’ soil hydraulic prop￾erties. From that comparison they concluded ‘A comparison with one-dimensional,
effective representations of these virtual soils demonstrated that upscaling of soil
water dynamics becomes inaccurate when lateral fluxes become relevant at the scale
of observation’. So, the 1D approach with effective hydraulic properties can be used
only in cases where lateral flow can be neglected.
Vereecken et al. (2007) provided a comprehensive review on how to upscale soil
water processes from the local to the field scale and how to derive effective hydraulic
properties. They considered two main approaches: forward and inverse upscaling.
For both approaches, information about the spatial structure of hydraulic properties
and the temporal and spatial structure and variability of state variables and boundary
conditions is important. Lack of this information and that on the effect of the
presence of vegetation are seen as the most limiting factors. Finally, the authors
stated that at that time most research was based on stochastic perturbation theories.
They suggested, however, other methods should also be explored.
There seems to be no single, universal approach to handle spatial variation in
modelling soil water movement. When one-dimensional models are used, possible
approaches may include the following: (i) perform multiple simulations with differ￾ent input variables that represent the spatial variation. The results may then be
averaged and the spread in outcome (uncertainty) can be quantified. This could
also be extended by using several different simulation models (ensemble) and using
Bayesian model averaging to obtain an average output and a measure for uncer￾tainty. The parameters can either be taken from locally measured soil data or drawn
from some kind of known stochastic probability density function. (ii) Based onModelling Soil Water Dynamics 147
‘effective’ (upscaled) parameters, the field can be simulated once (or use Bayesian
ensemble modelling). (iii) Multidimensional models can explicitly take into account
spatially distributed input parameters. The parameters can either be taken from
locally measured soil data or drawn from some kind of known stochastic probability
density function.
11 Epilogue
This chapter has focused on modelling the dynamics of water in soils. We have
described the main theory of water movement in soils, have shown how well the
numerical solution compares to an analytical solution for infiltration and provided an
example of how weather forecasts can be used to predict future water contents in the
root zone. One aspect that plays an important role in precision agriculture is how to
deal with spatial variation in soil processes and soil properties. This aspect has
gained attention in several studies, such as described in the previous section.
However, we believe that research is still needed on how to cope with spatial
variation in a parcel in combination with soil–crop modelling in the area of precision
agriculture. Can multiple or ensemble simulations using one-dimensional models be
used to represent the spatial variation in a field? To what extent can we make use of
one-dimensional models, or when is it necessary to switch to multidimensional
models; for example when are lateral flows important?
Conflict of Interest The author declares that there are no conflicts of interest.
References
Bartholomeus, R. P., Witte, J. P. M., van Bodegom, P. M., van Dam, J. C., & Aerts, R. (2008).
Critical soil conditions for oxygen stress to plant roots: Substituting the Feddes-function by a
process-based model. Journal of Hydrology, 360, 147–165.
Basha, H. A. (1999). Multidimensional linearized nonsteady infiltration with prescribed boundary
conditions at the soil surface. Water Resources Research, 35(1), 75–83.
Beven, K., & Germann, P. (1982). Macropores and water flow in soils. Water Resources Research,
18, 1311–1325. https://doi.org/10.1029/WR018i005p01311
Beven, K., & Germann, P. (2013). Macropores and water flow in soils revisited. Water Resources
Research, 49(6), 3071–3092. https://doi.org/10.1002/wrcr.20156
Boote, K. J., Sau, F., Hoogenboom, G., & Jones, J. W. (2008). Chapter 3: Experience with water
balance, evapotranspiration, and predictions of water stress effects in the CROPGRO model. In
L. R. Ahuja, V. R. Reddy, S. A. Saseendran, & Q. Yu (Eds.), Response of crops to limited water:
Understanding and Modeling water stress effects on plant growth processes (Advances in
agricultural systems Modeling) (Vol. 1). ASA-CSSA-SSSAJ. https://doi.org/10.2134/
advagricsystmodel1.c3
Bouma, J. (2007). Precision agriculture: Introduction to the spatial and temporal variability of
environmental quality. In J. V. Lake, G. R. Bock, & J. A. Goode (Eds.), Precision agriculture:
Spatial and temporal variability of environmental quality: Precision agriculture: Spatial and148 M. Heinen
temporal variability of environmental quality: Ciba foundation symposium (Vol. 210, pp.
5–17). https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470515419.ch2
Bouten, W., Heimovaara, T. J., & Tiktak, A. (1992). Spatial patterns of throughfall and soil water
dynamics in a Douglas fir stand. Water Resources Research, 28, 3227–3233. https://doi.org/10.
1029/92WR01764
Brown, H., Carrick, S., Müller, K., Thomas, S., Sharp, J., Cichota, R., Holzworth, D., & Clothier,
B. (2018). Modelling soil-water dynamics in the rootzone of structured and water-repellent
soils. Computers and Geosciences, 113, 33–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2018.01.014
Buckingham, E. (1907). Studies on the movement of soil moisture (Bulletin No. 38) (pp. 7–61).
USDA Bureau of Soils.
Buttler, I. W., & Riha, S. J. (1992). Water fluxes in Oxisols: A comparison of approaches. Water
Resources Research, 28(1), 221–229.
Campbell, G. S. (1991). Simulation of water uptake by plant roots. In J. Hanks & J. T. Ritchie
(Eds.), Modeling plant and soil systems (Agronomy monograph 31) (pp. 273–285). American
Society of Agronomy.
Celia, M. A., Bouloutas, E. T., & Zarba, R. L. (1990). A general mass-conservative numerical
solution for the unsaturated flow equation. Water Resources Research, 26, 1483–1496.
Dalton, F. N., Raats, P. A. C., & Gardner, W. R. (1975). Simultaneous uptake of water and solutes
by plant roots. Agronomy Journal, 67, 334–339.
Dane, J. H., & Topp, G. C. (Eds.). (2002). Methods of soil analysis. Part 4. Physical methods. Soil
Science Society Of America.
Darcy, H. (1856). Les fontaines publique de la ville de Dijon. Dalmont Paris.
Jong, D., van Lier, Q., van Dam, J. C., Metselaar, K., de Jong, R., & Duijnisveld, W. H. M. (2008).
Macroscopic root water uptake distribution using a matric flux potential approach. Vadose Zone
Journal, 7, 1065–1078. https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2007.0083
De Vos, J. A., Hesterberg, D., & Raats, P. A. C. (2000). Nitrate leaching in a tile-drained silt loam
soil. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 64, 517–527.
De Willigen, P., & van Noordwijk, M. (1987). Roots, plant production and nutrient use efficiency.
Ph.D. thesis, Agricultural University, Wageningen, The Netherlands, 282 p.
De Willigen, P., Heinen, M., & van Noordwijk, M. (2018). Roots partially in contact with soil:
Analytical solutions and approximation in models of nutrient and water uptake. Vadose Zone
Journal. https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2017.03.0060
De Willigen, P., van Dam, J. C., Javaux, M., & Heinen, M. (2012). Root water uptake as simulated
by three soil water flow models. Vadose Zone Journal. https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2012.0018
Durner, W. (1994). Hydraulic conductivity estimation for soils with heterogeneous pore structure.
Water Resources Research, 30, 211–223.
Feddes, R. A., & Raats, P. (2004). Parameterizing the soil–water–plant root system. In R. A. Feddes
et al. (Eds.), Unsaturated-zone modeling: Progress, challenges and applications (pp. 95–141).
Kluwer Acad. Publ.
Feddes, R. A., Kowalik, P. J., & Zaradny, H. (1978). Simulation of field water use and crop yield.
Simulation Monograph, PUDOC.
Feddes, R. A., Kabat, P., van Bakel, P. J. T., Bronswijk, J. J. B., & Halbertsma, J. (1988). Modelling
soil water dynamics in the unsaturated zone - state of the art. Journal of Hydrology, 100,
69–111.
Hansen, S., Jensen, H. E., Nielsen, N. E., & Svendsen, H. (1990). DAISY – Soil plant atmosphere
system model. Report A10. The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University. Available at:
https://daisy.ku.dk/publications/
Heinen, M. (2001). FUSSIM2: Brief description of the simulation model and application to
fertigation scenarios. Agronomie, 21, 285–296. https://doi.org/10.1051/agro:2001124
Heinen, M. (2006). Simplified denitrification models: Overview and properties. Geoderma,
133(3–4), 444–463. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2005.06.010
Heinen, M. (2014a). Compensation in root water uptake models combined with three-dimensional
root length density distribution. Vadose Zone Journal. https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2013.08.0149Modelling Soil Water Dynamics 149
Heinen, M. (2014b). Correction of the Vimoke-Taylor concept representing drains in a numerical
simulation model. Vadose Zone Journal. https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2014.06.0066
Heinen, M., & Bakker, G. (2016). Implications and application of the Raats superclass of soils
equations. Vadose Zone Journal, 15(8). https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2016.02.0012
Heinen, M., & de Willigen, P. (1998). FUSSIM2 A two-dimensional simulation model for water
flow, solute transport and root uptake of water and nutrients in partly unsaturated porous media
(Quantitative approaches in systems analysis no. 20) (p. 140). DLO Research Institute for
Agrobiology and Soil Fertility and the C.T. de Wit Graduate School for Production Ecology.
https://edepot.wur.nl/4408
Heinen, M., & de Willigen, P. (Eds.). (2001). FUSSIM2 version 5. New features and updated user’s
guide (Alterra rapport 363). Alterra. https://edepot.wur.nl/41784
Heinen, M., & Raats, P. A. C. (1999). Hysteretic hydraulic properties of a coarse sand horticultural
substrate. In M. T. van Genuchten, F. J. Leij, & L. Wu (Eds.), Characterization and measure￾ment of the hydraulic properties of unsaturated porous media, part 1: Proceedings of an
international workshop organized by the U.S. Salinity Laboratory (pp. 467–476). USDA￾ARS and the Department of Soil & Environmental Sciences of the University of California.
Heinen, M., Assinck, F., Groenendijk, P., & Schoumans, O. (2020a). Soil dynamic models:
Predicting the behavior of fertilizers in the soil. Chapter 8.2. In E. Meers, G. Velthof,
E. Michels, R. Rietra, & C. V. Stevens (Eds.), Biorefinery of inorganics: Recovering mineral
nutrients from biomass and organic waste. Wiley.
Heinen, M., Bakker, G., & Wösten, J. H. M. (2020b). Waterretentie- en
doorlatendheidskarakteristieken van boven- en ondergronden in Nederland: de Staringreeks.
Update 2018 (Report 2987) (Vol. 10, p. 18174/512761). Wageningen Environmental Research.
Heinen, M., Dik, P. E., & Cruijsen, J. J. P. (2021). Aanpassing en toepassing SWAP gericht op
bodem en hydrologische maatregelen (p. 3059). Deelrapport thema Bewuste Bodem in
onderzoeksprogramma Lumbricus.
Hillel, D. (1980). Fundamentals of soil physics. Academic Press.
Ippisch, O., Vogel, H.-J., & Bastian, P. (2006). Validity limits for the van Genuchten–Mualem
model and implications for parameter estimation and numerical simulation. Advances in Water
Resources, 29, 1780–1789. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2005.12.011
Jansson, P.-E., & Karlberg, L. (2011). Coupled heat and mass transfer model for soil-plant￾atmosphere systems. COUP manual. at: http://www.coupmodel.com/documentation
Jarvis, N. J. (1989). A simple empirical model of root water uptake. Journal of Hydrology,
107(1–4), 57–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1694(89)90050-4
Javaux, M., Draye, X., & Cl. Doussan, J. Vanderborght, and H. Vereecken. (2011). Root water
uptake: Toward 3-D functional approaches. In J. Glinski et al. (Eds.), Encyclopaedia of
agrophysics (pp. 717–721). Springer.
Jaynes, D. B. (1984). Comparison of soil-water hysteresis models. Journal of Hydrology, 75,
287–299.
Kool, J. B., & Parker, J. C. (1987). Development and evaluation of closed-form expressions for
hysteretic soil hydraulic properties. Water Resources Research, 23, 105–114.
Kroes, J. G., van Dam, J. C., Bartholomeus, R. P., Groenendijk, P., Heinen, M., Hendriks, R. F. A.,
Mulder, H. M., Supit, I., & van Walsum, P. E. V. (2017). SWAP version 4. Theory description
and user manual (Report 2780). Wageningen Environmental Research. Available at: https://
edepot.wur.nl/416321; see also: swap.wur.nl
Larsbo, M., & Jarvis, N. (2003). MACRO 5.0. A model of water flow and solute transport in
macroporous soil. Technical description. Department of Soil Sciences, Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences. ISBN 91-576-6592-3. Available at: https://www.slu.se/globalassets/ew/
org/centrb/ckb/modeller_dokument/macro-5.0-technical-report-2003.pdf
Leij, F. J., Russell, W. B., & Lesch, S. M. (1997). Closed-form expressions for water retention and
conductivity data. Ground Water, 35, 848–858. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6584.1997.
tb00153.x150 M. Heinen
Maas, E. V., & Hoffman, G. J. (1977). Crop salt tolerance-current assessment. Journal of the
Irrigation and Drainage Division, American Society of Civil Engineers, 103, 115–134.
Mallants, D., Mohanty, B. P., Jacques, D., & Feyen, J. (1996). Spatial variability of hydraulic
properties in a multi-layered soil profile. Soil Science, 161, 167–181.
Malone, R. W., Ahuja, L. R., Ma, L., Wauchope, R. D., Ma, Q., & Rojas, K. W. (2004). Application
of the root zone water quality model (RZWQM), to pesticide fate and transport: An overview.
Pest Management Science, 60, 205–221. https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.789
McCord, J. T. (1991). Application of second-type boundaries in unsaturated flow modeling. Water
Resources Research, 27, 3257–3260.
Meijerink, J. A., & Van Der Vorst, H. A. (1977). An iterative solution method for linear systems of
which the coefficient matrix is a symmetric M-matrix. Mathematics of Computation, 31,
148–162.
Miller, E. E., & Miller, R. D. (1956). Physical theory for capillary flow phenomena. Journal of
Applied Physics, 27, 324–332.
Mualem, Y. (1976). A new model for predicting the hydraulic conductivity of unsaturated porous
media. Water Resources Research, 12, 513–522.
Mualem, Y. (1984). A modified dependent-domain theory of hysteresis. Soil Science, 137,
283–291.
Nemes, A., Schaap, M. G., Leij, F. J., & Wösten, J. H. M. (2001). Description of the unsaturated soil
hydraulic database UNSODA version 2.0. Journal of Hydrology, 251, 151–162.
Otten, W., Raats, P. A. C., & Kabat, P. (1999). Hydraulic properties of root zone substrates used in
greenhouse horticulture. In M. T. van Genuchten, F. J. Leij, & L. Wu (Eds.), Characterization
and measurement of the hydraulic properties of unsaturated porous media, part 1: Proceedings
of an international workshop organized by the U.S. Salinity Laboratory (pp. 477–488). USDA￾ARS and the Department of Soil & Environmental Sciences of the University of California.
Patankar, S. V. (1980). Numerical heat transferand fluid flow. Hemisphere Publishing Corporation.
Press, W. H., Teukolsky, S. A., Vetterling, W. T., & Flannery, B. P. (1992). Numerical recipes in
Fortran 77. The art of scientific computing, second edition. Cambridge University Press.
Priesack, E., & Durner, W. (2006). Closed-form expression for the multi-modal unsaturated
conductivity function. Vadose Zone Journal, 5, 121–124.
Raats, P. A. C. (1970). Steady infiltration from line sources and furrows. Soil Science Society of
America Proceedings, 34, 709–714. https://doi.org/10.2136/sssaj1970.
03615995003400050015x
Raats, P. A. C. (1992). A superclass of soils. In M. T. van Genuchten et al. (Eds.), Indirect methods
for estimating the hydraulic properties of unsaturated soils: Proceedings of the International
Workshop, Riverside, CA. 11–13 Oct. 1989 (pp. 45–51). US Salinity Lab.
Richards, L. A. (1931). Capillary conduction of liquids through porous mediums. Physics, 1,
318–333.
Saito, H., Šimůnek, J., & Mohanty, B. P. (2006). Numerical analysis of coupled water, vapor, and
heat transport in the vadose zone. Vadose Zone Journal, 5, 784–800.
Scanlon, B. R., Christman, M., Reedy, R. C., Porro, I., Šimůnek, J., & Flerchinger, G. F. (2002).
Intercode comparisons for simulating water balance of surficial sediments in semiarid regions.
Water Resources Research, 38(12) 1323, 59.1-59.16. https://doi.org/10.1029/2001WR001233
Schaap, M. G., Leij, F. J., & van Genuchten, M. T. (2001). ROSETTA: A computer program for
estimating soil hydraulic parameters with hierarchical pedotransfer functions. Journal of
Hydrology, 251, 163–176.
Schaap, M. G., & van Genuchten, M. T. (2006). A modified Mualem–van Genuchten formulation
for improved description of the hydraulic conductivity near saturation. Vadose Zone Journal, 5,
27–34. https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2005.0005
Schlüter, S., Vogel, H.-J., Ippisch, O., Bastian, P., Roth, K., Schelle, H., Durner, W., Kasteel, R., &
Vanderborght, J. (2012). Virtual soils: Assessment of the effects of soil structure on the
hydraulic behavior of cultivated soils. Vadose Zone Journal, 11, doi:10.2136/vzj2011.0174.Modelling Soil Water Dynamics 151
Shelia, V., Šimůnek, J., Boote, K., & Hoogeboom, G. (2017). Coupling DSSAT and HYDRUS-1D
for simulations of soil water dynamics in the soil-plant-atmosphere system. Journal of Hydrol￾ogy and Hydromechanics, 66(2), 232–245. https://doi.org/10.1515/johh-2017-0055
Šimůnek, J., Šejna, M., Saito, H., Sakai, M., & van Genuchten, M. T. (2009). The HYDRUS-1D
Software package for simulating the one-dimensional movement of water, heat, and multiple
solutes in variably-saturated media. Version 4.08. Department of Environmental Sciences
University of California Riverside Riverside. Available at: https://www.pc-progress.com/
Downloads/Pgm_hydrus1D/HYDRUS1D-4.08.pdf
Šimůnek, J., van Genuchten, M. T., & Šejna, M. (2018). The HYDRUS software package for
simulating the two- and three-dimensional movement of water, heat, and multiple solutes in
variably-saturated porous media (Technical Manual Version 3). PC-Progress. Available at:
https://www.pc-progress.com/downloads/Pgm_Hydrus3D3/HYDRUS3D_Technical_Manual_
v3.pdf
Srivastava, R., & Yeh, T.-C. J. (1991). Analytical solutions for one-dimensional transient infiltra￾tion toward the water table in homogeneous and layered soils. Water Resources Research, 27(5),
753–762.
Ten Berge, H. F. M. (1987). Heat and water transfer at the bare soil surface. Aspects affecting
thermal imagery. PhD thesis, Landbouwhogeschool, Wageningen. Available at: https://edepot.
wur.nl/166817
Topp, G. C. (1969). Soil-water hysteresis measured in a sandy loam and compared with the
hysteretic domain model. Soil Science Society of America Proceedings, 33, 645–651.
Van Dam, J. C., de Rooij, G. H., Heinen, M., & Stagniti, F. (2004). Concepts and dimensionality in
modeling unsaturated water flow and solute transport. In R. A. Feddes, G. H. de Rooij, & J. C.
van Dam (Eds.), Unsaturated zone modeling. Progress, challenges and applications
(Wageningen UR Frontis Series) (Vol. 6, pp. 1–36). Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Van Dam, J. C., Groenendijk, P., Hendriks, R. F. A., & Kroes, J. G. (2008). Advances of modeling
water flow in variably saturated soils with SWAP. Vadose Zone Journal, 7, 640–653. https://doi.
org/10.2136/vzj2007.0060
Van Genuchten, M. T., Leij, F. J., & Yates, S. R. (1991). The RETC code for quantifying the
hydraulic functions of unsaturated soils (Report No. EPA/600/2-91/065) (p. 83). Robert S. Kerr
Environmental Research Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, US Environmental
Protection Agency.
Van Genuchten, M. T. (1980). A closed-form equation for predicting the hydraulic conductivity of
unsaturated soils. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 44, 892–898.
Verburg, K. (Ed.). (1996). Methodology in soil-water-solute balance modelling: An evaluation of
the APSIM-SoilWat and SWIMv2 models. Report of an APSRU / CSIRO Division of Soils
workshop held in Brisbane, Australia from 16–18 May 1995, Divisional Report
No. 131, Division of Soils, CSIRO, Australia. Available at: https://doi.org/10.4225/08/
586d398cbe4e2.
Verburg, K., Ross, P. J., & Bristow, K. L. (1996). SWIMv2.1 user manual. CSIRO Division of Soil.
Available at: https://www.apsim.info/Portals/0/Documentation/SWIMv21UserManual.pdf
Vereecken, H., Kasteel, R., Vanderborght, J., & Harter, T. (2007). Upscaling hydraulic properties
and soil water flow processes in heterogeneous soils: A review. Vadose Zone Journal, 6, 1–28.
https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2006.0055
Vereecken, H., Schnepf, A., Hopmans, J. W., Javaux, M., Or, D., Roose, T., Vanderborght, J.,
Young, M. H., Amelung, W., Aitkenhead, M., Allison, S. D., Assouline, S., Baveye, P., Berli,
M., Brüggemann, N., Finke, P., Flury, M., Gaiser, T., Govers, G., Ghezzehei, T., Hallett, P.,
Hendricks Franssen, H. J., Heppell, J., Horn, R., Huisman, J. A., Jacques, D., Jonard, F., Kollet,
S., Lafolie, F., Lamorski, K., Leitner, D., McBratney, A., Minasny, B., Montzka, C., Nowak,
W., Pachepsky, Y., Padarian, J., Romano, N., Roth, K., Rothfuss, Y., Rowe, E. C., Schwen, A.,
Šimůnek, J., Tiktak, A., Van Dam, J., van der Zee, S. E. A. T. M., Vogel, H. J., Vrugt, J. A.,
Wöhling, T., & Young, I. M. (2016). Modeling soil processes: Review, key challenges, and new
perspectives. Vadose Zone Journal, 15(5). https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2015.09.0131152 M. Heinen
Viaene, P., Vereecken, H., Diels, J., & Feyen, J. (1994). A statistical analysis of six hysteresis
models for the moisture retention characteristic. Soil Science, 157, 345–355.
Vogel, T., van Genuchten, M. T., & Cislerova, M. (2000). Effect of the shape of the soil hydraulic
functions near saturation on variably-saturated flow predictions. Advances in Water Resources,
24, 133–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0309-1708(00)00037-3
Vrugt, J. A., van Wijk, M. T., Hopmans, J. W., & Šimůnek, J. (2001). One-, two-, and three￾dimensional root water uptake functions for transient modeling. Water Resources Research, 37,
2457–2470. https://doi.org/10.1029/2000WR000027
Wang, H. F., & Anderson, M. P. (1982). Introduction to groundwater modeling. Finite difference
and finite element methods (p. 237). W.H. Freeman and Company.
Wösten, J. H. M., Lilly, A., Nemes, A., & le Bas, C. (1999). Development and use of a database of
hydraulic properties of European soils. Geoderma, 90, 169–185.Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era
Annamaria Castrignanò and Antonella Belmonte
1 Introduction
The field of agricultural sciences is changing from a data-limited to a data-rich field,
due to the accumulation of research data from international observatory networks
and the integration of multi-source sensor data from space-borne remote sensing
systems and proximal sensing arrays. In 2011, the agricultural G20 Agricultural
Ministers launched the Global Agricultural Monitoring (GEOGLAM) initiative
(http://www.geoglam.org/index.php/en/) to ‘strengthen global agricultural monitor￾ing by improving the use of remote sensing tools for crop production prediction and
weather forecasting’. The Joint Experiment for Crop Assessment and Monitoring
(JECAM) (http://jecam.org), which is the research branch of the GEOGLAM initia￾tive, has been operating over almost 10 years to develop algorithms and collect
datasets to improve agricultural monitoring and modelling. Moreover, the advent of
the Copernicus program of the European Space Agency (ESA) and the observations
collected by its Sentinel1 and Sentinel2 satellites provide unprecedented open and
free data relevant for agricultural monitoring at a spatio-temporal scale, which might
prove to be of interest even for precision agriculture.
A varied plethora of on-the-go sensors, from radiometric to geophysical ones in
contact with the ground or at close proximity (proximal sensing), make it possible to
collect an enormous amount of 3D data in a noninvasive, easy and cost￾effective way.
A. Castrignanò (✉)
Gabriele D’Annunzio University of Chieti – Pescara, Chieti Scalo, (CH), Italy
e-mail: annamaria.castrignano@unich.it
A. Belmonte
CNR-IREA National Research Council—Institute for Electromagnetic Sensing of the
Environment, Bari, Italy
e-mail: belmonte.a@irea.cnr.it
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_7
153154 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
Despite considerable research progress in agricultural monitoring and modelling
over the last decades, gaps remain in observational capabilities, data processing and
scientific knowledge. In particular, combining different types of data sources, such
as in situ, meteorological, (geo)statistical, multi-remote and proximal sensor data,
with crop model predictions is of crucial interest to improve agricultural practices.
There is then an unprecedented demand to convert this huge amount of raw data
into meaningful information, which can improve our fundamental knowledge and
modelling of environmental processes and finally support decision-making in pre￾cision agriculture (PA). In a data-rich era, the major research activities will then shift
focus from measurements and data collection to data processing, analysis and
interpretation for improving the accuracy of model prediction and ultimately action.
In the past, limited data could be stored and processed with relatively simple tools,
whereas nowadays, more sophisticated techniques are required to analyse big data
jointly from multiple sensors of different types (data fusion). An ambitious target of
the coming decade is determining the response of vegetation and food production to
many co-occurring stressors under different cultivation practices that should be
optimised. This will require the development and validation of novel modelling
methods, based on the use of big and heterogeneous spatial and temporal data.
Observations/monitoring and process-thinking are two basic approaches to scientific
investigation. The former records the state of a system and draws information about
the underlying processes; the latter identifies these processes and expresses them
formally in a model. These are two different ways of approaching the study of a
biophysical system and making inference; however, they have to be seen as com￾plementary rather than alternative. Only by synergistically combining the two
approaches, the more stochastic approach guided essentially by data and the more
deterministic approach based on formal equations will it be possible to make
significant progress in the knowledge of the processes. This will entail greater
control, the possibility of making informed decisions and ultimately managing the
agricultural system more efficiently.
In this chapter, we will propose a way of dealing with data fusion using
geostatistics, in the perspective that it can be useful for modelling in precision
agriculture.
2 Need for Data Fusion in Precision Agriculture
The most recent definition of precision agriculture (PA) adopted by the International
Society for Precision Agriculture (ISPA) in 2019 is the following:
Precision Agriculture is a management strategy that gathers, processes and analyses tempo￾ral, spatial and individual data and combines it with other information to support manage￾ment decisions according to estimated variability for improved resource use efficiency,
productivity, quality, profitability and sustainability of agricultural production. (https://
www.ispag.org/)Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 155
This definition highlights some fundamental issues, such as that PA is based on
the analysis of different types of spatio-temporal data for efficient, cost-effective and
sustainable management of the agricultural system. However, one of the greatest
obstacles to implementing PA derives from the difficulties to determine temporal
variation of agricultural inputs locally (Evans et al., 1996). Soil and crop attributes
often vary considerably over space and time so that a large number of samples would
be needed to provide information at the fine spatial and temporal resolutions required
by PA (Adamchuk et al., 2011; Mulla, 2017). Intensive field sampling and labora￾tory analysis have been the traditional way of determining soil and plant properties
for many years. Unfortunately, these methods are generally expensive, destructive
and time-consuming, making it difficult, in some cases, to adopt PA practices.
Various remote and proximal sensing technologies have been introduced to over￾come these limitations (Castrignanò & Buttafuoco, 2020; Muazen et al., 2020;
Castrignanò et al., 2017, 2018).
Sensors of different types are mounted on board satellites, air vehicles or on
mobile platforms on the ground, although in the latter case, it is referred to as
proximal sensing. The sensors used for remote sensing may differ in their spatial,
temporal and spectral resolutions, as well as the intrinsic precision characteristics of
the radiometer used. The spatial resolution is related to the pixel size; the temporal
resolution is related to the revisit time of the same observation area, while the
spectral resolution is indicated by the number of bands captured in the range of the
electromagnetic spectrum of the radiometer used (Nowatzki et al., 2004).
Hyperspectral sensors contain a large number of correlated bands of narrow width
(<20 nm) and separated by very small increments in wavelength (2–3 nm) (Teke
et al., 2013; Sishodia et al., 2020). The outputs of these sensors, appropriately
processed, make it possible to extract useful information on the status of the crops
(Chang et al., 2020; Nagasubramanian et al., 2019). More recently, hyperspectral
sensors, which use the process of sunlight-induced chlorophyll fluorescence, have
been applied increasingly to estimate photosynthesis, crop nutrient content and
biotic and abiotic stresses such as disease and water stress (Chang et al., 2020;
Nagasubramanian et al., 2019; Zarco-Tejada et al., 2016; Mohammed et al., 2019;
Castrignanò & Buttafuoco, 2020; Muazen et al., 2020).
Two other sensors (thermal infrared and microwave sensors), mounted on board
satellites or aircraft, are also used in agriculture mainly to estimate crop water stress
and irrigation requirements (Palazzi et al., 2019; Babaeian et al., 2019; ). Although
satellites with high spatial resolution (<5 m) and daily revisit times (Sishodia et al.,
2020) have recently been launched, most of the products supplied by remote sensing
cannot be used in PA because of their low spatial and temporal resolutions. Indeed,
the resolution required in PA depends on many factors, such as the management
objectives, the size of the field, the technological level of the equipment used on the
farm and the type of agronomic operation used. For example, for crop yield
estimation, higher resolutions (1–3 m) are required, compared with the estimation
of fertiliser and irrigation water, which require resolutions of about 5–10 m (Sishodia
et al., 2020). Weed control and disease detections, however, require centimetre
resolutions (Fernández-Quintanilla et al., 2018; Castaldi et al., 2017), as has been156 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
demonstrated recently in the fight against Xylella infection of olive trees in Southern
Italy (Castrignanò et al., 2020; Zarco-Tejada et al., 2018).
Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-based platforms, capable of providing finer
spatial resolutions than the satellites, have been rapidly adopted in agricultural
research in the last two decades. They can provide on-demand relatively cheap
information during a crop growing season at the spatial scale required by PA
operations (Huang et al., 2018).
An efficient application of PA requires an accurate assessment of the spatial and
temporal variation of the soil as well as plants. For this purpose, on-the-go proximal
sensors of different types, capable of measuring moisture, micro and macro nutrient
contents, texture and other important soil properties at very fine spatial resolution,
are already widely used (Castrignanò et al., 2017; De Benedetto et al., 2015; Viscarra
Rossel et al., 2011). These sensors employ a wide variety of measurement tech￾niques (electromagnetic induction (EMI), electrical resistivity, ground-penetrating
radar (GPR) and gamma sensors, multi- and hyperspectral radiometer and fluorim￾eter). In particular, geophysical sensors are playing a major role in characterising
field-scale soil spatial variation in PA (Corwin & Scudiero, 2016; Castrignanò et al.,
2018).
Despite the challenges posed by the use of different sensors, with different spatial
and temporal resolutions and uncertainties, combining (fusing) them will result in
better spatio-temporal information. For example, the combination of satellite images
using data from different types of satellite, such as those with high spatial resolution
and those with high temporal resolution, will provide a final product that has all the
relevant spatio-temporal features of interest (Zhu et al., 2018; Knipper et al., 2019).
Sparse ground truth data could be processed jointly with high spatial and temporal
resolution data (e.g. UAV data) and then be used as inputs to decision support
systems (DSS) in PA.
Adequate data analysis techniques (data fusion) are needed to integrate multi￾source spatial data efficiently, in order to obtain more exhaustive and accurate
information. An appropriate data fusion approach must resolve several crucial
problems, such as those related to the generally large size of data from remote and
proximal sensing (big data) and to differences in measurement volume (support) and
uncertainty of the various types of equipment. Presently, there is no single solution
to the problem of data fusion from a statistical point of view, and various methods
have been proposed, based on regression methods (Best et al., 2000; Young &
Gotway, 2007), the Bayesian approach (Castanedo, 2013) and more recently artifi￾cial intelligence (AI) (Patrício & Rieder, 2018).
Geostatistics offers a set of optimal linear multivariate estimators (i.e. unbiased
and with minimum error variance) to treat spatial data of different types by deter￾mining a statistical model of coregionalisation of spatial dependence (Castrignanò
et al., 2000; Wackernagel, 2003). Moreover, geostatistics enables the crucial prob￾lem of ‘change of support’ to be solved, where support is used in the sense of
geometrical size, shape and spatial orientation of the region associated with the
measurements (Olea, 1991). The solution involves defining a statistical approach
that jointly analyses two or more variables with different supports to permit valid
inference about the new target support.Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 157
2.1 Principles of Geostatistical Data Fusion and Change
of Support
When dealing with a specific spatial problem, it is common to analyse heterogeneous
data jointly that are characterised by different degrees of aggregation and uncer￾tainty. It is critical, therefore, to define a robust statistical approach to transform
spatial data from one level of aggregation to another. Topics such as scale and
scaling continue to encourage research in spatial analysis and modelling (Atkinson
& Tate, 2000; Castrignanò & Buttafuoco, 2020). The two approaches, commonly
used to integrate spatial data aggregated at different scales, are downscaling and
upscaling. The former makes inferences at a lower level of aggregation than the
original data, also called disaggregation, whereas the latter makes inferences at a
higher level of aggregation. Data aggregation is also known under different names:
the modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP) (Openshaw & Taylor, 1979) or the
change of support problem (COSP) in geostatistics (Cressie, 1996; Young &
Gotway, 2007). The COSP essentially makes inferences about a spatial variable
with a specific spatial support but using variables with different spatial supports on
the basis of a statistical model.
The COSP involves two critical inferential issues: the first, the ‘aggregation
effect’, is that the data distribution of a variable averaged over a larger support is
more bell-shaped and has smaller variance than that of the original variable. Aggre￾gation then tends to reduce spatial heterogeneity and smooths the spatial data,
although spatial autocorrelation (i.e. correlation between nearby observations)
works as a mitigating factor (Castrignanò & Buttafuoco, 2020).
The second issue, the ‘zoning effect’ (Wong, 1996; Castrignanò & Buttafuoco,
2020), is the effect on statistical inference resulting from a different grouping of the
same spatial units. The effect of this is to produce groups of different shape and
orientation but at the same spatial scale.
A more complex problem arises in data disaggregation, where prediction (infer￾ence) is made at a finer spatial support than the one of the original data. It is worth
emphasising that correlations at the individual level or from aggregated data are
generally different and therefore the inferences obtained at a given scale cannot be
transferred to another (Castrignanò & Buttafuoco, 2020). This further emphasises
the importance of specifying the spatial scale concerning what the possible processes
at play refer to.
There is no universal solution to COSP and the current main solutions include
spatial smoothing techniques (Kelsal & Wakefield, 2002), statistical regression
models (Grose et al., 2007), Bayesian hierarchical models (Brus et al., 2008) and
multi-scale tree models (Huang et al., 2002). The GIS techniques, although widely
used, do not offer a proper solution from a statistical point of view because in general
they do not provide any measure of uncertainty (Neteler & Mitasova, 2008).
Furthermore, they do not define a clear disaggregation or aggregation approach
when using covariates.158 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
Several geostatistical solutions have been proposed to solve COSP (Atkinson &
Tate, 2000; Chilès & Delfiner, 2012; Castrignanò et al., 2017, 2019). Block
cokriging has been widely used in the past for data upscaling only, but in its
generalised form (Young & Gotway, 2007), it can be used for both upscaling
(aggregation) and downscaling (disaggregation) (Castrignanò & Buttafuoco,
2020). For downscaling, however, other solutions were proposed such as: area-to￾point kriging (Goovaerts, 2008; Yoo & Kyrialidis, 2009), cokriging for image
sharpening (Pardo-Iguzquiza et al., 2006) and a deconvolution-convolution proce￾dure to estimate the local variogram in super-resolution mapping (Atkinson &
Jeganathan, 2010). To fuse multi-resolution remote sensing data, Nguyen et al.
(2012) proposed a spatial statistical data fusion model. In addition to block (co)
kriging, other more advanced geostatistical techniques, such as nonlinear methods
and iso-factorial models, have been used more recently (Chilès & Delfiner, 2012).
The advantage of geostatistical methods to solve COSP is that they are formulated
in a probabilistic framework for which a measure of uncertainty can be obtained.
However, these approaches have two main disadvantages: (i) they can be computa￾tionally intensive and (ii) require the assumption of second-order stationarity. The
latter implies that the averages of random variables are constant and known and that
the spatial covariance function depends only on the distance between observations
(Chilès & Delfiner, 2012). For big spatial datasets covering large areas, the assump￾tion of stationarity is often not satisfied. One way to deal with spatial non-stationarity
is through local (co)kriging (Hammerling et al., 2012). In this approach, the obser￾vations within local windows are used for both estimation of the covariance param￾eters and spatial predictions. Other computationally efficient approaches exist to
reduce the computational burden, such as data dimension reduction (Wikle, 2010)
and fixed rank kriging (FRK) and fixed rank filtering (FRF) developed by Cressie
et al. (2010).
Therefore, a data fusion approach that takes advantage of the complementary
features of the different types of data and combines them in a statistically robust way
is proposed hereafter based on geostatistics. Multivariate geostatistics uses an
unbiased optimal (with minimum error variance) estimator (cokriging) for interpo￾lation, which requires the previous specification of a spatial model of multivariate
dependence (Wackernagel, 2003). Block cokriging enables the estimate of different
variables to be referred to the same support (block), thus providing a solution to the
crucial problem of COSP. However, with proximal or remote sensing datasets that
are often big in size, the required matrix inversion may be difficult if not impossible.
A solution is possible with multicollocated cokriging (MCC) (Rivoirard, 2001),
which is a simplified version of full cokriging using the auxiliary (grid) variable
(s) only at the target point and at all locations where the primary variable of interest is
available. This approach requires that the auxiliary variable(s) is (are) known at all
(target) locations where the variable of interest has to be estimated. Moreover, MCC
makes it possible to integrate the differences between the various sensor data
synergistically and to complement them effectively with the point ground truths of
the variable of interest (Castrignanò et al., 2012). The outcome of such an approach
is a series of thematic maps of the variables considered to be of interest for PA.Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 159
Fig. 1 Integrated framework of geostatistical data fusion and modelling
To delineate homogeneous management zones for site-specific farming, a very
effective multivariate geostatistical tool called factorial cokriging can be used. It can
synthesise multi-type data that encapsulate different spatial scales, into simple
summary scale-dependent indices that can be used effectively for field partitioning.
In a fully integrated framework between data fusion and modelling, geostatistics can
be considered at the core of all data flows from the various remote and proximal
sensors and coupled with a numerical model that in turn uses other data sources and
remote sensing data. Geostatistics is then useful for fusing all the different sources of
information and for interpreting and modelling their statistical space–time structures,
before the transformed data are used as input to a simulation model aimed at site￾specific management (Fig. 1).
The following is a brief outline of the proposed approach to data fusion based on
geostatistical techniques. The interested reader can learn more about the procedures
mentioned in the numerous references provided.
– Exploratory Data Analysis
The input data, including both point-based and grid data, generally need some
adjustment before undergoing a multivariate analysis. First, the values of the vari￾ables on a grid have to be migrated to the nearest sample location to create the
coregionalisation dataset. Exploratory data analysis can then be performed on the
common dataset by calculating the basic statistics (mean, median, minimum and
maximum values, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis) of all variables in the
study.
Skewed data distributions can often be made more suitable for geostatistical
modelling by transforming each variable into a normal distribution with mean zero
and unit variance using a mathematical function.
However, the transformation function must be corrected if the estimate is to be
produced on a larger support (block) by using a support correction coefficient r.
– Spatial Modelling and a Geostatistical Solution for Support Correction160 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
Fig. 2 Discretisation of
blocks
The key tool in geostatistics for expressing spatial dependence is the variogram,
both direct and cross- variogram between pairs of variables. All direct and cross￾variogram models are expressed as linear combinations of the same basic mathe￾matical functions for each spatial scale under the scope of the linear model of
coregionalisation (LMC).
From observations at locations with point support, block cokriging can be used to
predict the average values of a multivariate process over a larger support (block),
accounting for the specific block attributes (size, shape and orientation). The main
difference between point and block (co)kriging is the calculation of the point-to￾block covariance:
C Bð Þ , xα = covð Þ Z Bð Þ, Zð Þ xα =
Z
B
Cð Þ u, xα du
j j B , ð1Þ
where |B| is the volume of the block (spatial support) and C(∙) is the point-to-point
covariance (spatial covariance is the complement of variogram with respect to the
sample variance). The volume of the block B is discretised into points (u) so that the
mean covariance (C) is approximated by a summation through numerical integration.
The block variogram is calculated through regularisation, which transforms a
variogram model established on points into the corresponding variogram on a
given block support. The variogram on a point support is calculated on the smallest
support and then regularised. In practice, the regularised LMC is estimated by using
a discretisation of the blocks into equal cells, whereby the blocks are replaced by the
union of the cell centres (Fig. 2).
After that, a pseudo-experimental variogram is calculated at the fictitious centres
of each cell, regularly discretising the new support and then the point variograms are
averaged over the whole block. A model of the block regularised variogram is fitted
before using it subsequently in cokriging. Using the observations at locations (xα)
with point support, block cokriging predicts the average value of the variable(s) of
interest over a larger support (upscaling).Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 161
Multi-collocated block cokriging is preferred to standard cokriging to fuse sample
variables with gridded (exhaustive) variables for the final prediction on the target
support as it reduces the size of the cokriging system to be solved, making it feasible
to invert the matrix of spatial covariances.
Block cokriging can be used also in downscaling, when the estimates are on a
smaller support than that of observations. However, in this case, a sort of deregula￾tion or deconvolution is needed to transform variograms on areal support into
variograms on point support through an iterative fitting process (Goovaerts, 2008;
Castrignanò & Buttafuoco, 2020). Unfortunately, there is no unique way to recon￾struct statistical properties at the individual level starting from aggregated data
(King, 1997), and downscaling is implemented only on few commercial or free
software packages.
– Factorial Block Cokriging
Factorial cokriging differs from traditional principal component analysis (PCA)
(Jackson, 2003) in that it applies to the individual spatial (scale-dependent) compo￾nents (coregionalisation matrices) instead of applying to the entire variance–covari￾ance matrix, after fitting a linear model of coregionalisation model (LMC)
(Castrignanò et al., 2000). As for PCA, it decomposes each coregionalisation matrix
into two additional matrices: the eigenvalue matrix and the eigenvector matrix
(Wackernagel, 2003). The transformation coefficients (loading coefficients) corre￾spond to the covariances between the variables and the principal component, here
called the regionalised factor, for any given spatial scale. They express the influence
of each variable on the factor at a given spatial scale and are therefore used to assign
a physical meaning to the factor. Mapping of scale-dependent regionalised factors
then represents a concise and effective way of showing the spatial relationships
among the variables at different spatial scales. It is therefore commonly used in PA
to produce a scale-dependent partition of the field into homogeneous areas according
to the attributes used. Again, if multiple exhaustive information (i.e. known at each
node of the interpolation grid) is available, multicollocated factorial block cokriging
is preferred to the full version.
Uncertainty Estimation and Model Evaluation
The final step is to determine prediction uncertainty of the raw variables after
back-transformation. It is assessed by calculating the confidence interval (CI) at a
given probability level, which reflects the inability to define an unknown value
exactly (prediction) (Castrignanò et al., 2019; Manzione & Castrignanò, 2019).
The confidence interval (CI) is calculated based on the following equation:
CI = UL–LL, ð2Þ
where UL and LL are the upper and lower limits of prediction, respectively. These
limits are defined in terms of standard deviation (SD) of a Gaussian variable and for
the probability level of 95% are given by162 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
UL = predicted value þ 1:96 SD ð3Þ
and
LL = predicted value–1:96 SD: ð4Þ
The CI is then linked to the probability that the unknown value lies within a given
interval. The above calculation of CI requires that the data are normally distributed
(Castrignanò et al., 2009). Therefore, the block cokriged Gaussian predictions and
their corresponding upper and lower limits are back-transformed into the raw values
by using the block transformation function, previously estimated.
Figure 3 gives a complete overview of the proposed method.
2.2 Application of Geostatistical Data Fusion in Precision
Agriculture
To illustrate the method described previously, an example is given below in which
multi-source soil data with different supports are fused to delineate an agricultural
field into management zones using regionalised factors as synthetic indicators of
multivariate variability (Buttafuoco et al., 2019, 2021). Furthermore, as the pro￾cesses underlying site-specific management are a function of scale, it is expected that
field delineation too will be scale dependent. This particular case study was chosen
because in the fusion process the change of support and the critical influence of
spatial resolution on the statistical characteristics of the estimates are considered
explicitly. The flexibility and effectiveness of the method are also evident in the
numerous case studies to which it has been applied and to which the interested reader
is advised to refer for further details (Buttafuoco et al., 2019; Castrignanò et al.,
2017; Castrignanò & Buttafuoco, 2020; De Benedetto et al., 2013a, b).
The study area (Fig. 4) is in Southern Italy (latitude 40°48′22″N, longitude 14°
34′12″E), in a field cropped with Solanum lycopersicum L. cv San Marzano. Fifty
soil samples were collected at the nodes of a quasi-regular grid with mesh of about
9-m and down to 0.30–m depth to cover the 5500-m2 field evenly. The locations of
soil samples were determined with a GPS system with differential correction (DGPS,
HiPer 27 Pro, Topcon, Tokyo, Japan) and sub-metric accuracy in the UTM projec￾tion system.
The samples were analysed in the laboratory for total organic carbon content and
concentrations of nitrogen, potassium and phosphorous.
In addition, reflectance of each soil sample, in the radiometric range between
350 and 2500 nm, was measured in the laboratory using an ASD FieldSpec IV
spectroradiometer and pre-processed according to the procedures described by
Conforti et al. (2015). A PCA of spectral data was performed to reduce the dimen￾sionality of the data.Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 163
Fig. 3 Flowchart of the
proposed methodology of
geostatistical data fusion
A soil survey was carried out to measure ECa (mS m-1
) along 24 parallel
transects (Fig. 5) with a multiple frequency electromagnetic profiler GEM300®
(Castrignanò et al., 2019). The ECa data, measured with the highest operating
frequency only (19,975 Hz), were used in this study to characterise the topsoil.
The maximum depth of investigation of this operating frequency was 1.59 m
(Huang, 2005), but the effective depth (the depth above which 50% of the signal
contribution effect is retained) was about 0.40 m (Sudduth et al., 2005).164 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
Fig. 4 Location of study site (a) and the field site (b)
Fig. 5 Survey scheme: the
black dotted lines are the
24 transects where the
geophysical surveys were
carried out; the brown points
are the soil sample locations
The vertical supports of the three different types of measurements can be consid￾ered comparable (0–0.30/0.40-m depth); the surface supports were quite different:
point (a circle of about 0.008-m2 area) for soil sample data, including reflectance
data, and about 1.2 m (distance between the two transmitter–receiver coils) × 1 m
(the mean distance travelled in 1 s) for EMI data.
Results of PCA on soil spectra showed that the first principal component (PC1)
accounted for about 92% of the total variance; therefore, it was retained and used as aVariable Mean Median Minimum Maximum Skewness Kurtosis
Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 165
Table 1 Summary statistics for apparent electrical conductivity (ECa, mS m-1
), first principal
component of spectral data (PC1), potassium (K, mg kg-1
), nitrogen (N, mg kg-1
), phosphorous (P,
mg kg-1
) and total organic carbon (TOC, %)
Standard
deviation
ECa 90.69 88.24 80.25 106.69 6.37 0.75 2.81
PC1 0.00 –0.36 –32.26 38.58 14.12 0.23 3.29
K 692.81 678.32 556.74 863.18 70.06 0.73 3.05
N 1.22 1.23 0.90 1.61 0.18 –0.60 2.19
P 135.33 134.32 113.00 171.09 13.88 0.27 2.19
TOC 16.94 16.55 14.18 21.74 2.22 0.76 2.73
synthetic spectral index to be processed together with the other variables. The
loading coefficients of PC1 showed that PC1 was mainly influenced by the bands
between 750 and 2250 nm, corresponding to the main absorption wavelengths of
most chemical soil components (Riefolo et al., 2019). It can therefore be interpreted
as an indicator of soil chemistry in addition to laboratory analytical measurements.
A combined coregionalisation dataset, consisting of six variables, four soil
attributes (K, N, P, TOC), the first PC of the spectra (PC1) and the migrated ECa
data to the nearest soil sample location to a maximum distance of 9 m, was created to
be analysed jointly using multivariate analysis. Exploratory data analysis was then
performed by calculating the basic statistics (mean, median, minimum and maxi￾mum values, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis).
Table 1 showed that the data distributions of ECa, K and TOC deviate signifi￾cantly from normality. Moreover, all histograms of the six soil attributes (Fig. 6),
except PC1, exhibited clear shifts from the normal distribution with an evident
bimodality for N and P. This pattern indicated that at least two zones in the field
should be subjected to different fertilisation since the average N and P contents in the
soil were different.
All data were then transformed into standardised Gaussian-shaped variables with
mean 0 and variance 1 by using a point Gaussian transformation function to mitigate
the effect of outliers on variogram fitting. A point LMC was fitted consisting of the
following basic structures: a nugget effect, a cubic model with spatial range of
34.95 m and a K-Bessel function (Chilès & Delfiner, 2012) with a scale of
14.01 m and second parameter equal to 10.24. The goodness of fit was tested through
cross-validation, reporting mean errors for all variables close to zero and error
variances within the tolerance interval: 0.4–1.6 (Chilès & Delfiner, 2012) (data not
shown).
In Table 2, the block support correction coefficients together with the point and
block variances are reported for each variable, highlighting the reduction of variance
due to averaging over the block, especially for PC1, N and P.
The above results are quite crucial for site-specific management and emphasise
the need to define in advance the spatial scale at which the processes under
investigation take place. If, for example, the absorption of N and P by roots occurs166 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00 80 90 100 105 85 95
Frequencies
EC a
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00 -30 -20 -10 100 20 40 30
Frequencies
PC1
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00 550 600 700650 750 850 800
Frequencies
K
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6
Frequencies
N
0.125
0.100
0.075
0.050
0.025
0.000110 120 130 140 150 160 170
Frequencies
P
0.15
0.20
0.10
0.05
0.00 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Frequencies
TOC
Fig. 6 The histograms of the six soil attributes: ECa, PCI, K, N, P and TOC
Table 2 Block support correction calculations for apparent electrical conductivity (ECa, mS m-1
),
first principal component of spectral data (PC1), potassium (K, mg kg-1
), nitrogen (N, mg kg-1
),
phosphorous (P, mg kg-1
) and total organic carbon (TOC, %)
Point variance Block variance Block support correction
ECa 40.51 39.90 0.99
PC1 198.43 57.31 0.54
K 4892.58 4741.44 0.99
N 0.03 0.01 0.65
P 192.03 74.14 0.63
TOC 4.88 4.39 0.96
on a scale smaller than 1 m × 1 m, producing a composite soil sample over 1 m2 or
more of the field might cause the reduction of more than 40% in variance, which
might have a negative effect on the optimisation of local fertilisation because all the
information within the scale of 1 m would be lost.
It is important to note that not only is the variance affected in a way that is
statistically and easily predictable but also the shape of the whole histogram
(Lajaunie & Wackernagel, 2000). The support effect then becomes critical when
estimating the conditional probability that the average over a specified block is
below a critical value. In PA, such a probability could be used as a criterion to
decide when and where nutrients and or water need(s) to be added to the soil.
This highlights the importance of selecting the sensor with a suitable support
(footprint) comparable to the scale of the study process, because all predictions can
be done only at this scale when using proximal sensing.Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 167
Before performing multivariate analysis, an anisotropic nested model was fitted to
the point variogram of the Gaussian-transformed ECa data comprising the following
three spatial structures: a nugget effect, an isotropic spherical model with range of
20 m and a zonal anisotropic K-Bessel model in the direction 170° from north with a
range of 40 m and parameter equal to 2. The goodness of fit was tested by cross￾validation producing mean error and standardised error variance close to 0 and
1, respectively. The zonal anisotropy, approximatively along the direction of the
longer axis of the field, can be explained by its elongated shape, and most mechan￾ical operations were performed in that direction so causing greater spatial continuity
(longer range).
The use of point kriging is justified because the surface support of the GEM
sensor is about 1.2 m × 1 m; therefore, it is comparable with the one of the
interpolation grid cells. Moreover, the preliminary interpolation of ECa on the grid
was necessary for the subsequent application of multi-collocated cokriging.
The experimental point variograms of the Gaussian-transformed soil variables
were regularised over the 1-m × 1-m block, and the fitted block LMC was an
isotropic linear model of coregionalisation including the following two basic spatial
structures: a spherical model with a range of 18.10 m and a spherical model with
range of 35.30 m. As for point LMC, the fitting was reasonable based on mean errors
and standardised error variances, quite close to 0 and falling within tolerance interval
(0.4–1.6), respectively. The total spatial variance was therefore divided into two
spatially correlated components: the former at a shorter range (18.10 m) accounting
for 59% of the total variance and the latter at a longer range (35.30 m) accounting for
the remaining 41%. Conversely, the spatially uncorrelated component was
negligible.
The LMC is a way to describe the mutual spatial relationships between the
various variables. The fact that point LMC and block LMC show differences
means that the relationships between the variables are scale dependent. Therefore,
it is critical, when studying processes occurring in an agricultural field, to decide in
advance the scale at which the study is to be conducted.
The two spatial structures of the LMC can be interpreted as the effect of two
causes of variation operating at different scales in this agricultural field: one of
shorter range, probably of anthropic origin (agricultural operations), and the other of
more natural origin related to the physical–chemical characteristics of the soil and
subsoil. It is worth noting that the two spatial scales do not differ greatly from those
identified in the variogram of ECa. This would suggest that ECa is influenced for the
most part by those same processes that determine soil attributes (Fig. 7).
From the proximity of the cross-variogram model to the dotted curve,
representing the maximum correlation between the two variables (intrinsic correla￾tion) (Wackernagel, 2003), the significant correlation of ECa with all the other
variables except for N can be deduced. More precisely, ECa was positively corre￾lated with K and PC1, therefore with most of the cations present in the soil, but
negatively with P and TOC the components most related to mineral and organic soil
fertilisation.168 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
0.9 G ECa
Variogram
Distance (m) Distance (m) Distance (m) Distance (m) Distance (m)
0.8
NO
N90
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.9
G K
0.8
NO
N90
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.3
-0.3
0.2
-0.2
0.1
-0.1
0.0
G F1 x GECa
Variogram
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.25
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.20
G F1
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.5
0.0
-0.5
G K x G ECa
Variogram
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
0.0
G K x G F1
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.3
0.2
0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
0.0
G N x G K
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.1
0.0
-0.1
G N x G ECa
Variogram
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.3
0.2
-0.2
0.1
-0.1
0.0
-0.3
G N x G F1
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
G N
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.5
-0.5
0.0
G P x G K
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.5
-0.5
0.0
G P x G ECa
Variogram
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.2
0.1
0.0
-0.1
-0.2
G P x G F1
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
G P
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.2
0.0
0.1
-0.1
-0.2
G P x G N
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.5
-0.5
0.0
G TOC x G K
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.5
-0.5
0.0
G TOC x G ECa
Variogram
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.4
-0.4
0.3
-0.3
0.2
-0.2
0.1
-0.1
0.0
G TOC x G F1
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
0.0
G TOC x G P
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Distance (m)
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
G TOC
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.5
0.0
-0.5
G TOC x N
NO
N90
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Fig. 7 Regularised LMC of the Gaussian-transformed variables: model (bold line), experimental
variogram (dot points) and intrinsic correlation curve (dotted line)
The results confirm the findings of previous studies (Corwin & Scudiero, 2016;
De Benedetto et al., 2013a, b) that bulk electrical conductivity measured with an
electromagnetic sensor can be used as an indicator of soil variability resulting from
the combined action of many physical, chemical and organic properties.
The cokriged maps of PC1, K, N, P and TOC (Fig. 8b–f) appear consistent and
reveal greater continuity (uniformity) in the direction 170° from the north. However,
for K, N and TOC, it is the western edge of the field that has the largest values, while
for PC1 and P, it is the eastern edge (Fig. 8). For P, there are alternate longitudinal
strips with different fertility. These characteristics of the spatial variation may be
of anthropogenic source because of inhomogeneity in the distribution of fertilisers.
A different spatial pattern is shown by ECa (Fig. 8a): on the basis of this variable, the
field could be divided roughly into three parts, approximately perpendicular to the
longitudinal direction with different dielectric properties of soil. This diversification
might be due also to physical and chemical characteristics of the soil, such as texture,
porosity and/or moisture, other than those covered by this study. However, from theData Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 169
Fig. 8 Maps of the soil properties using three isofrequency classes: (a) apparent electrical
conductivity (ECa), (b) first principal components of spectral data (PC1), (c) potassium (K), (d)
nitrogen (N), (e) phosphorous (P) and (f) total organic carbon (TOC)170 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
Fig. 9 Maps of the short (a) and long (b) range regionalised factors using three iso-frequency
classes
strong spatial correlation of ECa with K, P and TOC (Fig. 7), the hypothesis may be
suggested that these variables also contribute to the partition of the soil in the three
macro-areas.
Among the six regionalised factors corresponding to each spatial scale (18.10 and
35.30 m), the first factor only for each scale was retained because it was associated
with an eigenvalue greater than 1, therefore explaining a proportion of the variance at
each scale greater than the one explained by each variable standardised to unit
variance. In particular, the first factor at shorter range explained 97.06% of the
variance at that scale and was affected mainly by the Gaussian-transformed variables
of ECa and K, which confirms what we stated previously about the strong correlation
between these two variables. On the other hand, the first factor at longer range
explained 81.75% of the variance, and the Gaussian-transformed variables of TOC
and N had a strong negative relation.
The first two regionalised factors have a different pattern (Fig. 9). The map of the
first regionalised factor at short range (Fig. 9a) shows a rough partition of the field
into three main zones, quite similar to the one produced by ECa although more
variable, characterised by different physical properties and different concentrations
of K. This map could therefore be used to advantage in site-specific fertilisation of K
because the large central zone is characterised by the smallest K values, the southern
zone by the largest and the northern zone by the intermediate values.
The first factor at long range (Fig. 9b) shows a similar pattern to that of N and
TOC but with an inverse relation as expected (Fig. 8d, f). This map could be used as
a support to improve the chemical fertility of the field.
Figure 8 shows that the field delineation may vary as a function of the spatial
scale, because most processes occurring in the soil are scale dependent and conse￾quently the variation in soil properties is as well. This means that traditional
statistical clustering techniques to delineate homogeneous areas in the field mightData Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 171
not be appropriate. Most classical clustering techniques do not consider the proxim￾ity of the samples and their spatial correlation, with a few rare exceptions (Oliver &
Webster, 1989; Urban, 2004); moreover, they process data jointly regardless of the
spatial scale and support.
The results of this case study have shown clearly that not only the variances but
also the spatial relationships between the variables vary according to the spatial
scale. This has a critical impact on field delineation and then on site-specific
management.
In the light of all the above, we would like to warn PA practitioners against using
spatial techniques that do not take into account the actual spatial correlation between
observations. We would also urge the scientific community to consider the problem
of scaling and change of support when analysing heterogeneous data jointly. The
case study illustrates that these are not purely academic discussions but crucial topics
that can have a significant impact on effectiveness of site-specific management
in PA.
2.3 Applications of Data Fusion in Remote Sensing
In remote sensing, data fusion is one of the most commonly used techniques. The
current satellites can interpret the spectral, spatial and temporal information of a
phenomenon on Earth in different ways. The outcome is a wide variety of data, some
repetitive and some integral, proposing various portrayals of a similar physical
event. Data fusion aims to integrate the information acquired with different spatial
and spectral resolutions from satellite sensors. In general, it is used to merge spatial
information of a high-resolution panchromatic (PAN1
) image with the spectral
information of a low-resolution multispectral (MS2
) or hyperspectral (HS3
) image
of the same area. Taking advantage of having multiple free image datasets (e.g. the
Sentinel series ESA’s Copernicus program), data fusion has focused increasingly on
improving algorithms to merge, in particular, the optical and SAR types of remote
sensing data. This section is based on the SAR–optical data fusion aspect. The
complementarity of these two types of data can provide enhanced information on
Earth observation, particularly in the agricultural field. In the following, an overview
of data fusion techniques will be shown, highlighting their uniqueness.
SAR–Optical Data Fusion
Each satellite sensor has different features used for specific tasks. In the Earth
observation field, the sensors comprise resolutions from the centimetre to the
1
PAN image: a single greyscale image.
2
MS image: a colour image with typical 4–12 bands. 3
HS image: a colour image with typical >100–1000 bands.172 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
kilometre scales. They include both active and passive sensing technologies with a
range throughout most of the electromagnetic spectra.
Visible-infrared (VIR) optical sensors are passive elements that acquire the
electromagnetic energy reflected and emitted from the surface. By analysing the
response detected by the optical sensor, it is possible to discriminate physical and
chemical information about terrain cover types and to provide valuable data, for
example, about leaf pigments, water content and plants’ overall health condition
(Zarco-Tejada et al., 2018).
Optical images are relatively easy to interpret but they are affected by weather
conditions and solar illumination. In addition, VIR sensors cannot capture images
during the night, and they do not record targets hidden by clouds, trees and other
ground covers.
The SAR sensors are active elements, and mostly they work in the microwave
electromagnetic spectrum, emitting a signal and recording the return echo (back￾scattering signal). They can operate at night in the presence of clouds and be
sensitive to conditions in the upper few centimetres (about 10 cm for P band,
depending on soil texture and soil moisture) of the ground. The SAR images provide
information on the geometric and dielectric properties of the target, such as the
moisture content and existence of vegetation and the geometry and structure of the
features (Gherboudj et al., 2011; Souissi & Ouarzeddine, 2016). However, these
sensors suffer from geometric and radiometric decorrelation effects. The former is
due to the side-looking acquisition mode of the SAR. This appears as a granular
visible effect from the speckle (Goodman, 1976), formed as a result of the coherent
radiation. The speckle is a peculiarity of the sensor itself. It makes interpretation of
SAR images less intuitive than optical ones.
SAR–Optical Pre-processing
Because of the different geometric and radiometric properties of SAR and optical
sensors, it is difficult to match and co-register these two types of images. To improve
the performance of SAR–optical data fusion, it is necessary to reduce the sources of
geometric and radiometric errors. Therefore, it is necessary to apply appropriate
pre-processing algorithms (see Table 3).
Data Fusion Methodologies
There is no universally valid data fusion algorithm because of the variety of image
types. The fused image must fulfil three fundamental requirements: (i) maintenance
of all relevant information, (ii) removal of irrelevant information and noise and (iii)
minimisation of artefacts. An ideal fusion process should preserve the original
spectral characteristics while improving the spatial characteristics of the image.
Data fusion, depending on the level at which it is performed, is classified into the
following types: at pixel, feature and decision levels (see Fig. 10).
• Pixel Level
Pixel level fusion extracts information on a pixel-by-pixel basis to generate a
fused image from a set of pixels in original images. This methodology has theData Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 173
Table 3 Pre-processing data fusion
Optical data SAR data
Calibration: The procedure allows pixel values
to be expressed in units of reflectance. It
reduces the number of unwanted artefacts,
which are mainly due to atmospheric effects,
lighting conditions and soil topography during
the acquisition time of images.
Focalisation: The SAR image is represented as
a matrix, which contains in each row the sam￾pling and the valour of the backscattering sig￾nal. During the acquisition, the contribution of
a single target is dispersed over several ele￾ments of the matrix. The focusing allows us to
‘concentrate’ the contribution in a single ele￾ment of the matrix. It assures the correspon￾dence between each matrix element and each
ground resolution cell. Thus, the raw data
matrix is turned into a real ground image,
called a single look complex (SLC). Generally,
as SAR data, the product SLC is used.
De-speckle: This process removes the speckle.
Georeferencing: This algorithm is common to SAR and optical data. It puts all images in the same
reference geographical system. This can also be performed before de-speckling for SAR images,
although it is preferable afterwards.
Registration: The process requires that the pixels in the two images (SAR and optical ones)
coincide exactly with the same points on the ground.
Resampling: This step may also be applied. It ensures that the image at low spatial resolution, for
example, MS image, has the same spatial resolution as the PAN/SAR image, using various
algorithms (e.g. the nearest neighbour or cubic convolution) (Keys, 1982).
Fig. 10 Data fusion levels: (a) pixel level, (b) feature level and (c) decision level
potential to achieve the highest performance in signal detection, evaluating the
spatial and spectral information content present in the recorded images. This data
fusion methodology is in turn subdivided into four classes: component substitution
(CS), multiresolution analysis (MRA), hybrid methods (a combination of CS and
MRA) and model-based algorithms.174 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
Fig. 11 Flowchart of PCA method
Component Substitution
In CS fusion, one of the transformed components (usually the first component or
intensity, IL) is substituted by the high-resolution SAR/PAN image before the
inverse transformation is enforced. The most common CS techniques include
(i) PCA, principal component analysis; (ii) IHS, intensity-hue-saturation; (iii) GS,
Gram–Schmidt; (iv) BT, Brovey transform; (v) HPF, high-pass filtering; (vi) Elhers
fusion; and (vii) geostatistical analysis:
– In PCA, the first principal component image, PC1, contains most spatial infor￾mation of the multispectral channels, which are used as input for PCA, while the
remaining components recover the remaining spectral information. The PC1 is
replaced by the high spatial resolution image (SAR image) after matching the
histogram of the SAR image with one of the first principal components. As the
last step, inverse PCA transformation generates the output fused image (see
Fig. 11).
– The IHS method aims to enhance the spectral of the final image. It modifies an
MS image at low resolution from RGB space into IHS colour space. Thus, the
intensity (I) band, which resembles a panchromatic image, is replaced by a
high-resolution SAR/PAN image in the fusion. An inverse IHS transform is
then performed on the SAR/PAN together with the hue (H) and saturation
(S) bands, resulting in an IHS merged image (Fig. 12).
– The GS method can be regarded as a generalisation of PCA. Unlike PCA, the first
principal component is chosen arbitrarily while the others are calculated as
perpendicular to the first one. A simulated low-resolution SAR band is generated;DNB1new = ½  DNB1=ð Þ DNB1 þ DNB2 þ DNB3 × ½  DN SAR
DNB2 new = ½  DNB2=ð Þ DNB1 þ DNB2 þ DNB3 × ½  DN SAR
DNB3 new = ½  DNB3=ð Þ DNB1 þ DNB2 þ DNB3 × ½  DN SAR
ð5Þ
Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 175
Fig. 12 Flowchart of IHS method
the GS transformation is applied to it and the other multispectral bands; the first
GS band is then replaced by the high spatial resolution SAR band; and finally,
through inverse GS transformation, a high spatial resolution MS image is pro￾duced (Laben & Brower, 2000).
The difference between GS and PCA is based on how the information is distrib￾uted: for PCA, the information is mostly in the first component and decreases
markedly in the remaining components, and in GS, the transformed components
only are orthogonal and the information is not significantly different in each of them.
Therefore, to avoid keeping all the information in the first component, this transfor￾mation keeps the spatial texture characteristics of the PAN images and the spectral
information of the original MS images. However, GS transformation is fairly
complex and not applicable for large-scale image fusion.
– In Brovey transformation, the MS bands to be fused are normalised and then
multiplied by a high-resolution band as SAR/PAN one. The general equation (see
Eq. 5) uses red, green and blue (RGB) and the PAN/SAR bands as inputs to
produce the new MS bands. This method is based on spectral modelling and
enhances the visual contrast between the low and high ends of the data histogram.
It enables the desired spatial information to be obtained but with significant
radiometric distortion (Wang et al., 2005).where MSf is the data fusion image and HF and LF correspond to the high- and
low-pass filter operators, with Whigh and Wlow weights, respectively.
(FFT) into a frequency domain. The IHS transform is enforced on MS images.
intensity component and SAR image, respectively. At the end a data fusion,
–
M
Wavelet theory is a popular approach in signal and image processing, with wide￾ranging use including remote sensing. It is applied on the multi-resolution analysis
(MRA) method. It is based on decomposing the signal into elementary functions
called ‘wavelets’ (Meyer, ). In fusing an MS image with a high-resolution
SAR/PAN image (see Fig. 13), it is necessary to apply these steps: (i) The SAR/PAN
1990
176 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
Table 4 Advantages and disadvantages of the different CS techniques
Technique Advantages Disadvantages
PCA Very simple, computationally efficient,
faster processing time and high spatial
quality
Spectral degradation and colour distor￾tion; fusion results may vary depending
on the selected datasets
IHS Very simple, computationally efficient
and faster processing and high sharpening
ability
It can process only three multispectral
bands; colour distortion; the fusion
results may vary depending on the
selected datasets
GS Computationally efficient and faster
processing
Colour distortion; the fusion results
may vary depending on the selected
datasets
Brovey Very simple, computationally efficient
and faster processing time. Fused image
with higher degree of contrast
Colour distortion
HPF Very simple and computationally
efficient
Sometimes the edges are emphasised
too much.
Elhers Computationally efficient and higher
spectral preservation
More or less significant colour shifts
– The HPF method applies a high-pass filter in the frequency domain to the high￾resolution image (SAR image) achieving an improvement in spatial resolution of
the fusion product (Pohl & Genderen, 1998; Wang et al., 2005). The process is
expressed as
MSf = Whigh ∙ HF SAR ½    ∙ f g Wlow ∙ LF MS ½  : ð6Þ
– Ehlers fusion technique combines IHS transformation with fast Fourier transform
Then, low-pass (LP) and high-pass (HP) Fourier filters are applied on the
image is produced through the inverse FFT-1
. This process preserves the spectral
characteristics of the original multispectral dataset, without depending on the
selection or the order of the bands in IHS transform.
Geostatistical techniques. This method has been widely debated above: 2.1
(Table 4).
ulti-resolution Analysis (MRA)2010) and the Brovey transformation algorithm (Zhang, ). These procedures
aim ‘to sharpen’ low spatial resolution images by linearly combining the pixel values
of high and low spatial resolution images.
2010
extracted atoms from an over-complete dictionary constructed by the whole set of
Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 177
Fig. 13 Flowchart of MRA method
image is first decomposed into a set of low-resolution PAN images, which corre￾spond to wavelet coefficients (spatial details) for each level. (ii) Each band of the MS
image then supplants the low-resolution PAN at the resolution of the original MS
image. (iii) The SAR/PAN spatial detail is inserted into each MS band by achieving a
reverse wavelet transform on each MS band together with the analogous wavelet
coefficients.
The MRA methods provide fine resolution in both the spatial and spectral
domains, by reducing spatial and spectral distortion, and good signal-to-noise ratio.
Hybrid Methods
Hybrid methods combine the advantages of CS and MRA techniques. Those most
frequently used in remote sensing are the high-pass filter (Lu et al., 2011; Zhang,
Model-Based Algorithms (MBA)
Model-based algorithms can be divided into two main classes: (i) ‘variational’
models (Piella, 2009) and (ii) ‘sparse representation-based’ (SR) models (Mairal
et al., 2008). The first models consider the input images as discrete samples of
continuous two-dimensional functions and calculate the unknown values of such
two-dimensional functions.
The second models describe signals based on the sparsity and redundancy of their
representations. For this method, an image signal is considered as a specific dictio￾nary (i.e. a matrix) that contains k prototype signals, also referred to as atoms (Mairal
et al., 2008).
The MBA produce high-resolution merged data as a linear combination of the
the images. A small number of atoms only are essential to regenerate a signal
accurately, ensuring a good sparse representation of signals.This method works out information on feature level after the recognition and
Decision Level
Decision-level processes develop information at a higher level of abstraction. In
arti cial neural networks (ANNs), Fig. 14, are machine learning algorithms that aim
map an input x to an output y through some nonlinear transformations: f￾both SAR and optical images from the Sentinel 1 (S1) and Sentinel 2 (S2) satellites,
178 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
Fig. 14 Flowchart of artificial neural network method
• Feature Level
extraction of objects from pixels as intensities, edges or textures in the original data.
Contrary to the pixel-level fusion, feature-level fusion provides good results but at
the cost of execution time.
•
other words, information extraction is achieved using outputs from various algo￾rithms that are then merged using given decision rules. Recently, new procedures
based on neural networks have found wide application in remote sensing. Traditional
fi
to approximate parameterised mathematical functions y = f(x, θ). These functions
(x) = ( fn ∙ ⋯ ∙ f1)(x). Each element fk represents a simple linear transformation of
the previous component’s output, tracked by a nonlinear function, fk = σk(θkfk - 1),
where σk are the nonlinear functions, as Sigmoid, Tanh, ReLU and leaky ReLU
(Jones, 2014), and θk are matrices of numbers, called the model’s weights.
During the training phase, the network makes predictions about the output layer
using an intermediate representation of inputs of each network component. The
network has to learn how to make use of these representations to create a complex
hierarchical scheme of the data to obtain the correct predictions at the end in the
output layer.
Nowadays, satellite programmes such as Copernicus allow unlimited access to
respectively.
The H2020 SENSAGRI4
-Sentinels Synergy for Agriculture (2016–2019) project
aimed to analyse the capacity of S1 and S2 to develop innovative agricultural
monitoring services capable of near real-time operations. In particular, a method
4
https://e2l-coop.eu/en/projects/h2020-sensagri/for data fusion in PA. However, modelling of change of support has not yet been
studied in detail and verified in the decision support systems (DSS) operated in
PA. A possible cause is the lack of awareness of the impact that neglecting spatial
Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 179
was developed to generate an improved time-continuous leaf area index (LAI)
product. This fused LAI algorithm is based on a machine learning regression
algorithm developed in a Bayesian framework: Gaussian processes regression
(GPR).5
Quality of Measures
When the assessment of the fused product is left to the visual interpretation of the
user, it appears rather subjective, especially when there is no ground truth. To
overcome this problem, a ‘reference’ merged image may be available or created
manually. A reference image is produced, downscaling the input MS and PAN/SAR,
and then they are merged and related to the original data. Some quality metrics have
been defined to evaluate objectively fusion of remote sensing images (Jagalingam &
Hegde, 2015). The metrics include two classes: with or without a reference image. In
remote sensing, the absence of a reference image is overcome by using Wald’s
protocol (Wald et al., 1997).
Conclusion
Data fusion is becoming more important because it helps scientists to extract
increasingly precise and relevant knowledge from the available information. Fusion
of multi-sensor data will enable the maximum use of what is available in the
repository of data or of what can be acquired in the shortest possible time. A relevant
example for the use of complementary information from the Earth observation
sensors is the joint use of SAR and optical data. Fusion of these sensors, with highly
complementary characteristics, contributes to a better understanding of the sensed
data, and thus, many applications can be improved; but it is not a trivial task.
The future of research in SAR–optical data fusion moves on in several interesting
directions: (i) the exploitation of big data; and the ESA Copernicus programme
offers access to huge amounts of Earth observation data; (ii) the use of sophisticated
processing methods, such as deep learning.
2.4 Summing Up
The above shows clearly how multivariate geostatistics can provide an efficient tool
and/or temporal autocorrelation and the effect of support may have on agricultural
management.
5
https://ipl.uv.es/sensagri/ftp/DELIVERABLES/WP4/SENSAGRI_D4_9_v1.0.pdfAdamchuk, V. I., Viscarra Rossel, R. A., Marx, D. B., & Samal, A. K. (2011). Using targeted
sampling to process multivariate soil sensing data. Geoderma, 163, 63–73.
in superresolution mapping. In P. M. Atkinson & C. D. Lloyd (Eds.), geoENV VII—geostatistics
for environmental applications (pp. 279–294). Springer.
175–176, 78–89.
180 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
On the other hand, future research is needed to adapt nonlinear geostatistical
techniques to PA applications to improve the prediction of plant response, which is
affected by so many factors operating on several spatial and temporal scales.
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
References
Atkinson, P. M., & Jeganathan, C. (2010). Estimating the local small support semivariogram for use
Atkinson, P. M., & Tate, N. J. (2000). Spatial scale problems and geostatistical solutions: A review.
The Professional Geographer, 52(4), 607–623.
Babaeian, E., Sidike, P., Newcomb, M. S., Maimaitijiang, M., White, S. A., Demieville, J., Ward,
R. W., Sadeghi, M., LeBauer, D. S., Jones, S. B., Sagan, V., & Tuller, M. (2019). A new optical
remote sensing technique for high resolution mapping of soil moisture. Frontiers in Big Data,
2, 37.
Best, N. G., Ickstadt, K., & Wolpert, R. L. (2000). Spatial Poisson regression for health and
exposure data measured at disparate resolutions. Journal of the American Statistical Associa￾tion, 95, 1076–1088. https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2000.10474304
Brus, D. J., Bogaert, P., & Heuvelink, G. B. M. (2008). Bayesian maximum entropy prediction of
soil categories using a traditional soil map as soft information. European Journal of Soil
Science, 59(2), 166e177.
Buttafuoco, G., Quarto, R., Quarto, F., Conforti, M., Venezia, A., Vitti, C., & Castrignanò,
A. (2019). A geophysical and spectrometric sensor data fusion approach for homogeneous
within-field zone delineation. In J. V. Stafford (Ed.), Precision agriculture ’19 (pp. 705–712).
Academic.
Buttafuoco, G., Quarto, R., Quarto, F., et al. (2021). Taking into account change of support when
merging heterogeneous spatial data for field partition. Precision Agriculture, 22, 586–607.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11119-020-09781-9
Castaldi, F. F., Pelosi, F., Pascucci, S., & Casa, R. (2017). Assessing the potential of images from
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) to support herbicide patch spraying in maize. Precision
Agriculture, 18, 76–94.
Castanedo, F. (2013). A review of data fusion techniques. Scientific World Journal. https://doi.org/
10.1155/2013/704504
Castrignanò, A., & Buttafuoco, G. (2020). Chapter 3: Data processing. In A. Castrignanò,
G. Buttafuoco, R. Khosla, A. M. Mouazen, D. Moshou, & O. Naud (Eds.), Agricultural Internet
of Things and decision support for precision smart farming (1st ed., pp. 139–182).
Academic. ISBN:978-0-12-818373-1.
Castrignanò, A., Giugliarini, L., Risaliti, R., & Martinelli, N. (2000). Study of spatial relationships
among soil physical-chemical properties using Multivariate Geostatistics. Geoderma, 97,
39–60.
Castrignanò, A., Costantini, E. A. C., Barbetti, R., & Sollitto, D. (2009). Accounting for extensive
topographic and pedologic secondary information to improve soil mapping. Catena. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.catena.2008.12.004
Castrignanò, A., Wong, M. T. F., Stelluti, M., De Benedetto, D., & Sollitto, D. (2012). Use of EMI,
gamma-ray emission and GPS height as multi-sensor data for soil characterisation. Geoderma,Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 181
Castrignanò, A., Buttafuoco, G., Quarto, R., Vitti, C., Langella, G., Terribile, F., & Venezia,
A. (2017). A combined approach of sensor data fusion and multivariate geostatistics for
delineation of homogeneous zones in an agricultural field. Sensors (Switzerland). https://doi.
org/10.3390/s17122794
Castrignanò, A., Buttafuoco, G., Quarto, R., Parisi, D., Viscarra Rossel, R. A., Terribile, F.,
Langella, G., & Venezia, A. (2018). A geostatistical sensor data fusion approach for delineating
homogeneous management zones in Precision Agriculture. Catena. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
catena.2018.05.011
Castrignanò, A., Quarto, R., Venezia, A., & Buttafuoco, G. (2019). A comparison between mixed
support kriging and block cokriging for modelling and combining spatial data with different
support. Precision Agriculture. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11119-018-09630-w
Castrignanò, A., Belmonte, A., Antelmi, I., Quarto, R., Quarto, F., Shaddad, S., Sion, V., Muolo,
M. R., Ranieri, N. A., Gadaleta, G., Bartoccetti, E., Riefolo, C., Ruggieri, S., & Nigro, F. (2020).
A geostatistical fusion approach using UAV data for probabilistic estimation of Xylella
fastidiosa subsp. pauca infection in olive trees. Science of The Total Environment, 752, ISSN
0048-9697. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141814
Chang, C. Y., Zhou, R., Kira, O., Marri, S., Skovira, J., Gu, L., & Sun, Y. (2020). An Unmanned
Aerial System (UAS) for concurrent measurements of solar induced chlorophyll fluorescence
and hyperspectral reflectance toward improving crop monitoring. Agricultural and Forest
Meteorology, 294, 1–15.
Chilès, J. P., & Delfiner, P. (2012). Geostatistics: Modeling spatial uncertainty (2nd ed.). Wiley.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118136188
Conforti, M., Castrignanò, A., Robustelli, G., Scarciglia, F., Stelluti, M., & Buttafuoco, G. (2015).
Laboratory based Vis NIR spectroscopy and partial least square regression with spatially
correlated errors for predicting spatial variation of soil organic matter content. Catena, 124,
60–67.
Corwin, D. L., & Scudiero, E. (2016). Field-scale apparent soil electrical conductivity. In
S. Logsdon (Ed.), Methods of soil analysis (pp. 1–29). Soil Science Society of America.
https://doi.org/10.2136/methods-soil.2015.0038
Cressie, N. (1996). Change of support and the modifiable areal unit problem. Geographical
Systems, 3, 159–180.
Cressie, N., Shi, T., & Kang, E. (2010). Fixed rank filtering for spatial-temporal data. Journal of
Computational and Graphical Statistics, 19(3), 724–745.
De Benedetto, D., Castrignanò, A., Rinaldi, M., Ruggieri, S., Santoro, F., Figorito, B., Gualano, S.,
Diacono, M., & Tamborrino, R. (2013a). An approach for delineating homogeneous zones by
using multi-sensor data. Geoderma. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2012.08.028
De Benedetto, D., Castrignano, A., Diacono, M., Rinaldi, M., Ruggieri, S., & Tamborrino,
R. (2013b). Field partition by proximal and remote sensing data fusion. Biosystems Engineer￾ing. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2012.12.001
De Benedetto, D., Quarto, R., Castrignanò, A., & Palumbo, D. A. (2015). Impact of data processing
and antenna frequency on spatial structure modelling of GPR data. Sensors (Switzerland), 15,
16430–16447. https://doi.org/10.3390/s150716430
Evans, R. G., Han, S., Kroeger, M. W., & Schneider, S. M. (1996). Precision center pivot irrigation
for efficient use of water and nitrogen. In P. C. Robert, R. H. Rust, & W. E. Larson (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 3rd international conference (pp. 75–84). ASA/CSSA/SSSA. https://doi.
org/10.2134/1996.precisionagproc3.c8
Fernández-Quintanilla, C., Peña, J. M., Andújar, D., Dorado, J., Ribeiro, A., & López-Granados,
F. (2018). Is the current state of the art of weed monitoring suitable for site-specific weed
management in arable crops? Weed Research, 58, 259–272.
Gherboudj, I., Magagi, R., Berg, A. A., & Toth, B. (2011). Soil moisture retrieval over agricultural
fields from multi-polarized and multi-angular RADARSAT-2 SAR data. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 115(1), 33–43. ISSN:0034-4257.182 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
Goodman, J. W. (1976). Some fundamental properties of speckle, JOSA. Optical Society of
America, 66(11), 1145–1150.
Goovaerts, P. (2008). Kriging and semivariogram deconvolution in the presence of irregular
geographical units. Mathematical Geology, 40(1), 101–128.
Grose, D. J., Harris, R., Brundson, C., & Kilham, D. (2007). Grid enabling geographically
weighted regression. In Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on e-Social Science,
Ann Arbor.
Hammerling, D. M., Michalak, A. M., O’Dell, C., & Kawa, S. R. (2012). Global CO2 distributions
over land from the greenhouse gases observing satellite (GOSAT). Geophysical Research
Letters, 39, L08804. https://doi.org/10.1029/2012GL051203
Huang, H. (2005). Depth of investigation for small broadband electromagnetic sensors. Geophysics,
70, G135–G142.
Huang, H. C., Cressie, N., & Gabrosek, J. (2002). Fast resolution-consistent spatial prediction of
global processes from satellite data. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 11,
1–26.
Huang, W., Lu, J., Ye, H., Kong, W. A., Mortimer, H., & Shi, Y. (2018). Quantitative identification
of crop disease and nitrogen-water stress in winter wheat using continuous wavelet analysis.
International Journal of Agricultural and Biological Engineering, 11, 145–151.
Jackson, J. E. (2003). User’s guide to principal components. Wiley.
Jagalingam, P., & Hegde, A. V. (2015). A review of quality metrics for fused image. In Interna￾tional conference on water resources, coastal and ocean engineering (pp. 133–142).
Jones, N. (2014). Computer science: The learning machines. Nature, 505(7482), 146–148, 1.
Kelsall, J., & Wakefield, J. (2002). Modeling spatial variation in disease risk: A geostatistical
approach. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97, 692–701. https://doi.org/10.
2307/3085705
Keys, R. (1982). Cubic convolution interpolation for digital image processing. IEEE Trans Acoust
Speech Signal Process. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 29,
1153–1160. https://doi.org/10.1109/TASSP.1981.1163711
King, G. (1997). A solution to the ecological inference problem. Princeton University Press.
Knipper, K. R., Kustas, W. P., Anderson, M. C., Alfieri, J. G., Prueger, J. H., Hain, C. R., Gao, F.,
Yang, Y., McKee, L. G., Nieto, H., Hipps, L. E., Mar Alsina, M., & Sanchez, L. (2019).
Evapotranspiration estimates derived using thermal-based satellite remote sensing and data
fusion for irrigation management in California vineyards. Irrigation Science, 37, 431–449.
Laben, C. A., & Brower, B. V. (2000). Process for enhancing the spatial resolution of multispectral
imagery using pan-sharpening. US Patent 6,011,875.
Lajaunie, C., & Wackernagel, H. (2000). Geostatistical approaches to change of support problems:
Theoretical framework (IMPACT Project Deliverable Nr 19, Technical Report N–30/01/G).
Centre de Géostatistique, Ecole des Mines de Paris.
Lu, D., Li, G., Moran, E., Dutra, L., & Batistella, M. (2011). A comparison of multisensor
integration methods for land cover classification in the Brazilian Amazon. GIScience & Remote
Sensing, 48, 345–370. https://doi.org/10.2747/1548-1603.48.3.345
Mairal, J., Elad, M., & Sapiro, G. (2008). Sparse representation for color image restoration. IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing, 17(1), 53–69. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2007.911828
Manzione, R. L., & Castrignanò, A. (2019). A geostatistical approach for multi-source data fusion
to predict water table depth. Science of the Total Environment, 696, 133763. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.scitotenv.2019.133763
Meyer, Y. (1990). Ondelettes et operateurs I: Ondelettes. Hermann, 215 pp.
Mohammed, G. H., Colombo, R., Middleton, E. M., Rascher, U., van der Tole, C., Nedbald, L.,
Goulas, Y., Pérez-Priego, O., Damm, A., Meroni, M., et al. (2019). Remote sensing of solar￾induced chlorophyll fluorescence (SIF) in vegetation: 50 years of progress. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 231, 1–39.Data Fusion in a Data-Rich Era 183
Muazen, A. B., Alexandridis, T., Buddenbaum, H., Cohen, Y., Moshou, D., Mulla, D., Nawar, S.,
& Sudduth, A. (2020). Chapter 2: Monitoring. In A. Castrignanò, G. Buttafuoco, R. Khosla,
A. M. Mouazen, D. Moshou, & O. Naud (Eds.), Agricultural Internet of Things and decision
support for precision smart farming (1st ed., pp. 35–138). Academic. ISBN:978-0-12-
818373-1.
Mulla, D. J. (2017). Spatial variability in precision agriculture. In S. Shashi, H. Xiong, & X. Zhou
(Eds.), Encyclopedia of GIS (pp. 2118–2125). Springer.
Nagasubramanian, K., Jones, S., Singh, A. K., Sarkar, S., Singh, A., & Ganapathysubramanian,
B. (2019). Plant disease identification using explainable 3D deep learning on hyperspectral
images. Plant Methods, 15, 1–10.
Neteler, M., & Mitasova, H. (2008). Open source GIS: A GRASS GIS approach (3rd ed.). Kluwer
Academic Publishers/Springer.
Nguyen, H., Cressie, N., & Braverman, A. (2012). Spatial statistical data fusion for remote sensing
applications. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 107(499), 1004–1018.
Nowatzki, J., Andres, R., & Kyllo, K. (2004). Agricultural Remote Sensing Basics. NDSU
Extension Service Publication. Available online: www.ag.ndsu.nodak.edu. Accessed
23 Sept 2020
Olea, R. A. (Ed.). (1991). Geostatistical glossary and multilingual dictionary. Oxford University
Press.
Oliver, M. A., & Webster, R. (1989). A geostatistical bases for spatial weighting in multivariate
classification. Mathematical Geology, 21(1), 15–35.
Openshaw, S., & Taylor, P. (1979). A million or so correlation coefficients. In N. Wrigley (Ed.),
Statistical methods in the spatial sciences (pp. 127–144). Pion.
Palazzi, V., Bonafoni, S., Alimenti, F., Mezzanotte, P., & Roselli, L. (2019). Feeding the world with
microwaves: How remote and wireless sensing can help precision agriculture. IEEE Microwave
Magazine, 20(12), 72–86.
Pardo-Iguzquiza, E., Chica-Olmo, M., & Atkinson, P. M. (2006). Downscaling cokriging for image
sharpening. Remote Sensing of Environment, 102(1–2), 86–98.
Patrício, D., & Rieder, R. (2018). Computer vision and artificial intelligence in precision agriculture
for grain crops: A systematic review. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 153, 69–81.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.08.001
Piella, G. (2009). Image fusion for enhanced visualization: A variational approach. International
Journal of Computer Vision, 83, 1–11.
Pohl, C., & Genderen, J. L. V. (1998). Multisensor image fusion in remote sensing: Concepts,
methods, and applications. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 19(5), 823–854.
Riefolo, C., Castrignanò, A., Colombo, C., Conforti, M., Vitti, C., & Buttafuoco, G. (2019).
Investigation of soil surface organic and inorganic carbon contents in a low-intensity farming
system using laboratory visible and near-infrared spectroscopy. Archives of Agronomy and Soil
Science, 66(10), 1436–1448. https://doi.org/10.1080/03650340.2019.1674446
Rivoirard, J. (2001). Which models for collocated cokriging? Mathematical Geology, 332,
117–131.
Sishodia, R., Ray, R., & Singh, S. (2020). Applications of remote sensing in precision agriculture: A
review. Remote Sensing, 12, 3136. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs12193136
Souissi, B., & Ouarzeddine, M. (2016). Polarimetric SAR data correction and terrain topography
measurement based on the radar target orientation angle. Journal of the Indian Society of Remote
Sensing, 44, 335–349. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12524-015-0493-x
Sudduth, K. A., Kitchen, N. R., Wiebold, W. J., Batchelor, W. D., Bollero, G. A., Bullock, D. G.,
Clay, D. G., Palm, H. L., Pierce, F. J., Schuler, R. T., & Thelen, K. D. (2005). Relating apparent
electrical conductivity to soil properties across the north-central USA. Computers and Elec￾tronics in Agriculture, 46, 263e283.184 A. Castrignanò and A. Belmonte
Teke, M., Deveci, H. S., Haliloglu, O., Gürbüz, S. Z., & Sakarya, U. (2013). A short survey of
hyperspectral remote sensing applications in agriculture. In Proceedings of the 2013 6th
international conference on Recent Advances in Space Technologies (RAST), Istanbul, Turkey
(pp. 171–176).
Urban, D. L. (2004). Multivariate analysis: Nonhierarchical agglomeration, course notes, multi￾variate methods for environmental applications. Nicholas School of the Environment and Earth
Sciences at Duke University. [online]: www.env.duke.edu/landscape/classes/env358/mv_
pooling.pdf. Accessed 21 Jan 2005
Viscarra Rossel, R. A., Adamchuk, V. I., Sudduth, K. A., McKenzie, N. J., & Lobsey, C. (2011).
Proximal soil sensing. An effective approach for soil measurements in space and time. Advances
in Agronomy, 113, 237–282. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-386473-4.00010-5
Wackernagel, H. (2003). Multivariate geostatistics: An introduction with applications.
Springer. ISBN:13:9783540441427.
Wald, L., Ranchin, T., & Mangolini, M. (1997). Fusion of satellite images of different spatial
resolutions: Assessing the quality of resulting images. Photogrammetric Engineering and
Remote Sensing, 63, 691–699.
Wang, Z., Ziou, D., Armenakis, C., Li, D., & Li, Q. (2005). A comparative analysis of image fusion
methods. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 43(6), 1391–1402.
Wikle, C. K. (2010). Low-rank representation for spatial processes. In A. E. Gelfand, P. Diggle,
P. Guttorp, & M. Fuentes (Eds.), Handbook of spatial statistics (pp. 107–118). CRC Press.
Wong, D. W. S. (1996). Aggregation effects in geo-referenced data. In D. Griffiths (Ed.), Advanced
spatial statistics (pp. 83–106). CRC Press.
Yoo, E. H., & Kyriakidis, P. C. (2009). Area-to-point kriging in spatial hedonic pricing models.
Journal of Geographical Systems, 11(4), 381–406.
Young, L. J., & Gotway, C. A. (2007). Linking spatial data from different sources: The effect of
change of support. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment, 21, 589–600.
Zarco-Tejada, P. J., González-Dugo, M. V., & Fereres, E. (2016). Seasonal stability of chlorophyll
fluorescence quantified from airborne hyperspectral imagery as an indicator of net photosyn￾thesis in the context of precision agriculture. Remote Sensing of Environment, 179, 89–103.
Zarco-Tejada, P. J., Camino, C., Beck, P. S. A., Calderon, R., Hornero, A., Hernández-Clemente,
R., Kattenborn, T., Montes-Borrego, M., Susca, L., Morelli, M., et al. (2018). Previsual
symptoms of Xylella fastidiosa infection revealed in spectral plant-trait alterations. Nature
Plants, 4, 432–439.
Zhang, J. (2010). Multi-source remote sensing data fusion: Status and trends. International Journal
of Image and Data Fusion, 1, 5–24. https://doi.org/10.1080/19479830903561035
Zhu, X., Cai, F., Tian, J., & Williams, T. K. A. (2018). Spatiotemporal fusion of multisource remote
sensing data: Literature survey, taxonomy, principles, applications, and future directions.
Remote Sensing, 10, 527.Data Assimilation of Remote Sensing Data
into a Crop Growth Model
Keiji Jindo, Osamu Kozan, and Allard de Wit
Abbreviations
APSIM agricultural production system simulator
CSM crop simulation model
DA data assimilation
DSSAT decision support system for agrotechnology
EVI enhanced vegetation index
FAO-WRSI Food and Agriculture Organization-water requirement satisfaction
index
FAPAR fraction of absorbed photosynthetically active radiation
IOT Internet of Things
LAI leaf area index
NDVI normalized difference vegetation index
PAR photosynthetically active radiation
RS remote sensing
VI vegetative index
WDVI weighted difference vegetation index
WOFOST world food studies
K. Jindo (✉)
Agrosystems Research, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, the Netherlands
e-mail: keiji.jindo@wur.nl
O. Kozan
Center for Southeast Asia Studies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
A. de Wit
Environmental Research, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, the Netherlands
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_8
185186 K. Jindo et al.
1 Introduction
Data assimilation (DA) is the overarching term for an ensemble of techniques to
combine all possible information (models, observations, a priori data and statistics)
to obtain the best possible estimate of the state of a system (Zhang & Moore, 2015).
Data assimilation has its origins in meteorology and found its way into operational
weather forecasting, oceanography and hydrology, but it is also a valuable technique
for estimating variables related to crop growth (soil moisture, LAI (leaf area index),
biomass, etc.) by combining models and observations of crop variables.
In precision agriculture, we are interested in “the application of technologies and
principles to manage spatial and temporal variability associated with all aspects of
agricultural production for the purpose of improving crop performance and environ￾mental quality” (Pierce & Nowak, 1999). Observing the state of crops and soils
accurately and precisely is key to precision agriculture. However, many aspects of
crops and their environment are difficult to observe. For example, the most accurate
way of measuring crop yield is by destructive sampling, which is time-consuming
and often not practical at the scale that would be required in commercial farming.
Other variables such as crop nitrogen content or the amount of nitrate that has
leached beyond the reach of crop roots are even harder to measure.
Moreover, some of the variables are affected by management decisions that have
been taken weeks or even months earlier (sowing date, fertilization, etc.). Decisions
about agro-management must be based on a good understanding about the interac￾tion between crop management, crop growth and the environmental factors (weather,
soil, etc.). Crop simulation models (CSMs) provide a tool for describing these
dynamic interactions, and they allow us to make predictions about the impact of
agro-management decisions on the crop variables of interest. Many crop simulation
models exist, ranging from simple models focusing on crop water use only
(e.g. FAO-WRSI) (Frère & Popov, 1986) to models simulating crop growth in a
comprehensive manner which include phenology, photosynthesis, growth of plant
organs and water/nitrogen use (e.g. DSSAT, decision support system for
agrotechnology; WOFOST, world food studies; APSIM, agricultural production
system simulator). Plant functional–structural models extend this even further by
explicitly describing growth and development at an individual plant level including
structural aspects such as branch and leaf geometry and the competition between
plants for resources (Evers et al., 2019).
Although crop simulation models can be highly relevant for understanding the
interaction between crop growth, weather and management, their application in
precision agriculture is often confounded by uncertainties. Such uncertainties reduce
the accuracy with which the model can be used to make predictions about the growth
and development of the crop, which reduces the benefits of applying a CSM. In
precision agriculture, such uncertainties are often related to model processes that are
not well simulated due to lack of knowledge about them or intra-field variation of
soil properties which cannot be resolved by the available soil maps but which cause
differences in crop response to lack of water (drought) or too much waterData Assimilation of Remote Sensing Data into a Crop Growth Model 187
(water-logging and ponding). Other uncertainties rise from factors not included in
the model (e.g. pest and disease) or factors that are difficult to describe accurately
(e.g. local frost kill due to varying snow depth as a result of micro-relief).
The application of DA can reduce uncertainties in CSMs by assimilating external
observations of crop variables into the model. They can be used to adjust the model
for the effect of factors that are not included in the model structure (its biophysics) or
for uncertainty about the correct values for certain model inputs. In other words, DA
can help to ‘bring the model back on track’ in cases where discrepancies arise
between model predictions and observations in the real world.
The routine collection of observations of crop-related variables at the field scale
has become much easier in recent years due to the developments in sensor networks
and (remote) sensing techniques. Cheap and accessible sensors to measure soil
moisture, light interception and crop spectral properties are now available, and
sensor networks using the Internet of Things (IOT) technologies can be used to
report in real time. Moreover, continuing advances in imaging technology mean that
images of crop fields can be collected routinely by drones or satellites. For example,
the Sentinel 1 and Sentinel 2 satellite series, which are part of the European
Copernicus programme, are tremendously useful for precision agriculture. The
collection of observations through both sensors, which have a high temporal reso￾lution, as well as observations from imaging platforms that can characterize spatial
variation provides a valuable opportunity for integrating DA with crop simulation
models.
The objective of this chapter is to provide an introduction to the application of DA
in precision agriculture. This includes an overview of the different DA techniques
available, with their pros and cons, as well as references to relevant papers describ￾ing applications of DA in real-world situations. We end the chapter with an outlook
and future perspectives of applications of DA for precision agriculture.
2 Data Assimilation Techniques
Overview
Assimilation Methods of Remote Sensing Data into Crop Growth Models
A classification of data assimilation methods can be gleaned from several reviews
(Dorigo et al., 2007; Moulin et al., 2010; Jin et al., 2018; Fischer et al., 2009). The
classes are forcing, calibrating, updating and re-initiating/re-calibrating (Table 1).
2.1 Forcing
Forcing takes place when instead of calculating values for a given state variable in
the model, values are used that are observed in the real world. As a concrete188 K. Jindo et al.
Table 1 The basic features of three methods of assimilating remote sensing data into a crop
simulation model
Method of assimilating remote sensing data into a crop simulation
model
Forcing Calibration Updating
Computation time Less More Less
Flexibility No Yes Yes
Propagation of uncertainty Possibly Minimizing errors Minimizing errors
Number of parameters Fewer More More
example, a value of from LAI obtained from a vegetation index (VI) measured with a
satellite can be used instead of the value of LAI simulated by a CSM. It has been
established that WDVI (weighted difference vegetation index) has a strong relation￾ship with LAI in several crops (Bouman, 1995; Clevers, 1991; Clevers et al., 2017).
The forcing method completely replaces the model logic by an external observation
(e.g. fraction of absorbed PAR (photosynthetically active radiation) is prescribed by
the external (satellite) data and the model no longer simulates canopy development).
To use the forcing method, Bouman stressed two key criteria: (1) a large number
of (remote sensing) observations with a regular frequency (e.g. weekly observations)
and (2) the initial point of crop growth in time (sowing or emergence date) must be
known in advance. Wagner et al. (2020) mentioned a couple of drawbacks of using a
forcing method as the following:
1. Highly demanding of measurements for each simulation step which are occa￾sionally unavailable or require to be interpolated. This is especially so when it
comes to integration with observations of optical satellite sensors, which could be
limited in the number of available observations due to cloud cover.
2. This method breaks up the simulation loop because it replaces intermediate
outcomes with external input.
3. Uncertainties of the observations are not accounted for, implying that possible
errors in observations could propagate into the model.
2.2 Recalibrating
This method is applied by adjusting the initial parameters of CSMs to reach
consistency with the satellite data. As the first step, recalibration of model inputs
and parameters takes place with remote sensing data, and then the optimal scenario is
chosen for running the recalibrated model in predictive mode (Baret et al., 2007).
Generally, the objective of this method is to minimize the gap between the remote
sensing data and the simulated data using an optimization algorithm. Therefore, the
result of this method is a new set of parameters which bring a better approximation to
the observations. However, two constraints exist in using this method: (1) it requires
considerable computation time due to the use of optimization algorithms that usuallyData Assimilation of Remote Sensing Data into a Crop Growth Model 189
apply iterative search strategies; (2) calibration settings might represent an unreliable
parameter setup (Gumma et al., 2021). To improve the estimated prediction by this
approach, it is recommended to (1) collect accurate input data (e.g. nitrogen appli￾cation rate and timing) and (2) use LAI and other vegetation indices (NDVI or EVI,
enhanced vegetation index) rather than use LAI alone (Gumma et al., 2021; Fang
et al., 2011). Another approach has also been developed recently on the basis of the
four-dimensional variation algorithm (4DVar) considering anisotropy of the back￾ground error and time window to overcome the difficulty with certain irregular time
intervals of observations and heterogenous effects of observations on the effect of
yield simulation (Wu et al., 2021).
2.2.1 Reinitiating
In this method, remote sensing data are used through a runtime calibration of the
model. Sometimes, this approach is categorized as a sub-group of calibrating
methods (Wagner et al., 2020). In general, two input parameters, at minimum, are
used for reinitialization. For example, Maas (1992) recalibrated two parameters of
the GRAMI model: sowing date and leaf area index at emergence time. In contrast,
Xu et al. (2011) reinitialized emergence date and minimum temperature of plant
growth to compare phenological information by using MODIS (moderate resolution
imaging spectroradiometer)-LAI before assimilating it into the SWAP model. Both
studies achieved a better prediction result compared to a prediction without external
observations.
There exist potential uncertainties in the remote sensing data themselves. There￾fore, rather than one single variable for the assimilation (e.g. LAI), the approach with
multi-objective variables is recommended to obtain a more accurate simulation.
Evapotranspiration, soil moisture and fraction of absorbed photosynthetically active
radiation (FAPAR) can be those candidates (Gumma et al., 2021) to create a well￾calibrated and more robust simulation.
2.2.2 Re-parameterization
Re-parameterizing CSM by time series remote sensing measurement. This is also
considered a sub-group of the calibrating methods (Wagner et al., 2020). In this
approach, the parameter which connects CSM and remote sensing is the one that
most likely determines the quality of the performance of the simulation. Commonly,
LAI is known as a parameter of re-parameterization (Bouman, 1995; Maas, 1988).
Through the procedure of connecting two sides, canopy reflectance can be simulated
with CSM, and then, the model is re-parameterized to adjust simulated canopy
reflectance to the measured one (Fig. 1).Fig. 1 Schematic representation of three data assimilation methods of remote sensing data into
crop simulation models: ((a) forcing method, (b) recalibrating method, (c) updating). Round black
symbols represent remote sensing observations, square black symbols represent remote-sensed state
variables, open square symbols represent modelled state variables and round grey symbols repre￾sent optimized state variables. The dotted line represents the simulated LAI by the model, and the
solid line represents LAI by integrating the observations. (Adapted from Jin et al., 2018)Data Assimilation of Remote Sensing Data into a Crop Growth Model 191
2.3 Updating
The updating approach works by directly adjusting model state variables whenever
an observation is available. This method is attributed to the assumption that a better
estimate of the model state variables at ‘day t’ by combining a model prediction and
an observation will improve accuracy of the simulated variable during the
succeeding days. It should be noted that updating techniques can ‘break’ a model
in the sense that mass and energy are not conserved. This implies that special
measures often need to be taken to ensure that mass and energy balances close. It
is noteworthy to mention that updating two state variables at the same time could
provoke imbalances (Jongschaap, 2006).
A key aspect of updating approaches is that uncertainty of both the model
prediction and the observation must be estimated. The classical example of an
updating method is the Kalman filter which can be applied to linear or mildly
nonlinear models. The Kalman filter provides an analytical solution for propagating
the uncertainty of the simulated states and computes a new state estimate by
weighting the model and observation uncertainties assuming that the errors on
both have a Gaussian distribution. This weight factor for updating of the model
states is often called the Kalman gain.
For strongly nonlinear models, however, such as crop models, the analytical
solution for propagating model uncertainty does not apply. For such models, a
numerical version of the Kalman filter has been developed: the Ensemble Kalman
filter (EnKF) (Evensen, 2003). The EnKF propagates uncertainty through an ensem￾ble of model simulations, and the model variance is estimated from the ensemble of
model states. Assumptions on the Gaussian distribution of the errors for model states
and observations still applies. An alternative updating technique is the particle filter
which can also be applied in cases when error distributions are strongly
non-Gaussian (Mladenova et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2017).
3 A Guideline on Applying DA Techniques
As discussed in the previous section, the application of data assimilation in crop
growth models often reduces the error of model predictions compared to the pre￾dictions derived solely from the crop growth model. It is worthwhile to address the
importance of how users would choose one of the approaches in practice, depending
on the objectives and the quality of the dataset as well as remote sensing features.
The forcing strategy is merely useful when users have guaranteed observations from
a high-quality dataset, and therefore uncertainty in the observations is much less than
from the model. In contrast, the recalibration strategy is often used for solving
unknown initial conditions at the field scale (e.g. sowing date, initial biomass) or
unknown parameter values for the particular cultivar growing at the field
(e.g. temperature sum, leaf death).192 K. Jindo et al.
Fig. 2 Decision choice for the updating method of data assimilation (DA) into crop growth models
with different approaches including the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), Kalman filter (KF),
Ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) and particle filter (PF). (Source: Huang et al., 2019)
The updating strategy is more suitable where some factors are not taken into
account at all by the model (e.g. pests and diseases) or are inherently uncertain
(e.g. soil moisture due to rainfall variability). The ensemble Kalman filter showed a
better performance for yield forecasting using the WOFOST model with MODIS
(de Wit & van Diepen, 2007) as well as the CERES model with Landsat (Xie et al.,
2017). The schematic flow of the DA method choices, described in Huang et al.
(2019), illustrates a useful chart for the selection of the various assimilation methods
(Fig. 2).
4 CSM-RS Assimilation in the Framework of Precision
Agriculture
Within-field variability in soil fertility, plant growth and yield is the top priority to be
resolved in the implementation of precision agriculture. Recently, the number of
reports on the use of high-resolution imagery data for monitoring agricultural fields
shows that it is becoming increasingly popular. Sentinel 1 and Sentinel 2 are
examples of these well-known products, and the range of resolution is from 10 m
to m. It is worthwhile to mention that PlanetLab operates with a large constellations
of products with 3–5 m resolution. Another emerging technology is the application
of proximal sensing in field operations such as data acquisition of reflectance for
nitrogen status (e.g. Greenseeker, Yara N-sensor, Cropcircle) from tractor-mounted
sensors (Thessler et al., 2011; Van Evert et al., 2017; Jonard et al., 2019) (andData Assimilation of Remote Sensing Data into a Crop Growth Model 193
vegetation indices measured by an airborne vehicle (e.g. unmanned aerial vehicle,
UAV, helicopter and LiDAR)) (Kasampalis et al., 2018). Hyperspectral imaging has
the capability of measuring the reflectance in large number of narrow bands and can
create a rich dataset to detect phenomena that are not detectable by wide band
sensors. Li et al. (2015) present the application of two assimilation variables taken
from a hyperspectral sensor in DSSAT-CERES crop model for yield prediction,
showing more robust estimation. Yu et al. (2020) incorporated the plant height
measurement taken from UAV to the SWAP model to estimate sugarcane yield.
Proximal sensing and very high-resolution satellite imagery can contribute to
improving the assimilation methods and provide decision support to farmers such
as variable rate fertilizer applications.
Another highlight is that there exists great interest in interdisciplinary research
between the breeding and CSM + DA, which is highly demanding at present, for
example, high-throughput phenotyping (HTP) technologies to develop association
mapping at field level as well as predictive genomic selection models in crop
improvement (Moreira et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021).
5 Future Perspective
Pest Management
Development to minimize the difference between observation and simulation is a
principal goal for the implementation of DA. In addition, the occurrence of pests and
diseases is a major concern for farmers. Several CSMs can simulate the biotic stress
related to pests and diseases if they are not properly controlled. In the 1990s, the
PNUTGRO and SOYGRO models were created to couple pest damage into the
peanut (Arachis hypogaea) and soybean (Glycine max) growth models, respectively
(Batchelor et al., 1993). The DSSAT v.3 is a well-known and long-run crop model
with a more holistic approach for decision support taking account of not only pest
damage but also other topics (e.g. rotation and crop residues) (Jone et al., 1998).
According to Peng et al. (2020)), at least three sub-modules are required for process￾based simulation of crop pest and disease management; these include population
dynamics, injury and damage and management actions. Combination of the popu￾lation model with the crop growth model has been developed to create a complex
interaction that includes crop and pest or pathogen dynamics. The drawback of this
combined approach is the lack of deep understanding of the injuries and damage
mechanisms, which requires a wide range of knowledge about plant pathology and
physiology to pinpoint the identification of damage mechanisms. Once the popula￾tion dynamics of pests and diseases are taken into account, simulation of pesticide
use can be estimated. Donatelli et al. (2017) proposed a new roadmap that comprised
five steps which incorporate the effect of pests and diseases into crop simulation
modelling. Evaluation of the dataset as model inputs of the pests and diseases and
assessment of the model are the required pre-processing steps before integration to194 K. Jindo et al.
the CSM. Suitable identification of the damage mechanisms is a challenging issue
which could partly be tackled by image processing techniques using multispectral or
hyperspectral sensors (Liu & Chahl, 2021).
As another example, InfoCrop is a crop simulation model which takes into
consideration about the influence of weather, followed by pests and soil properties.
And one of the simulation outputs is yield loss due to the pest. Hebbar et al. (2008)
applied a satellite data of 24 m resolution into this model to derive the spatial
distribution of cotton growth and production. Based on this model, the development
of crop loss assessment monitor (CAM) has been released recently on which four
different models for yield loss are structured, including RS model, CSM model,
weather-based model and hybrid model (Aggarwal et al., 2020).
Metamodel
There is some criticism of the application of CSM and RS due to their complex
structures, which are often too complicated for end users such as farmers,
policymakers and extension officers. A metamodel is a simpler model derived
from a complex model and can be easily operationalized with the aim of decision
support to users. Metamodels are often used in hydrology to operationalize complex
models for applications such as irrigation management (Galelli et al., 2010). Regard￾ing CSM, crop modelling and PA domains, Florin et al. (2010) applied a metamodel
of the APSIM model to estimate soil available water at high resolution by integrating
yield data from yield monitors. The use of metamodels could be integrated with DA
and would become particularly useful when the metamodels enable the integration of
observations throughout the cropping season with a direct relationship between crop
managements, such as crop nitrogen content and soil water content. Future study of
metamodels in combination with DA needs to be explored with the aim of emulating
the outputs of complex models with greater accuracy (Folberth et al., 2019).
6 Conclusion
The combination of CSMs with external observations of crop variables through DA
techniques has demonstrated improvement in the monitoring of fields and in making
better predictions of crop yield and other variables. This approach makes possible
more robust decision-making support service to end users. There are still several
issues that need to be addressed, however, such as (1) information provided by
farmers regarding field management (e.g. crop variety, sowing date, fertilization time
and pest management) which is an essential input to run the models. Only the
farmers have full insight into the management activities of their fields; therefore,
the CSM + DA framework has to be run in an environment that is operated by the
farm or an extension officer, not by scientists and specialists. This puts considerable
demand on robustness, ease of use and usability of the CSM + DA framework. No
such integrated applications exist today; (2) having existing free remote sensing data
at a spatial resolution of 10 m limits the accuracy of estimates of within-fieldData Assimilation of Remote Sensing Data into a Crop Growth Model 195
variation in the status of the soil and plants if the farmers have small field sizes.
Nevertheless, the use the commercially available imagery from the Planet Labs
constellation (3–5 m spatial resolution) combined with other emerging technologies
such as proximal sensing, drones and IOT sensors can overcome this challenge.
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
References
Aggarwal, P., Shirsath, P., Vyas, S., Arumugam, P., Goroshi, S., Aravind, S., et al. (2020).
Application note: Crop-loss assessment monitor–A multi-model and multi-stage decision sup￾port system. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 175, 105619.
Baret, F., Houles, V., & Guerif, M. (2007). Quantification of plant stress using remote sensing
observations and crop models: The case of nitrogen management. Journal of Experimental
Botany, 58, 869–880. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erl231
Batchelor, W. D., Jones, J. W., Boote, K. J., & Pinnschmidt, H. O. (1993). Extending the use of crop
models to study pest damage. Transactions of the ASABE, 36, 551–558.
Bouman, B. A. M. (1995). Crop modelling and remote sensing for yield prediction. Netherlands
Journal of Agricultural Science, 43, 143–161. https://doi.org/10.18174/njas.v43i2.573
Clevers, J., Kooistra, L., & van den Brande, M. (2017). Using Sentinel-2 data for retrieving LAI and
leaf and canopy chlorophyll content of a potato crop. Remote Sensing, 9(5). https://doi.org/10.
3390/rs9050405
Clevers, J. G. P. W. (1991). Application of the WDVI in estimating LAI at the generative stage of
barley. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 46(1), 37–47. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0924-2716(91)90005-G
de Wit, A. J. W., & van Diepen, C. A. (2007). Crop model data assimilation with the ensemble
Kalman filter for improving regional crop yield forecasts. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology,
146(1–2), 38–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2007.05.004
Donatelli, M., Magarey, R. D., Bregaglio, S., Willocquet, L., Whish, J. P. M., & Savary, S. (2017).
Modelling the impacts of pests and diseases on agricultural systems. Agricultural Systems, 155,
213–224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2017.01.019
Dorigo, W. A., Zurita-Milla, R., de Wit, A. J. W., Brazile, J., Singh, R., & Schaepman, M. E.
(2007). A review on reflective remote sensing and data assimilation techniques for enhanced
agroecosystem modeling. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and
Geoinformation, 9(2), 165–193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2006.05.003
Evensen, G. (2003). The ensemble Kalman filter: Theoretical formulation and practical implemen￾tation. Ocean Dynamics, 53, 343–367. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10236-003-0036-9
Evers, J. B., van der Werf, W., Stomph, T. J., Bastiaans, L., & Anten, N. P. R. (2019). Under￾standing and optimizing species mixtures using functional-structural plant modelling. Journal of
Experimental Botany, 29;70(9), 2381–2388. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/ery288
Fang, H., Liang, S., & Hoogenboom, G. (2011). Integration of MODIS LAI and vegetation index
products with the CSM–CERES–Maize model for corn yield estimation. International Journal
of Remote Sensing, 32(4), 1039–1065. https://doi.org/10.1080/01431160903505310
Fischer, A., Kergoat, L., & Dedieu, G. (2009). Coupling satellite data with vegetation functional
models: Review of different approaches and perspectives suggested by the assimilation strategy.
Remote Sensing Reviews, 15(1–4), 283–303. https://doi.org/10.1080/02757259709532343
Florin, M. J., McBratney, A. B., Whelan, B. M., & Minasny, B. (2010). Inverse meta-modelling to
estimate soil available water capacity at high spatial resolution across a farm. Precision
Agriculture, 12(3), 421–438. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11119-010-9184-3196 K. Jindo et al.
Folberth, C., Elliott, J., Muller, C., Balkovic, J., Chryssanthacopoulos, J., Izaurralde, R. C., Jones,
C. D., Khabarov, N., Liu, W., Reddy, A., Schmid, E., Skalsky, R., Yang, H., Arneth, A., Ciais,
P., Deryng, D., Lawrence, P. J., Olin, S., Pugh, T. A. M., Ruane, A. C., & Wang, X. (2019).
Parameterization-induced uncertainties and impacts of crop management harmonization in a
global gridded crop model ensemble. PLoS One, 14(9), e0221862. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0221862
Frère, M., & Popov, G. (1986). Early agrometeorological crop yield forecasting. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Galelli, S., Gandolfi, C., Soncini-Sessa, R., & Agostani, D. (2010). Building a metamodel of an
irrigation district distributed-parameter model. Agricultural Water Management, 97(2),
187–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2009.09.007
Gumma, M. K., Kadiyala, M. D. M., Panjala, P., Ray, S. S., Akuraju, V. R., Dubey, S., Smith, A. P.,
Das, R., & Whitbread, A. M. (2021). Assimilation of remote sensing data into crop growth
model for yield estimation: A case study from India. Journal of the Indian Society of Remote
Sensing. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12524-021-01341-6
Hebbar, K. B., Venugopalan, M. V., Seshasai, M. V. R., Rao, K. V., Patil, B. C., Prakash, A. H.,
et al. (2008). Predicting cotton production using Infocrop-cotton simulation model, remote
sensing and spatial agro-climatic data. Current Science, 1570–1579.
Huang, J., Gómez-Dans, J. L., Huang, H., Ma, H., Wu, Q., Lewis, P. E., Liang, S., Chen, Z., Xue,
J.-H., Wu, Y., Zhao, F., Wang, J., & Xie, X. (2019). Assimilation of remote sensing into crop
growth models: Current status and perspectives. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology,
276–277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2019.06.008
Jin, X., Kumar, L., Li, Z., Feng, H., Xu, X., Yang, G., & Wang, J. (2018). A review of data
assimilation of remote sensing and crop models. European Journal of Agronomy, 92, 141–152.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2017.11.002
Jonard, F., Bogena, H., Caterina, D., Garré, S., Klotzsche, A., Monerris, A., Schwank, M., & von
Hebel, C. (2019). Ground-based soil moisture determination. In Observation and measurement
of ecohydrological processes (pp. 29–70). Ecohydrology. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-
48297-1_2
Jones, J. W., et al. (1998). Decision support system for agrotechnology transfer: DSSAT v3. In
G. Y. Tsuji, G. Hoogenboom, & P. K. Thornton (Eds.), Understanding options for agricultural
production. Systems approaches for sustainable agricultural development (Vol. 7). Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-017-3624-4_8
Jongschaap, R. E. E. (2006). Run-time calibration of simulation models by integrating remote
sensing estimates of leaf area index and canopy nitrogen. European Journal of Agronomy,
24(4), 316–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2005.10.009
Kasampalis, D., Alexandridis, T., Deva, C., Challinor, A., Moshou, D., & Zalidis, G. (2018).
Contribution of remote sensing on crop models: A review. Journal of Imaging, 4(4). https://doi.
org/10.3390/jimaging4040052
Li, Z., Jin, X., Zhao, C., Wang, J., Xu, X., Yang, G., Li, C., & Shen, J. (2015). Estimating wheat
yield and quality by coupling the DSSAT-CERES model and proximal remote sensing.
European Journal of Agronomy, 71, 53–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2015.08.006
Liu, H., & Chahl, J. S. (2021). Proximal detecting invertebrate pests on crops using a deep residual
convolutional neural network trained by virtual images. Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture, 5,
13–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2021.01.003
Maas, S. J. (1992). GRAMI: A crop model growth that can use remotely sensed information; USDA￾ARS. ISSN: 1052-5386.
Maas, S. J. (1988). Using satellite data to improve model estimates of crop yield. Agronomy
Journal, 80(4), 655–662. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj1988.00021962008000040021x
Mladenova, I. E., Bolten, J. D., Crow, W., Sazib, N., & Reynolds, C. (2020). Agricultural drought
monitoring via the assimilation of SMAP soil moisture retrievals into a global soil water balance
model. Frontiers in Big Data, 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fdata.2020.00010Data Assimilation of Remote Sensing Data into a Crop Growth Model 197
Moreira, F. F., Oliveira, H. R., Volenec, J. J., Rainey, K. M., & Brito, L. F. (2020). Integrating high￾throughput phenotyping and statistical genomic methods to genetically improve longitudinal
traits in crops. Frontiers in Plant Science, 11, 681. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2020.00681
Moulin, S., Bondeau, A., & Delecolle, R. (2010). Combining agricultural crop models and satellite
observations: From field to regional scales. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 19(6),
1021–1036. https://doi.org/10.1080/014311698215586
Peng, B., Guan, K., Tang, J., Ainsworth, E. A., Asseng, S., Bernacchi, C. J., Cooper, M., Delucia,
E. H., Elliott, J. W., Ewert, F., Grant, R. F., Gustafson, D. I., Hammer, G. L., Jin, Z., Jones,
J. W., Kimm, H., Lawrence, D. M., Li, Y., Lombardozzi, D. L., Marshall-Colon, A., Messina,
C. D., Ort, D. R., Schnable, J. C., Vallejos, C. E., Wu, A., Yin, X., & Zhou, W. (2020). Towards
a multiscale crop modelling framework for climate change adaptation assessment. Nature
Plants, 6(4), 338–348. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-020-0625-3
Pierce, F. J., & Nowak, P. (1999). Aspects of precision agriculture. In Advances in agronomy
(Advances in agronomy) (Vol. 67, pp. 1–85). https://doi.org/10.1016/s0065-2113(08)60513-1
Thessler, S., Kooistra, L., Teye, F., Huitu, H., & Bregt, A. K. (2011). Geosensors to support crop
production: Current applications and user requirements. Sensors, 11(7), 6656–6684. https://doi.
org/10.3390/s110706656
Van Evert, F. K., Gaitán-Cremaschi, D., Fountas, S., & Kempenaar, C. (2017). Can precision
agriculture increase the profitability and sustainability of the production of potatoes and olives?
Sustainability, 9(10), 1863. https://doi.org/10.3390/su9101863
Wagner, M. P., Slawig, T., Taravat, A., & Oppelt, N. (2020). Remote sensing data assimilation in
dynamic crop models using particle swarm optimization. ISPRS International Journal of
Geo-Information, 9(2). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijgi9020105
Wu, S., Yang, P., Ren, J., Chen, Z., & Li, H. (2021). Regional winter wheat yield estimation based
on the WOFOST model and a novel VW-4DEnSRF assimilation algorithm. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2020.112276
Xie, Y., Wang, P., Bai, X., Khan, J., Zhang, S., Li, L., & Wang, L. (2017). Assimilation of the leaf
area index and vegetation temperature condition index for winter wheat yield estimation using
Landsat imagery and the CERES-wheat model. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 246,
194–206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2017.06.015
Xu, W., Jiang, H., & Huang, J. (2011). Regional crop yield assessment by combination of a crop
growth model and phenology information derived from MODIS. Sensor Letters, 9(3), 981–989.
https://doi.org/10.1166/sl.2011.1388
Yang, S., Zheng, L., He, P., Wu, T., Sun, S., & Wang, M. (2021). High-throughput soybean seeds
phenotyping with convolutional neural networks and transfer learning. Plant Methods,
17(Maro), 50. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13007-021-00749-y
Yu, D., Zha, Y., Shi, L., Jin, X., Hu, S., Yang, Q., Huang, K., & Zeng, W. (2020). Improvement of
sugarcane yield estimation by assimilating UAV-derived plant height observations. European
Journal of Agronomy, 121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2020.126159
Zhang, Z., & Moore, J. C. (2015). Chapter 9: Data assimilation. In Z. Zhang & J. C. Moore (Eds.),
Mathematical and physical fundamentals of climate change (pp. 291–311). Elsevier. ISBN
9780128000663. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-800066-3.00009-7Part III
Case StudiesAdapt-N® (Yara International)
Harold van Es, Rebecca Marjerison, and Muhammad Barik
1 Introduction
Among essential crop nutrients, nitrogen is the most challenging to manage but also
the most likely to benefit from precision management technologies (van Es et al.,
2007). It causes major water quality concerns, including nitrate contamination of
groundwater in agricultural regions and hypoxia in estuaries. Also, gaseous forms of
N are the largest contributor to agricultural greenhouse gas emissions (EPA, 2020)
and fine particulate air pollution (Pinder et al. 2007). Anthropogenic N pollution,
therefore, has large social costs, with estimated potential ecosystem and health
damages of $157 billion annually in the USA alone (Sobota et al. 2015).
The 4R idea promotes field application of nutrients with the right source, at the
right place, right time and right rate (TFI, 2018). As a concept, 4R is straightforward,
but under the complexity of production environments in farmer fields, the ‘right’
answer to each R factor, especially N rate, remains an elusive concept. Tools based
on dynamic simulation models, like Adapt-N, can integrate these concepts and tailor
N management to the localized conditions of the production environment (Sela &
van Es, 2018). At a global scale, this is especially relevant for maize (corn, Zea mays L.)
due to its widespread cultivation, high N needs and sensitivity to weather (Tremblay
et al., 2012).
H. van Es (✉)
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
e-mail: hmv1@cornell.edu
R. Marjerison · M. Barik
Yara International ASA, Oslo, Norway
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_9
201202 H. van Es et al.
2 Technique
Adapt-N is a decision support framework that facilitates the monitoring of soil N,
crop N and other agronomic and environmental elements based on daily model
simulations (Sela et al., 2016). The tool was developed at Cornell University and is
now licensed by Yara International ASA. Adapt-N is enabled by both deterministic
and stochastic model components to derive optimum N recommendations at either
field, zone or grid (20 × 20 m) scale. The model to derive N recommendations is
based on a mass-balance equation that incorporates the following:
(i) The N needed to achieve a yield target at the end of the season.
(ii) The amount of N in the crop and soil (from dynamic model simulations).
(iii) A probabilistic estimate of projected future N gains and losses until the end of
the growing season, based on historical climate data.
(iv) An integrated economic, risk and efficiency factor that accounts for fertilizer
and grain prices, asymmetric profit risks and a yield-efficiency relationship.
(v) A rotation effect credit.
Components (ii) and (iii) are the most complex and dynamic and are addressed
through the application of the precision nitrogen management (PNM) model
(Melkonian et al. 2007), a set of process-based computational routines that simulate
soil hydrology, chemical transformations and movement of N in the soil, as well as
crop growth and yield. The PNM model was developed from two earlier models, the
LEACHN soil model (Hutson, 2010) and an unnamed maize crop growth model by
Sinclair and Muchow (1995). Transformations of C and N are primarily modelled
using functions modulated by soil temperature and soil water content as predicted
from high-resolution climate data. The model also reports environmental N losses in
the form of gases or leachate.
The evolution of the Adapt-N solution followed a series of developmental steps:
(i) PNM model development (Melkonian et al., 2007); (ii) model calibration and
validation efforts based on detailed (mostly lysimeter-based) multi-year studies
involving N rates, rotations, manure applications and cover crops (Sogbedji et al.,
2001a,b,c; Sogbedji et al., 2006; Melkonian et al., 2010; Marjerison et al., 2016);
(iii) development of the integrated Adapt-N tool and a user interface (Melkonian
et al., 2008); and (iv) independent validation on commercial farms – more than
200 strip trials – in broad geographical regions in the USA (Sela et al., 2016, 2017,
2018a; Osmond et al., 2018). Also, Graham et al. (2010) first applied the model to
generate within-field site-specific N recommendations.
3 Usage
Adapt-N was launched in 2008 (Melkonian et al., 2008) and made publicly available
through XML web services. In 2013, it was licensed to, and commercialized by, a
start-up company which in turn was acquired by Yara International ASA in 2017.Adapt-N® (Yara International) 203
Adapt-N is cloud-based and provides real-time N recommendations for maize-based
systems (being expanded to other crops) using daily high-resolution climate data and
regionally adapted soil parameters under a diverse range of management scenarios. It
accounts for different maize systems (grain, silage, sweet corn), fertilizer formula￾tions, tillage systems and residue levels, rotations, cover crops, manure or compost
applications, cultivars and enhanced efficiency products. It also facilitates selected
field observations to enhance prediction accuracy (date of crop emergence, in-season
soil nitrate test results, irrigation applications). In addition to daily tracking of soil
and crop N status, the model also provides estimates of crop stage and soil water
status (facilitating irrigation planning). The primary client group comprises fertilizer
retailers and crop consultants, with many now accessing Adapt-N through applica￾tion programming interface (API) technology with third-party software.
4 Advantages to Growers
Adapt-N recommendations were compared with grower practice under a variety of
management scenarios through on-farm strip trials in New York and Iowa (n = 113;
Sela et al., 2016). Marginal profits were on average $64 ha-1 higher and N inputs
45 kg ha-1 lower with Adapt-N rates. The monetary benefits were associated with
fertilizer savings when Adapt-N rates were lower and achieved similar yields to
grower rates (83% of cases; Fig. 1) and prevented yield reductions from N deficits
when the tool recommended higher rates (17% of cases, mostly in wet years).
Another 16 on-farm multi-N rate trials in New York and 23 trials in the Midwest
(Indiana, Ohio and Wisconsin; Sela et al., 2017) estimated the ex post economic
optimum N rate (EONR). In the New York trials Adapt-N achieved RMSE values of
33 kg ha-1 and an average bias of -12 kg ha-1 relative to the EONR, compared to
85 kg ha-1 and 64 kg ha-1 for a conventional static N calculator. For the Midwest
trials, Adapt-N had an RMSE of 33 kg ha-1 and bias of -10 kg ha-1 compared to
49 kg ha-1 and 39 kg ha-1
, respectively, for the regional static N calculator. Profits
Fig. 1 Yield results from
113 Adapt-N vs. grower
trials. When Adapt-N
recommended lower rates
(87%), average yields were
the same as grower yields;
when Adapt-N
recommended higher rates
(17%), yields generally
increased204 H. van Es et al.
were $64 ha-1 higher for Adapt-N for the New York trials and $25 ha-1 higher for
the Midwest trials. Adapt-N on average recommended 13 kg N ha-1 less than
experienced crop consultants in 38 site years of on-farm strip trials in North
Carolina, with identical profits (Osmond et al., 2018).
5 Environmental Benefits
The environmental impacts were assessed from the above trials by simulating
leaching (beyond bottom of root zone) and gaseous losses (from soil surface)
under the trial conditions. For the Adapt-N vs. grower trials, estimated post-sidedress
N losses averaged 36% less leaching and 39% lower gaseous losses for Adapt-N
(Sela et al., 2016). In the multi-N rate studies, Adapt-N reduced simulated N
leaching losses by 53% and gaseous losses by 54% compared to the conventional
N calculator in New York trials and by 3% and 22%, respectively, in Midwest trials
(Sela et al., 2017). A separate field lysimeter study in New York corroborated these
results (van Es et al., 2020) with mean leached NO3 concentrations reduced by 37%
and 41% for a clay loam and loamy sand soil, respectively, while yields were not
negatively affected. The above studies only addressed N rate differences, and larger
gains might be achieved when all 4R practices are optimized simultaneously (Sela
et al., 2019).
6 Transparency
Adapt-N provides N recommendations at the field, zone and grid scale. Users receive
tabular simulation results to gain insight into, and understanding of the N rate
advisory (Fig. 2). This includes crop stage and N uptake, N in the soil (root zone
and top 30 cm), N needed at harvest, N mineralized from organic sources (inherent
and applied), N lost to the environment, predicted future N losses, rainfall received
and soil water status and irrigation needs. In addition, more detailed graphical
outputs (by date) are provided for N leaching, N gaseous losses, N mineralization,
inorganic N in soil, precipitation (cumulative, daily), crop stage development and
growing degree days (Fig. 2). The interface has review and editing features for input
data, map displays, aggregated field, and export utilities tailored to products (includ￾ing prescription shapefiles). Users can further adjust the tool by specifying current
fertilizer and grain prices, N contents of mature crops and threshold levels for daily
alerts by text or email.Adapt-N® (Yara International) 205
7 Adoption
Customer surveys (internal Yara research, 2020) rated the three top-ranked criteria
for the use of Adapt-N to be scientific validity, usability, and compatibility with
other software (through API). Other stated advantages included: better recommen￾dations and more profitability, ability to fine-tune N management, customization
Fig. 2 Selected examples of the Adapt-N user interface with recommendations (here: 20 × 20 m
grid based) and simulation results206 H. van Es et al.
Fig. 2 (continued)
options with GIS, spatial recommendations, full-season N programming, improved
grower relations, ability to show benefits of variable-rate management, improved 4R
practices and remote field monitoring capabilities.
Conversely, the most prominent adoption challenge is limited grower understand￾ing of the opportunities with data-driven models. Another challenge relates to
regulatory standards which remain focused on simple static and generalized calcu￾lators, despite generally inferior performance (Sela et al., 2017, 2018a; van Es et al.,
2020). Adverse results from incorrect usage can be a problem but is addressed
through user training.
The Adapt-N model framework has also been applied for in silico evaluations of
environmental benefits of 4R management scenarios in support of policy develop￾ment (McLellan et al., 2018; Sela et al., 2018b, 2019). They demonstrated opportu￾nities for the use of model tools to meet environmental standards for N use efficiency
and carbon targets.
8 Conclusion
The use of model-driven tools for precision N management can be effectively
implemented in commercial crop production with clear economic and environmental
benefits.Con ict of Interest The authors declare that the Adapt-N technology was developed at Cornell
Adapt-N® (Yara International) 207
fl
University and is commercially marketed by the Yara International ASA. Co-authors Marjerison
and Barik are fully employed by the company, while author and lead inventor van Es receives
remuneration for advisory services.
References
EPA. (2020). Inventory of US greenhouse gas emissions and sinks. United States Environmental
Protection Agency. EPA 430-R-19-001.
Graham, C.J., H.M. van Es, J.J. Melkonian, D.A. Laird. 2010. Improved nitrogen and energy use
efficiency using NIR estimated soil organic carbon and N simulation modeling. In: D.A. Clay
J. Shanahan. GIS applications in agriculture – Nutrient Management for Improved Energy
Efficiency. pp. 301–325, Taylor and Francis, LLC.
Hutson, J. L. (2010). LEACHM: Leaching Estimation and Chemistry Model: A process-based
model of water and solute movement, transformations, plant uptake and chemical reactions in
the unsaturated zone (Version 4. Res. Ser. R03–1). Cornell Univ.
Marjerison, Melkonian, R. D. J., Hutson, J. L., van Es, H. M., Sela, S., Geohring, L. D., & Vetsch,
J. (2016). Drainage and nitrate leaching from artificially drained maize fields simulated by the
Precision Nitrogen Management model. Journal of Environmental Quality, 45, 2044–2052.
McLellan, E. L., Cassman, K. G., Woodbury, P. B., Sela, S., Eagle, A. J., Tonitto, C., Marjerison,
R. D., & van Es, H. M. (2018). The nitrogen balancing act: Tracking the environmental
performance of food supply chains. Bioscience, 68(3), 194–203.
Melkonian, J., van Es, H. M., DeGaetano, A. T., Sogbedji, J. M., & Joseph, L. (2007). Application
of dynamic simulation modeling for nitrogen Management in Maize. In T. Bruulsema (Ed.),
Managing crop nutrition for weather (pp. 14–22). Plant Nutrition Institute Publ.
Melkonian, J. J., van Es, H. M., DeGaetano, A. T., & Joseph, L. (2008). ADAPT-N: Adaptive
nitrogen management for maize using high-resolution climate data and model simulations. In
R. Kosla (Ed.), Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Precision Agriculture, July
20–23, 2008, Denver, CO (CD-ROM).
Melkonian, Geohring, J. L. D., van Es, H. M., Wright, P. E., Steenhuis, T. S., & Graham, C. (2010).
Subsurface drainage discharges following manure application: Measurements and model
analyses. Proc. XVIIth World Congress of the Intern. Commission of Agric. Engineering,
Quebec City, Canada.
Osmond, D. E., Shelton, S., Autin, R., van Es, H., & Sela, S. (2018). Evaluation of adapt-N and
realistic yield expectation approaches for maize management in North Carolina. Soil Science
Society of America Journal, 82, 1449–1458.
Pinder, R. W., Adams, P. J., & Pandis, S. N. (2007). Ammonia emission controls as a cost-effective
strategy for reducing atmospheric particulate matter in the eastern United States. Environmental
Science and Technology, 41, 380–386.
Sela, S., & van Es, H. M. (2018). Dynamic tools unify fragmented 4Rs into an integrative nitrogen
management approach. The Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, 73, 107A–112A.
Sela, S., van Es, H. M., Moebius-Clune, B. N., Marjerison, S. R., Melkonian, J. J., Moebius-Clune,
D., Schindelbeck, R., & Gomes, S. (2016). Adapt-N outperforms grower-selected nitrogen rates
in Northeast and Midwest USA strip trials. Agronomy Journal, 108(4), 1726–1734.
Sela, S., van Es, H. M., Moebius-Clune, B. N., Marjerison, R., Moebius-Clune, D., Schindelbeck,
R., Severson, K., & Young, E. (2017). Dynamic model improves agronomic and environmental
outcomes for corn N management over static approaches. Journal of Environmental Quality,
46(2), 311–319.
Sela, S., Woodbury, S. P., & van Es, H. M. (2018a). Dynamic model-based N management reduces
surplus nitrogen and improves the environmental performance of corn production. Environ￾mental Research Letters, 13, 054010. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aab908208 H. van Es et al.
Sela, S., van Es, H. M., Moebius-Clune, B. N., Marjerison, S. R., & Kneubuhler, G. (2018b).
Dynamic model-based recommendations increase the precision and sustainability of N fertili￾zation in midwestern US maize production. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 153,
256–265.
Sela, S., Woodbury, P. B., Marjerison, R., & van Es, H. M. (2019). Towards applying N balance as
a sustainability indicator for the US cornbelt: Realistic achievable targets, spatio-temporal
variability and policy implications. Environmental Research Letters, 14, 064015.
Sinclair, T. R., & Muchow, R. C. (1995). Effect of nitrogen supply on maize yield.1. Modeling
physiological responses. Agronomy Journal, 87, 632–641.
Sobota, D. J., Compton, J. E., McCrackin, M. L., & Singh, S. (2015). Cost of reactive nitrogen
release from human activities to the environment in the United States. Environmental Research
Letters, 10.
Sogbedji, J. M., van Es, H. M., Hutson, J. L., & Geohring, L. D. (2001a). N rate and transport under
variable cropping history and fertilizer rate on loamy sand and clay loam soils: II. Performance
of LEACHMN using different calibration scenarios. Plant and Soil, 229(1), 71–82.
Sogbedji, J. M., van Es, H. M., Hutson, J. L., & Geohring, L. D. (2001b). Fate of N fertilizer and
green manure in clay loam and loamy sand soils: I Calibration of the LEACHM model. Plant
and Soil, 229(1), 57–70.
Sogbedji, J. M., van Es, H. M., Klausner, S. D., Bouldin, D. R., & Cox, W. J. (2001c). Spatial and
temporal processes affecting nitrogen availability at the landscape scale. Soil & Tillage
Research, 58(3–4), 233–244.
Sogbedji, J. M., van Es, H. M., Melkonian, J. M., & Schindelbeck, R. R. (2006). Evaluation of the
PNM model for simulating drain flow nitrate-N concentrations under manure-fertilized maize.
Plant and Soil, 282, 343–360.
TFI (The Fertilizer Institute). (2018). The 4R of nutrient stewardship. Available at (https://
nutrientstewardship.com/4rs/. Accessed 22 Nov 2018.
Tremblay, N., Bouroubi, Y. M., Bélec, C., Mullen, R. W., Kitchen, N. R., Thomason, W. E.,
Ebelhar, S., Mengel, D. B., Raun, W. R., Francis, D. D., Vories, E. D., & Ortiz-Monasterio,
I. (2012). Corn response to nitrogen is influenced by soil texture and weather. Agronomy
Journal, 104, 1658–1671.
van Es, H. M., Kay, B. D., Melkonian, J. J., & Sogbedji, J. M. (2007). Nitrogen management under
maize in humid regions: Case for a dynamic approach. In T. Bruulsema (Ed.), Managing crop
nutrition for weather (pp. 6–13). Plant Nutrition Institute Publ.
van Es, H. M., Ristow, A., Nunes, M., Schindelbeck, R., Sela, S., & Davis, M. (2020). Nitrate
leaching decreases with adaptive-dynamic nitrogen management and reduced tillage. Soil
Science Society of America Journal. https://doi.org/10.1002/saj2.20031Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management
Robert Gunzenhauser
1 Introduction
Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management is a software tool to provide spatially
optimal nitrogen rate recommendations for maize fields in the United States. Utiliz￾ing a proprietary dynamic crop growth model (Granular Crop Model), thousands of
simulations can be run using weather, soil properties, management and genetic
information to estimate nitrogen requirements. Available via the Internet, the soft￾ware is primarily used by advisors on behalf of farmers.
Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management was started in 2013 as Encirca
Nitrogen Management, part of the suite of the Encirca Services offered through
DuPont-Pioneer, a division of DuPont. In 2017, at the same time as DuPont and Dow
merged to form first DowDuPont and later the spin-off Corteva Agriscience, Gran￾ular, a farm business management software company, was also purchased. Encirca
Services were then moved to Granular as Granular Agronomy. Over this time,
millions of hectares of growers’ maize have been serviced using Nitrogen Manage￾ment. Nitrogen Management was one of the first commercial softwares on the
market to offer dynamic nitrogen recommendations based on soils, weather, man￾agement and genetics with a crop model as the core of the offering.
This is a description of the service offering of Nitrogen Management, the
important components of the software, and future opportunities to be investigated.
R. Gunzenhauser (✉)
Corteva Agriscience, Johnston, IA, USA
e-mail: robert.gunzenhauser@corteva.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_10
209210 R. Gunzenhauser
2 Service Offering
Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management is provided in the United States through
certified service agents (CSAs). These agents range from independent agronomists
to associate sellers working with Pioneer sales representatives. The CSAs receive
yearly agronomic training to keep their skills up to date. As a CSA, they should not
sell products and services that compete with Granular, Pioneer or Corteva offerings.
Many offer complimentary services, including soil sampling and analysis, crop
scouting, irrigation scheduling and custom farming services.
Growers engage with Granular through the CSAs on a yearly basis. Granular
Agronomy Nitrogen Management is offered as part of the Granular Agronomy
service, which includes soil fertility and seeding management; Nitrogen Manage￾ment is an additional package. The suggested retail price for Granular Agronomy +
Nitrogen Management is $32.11 per hectare. However, CSAs have the freedom to
adjust this price to suit the needs, purchase volume and service-level requirements of
their grower-customers.
The value delivered to the farmer depends greatly on the level of service delivered
by the CSA. Farmers rate the Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management service
higher when the CSA spends the necessary time to discuss goals and outcomes with
the farmer, adjusting the inputs based on the changing conditions in the field
(e.g. changes in planting, nitrogen and irrigation dates). The service also has greater
value in years when the prices of both maize and nitrogen are higher than usual;
Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management helps to adjust nitrogen requirements
based on the farmer’s economic situation at the time.
3 Setup
To ensure accuracy, Nitrogen Management requires a certain level of information be
gathered and input into the software. A dedicated CSA as part of the initial setup has
been found to be a key to the success of the service to the grower.
On initiation of the service, a CSA will visit with the grower and gather some
initial information about his or her operation. What kind of management do
they use? How much nitrogen do they typically apply to their maize, in what
forms and at what times? This helps the CSA to put together the correct management
plans.
3.1 Field Boundaries
Field boundaries of the growers’ fields must be digitized into the system. In many
cases, this can be done from machine data, namely, from on-the-go planting,
application, or yield monitors with GPS receivers. If these are not available, fieldGranular Agronomy Nitrogen Management 211
boundaries can be obtained with a data layer called the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) common land unit (CLU) layer. Digitized in 2005–2006, this
layer captured the outline of most agricultural fields in the United States at the time.
It was publicly available for a brief time before being removed from public circu￾lation shortly after. If neither machine data nor CLU data is available, boundaries
may be manually digitized using a commonly available background layer of recent
imagery. Boundaries can be edited from year to year.
3.2 Data Hierarchy
Data are arranged in an Operation–Farm–Field hierarchy in Granular Agronomy.
The Operation corresponds to the farmer; the Farm is a collection of fields – some
operations have one Farm with all fields linked to it, while others may have a Farm
designated for each Field, and others somewhere in between these two extremes. A
Field is the area of work.
Once the Fields have been set up with Maize as the primary crop for the current
year, the CSA will enroll the fields into Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management.
This initiates a set of processes in the background that enable the usage of Nitrogen
Management on the field for that year.
3.3 Decision Zones
Once a crop has been assigned for a field, a layer called ‘Decision Zones’ is
generated automatically for the field. This digital layer is polygon-based and is an
intersection of two or more layers:
• Environmental Response Units (digitized soil data)
• Multi-Year Yield Analysis (MYYA) (optional, based on the assumption of access
to yield maps)
• Irrigation Zones (optional)
• Other user-supplied polygon-based layers to segment and capture further spatial
variation
For the service to generate estimated soil nitrogen amounts and recommenda￾tions, this key spatial information is required for Decision Zones:
• Soil properties (water-holding capacity, drainage, organic matter)
• Yield Targets – aspirational yield goals for each Decision Zone
• Irrigation zones – where irrigation takes place or not212 R. Gunzenhauser
3.3.1 Yield Targets
Yield Targets are used in nitrogen to determine the target level of nitrogen that
should be in the soil at plant growth stage VT/R1 (change from vegetative to
reproductive stage). They are a way for CSAs and growers to indicate the potential
productivity of each zone and to what levels of nitrogen each should have available.
These Yield Targets should be judicially selected; having extremely low or high
Yield Targets may result in disappointment and or nitrogen loss.
Yield Targets are assigned to each Decision Zone. In some fields, there may be
dozens of Decision Zones, so two approaches are used to ‘spread’ a single field yield
goal across the Decision Zones:
• National Yield Index
• Grower Yield Index
The National Yield Index uses a data source called the National Crop Commodity
Productivity Index or NCCPI. This is created and maintained by the USDA’s Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS); this productivity index rates each soil type
on its potential productivity for a number of commodity crops, including maize,
soyabeans, wheat and cotton. The maize productivity index value is used from the
NCCPI data set for this purpose. The NCCPI has a range from 0 to 1, with 1 being
the most productive for that crop. It is developed using each soil type’s physical,
chemical and biological measurements and crop modelling in the environment
where the soil type is found.
The Grower Yield Index is based upon Multi-Year Yield Analysis, or MYYA.
The MYYA requires at least 1 year of machine yield data collected from on-the-go
yield monitors with GPS receivers (multiple years are preferred). To create an
MYYA layer, each year’s yield data is normalized using a raster approach. Then,
each of the layers is merged and averaged together. This allows multiple crops
(maize, soybeans, wheat) to be considered together. Through the normalization and
averaging, spatial productivity trends can be identified. Polygon zones of low,
average and high are generated from the mean, normalized data with these ranges:
low, < 90%; average, 90–110%; and high, > 110%.
Through either approach, a relative productivity value is generated for each
Decision Zone. Based on the area of each Decision Zone, using the Field Yield
Goal, Yield Targets will be generated by Decision Zone such that their area￾weighted average will equal the Field Yield Goal. Once these Yield Targets have
been generated, a user of the software can edit individual Decision Zone Yield
Targets to their satisfaction.
3.3.2 Soils
Soil data are a key factor in crop model simulations. In many small-plot simulations,
actual soil measurements are used for the site. For a set of large-scale simulations
across millions of hectares and thousands of growers, a broader set of soil data are
utilized.Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management 213
The USDA has generated the Soil Survey Geographic Database or SSURGO and
made it publicly available. This database contains spatial and tabular information
describing the soils of the United States at varying levels of detail. Individual area￾level soil surveys (typically at a state–county level) have been performed multiple
times over the last 40–50 years by individual soil scientists. The SSURGO harmo￾nizes these area-level soil surveys into one source that can be used by many
consumers.
As a way to improve further upon the SSURGO data, team members developed a
process to re-position SSURGO map units based spatially on high-resolution digital
elevation models (DEMs), typically from Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) or
other sources. By comparing the SSURGO map data with topographic derivatives
from the DEMs and determining, by sampling, where SSURGO map units were
typically found based on the topographical derivatives (e.g. slope, curvature, wet￾ness index and more), a re-mapping of the map units resulted in a new product called
Environmental Response Units or ERUs (Fig. 1). This is a Corteva-proprietary
process to improve the spatial accuracy of the SSURGO map units and is used in
the Nitrogen Management offering. The SSURGO map units may also be used as an
alternative if so desired.
3.4 Management Plans
A key feature of Nitrogen Management is the ability to set up several nitrogen
application plans. These may have different application timings, methods and
products from the grower’s typical plans. Plans may be assigned to fields and
allow the user to explore how changes in management may affect their outcomes.
Nitrogen applications may be flat-rate or variable-rate and utilize commercially
available fertilizers or manure. The software user may designate the placement
Fig. 1 Example ERU (Environmental Response Units) soil layer with soil property details of a
selected soil map unit214 R. Gunzenhauser
Fig. 2 Management ‘cards’ displaying the various management activities performed on a field
Fig. 3 Fertilizer application information user interface
method of each application (broadcast not incorporated, broadcast incorporated or
surface banded, shallow injected and deep injected), if a nitrogen stabilizer is being
used and what type of stabilizer and if using a flat rate, the rate applied by the farmer
(Figs. 2 and 3). Once this plan is created, it can be applied to any of the operations
and fields the user has access to.
3.5 Initial Nitrogen
The user can specify the amount of nitrogen that is present in a 0–60 cm (0–24″)
depth from soil tests as a way to initialize the simulation. Based on the soil test, the
amount of ammonium (NH4-N) and nitrate (NO3-N) can be entered in parts per
million. This provides the model with values from which to start simulation.Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management 215
3.6 Soil Monitoring Depth
While the soil data used are modelled to approximately 180 cm (about 6 ft), the user
can specify a particular depth at which to monitor soil nitrogen amounts, particularly
for indicating if the target soil nitrogen is available at VT/R1. The soil depth can be
set in at 30, 45, 60, 90 or 120 cm (about 1, 1.5, 2, 3 or 4 ft).
3.7 Planting Information
The seeding date, seeding rate and relative maturity of the maize seed are critical
information. Initially, this may be considered as the planned planting information,
but as the crop is planted, actual values may be adjusted into the process. As an extra
feature, if a Pioneer brand hybrid is selected, hybrid-specific genetic parameters are
used in the simulation; if a non-Pioneer brand hybrid is selected, average values
based on relative maturity are used instead.
3.8 Irrigation
For fields that are irrigated, the user can enter a schedule of irrigation events prior to
the cropping season and later can edit them as the irrigation events are applied. A
range of dates for irrigation events, the frequency and amount per irrigation (inches)
can be set so that the user does not need to enter each event one by one (sometimes
12–18 events are applied each season).
In addition, nitrogen applied through irrigation can be accounted for in this
feature. Liquid nitrogen fertilizer products, such as urea-ammonium nitrate (UAN),
can be included in irrigation events as ‘fertigation’; quantities can be applied in mass
per area of nitrogen or liquid volume per area of product. Also, nitrates existing in
the irrigation water may be accounted for; the user may enter a water test with
nitrate-N, and the system will include nitrogen additions for each irrigation event
based on the quantity of water and the nitrate concentration.
4 Operation
Once a field has been enrolled in Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management and the
appropriate setup information has been entered, the system will run on a daily basis,
utilizing daily weather information to re-simulate the results each day (Fig. 4). Over
the winter period, this daily simulation is reduced or turned off to save computational
cycles, but the user can initiate a simulation on demand.216 R. Gunzenhauser
Fig. 4 Example use interface of current soil nitrogen levels and season chart (bottom)
4.1 Granular Crop Model
The Granular Crop Model (GCM) is a mechanistic, daily time-step crop growth
model that simulates both below-ground processes (soil temperature, soil moisture,
nitrogen transformation and movement and root development) and above-ground
processes (plant development and growth, water and N uptake, light interception and
more) and powers the Granular Nitrogen Management software. The GCM com￾bines below-ground functionality originally found in DSSAT (Hoogenboom et al.,
2019; Jones et al., 2003) with proprietary above-ground functionality developed by
Corteva and the University of Queensland. Additional functionality and improve￾ments have been made by Granular and Corteva scientists to the below-ground
functionality since the original development of the Granular Crop Model. GCM can
execute yearly crop growth simulations within a fraction of a second.
4.2 Season Chart
A dynamic season chart is provided for each enrolled field. This chart shows the
estimated and projected soil nitrogen amounts throughout the season, together with
key additional information, including nitrogen application events, planting date,
precipitation and irrigation events and soil nitrogen target at VT/R1 (Fig. 4).
To indicate the uncertainty of soil nitrogen amounts in the future (past the current
date plus 7 days of forecasted weather), confidence bands are indicated around the
median projected soil nitrogen amounts. Moving the mouse over the season chart
can show the estimated soil nitrogen levels and confidence values for each day.Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management 217
4.3 Weather
To simulate crop growth properly, daily weather data are a necessary input into the
crop growth model. Air temperature minimum and maximum, precipitation and solar
radiation are key inputs into the model.
Three weather data sets are used in combination:
• Current year
• Forecast
• Historical
The combination of these sources allows Nitrogen Management to calculate
potential outcomes of soil nitrogen amounts based on historical ranges.
4.3.1 Current Year
The crop simulation in Nitrogen Managements starts on October 1 of the previous
year and ends on December 31 of the current year. As each day progresses after
October 1, the available weather for the field is used and added to the simulation.
Weather data are provided through Corteva’s own network of weather stations and
publicly available weather stations.
4.3.2 Forecast
For 8 days from the current day onwards, forecast weather is used in the simulation.
This is useful to indicate effects to the soil nitrogen levels if a large rain event is
forecast in the next few days. The same sources for current year are also used for
forecast.
4.3.3 Historical
To provide a range of potential outcomes, historical weather found for the field
centroid is used. Twenty years of historical weather, maintained on a 30 km grid and
obtained from a service developed by Corteva, is utilized. In effect, for each
Decision Zone, there will be 20 model runs each day, each with a different set of
historical weather (See Fig. 5).
4.4 Variable-Rate Prescriptions
A key feature of the service is the ability to create variable-rate nitrogen prescriptions
for export to most application controllers in order to apply nitrogen at different rates218 R. Gunzenhauser
Historical
Current
Current
Historical
Historical
(1)
(2)
(3)
F
F
F
Fig. 5 Schematic diagram of the use of weather data in simulations. (1) Beginning of the crop
season. (2) Around January 1 of crop season. (3) Late in the crop season
across the field. The nitrogen rates are applied at the resolution of each Decision
Zone polygon.
To generate a nitrogen recommendation, all pertinent information must be entered
for the field (genetics, planting, irrigation, fixed-rate nitrogen applications). The
variable-rate application is added as part of the Management Plan, with the date,
product, application method and stabilizer use entered.
For each Decision Zone and one of 20 previous weather years, a series of
simulations is run with varying amounts of nitrogen applied in the simulation for
the variable-rate application. The first run is with zero additional units of nitrogen.
The estimated soil nitrogen at VT/R1 is compared to the target soil nitrogen level for
the Decision Zones (based on Yield Target); if the estimated soil nitrogen amount is
above or below within a set range (4.5 kg of N per hectare or 5 pounds per acre) of
the soil N target, the simulation stops, posts the proposed nitrogen rate and moves to
the next Decision Zone x Yield. If the difference is greater than the set range, the
difference is determined and added to the next attempted nitrogen rate. This com￾bined rate is run again through the process, and again the same logic is applied. This
iterative process is allowed to run up to 15 times, but generally, 1–5 cycles are
necessary to determine a converged value (Fig. 6).
Once all 20 years of simulations for a given Decision Zone are run, the median of
the yearly proposed N rates is determined and posted as the recommended nitrogen
rate for the Decision Zone; this process is run for all Decision Zones in the field.
In the user interface (Fig. 7), suggested nitrogen recommendations may be edited
by Decision Zone. Information about the Decision Zone (soil type, yield goal target
soil N and recommended N rate) is displayed. The rate may be adjusted by setting the
value or by adjusting the rate up or down by a percentage. In addition, multiple
Decision Zones may be selected, and the same process can be applied. This allows a
user to adjust the rates uniformly if necessary.
Variable rate prescriptions may be exported from the software to various common
data formats used in application controllers. One or many fields’ prescriptions may
be selected at export time. The rates may be exported as either units of nitrogen per
area or in units of the nitrogen product per area that corresponds to the nitrogen rate.
This includes dry products such as urea and ammonium nitrate or liquid products
such as urea-ammonium nitrate (UAN). Conversions to product units per area are
based on the density of each product.Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management 219
Fig. 6 Flowchart showing the process to calculate N-rate recommendation for a given Decision
Zone in a given year
Fig. 7 Example user interface of variable-rate nitrogen recommendation
4.5 Daily Reports
In season, the CSA will receive daily emails from the system, providing them with a
list of fields they have enrolled, their current nitrogen amounts and the projected soil
nitrogen levels at growth stage VT/R1. This provides a quick report for the CSA to
scan through and to note any fields that may be trending towards insufficient
amounts of nitrogen.220 R. Gunzenhauser
5 Future Development
5.1 Crops
As described thus far, Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management focuses primarily
on maize farmers in the Midwestern United States. This is where a large area of
maize is grown, together with a relatively large nitrogen use and technology
adoption.
Adding additional crops to Nitrogen Management is being considered. Wheat,
barley, canola and sunflowers are also consumers of commercial nitrogen and are
planted extensively across large areas of the globe. While maximizing yield is an
important aspect of nitrogen management, these crops are different from maize in
that there are yield penalties for over-application of nitrogen. Many of these crops
will have lodging issues if too much N is applied. Sunflower and canola attract more
insects and diseases and have maturity issues at harvest. Wheat and barley have two
issues with excessive nitrogen; one is excessive lodging and difficulty of harvest, the
other is a change in grain protein that may make it unsuitable for certain uses, like
malting.
5.2 Environmental Concerns
When over-applied, nitrogen can become a pollutant, both to groundwater and to the
atmosphere. Modelling the losses of nitrogen prior to application is a way to provide
growers with information about the impact they may have on the environment.
Providing this information would allow them to try alternative approaches that can
be modelled to reduce losses.
Currently, the Granular Crop Model does simulate leaching, denitrification,
nitrification and volatilization. These values may be exposed in the user interface
to help show the user how nitrogen may be lost (Fig. 8). In addition, as more research
becomes available, monetary values may be assigned to these losses and used in the
decision support process, balancing potential yield and gross income versus nitrogen
fertilizer and environmental costs.
5.3 Variable-Rate Nitrogen Approaches
Presently, the soil nitrogen target approach through Decision Zone Yield Targets is
the approach taken to apply nitrogen variably across the field. However, as the
Granular Crop Model is further tuned and improved through data collection and
analysis, alternative approaches may be better suited.Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management 221
Fig. 8 User interface showing an individual zone’s estimated nitrogen mineralization, leaching,
denitrification, soil N levels and plant N uptake (left)
The Economic Optimum Nitrogen Recommendation (EONR) approach uses
simulated yield responses to nitrogen application, together with the market price of
grain and cost of nitrogen fertilizer, to determine the optimal amount of nitrogen to
apply that provides the best return for the investments. This approach is easier to
understand by growers (best nitrogen value) and does not require Yield Targets to be
assigned at each Decision Zone (an often time-consuming process performed by the
CSAs). This approach is undergoing further study with field tests to validate it.
6 Conclusion
Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management is a comprehensive nitrogen manage￾ment tool, relying on a proprietary crop growth model as the engine, wrapped in
features to enable growers to address their particular needs. This approach takes the
crop model out of the laboratory and into a production setting, accessible by many
growers. While there are still areas of improvement that need to be addressed,
Nitrogen Management covers a wide range of scenarios for many growers. Ulti￾mately, this tool can be used to not only improve the grower’s profitability but also to
start to address environmental concerns, providing guidance towards improved
management.
Conflict of Interest The author declares that he is employed by Corteva Agriscience, which owns
Granular Nitrogen Management and the Granular Nitrogen Model.222 R. Gunzenhauser
References
Hoogenboom, G., Porter, C. H., Boote, K. J., Shelia, V., Wilkens, P. W., Singh, U., White, J. W.,
Asseng, S., Lizaso, J. I., Moreno, L. P., Pavan, W., Ogoshi, R., Hunt, L. A., Tsuji, G. Y., &
Jones, J. W. (2019). The DSSAT crop modeling ecosystem. In K. J. Boote (Ed.), Advances in
crop modeling for a sustainable agriculture (pp. 173–216). Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.19103/AS.2019.0061.10
Jones, J. W., Hoogenboom, G., Porter, C. H., Boote, K. J., Batchelor, W. D., Hunt, L. A., Wilkens,
P. W., Singh, U., Gijsman, A. J., & Ritchie, J. T. (2003). DSSAT cropping system model.
European Journal of Agronomy, 18, 235–265.xarvio® Digital Farming Solutions
Manuel Nolte, Andreas Tewes, and Holger Hoffmann
1 Introduction
In this chapter, we illustrate the practical relevance of crop model systems for
agricultural businesses by presenting a case study. The framework described
(Tewes et al., 2020a, b) is part of the tools used by the digital farming platform
xarvio® FIELD MANAGER offered by the xarvio® Digital Farming Solutions. We
introduce the case study with some conceptual remarks on how to integrate model
outputs into agricultural decision-making. This is followed by a summary of poten￾tial precision farming uses enabled by crop models. We conclude by providing
insights into the current state of crop modelling-based products at xarvio® Digital
Farming.
Modelling crop development plays a key role in precision agriculture digital
systems. In such systems, models are used to calculate, interpolate, extrapolate and
translate between relevant variables that indicate crop status and/or crop health.
Additionally, data modelling is used to identify patterns in the data (see Table 1 for a
list of example use cases).
With these capabilities and by using a range of environmental inputs (soil,
weather, remote sensing, etc.), management data (sowing date, crop, variety, etc.),
metadata (field boundary, variety details) and other crop models connect such data
for a digital farming system. As a result, they can be used to supplement or deliver
relevant data layers for digital farming recommendations and decision-making as
described in the following:
M. Nolte (✉) · A. Tewes · H. Hoffmann
xarvio, BASF Digital Farming GmbH, Köln, Germany
e-mail: manuel.nolte@xarvio.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_11
2231. Deliver data for smarter decisions (all information presented). One example of
extremely relevant information as a basis for making smarter decisions are crop
growth stages. These are used for most management decisions during the crop
season.
224 M. Nolte et al.
Table 1 Example uses of crop models
# Action Example use case
1 Calculate Calculate crop status, e.g. growth stage, or complex indices such as
water stress
2 Interpolate Interpolate biomass in between satellite images
3 Extrapolate Extrapolate LAI beyond the saturation in satellite images
4 Translate Translate measurable variables into other variables (e.g. NDVI to LAI)
5 Identify data
patterns
Identify and weigh relevant variables in sensor fusion and identify
spatial patterns
2. Deliver data for recommendations (defined option space). A defined set of
options is derived based on model output.
3. Deliver data for decision-making (single option). A unique solution is proposed.
The examples above describe how information can be processed straightfor￾wardly from a few inputs to output and directly to application. However, crop
management decisions are often taken under complex situations with several inter￾dependencies with other decisions. This is illustrated by the following case study.
2 Possible Use Cases
Crop yield is the most relevant contributor to a farmer’s income. Having access to an
early, field specific and accurate prediction of yield is of strategic importance in
managing agricultural businesses. Therefore, in digital farming applications, it is the
most prominent target variable derived from crop models.
Yield estimates are useful for a variety of cases. An early yield forecast helps a
farmer to evaluate whether management decisions are economically justified. This is
especially valuable when a crop model service operates at sub-field level. Under￾standing in-field variation of yield allows the farmer to identify low- and high￾yielding zones. The farmer is then able to optimize inputs such as fertilizers, seeding
rates or irrigation by accounting for these variations.
Yield forecasting can also be used to derive an early estimate of the farmer’s
revenue and thus enables better informed investment decisions. This is done by
multiplying the forecasted yield of a given crop by its expected market price. It may
include not only an average estimate but in addition uncertainty measures such as
upper and lower confidence intervals of the overall revenue. This allows the farmer
to have a more transparent view of his options with regard to future investments and
business strategy.xarvio® Digital Farming Solutions 225
When including historical data, a crop model service can help to assess the
general yield potential of a field. This helps when a farmer wants to invest in new
farmland without having information on historic yields – allowing him to evaluate
better if the price for a specific area is justified. Likewise, yield potential assessment
makes insurance management more transparent. Knowing the actual value of his
fields helps the farmer to decide whether a yield protection insurance programme is
necessary or not.
Finally, crop modelling also may improve farm management in the context of
sustainability. Measures such as implementing flowering strips in a field help
improve the biodiversity of agro-ecological systems. However, there is substantial
uncertainty regarding the associated costs due to yield loss, which may prevent many
farmers from introducing such measures. Crop models can help to reduce the conflict
between improving the ecological footprint of a farm and yield loss. By assessing the
variation of yield potential in each field, low-yielding areas can be identified and
selected as potential areas to use for ecological purposes.
Besides yield, additional crop model outputs may be useful in the decision￾making process. Depending on the complexity of the model framework at hand,
these can range from nutrient uptake and the estimation of water balance, for
example, to estimating the magnitude of influences of abiotic and biotic stresses.
If the model framework contains, for example, a routine describing plant nutrient
uptake, this can be used to predict optimum nutrient requirements of a crop at given
times and field locations. By combining optimal nutrient uptake with information
about actual nutrient uptake (e.g. from remote sensing data), one can then derive
highly specific fertilizer recommendations.
3 Crop Modelling at xarvio® Digital Farming Solutions
xarvio® (https://www.xarvio.com/) is the digital farming brand of the BASF Digital
Farming and a leader in the digital transformation of the agricultural industry.
xarvio® is represented by several digital products, addressing different problems,
customer profiles and farming systems. They include xarvio® FIELD MANAGER,
SCOUTING, HEALTHY FIELDS, CONNECT and the SMART SPRAYING joint
venture with Bosch.
xarvio® FIELD MANAGER is a digital farm management platform aimed at
improving and automating farming decisions. By combining manifold data sources
and modelling approaches, a deeper understanding of field and subfield processes is
gained and used to optimize farming inputs while reducing their ecological footprint.
xarvio® FIELD MANAGER covers all key areas of farming – including seeding,
crop nutrition, crop protection and weed management.
In such a digital farming system, crop models can play an important role by
integrating available data sources and simulating various aspects of crop growth
including the forecasting of harvested yields. As presented in the beginning, multiple226 M. Nolte et al.
Fig. 1 Visualization of crop model feature as displayed to the customer in xarvio® FIELD
MANAGER (2021 season)
levels of digital farming support can be thought of ranging from ‘decision support’ to
‘decision-making’. The latter undoubtedly requires higher confidence in the quality
of input data and an appropriate representation of reality by the model.
The crop model solution which is currently developed within xarvio® FIELD
MANAGER represents a ‘decision support tool’. The crop model solution provides
yield forecasts of the field average from the beginning of the season until harvest. To
account for uncertainty in the weather data, localized weather scenarios are calcu￾lated from historical weather data and used to display a plausible yield range within
the software. The model is currently validated for winter wheat and winter barley and
extended to additional crops. Figure 1 shows a visualization of the yield forecast
feature implemented in xarvio® FIELD MANAGER (beta), season 2021. The
display enables interpretation of the ultimate yield prediction (in t ha-1
) as well as
the investigation of temporal yield development under different weather scenarios.
Further developments of the solution may include the following features:
• Yield forecast at subfield level: This feature would allow the farmer to identify
low- versus high- and stable versus unstable yielding zones and adapt farming
inputs accordingly. Zone-based management decisions (e.g. varying nitrogen rate
applications) could be derived directly from the crop model output.
• Reference simulated yield of locations surrounding the field or locations of
similar environmental conditions. This would then provide context (benchmark)
to the given yield forecast and allow for interpretation if attained yields are above
or below what can be achieved under given environmental conditions.xarvio® Digital Farming Solutions 227
® 4 Crop Model Framework Used by xarvio Digital
Farming
When selecting a crop model for precision farming applications, several aspects need
to be considered. The model needs to address the complexity of growing conditions
in the field at a sufficient level to make accurate predictions for the crop variable of
interest. This depends on the target customer and the farming environment simu￾lated. In highly mechanized, industrialized agricultural systems, one can assume
that, in most cases, crops are not grown under nitrogen deficiency (in fact rather the
opposite). Therefore, the model will probably not need to consider nitrogen-limited
conditions. Hence, leaving out this aspect will not have a strong negative effect on
the accuracy of prediction. The chosen complexity of the crop model is limited by
the range of environmental data layers that are available in an operational context.
For example, if data concerning pest and disease pressure cannot be provided, then
the model will not attempt to account for these effects. Furthermore, computational
scalability and costs need to be considered in the choice of model.
At xarvio® FIELD MANAGER, models like the LINTUL-5 crop model are
explored, which includes components to account for water-, nitrogen-, phosphorus￾and potassium-limited growing conditions (Wolf, 2012). In its current implementa￾tion for testing, water limitation is the only growth-limiting factor considered. The
model is implemented by using SIMPLACE, a crop model framework that provides
a modular architecture, allowing for flexible design of crop model solutions (www.
simplace.net, accessed September 24, 2021). Crop growth is simulated in daily time
steps, that is, biomass dynamics are calculated from emergence to maturation.
Five different data sources are fed into the model framework:
1. Management data such as crop, crop variety and planting date are provided by
the user.
2. Growth stage data is provided by an in-house developed, separate phenology
model.
3. Weather data input for the phenology model and the crop model itself are
provided by a commercial weather data vendor (precipitation, solar radiation,
temperature).
4. Soil data required by the soil water module are provided by a public soil database.
5. Leaf area index (LAI) data derived from Sentinel-2 optical satellite data, for
example, provide the possibility for downscaling yield forecast on a subfield
level.
If data sources 1–4 only were used, one could only predict the average yield per
field because of the coarse resolution of these layers. However, if in-field variation of
yield is required, satellite imagery data can bridge the gap to downscale yield
estimates to subfield level. The LAI is a state variable of LINTUL-5 and is updated
at every timestep of the simulation. This allows assimilation of LAI data into the
crop model every time a new cloud-free satellite image becomes available. At each
pixel, the crop model is shifted to the local LAI level considering both the error of the228 M. Nolte et al.
Fig. 2 Comparison of
simulated (a) and observed
(b) spatial yield pattern for a
winter wheat field (2018) in
North-Rhine Westphalia,
Germany. Red dots indicate
field sampling locations
satellite product and the crop model. The pixel-wise assimilation ultimately results in
individual yield estimates for each pixel. While there are multiple assimilation
methods and strategies that have been tested for crop modelling, in this case, a
weighted ensemble mean assimilation is implemented (Tewes et al. 2020b).
Figure 2 shows an example for a German winter wheat field in North-Rhine
Westphalia, where yield was predicted in a hindcast simulation using the crop model
setup described above. The reference map represents 36 equally distributed ground
measured grain yield data points from which we extrapolated over the whole area to
illustrate spatial yield variation. As shown by the graphics, the crop model simula￾tions correctly capture the spatial patterns in yield distributions.
Conflict of Interest The authors declare to be employed by the BASF Digital Farming GmbH.
References
Tewes, A., Hoffmann, H., Nolte, M., Krauss, G., Schäfer, F., Kerkhoff, C., & Gaiser, G. (2020a).
How do methods assimilating Sentinel-2-derived LAI combined with two different sources of
soil input data affect the crop model-based estimation of wheat biomass at sub-field level?
Remote Sensing, 12, 925.
Tewes, A., Hoffmann, H., Krauss, G., Schäfer, F., Kerkhoff, C., & Gaiser, G. (2020b). New
approaches for the assimilation of LAI measurements into a crop model ensemble to improve
wheat biomass estimations. Agronomy, 10(3), 446.
Wolf, J. (2012). User guide for LINTUL5: Simple generic model for simulation of crop growth
under potential, water limited and nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium limited conditions.
Wageningen UR.WatchITgrow
Isabelle Piccard, Anne Gobin, Sven Gilliams, Laurent Tits,
and Jürgen Decloedt
Abstract WatchITgrow is a platform for crop monitoring that provides farmers,
contractors, advisors, researchers, traders, processing companies, suppliers, etc. with
weather and soil data and information on crop growth and development derived from
satellite images. It provides tools for improved soil sampling and variable-rate
planting, fertilization, irrigation, and crop protection based on the intra-field varia￾tions visible from the satellite images. WatchITgrow also includes a field registration
tool and can be used to store and exchange information on field management
practices, field observations, plant or soil analyses, etc. in a digital way. The final
objective of WatchITgrow is to combine the various data sources (satellite, weather,
soil, crop, yield data) using new technologies such as big data analytics and machine
learning to provide farmers with personalized advice to optimize field practices to
increase their yields sustainably.
1 Introduction
WatchITgrow is a Belgian platform launched to support farmers to monitor the status
and evolution of arable crops and vegetables, in view of increasing yields, both
qualitatively and quantitatively. It integrates various types of data such as satellite,
weather, soil, and field management data. The platform is freely accessible after
registration at www.watchitgrow.be (Fig. 1).
I. Piccard (✉) · A. Gobin · S. Gilliams · L. Tits · J. Decloedt
VITO Remote Sensing, Mol, Belgium
e-mail: isabelle.piccard@vito.be
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_12
229230 I. Piccard et al.
Fig. 1 WatchITgrow
platform for crop
monitoring
The WatchITgrow platform was developed in the framework of the research
project, iPot, a collaboration between researchers (VITO, CRA-W, and ULg-Arlon)
together with the Belgian potato trade and processing industry association
Belgapom. After the research phase, the platform became operational in 2017 and
was rebranded as WatchITgrow. WatchITgrow is an independent platform, hosted
by VITO, guaranteeing data privacy, security, and access. Belgapom members and
the Flemish farmers’ organization Boerenbond are actively using and promoting the
platform among their farmers in the context of the “digitization of agriculture” in
Belgium. Several Flemish and European H2020 projects ensure the further devel￾opment of the platform. In collaboration with various partners such as the Belgian
Soil Service, machinery producer AVR, agricultural research organization and
advisor Inagro, the Flemish Research Institute for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
(ILVO), etc., new data layers, improved products, and tools have been added,
integrating the results of joint research projects and using the latest big data and
cloud processing technologies. Although the platform was initially oriented towards
potato monitoring, WatchITgrow can now be used for monitoring a broad range of
arable crops, vegetables, and grasslands. Since 2017, more than 1600 users have
registered on WatchITgrow, including farmers, traders, processing companies, sup￾pliers, contractors, advisors, researchers, etc. In 2020, the platform was extended to
enable monitoring of fields across the border in France, the Netherlands, Germany,
and Italy. In 2021, about 2400 fields, approximately 14,000 ha, were monitored with
WatchITgrow.WatchITgrow 231
2 Content and Functionalities
2.1 Monitoring Crop Productivity and Health
with Satellite Data
WatchITgrow provides information on crop growth and development as observed
from Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 satellite images. Light reflectances measured by the
Sentinel-2 satellite sensor are converted into fAPAR (fraction of absorbed photo￾synthetically active radiation; Weiss & Baret, 2016). In WatchITgrow, fAPAR is
referred to as greenness. The fAPAR is a measure of the crop’s productivity and
health and is often used as an indicator of the state and evolution of crop cover. Low
greenness values indicate that there is no crop growing on the field (bare soil,
fAPAR = 0). When the crop emerges, the greenness will increase until the crop
has reached maturity (fAPAR = 0.95–1.00). Thereafter, the index will decrease
again until harvest. WatchITgrow produces new greenness maps every time the
satellite passes. Archived images are available from July 2015.
The Sentinel satellites have a revisit frequency of 5 days, at higher latitudes even
every 2–3 days. The images have pixel sizes of 10 m × 10 m. Under cloud-free
conditions, the availability of such frequent high-resolution satellite images allows a
close monitoring of the fields and an early detection of possible anomalies.
The satellite shows a picture “from above,” and this may reveal variability in crop
growth within the field that is not always visible when visiting the field from the
road. The reasons for this variability can be diverse and can include (natural) soil
heterogeneity, climate-induced problems such as drought or waterlogging and local
damage due to pests or diseases, and emergence problems, among others.
In addition to the greenness maps, greenness graphs can be retrieved showing
fAPAR evolution throughout the season at field level. By combining Sentinel-2
fAPAR and Sentinel-1 backscatter data in a unique VITO algorithm called
CropSAR, we can provide cloud-free fAPAR time series. CropSAR enables us to
combine the best of both worlds: understanding what happens in a plant using an
optical image and the cloud-penetrating capacity of radar. From these fAPAR or
greenness curves, key stages in crop development such as plant emergence, canopy
closure, and harvest can be detected even in cloudy periods, which would otherwise
be impossible (Fig. 2).
2.2 Improved Sampling
Satellite-based information on variation within the field allows farmers to manage
the fields according to different field zones and take representative soil or yield
samples. Farmers can define the desired location for soil sampling by combining
information from satellite images, aerial pictures, soil scans, and elevation maps and
send a request for a soil analysis to the Belgian Soil Service or to Inagro via
WatchITgrow.232 I. Piccard et al.
Fig. 2 Crop monitoring at field level with greenness maps and graphs
2.3 Application Maps
Based on the satellite greenness, application maps can be generated in WatchITgrow
for variable-rate fertilization, irrigation, and haulm killing. In practice, the farmer
enters the product dose (fertilizer, water, herbicide, etc.) that he or she would
normally apply on the field. The dose is then redistributed according to the differ￾ences in greenness detected from the satellite image. For N-fertilization, the farmer
can choose between two strategies, either applying a higher dose of a fertilizer to
zones with a higher greenness index or applying a lower dose to these zones. For
farmers, variable-rate applications are crucial in order to make cost savings in inputs,
to increase yields, and to use their fields in a more sustainable way. Similarly,
application maps can be created for variable-rate planting, by accounting for the
shadow zones within the field.
The current approach whereby variable-rate application maps are based only on
satellite greenness has some limitations. Satellite images may reveal variation within
the field, but to make sound decisions on how to respond, it is important to find out
what is causing the variation. Therefore, it is recommended that satellite data are
combined with other sources of information (also available via WatchITgrow) such
as soil maps or soil scans, elevation maps, weather data, or field observations.
Most satellite-based decision support tools use only the most recent images to
generate application maps for variable-rate irrigation and fertilization, but historical
satellite images collected in dry periods such as the summer of 2018 may also
contain valuable information, for example, on the occurrence of dry spots in the
field. Moreover, from previous research (Janssens et al., 2020), it was found that theWatchITgrow 233
Fig. 3 Application map for variable-rate fertilization
correlation between the spectral indices and in situ observations was often only
significant towards the end of the growing season, and hence not at the time of
fertilization, which hinders the use of actual satellite images. For this reason,
historical greenness maps were added to WatchITgrow. On the basis of these
maps, it can be decided to apply less fertilizer on dry spots or to increase the
irrigation dose at these spots (Fig. 3).
2.4 Yield Potential Maps
In addition to the greenness (fAPAR) maps, WatchITgrow also derives other maps
from the cloud-free images. Variability maps show the difference in crop perfor￾mance within the field at the time the image was taken. They are derived by
comparing the greenness index value for each pixel within the field with the median
index value of the field and classifying the differences into a number of categories
according to their relevance.
Spatial variation in crop performance can also be examined over an entire
growing season. In that case, we determine the average deviation of a pixel from
the median over the season. When generating variability maps for several seasons,
stable patterns may be detected. Recurrent good or bad zones may indicate the yield
potential of the field. Therefore, we also call these multiyear variability maps “yield
potential maps.”
Where multiyear recurrent variation can be caused by differences in soil, sur￾rounding vegetation, and hydrology, more abrupt and unexpected field variation234 I. Piccard et al.
could be caused by extreme weather events such as drought, hail, storm, or flood
damage. A farmer can use these yield potential maps to review a field’s history – this
could be interesting when a farmer is looking for new fields – or as input for variable￾rate fertilization or irrigation.
2.5 Remote Planning
As the satellite images cover large areas, they are ideal to monitor fields that are
located further away from the farm. They can also be used to compare and rank
different fields within a region, from low to high greenness or vice versa. This
information can then be used to organize field visits in a more efficient way, for
instance, by prioritizing fields that show greenness anomalies. During the harvest
period, information on the greenness of the fields can be useful for harvest planning
and logistics. For instance, in Northern Italy, WatchITgrow is used by seed multi￾plication companies to estimate the optimal harvest time for the seeds based on the
greenness evolution of the field. This is saving them time and fuel.
2.6 Weather and Soil Data
Crop production is largely influenced by the weather. By monitoring temperature
and rainfall, production risk or quality losses can be assessed. WatchITgrow pro￾vides maps showing temperature and rainfall deviations from the long-term average.
In addition, graphs can be retrieved showing the evolution of these meteorological
variables at field level.
In case of drought and if there is a need for irrigation, farmers can find informa￾tion on WatchITgrow about alternative water sources such as treated wastewater
from domestic use and food companies with the link from the WaterRadar platform.
Depending on the field size and crop, an indication of irrigation need is provided,
and potential water suppliers are listed in a search radius around the field.
The WatchITgrow platform also provides access to basic information layers such
as soil type, erosion risk, and elevation maps. These may help when trying to find the
cause of variation in crop growth within a field. With WatchITgrow, farmers can also
obtain information about soil fertility in Flanders at municipality level. This includes
information on pH, organic carbon, phosphorus, potassium, magnesium, and cal￾cium content of the soil derived from soil analyses from the Soil Service of Belgium.
Further, information on the field history is provided, showing the main crops that
have been grown on the fields. This information is retrieved from the farmers’
declarations in the framework of the European Integrated Administration and Con￾trol System (IACS).WatchITgrow 235
2.7 Yield Forecasting
WatchITgrow also provides yield forecasts for the two main potato varieties grown
in Belgium, Bintje and Fontane, by combining weather, plant-soil, and satellite data
in a crop growth model. To generate yield estimates, two crop growth models
are used: the AquaCrop plug-in (Raes et al., 2012) and the WOFOST model (van
Diepen et al., 1989) implemented in the Python Crop Simulation Environment
(PCSE) (http://pcse.readthedocs.io). Both models make use of meteorological-,
soil-, and crop-specific data. AquaCrop also integrates satellite-based FCover esti￾mates. To calibrate and validate the models for Belgian conditions, yield data were
collected in 2015 and 2016 for about 150 fields distributed across the potato-growing
areas in Belgium. Biweekly field visits were organized to collect information on
phenological development, crop growth, and field management. From mid-July until
harvest yield, samples were weighed, and tuber distribution was recorded at two
weekly intervals. The conversion from model-based yield estimates to yield fore￾casts is done using three possible weather scenarios reflecting bad, average, and
good weather conditions to the end of the season. As the crop growth models
estimate dry matter yield, a variety-specific empirical function is applied to convert
dry matter to fresh weight yields. The performance of yield models was assessed by
comparing simulated total tuber dry weight with dry yield estimates from field
sampling in 2015 and 2016 (Piccard et al., 2017) and by comparison of fresh yield
estimates with yields recorded by the farmers from 2017 to 2019.
Farmers don’t always appreciate that yield forecasts are made available to the
general public (and hence also to the buyers of their products), even if it is at an
aggregated level. For this reason, yield forecasts in WatchITgrow are only made
available at field level and for the registered farmer only.
2.8 Field Registration
WatchITgrow also includes a field registration tool. The platform can be used to
store and exchange field data in a digital way. This may include basic information
such as the variety, planting date, date of haulm killing, harvest date or more specific
information on the application of fertilizers, pesticides, irrigation, etc. or on damage
assessed in the field. Yield data collected with WatchITgrow are used to train yield
forecasting models.
It is also possible to upload pictures or maps of EC, pH, or organic matter derived
from soil scanning or to add soil, manure, or plant analysis reports to a field in
WatchITgrow. Also drone imagery and analytics maps can be added as a separate
map layer. In this way, all the information related to a field can be stored digitally in
one place.236 I. Piccard et al.
Fig. 4 Combination of map layers available for a field (soil type, electrical conductivity measured
by soil scanning, yield potential map, greenness map)
It is important to note that the farmer remains the owner of the data at all times. He
or she decides whether to share these data or not with advisors, contractors, buyers,
etc (Fig. 4).
2.9 Automatic Data Exchange
Farmers generally do not want to spend a lot of time registering their field activities.
Data exchange should be automated and standardized as much as possible. There￾fore, we are setting up connections with machinery producers such as AVR and John
Deere. For example, after connecting WatchITgrow to AVR Connect, yield maps
from AVR’s Puma 4.0 potato harvesters are automatically added to WatchITgrow.
This makes it easy for a farmer to compare the yield maps with soil and satellite data
that are available on the platform. Conversely, field boundaries entered in
WatchITgrow or application maps for variable-rate planting are automatically trans￾ferred to AVR Connect.
To facilitate data sharing and to avoid farmers having to enter their data several
times for different platforms, WatchITgrow also connects with data hubs such as
DjustConnect, managed by ILVO. Using the DjustConnect dashboard, Flemish
farmers can give permission to share their data safely with WatchITgrow.WatchITgrow 237
2.10 Connecting Different Actors in the Chain
WatchITgrow is intended as a collaboration platform where data can be shared
among farmers and advisors or researchers, to follow up on what is happening in
the field, to provide advice or to monitor field trials. Through close collaborations
with research organizations, we ensure valorization of their research results by
integrating them in WatchITgrow and making them available for farmers.
With WatchITgrow, farmers can also exchange field information with traders or
processors. Sharing fields among farmers and contractors may facilitate the organi￾zation and registration of fieldwork activities such as planting, fertilization, crop
protection, or harvesting.
Through WatchITgrow, a connection can be made with Mapeo, VITO’s drone￾based phenotyping solution for research and breeding. This allows researchers from
seed companies to compare drone-based information collected on trial fields with
weather, soil, and satellite data in WatchITgrow. But it also offers opportunities to
follow up on how new varieties are doing later during seed multiplication or on the
farmer’s fields, how they behave under certain conditions, or how they compare to
other varieties and to start interacting on this with the farmer through WatchITgrow.
3 Outlook: Towards Data-Driven Advice
The final objective of WatchITgrow is to combine the various data sources (satellite,
weather, soil, field, machinery data, etc.) using new technologies such as big data
analytics and machine learning to provide farmers with personalized advice to
increase their yields sustainably. This implies a shift from traditional crop growth
simulation models to big data models. To train these models, large amounts of field
data are needed. Today, many farmers are still reluctant to share data. Uncertainty
about what will happen with their data and the fear that they will be used against
them are some of the reasons why farmers do not share their data. In other cases,
farmers do register data via a field registration tool and do not want to repeat it when
using a crop monitoring tool, for example. Data sharing among different platforms
and tools, through direct exchange or via data hubs, may be a way to enable and
promote the exploitation of these agricultural data and to use them to the benefit of
the farmer.
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they are employees of the company (VITO) that
developed WatchITgrow.238 I. Piccard et al.
References
Janssens P., Reynaert, S., Piccard, I., Pauly, K., Garré, S., Dumont, G., von Hebel, C., Van der
Kruk, J., Neumann, A. M., Manevski, K., Peng, J., Korup, K., Kamp, J., & Booij, J. (2020).
Variable rate irrigation and nitrogen fertilization in potato; engage the spatial variation
(POTENTIAL). Available online: https://www.bdb.be/files/rap202001.pdf. Accessed on
19 Apr 2022.
Piccard I., Gobin A., Wellens J., Tychon B, Goffart J.-P., Curnel Y., Planchon V., Leclef A., Cools
R., & Cattoor N. (2017). Potato monitoring in Belgium with “WatchITgrow”. Proceedings of
the 9th international workshop on the analysis of multitemporal remote sensing images
(MultiTemp), Bruges, 27–29 June 2017. https://doi.org/10.1109/Multi-Temp.2017.8035229.
IEEE catalogue number: CFP17608-ART, ISBN: 978-1-5386-3327-4.
Raes, D., Steduto, P., Hsiao, T. C., & Fereres, E. (2012). Reference manual: AquaCrop plug-in
program (version 4.0). FAO. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquacrop.html
van Diepen, C. A., Wolf, J., Keulen, H., & van. (1989). WOFOST: A simulation model of crop
production. Soil Use and Management, 5, 16–24.
Weiss, M., & Baret, F. (2016). S2ToolBox level 2 products: LAI, FAPAR, FCOVER. Version 1.1.
Date issued: 03.05.2016. Available online: https://step.esa.int/docs/extra/ATBD_S2ToolBox_
L2B_V1.1.pdf. Accessed on 11 May 2020.Precision Agriculture in Rice Farming
Satoshi Iida
Abstract Japanese agriculture has reached a significant turning point due to factors
such as a considerable decline in the number of farmers because of aging. In such
circumstances, it is necessary to change Japanese agriculture into an attractive and
profitable business for the upcoming generations of professional farmers and to
ensure the local development of agriculture. To reach these goals, Kubota has
been making efforts to develop “smart agriculture,” namely [1], precision farming
based on the use of data and [2] ultra-labor-saving approach based on automation,
using Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and the Internet of Things
(IoT) and its diffusion as the next generation’s agriculture. To this point, Kubota has
launched the KSAS (Kubota Smart Agri System) with regard to precision farming
and autonomous/unmanned agricultural machinery such as a rice transplanter with
automatic steering, a combine harvester with automatic operating assistance func￾tion, and a fully autonomous tractor.
Furthermore, we give an outlook on smart agriculture considering several
approaches of precision farming and autonomous solutions to answer today’s chal￾lenges toward the realization and fusion of these approaches.
Keywords Precision farming · Rice farming · Smart agriculture · KSAS ·
Autonomous agricultural machinery
1 Introduction
Agriculture around the world faces many common issues, such as reduced avail￾ability of arable land due to climate change and soil degradation and reductions in
the number of farm workers, especially skilled workers. In addition to improving
productivity, there is also a need for sustainable food production combining high
food quality with a low environmental impact. To address these issues, precision
S. Iida (✉)
Kubota Corporation, Osaka, Japan
e-mail: satoshi.iida@kubota.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_13
239240 S. Iida
farming (PF) has been studied in the West since the 1990s. For example, it is
becoming essential for producers to improve their production methods by making
use of technologies such as auto-steering devices that use global navigation satellite
systems (GNSS), yield maps produced by combine harvesters with yield monitoring
functions, and satellite imaging for soil analysis and crop yield prediction. This
enables farmers to succeed in today’s global markets.
Farming in Japan faces similar issues, and Kubota is approaching these issues by
developing and utilizing the next generation of smart farming technologies. The
smart agriculture technologies are based on ICT and IoT (autonomous and
unmanned farm machinery) for data-driven Japanese-style precision farming and
considerable labor saving. In this way, the aim is not only to sell and service
agricultural machinery but also to provide an overall solution that benefits the entire
value chain.
This paper describes the status quo and the future vision of smart agriculture at
Kubota and discusses the opportunities of using big data analysis and artificial
intelligence (AI) to achieve further advances.
2 Kubota’s Role in Japanese Smart Agriculture
2.1 Current Situation and Issues of Japanese Agriculture
Japanese agriculture currently faces many challenges and has reached a major
turning point. For example, between 2000 and 2015, the number of commercial
farms in Japan decreased by almost 50%, falling from 2.3 million to 1.3 million. The
average Japanese farmer is today over 67 years of age, and it is predicted that the
number of active farmers will decrease by another 50% within the next decade.
On the other hand, there are a growing number of farming cooperatives and
professionals whose main business is agriculture, and their farms have increased in
size by assimilating smaller fields from people who have left farming. The govern￾ment has taken various steps to increase the proportion of farmland owned by
professional farmers from its current level of 56–80% by 2023. Since 2018, the
long-standing policy of reducing acreage for rice cultivation has also been abolished,
forcing Japanese farmers to finally become financially independent.
In this situation, several challenges need to be faced to ensure the sustainable
development of Japanese agriculture:
(a) Japanese agriculture should become an attractive and profitable business.
(b) The agricultural working environment should be reformed to release farmers
from heavy work and encourage young people to enter the business.
(c) Rural areas, including mountainous regions, should be revitalized and developed
to maintain multifunctional roles of agriculture.Precision Agriculture in Rice Farming 241
2.2 The Challenges Faced by Professional Farmers
and Kubota’s Position
The expansion of farming operations presents many challenges to professional
farmers and farming corporations who support Japanese agriculture, as outlined
below:
[Challenges Faced by Professional Farmers]
(a) Problems in managing multiple farm plots:
(i) Decrease in yield and quality
(ii) Management of an increasing number of workers
(b) Labor savings and workload reductions and reduction of production costs
(c) Offering products with higher added value (branding)
(d) Human resource development (transferring know-how to successors)
(e) Development and expansion of sales channels
To make Japanese agriculture more attractive and profitable, it will also be
necessary to visualize the entire agricultural system and create mechanisms within
the food value chain whereby farms can produce products precisely that are required
in time and amount (i.e., minimizing waste). To achieve this, it is essential to develop
and deploy smart agriculture systems based on ICT and IoT technology.
3 Using Data for Precision Farming
3.1 Farming Support System: Kubota Smart Agri System
(KSAS)
The KSAS is a support system for farm management and services, launched in 2014
by Kubota. It allows farmers to implement a profitable PDCA (Plan, Do, Check, Act)
cycle of management by using agricultural machinery and ICT to gather and utilize
information about work activity and crop data (yield and quality(taste)). Fig. 1 shows
the overall structure of this system which comprises “KSAS agricultural machinery”
equipped with wireless LAN hardware and direct communication units, “KSAS
mobile equipment” that workers can use to record their work and relay other
information, and “KSAS cloud server system” that stores and analyzes information.
A farming support system and machinery service system operates on top of these
components with the aim of providing additional value in the following ways:[Farming Support System]
242 S. Iida
Fig. 1 The overall picture of the current KSAS
(a) Producing tasty rice with high yields
(b) Producing crops in a safe and secure manner (ensuring traceability)
(c) Allowing farmers to work more efficiently and transfer their cultivation know￾how
(d) Providing stronger foundations for farm management (cost analysis and
reduction)
[Machinery Service System]
• Reducing downtime during the busy season by providing quick and appropriate
services based on the location operation and error information provided by
agricultural machinery
[PDCA Agriculture Based on Data]
The combine harvester, which plays one of the most important roles in the current
KSAS system, is equipped with load cells and near-infrared spectroscopic analysis
sensors (NIR) that perform real-time measurements of not only the weight of rice in
the grain tank but also its protein and moisture content, which are the main
substitutional characteristics for the taste of rice (Fig. 2). Every time a rice field is
harvested, these measurement data are transmitted to a cloud server together with the
combine harvester’s operating data. So far, this transfer was done via a KSAS
mobile device, but since 2019, it has been automated by direct communication.
With this system, the farmer can use a PC in the office to see at a glance the data
stored on the cloud server, including work records and the dispersion of yield/quality
(taste) in each individual plot (left side of Fig. 3). By combining this information
with the results of soil analysis, for example, it is possible to implement soilPrecision Agriculture in Rice Farming 243
Fig. 2 Combine harvester equipped with yield and quality (taste) sensors
Fig. 3 The PDCA cycle by KSAS
improvement measures tailored to the characteristics of each plot and to create
fertilizing plans for the following year. These planned fertilizer application data
can be transmitted to KSAS rice transplanters and tractors via their operators’ mobile
phones. On receiving this information, KSAS agricultural machinery can automat￾ically meter the amount of fertilizer, so that even an unexperienced operator can
easily fertilize over a hundred rice fields.
In this way, by repeatedly iterating through a cycle where data gathering leads to
work planning, followed by cultivation/harvesting, and then by more data gathering,
it is possible to make continuous improvements to both the yield and taste of crops
by optimizing the use of fertilizer and the allocation of human effort. This corre￾sponds to the PDCA approach for agriculture based on the use of data that has not
been applied to Japanese agriculture before (Fig. 3).
During a three-year trial in Niigata prefecture and other parts of Japan, this
approach enabled an improvement of yields by 15% and delivery of a product of
better and more stable quality. Furthermore, farmers were able to sell premium
quality rice at a higher price due to its superior taste and were able to stabilize the
quality of their product and sort it according to its moisture content to reduce the
drying costs.
The KSAS system is highly rated by users, who have reported achieving greater
field management efficiency and better rice quality and yield. Over the roughly
7-year period since the service began in June 2014, there were over 15,000 sub￾scribers (including service systems) whose average area is around 48 ha with an
average number of 225 plots per farm.244 S. Iida
3.2 Future Developments in KSAS
Step 1 (Fig. 4) is to realize PDCA agriculture by establishing data links with every
item of agricultural machinery in an integrated rice farming mechanization system.
Farmland consolidation has been promoted by the government, resulting in plots
that are larger in size; therefore, it is becoming increasingly important to manage
inhomogeneity within an individual plot. Therefore, Step 2 focuses on enabling
more precise cultivation by developing agricultural machinery systems that enable
sensing of soil and growing environments, growth conditions, and yield dispersion
in the field and enable more precise cultivation as listed below (Fig. 5).
1. Combine harvesters with precise taste/yield sensors became commercially avail￾able with the launch of Kubota’s WRH1200 general-purpose combine harvester
in April 2018, and from January 2019, the DR series of head-feeding combine
harvesters were available.
2. Remote sensing drones are in field trials throughout Japan.
3. WATARAS (Water for Agriculture Remote Actuated System), which is a remote
monitoring system and can automatically control the water level of a paddy field
by sensing the water level/temperature in the field, was released in 2018.
4. Growth models to determine adequate content of work and timing are in devel￾opment and a plan to link with the Agricultural Data Collaboration Platform
WAGRI.
As part of these efforts, it might be possible to use AI in the design of fertilizer
application, which is currently performed based on diverse sensing data and farmer’s
experience. For example, AI could suggest how much fertilizer to use based on taste/
yield data obtained by a taste/yield-sensing combine harvester or judge the crop’s
stage of growth based on remote sensing images or something similar and adjust the
amount and timing of topdressing accordingly. By adding other information such as
Fig. 4 The KSAS Step 1 (in service)Precision Agriculture in Rice Farming 245
Fig. 5 TKSAS Step 2
weather forecasts, this technology could even be applied to AI-based automation of
water management and prediction of optimal harvest times.
For Step 3, with the aim of building an advanced farming support system, in
addition to the functions of Step 2, by using AI to analyze and process big data
obtained by collaborating with information systems used by farmers (such as
accounting and sales systems) and external data (such as market information and
information from distribution networks), we plan to promote the evolution of
advanced farming simulator technology that can support business planning and
cropping using the most suitable crops to maximize the profits of arable farmers.
In addition, we hope to be able to support the creation of optimal work plans
detailing where, when, and by whom each item of machinery should be operated
to maximize efficiency (Fig. 6).
By making KSAS as useful as possible for farmers, the number of farmers that
use this system should be increased. To this end, it is essential to collaborate on the
use of public and private data such as farmland data and maps, weather information,
soil analysis results, and growth models. It is also important to collaborate with other
agricultural machinery and information systems. For this reason, Kubota is partic￾ipating in the Agricultural Data Collaboration Platform Council WAGRI and is
working on the implementation of a common infrastructure for agricultural data.
Through the work carried out at WAGRI, the findings of research organizations such
as the National Agriculture and Food Research Organization are expected to be
utilized.246 S. Iida
Fig. 6 Future vision of KSAS (Step 3)
4 Automation for Super Labor Savings
4.1 Automatic/Unmanned Agricultural Machinery
In addition to KSAS, which uses data to improve the efficiency of cultivation process
and farm management, Kubota is also working on autonomous and unmanned
agricultural machinery based on robot technology. The aim is to achieve further
increases in the efficiency of work such as tilling and reaping that has already been
mechanized, so that precise operations can be performed with super labor savings.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (2015) defines three automation
levels for agricultural machinery (Fig. 7), and Kubota is also working on the
following themes:
Level I auto-steer technology uses the global navigation satellite system (GNSS)
to perform automatic steering. Kubota released the M7 series tractors (130–170 HP)
for upland farming with auto-steering functionality (RTK-GNSS), in 2015.
In 2016, the first rice transplanters equipped with go-straight functions were
launched in Japan. Existing auto-steering equipment was bulky and expensive, but
by developing an own control mechanism combining a cost-efficient sub-meter
GNSS (D-GNSS) and an IMU (inertial measurement unit), we were able to imple￾ment a compact, low-cost auto-steering system (Noguchi, 2018). This enables even
an inexperienced operator to plant rice seedlings with the same precision as a
veteran, making the task much less stressful. This system is not only well accepted
by farmers but has also received many awards in Japan. We also launched small- and
medium-sized tractors equipped with this system. Furthermore, in December 2018,
we launched a combine harvester with an automatic driving assist function
(WRH1200A; Fig. 8, left).
Level II corresponds to autonomous or unmanned machinery under manned
monitoring and includes cooperative work involving unmanned and manned
machinery. Kubota has pioneered developments in this field, and in the fall ofPrecision Agriculture in Rice Farming 247
Fig. 7 Automation level of agricultural machinery
Fig. 8 Autonomous agricultural machinery
2017, we started test marketing of a Level II autonomous tractor (SL60A, 60 HP). A
high-precision GNSS system called RTK-GNSS, which we manufacture in-house,
made it possible to perform automatic driving with a single unmanned machine,
cooperative driving with a pair of manned and unmanned machines working
together, and automatic steering of a manned machine (Fig. 9).
Demonstrations have shown that this level of autonomous and unmanned oper￾ation improves the efficiency of conventional operations in tilling by around 1.5
times.
Concerning safety features, these machines have laser scanners and ultrasonic
sonar to ensure reliable stopping when they detect humans and obstacles (Fig. 10)
and a system that constantly monitors the surroundings with four cameras. Conse￾quently, it complies with the autonomous agricultural machinery safety guidelines
defined by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries.
At the end of 2019, an autonomous tractor with 100 HP was launched
(MR1000A; Fig. 8, center), then an autonomous rice transplanter was successively
launched at the end of 2020 (NW8SA; Fig. 8, right), and our product portfolio has
expanded.248 S. Iida
Fig. 9 Coordinated operation by manned and unmanned tractors (SL60A)
Fig. 10 Safety devices (laser scanner and ultrasonic sonar)
4.2 Future Plans for the Evolution of Autonomous
and Unmanned Agricultural Machinery
With regard to the evolution of autonomous and unmanned agricultural machinery,
the first aim is to complete Level II. In addition to the tractors and the rice
transplanter that have already been launched, we are also developing autonomous
combine harvesters. We are making further advances in farm automation, including
the autonomous operation of work at field boundaries, and expansion of applicable
implements by enhancing the control systems. When doing so, safety awareness is
essential. We believe that the use of AI will be the key to identifying humans and
animals in crops, detecting obstacles in the dark, and recognizing boundaries and
further more functionalities.
At the same time, we are preparing to provide compatibility with the quasi-zenith
satellite system promoted by the Japanese government. We expect it to become more
widely used if it is possible to reduce the cost of receivers and achieve 5–6 cm
accuracy without requiring a base station.
Next, Level III corresponds to completely unmanned machinery with remote
monitoring, where the aim is to perform unmanned work in multiple fields, including
driving on farm roads. To achieve this, it will be necessary to make further devel￾opments in farmland infrastructure, including farm roads and safety systems, and toPrecision Agriculture in Rice Farming 249
install high-speed communication infrastructure (such as 5G) to increase the speed
of monitoring and control. If tractors are completely unmanned, they must be
capable of driving on roads with their implements attached. This requirement raises
issues other than technological developments, such as relaxation of the road traffic
law. Thus, achieving Level III requires not only research and development but also
the creation of standards and infrastructure in cooperation with government and
industry organizations. These approaches are proceeding under the nation’s Strategic
Innovation Promotion Program (SIP) and some consortia of demonstration projects
in cooperation with the government, industry, and academia.
In single operations, autonomous and unmanned agricultural machines have a
limited effect. For this reason, Kubota is developing an operating support system for
autonomous agricultural machinery. This system is linked to KSAS to enable the
optimal operation and management of multiple agricultural machines, including
those that are not fully autonomous.
5 Outlook
Smart agriculture will bring in significant value according to the Sustainable Devel￾opment Goals, such as shown in Fig. 11. That is the path we see for Japanese
agriculture to be profitable, easy, environmentally friendly, robust, and sustainable.
Kubota will continue to tackle the challenges farmers are facing in Japan and
contribute to solving global agricultural challenges by starting to introduce KSAS
to rice farming and upland farming in Asia (smart agriculture research group web
page).
Fig. 11 Value of Smart agricultureCon ict of Interest The author of this chapter works for the Kubota Corporation, which devel￾250 S. Iida
fl
oped the KSAS digital tool for rice production.
References
2015 Agriculture and Forestry Census (Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries), 2016/2017.
Agricultural Data Collaboration Platform Council (WAGRI) web page. https://wagri.net/
Noguchi, N. (2018). Agricultural vehicle robot. Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics, 30(2),
165–172.
Smart agriculture research group web page. http://www.maff.go.jp/j/kanbo/kihyo03/gityo/g_
smart_nougyo/AgSkyNet: Harnessing the Power of Sky
and Earth for Precision Agriculture
Suryakant Sawant, Sanat Sarangi, and Srinivasu Pappula
Abstract Climate change is posing a serious threat to sustainable food production.
An interdisciplinary approach comprising agriculture, computer science and geo￾graphic information science is needed to solve critical problems in the crop–soil–
water–weather continuum. The AgSkyNet platform has been developed to address
the information needs of growers during crop cultivation and post-harvest. This
section provides insights into innovative solutions for integrated pest assessment and
crop growth simulation to estimate yield and to assess the severity of the effects of
stubble burning and pesticide residue detection. A first case on the prediction and
detection of biotic stress (i.e. pest estimation) shows the effective use of data
analytics to identify the pests, thereby reducing the use of agro-chemicals. A second
case covers insights into the integration of remote sensing and crop growth simula￾tion models to estimate crop yield and the severity of stubble burning. Finally, a case
study on the detection of pesticide residue using hyperspectral sensing demonstrates
the potential for rapid assessment and is a key enabler to increase awareness among
the farming community.
1 Introduction
The world is being buffeted today by a variety of forces ranging from a rapidly
growing population, increasing urbanization, decreasing arable land area, reduced
water availability and disastrous climate changes which threaten to destroy the
planet which we call our home. The imbalance caused due to these forces could
manifest itself in many ways with the recent COVID-19 pandemic being a possible
example of this. Sustainability has become increasingly important for saving the
planet, people and profits.
S. Sawant · S. Sarangi · S. Pappula (✉)
Digital Food Initiatives Group, Tata Consultancy Services Research & Innovation,
Hyderabad, India
e-mail: srinivasu.p@tcs.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_14
251At the TCS Digital Food Initiatives group, sustainability, scalability and suitabil￾ity (3Ss) have always occupied centre stage, and all our offerings have been designed
with these in mind. Through the AgSkyNet platform – the Sky and the Earth are
literally brought together by image processing, machine learning/deep learning and
blockchain, so that the underlying platform can be easily adopted even by a small
and marginal farmer with less than a hectare of land in Asia or Africa or by a farmer
owning thousands of hectares in the Americas.
252 S. Sawant et al.
Here, we give examples of innovations that harness the forces at the Earth, Sky,
Image Processing and Deep Learning while satisfying the 3Ss.
1.1 Integrated Pest Assessment with Data-Driven Insights
For most crops, timely management of pests is key to maximizing both quality and
quantity of harvest. One useful step in this direction is integrated pest management
(IPM) which advocates a balance between various techniques – cultural practices to
select the most suited varieties, crop sanitation and application of organic nutrition
and protection, biological controls with beneficial insects, and responsible applica￾tion of synthetic fertilizers. Implementing these principles has challenges with
operational and cost implications. Moreover, with changing ambient conditions in
open cultivation scenarios due to the variation in weather, soil, water and various
other factors, stress on the crop is almost unavoidable despite all the measures. Given
that pests are an inevitable part of a crop’s life cycle, an integrated strategy is needed
not just with the most suited agronomic practices but also with technology that can
predict, process and react quickly to help manage the crop effectively in its volatile
environment.
At TCS Digital Food Initiatives group, we have been working on a technology￾led integrated pest assessment (IPA) approach that involves the prediction of pest
risk together with pest detection at the early or any of the subsequent cultivation
stages in order to provide a precise course of action to be taken to manage the crop.
At the heart of this approach is the data that allows models giving specific insights to
be configured and customized to the requirements of the local conditions for
the crop.
Crops often have very distinct ecosystems within which they are produced,
harvested and consumed. The need for insights as part of IPA is closely linked to
key stakeholders in the ecosystem and their role in maximizing the effectiveness of
their impact on crop management. For example, paddy rice (Oryza sativa), a staple
crop of India, is cultivated over large open stretches by farmers with landholdings of
all sizes – big or small. Given that most farmers are independent small growers,
farming here is largely unorganized where farmers take the local rice varieties based
on recommendation from the regional agricultural universities. Efforts have started
to bring about some organization to this system through the establishment of Farmer
Producer Organizations (FPOs) (Pappula, 2013). The largest players in this system
are agri-input companies that supply essential pesticides to help contain the bioticAgSkyNet: Harnessing the Power of Sky and Earth for Precision Agriculture 253
stress on the crop. Such organizations, therefore, have a keen interest to digest IPA
insights to be able to position their products strategically for farmers. Let us take
another major crop, tea (camellia sinensis), where India is the second largest
producer of the crop after China. A significant fraction of this sector is organized
around large tea gardens that are managed with a dedicated staff of workers and
managers. Here, maximizing the quality and quantity of crop is essential for the
organization (and processor) owning the garden and processing the harvest to
produce tea. This drives their interest in IPA insights to monitor closely the potential
and current stress incidents.
Our proposed IPA has two broad areas – pest prediction and pest detection. Pest
prediction refers to the use of ambient information around a crop such as the weather
in open farms to forecast the risk of occurrence of a particular pest in the next few
days from a given day. In a closed farming environment such as a greenhouse, the
source of data could be a set of sensors that capture the ambient micro-climatic
conditions (Elijah et al., 2018). Further, more than awareness of a particular risk, it is
important to know the severity level of the risk to plan a course of action whether it is
mobilizing supplies close to the region of agri-input sales or taking a stocking
decision for a garden. This severity is therefore usually tied to an economic threshold
level (ETL) where a pesticide spraying decision is made when the ETL is breached
(Carlson, 1970). Otherwise, the cost incurred in pesticides does not offset the market
value of the final produce. While the prediction of pest risk gives a probability to
help prepare for pest onset with any prophylactic measures, pest detection refers to
effectively assessing the severity and spread of an infestation that has already started
to facilitate the adoption of curative measures. An essential component of managing
farm operations involves regularly scouting the farms by field staff with phones or
with other equipment such as drones. This involves capturing all relevant events of
interest that includes of course pest-related stress incidents. Each event typically
includes a picture of the crop accompanied by supporting information such as textual
and audio meta-data. Computer vision models work on the images from such
crowdsourced data to generate insights on the condition and severity. This could
translate to automated demarcation of specific hotspot regions that need immediate
attention. Without technology, collating all this information and interpreting it to
recognize a pattern on which some decision can be taken in a timely way is
non-trivial – especially with only human effort. Such simplified and timely recom￾mendations associated with pest infestations, therefore, help to significantly bolster
the IPA objectives of appropriate curative actions to protect crop.
Development of pest prediction models started by carrying out control studies in a
small defined region often with a weather station in proximity that measured various
dependent ambient variables at a time when computing capabilities were limited.
Common properties that pest growth depends on include temperature, humidity,
rainfall and sunshine hours. Models, therefore, work with some of these input
properties over a historical period and generate as output a risk of pest appearance.
Other properties such as duration of leaf wetness which has been shown to favour
pest growth have also been studied and used for modelling. This is also often
coupled with inputs from process models associated with the crop or the pest. The254 S. Sawant et al.
approach to modelling itself has evolved over many years. It started with thumb rules
and moved towards linear regression as a popular approach. With advances in
nonlinear modelling and better computing capabilities, methods such as neural
networks for (nonlinear) curve fitting and support vector machines that transform
the data to a higher plane, with kernel functions, where the data becomes linearly
separable have proved useful. Each modelling approach has some inherent advan￾tages and constraints. One of the key constraints is the amount of data available to
work with, which may not be much to begin with but grows over time and crop
seasons. In our deployments, we take a data-adaptive approach where the model
elements evolve as more data become available and the risk estimates become local
and personalized to the region of interest under observation. Figure 1 depicts risk
prediction at different severity levels in paddy fields for multiple pests in a district of
Telangana, India, on a particular day in the Rabi (winter) season of 2019–2020
(Fig. 2).
To detect pest infestation of a certain severity accurately over a region for
decision-making on pesticide spraying is non-trivial and therefore often subjective.
Given that periodic monitoring of an indoor or outdoor farm often involves regular
capture of events by field supervisors and equipment, where each event consists of
one or more images, we have developed computer vision-based models (Szegedy
et al., 2013) that identify affected parts of the plant and the degree of infestation in
those parts to assess the severity of the condition. These insights collated from a set
of geo-tagged images could be fused to create a variable-rate application (VRA) map
to guide the application of pesticides precisely. Computer vision development has
also evolved rapidly over the years. With advances in computing capacity and
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), more commonly understood as deep learn￾ing, it has become possible to extract a robust set of features from multilevel neural
Fig. 1 The overall risk predictions at different severity levels for multiple pests in the Rabi season
of 2019–2020AgSkyNet: Harnessing the Power of Sky and Earth for Precision Agriculture 255
Fig. 2 Risk prediction for multiple pests for a given window across the Rabi 2019–2020 season
network architectures trained on very large image datasets. This has helped consid￾erably to improve accuracy of (say) recognizing a key entity in an image
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012). Detecting the severity of a pest infestation involves
working to address various aspects of this challenge with models that depend on
(data-light) traditional image processing techniques to (data-heavy) deep learning.
The volume of available data has a significant bearing on how these models are
configured for the best possible results while leaving enough room for the models to
evolve as the data accumulates over time (Bhatt et al., 2019). Figure 3 shows the
detected pests – Helopeltis theivora or tea mosquito bug (TMB) and Tetranychus
urticae or red spider mites (RSM) – with corresponding confidence scores on tea
leaves. Figure 4 shows the probability of each pest in the image.
1.2 Integration of Remote Sensing and Crop Growth
Simulation Models to Estimate Crop Yield and Stubble
Burning Severity
Cropping systems are constantly under pressure to feed the growing population.
Irrigated cereal growing regions are intensively cultivated across the year leaving a
very short window for pre-sowing activities such as stubble removal and tillage. As a256 S. Sawant et al.
Fig. 3 Convolutional
neural network-based pest
detection on tea leaves with
corresponding confidence
scores
RSM 99.9%
RSM 99.75%
TMB 99.37%
TMB 94.96%
Fig. 4 Image-based pest identification and confidence score
result, after each cropping season, a large amount of crop residue is burnt in the
fields, thereby increasing harmful emissions and damage to soil microbiome. Our
earlier study on the monitoring of stubble burning in 2019 showed that a maximum
number of fire incidences were reported from Fatehabad, Sirsa, Jind, Kaithal and
Karnal in Haryana, India. Reports poured in from Sangrur, Bathinda, Ferozpur and
Patiala. The Malwa region of Punjab and Hisar division of Haryana were more prone
to burning. Moreover, analysis showed that 26 October–8 November is a peak time
of burning in Punjab and is also the maximum period of burning in Haryana. In this
study, we integrated the crop growth simulation model with the remote sensing
observations to estimate biomass yield. The quantity of grain and biomass yield were
estimated in conjunction with the crop phenology parameters such as start, peak and
end of the season. The study was conducted in rice–wheat cropping systems of
Punjab and Haryana, India. During the cropping season, information wasAgSkyNet: Harnessing the Power of Sky and Earth for Precision Agriculture 257
Fig. 5 Framework for crop yield estimation
disseminated to the local agencies and government departments to understand the
extent of stubble burning (Fig. 5).
Technique: Enhancing the crop growth simulation models using remote sensing
observations (spatialization of crop growth simulation models using remote
sensing observations)
Usage: Early estimate of potential harvest. Effective crop residue management
Advantage for the grower: Fair price for the produce
Effect on the environment: Reduction in CO2 emissions due to reduction in stubble
burning
Food Security: Positive. Proactive corrective measures can be taken throughout the
season
Transparency: Comply with Crop Certification Agencies, which track crop health,
yield and residue management
Adoption obstacles: Unavailability of cost-effective and efficient equipment. Need
for public policy decisions to improve adoption by the farming community258 S. Sawant et al.
1.3 Hyperspectral Sensing for Pesticide Residue Detection
in Green Tea Leaves
Tea is consumed worldwide due to its antioxidant properties and other beneficial
health effects. More than 36 countries cultivate tea on a commercial scale (Tea Board
of India, 2017). China and India are the largest producers; however, changing
climate is causing a huge risk of pest/diseases in the tea industry. With changing
weather conditions, tea plantations are vulnerable to biotic (insect pest, weeds, etc.)
and abiotic (water, nutrient, etc.) stresses.
It has been reported that around 167 species of pests cause around 11–55% of the
annual yield loss (Das, 1965). In India, pesticide usage for tea is greater than among
all other crops (Barooah, 2011). Several synthetic chemicals are being sprayed to
control pest infestation. However, uncontrolled use of such chemicals due to lack of
knowledge and also the harvest interval are responsible for pesticide residue
remaining on the leaves. Moreover, it has been also noticed that various banned
chemicals/pesticides which are not recommended by the Tea Research Board are
sprayed by the small tea growers as they are cheaper. These harmful chemicals enter
various natural systems such as surface waters, groundwater, soil, human food chain,
etc. In addition to the environmental risk, high pesticide residue levels also degrade
the quality of manufactured tea.
In this context, the detection of various pesticide residues is crucial. The mini￾mum residue levels vary across pesticides from few μg/L to few mg/L. To detect
such small concentrations precisely, researchers have established methods using
analytical instruments such as liquid chromatography–mass spectroscopy (LC–
MS), gas chromatography–mass spectroscopy (GC–MS), high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) and immunoassay (ELISA) (Li et al., 2013). These
methods are accurate but involve the destruction of the sample to be tested and
take time as well as skilled labour. Considering the time and costs involved in such
destructive techniques, researchers have developed various multi-residue analysis
methods to test multiple residues in a single analysis (Chen et al., 2014, 2016; Hou
et al., 2013, 2014). Chen et al. (2016) developed a gas chromatography–tandem
mass spectroscopy-based method for residue analysis of 70 pesticides using a
modified QuEChERS (quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged and safe).
Recently, attempts have been made to use non-destructive techniques such as
NIR spectroscopy and hyperspectral sensing. Although technologies such as
hyperspectral sensing (HS) are not as accurate as LC–MS and GC–MS, they provide
the results in a very short time and in a non-destructive way, so the techniques can be
used in near real/real time for the detection of pesticide residues. Hyperspectral
sensing (HS) has been used to detect pesticide residue in crops such as mulberry
(Morus alba), grapes (Vitis vinifera), apple (Malus domestica) surface and vegeta￾bles (Lv et al., 2018; Jun et al., 2016; Mohite et al., 2017; Dhakal et al., 2014).
Although HS has been applied with multiple crops and residues, very few attempts
have been made to use the method for tea. The objective of this study is to detect
three banned pesticides – acetamiprid, cypermethrin and monocrotophos – using aAgSkyNet: Harnessing the Power of Sky and Earth for Precision Agriculture 259
noninvasive hyperspectral sensing-based method and propose an operational
approach to monitor the green tea leaves across various processing phases to enable
the traceability (Mohite et al., 2019).
To make the system reliable and operational, we have collected the data in a
closed environment using light-emitting diodes (LED) as the source of radiation. A
deep learning-based approach was used for the detection of individual pesticides.
We claim that the device and method can be easily implemented for near real-time
operational use to detect multiple pesticide residues (Fig. 6).
Technique: Using cost-effective hyperspectral sensing for pesticide residue
detection
Usage: Non-destructive and faster assessment
Advantages for the grower: Awareness regarding effects of uncontrolled agro￾chemical usage Residue-free production. Increased price. Greater acceptance and
uptake in the market
Effect on the environment: Reduction in pesticide residue in environment
Food safety: Reduction in pesticide residue
Fig. 6 Use of hyperspectral sensing for pesticide residue detection in teaTransparency: Comply with the food safety standards and maintain traceability
260 S. Sawant et al.
Adoption obstacles: Certification by implementation agencies
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they are employed by the company which owns the
commercial product that is being discussed.
References
Barooah, A. (2011). Present status of use of agrochemicals in tea industry of eastern India and future
directions. Science and Culture, 77(9–10), 385390.
Bhatt, P. V., Sarangi, S., & Pappula, S. (2019). Detection of diseases and pests on images captured
in uncontrolled conditions from tea plantations. In Autonomous air and ground sensing systems
for agricultural optimization and phenotyping IV (Vol. 11008). International Society for Optics
and Photonics.
Carlson, G. A. (1970). A decision theoretic approach to crop disease prediction and control.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 52(2), 216–223.
Chen, H., Yin, P., Wang, Q., Jiang, Y., & Liu, X. (2014). A modified QuEChERS “sample
preparation method for the analysis of 70 pesticide residues in tea using gas chromatography￾tandem mass spectrometry”. Food Analytical Methods, 7(8), 1577–1587.
Chen, H., Hao, Z., Wang, Q., Jiang, Y., Pan, R., Wang, C., Liu, X., & Lu, C. (2016). Occurrence
and risk assessment of organophosphorus pesticide residues in Chinese Tea. Human and
Ecological Risk Assessment: An International Journal, 22(1), 28–38.
Das, G. (1965). PESTS of tea in north-east India and their control, 27.
Dhakal, S., Li, Y., Peng, Y., Chao, K., Qin, J., & Guo, L. (2014). Prototype instrument development
for non-destructive detection of pesticide residue in apple surface using Raman technology.
Journal of Food Engineering, 123, 94103.
Elijah, O., Rahman, T. A., Orikumhi, I., Leow, C. Y., & Hindia, M. N. (2018). An overview of
internet of things (IoT) and data analytics in agriculture: Benefits and challenges. IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, 5(5), 3758–3773.
Hou, R. Y., Jiao, W. T., Qian, X. S., Wang, X. H., Xiao, Y., & Wan, X. C. (2013). Effective
extraction method for determination of neonicotinoid residues in tea. Journal of Agricultural
and Food Chemistry, 61(51), 12565–12571.
Hou, X., Lei, S., Qui, S., Guo, L., Yi, S., & Liu, W. (2014). A multi-residue method for the
determination of pesticides in tea using multi-walled carbon nano tubes as a dispersive solid
phase extraction absorbent. Food Chemistry, 153, 121–129.
Jun, S., Shuying, J., Meixia, Z., Hanping, M., Xiaohong, W., & Qinglin, L. (2016). Detection of
pesticide residues in mulberry leaves using vis-nir hyper-spectral imaging technology. Journal
of Residuals Science Technology.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2012). Imagenet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems.
Li, X., Zhang, Z., Li, P., Zhang, Q., Zhang, W., & Ding, X. (2013). Determination for major
chemical contaminants in tea (Camellia sinensis) matrices: A review. Food Research Interna￾tional, 53(2), 649–658.
Lv, G., Du, C., Ma, F., Shen, Y., & Zhou, J. (2018). Rapid and non-destructive detection of
pesticide residues by depth-profiling fourier transform infrared photoacoustic spectroscopy.
ACS Omega, 3(3), 3548–3553.AgSkyNet: Harnessing the Power of Sky and Earth for Precision Agriculture 261
Mohite, J., Karale, Y., Pappula, S., Shabeer, A., Sawant, S., & Hingmire, S. (2017). Detection of
pesticide (cyantraniliprole) residue on grapes using hyper-spectral sensing. In Sensing for
agriculture and food quality and safety IX (vol. 10217, p. 102170P). International Society for
Optics and Photonics.
Mohite, J., Sawant, S., Borah, K., & Pappula, S. (2019). Temporal detection of pesticide residues in
tea leaves using hyperspectral sensing. In IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Symposium (IGARSS 2019) (pp. 7274–7277). IEEE.
Pappula, S. (2013). The concept of PRIDE™ empowering farmers to live with pride. CSI Commu￾nications, 37(8).
Szegedy, C., Toshev, A., & Erhan, D.. (2013). Deep neural networks for object detection. In
Advances in neural information processing systems.
Tea Board of India 64th annual report 2017–18, URL: http://www.teaboard.gov.in/pdf/64th_
Annual_Report_2017_18_pdf4214.pdf. Accessed on 20 May 2020.Dacom Precision Agriculture System
Frenk-Jan Baron and Lud Uitdewilligen
Abstract The Dacom Farm Management Information System (FMIS) provides
farmers with detailed advice on crop protection, crop growth, irrigation management
and precision farming. The data are collected at one central platform which is
connected to many partners. The user has all data required in one place, and using
the different advice modules, the data are transformed into management information.
This information helps the user to apply chemicals, water and fertilizer at the right
time, in the right place and in the right amount. The user can save on agri-inputs, and
with the best possible crop care, the yields will increase. By connecting the Dacom
platform to the farm machinery, the data can be exchanged via the cloud, and
working with variable-rate application maps becomes easier.
1 Introduction
Dacom provides an integrated precision agriculture software system for their cus￾tomers. Among these customers are farmers, contractors, food processing compa￾nies, the agri-supply industry and crop advice companies. The Dacom crop
recording platform is used to collect the necessary data to run the different models.
Based on the location of the fields, the crops, the varieties and the operations
(e.g. seeding, fertilizer), the models can generate advice for the customers. At this
moment, the two following models are operational and used by customers.
F.-J. Baron · L. Uitdewilligen (✉)
Dacom Farm Intelligence, Groningen, The Netherlands
e-mail: info@dacom.nl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_15
263264 F.-J. Baron and L. Uitdewilligen
1.1 Fungal Disease Prediction Model
This model is used to generate timely advice to prevent an infection of the crop. This
model is available for more than 40 fungal diseases in more than 20 crops. The
history of this model goes back to 1980 when it was developed together with the
Wageningen University and Research. Since then, the model has been constantly
under development and has been expanded with new modules and technologies. The
core of the model is calculation of the life cycle of the fungus. Based on the location
of the field, the nearest weather station is selected. In Western Europe, Dacom has
more than 100 weather stations placed in regions where potatoes are cultivated. In
other parts of the world, Dacom works with the weather data of private weather
station. The measured and predicted weather are combined with the amount of
unprotected leaf area and the disease pressure to calculate the infection risk
(Fig. 1). Where a large infection risk is predicted in the coming days, the farmer
gets an advice to spray a preventive chemical. If the advice is ignored and the
infection has taken hold, a curative chemical is advised.
The model for Late Blight in potato is the one most used. The crop observations
(crop stage and crop growth) needed for reliable advice are generated automatically
by the crop growth model. So, it is no longer necessary to fill in these observations
manually. In addition, the application of chemicals can be recorded automatically
using ISOBUS machinery. Recently, the model was extended to be able to give an
advice on zones within the field when conditions differ between them. Examples are
Fig. 1 Visual representation of the different parts of the Dacom Fungal disease modelDacom Precision Agriculture System 265
less growth in shaded areas under trees, microclimate under trees and parts of the
field under irrigation (this is automatically recorded using, for example, Raindancer
irrigation technology). This information is combined with crop growth observed by
satellite to give advice on variable-rate application (VRA) of chemicals.
1.2 Crop Growth Model
The Dacom crop growth model is based on the well-known LINTUL and WOFOST
models (Kooman and Haverkort, 1995, Van Diepen et al., 1989). The necessary
inputs come from the crop recording, weather stations and weather prediction. The
model is used to generate weekly crop observations for the disease model. It is also
used to predict the final yield and to analyse the effect of different weather scenarios
on the final yield. This service was developed together with food processing
companies that wanted insight into the expected yield. Those companies already
have the Dacom Farmlook software in which they collect all the crop recording data
of their growers for food safety programmes and data analysis. This platform has
been expanded with the yield prediction model and possibilities to study the effects
of different weather scenarios. Satellite images are used to validate the model pre￾dictions for the above-ground biomass. When, for example, the calculated emer￾gence date does not match the leaf area index (LAI) measured by satellite, the model
is adjusted. The same is done at the end of the season when the calculated senescence
does not match the LAI from satellite images. This model adjustment is done
manually by looking at the modelled and measured LAI graphs. This is a time￾consuming process which will be automated in 2022. The model also has an
elaborate water balance component that can also be used to give irrigation advice.
Where there are differences in growth within the field, variable-rate irrigation based
on the predicted water uptake is possible.
1.3 Development of Dacom Software System
The outcomes of the aforementioned models are combined with task maps in the
Cloudfarm software. In this way, the VRA of agri-input is no longer based only on
the experience of the farmers and advisors but on scientific models. In this way,
precision agriculture can be combined with decision support systems (DSS) to result
in decision agriculture. The strong point of the Dacom software is the full integration
between the different parts, so a farmer no longer needs stand-alone apps for each
application (Fig. 2). The complete farm can be managed in one software package
which combines state-of-the-art technology both on the model and task map gener￾ation sides.
Dacom Farm Intelligence was established in 1980. During the past 40 years,
Dacom developed into a Software as a Service (SaaS) company. Dacom software is266 F.-J. Baron and L. Uitdewilligen
Fig. 2 Overview of the Dacom software system
currently used on approximately 26,000 farms and 800,000 crop fields and in 40+
countries around the world. In 2021, the company was bought by CropX. The SaaS
solutions from Dacom are applicable worldwide as it is designed with internation￾alization in mind. The platform is currently translated into eight languages. How￾ever, it also offers dedicated options for localization to provide the best possible crop
recording experience for the farmer. An example is the use of open datasets provided
by government institutions to make it easy to enter data of crop field boundaries.
The company focus in Western Europe has shifted to arable farms aiming to grow
their business based on data-driven farming. To boost the adoption of digital
farming, customers can start with a relatively simple product ‘Boer&Bunder’. This
product shows ready-to-use data for all crop fields in the Netherlands, Belgium,
France and Denmark based on open data, satellite data and weather and disease
models. Farmers that want to log and apply farm data on their own farm can upgrade
to Dacom crop recording. Dacom has a feature-based subscription model which
allows customers to scale up with product as they expand and grow to the next level
of data-driven farming. This includes more options for automatic crop recording and
the use of advice models in combination with task maps.
Dacom also believes that to be able to communicate, process and analyse farm
data, the data should be stored in a strongly structured way. Dacom maximizes the
use of standardized crop data. The crop recording data are stored in the EDI-crop fileDacom Precision Agriculture System 267
format1
; this standard provides coding lists for chemicals, fertilizers and methods
like spraying, ploughing, etc. As-applied machine data are mainly stored in the
ISO-xml file format. This also makes connections with other farm management
systems (FMS) more viable. This global approach is unique and especially interest￾ing for international farm enterprises and other agribusiness partners of Dacom.
Digital crop recording is mainly used by customers to comply legislation and
food safety programmes from food processing companies. Often the same crop data
are shared with multiple supply chain partners saving on time by sharing data from
one single source. A key objective of Dacom is to maximize automatic data
collection at the farm level. The feature-based subscription model makes it possible
for farmers to scale in features that contribute to time savings and more accurate data
collection. Examples are the following:
• Open data makes it easier and faster to enter data of crop field boundaries and soil
types.
• Third-party integrations allow farmers to import automatically soil analysis,
chemical or fertilizer stocks or contracts from suppliers.
• Satellite data are used to monitor crop growth and detect structural or in-season
variation.
• Weather data and forecast are used throughout the Dacom platform. One example
is that crop recordings are enriched with local weather conditions as a require￾ment for GLOBALG.A.P. certification.
• For planting and irrigation purposes, the soil moisture content and temperature
are predicted by models or measured more accurately by connecting soil moisture
sensors.
• Automatic time tracking (with mobile devices) is possible for employees that
carry out scheduled tasks for larger farms and contractors.
• A recent development is the connection of machinery in order to send task data
wirelessly to tractor devices and logging as-applied data to automate crop
recordings.
In addition to fast and accurate data collection, the use of advice models in
combination with task maps for tractors results in several advantages:
• Optimal usage of agri-inputs like fertilizers, chemicals, water and fuel.
• Yield and quality improvement.
Advantages of variable-rate applications in arable farming may not be the same in
all years and on all farms due to changing conditions: crop rotation, crop varieties,
treatments and weather and soil conditions. Some examples of variable-rate appli￾cations in the Netherlands (like variable planting of potatoes) can be found on www.
proeftuinprecisielandbouw.nl.
The use of advice models in combination with task maps is important to contrib￾ute to circular agriculture, which is the vision of the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture,
1
https://www.agroconnect.nl/en-us/productgroups/cropcultivation.aspx268 F.-J. Baron and L. Uitdewilligen
Nature and Food Quality.2 Variable-rate application and soil improvement focus on
good yields and the sparing use of agri-inputs. Furthermore, it puts less pressure on
the environment, nature and climate. Although precision agriculture is in the farm
management software of Dacom, it is still not used by all farmers who use the
Dacom system. Many farmers are still not convinced that the benefits outweigh the
cost of the software. Dacom also discovered a gap between this new highly technical
precision agriculture system and a large part of the older and less digitally minded
user group. Despite all the efforts on data standardization and exchange of machine
data, many farmers still struggle with getting the variable-rate application maps
working on all different tractor terminals. Support through machinery manufactures
and their dealers is key in the adaptation of precision technology by this large group
of farmers.
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they are employed by Dacom Farm Intelligence.
References
Kooman, P., & Haverkort, A. (1995). Modelling development and growth of the potato crop
influenced by temperature and daylength: LINTUL-POTATO. Potato ecology and modelling
of crops under conditions limiting growth (pp. 41–59). Springer.
Van Diepen, C. V., Wolf, J. V., Van Keulen, H., & Rappoldt, C. (1989). WOFOST: A simulation
model of crop production. Soil Use and Management, 5, 16–24.
2
https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/actueel/nieuws/2018/09/08/minister-schouten-wil-omslag-naar￾kringlooplandbouw-nu-inzettenA unique point of the Akkerweb service platform is the availability of several
science-based agronomic models which are currently made available as APIs for use
in smart farming applications. Examples of these models are those to calculate water
availability (Watbal model), potato crop growth (Tipstar model), late blight infection
(Blight module), and nematode management (Nemadecide) at individual field and
within-field levels. Other models are available for variable-rate application of soil
Akkerweb and farmmaps: Development
of Open Service Platforms for Precision
Agriculture
Thomas H. Been, Corné Kempenaar, Frits K. van Evert, Idse E. Hoving,
Geert J. T. Kessel, Willem Dantuma, Johan A. Booij,
Leendert P. G. Molendijk, Fedde D. Sijbrandij, and Koen van Boheemen
Abstract The development of the Akkerweb service platform (https://akkerweb.eu)
was started around 2010. It is an open platform in precision farming, providing the
maps, services, data, and connections required, in principle, for any smart farming
application envisioned. This includes background maps, services for weather data,
satellite images, soil maps, crop polygons, etc., but also visualization tools, an app
store, a task map generator, and crop growth models. Akkerweb provides the
infrastructure needed to develop an application easily using the available services
and to publish it on the Akkerweb platform. Moreover, Akkerweb applications can
also run on other websites, seemingly as stand-alone applications with the look and
feel of the customer’s website.
T. H. Been · C. Kempenaar (✉) · F. K. van Evert · F. D. Sijbrandij · K. van Boheemen
Agrosystems Research, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, The Netherlands
e-mail: corne.kempenaar@wur.nl
I. E. Hoving
Livestock & Environment, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, The Netherlands
G. J. T. Kessel · J. A. Booij · L. P. G. Molendijk
Open Field Crops, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, The Netherlands
W. Dantuma
Dobs Automatisering b.v, Wageningen, The Netherlands
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0_16
269270 T. H. Been et al.
herbicides and fungicides against blight, nitrogen top-dress application in potato and
potato haulm killing. In total, Akkerweb has more than 30 apps.
farmmaps (https://farmmaps.eu) is the next version of Akkerweb. It has a new
data repository and management system as well as a new, more intuitive dashboard
design running on all devices. It became available first in 2021.
Abbreviations
AWS Amazon web services
CI chlorophyll index
FMIS farm management information system
GIS geospatial information system
GPU graphical processing unit
ICT information and communications technology
NSS nitrogen side dress system
UAV unmanned aerial vehicle
WDVI weighted difference vegetation index
1 Introduction
Precision agriculture (PA) is a farming management concept based on observing,
measuring, and responding to inter- and intra-field variability in crops (Wikipedia,
2020). It is expected to lead to an increase in productivity and quality, as well as
increased sustainability (Van Evert et al., 2017a, b). Adoption of PA is slower than
expected because it is complex to apply, among other issues (EIP, 2015). Kempenaar
et al. (2018) listed at least 13 different PA applications in potato production. All
these PA applications have data, a decision support, and an actuation component and
cannot be carried out without information and communications technology (ICT).
Many hard- and software tools have been developed and marketed in the last
25 years to capture data on variation in crops. The technologies enable measuring
and viewing of site- and time-specific soil, crop, climate, and input and output
variables and using these data in operational, tactical, and strategic decisions. To
start with, a farmer must have a suitable farm management information system
(FMIS) (Fountas et al., 2015) to use the data. The FMISs have developed from
simple crop-recoding software tools on stand-alone computers to web-based data￾base platforms with geo-spatial information system (GIS) features and connections
to data suppliers. In the Netherlands, we identified at least 25 of such platforms in
arable farming. They are marketed by different types of institutions such as advisory,Akkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 271
sensor, crop protection and fertilizer companies, machine companies, farmers’
cooperatives, and knowledge institutes. The Wageningen University & Research
also developed such a platform in cooperation with the Agrifirm Plant, a farmers’
cooperative, and DOBS automatisering, a software company, with the aim of
developing decision support for precision faming as close as possible to Dutch
farming practices and to work as much as possible with the state-of-the-art of data
that are available on farms.
In this chapter, we describe the development of the Akkerweb and farmmaps
precision agriculture service platforms. In Sect. 2, we give a brief history and
technical implementation and features of the platforms and in Sect. 3, a selection
of models and apps that can be used on the platforms. We end in Sect. 3 with an
outlook on how data platforms will contribute to mature data-driven precision
agriculture.
1.1 Development of Akkerweb and farmmaps Platforms
The development of Akkerweb was set in motion by two projects more than 10 years
ago. The first was a pilot developed for Boerenbond Helden, a farmers’ cooperative
that needed a GIS to match tenants with landlords. The prototype system depicted
one’s own fields as well as fields available for rent. Requests could be made by
interested farmers to open these fields for review, presenting all necessary informa￾tion, such as soil type, fertilization history, cropping scheme, diseases, etc. The
second initiative came from the NemaDecide project (Been & Schomaker 2004;
Been et al., 2005) and the development of a decision support system (DSS) for
potato cyst nematodes and root knot nematodes, both quarantine organisms. This
required a geographical component identifying the field and the exact location and
dimension of the sampled areas, regardless of being disease free or infested, to
produce the correct advice needed to manage these pests.
The Wageningen University & Research joined forces with Agrifirm Plant, a
farmers’ cooperative, in 2010 to develop a service platform for precision agriculture,
named Akkerweb. Software programming was done by DOBS. By 2016, the
partners concluded that Akkerweb was mature enough to be launched on the
Dutch market as an open service platform for precision agriculture. Users can create
an account for no charge in which they can manage public and private data, do crop
monitoring, and apply precision agriculture applications, for example, to make
variable-rate prescription maps. Today Akkerweb has over 5.000 users, mainly
Dutch arable farmers, farm advisors, and researchers. It has undergone several
technical modifications, and currently, Akkerweb 3.0 named farmmaps with a
new data repository and management system with a new, more intuitive dashboard
design, has become available in 2021.(continued)
272 T. H. Been et al.
1.2 Features of the Platforms
Akkerweb is a cloud-based service platform on which apps provided by different
developers can run. It provides basic apps and services (e.g., weather data) together
with many specific applications. Table 1 provides a list describing the services and
features that are available to every user, while Table 2 lists the applications
Akkerweb provides free of costs. These are considered the basic instrumentation
every user and developer needs. The landing page and dashboard of Akkerweb are
shown in Fig. 1.
Table 1 List of services and features freely available to use
Feature Description
Account grower Akkerweb offers an individual login for accounts; this means that only
the user (grower) has access to the files he owns. Via “single sign-on,”
the user is directly logged into other services and applications that are
relevant for him/her; this avoids repeated entering of user account
credentials
Background maps Displaying geographical information against a freely chosen back￾ground: Google maps, OpenStreetMap, Bing, Top10, or any other
background
Crop polygons Can be downloaded using various web services, directly from the
Dutch government (RVO) or by public reference map layers of crop
fields (most EU countries)
Contact details Once entered, data are available in all applications the grower wishes
to use
Downloading or draw￾ing fields
Fields can be uploaded from Dutch FMIS CROP-R and CropVision
(upload xml message) or added using drag and drop. (formats
supported: Shape files, Google polygons, etc.). If necessary, crop
polygons can be drawn by hand
Crop cultivation data If not available by upload from an FMIS, Akkerweb provides a simple
crop rotation app to provide advisory systems with cropping infor￾mation (crops, varieties, planting date, growing period)
Sensor data Tractor logs, data via .csv, .xlsx, .dbf, .dat, but also satellite data
(NVDI, WDVI, yield maps (geotiff)) can be uploaded. Addition of a
new format will take half a day
Editing Standard functionality for editing geographical information; edit,
merge, or split fields, add objects, and convert grid files and other
formats into visual information
Links Web services to agro partners are available, a.o. ISAcert, Eurofins,
WEnR, NEO, Dacom and AgroVision. VanderSat, Agrirouter, etc
Storage All data remain property of the grower/owner and can be used or
stored for later application. Data are stored on Amazon AWS in
Ireland
Output Generic output is possible. As .csv file, as .pdf for pictures, etc. this
functionality is available to each application
Applications The grower can use the free and the commercial applications with the
plot as his starting pointAkkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 273
Table 1 (continued)
Feature Description
ISOBUS, shape, and
surfer
Task maps can be generated for ISOBUS, shape, and surfer format
Sharing information Growers can share their geographical information, time-limited if
necessary, completely or partially, with third parties (neighbor, coop￾eration, or payroll employee
Send/retrieve data Edi-crop v 4.0 and the eLab messages are supported. Using services to
business management systems prevents repetitive data input
Uptime and scalability The Akkerweb platform is hosted on Amazon servers under European
law. This ensures an uptime of almost 100% and instant scalability
(number of users) and provides the need for fast processing of geo￾graphic data
Weather Available are 40 years of historical data (30 by 30 km grid) and
observed and forecasted weather (500 by 500 m) worldwide. Rain
radar information is included for the Netherlands
Available information
and models
Availability of soil maps, crop growth models, etc. crop polygons
from 2009–now, agricultural acreage 2013
Table 2 Freely available Akkerweb applications (apps)
App Description
Cropping plan Entering grower’s fields plus crops, cultivars, soil type, planting, and
harvesting date either manually or via web services connecting to official
bodies and farm management systems.
Map Overview of all of a grower’s fields on a map. Add layers of information from
your applications, for example, all fields that have been sampled, all fields with
sensor data, etc. click on a field polygon and all information available will be
listed.
Sensor data Upload all types of sensor data and visualize the information. Use these data in
various applications on Akkerweb.
Satellite Download satellite imagery – WDVI and NVDI biomass maps for further use
in Akkerweb, for example, haulm killing (currently WEnR and NEO WCS
services).
Contractor Order sensor information, EM38 (v/d Borne), Veris scan (Agrometius) and
NVDE, and WDVI drone images (dronewerker.nl) directly from Akkerweb,
and receive the results in your account.
My advices Advice generated in the advisory apps used by third parties and not available to
the farmer can be stored and retrieved for later use.
Charing
information
Connect with another Akkerweb user and share information in different ways
(time bound, editable or not, etc.).
Store Here all available applications can be found and downloaded to the account
holders desktop, application can be for free, licensed, sponsored, etc.
Akkerweb apps can be integrated in several ways within the framework. In its
most simple form, a third-party app runs in an i-frame and can be found in the
Akkerweb Store and added to the dashboard if needed. The next step is an external274 T. H. Been et al.
Fig. 1 Impression of Akkerweb 2.0. (a) Landing page and (b) a user dashboard
app that uses some of the services (Akkerweb APIs), for instance, the farmer’s
cropping scheme, but has no connection to the other apps. When fully “integrated,”
Akkerweb apps can share their information with other apps. For example, new layers
generated by a fully integrated app are available for use by other apps.
The data model of Akkerweb is the reference model Agro (rmAgro) developed by
Goense (2017). This standard facilitates the connections with other platforms,
portals, and agribusiness companies that comply with rmAgro for laboratory results,Akkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 275
cropping schemes, advice, and cultivation messages (e.g., fertilizers, irrigation, crop
protections, and yields).
Several functions and services are encapsulated in Angular software components
and can easily be added to a new app. Developers can now concentrate on the desired
interface and implementation of their own knowledge. In farmmaps, using Angular
by default, a component library is available with interface objects that can be reused.
1.3 Technical Implementation
Akkerweb is a web-based platform based on a client-server architecture. There are
currently two generations of Akkerweb applications, using a slightly different
technology stack.
1.3.1 Authentication/Authorization
Akkerweb uses a claim-based authentication and authorization scheme; user identi￾ties are provided in the API requests as JSON Web Token (JWT), provided by an
OpenID Connect compliant identity server.
1.3.2 Server Side
The business logic of the first generation was implemented in .Net C# using the
NetTopology suite for the spatial operations. Some computation-intensive parts were
offloaded to parts implemented in C / C++ on a CUDA server. The server side of
second-generation Akkerweb applications is also implemented in C# (.Net Core),
but NetTopology suite has mostly been replaced with GDAL (GDAL/OGR contrib￾utors, 2021).
1.3.3 Server Side, Data Persistence Layer
Akkerweb runs on Amazon AWS servers under European law. It also allows for
robust availability and scalability. Amazon was chosen specifically because only its
servers were equipped with GPUs for graphical calculations. Most of the
Wageningen University & Research apps run on Amazon, but app developers can
also run their apps on their own servers.
Apps can run on Akkerweb and can be stand-alone. A digital request for soil
sampling for instance runs on Akkerweb, where it is connected with the crop
polygons of the farmer, but is also on the website of the soil sampling agency
offering this service. Data persistence is implemented using a Postgres/Postgis
database server for the meta-data.276 T. H. Been et al.
1.3.4 Client Side
The client side of Akkerweb applications of the first generation is implemented in a
multiple page pattern using JavaScript and HTML5/CSS supported by toolkits as
jQuery, Knockout js, and OpenLayers 2. Applications of the second generation are
implemented as a SPA (single page application) using Angular 9+, typescript,
HTML5 /CSS, bootstrap 4, and OpenLayers 3+/Cesium. Cesium is used for the
3D visualizations.
1.3.5 Client Server Communication
In Akkerweb applications, all communication (between the client and the server and
between applications) is based on RESTful services with the payload formatted as
Json/GeoJson. Most geographical data are transported following different OGC
standards such as WMS, WFS, WMTS, and WCS, but in the APIs, a GeoJson￾based representation is used. SignalR on a WebSocket transport is used for push
communications (events).
2 Models and Apps on Akkerweb/farmmaps
There are currently more than 30 apps available on Akkerweb. See Table 3 for an
overview of the most used apps. Some of these are Akkerweb apps which are free for
use and provide basic functionality. The other apps are provided by WUR and
external partners who use the platform to enable their applications. Some agro￾ecological models in webservices are linked to Akkerweb and farmmaps. Hereafter,
we describe two models and five apps that run on Akkerweb and farmmaps. The
models deliver information on soil and crop status to the apps.
2.1 WatBal Soil Moisture Balance Model
WATBALsig is a simple water balance model for an unsaturated or saturated soil
profile. It is derived from the WATBAL model (Berghuis-van Dijk, 1985) which
was primarily developed to produce dynamic hydrological data, such as moisture
content, over a long time scale for a separate agricultural nitrate leaching model.
Vinten (1999) used WATBAL to simulate nitrate leaching from soils with different
textures. These qualities make WATBAL suitable for other modeling purposes such
as irrigation advice and grass or crop growth prediction (see Sect. 3.4.2, Chap. 3).
Complex agro-hydrological models for predicting moisture content like SWAP
(Kroes et al., 2008) have the disadvantage that rather detailed input is needed. TheAkkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 277
Table 3 List of WUR and third-party applications available in the Store
Application name Short description
Digital sampling request Nematodes, phosphate, and white rot
Stripbuilder Program to subdivide fields into sampling units for nematodes, phos￾phate, white rot, tracks, and buffers, in order to supply sampling maps
and display results
NemaDecide Geo Free version of a decision support system for the potato cyst nematode
NemaDecide Geo PLUS Version of NemaDecide including root knot nematodes (Meloidogyne
chitwoodi) and the root lesion nematode (Pratylenchus penetrans)
with extra features
Agrifirm mineral Calculate fertilizer needs, based on crop, soil type, and acreage for
your whole farm
AgrifirmGBM Calculate crop protection product needs, based on crop, soil type, and
acreage for your whole farm
Task map nematostats Based on soil sampling results, a task map will be calculated including
official delimitation
Potato information More than 400 potato cultivars and all their properties, including
partial resistance against potato cyst nematodes, blight, etc., data
querying and links to the breeders
Task map haulm killing Biomass-dependent haulm killing of potatoes based on NDVI and
WDVI originating from satellite and E-bee
Task map side dress
nitrogen
Biomass-dependent task map for nitrogen side dress for potatoes
based on NDVI and WDVI originating from satellite, E-bee, or Yara
images
Task map herbicides An application map based on lutum (clay particles <2 μm) and
organic matter content of the soil
Get hold of your grass
production
Measure your grass height georeferenced using your mobile and
calculate the Feed Wedge on Akkerweb
Bioscope A service that provides a farmer with different products, among which
is an WDVI-green biomass map, every 10 days. Imagery originates
from satellites or from drones, when satellite images are unavailable
Late Blight A completely new state-of-the-art decision support system to avoid
yield losses by Phytophthora infestans.
Task map Blight
treatment
The late blight app can be extended with the variable-rate app
Task map lime
application
Calculate task map for site-specific need for potassium based on pH
map (Veris sensor)
Grip on Data Drop word, excel, and pdf files on your plot and make them
georeferenced. Click on your plot and have a look at all your plot data
Mycokey App Comprehensive monitoring of mycotoxins at critical control points in
the food/feed chains for wheat and maize (DON, Aflatoxin B1, and
Fumonisin)
Tipstar Crop growth model for potato (growth is limited by the availability of
water and nitrogen)
WatBalSig Dynamic prediction of moisture content depending on precipitation,
evapotranspiration, irrigation, and drainage
GAOS Calculate the optimal driving path of your tractor over the field,
avoiding obstacles, and download it to your tractor
Zoning Read in sensor data for your field, calculate treatment zones, and make
a task map yourself278 T. H. Been et al.
precision and very small time-step (≫ 0.1 day) with which they describe the water
balance are superfluous compared to the precision that is needed to simulate crop
transpiration on a daily basis depending on soil moisture content and practical
precision farming purposes. Therefore, a model is required that describes the water
balance of a soil profile more globally. Such a model should meet the following
demands (adapted from Berghuis-van Dijk (1985)):
• Input of only the most important soil characteristics
• Good simulation of water balance of the root zone, from which crop transpiration
is subtracted at a rate which is affected by soil moisture content
• Good simulation of movement of the groundwater table, which is a condition for
simulating boundary water fluxes and a proxy for judging the quality of water
balance simulations
• Quantification of real evapotranspiration, capillary rise, drainage (subsurface),
irrigation, and upward and downward seepage, which are important for correct
simulation of the soil water balance and management
• Short computing time for facilitating real-time interactive exchange with the user
and the possibility of developing a future self-learning system for enhancing
simulation quality
The WATBAL model simulates the water balance of a (cropped) soil in a simple
and fast way, dividing the soil profile into two layers. The first layer represents the
root zone and the second layer the subsoil to at least the depth of the deepest
groundwater table. The model calculates analytically on a daily basis per sub-time
step (≤ 1 day) the changes in moisture content of the two layers and the movement of
the groundwater table. Calculations depend on precipitation, evapotranspiration,
capillary rise from layer two to layer one, water transport from layer one to layer
two, and possibly drainage to differently defined drainage systems (including a
bottom boundary).
WATBALsig is developed from WATBAL by implementing some new features
and adaptations to meet the specific requirements for the intended use of the model.
The most important of these are the following:
The dependence of crop transpiration on soil moisture is described with the well￾known Feddes model (Feddes et al., 1978)
The first layer is divided into a root zone with dynamic depth and a zone without
roots
The model is made more robust for special conditions such as perched groundwater
(layer one saturated and layer two unsaturated)
For precision farming purposes, WATBALsig has been made operational by a
user interface that runs on Akkerweb/farmmaps (Fig. 2). To arrange field-specific
input, the web application provides weather data and the crop concerned from
Akkerweb/farmmaps and soil data and hydrologic features from digital geographic
maps of the Wageningen University & Research, department Environmental
Research. The next step is to build into WATBALsig all kinds of precision farming
Internet devices.Akkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 279
Fig. 2 WatBal provides the water requirement related to the crop grown, here potato. The dark line
represents the calculated water requirement of the crop that should be maintained at the “Enough”
level. Currently, water requirement can be calculated for more than 10 major crops and, when using
weather prediction, irrigation advice, and both the amount and time to apply, can be provided
2.2 Tipstar Water- and Nitrogen-Limited Potato Crop Growth
Model
Tipstar is a potato-specific model that simulates crop growth, soil water dynamics,
and nitrogen dynamics for crops and soil. It was originally developed to support
decision-making in starch potato production (Jansen, 2008) and has recently been
updated (Van Oort et al., 2020). The model is unique in that growth of the canopy
takes precedence over growth of other organs. Thus, tuber initiation and growth of
potato tubers take place when more assimilates are created than are needed for
canopy growth. In adverse growing conditions, assimilates can be remobilized and
translocated from the tuber to the canopy.
Tipstar-based recommendations for the application of nitrogen and irrigation
water lead to yields similar to those obtained by the best farmers (Jansen et al.,
2003). In spite of this, the model has not found practical application, possibly
because of the effort required to gather input data, perform simulations, and present
results in a meaningful way.
In 2020, Tipstar was integrated into Akkerweb 3.0 where soil, weather, and crop
management information can be provided. Now, the user can use a mouse to indicate
on a map on the computer screen the field(s) for which Tipstar should simulate
production. The location of the field is used by Akkerweb to retrieve weather data
and biophysical properties of the soil. Planting date, maturity class of the cultivar,
irrigation dates and amounts, and the dates and amounts of fertilizer application can
be provided by the user or retrieved from the user’s farm management information
system (FMIS). With this information, Tipstar produces time series of several
important variables that describe the status of the soil (e.g., water content profile,280 T. H. Been et al.
N content profile) and crop (e.g., LAI, leaf biomass, canopy biomass, tuber biomass)
(Fig. 3).
Tipstar as offered on Akkerweb 3.0 supports tactical and operational decisions
about the application of fertilizer and/or irrigation water by providing in-season
information about the crop and soil. For an in-season decision, a mix of current
weather, forecast weather, and historic weather is used. Current weather is used up to
the day of the decision (e.g., 15 June 2020), and forecast weather is used for the next
2 weeks (16–30 June). The rest of the year (from 1 July until harvest) is simulated
stochastically: 30 simulations are performed, where each simulation uses the weather
of one of the last 30 years. This results in a plume of curves rather than a single
Fig. 3 Tipstar forecast for a potato crop near Wageningen. (a) Fresh tuber yield. The crop was
planted on 15 April 2020 and the forecast was made on 4 June. From planting to 4 June, observed
weather was used for the simulation. For the 2 weeks following 4 June, forecast weather was used.
From 20 June, a stochastic simulation using 30 years of historic weather was performed; thus, from
20 June, the line becomes a plume. (b) Total amount of water in the upper 70 cm of the soil and
plant available water. The figure shows that the crop will run out of water with the irrigation
schedule that is proposedAkkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 281
curve; the median of the curve is taken as the expected value, and the spread around
the median indicated the uncertainty of the simulation. Once a field has been
registered, Tipstar is run every day, and the application creates an alert when the
simulation indicates that N or water will become limiting to growth within the next
few days.
2.3 NemaDecide
NemaDecide is a DSS for the management of plant parasitic nematodes that started
as a PC version (Been et al., 2004, 2005) but has now been converted to an
Akkerweb application. Models for population dynamics, yield reduction, partial
resistance, soil sampling, chemical control, etc. are included in the system. It
combines several data sources and models to enable strategic and operational
decisions at the farm level (see Fig. 4a, b). The quantitative information system
provides growers with the possibility to estimate risks of yield loss, population
development, detection probabilities of infestation foci by soil sampling, and calcu￾lation of cost/benefit of control measures and provides adequate advice for farmers to
optimize financial returns. Farmers can compare cropping scenarios and ask “what
if” questions. The DSS provides answers to the top 10 questions an extension officer
is exposed to. A database with more than 500 potato cultivars is available with
information on susceptibility for fungal and viral diseases, cultivar properties, and
partial resistance, expressed as relative susceptibility, of the cultivar against both
species of the potato cyst nematode.
NemaDecide is targeted to control potato cyst nematodes (Globodera spp.),
Pratylenchus penetrans, and Meloidogyne chitwoodi. The latter two species have a
broad range of hosts which necessitated the inclusion of a suitable number of crops
to enable simulations of crop rotations over successive years. Almost 50 arable,
green manure and vegetable crops, grasses, and some flower bulbs have been added.
The system was extended with the population dynamics of P. penetrans and
M. chitwoodi, both in the absence and presence of hosts. In addition, new population
dynamic models and yield loss models had to be developed to include the compe￾tition between species when attacking the same host. NemaDecide has been devel￾oped in close cooperation with extension officers and was tested “on-farm” with
more than 60 farmers. The system is connected to soil sampling companies to
retrieve nematode sampling results.
2.4 Soil Herbicide Variable-Rate Application App
Christensen et al. (2009) describe site-specific weed control and variable-rate appli￾cation (VRA) of herbicides as a way to reduce herbicide use in agriculture. The
WUR developed and validated a regression model for VRA of soil herbicides282 T. H. Been et al.
Fig. 4 (a) The NemaDecide digital chain. In the cropping scheme app, a farmer can download field
boundaries from the government database. Selecting a field, the farmer can order a nematode
sampling. The sampling agency uses the Stripbuilder app to generate the sampling units, and after
collection and processing of the soil samples, the results will be returned to the farmer. He/she can
now obtain advice from NemaDecide, choose the most suitable potato cultivar, or generate a task
map for a granular nematostatic. (b) NemaDecide GEO application. On the right, a map of the
parcel with the sampled strips and the detected infestation. To the left, the app dashboard
(SH) (Kempenaar et al., 2014a). The amount of soil herbicides used in a crop can be
reduced by adjusting the dosage to site-specific soil conditions. Soil herbicides are
more effective on parts of the field where soil organic matter and clay content are
small. The application rate of soil herbicides can be decreased in those areas withoutAkkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 283
Fig. 5 Three steps in the soil herbicide apps. (a) Upload of soil organic matter map, (b) herbicide
prescription map, and (c) machine-ready task map
affecting herbicide efficacy. The SH VRA model is integrated into a herbicide app
on Akkerweb. The app requires a soil map that shows the variation of soil organic
matter and/or clay of the field. The user of the app selects the dosing algorithm of the
herbicide of interest to make a prescription map. The last step is to make the VRA
task map set to the conditions of the user’s sprayer. In Fig. 5, we show the steps from
soil map to prescription map to task map. These steps also occur in the other VRA
apps on Akkerweb. On-farm testing of this VRA soil herbicide system with sprayers
that can vary the dose at a scale of ca 50 m2 showed reductions in herbicide use of
between 20 and 40%, with an average of 27% (Kempenaar et al., 2018). An
additional benefit of site-specific optimization of soil herbicide use is less reduction
in the growth of the crop, leading to increases in crop yield of up to 5%.
2.5 Variable-Rate Application App to Kill Potato Haulm
Modern potato farmers have to kill the aboveground green haulm of their crops
before they can mechanically harvest the belowground potato tubers. Most com￾monly, they do this by spraying a nonsystemic defoliant or leaf desiccant herbicide
some weeks before harvest (Kempenaar & Struik, 2008). Variable-rate application
(VRA) of the herbicide is a way to minimize herbicide use in a rational way. The
WUR developed and validated a regression model for VRA of potato haulm killing
(PHK) herbicides (Kempenaar et al., 2014b). The more biomass present on a part of
the field, as expressed in a crop reflection biomass index, the larger the dose of the
defoliant should be. The PHK model is integrated in a potato haulm killing app on
Akkerweb. The steps to make a PHK VRA map are similar to those for the SH VRA
app. In this case, the app requires a biomass map that shows the variation in
aboveground crop biomass (NDVI, WDVI, or other crop reflection index). The
other steps to make the prescription and task maps are similar to those for the SH
VRA app (see Sect. 3.4.3, Chap. 3). Figure 6 shows the data flow and output of the
app. On-farm experiments with the PHK dosing model and app showed reductions in
herbicide use of between 20 and 47%, with an average of 38% (Kempenaar et al.,
2014b, 2018). The PHK model can also be used on variable-rate spraying on-the-go
with sensors mounted on the sprayer and direct control of the dosing by the computer
on the sprayer.284 T. H. Been et al.
Fig. 6 Data input (blue text balloons) into PHK model (green text boxes) for biomass-dependent
dosing and output of the model for direct control of the on-the-go sprayer or to a variable-rate
prescription map that can be used to make a task map for a sprayer. For potato haulm killing,
biomass data (in red) is the main driver in the model
2.6 Late Blight App
Potato late blight, caused by the oomycete Phytophthora infestans, is one of the most
economically damaging diseases in potato. Annual losses are conservatively esti￾mated at one billion euros for Europe and three billion euros globally (Haverkort
et al., 2008). Current control methods rely primarily on frequent (calendar-based)
fungicide applications (Cooke et al., 2011).
The Late Blight app helps farmers to optimize the timing of fungicide applica￾tions to prevent potato late blight. For this purpose, local measured and local
forecasted weather data, obtained from the Akkerweb weather service, are analyzed
to identify infection events in the near future and recent past (see Fig. 7a). Preventive
fungicide applications are advised just prior to predicted infection events in the near
future. Curative fungicide applications are advised to treat young, latent infections
identified in the recent past. Eradicant fungicide applications aim to remedy older
latent and active infections. The principles of the infection risk model in the app are
described by Kessel et al. (2018).
The Late Blight app uses fungicide-specific ratings for rain intensity and protec￾tion of the foliage and tubers, for example, as published by Euroblight (www.
euroblight.net), to calculate the time- and weather-dependent protection level of
foliage and tubers. These ratings have been established through multiyear andAkkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 285
Fig. 7 (a) Data use and flow in the potato blight App: Forecasted and measured local weather data
are used to calculate crop emergence, crop growth (LAI), pathogen infection events and (remaining)
fungicide protection. Preventive fungicide applications are advised when an infection event is
predicted in the near future AND the remaining fungicide protection is insufficient. (b) Screenshot
of a Late Blight app advice on 28 May. On 30 May, an infection event is predicted by the infection
risk model. That is why on 29 May, a preventive fungicide application is recommended (yellow). If
this advice cannot be carried out, a curative advice (orange) or an eradicant advice (red) is issued for
30 and 31 May. The marker on 23 May indicates crop emergence. Spray advice is not issued before
crop emergence
multicountry field trials and are updated when necessary. A further fungicide
application is advised only when protection from the previous application is insuf￾ficient and an infection event is identified in the near future. The results are displayed
in a simple interface which summarizes visually the key parameters and the advice
(Fig. 7b). The Late Blight App operates at field level. It allows farmers to enter
multiple fields. Advisors can view the results of multiple clients (farmers), each with
multiple fields, once permission is granted by the client. The interface is built on a
digital map of the farm or region with the potato fields highlighted in different colors
representing the spray advice:
Green: No action is necessary
Yellow: A preventive fungicide application is advised
Orange: A curative fungicide application is advised
Red: An eradicant fungicide application is advised
In the next version, of the Late Blight app, the model is extended in a way that the
resistance of the potato variety can be taken into account and variable-rate286 T. H. Been et al.
prescription maps can be made using crop biomass maps. This version has been
tested in on-farm research since 2019.
2.7 Nitrogen Side Dress System (NSS) in Ware and Starch
Potatoes
This application supports farmers to apply N side dress with variable-rate technology
to maximize growth of the potatoes while minimizing the use of N (Booij et al.,
2017, Booij and Uenk, 2004; Van Evert et al., 2012). In a side dress system, N is
applied twice. Before planting, two-thirds of the nitrogen recommendation is applied
as a flat rate by chemical and/or organic fertilizers (manure, compost, etc.). In late
June or early July, a site-specific amount of side dress N is applied according to the
crop’s needs. To achieve this, canopy reflectance is measured with a satellite, an
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), or a tractor-mounted sensor, and a vegetation index
is derived. The application has the possibility to import a map of the vegetation index
into the farmer’s account on Akkerweb, or it can make use of already available data
from other services on Akkerweb, like the Bioscope application, satellite applica￾tion, or sensor data application.
The NSS app consists of three parts. First, the vegetation index map is converted
to a nitrogen uptake map. Using relations derived from field research, a vegetation
index like weighted difference vegetation index (WDVI) (Clevers, 1988) or chloro￾phyll index (CI) (Gitelson and Merzlyak, 1994; Gitelson et al., 2005), which give
relative values, are converted to nitrogen uptake of the aboveground biomass of
potatoes, which are absolute values in kg N per hectare. Second, an empirical growth
curve is used to determine the amount of nitrogen that would have been taken up by a
crop that is not limited by the availability of N. This curve takes into account the
temperature sum between planting date and scouting date, expected yield, and the
aim of the cultivation (ware or starch potatoes). Last, from the optimal and the
measured nitrogen uptake, a site-specific recommendation is calculated (van Evert
et al., 2012; Booij et al., 2017).
The nitrogen side dress system leads to an average reduction in the use of N of
about 40 kg nitrogen per hectare with no reduction in yield (Van Evert et al., 2012)
(Fig. 8 and Table 4). Additionally, in wet seasons, leaching of N is reduced (van
Evert et al., 2017a, b).
Figure 9 shows the architecture of the NSS application. The user of the applica￾tion must select a field within the crop rotation plan. These data are retrieved from
the crop field app in Akkerweb. The variety and planting date are also included.
Then, the user imports a biomass map, either manually from his/her own PC or from
other applications on Akkerweb, such as the sensor data app, Bioscope app, or
satellite app. The user must also fill in the expected yield. The application, in return,
shows a nitrogen uptake map, the target nitrogen uptake derived from the optimum
growth curve, and the recommended amount of side dress N. In the background, theAkkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 287
Fig. 8 Comparison of applied N and fresh tuber yield obtained with the recommended N rate and
with the N side dress system. On the horizontal axis, the change in applied N with NSS relative to
the recommended N rate is given. On the vertical axis, the change in fresh tuber yield is given. Each
symbol represents an experiment. For black symbols, the yield difference was statistically different;
for gray symbols, the yield difference was not statistically different. The overall trend is that if NSS
recommends a large N rate, then yield is high, too, whereas if NSS recommends a small N rate, then
yield is not affected
application connects to a webservice which contains the growth model and a
connection to weather data. Last, the user can tune the recommendation by filling
in the nitrogen content of the specific fertilizer that will be used, the minimum and
maximum rate of N to be applied, and the grid size. A task map is then generated,
which can be used in an up-to-date tractor terminal.
2.8 farmmaps Dashboard
The models and apps presented in Sects. 2.1 and 2.7 also run on the farmmaps
platform, the third version of Akkerweb, currently in development and available in
spring 2021. farmmaps features several improvements which resulted from obser￾vation on the interaction between farmers and Akkerweb and their needs observed
during the last few years: data files are getting bigger and bigger, farmers like to be
“taken by the hand,” and everything should also be available on the mobile phone.
First of all, farmmaps has an updated data repository which can process and store
data independent of their size. Data can be dragged and dropped onto the map and
analyzed to recognize the type of data and provide an image for visualization in one
go. The properties of each file will be stored in a metafile for the rapid retrieval of
files, appropriate for use in a certain application. Non-GEO data can be dropped on a288 T. H. Been et al. Table 4 Summary of tests with NSS Year Location Soil Cultivar Use N rate (kg ha-1) Fresh yield (t ha-1) Starch (t ha-1) Sign. Ref. Recomm. Side dress Recomm. Side dress Recomm. Side dress 2002 Colijnsplaat Clay Agria Ware 80+54 80+0 62.5 60.8 1,2 2002 Colijnsplaat Clay Felsina Ware 131+88 131+0 49.5 48.5 1,2 2003 Colijnsplaat Clay Agria Ware 102+68 102+60 57.5 51.8 y 1,3 2003 Colijnsplaat Clay Felsina Ware 141+94 141+35 44.9 43.2 1,3 2002 Rolde Sand Seresta Starch 225 150+30 54.6 55.3 12.2 12.4 1,4 2002 Rolde Sand Mercator Starch 155 120+20 53.2 53.9 11.3 11.5 1,4 2003 Rolde Sand Seresta Starch 250 115+70 52.1 51.4 11.1 10.9 1,4 2003 Rolde Sand Mercator Starch 185 90+70 49.3 55.2 9.9 11.4 y 1,4 2010 Valthermond Sand Seresta Starch 225 175+100 47.8 48.5 10.0 10.2 5 2010 Colijnsplaat Clay Victoria Ware 250 150+50 44.4 46.8 5 2011 Valthermond Sand Seresta Starch 120+60 120+45 46.6 49.1 10.3 10.5 6 2011 Reusel Sand Fontane Ware 165 219+54 78.6 87.2 y 6 2011 Reusel Sand Fontane Ware 229 229+27 91.4 100.9 y 6 2011 Biddinghuizen Clay Milva Ware 150+54 150+54 70.9 71.0 6 2012 Vredepeel Sand Fontane Ware 266 145+90 78.0 78.8 7 2012 Hulsberg Löss Fontane Ware 182 150+0 63.5 62.2 7 2013 Vredepeel Sand Fontane Ware 287 150+53 70.6 69.5 7 2013 Hulsberg Löss Fontane Ware 171 150+59 58.3 61.9 7 2014 Valthermond Sand Seresta Starch 205 205+50 49.6 49.9 10.9 10.7 8 The difference between yields in an experiment is statistically significant if a “y” is noted in column “Sign.” Reports cited are 1Van Evert et al. (2012), 2Slabbekoorn (2002), 3Slabbekoorn (2003), 4Van Geel et al. (2004), 5Van Evert et al. (2011), 6Van der Schans (2012), 7Van Geel et al. (2014), 8and Van Geel and Van der Schans (2015)Akkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 289
Fig. 9 Schematic flow of inputs (I) and (O) in Akkerweb NSS app. A task map based on CI map
and NSS model and expected yield of 55 tons per ha is shown
parcel and will be georeferenced and are viewable (Excel, Word, PDF, images). The
farmer can now store and retrieve all information concerning his parcel.
The concept of “workers” is introduced, small pieces of code that carry out
automatic and, if necessary, scheduled tasks that can also be triggered by events
and which fuel the dashboard by constantly updating the information presented.
The interface is created in Angular which means that farmmaps can run on all
devices, including mobile phones. The most important interface change is the use of
information widgets in a dashboard (Fig. 10a) that is eventually intended to provide
the farmer with an instant overview concerning the current state of his farm,
including the necessary alerts to take action if required. The widgets present con￾densed information and alerts. More specific information can be obtained when
opening the widget (Fig. 10b). Clicking on the icon will take the user to the app that
will solve the problem. This three-tier approach should provide a more intuitive
approach for a farmer than a selection of 30+ different single app tiles on a
dashboard.
The models running on Akkerweb are also available on farmmaps. However, the
new engines are implemented as web services that will be available to third parties
who like to use these engines but prefer to use and present them on their own
GEO-platform with their own interfaces.290 T. H. Been et al.
Fig. 10 farmmaps look and feel. (a) Dashboard with widgets giving soil and crop information.
Detailed information can be provided by opening widgets. (b) Soil moisture data as measured with
radar remote sensing. Widget information on water availability and deficiency is shown in Fig. 2 on
the crop growth of potato in Fig. 3
3 Outlook
It is likely that precision agriculture will become more mainstream in the coming
years contributing to more sustainable and circular crop production and that farming
and value chain optimization will be based on data to a much greater extent. ThisAkkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 291
transition will be much influenced by the availability of service platforms like
Akkerweb that bring together all relevant data in a safe farm data space where the
farmer has control over his data. He wants to use the data to monitor and benchmark
his crops, to report to chain partners, and to make better management decisions. In
addition, digital agri-food chains can be optimized, and tracking and tracing become
possible when we have mature value chains. The question is when will this all
become mainstream, for example, more than 50% of the farms in countries like the
Netherlands use data to do all aforementioned farming activities. A few issues still
have to be solved to reach this stage (today, we estimate that less than 1% of the
farms in the Netherlands are mature data-driven farms). Farmers must become
convinced that data-driven farming is not too complex, that the investments bring
significant added value, and that data will not be misused. Ease of use, equal sharing
of benefits across the value chain, and trust by good governance will be crucial in
making data-driven farming mainstream.
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they are employed by the Wageningen University &
Research, which is the sole member of the not-for-profit foundation that owns and exploits
Akkerweb and farmmaps.
References
Been, T. H., & Schomaker, C. H. (2004). A geo-referenced decision support system for nematodes
in potatoes. In D. K. L. Mac Kerron & A. J. Haverkort (Eds.), Decision support systems in
potato production (pp. 154–167). Bringing Models to Pratice Wageningen.
Been, T. H., Schomaker, C. H., & Molendijk, L. P. G. (2005). Nema decide: A decision support
system for the management of potato cyst nematodes. In A. J. Haverkort & P. C. Struik (Eds.),
Potato in progress (pp. 154–167). Wageningen Academic Publishers.
Berghuis-van Dijk, J. T. (1985). WATBAL: A simple water balance model for an unsaturated￾saturated soil profile. Institute for Land and Water Management Research. Note Nr. 1670.
Booij, R., & Uenk, D. (2004). Crop-reflection-based DSS for supplemental nitrogen dressings in
potato production. In D. Mackerron & A. J. Haverkort (Eds.), Decision support systems in
potato production: Bringing models to practice (pp. 46–53). Wageningen Academic Publishers.
Booij, J. A., van Evert, F. K., & van Geel, W. C. A. et al.. (2017, June). Roll-out of online
application for N sidedress recommendations in potato. In Proceedings of EFITA. Montpellier.
http://library.wur.nl/Web Query/wurpubs/fulltext/445495
Christensen, S., Sogaard, H. T., Kudsk, P., et al. (2009). Site-specific weed control technologies.
Weed Research, 49(3), 233–241.
Clevers, J. G. P. W. (1988). The derivation of a simplified reflectance model for the estimation of
leaf-area index. Remote Sensing of Environment, 25, 53–69.
Cooke, L. R., Schepers, H. T. A. M., Hermansen, A., et al. (2011). Epidemiology and integrated
control of potato late blight in Europe. Potato Research, 54, 183–222.
EIP. (2015). EIP-AGRI focus group on precision farming: Final report. https://ec.europa.eu/eip/
agriculture/en/publications/eip-agri-focus-group-precision-farming-final
Euroblight. (2020, May 13). http://www.euroblight.net
Feddes, R. A., Kowalik, P. J., & Zaradny, H. (1978). Simulation of field water use and crop yield.
(189 p). Simulation Monographs Pudoc.292 T. H. Been et al.
Fountas, S., Carli, G., Sorensen, C. G., et al. (2015). Farm management information systems:
Current situation and future perspectives. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 115,
40–50.
GDAL/OGR contributors. (2021). GDAL/OGR geospatial data abstraction software library. Open
Source Geospatial Foundation. https://gdal.org
Gitelson, A., & Merzlyak, M. N. (1994). Quantitative estimation of chlorophyll-A using reflectance
spectra: Experiments with autumn chestnut and maple leaves. Journal of Photochemistry and
Photobiology B: Biology, 22, 247–252.
Gitelson, A. A., Vina, A., Ciganda, V., Rundquist, D. C., & Arkebauer, T. J. (2005). Remote
estimation of canopy chlorophyll content in crops. Geophysical Research Letters, 32. https://
doi.org/10.1029/2005gl022688
Goense, D. (2017). rmAgro/drmAgro/drmCrop. https://edepot.wur.nl/408327
Haverkort, A. J., Boonenkamp, P. M., Hutten, R. C. B., & Jacobsen, E. (2008). Societal costs of late
blight in potato and prospects of durable resistance through Cisgenic modification. Potato
Research, 51(1), 47–57.
Jansen, D. M. (2008). Beschrijving van TIPSTAR: hét simulatiemodel voor groei en productie van
zetmeelaardappelen (Nota 547). Plant Research International.
Jansen, D. M., Davies, J., & Steenhuizen, J. (2003). Gevoeligheid van TIPSTAR voor de waarden
van situatie-specifieke invoergegevens (Nota 258). Plant Research International.
Kempenaar, C., & Struik, P. C. (2008). The canon of potato science: Haulm killing. Potato
Research, 50, 341–345.
Kempenaar, C., Heiting, S., & Michielsen, J. M. (2014a). Perspectives for site specific application
of soil herbicides in arable farming. In Proceedings of ICPA conference, Sacramento, USA, July
2014. Paper 1414, https://www.ispag.org/icpa
Kempenaar, C., van Evert, F.K., & Been, Th. (2014b). Use of vegetation indices in variable rate
application of potato haulm killing herbicides. In Proceedings of ICPA conference, Sacramento,
USA, July 2014. Paper 1413, https://www.ispag.org/icpa
Kempenaar, C., Been, T., Booij, J. A., van Evert, F. K., Michielsen, J. M., & Kocks, C. G. (2018).
Advances in variable rate technology application in potato in The Netherlands. Potato Research,
60(3–4), 295–305.
Kessel, G. J. T., Mullins, E., Evenhuis, A., et al. (2018). Development and validation of IPM
strategies for the cultivation of cisgenically modified late blight resistant potato. European
Journal of Agronomy, 96, 146–155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2018.01.012
Kroes, J. G., van Dam, J. C., Groenendijk, P., Hendriks En, R. F. A., & Jacobs, C. M. J. (2008).
SWAP version 3.2: Theory description and user manual. Wageningen University & Research.
Slabbekoorn, H. (2002). Stikstofbijmestsystemen in consumptieaardappelen, 2002 = N sidedress
systems in ware potatoes, 2002.WUR-PPO, Westmaas.
Slabbekoorn, H. (2003). Stikstofbijmestsystemen in consumptieaardappelen, 2003 = N sidedress
systems in ware potatoes, 2003.WUR-PPO, Westmaas.
Van der Schans, D.A. (2012). Sensorgestuurde advisering van stikstof bijbemesting in aardappel:
implementatie en integratie Praktijkonderzoek Plant & Omgeving, Business Unit Akkerbouw,
Groene Ruimte en Vollegrond[s]groenten, .
Van Evert, F. K., Van der Schans, D. A., Malda, J. T., Van den Berg, W., Van Geel, W. C. A., &
Jukema, J. N. (2011). Geleide N-bemesting voor aardappelen op basis van gewasreflectie￾metingen: Integratie van sensormetingen in een N-bijmestsysteem (PPO Rapport 423).
Praktijkonderzoek Plant & Omgeving (PPO), Lelystad.
Van Evert, F. K., Booij, R., Jukema, J. N., Ten Berge, H. F. M., Uenk, D., Meurs, E. J. J., et al.
(2012). Using crop reflectance to determine sidedress N rate in potato saves N and maintains
yield. European Journal of Agronomy, 43, 58–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2012.05.005
Van Evert, F. K., Gaitán-Cremaschi, D., Fountas, S., & Kempenaar, C. (2017a). Can precision
agriculture increase the profitability and sustainability of the production of potatoes and olives?
Sustainability, 9(10), 1863–1886. https://doi.org/10.3390/su9101863Akkerweb and farmmaps: Development of Open Service Platforms for... 293
Van Evert, F. K., Fountas, S., Jakovetic, D., et al. (2017b). Big data for weed control and crop
protection. Weed Research, 57, 218–233. https://doi.org/10.1111/wre.12255
Van Geel, W. C. A., & Van der Schans, D. A. (2015). Toepassing van NBS-aardappelsensing in de
teelt van zetmeelaardappelen: IJkakker, veldproef 2014 ’t Kompas Praktijkonderzoek Plant &
Omgeving, onderdeel van Wageningen UR. Business Unit Akkerbouw, Groene ruimte en
Vollegrondgroenten.
Van Geel, W. C. A., Wijnholds, K. H., Grashoff, C.. (2004). Ontwikkeling van geleide
bemestingssystemen bij de teelt van zetmeelaardappelen 2002–2003 (Development of guided
fertilization for starch potatoes in 2002–2003). WUR-PPO.
Van Geel, W. C. A., Kroonen-Backbier, B. M. A., Van der Schans, D. A., & Malda, J. T. (2014).
Nieuwe bijmestsystemen en -strategieën voor aardappel op zand- en lössgrond. Deel 2:
resultaten veldproeven 2012 en 2013 (p. 66). PPO-AGV.
Van Oort, P.A.J., Van Evert, F. K., & Kempenaar, C. (2020). Calibration of the Tipstar potato
model using remote sensing data. Second International Crop Modelling Symposium
(iCROPM2020). Montpellier.
Vinten, A. J. A. (1999). Predicting nitrate leaching from drained arable soils derived from glacial
till. Journal of Environmental Quality, 28, 988–996.
Wikipedia. (2020, May 13). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/precision_agricultureIndex
A
Accuracy, 57
Actual N uptake, 116
Adapt-N, 201–207
Adjusting model state variables, 191
Adoption of model-based practices, 76–98
Age, 94
Aggregation, 157, 158
Agricultural Data Collaboration Platform
WAGRI, 244
Agricultural data sharing, 18
Agricultural field, 162, 167, 171
Agricultural monitoring, 153, 154, 178
Agricultural Production Systems sIMulator
(APSIM), 109, 186, 194
Agronomic management, 105
AgSkyNet, 252
Air-entry value, 141
Algorithms, 153, 171–173, 177, 178
Analytical solution, 135
Anchoring, 93
Apple, 258
Apps, 271
APSIM-SWIMv2.1, 143
APSIM-WEIRDO, 143
AquaCrop, 235
Artificial neural networks, 178
Autonomous machinery, 246
Auto-steer technology, 246
Auxiliary variables, 55
AVR, 236
B
Barley, 118
Behavioural approaches, 90–93
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
D. Cammarano et al. (eds.), Precision Agriculture: Modelling, Progress in Precision
Agriculture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15258-0
295
Behavioural economics, 78
Behavioural factors, 77
Benchmark, 226
Beneficial insects, 252
Big data models, 237
Block cokriging, 158, 161
Boundaries, 54
Boundary conditions, 133
C
Calibrated, 117
Carrying capacity, 66
Cauchy boundary conditions, 133
CENTURY model, 108
CERES, 192, 193
Certification, 260
Change of support, 156, 157, 162, 171, 179
Chlorophyll index (CI), 286
Climate extremes, 4
Climatic scenarios, 50
Cloudfarm, 265
C:N ratio, 109
Coefficients, 55
Complexity, 50
Computer programs, 55
Conservation of mass, 133
Constants, 55
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs), 13,
254
Copernicus, 187
Coregionalisation, 156, 159–161, 165, 167
Corn, 201, 203
Cost-effective, 155
COUP, 143
Cracks, 141296 Index
Critical, 114
Cropcircle, 192
Crop consultants, 203
Crop growth models, 11–12, 265
Crop growth simulation models, 257
Crop models, 26, 107
Crop nitrogen uptake, 6
Crop parameters, 30
Crop production, 26
Crop protection, 54
Crops, 50
CropSAR, 231
CropSyst, 112
Crop-soil interactions, 105
Crop water stress index (CWSI), 10
Crop yield, 155
Curative fungicide applications, 284
D
DAISY, 143
Darcy–Buckingham equation, 130
Data assimilation, 186
Data availability, usage and quality, 19
Data-Driven Advice, 237
Data exchange, 17
Data fusion, 154, 156, 158, 159, 163, 171–173,
176, 179
Data-limited, 153
Data ownership, 17
Data-rich, 153, 154
Data security, 17
Decision-level, 178
Decision-making, 50, 223–226
Decision support, 226
Decision support systems (DSSs), 53, 76,
265, 271
Decision support system for agrotechnology
transfer (DSSAT), 108, 186, 193
Decision tools, 53
Decision Zones, 211–213, 218
Deficiency N demand (DND), 116
Definitions of precision agriculture, 8
Demographic factors, 88
Denitrification, 107, 220
Destructive sampling, 186
Deterministic model, 51
Development, 154
Digital agriculture, 5
Digital farming, 224
Digital soil mapping (DSM), 33
Digital twin (DT), 12
Dirichlet condition, 133 Fertilizer prices, 204
Disaggregation, 157, 158
Disease cycle, 53
Ditches, 134
DjustConnect, 236
Downscaling, 157
Drainage, 141
Drains, 134
Driving functions, 55
Drought, 35
DSSAT–CENTURY, 111
Dynamic model, 10
E
Econometric analysis, 94–97
Economic optimum nitrogen recommendation
(EONR), 203, 221
Economics, 7
Economic sustainability, 106
Economic threshold level (ETL), 253
Education, 94
Education level, 77
Empirical growth curve, 286
Empirical models, 51
Empirical relations, 36
Environment, 50, 54
Environmental Response Units (ERUs),
211, 213
Environmental sustainability, 106
Epidemics, 50
Epidemiological processes, 50
EPIPRE, 11
Eradicant fungicide applications, 284
Erosion, 5, 135
Ethical matrix, 17
Euroblight, 284
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts (ECMWF), 144
Eutrophication, 4
Evaluation, 118
Expected utility theory, 91
External variables, 55
F
Factorial cokriging, 159, 161
Farm management, 225
Farm management information systems
(FMISs), 16, 270
Farm size, 90, 94
Feddes model of water uptake, 137
Fertilization, 105Index 297
Fertilizer recommendations, 225
Fertilizer retailers, 203
Field, 117
Field boundaries, 210
FIELD MANAGER, 223
Flows, 55, 108
FLUX, 108
Foliar disease, 60
Food and Agriculture Organization-water
requirement satisfaction index
(FAO-WRSI), 186
Food safety, 260
Forcing, 187–188
Forecast weather, 217, 280
Fraction of absorbed photosynthetically active
radiation (fAPAR), 231
Framing, 92
Fresh organic matter (FOM), 110
Functional, 29
Fundamental models, 52
Fungal disease prediction model, 264
Fungicides, 68
Fusion, 162, 171–176, 178, 179
FUSSIM-2D, 143
Fuzzy control system (FCS), 68
G
Gaseous losses, 204
Globodera spp., 281
GOSSYM/COMAX, 11
Grain N, 117
Grain prices, 204
Grain protein and moisture content, 242
Granular Agronomy Nitrogen Management,
209–211, 215, 220, 221
Granular crop model, 209, 216
Grapes, 258
Grapevine downy mildew, 59
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, 201
Green Revolution, 3
Greenseeker, 192
Growth, 66
Growth N demand (GND), 116
H
Harvest planning and logistics, 234
Heat capacity, 142
Heat conductivity, 142
Helopeltis theivora, 255
Herbicide application, 10
Herding behaviour, 92
High-resolution panchromatic, 171
Historical weather, 217, 280
Homogeneous management zones, 159
Host crop, 54
Host-plant, 55
Human behaviour, 7
Human interventions, 54
Humic fraction (HUM), 110
Hybrid, 177
Hydraulic conductivity characteristic, 134
HYDRUS-1D, 143
Hyperspectral, 155, 156, 171
Hyperspectral sensing (HS), 258
HYPRES, 135
Hysteresis, 140
I
Immobilization, 109
Infection risk model, 284
Infiltration, 135
InfoCrop, 194
Initial condition, 133
Initial status, 34
Innovation diffusion, 76
Inoculum, 59
Inorganic N, 107
In-season estimated yield (INSEY), 9
Integrated Administration and Control System
(IACS), 234
Integrated pest assessment (IPA), 252
Integrated pest management (IPM), 58, 252
Integrated rice farming mechanization
system, 244
Interactions, 106
Intermediate, 55
Intermediate variables, 55
Irrigation, 38, 215, 234
Irrigation advice, 265
Irrigation planning, 203
Irrigation zones, 211
ISOBUS, 264, 273
J
Judgment of utility, 57
K
Kalman filter, 191, 192
KNMI, 144
Kriging, 158, 160, 167
Kubota Smart Agri System (KSAS), 241–243298 Index
L
Labor savings, 246–249
Landscapes, 25
Laser scanners, 247
Late Blight in potato, 264
Leaching, 220
LEACHN, 202
Leaf area index (LAI), 227, 265
Leaves, 115
Lesions, 62
Limiters, 54
LINTUL, 265
LINTUL-5, 227
Long-term simulations, 38
Loss aversion, 92
Low-resolution multispectral, 171
M
Machine learning (ML), 12
MACRO, 143
Macropores, 141
Malus domestica, 258
Management plans, 210
Management zones, 26
Mapeo, 237
Mathematical framework, 56
Maximum, 114
Mechanistic, 29
Mediterranean, 117
Meloidogyne chitwoodi, 277, 281
Metamodel, 194
Michealis-Menten, 110
Minimum, 114
Model, 49
Model-based practices (MBPs), 76
Model calibration, 7
Model evaluation, 57
Model flowchart, 55
Modelling, 153, 154, 157, 159, 175, 179
Model lifecycle, 79
Model performance, 50
Moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer
(MODIS), 189, 192
Monitoring, 154
Morus alba, 258
Mualem–Van Genuchten (MvG) models, 135
Mulberry, 258
Multi-N rate trials, 203
Multi-resolution, 176
Multi-Year Yield Analysis (MYYA), 211
N
National Agriculture and Food Research
Organization, 245
National Crop Commodity Productivity Index
(NCCPI), 212
National Yield Index, 212
Natural enemies, 54
Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS), 212
N concentration, 114
N demand, 114
N dynamic simulation, 107
Near-infrared spectroscopic analysis sensors
(NIR), 242
Near-saturated conditions, 132
NemaDecide, 271, 281
Neumann condition, 133
Neural networks, 254
N factors, 114
Nitrate leaching, 4
Nitrate vulnerable zones (NVZs), 4
Nitrification, 107, 220
Nitrogen (N), 28, 105, 201
Nitrogen-limited production, 7
Nitrogen mineralization, 107
Nitrogen rate recommendations, 209
Nitrogen recommendations, 202
Nitrogen side dress system (NSS), 286
Nitrogen sufficiency index (NSI), 9
N management scenario, 122
N models, 108
Non-adoption, 91
Normalized difference vegetation index
(NDVI), 10, 277, 283
N recommendations, 40
N reduction factors, 115
N stress, 114
N supply, 108
Numerical solution, 133
O
Observations, 154
Observations of crop variables, 186, 187, 194
One-dimensional, 33
Operational, 58
Optical images, 172
Organs, 114
Oryza sativa, 252
Owner of the data, 236
Oxygen, 142Index 299
Oxygen deficiency, 35
Oxygen stress, 142
P
PAPRAN model, 108
Participatory-based approaches, 77
Pathogens, 50, 54
Pest detection, 253
Pest prediction, 253
Phenology, 114
Photosynthesis, 30
Phytophthora infestans, 277, 284
Pixel level, 172
Planet Labs, 195
Plant components, 114
Plant disease, 50
Plant disease epidemics, 50
Plant pathology, 50
Plants, 156, 172
PNUTGRO, 193
Ponding, 135
Pore-size distribution, 141
Potato cyst nematodes, 271, 281
Potato haulm killing (PHK), 10, 283
Potato late blight, 284
Potential N supply, 116
Potential production, 7
Potential rate of nitrification, 110
Pratylenchus penetrans, 277, 281
Precision agriculture (PA), 5, 26, 129, 153, 154,
186, 187, 192, 223, 263, 270, 290
Precision application equipment, 19
Precision farming (PF), 239
Precision nitrogen management (PNM), 202
Prediction of yield, 224
Predictive models, 52
Preventive fungicide applications, 284
Probability weighting, 91
Process-based, 28
Process-based crop models, 10
Process-based models, 52
Process-thinking, 154
Propagation of uncertainty, 188
Prospect theory, 91
Puma 4.0 potato harvesters, 236
Q
Qualitative model, 51
Quantitative model, 51
R
Radiation use efficiency (RUE), 30
Raindancer, 265
Rainfall, 118
Rates, 55
Recalibration, 188, 191
Recommendations, 106
Red spider mites (RSM), 255
Reduction in biodiversity, 5
Reduction of herbicide use, 10
Reference image, 179
Reference model Agro (rmAgro), 274
Regression, 156, 157, 179
Regression models, 9–10
Remote sensing, 171, 255–257
Remote sensing data, 225
Remote sensing drones, 244
RETC model, 134
Revenue, 224
Rice, 252
Rice cultivation, 240
Rice transplanters, 246
Richards equation, 131
Risk attitudes, 91–92
Risk prediction, 254
Robot technology, 246
Robustness, 57
Root distribution, 132
Root knot nematodes, 271, 277
Root lesion nematode, 277
Root water uptake, 36, 136
Rooting depth, 132
Runoff, 5, 135
Rust, 64
RZWQM, 143
S
Salinity stress, 142
Satellite imaging, 240
Satellites, 153, 155, 156, 171, 178, 265
Scale, 157
Scale of observation, 145
Scaling, 157
Scouting, 253
Secondary infections, 62
Sensitivity analysis, 57
Sensors, 153
Sentinel-1 (S1), 187, 192, 231
Sentinel-2 (S1), 187, 192, 227, 231
Share data, 237300 Index
Shrinking, 141
SIMPLACE, 227
Simplicity, 50
Simulating leaching, 204
Simulation models, 52
Site-specific, 106
Site-specific N recommendations, 202
Skewed data, 159
Social factors, 87–90
Social learning, 77
Societal factors, 88, 89
Socioeconomic factors, 92
Software as a Service (SaaS), 265
Soil, 155, 156, 162–170, 172, 173
Soil compaction, 5
Soil–crop interaction, 26
Soil and crop N status, 203
Soil herbicides, 281
Soil heterogeneity, 146
Soil improvement measures, 242
Soil organic carbon, 13
Soil-plant-atmosphere-management
interactions, 106
Soil properties, 25
Soil sampling, 33
Soil structure, 5
Soil Survey Geographic Database (SSURGO),
213
Soil temperature, 142
Soil water balance, 278
Soil water dynamics, 129
Soil water status, 203
Solute transport, 132
Solute transport in soils, 142
SOYGRO, 193
Sparse representation-based, 177
Spatial data, 154–161, 165, 167, 168, 170–177,
179, 180
Spatial dependence, 156
Spatial patterns, 26, 37
Spatial variation, 25, 105, 117, 145, 147
Spatial variation in crop performance, 233
Spatial yield pattern, 228
Spatial yield variation, 228
Spatio-temporal data, 155
Stable zones, 37
Stakeholders, 77, 78
Staring series, 135
State variables, 55
Statistical crop models, 10
Stochastic models, 51
Strategic, 54
Subsoil, 37
Support, 156
Support vector machines, 254
Sustainability, 225
Sustainable, 155
Sustainable management practice, 38
SWAP, 136, 142, 143, 189, 193, 276
SWAP–WOFOST, 143
Swelling and shrinking, 141
Switches, 55
System, 49
Systems analysis, 55
T
Tactical, 54
Tactical and operational decisions, 280
Task map, 283
TCS Digital Farming Initiatives group, 252
Tea mosquito bug (TMB), 255
Technology acceptance, 76
Technology acceptance model (TAM), 81, 87
Temporal data, 154
Temporal dynamics, 26
Testing, 83–84
Tetranychus urticae, 255
Theory of dynamic systems and models, 6
Tipping-bucket approach, 131
Tipstar, 11
Tipstar potato growth model, 279
Traceability, 242, 260
Trade-off, 106
Transformation, 159, 161, 162, 165, 174–178
Translocation, 114
Type of farm, 94
U
Ultrasonic sonar, 247
Uncertainties, 156
Undernourishment, 3
United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA), 213
Unmanned aerial vehicle, 156
UNSODA, 135
Updating, 187, 190–192
Upscaling, 157
Uptake, 116
Upward movement of water, 132
Upward movements, 109
V
Validation, 154, 165, 167
Variability maps, 233
Variable-rate application (VRA), 232, 254, 265,
267, 281, 283
Variable-rate nitrogen prescriptions, 217Index 301
Variable-rate technology, 286
Variational, 177
Variogram, 158, 160, 165, 167, 168
Vegetation index, 286
Veris sensor, 277
Vertical supports, 164
Visible-infrared, 172
Vitis vinifera, 258
Volatilization, 220
W
WATBAL, 276
WatBal soil moisture balance model, 276
WatchITgrow, 230
Water, 26, 117
Water for Agriculture Remote Actuated System
(WATARAS), 244
Water-holding capacity, 132
Water-limited production, 7
Water movement, 130
WaterRadar, 234
Water retention characteristic, 134
Wavelet, 176
Weather, 26
Weather conditions, 53
Weighted difference vegetation index
(WDVI), 286
Weighted ensemble mean assimilation, 228
WELL_N, 82
What-if, 107
Wheat, 117
Wheat yield patterns, 5
WOFOST, 186, 192, 235, 265
X
xarvio®, 223, 225–227
xarvio® Digital Farming, 223
xarvio® Digital Farming Solutions, 223
Y
Yara N-sensor, 10
YDRUS-2D/3D, 143
Yield forecasts, 224, 235
Yield monitors, 210, 212
Yield potential maps, 233
Yield prediction, 240
Yield stability zones, 119
Yield targets, 212
Z
Zea mays, 201
Zoning effect, 157
