Predictive Analytics 
in Smart Agriculture
Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture explores computational engineering 
techniques and applications in agriculture development. Recent technologies, such as 
cloud computing, IoT, big data, and machine learning, are focused on for smart agri￾cultural engineering. This book also provides a case-oriented approach for IoT-based 
agricultural systems.
This book deals with all aspects of smart agriculture with state-of-the-art predictive 
analysis in the complete 360-degree view spectrum. The book includes the con￾cepts of urban and vertical farming using Agro IoT systems and renewable energy 
sources for modern agriculture trends. It discusses the real-world challenges, com￾plexities in Agro IoT, and advantages of incorporating smart technology. It also 
presents the rapid advancement of the technologies in the existing Agri model by 
applying the various techniques. Novel architectural solutions in smart agricultural 
engineering are the core aspects of this book. Several predictive analysis tools and 
smart agriculture are also incorporated.
This book can be used as a textbook for students in predictive analysis, agriculture 
engineering, precision farming, and smart agriculture. It can also be a reference book 
for practicing professionals in cloud computing, IoT, big data, machine learning, and 
deep learning working on smart agriculture applications.Predictive Analytics 
in Smart Agriculture
Edited by
Saravanan Krishnan, A. Jose Anand, 
Narayanan Prasanth, Sam Goundar, 
and Christo AnanthDesigned cover image: Shutterstock
MATLAB® is a trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. and is used with permission. The MathWorks does 
not warrant the accuracy of the text or exercises in this book. This book’s use or discussion of MATLAB®
software or related products does not constitute endorsement or sponsorship by The MathWorks of a 
particular pedagogical approach or particular use of the MATLAB® software.
First edition published 2024
by CRC Press
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2024 selection and editorial matter, Saravanan Krishnan, A. Jose Anand, Narayanan Prasanth, 
Sam Goundar, and Christo Ananth; individual chapters, the contributors
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher 
cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors 
and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publica￾tion and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If 
any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any 
future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, trans￾mitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval 
system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com
or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-
750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are 
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 978-1-032-47950-7 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-48898-1 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-39130-2 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302
Typeset in Times
by KnowledgeWorks Global Ltd.v
Contents
Contributors.............................................................................................................vii
Chapter 1 Farming Assistance Using Machine Learning and Internet 
of Things ..............................................................................................1
Kauser Ahmed P. and V. Srishti
Chapter 2 Automated Seasonal Crop Mapping and Acreage Estimation 
Framework Using Machine Learning Algorithms: A Survey............20
V. Santhi and S. Mahenthiran
Chapter 3 Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture: A Systematic 
Review on Tools, Techniques, and Applications................................37
J. Dhakshayani, B. Surendiran, and J. Jyothsna
Chapter 4 Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques ..............58
Parveen Sultana H., Nishant Sharma, and Sneha Leela Jacob
Chapter 5 Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation System Using 
IoT and Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) Model ....................................80
Y.P. Arul Teen, R. Bharathi, C. Justin Dhanaraj, 
and Anchana B.S.
Chapter 6 IoT-Enabled Smart Irrigation with Machine Learning 
Models for Precision Farming .......................................................... 107
Sujatha Rajkumar, Raghav Biyani, Shubham Jagtap, 
Nandasai Penumuchu, and Shriram S. S.
Chapter 7 Leaf-CAP: A Capsule Network-Based Tea Leaf Disease 
Recognition and Detection ............................................................... 127
Alkha Mohan and Jayakrishnan A.
Chapter 8 Agri Retail Product Management System ........................................ 144
Perepi Rajarajeswari, Vinila Jinny S., R. Saraswathi, 
Sawant Swara Anant, Manav Goyal, and Deraj RMvi Contents
Chapter 9 Challenges and Prospects of Implementing Information 
and Communication Technology for Small-Scale Farmers............. 156
Karthikeyan Kaliyaperumal, V. Mahalakshmi, 
P.M. Sithar Selvam, T. Priya, B. Lakshmi Narayana, 
and T. Pradeep
Chapter 10 Navigating Ethical and Legal Challenges in Smart 
Agriculture: Insights from Farmers.................................................. 175
S. Mayakannan, M. Saravanan, R. Arunbharathi, 
V. Prasanna Srinivasan, S Venkatesa Prabhu, 
and Rakesh Kumar Maurya
Chapter 11 Decision Support System for Smart Agriculture 
in Predictive Analysis....................................................................... 191
Nestor Ulloa, R. Sharmila, E. Brindha, R. Deepalakshmi, 
R. Arunbharathi, and K. Divya Vani
Chapter 12 Broad Framework of Digital Twins in Agricultural Domain........... 213
S. Muthukaruppasamy, G. Arun Sampaul Thomas, 
J. Nandha Gopal, S. Ravindra, and K. Saravanan
Chapter 13 Predictive Analytics of Climate Change: The Future 
of Global Warming Lies in Data Analytics......................................229
G. Arun Sampaul Thomas, S. Muthukaruppasamy, 
S. Sathish Kumar, K. Saravanan, and Beulah J. Karthikeyan
Chapter 14 Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics...............................250
Dhiraj Kapila, Nestor Ulloa, S. Anita, R. Siva Subramanian, 
Priti Kandewar, and P. Sujatha
Chapter 15 Design of Autonomous Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) 
in Smart Agriculture ........................................................................ 275
Yogesh Gangurde, Syam Narayanan S., Rajalakshmi P., 
and Naga Praveen Babu Mannam
Index......................................................................................................................299vii
Contributors
Jayakrishnan A.
College of Engineering Karunagappally
Kollam, India
Sawant Swara Anant
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
S. Anita
R.M.K. Engineering College
Kavaraipettai, India
R. Arunbharathi
Sri Krishna College of Engineering 
and Technology
Coimbatore, India
R. Bharathi
University College of Engineering
Nagercoil, India
Raghav Biyani
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
E. Brindha
Cheran College of Arts and Science
Tiruppur, India
R. Deepalakshmi
The Tamilnadu Dr. Ambedkar Law 
University
Chennai, India
J. Dhakshayani
National Institute of Technology
Puducherry, India
C. Justin Dhanaraj
University College of Engineering
Nagercoil, India
Yogesh Gangurde
NMICPS TiHAN Foundation Indian 
Institute of Technology
Hyderabad, India
J. Nandha Gopal
Velammal Institute of Technology
Tiruvallur, India
Manav Goyal
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
Parveen Sultana H.
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
Sneha Leela Jacob
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
Shubham Jagtap
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
J. Jyothsna
Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi 
Vishwavidyalaya
Jabalpur, India
Karthikeyan Kaliyaperumal
Ambo University
Ethiopia
Dhiraj Kapila
Lovely Professional University
Phagwara, India
Priti Kandewar
St. Martin’s Engineering College
Secunderabad, Indiaviii Contributors
Beulah J. Karthikeyan
J.B. Institute of Engineering 
and Technology
Hyderabad, India
S. Sathish Kumar
J.B. Institute of Engineering 
and Technology
Hyderabad, India
V. Mahalakshmi
Panimalar Engineering College
Chennai, India
S. Mahenthiran
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
Naga Praveen Babu Mannam
NMICPS TiHAN Foundation 
Indian Institute of Technology
Hyderabad, India
Rakesh Kumar Maurya
MJP Rohilkhand University
Bareilly, India
S. Mayakannan
Vidyaa Vikas College of Engineering 
and Technology
Namakkal, India
Alkha Mohan
Indian Institute of Information 
Technology
Trichy, India
S. Muthukaruppasamy
Velammal Institute of Technology
Tiruvallur, India
B. Lakshmi Narayana
St. Martin’s Engineering College
Secunderabad, India
Kauser Ahmed P.
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
Rajalakshmi P.
NMICPS TiHAN Foundation 
Indian Institute of Technology
Hyderabad, India
Nandasai Penumuchu
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
S. Venkatesa Prabhu
Addis Ababa Science and Technology 
University
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
T. Pradeep
Kongu Engineering College
Erode, India
T. Priya
NPR College of Engineering 
& Technology
Dindigul, India
Perepi Rajarajeswari
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
Sujatha Rajkumar
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
S. Ravindra
Vasireddy Venkatadri Institute 
of Technology
Guntur, India
Deraj RM
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
Anchana B. S.
Marthandam College of Engineering 
and Technology
Marthandam, India
Vinila Jinny S.
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, IndiaContributors ix
Syam Narayanan S.
NMICPS TiHAN Foundation Indian 
Institute of Technology
Hyderabad, India
Shriram S. S.
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
V. Santhi
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
R. Saraswathi
Sreenivasa Institute of Technology 
and Management Studies
Chittoor, India
K. Saravanan
College of Engineering
Guindy
Anna University
Chennai, India
M. Saravanan
Annamalai University
Chidambaram, India
P. M. Sithar Selvam
RVS School of Engineering 
& Technology
Dindigul, India
Nishant Sharma
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
R. Sharmila
Dhanalakshmi Srinivasan 
Engineering College
Perambalur, India
V. Prasanna Srinivasan
RMD Engineering College
Kavaraipettai, India
V. Srishti
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, India
R. Siva Subramanian
Sri Krishna College of Engineering 
and Technology
Coimbatore, India
P. Sujatha
Vels Institute of Science
Technology & Advanced Studies
Pallavaram, India
B. Surendiran
National Institute of Technology
Puducherry, India
Y. P. Arul Teen
University College of 
Engineering
Nagercoil, India
G. Arun Sampaul Thomas
J.B. Institute of Engineering 
and Technology
Hyderabad, India
Nestor Ulloa
Escuela Superior Politecnica 
de Chimborazo
Riobamba, Ecuador
K. Divya Vani
St. Martin’s Engineering 
College
Secunderabad, IndiaDOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-1 1
Farming Assistance 
Using Machine Learning 
and Internet of Things
Kauser Ahmed P. and V. Srishti
1.1 INTRODUCTION
1.1.1 Background of the Problem
The cornerstone of many nations, agriculture, serves as the backbone of the global 
economy for developing countries. The proper crop must be planted in a certain loca￾tion for the optimum outcome. The majority of farmers and other agricultural activists 
recommend crops using poor, tested scientific methods, which is an issue [1] In order 
to boost productivity and profit from the suggested technique, our suggested effort will 
assist farmers in choosing the ideal crop based on elements like cost of cultivation, cost 
of production, and yield.
1.1.2 Motivation of the Proposed Work
In India, agriculture is important to the country’s economy. In recent years, indus￾trialization and excessive pesticide use have led to a decrease in soil strength. Many 
agricultural practices now in use are insufficient to increase yield. The biggest prob￾lem that Indian farmers are facing is their ignorance about the optimum crop to plant 
based on the needs of their land, which reduces production [2–4]. Indian farmers 
face a variety of challenges while determining which farming technique to employ 
and which crop to select for which environment. When choosing crops for maxi￾mum yield, which are influenced by topographic conditions and economic concerns, 
Indian farmers frequently make mistakes. In the agriculture sector, achieving maxi￾mum crop yield at minimum cost is the goal of production [5]. In order to boost pro￾ductivity and profit from the suggested technique, our suggested effort will assist 
farmers in choosing the ideal crop based on elements like cost of cultivation, cost of 
production, and yield.
1.1.3 Focus of the Proposed Work
India uses conventional farming techniques. To automate and monitor farm oper￾ations, we can use wireless sensor networks and Internet of Things (IoT) devices. 
Farmers can get the most recent agricultural conditions using a smartphone using the 
IoT system’s mobile app. The selection of a crop that is suitable for the provided field 
will be the main objective of this exercise.
12 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
1.1.4 Proposed Work Contribution
The suggested strategy improves the existing system by introducing cutting-edge 
methods into the work plan that was previously in place. A soil moisture sensor, tem￾perature and humidity sensors, a pH sensor, a current amplifier, and Mail make up 
the hardware. To gather data, the sensors are placed in various field areas. The soil’s 
alkalinity, temperature, relative humidity, and moisture content are a few of the many 
factors analyzed. Using sensor data that is first kept in a database and then delivered 
to a web interface, the crop is predicted using the K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) algo￾rithm [6]. The predicted crop or outcome is then mailed to the farmer.
1.2 RELATED WORK
Reshma et al. [7] use existing statistics and data mining techniques to categorize soil 
into high, medium, and low in order to estimate crop production. These factors were 
used in an analysis to determine which crops could be grown in the specific soil type.
Limitations of the existing work: Fuzzy or intelligent methods, which are not 
used in the current study, could increase this effort by predicting the soil 
that will be used to grow future crops.
Result and inference: The study’s objective is to identify the type of soil and the 
optimum crop to produce there using classification algorithms. The accuracy 
score is used to choose between the Support Vector Machine and Decision 
Tree techniques that employ the most effective classification method.
Katarya et al. proposes a framework applicable to crop recommendation systems, 
a subset of precision agriculture that uses various machine learning algorithms to 
propose crops in accordance with predetermined rules and data. The type and quan￾tity of data used determine the quality of the recommendations. These algorithms’ 
statistical properties enable increase in yield. The need for a precision measure is 
driven by the negative consequences of not having one, which include substantial pro￾ductivity losses, time and seed waste, among other things. The parameters that can be 
considered while making suggestions include things like temperature, soil properties, 
humidity, and others.
Limitations of the existing work: Soil qualities and nutrients are the most 
important factors in crop recommendation; thus, they deserve special atten￾tion. It is hoped that a user-friendly web/mobile application will result in an 
increase in yield.
Result and inference: Machine learning models and other techniques are cov￾ered in this study. These algorithms furnish the best recommendations.
In order to assist farmers in choosing crops for their agricultural area, Rajeswari 
et al. [8] suggest a rough set method based on fuzzy data. The suggested strategy has 
been tested on 24 different types of plants. The pH, soil type, and location are the 
most important factors to consider while selecting the crop for the area. The proposed Farming Assistance Using Machine Learning and Internet of Things 3
approach splits numerical properties and applies fuzzy reasoning to handle border 
situations. With the use of crude set-based rule induction, the fuzzy rules are devel￾oped. The membership function (MF) with three and five linguistic terms uses the 
suggested method.
Limitations of the existing work: There was no deployment of an Android 
application to Support Vector Machine (SVM) assist new and inexperienced 
farmers in learning more about suitable crops, soil types, and soil health.
Result and inference: The experimental findings show that the Learning from 
Examples Module (LEM2) algorithm’s fuzzy rules beat rival algorithms in 
terms of prediction accuracy for both discretized and fuzzified datasets.
Oswal et al. (2021) [9] propose a technique for saving the optimal values of given 
properties for various plants. For this paper, they chose five variables: minimum and 
maximum temperatures, minimum and maximum rainfall, types of soil, minimum and 
maximum soil pH, and previous crop. The algorithm scans through the entire dataset 
and then recommends the plant with the highest score and overall ranking of a plant.
Limitations of the existing work: Weather forecasts must be integrated into 
the system using external weather Application Programming Interfaces 
(APIs). When compared to Machine Learning (ML) models, the recom￾mendation’s correctness was not tested.
Result and inference: The system uses a mathematical approach based on 
membership functions for fuzzy logic instead of a machine learning-based 
approach.
Farmers will be helped by the hardware and software parts of the system described 
in this paper by Nair [10] in selecting the best crop for their soil and type of land. The 
agricultural industry has a lot to gain from IoT and machine learning. By using sen￾sors like the DHT11 and soil pH sensor, it is possible to determine the temperature, 
humidity, and pH levels of the soil. Using a Wi-Fi module, we can send data that has 
been fetched to a machine learning model. Using the values, the machine learning 
model will find a few crops suitable for the agricultural region and distribute them 
to the farmers via a web application. To monitor the farm environment, we placed 
IoT sensors; the sensor equipment may help measure temperature, humidity, and 
soil pH. Data is sent to the server from our IoT sensors. The database can be used to 
extract all sensor data, which can then be put through data analysis. Our technology 
does analyze the farm’s environmental factors before selecting the best crops. Before 
analyzing any data, such as appropriate months and soil types, our system performs 
feature extraction to guarantee that the analyzed data and the analysis result of preset 
targets are accurate. Our recommended plan of action and goals can increase crop 
productivity while supporting research on farmers’ agricultural practices.
Result and inference: Because the plant that was advised grew enormously 
and the other plant that was not recommended did not, we could conclude 
that our method was successful in recommending the right crop for the 4 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
suitable climatic conditions. Thus, our method might be used on a bigger 
farm, which might result in good harvests and let the farmer get more out 
of his or her field. Agriculture is gradually being replaced and improved by 
more precise and advanced digital and electrical technology.
Adithya et al. [11] suggested an IoT-based sensor network for smart agriculture. 
Since standard development is more serious, risky, and silly in light of low yield or 
an exhibit of God, little ranchers, who don’t know anything about the sharp agribusi￾ness framework, geniuses and corporate regions are getting the awards for skillful 
agriculture advancement. Because of pandemic Covid-19, which returned homeless 
people to their solitary towns with next to no kind of income, they are restless to 
return to their fascinating horticulture.
Limitations of the existing work: With the new time of development come 
more frustrated techniques for a humble farmer. The deficiency of a solid 
association is the beginning stage for the underpinning of such critical level 
interconnectivity. There has been no discussion of unequivocal or standard 
simple-to-use interfaces.
Result and inference: IoT-based sensors can be used for green cutoff points. 
Sensor networks’ correspondence and ranchers’ difficulties can similarly 
be lessened, and a predominant corresponding way for the exchange of sig￾nificant information can be accomplished among various focuses. Ranchers 
can supervise different rural-related stuff and screen their yield on smart￾phones or Personal Computers (PCs) in that capacity.
Doshi et al. [12] design a device that screens the ranch or nursery and sends vari￾ous messages to the rancher about the continuous situation considering the readings 
of various sensors, for instance, temperature, steadiness, soil-soaked quality, UV, IR, 
soil improvements, and soil supplements. The ranchers’ quick exercises will help them 
in extending the efficiency of their creation and genuine utilization of ordinary assets, 
which will make our thing climate agreeable too. By means of carefully dissecting 
the different current circumstances, our thing will grow the sum and combination of 
harvests. It is an IoT device with “Fitting and Sense.” On PCs and Personal Digital 
Assistants (PDAs), live information for various limits should be recognizable.
Limitations of the existing work: The design of this system is extremely con￾voluted, and no working model is proposed to screen the reap prosperity 
at standard ranges. Moreover, the cost of building such a model is prohibi￾tively exorbitant and drawn out to a gigantic degree.
Result and inference: Expected benefits of this development are remote 
checking for farmers, resource protection, and water. Extraordinary orga￾nization moreover allows additionally created tamed animal developing; 
the things which are not apparent to the unaided eye ought to be noticeable, 
bringing about exact farmland and reap appraisal, incredible quality, and 
further entertainment.Farming Assistance Using Machine Learning and Internet of Things 5
Chakraborty et al. [13] develop a crop decision to help farmers by using Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and mind associations to think about all factors, for instance, estab￾lishing cropping season, soil, and land region.
Methodology: A few datasets from Kaggle and government sites were used 
to feed the model. The dataset incorporated a few boundaries, for example, 
crop development costs, yield, crop types developed, and precipitation and 
temperature information. These datasets were preprocessed prior to being 
prepared using AI calculations, like straight relapse, and taken care of by a 
brain organization.
Result and inference: Using the KNN classifier, the model suggested which 
harvest was the best coordinate and anticipated supportability with up to 
89% precision using brain organizations. In any case, there was no genuine 
equipment execution or even reenactment for computerized water system 
for a totally changed horticulture framework.
Talaviva et al. (2020) [14] talk about including AI in the field of agriculture region 
and the looming propels that can help with conveying disturbance to the specific field. 
Different new concentrated contemplations, including image affirmation and wisdom, 
chatbots for farmers, and electrically related water framework strategies, including 
dielectric and neutron control, are referred to in the paper. Also, there has been notice 
of substance-based techniques to deal with weeding. The use of Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles (UAVs) like robots can moreover be a strong plan from this perspective. 
Advance-based crop checking and data examination can moreover go probably as the 
cherry on the most noteworthy place of the splendid cultivation structure.
Limitations of the existing work: This paper needs practical presentation of 
any of the contemplations discussed previously. There is a notice of various 
headways disregarding the way that there has not been any hardware or 
establishment done in the improvement time of any of these contemplations.
Khandelwal et al. [15] suggest ML- and AI-based agriculture information. 
In farming, there is a catalyst change to AI in its different creating methods. The 
chance of mental enrollment is the one which mirrors human viewpoint as a model 
in PC. This outcome as angry headway in AI-fueled development conveys its asso￾ciation in unwinding, gaining, and noting various circumstances (taking into account 
the learning acquired) to additionally foster ampleness. Besides, a part of the cap￾tivating considerations that are inspected in the paper consolidates image-related 
understanding of age, disease disclosure in crops, fielding the board, recognizing 
confirmation of ideal mix for agronomic things, automation methods that are used 
in water framework, and the use of robots and other UAVs. Moreover, one huge and 
exceptional thought analyzed in the paper included precision development that was 
associated with working on significant standard pictures and using ML and AI to 
expect delegate information. Yield management is also discussed in this paper where 
satellites are used for crop planning and affiliation.6 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Limitations of the existing work: The thoughts examined here are brilliant, 
no matter how costly they are to finish and require enormous capital spec￾ulations. The examinations talked about here are also not related to the 
ground or the root level; thusly, the contemplations dissected in this paper 
are not reasonable for little ranchers.
Result and inference: With everything considered, the fate of making in 
the times to come is all about changing mental and certifiable strategies. 
Regardless, a colossal appraisal is still on, and different applications are 
in the end open, but the making business is right now not having satis￾fying help, which stays to be underserved. While it drops in directing 
steady inconveniences and requests looked at by the ranchers, recalling AI 
dynamic frameworks and farsighted designs for managing them, making 
with AI is essential in an early phase. To take advantage of the gigantic level 
of AI being created, applications ought to be all the more really hot.
Chong et al. [16] suggest a plan to create tasks, for example, a fish holding tank 
or a rack for making harvests. The attributes that are known to be sincere to the 
yield of improvement are being surveyed and followed by sensors. PC vision is 
used, for example, with a camera mounted over the subjects, to screen and track 
the produce of improvement. The responsibilities for information openness using 
AI may likewise unite extra information that might be connected with the yield 
subject to earlier information. A food creation affiliation could set up the informa￾tion disclosure framework proposed in the paper for the situation when it wishes 
to learn or find a ton of ideal natural parts for a particular fish or vegetable sort 
that it could use to assist the yield with rating. He will unequivocally keep on 
cultivating the particular fish or veggie while getting together sensor and vision 
information for a long time. The creating affiliation could change the cutoff values 
during the information-gathering period with an extreme goal to expand yield. 
After the given out time has elapsed, the collected information might be passed on 
in bunches for information disclosure. Regardless, using the reasonable learning 
calculations, for example, a phony safe learning structure, on the web or dynamic 
learning is possible.
Limitations of the existing work: Singapore needs to help its food security 
by expanding food creation. Over the course of the following decade, sig￾nificantly increasing its ability for food production is presently planned. 
The city-state intends to meet 30% of its wholesome requests by 2030, fre￾quently known as the “30-by-30 vision.” Overall, 10% is made right now. 
This undertaking is meant to expand the neighborhood food creation’s yield 
in this present circumstance.
Result and inference: Ranchers could hence have the option to set up a com￾parative framework to computationally comprehend the developing quali￾ties of explicit yields corresponding to various natural boundaries in view 
of the outcomes. This will be particularly useful for cultivating organiza￾tions that are simply beginning or for laid-out organizations working with 
novel yields.Farming Assistance Using Machine Learning and Internet of Things 7
Revathi et al. (2019) [17] propose a framework that thoroughly chips away at three 
sections right off the bat to identify temperature, dampness level, and human location 
by associating all temperature, soil dampness, PIR sensor, water siphon, and GSM 
module to Arduino microcontroller, then, at that point, transferring programs to com￾puterize the water system framework, and sending information to ranchers versatile as 
often as possible and also sending information to cloud [18]. Second, sending data to 
ranchers at different temperatures is high, SavvySystem ships off ranchers at high tem￾peratures, LD demonstrates Land Dry, HD shows Human Detection regularly through 
GSM module by embedding SIM card; lastly, sending information to cloud through 
GPRS by making an account in AWS; IP address will be given and through that IP 
address, information will be transferred and a page will open where all the informa￾tion will be put away.
Limitations of the existing work: There are a few restrictions inside the task 
executed, like a cost-major issue in horticulture is the expense of equipment 
gadgets which are exorbitant to manage for ranchers, then, at that point, 
battery life wireless sensors used here run on a battery which gets released 
soon and there is a need to change the batteries of the relative multitude of 
sensors, then there is an issue with band range – were we know the greater 
part of the farming is being finished in rustic distant regions where there is 
less accessibility of the organization, and efficiency of the remote innova￾tions is likewise the main thing at long last, there is likewise more power 
utilization that ought to be productive.
Result and inference: The developed smart framework assists with check￾ing crop fields and robotizes the water system framework in view of 
dampness level, so wastage of water is diminished. All the data is shipped 
off to various ranchers through instant messages, and information is put 
away in Amazon Cloud administrations for additional examination. This 
brilliant framework decreases the wastage of water, diminishes rancher 
time and their actual work at less expense, and increments their harvest 
yield.
Swetha et al. [19] develop regular AI procedures, which were applied involving IoT 
for continuous checking of harvests and gave improved yield. By using machine learn￾ing procedures, the yields were delegated a sound and unfortunate class to show up at a 
choice regardless of whether to water them, which can help ranchers in crop the board 
by getting the information connected with crop the executives, viz., temperature, soil 
dampness, and mugginess.
Methodology: Here, an exploratory arrangement was planned that comprised 
sensors like soil dampness and moistness and temperature sensors for infor￾mation assortment for the model as well with respect to continuous observ￾ing for the yields. Two harvests – fenugreek and coriander – were picked 
and tried in different natural circumstances all through their development 
period, and these information were shipped off the cloud by means of 
Arduino for additional handling. At long last, a water siphon was likewise 8 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
impelled in view of the framework that was proposed regardless of whether 
the plant would require it.
Result and inference: Hence, a programmed water system framework was laid 
out as well as the framework anticipated whether a harvest was sound with 
94% precision in the event of coriander and 87% precision in the event of fen￾ugreek. The model in any case had no arrangement that would suggest a yield 
or a stage where the rancher could really get to know these new advances.
Prabavathi et al. [20] use an absurd AI estimation; the proposed model in this 
paper predicts crop yield. The soil properties were gotten from the public 
power site. On the dataset, this model purposes an 80:20 split for planning 
and testing. Ridiculous learning machines will outmaneuver standard learn￾ing computations. This estimation is genuinely skilled at learning cerebrum 
associations. To achieve the most negligible readiness screw-up, Gaussian 
Extreme Learning Machine (ELM) is used to set up a singular mystery layer 
feedforward network (SLFN) with different commencement capacities.
Limitations of the existing work: The experts are endeavoring to find 
advancement deals with serious consequences regarding the cultivating 
dataset, and they are facing three key obstructions. In any case, making 
conjecture estimations that work across each geographic circumstance and 
wide soil data is trying. Second, because the dataset is jumbled, decision 
and isolation are critical parts that could provoke an underfit or overfit 
gauge plan. Third, the deficit of a general model makes it difficult to design 
an estimation that will produce crops with incredible yield.
Result and inference: A soil supplement examination is finished using dif￾ferent AI estimations, for instance, SVM, neural net, Decision Tree, Naive 
Bayes, and ELM, with the Gaussian preposterous AI computation beating 
the others.
1.3 PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
1.3.1 Method and Approaches
The work focuses on the following methods and approaches:
1. Data for a set of crops is collected using sensors.
2. The DHT11 sensor is placed in the soil and left to detect the values of tem￾perature and humidity.
3. The sensors are connected to the Arduino to give the output values of the 
sensors attached to it.
4. Then we interface Arduino with NodeMCU and send the values to it.
5. Then using the API keys of the chosen cloud platform, we send the tempera￾ture and humidity values to the cloud for NodeMCU.
6. The data is then analyzed using machine learning algorithms.
7. The best crop is suggested for the type of soil input into the model.
8. A website is then built around this crop recommendation system so as to 
make it easy for farmers to use it.Farming Assistance Using Machine Learning and Internet of Things 9
1.3.2 Metrics and Measurements
The yield would be recommended based on the following features of the environment:
1. Nitrogen content
2. Potassium content
3. Phosphorus content
4. Temperature
5. Humid
6. pH
7. Rainfall
1.3.3 Data Analysis Methods
One of the best accuracy-producing ML algorithms will be trained on the dataset 
generated from the sensors which will be then used to generate crop recommenda￾tions for the type of soil the farmer inputs into the model.
1.4 SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The Architecture diagram for best crop prediction is shown in Figure 1.1.
FIGURE 1.1 Architecture diagram for best crop prediction.10 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
1.4.1 Architecture Diagram Explanation
Data for a set of crops is collected using sensors:
1. The DHT11 sensor is placed in the soil and left to detect the values of tem￾perature and humidity.
2. The sensors are connected to the Arduino to give the output values of the 
sensors attached to it.
3. Then we interface Arduino with NodeMCU and send the values to it.
4. Then utilizing the API keys of the picked cloud stage, we send the tempera￾ture and dampness values to the cloud for NodeMCU.
5. The data is then analyzed using machine learning algorithms.
6. The best crop is suggested for the type of soil input into the model.
7. A website is then built around this crop recommendation system so as to 
make it easy for farmers to use it.
1.4.2 Proposed Algorithm for Crop Prediction
To recommend the best crop, the user had to input parameters to get the details.
A dataset comprising six different parameters such as nitrogen, phosphorus, potas￾sium, and other mineral content, temperature, and humid conditions required to grow 
certain crops. It includes the details of 20+ different crops with suitable conditions.
Since the dataset comprises input parameters along with their output (the type of 
crop), it turned into a classifying problem that used a supervised ML algorithm. Here 
KNN algorithm is used for crop classification. The algorithm is chosen to compute 
the distance between these two points using KNN. Euclidean distance is used to 
calculate the distance.
(p, q) ( )
2
1
d q p i i
i
n
= − ∑=
1.4.2.1 Description of the Proposed Work
These are the following steps that were performed in our proposed model:
1. Data mining and finding the right dataset.
2. Importing the necessary libraries.
3. Performing some preprocessing techniques like label encoding and 
interchanging/filling missing numbers.
4. Splitting into X and Y data.
5. Splitting the data into 70% training set and 30% testing set.
6. Performing KNN algorithm by choosing the correct values of K variable. 
The value of K variable here was taken as 3.
7. Finding the performance metric of the model to calculate the accuracy and 
see how well the model performed.
Once the model was built using Figure 1.2, the user had to give the seven input 
parameters.Farming Assistance Using Machine Learning and Internet of Things 11
The model calculates the three closest neighbors for the given parameters and 
recommended the best crop suited.
1.4.3 Application Interface and Experimental Setup
The temperature and humidity values from the soil are measured using DHT11 sensors 
which are sent to the Arduino UNO microprocessor. After that, these values are sent 
to the Node MCU board through which we can upload these values to a cloud platform 
for further usage of the values.
1.4.4 Components Required
1. DHT 11
2. Arduino UNO
3. Node MCU
4. Connecting wires
5. Bread board
1.4.5 DHT11
The DHT11 sensor is an efficient and cost-effective sensor which helps in sensing tem￾perature and humidity. The sensor has a temperature range of 0–50°C with chances of 
error of ±1°C and humidity range of 20%–90% with error rate of ±1%. It also wants a 
power supply of 3.5–5.5 V.
1.4.6 Arduino UNO
Arduino UNO is a microcontroller board. It has 14 digital input and output pins, 
6 analog inputs, a USB connection, a power jack, 16-MHz quartz crystal, and ICSP 
header and a reset button. It is useful to interface it to a PC with a USB link or power 
it with an AC-to-DC connector or battery to begin.
1.4.7 Node MCU
It is an open-source LUA-based firmware delivered for the ESP8266 Wi-Fi chip.
FIGURE 1.2 Crop prediction model using KNN algorithm.12 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
1.4.8 Software Requirement: Arduino IDE, ThingSpeak Arduino
1.4.8.1 Arduino IDE
The Arduino IDE is an open-source software to write code and upload it to the board.
1.4.9 ThingSpeak
It is an IoT analytics platform that allows users to understand, merge, and visualize 
live data streams in the cloud.
1.4.10 Hardware Implementation
To monitor our crops, Arduino with NodeMCU are used as hardware.
1.4.10.1 Procedure
• The DHT11 sensor is placed in the soil and left to detect the values of tem￾perature and humidity.
• The sensors are connected to the Arduino to give the output values of the 
sensors attached to it.
• Then we interface Arduino with NodeMCU and send the values to it.
• Then using the API keys of the chosen cloud platform, we send the tempera￾ture and humidity values to the cloud for NodeMCU.
1.4.10.2 Arduino
1. Import required libraries.
2. Set up or initialize ports used.
3. Convert the temperature and humidity values to JSON format.
4. Begin serial communication and transfer values.
1.4.10.3 NodeMCU
1. Import required libraries.
2. Set up or initialize port used.
3. Begin serial communication and receive values from Arduino.
4. Convert the values to de-JSON format.
5. Initialize the cloud platform to be used.
6. Input Wi-Fi SSID and password.
7. Import values to the cloud.
1.4.11  Algorithm Improvement and Justification
of the Proposed Methodology
In KNN algorithm, the distance measurement is the only factor that influences the 
algorithm’s prediction. For applications with more to sufficient area information, 
this KNN algorithm makes a good sense. The KNN algorithm is also referred to 
as lazy-learner algorithm. Despite the fact that this strategy raises processing costs, 
KNN is as yet the better decision for applications where exactness is significant yet 
conjectures are not much of the time examined.Farming Assistance Using Machine Learning and Internet of Things 13
KNN is suitable for information with fewer aspects. It is truly easy to compre￾hend and set in motion. Because of its incredibly close to results, KNN estimation 
can rival the most solid models. You can likewise involve the KNN computation for 
applications that need high accuracy yet don’t need a characterized model. The idea 
of the assumptions is affected by the aspects and distance.
It is to be noticed that the strategy is dimensionality-reviled and is particularly 
powerless against uproarious information sources, exceptions, missing information, 
and anomaly ID. To streamline the KNN strategy, a pre-handling layer should be 
added before the last information is grouped.
1.5 EXPERIMENTAL RESULT ANALYSIS
1.5.1 Evaluation Criteria
The crop would be suggested based on the following characteristics of the soil:
1. Nitrogen content
2. Potassium content
3. Phosphorus content
4. Temperature
5. Humid
6. pH
7. Rainfall
1.5.1.1 Performance Metrics Used
• Accuracy
• Precision
• Recall
• F1 score
Experimental setup for crop prediction is explained in Figure 1.5. Figure 1.3 and 
Figure 1.4 represent the sample dataset and different categories of crops.
FIGURE 1.3 Sample dataset.14 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
1.6 RESULTS OBTAINED THROUGH PROPOSED APPROACH
The results obtained through proposed approach are given in Figures 1.6 and 1.7.
1.7 APPLICATION INTERFACE
The User interface Figure 1.8 that we’ve designed takes inputs from the user and returns 
with the best crop suited for the soil. Our interface supports text to speech as well.
FIGURE 1.5 Experimental setup for crop prediction.
FIGURE 1.4 Different categories of crops.
FIGURE 1.6 ThingSpeak (cloud platform).Farming Assistance Using Machine Learning and Internet of Things 15
1.8 DESCRIPTION OF THE RESULTS OBTAINED 
THROUGH PROPOSED APPROACH
Performance metrics: Precision, Recall, Accuracy, and F are calculated for proposed 
model from [21–24]. Our model gave 98.4% accuracy (Figure 1.9).
Precision
2
TP
TP FP
Recall TP
TP FN
Accuracy
TP TN
TP FP TN FN
F Precision Recall
Precision Recall
= +
= +
= +
+ + +
= × ×
+


 


FIGURE 1.7 Predicted crop based on proposed model.
FIGURE 1.8 Crop recommendation assistant.16 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
1.8.1 Performance Analysis
Figure 1.10 is from paper [25], showing the results of the proposed methodology 
of that paper which is a crop recommendation system with cloud computing. Our 
proposed methodology has more precision, recall, and f-1 score than the existing 
method used widely.
FIGURE 1.9 Performance analysis.
FIGURE 1.10 Comparison with existing studies and methods.Farming Assistance Using Machine Learning and Internet of Things 17
1.9 CONCLUSION, LIMITATION AND FUTURE SCOPE OF WORK
This framework overcomes any barrier between uninformed farmers and current 
rural advances. We have effectively executed our thoughts and made a straightfor￾ward yet easy-to-use interface for suggesting the best harvest. It additionally upholds 
text to discourse transformation. We have carried out a KNN-based calculation to 
find the pattern of the great yields filled in that soil and suggest the harvest likewise. 
We have gotten the information from IoT sensors and transferred it to a cloud stage.
The farmers might foster more, procure more, and live longer as they have a more 
noteworthy consciousness of their property and grounds, as well as the potential 
dangers to their territory and efficiency. Regardless of the way that ranchers know 
nothing about it, the nation will confront significant emergencies for a long time to 
come. Little landowners ought to be designated by the public authority, which ought 
to be taught and urged to moderate the plant’s hereditary assets for a more promis￾ing time to come. FAO’s unification of assets and data can without a doubt help with 
bettering state-funded instruction.
REFERENCES
1. Katarya, Rahul, Raturi, Ashutosh, Mehndiratta, Abhinav, and Thapper, Abhinav, “Impact of 
Machine Learning Techniques in Precision Agriculture,” 2020 3rd International Conference 
on Emerging Technologies in Computer Engineering: Machine Learning and Internet of 
Things (ICETCE), Jaipur, India, 2020, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/ICETCE48199.2020.9091741
2. Rawal, Srishti. (2017). IoT-based smart irrigation system. International Journal of Computer 
Applications, 159(8), pp. 7–11.
3. Togneri, Rodrigo, Kamienski, Carlos, Dantas, Ramide, Prati, Ronaldo, Toscano, Attilio, 
Soininen, Juha-Pekka, and Cinotti, Tullio Salmon. (2019). Advancing IoT-based smart 
irrigation. IEEE Internet of Things Magazine, 2(4), pp. 20–25.
4. Anand, Jose, and Raja Paul Perinbam, J., “Automatic Irrigation System using Fuzzy Logic”, 
AE International Journal of Multidisciplinary Research, 2 (8), pp. 1–9, August 2014.
5. Ojha, M., Mohite, S., Kathole, S., and Tarware, D. (2016). Microcontroller based auto￾matic plant watering system. International Journal of Computer Science and Engineering, 
5(3), pp. 25–36.
6. Priyadharshini, A., Chakraborty, Swapneel, Kumar, Aayush, and Pooniwala, Omen 
Rajendra. “Intelligent Crop Recommendation System Using Machine Learning,” 2021 5th 
International Conference on Computing Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC), 
IEEE, 2021, pp. 843–848.
7. Reshma, R., Sathiyavathi, V., Sindhu, T., Selvakumar, K., and SaiRamesh, L., “IoT Based 
Classification Techniques for Soil Content Analysis and Crop Yield Prediction,” 2020 
Fourth International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) 
(I-SMAC), Palladam, India, 2020, pp. 156–160, doi: 10.1109/I-SMAC49090.2020.9243600
8. Rajeswari, A. M., Selva Anushiya, A., Seyad Ali Fathima, K., Shanmuga Priya, S., 
and Mathumithaa, N., “Fuzzy Decision Support System for Recommendation of Crop 
Cultivation Based on Soil Type,” 2020 4th International Conference on Trends in 
Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI)(48184), Tirunelveli, India, 2020, pp. 768–773, doi: 
10.1109/ICOEI48184.2020.9142899
9. Oswal, Manas, Mahajan, Karan, Pagare, Shubham, Kasa,Vishal, Malhotra, Jyoti, and 
Sarode, Sambhaji, “Feature-Based Analytical Crop Recommendation System,” 2021 
IEEE Pune Section International Conference (PuneCon), Pune, India, 2021, pp. 1–6, doi: 
10.1109/PuneCon52575.2021.968653018 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
10. Nair, Sujaya. (2020). Crop selection using IoT and machinelearning.International Journal for 
Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology,8, pp.1241–1244, doi:10.22214/
ijraset.2020.30462
11. Vadapalli, Adithya, Peravali, Swapna, and Rao Dadi, Venkata (2020). Smart agriculture￾system using IoT technology. International Journal of Advance Research in Science and 
Engineering, 9(9), pp. 58–65.
12. Doshi, Jash, Patel, Tirthkumar, and Bharti, Santosh Kumar. “Smart Farming Using 
IoT, a Solution for Optimally Monitoring Farming Conditions,” The 3rd International 
Workshop on Recent Advances on Internet of Things: Technology and Application 
Approaches(IoT-T&A 2019), Coimbra, Portugal, November 4–7, 2019.
13. Priyadharshini, A., Chakraborty, Swapneel, Kumar, Aayush, and Pooniwala, Omen 
Rajendra, “Intelligent Crop Recommendation System Using Machine Learning,” 
2021 5th International Conference on Computing Methodologies and Communication 
(ICCMC), 2021, pp. 843–848, doi: 10.1109/ICCMC51019.2021.9418375
14. Talaviva, Tanha, Shah, Dhara, Patel, Nivedita, Yagnik, Hiteshri, and Shah, Manan, 
(2020). Implementation of artificial intelligence in agriculture for optimisation of irriga￾tion and application of pesticides and herbicides. Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture, 4, 
pp.58–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.04.002
15. Khandelwal, Paras M., and Chavhan, Himanshu. “Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture: 
An Emerging Era of Research”, 2019.
16. Chong, Y. T., Loo, P. K., and Ding, Z. Q., “Knowledge Discovery Through the Machine 
Learning of Farming Parameters and Yield Performance,” 2019 IEEE International 
Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management (IEEM), 2019, 
pp. 1550–1552, doi: 10.1109/IEEM44572.2019.8978814
17. Revathi, G. P., and Vanishree, K. (2019). Development of smartagriculturalmonitoring 
and automaticirrigationsystem. International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer 
Science & Technology (IJIRCST), ISSN: 2347-5552, 7(3), doi: 10.21276/ijircst.2019.7.3.5
18. Dhanalakshmi, R., Anand, Jose., Kumar Sivaraman, Arun, and Rani, Sita, “IoT-based 
Water Quality Monitoring System using Cloud for Agriculture Use”, Cloud and Fog 
Computing Platforms for Internet of Things, Edited by Pankaj Bhambri, Sita Rani, 
Gaurav Gupta and Alex Khang, Taylor & Francis, Hersey, PA, pages 14, 2022, ISBN: 
9781003213888.
19. Swetha, Tiramareddy Manasa, Yogitha, Tekkali, Kuruba Sai Hitha, Manche, Syamanthika, 
Puppala, Poorna, S. S., and Anuraj, K., “IOT Based Water Management System For Crops 
Using Conventional Machine Learning Techniques,” 2021 12th International Conference on 
Computing Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), 2021, pp. 1–4, doi: 
10.1109/ICCCNT51525.2021.9579651
20. Prabavathi, R., and Chelliah, Balika J., “An Optimized Gaussian Extreme Learning 
Machine (GELM) for Predicting the Crop Yield using Soil Factors,” 2022 International 
Conference on Electronic Systems and Intelligent Computing (ICESIC), 2022, pp. 219–222, 
doi: 10.1109/ICESIC53714.2022.9783578
21. Acharjya, Debi. Prasanna., and Kauser Ahmed, P. (2022). A hybridized rough set and 
bat-inspired algorithm for knowledge inferencing in the diagnosis of chronic liver dis￾ease. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 81, pp. 13489–13512. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11042-021-11495-7
22. Kauser, Ahmed P., and Acharjya, Debi. Prasanna. (2021). Knowledge inferencing using 
artificialbeecolony and roughset for diagnosis of hepatitisdisease. International Journal 
of Healthcare Information Systems and Informatics (IJHISI), 16(2), pp. 49–72.
23. Kauser, Ahmed P., and Rishabh, Agrawal, “Cluster Analysis of Health Care Data 
Using Hybrid Nature-Inspired Algorithms”, Recent Advances in Hybrid Metaheuristics 
for Data Clustering, First Edition, Edited by Sourav De, Sandip Dey, and Siddhartha 
Bhattacharyya, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119551621.ch6Farming Assistance Using Machine Learning and Internet of Things 19
24. Kauser, Ahmed P., and Senthil Kumar, Narayanswamy.,“A Comprehensive Review of 
Nature Inspired Algorithms for Feature Selection (Chapter)”,Handbook of Research 
on Modeling, Analysis, and Application of Nature-Inspired Metaheuristic Algorithms, 
Edited by Sujata Dash, B.K. Tripathy, and Attaur Rahman, IGI Global Publishers, 
Pennsylvania, pp. 331–345, 2017. ISBN13: 9781522528579, (ACM).
25. Dhabal, G., Lachure, J., and Doriya, R., “Crop Recommendation System with Cloud 
Computing,” 2021 Third International Conference on Inventive Research in Computing 
Applications (ICIRCA), 2021, pp. 1404–1411, doi: 10.1109/ICIRCA51532.2021.954452420 DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-2
Automated Seasonal 
Crop Mapping and 
Acreage Estimation 
Framework Using 
Machine Learning 
Algorithms
A Survey
V. Santhi1 and S. Mahenthiran2
1 School of Computer science and Engineering, 
Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore – India
2 School of Civil Engineering, Vellore Institute 
of Technology, Vellore – India
2.1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the agricultural system has been adversely impacted and degraded 
due to natural disasters such as floods and drought. It greatly influences the food sup￾ply and economic development of a country. The large population in India depends 
on agriculture, and there are numerous challenges in agricultural activities due to 
diverse patterns in topography and climate. There will be an increase in demand 
for food production in future due to the increase in population (Singh et al., 2021). 
The urbanization, degradation of land, and climate change impose a serious threat 
to agricultural production (Behera et al., 2018). Thus, it is necessary to develop a 
strategy for the sustainable development and management of agricultural resources. 
Effective crop mapping is a great challenge to stakeholders in farming due to diverse 
crop patterns and a lack of clearly defined field boundaries (Liu et al., 2010; Rogan 
and Chen, 2004). However, crop mapping is essential for monitoring agricultural 
land and calculating the spatial distribution of crop acreage (Hudait and Patel, 2018; 
Kuemmerle et al., 2013). Crop insurance is necessary for agricultural planning, and 
crop insurance estimation requires information such as crop acreage and its yield at 
a micro level. The crop surveying in the field using standard procedures such as the 
interpolation method is inefficient and uneconomic and provides inconsistent results. 
Thus, it is essential to develop an effective method for accurately mapping different 
2Automated Seasonal Crop Mapping and Acreage Estimation Framework 21
types of seasonal crops in less time with low manpower. The automated seasonal 
crop mapping is essential for water resources and agriculture managers in policy- and 
decision-making processes. Numerous researchers (Adrian et al., 2021; Devadas et al., 
2012; Ibrahim et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Mulyono, 2016) use satellite data for automated 
seasonal crop mapping and acreage estimation with the aid of machine learning algo￾rithms. Prins and Van Niekerk (2021) integrated LiDAR, Sentinel-2, and aerial imag￾ery with machine learning algorithms for crop mapping. Saad El Imanni et al. (2022) 
used high-resolution Sentinel images for crop mapping in highly heterogeneous regions. 
Liu et al. (2022) used Sentinel-1, Sentinel-2, and planet images to identify the tillage 
activities in small field farms. Kasimati et al. (2022) estimated the quality of grapes by 
combining Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) data and machine learn￾ing algorithm. The crop mapping (in-season and dynamic) is done by Gallo et al. (2023) 
through the integration of 3D convolutional neural networks (CNN) and Sentinel-2 time 
series data. Integrating satellite data and machine learning is an emerging technology to 
map the crop pattern and acreage estimation with high accuracy.
Remote sensing (RS) is the technical process of locating features on the earth’s 
surface and determining the physical characteristics of those features by employing 
electromagnetic radiation as the medium of contact (Xavier et al., 2006). The major 
properties of the sensor that help with target identification include spectral, spatial, 
temporal, and polarization signatures (Navalgund et al., 2007). Before extraction of 
spectral information, the data collected from the earth’s surface by the sensors at var￾ious wavelengths (reflected, dispersed, and/or emitted) should undergo radiometric 
and geometric correction (Vicente and De Souza Filho, 2011). RS is categorized as 
optical and microwave (Rahman and Di, 2020). In optical RS, the sensors detect the 
energy radiated from the sun in the visible, near-middle, and thermal infrared ranges 
(Roy et al., 2017). This radiation is either reflected/scattered or emitted from the earth, 
creating images that are similar to photographs taken by a camera or sensor located 
in space at a great distance (Kumar and Singh, 2013). The wavelength is longer than 
visible, infrared rays are microwaves, and sensors detect them. The observation of 
microwave RS is not affected by day/night and climate conditions. RS is widely used 
in applications such as monitoring the ocean, agricultural land mapping, crop inven￾tory, yield forecasting, assessing the damage caused by flood/drought, and land use 
management. Because of India’s varied and scattered land holdings, complex crop 
sowing patterns, and limited ground data, automated satellite-based crop mapping 
is still difficult in the country (Ibrahim et al., 2021). The growing geographical and 
temporal resolution of satellite data time series in various wavelength ranges, such 
as Sentinel-2 and Sentinel-1 images, presents new opportunities for generating crop￾type maps on a local or regional scale (Kpienbaareh et al., 2021).
Because of the significance of crop mapping and land monitoring, extensive lit￾erature studies using machine learning techniques and image processing is the need 
of the hour (Whyte et al., 2018). The automated seasonal crop mapping is essential 
for water resources and agriculture managers in policy- and decision-making pro￾cesses. It is also vital for planning in the zones of multiple cropping patterns (Behera 
et al., 2019). In the event of a disaster, this would serve as guidelines for carrying 
out evaluation procedures for crop insurance (Munawar et al., 2021). Thus, auto￾mated seasonal crop mapping is essential for enhanced food security. In this context, 22 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
a comprehensive review of existing automated seasonal crop mapping by machine 
learning techniques is discussed in greater depth in this chapter. This chapter also 
aims to determine the best machine learning model type for regional crop mapping 
and its performance evaluation under varying conditions.
The accurate crop mapping and acreage estimation is very important, because it 
helps to calculate yields of a particular crop/acre, loss of particular crop/acre, helps to 
take decision on farmer’s crop insurance if crops are getting affected by heavy flood or 
water scarcity, and also helps the agricultural managers to design a policy in decision￾making process. It is also required to plan water and other resource management in 
agricultural fields. It is necessary to automate the seasonal crop mapping to ease the 
process of estimation due to the various reasons mentioned earlier. Hence, in this chap￾ter, various machine learning methodologies employed for automatic mapping of dif￾ferent types of seasonal crops in less time with low manpower are discussed in detail.
2.2 MATERIALS AND METHODS
In this section, the methods adopted to collect data, various pre-processing techniques, 
and machine learning methodologies employed to perform automatic crop mapping 
are discussed in detail.
2.2.1 Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)
The data which covers the targeted land area exactly is required to build an auto￾mated seasonal crop mapping model. Acquiring more data is important before the 
prediction of any type of class. Numerous research studies use Sentinel 1, Sentinel 2, 
Landsat, and GaoFen-1 (GF-1). The Wide-field View (WFV) imageries for automated 
seasonal crop mapping (Moumni and Lahrouni, 2021; Prins and Van Niekerk, 2021; 
Zhou et al., 2019). After dataset acquisition, image pre-processing is mandatory for 
accurate perdition of crop types before feeding input images into the model. In this 
section, various pre-processing techniques are discussed in detail.
2.2.1.1 Resampling
Dataset resampling is creating or producing a new dataset by changing the existing 
dataset. The resampling method is very useful for an unbalanced dataset. If the data￾set is unbalanced and feeding the unbalanced dataset into the model results in inac￾curate class prediction, the model will also result in overfitting. Thus, dataset should 
be balanced by data augmentation techniques prior to introducing the dataset into a 
model (Waldner et al., 2019). The researchers use various methods such as oversam￾pling (Zhang et al., 2022), undersampling (Valdar et al., 2009), and hybrid (Susan and 
Kumar, 2021) for dataset resampling.
Oversampling is increasing the sample numbers in a class to balance the classes. The 
methods such as augmentation (Yan et al., 2021) and Generative Adversarial Network 
(GAN) (Zhao et al., 2021) are used to increase the samples. Both techniques multiply 
the current dataset sample count. The undersampling reduces the samples present in a 
class to balance the classes. Hybrid sampling combines both undersampling and overs￾ampling to provide a balanced dataset for creating decision tree classification models.Automated Seasonal Crop Mapping and Acreage Estimation Framework 23
2.2.1.1.1 Oversampling Methods
i. Random oversampling (ROS) randomly selects the data from the minor￾ity class and replaces them in the training dataset (Chawla, 2009). The main 
disadvantage of ROS is overfitting when creating more duplicate data.
ii. Synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) generates fresh 
occurrences of the minority class by combining nearby occurrences in con￾vex ways (Chawla et al., 2002). When k is a configurable hyperparameter, 
SMOTE generates synthetic occurrences by random along a line connect￾ing a minority occurrence to its k-nearest neighbors. Here, overfitting is 
uncommon because SMOTE generates fresh instances. Conversely, syn￾thetic cases are developed close to the majority of occurrences, and the 
surroundings of the artificial instances are disregarded, which increases 
the possibility of misclassification.
iii. Safe-level SMOTE (SLS) creates minority occurrences in “secure” places to 
get around SMOTE’s flaws (Bunkhumpornpat et al., 2009). Depending on the 
percentage of nearby minority instances, a secure ratio is allocated to every 
minority instance. When the secure proportion is closer to 0, an instance is 
regarded as noise, whereas when it is higher, it is seen as secure. Then, syn￾thetic instances are put close to minority occurrences with a high secure ratio.
iv. Adaptive neighbor SMOTE (ANS) creates virtual instances by adjust￾ing the number of neighbors required for sampling around some marginal 
regions in a dynamic manner (Siriseriwan and Sinapiromsaran, 2017). ANS 
also describes outcasts as minority occurrences, the close neighbors of which 
belong to a different class.
v. The adaptive synthetic (ADASYN) sampling strategy for unbalanced learn￾ing (ADASYN) weights minority cases based on their learning difficulty. It 
creates additional synthetic data for occurrences that are more difficult to 
learn (He et al., 2008). In contrast to SMOTE, the number of neighbors syn￾thesizing minority occurrences is not defined.
2.2.1.1.2 Undersampling Methods
Random undersampling (RUS) is a non-heuristic approach to balance the class distri￾bution by randomly eliminating instances belonging to the majority class. One disad￾vantage of this strategy is that essential instances for the learning process are eliminated.
The Tomek link (Tk) detects pairings of instances that are nearest neighbors and 
pertain to separate classes (Tomek, 1976). It is performed either in undersampling 
(removing the majority of instances) or cleaning (removing both instances) mode.
Edited nearest neighbor (ENN) eliminates most instances in which the class label 
varies from most of its k-nearest neighbors (Wilson, 1972).
2.2.1.2 Mosaics
The mosaic technique merges multiple images into a single image, which is carried 
out after acquiring the data. The image with high resolution is generated using an 
image mosaic approach. It merges multiple images with overlapped portions, like the 
images taken at various times, from various observation points, or with various sen￾sors (Schmale Iii et al., 2008). There are some existing image mosaicking ways, and 24 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
the steps vary, but the overall procedure is the same. There are five different ways 
present that are described next (Moravec, 1981):
1. Image pre-processing. It involves de-noising the digital image, processing 
of histogram, and picture-matching template creation.
2. Image matching. The significance of picture mosaic technology is image 
matching. It applies a specific matching approach to determine the relevant 
location of the template in the reference image to be stitched. As a result, 
the two images’ transformation relationship is also determined.
3. Establish a transformation model. The parameter value in the mathemat￾ical model is determined based on the corresponding relationship between 
templates or image features. As a result, a mathematical transformation 
model of the two images is established.
4. Uniform coordinate transformation. On the basis of mathematical trans￾formation model, the image to be stitched is transformed to reference image 
coordinate system. Thus, transformation of unified coordinate is performed.
5. Fusion reconstruction. The overlapping section of the image to be stitched 
is merged together to create a continuous panoramic image which is spliced 
and rebuilt. Based on the requirements of various purposes of stitching, 
its speed and accuracy, the low-altitude RS image splicing of Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicle (UAV) is divided into four categories. It includes uncon￾trolled ortho-photo mosaic, quick mosaic with seam, panoramic image 
mosaic and controlled ortho-photo mosaic (Harris and Stephens, 1988).
2.2.1.3 Atmospheric Correction
It eliminates the atmospheric effect on the reflectance values of images obtained 
by satellite or airborne sensors (Hadjimitsis et al., 2010). Any sensor that records 
electromagnetic radiations from the earth’s surface by visible or near-visible light, 
records a combination of two forms of energy (Fraser et al., 1992). While taking a 
picture from a satellite, the location of that particular pixel will not be the ground 
truth or original object because of some illumination. Illumination means the sun￾light falls on that object or atmospheric disturbance like shadows. While extracting 
the information from the image leads to the loss of original information (Jothiaruna 
et al., 2019). Because the separation of contributions is uncertain at the outset, atmo￾spheric correction seeks to quantify those elements. In this case, the analysis is based 
on modified target reflectance or radiance values.
2.2.1.4 Radiometric Correction
The purpose of radiometric correction is to eliminate radiometric inaccuracies 
induced by sensitivity of sensor, angle of sun, and topography (Chen et al., 2005; 
Pons et al., 2014). The two types of radiometric correction are relative correction and 
absolute correction. The calibration data of sensor, angle of sun, its view angle, atmo￾spheric models, and ground truth data are used to determine the correct radiance or 
reflectance. Radiometric correction is used to correct the incident energy input to 
sensors. The atmospheric model is so complex and accurate measurement of atmo￾spheric conditions is problematic that relative correction is used in most applications Automated Seasonal Crop Mapping and Acreage Estimation Framework 25
(Johansen et al., 2022). The relative correction normalizes multi-temporal data col￾lected on various dates to a particular reference data at a particular time.
2.2.2 Feature Extraction and Classification
Feature extraction extracts features from satellite images for accurate crop detec￾tion. Before extracting the features, pre-processing is done, which is described in 
Section 4.2.1. The classification is carried out by training the model after extracting 
the features. Later some of the feature extraction and classification techniques are 
described. The classification process is shown in Figure 2.1.
2.2.2.1 Random Forest Classification
Random Forest (RF) is a supervised machine learning method that is commonly used 
for classification and regression applications (Akbari et al., 2020; Rodriguez-Galiano 
et al., 2012). It comprises more decision trees, and the classes are predicted or classi￾fied by the average of all the decision trees (Figure 2.2). It is similar to an ensemble 
learning model and helps avoid overfitting issues while training the model (Cheng 
et al., 2022; Vuolo et al., 2018). If the number of trees increases, the model’s accu￾racy also increases (Cheng et al., 2022). As a result, there is a positive correlation 
between the number of trees and the model’s accuracy. RF is the cost-effective and 
accurate method for estimating crop acreage (Hudait and Patel, 2022). Ok et al. (2012) 
FIGURE 2.1 General architecture.
FIGURE 2.2 Random Forest prediction process.26 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
classify the crops using RF and Maximum Likelihood Classification methods, based 
on pixel-based and parcel-based approaches. The overall accuracy (OA) of results 
obtained through the RF technique is 8% higher than the MLC method. Sonobe et al. 
(2014) classify the six types of crops based on RF and classification and regression 
tree (CART) methods and conclude that the former technique provides better results. 
The larger paddy plots are extracted with high accuracy based on RF-based image 
classification. The obtained accuracy values are quite low in high LULC (land use/
land cover) heterogeneity zones and small field areas (Hudait and Patel, 2022). The 
crop identification in the monsoon season with a combination of SAR and optical data 
gives a better result. Useya and Chen (2019) state that single-date SAR image provides 
OA of only 46%, which is not satisfactory.
2.2.2.2 Support Vector Machine Classification
Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a type of supervised learning used for clas￾sification and regression. It is a statistical technique that categorizes diverse data 
accurately by non-consideration of the input data distribution. Support vectors are 
used to maximize the classifier’s margin. Support vectors are data points nearer to 
the margin and help match the hyper-plane. The other datasets are deleted since 
they do not contribute to hyper-plane location or orientation. Dhumal et al. (2019) 
suggest that the classification of crops using SVM and Gray Level Co-occurrence 
Matrix (GLCM) techniques provides good results with an OA of 90.29% and kappa 
coefficient of 0.88. Khobragade and Raghuwanshi (2015) state that using a genetic 
algorithm with SVM for optimization provides better results. Camps-Valls et al. 
(2003) describe that SVM results are better than neural networks and efficiently 
work, even if pre-processing is impossible. SVM also spots the noisy bands effec￾tively. Devadas et al. (2012) define object-based SVM functioned more effectively 
than pixel-based maximum likelihood classifier (MLC). Mazarire et al. (2020) 
classify nine types of crops using SVM and RF algorithms. They conclude that the 
SVM technique (OA – 95%) provided better results than RF technique (OA – 85%) 
in a heterogeneous environment. To overcome the class imbalance problem and 
attain high accuracy in crop classification, Zhang et al. (2022) couple Gray Wolf 
Optimizer (GWO) with SVM. The results are enhanced in the GWO-SVM method 
by 0.8% and 1.2% compared to the SVM and RF methods, respectively.
2.2.2.3 Long Short-Term Memory Classification
Long short-term memory (LSTM) is a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) architec￾ture, and it is useful in detecting sequence problems (Crisóstomo de Castro Filho 
et al., 2020). Apart from the images, it processes the entire series of data, as shown in 
Figure 2.3. Xin and Adler (2019) identify the grass using convolutional LSTM with 
an accuracy of 98.8%. Rußwurm and Korner (2017) use LSTM in crop identification 
on a temporal scale. Nguyen et al. (2022) integrate LSTM with a self-attention mech￾anism to track plant growth. The results suggest that this model successfully identifies 
the six different types of crops with an OA near 90%. Zhou et al.’s (2019) parcel-based 
approach to classifying the crops using LSTM provides 5% higher results than tra￾ditional methods. This research also describes that this model provides results with 
high accuracy in rainy and cloudy areas. Chang et al. (2022) used a convolutional Automated Seasonal Crop Mapping and Acreage Estimation Framework 27
LSTM rice field classifier (ConvLSTM-RFC) to classify the crops. The convolutional 
block attention module (CBAM) is integrated with convolutional LSTM to detect rice 
at different periods. The accuracy of this model is 98.08%. Bi-LSTM models are gen￾erally more effective in dealing with contextual data than unidirectional LSTM mod￾els (Zhou et al., 2019). The Bi-LSTM architecture has LSTM units that can detect 
past and future data in both the forward and backward layers.
2.2.2.4 U-Net
U-Net is a feature extraction technique. For crop mapping, it uses de-noised back￾scatter/texture and spectral information from multi-temporal Sentinel-1 SAR data 
and multi-temporal Sentinel-2 data, respectively. Zhao et al. (2019) state that RGB 
images provide better results than multi-spectral images in the recognition of rice 
lodging. Adrian et al. (2021) integrated multi-temporal Sentinel-1 data with multi￾temporal optical Sentinel-2 data to increase the classification accuracy for crop cat￾egories. The obtained outcomes from this study are compared with RF and deep 
learning networks, which include SegNet and 2D U-Net. Adrian et al. (2021) con￾clude that 3D CNN provides results with high accuracy than 2D CNN for crop map￾ping. Wei et al. (2019) added Batch Normalization (BN) algorithm to the U-Net 
model to enhance the network training efficiency. Liu et al. (2022) expanded the 
U-Net structure by introducing atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP) structure to 
enhance the model ability, and dropout layer is hosted to avoid overfitting.
2.2.2.5 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
The CNN is a network architecture for the identification of patterns in images to 
recognize objects and classes. Wang et al. (2021) integrate CNN and Geo-CBAM 
to handle more features. The Geo-CBAM-CNN approach reduces the impact due 
FIGURE 2.3 LSTM architecture.28 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
to geographic heterogeneity and filters the excess information. Kwak et al. (2021) 
combine the models CNN and RF to overcome the error encountered due to mini￾mum data availability. This model is best suited in the early crop stage when limited 
training samples and fewer images are available for input. Li et al. (2022) combine 
the geodesic distance spectral similarity method (GDSSM) and 1D CNN to over￾come the problems encountered due to an inadequate number of labeled samples. 
The GDSSM-CN method provides 19.94% and 23.91% higher results than GDSSM 
and CNN, respectively. Seydi et al. (2022) coupled CNN and a dual attention mod￾ule (DAM) to classify the crops using Sentinel-2 datasets. The spectral module is 
employed to detect the crop’s behavior during its growth, and the spatial attention 
module is used to identify the neighborhood properties. This study’s OA and kappa 
coefficient are 98.54%, and 0.981, respectively. It efficiently classifies the crop more 
than the other models such as RF, CNN (R, 2D and 3D), XGBOOST, and CBAM. 
Moreno-Revelo et al. (2021) use enhanced 2D-CNN to classify crops in tropical 
regions. This model is developed for smaller scale settings and performs well in low 
spatial-resolution images and imbalanced classes.
2.3 PERFORMANCE MEASURES
Performance measure depicts the model accuracy in class prediction using machine 
learning and deep learning methods. There are different performance measures, 
including Cohen’s kappa coefficient (CKC), OA, producer accuracy (PA), and user 
accuracy. Table 2.1 compares different crop classifications using machine learning 
and deep learning techniques.
2.3.1 Cohen’s Kappa Coefficient
CKC determines the correlation between two rates that categorize a certain number 
of items (N) into mutually exclusive categories. It is a more reliable measure than a 
simple percent estimation (Vieira et al., 2010). Cohen’s kappa coefficient is defined 
in Equation (2.1):
−
− − −
− Cohen s Kappa coefficient = = 1 C C
C
C
C
a c
c
a
1 c
1
1
’   (2.1)
where Ca is the level of perceived agreement between raters and Cc is the hypotheti￾cal possibility of chance agreement using the acquired data for calculating the prob￾ability of observing randomly for each category. If CKC value is zero, it represents 
no relation between classification data and referenced data. If CKC value is one, it 
means the classified image is equal to the original image (Xu et al., 2020).
2.3.2 Overall Accuracy
A confusion matrix is a quantitative way to describe the accuracy of image classi￾fication. A table illustrates how reference and classified data correspond (Sun et al., 
2020). The percentage of correctly mapped reference data out of all the reference 
data is known as OA (You et al., 2021). Typically, the OA is given as a percentage, Automated Seasonal Crop Mapping and Acreage Estimation Framework 29
TABLE 2.1
Comparison of Different Crop Mapping Classification Using Machine 
Learning and Deep Learning
Authors ML/DL Classifier
Accuracy 
(%) Advantages
Zhang et al. (2022) GWO-SVM 96.26 Slow convergence.
Yan et al. (2021) Random Forest 88.0 It is applicable to all other crop types.
Akbari et al. 
(2020)
RF+PSO 92.85 Similar biophysical characteristics lead to 
misclassification issues.
Rodriguez-Galiano 
et al. (2012)
Random Forest 92.00 It is robust when training data reduction and 
also in noise.
Vuolo et al. (2018) Random Forest 96.00 Multi-temporal crop-type classification 
efficiently mitigates negative effects.
Dhumal et al. 
(2019)
SVM 86.04 Combining GLCM and SVM obtained better 
90.29 accuracy in crop-type classification.
Mulyono (2016) SVM 90.78 It can be applied to all other crop-growing areas.
Devadas et al. 
(2012)
Object-based SVM 95 The object-based approach is superior to the 
Pixel-based pixel-based approach.
classification 
(Maximum 
Likelihood 
Classification)
89
Xin and Adler 
(2019)
Convolutional LSTM 98.8 Both models perform well and give better 
3-layer fully connected accuracy.
neural network
92
Mazarire et al. 
(2020)
Random Forest 85 Sentinel-2 data performs better in SVM 
SVM 95 classifier in comparison with the RF classifier.
Crisóstomo de 
Castro Filho 
et al. (2020)
Bi-LSTM 99.14 Analyze non-periodic time series data.
LSTM 98.86
Xu et al. (2020) LSTM 95 Exploiting NDVI and Enhanced Vegetation 
Index (EVI) profiles is necessary.
Belgiu and Csillik 
(2018)
TWDTW 96.2 Misclassification in all test classes.
RF 97.6
Verma et al. (2017) DT 87.93 ISODATA and MLC algorithms are unable to 
classify accurately.
Zhao et al. (2019) U-Net 96.26 Without extracting the features from RGB 
images, the outcome is better when compared 
with the multi-spectral image in recognizing 
the rice lodging.
Adrian et al. (2021) 3D U-Net 99.20 3D CNN provides results with high accuracy 
2D U-Net 94.30 than 2D CNN for crop mapping.
SegNet 87.10
Liu et al. (2022) U-Net 92.14 The model has a better ability for crop 
classification and crop recognition.
(Continued)30 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
with 100% accuracy denoting an accurate classification in which all references are 
correctly categorized, which is shown in Equation (2.2):
    =     Overall accuracy
Correctly classified samples
overall data
(2.2)
2.3.3 Producer’s Accuracy
PA is fully based on the classification. PA is the map’s correctness as seen by the map 
maker (the producer) (De Wit and Clevers, 2004, Foody, 2005). This is the frequency 
with which real features on the ground are appropriately depicted on the classified 
map (Enderle and Weih, 2005). PA is well-defined in Equation (2.3):
Producer accuracy No. of pixels are correct classification in each category
Total no. of pixel classified in that category ( ) = *100
row
(2.3)
The correctness from the perspective of a map user, rather than the map developer, is 
known as the user’s accuracy (Virnodkar et al., 2020). The user’s accuracy basically 
conveys to us how frequently the class on the map will be existing on the ground 
(Liu et al., 2007), which is well defined in Equation (2.4).
User accuracy
No. of pixels are correct classification in each category
Total no. of pixel classified in that category ( ) = *100
column
(2.4)
2.4 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This chapter concludes that the crop mapping accuracy level attained for regions 
of variability and small field area is reasonably low. The dependability of results 
obtained at agricultural field boundaries is also relatively low. It is significantly more 
TABLE 2.1 (Continued)
Comparison of Different Crop Mapping Classification Using Machine 
Learning and Deep Learning
Authors ML/DL Classifier
Accuracy 
(%) Advantages
Wang et al. (2021) RF 95.04 Geo CBAM-CNN model spontaneously 
distributed different weights to features and 
attained better accuracy compared to another 
model.
CNN 96.43
CBAM-CNN 97.13
Geo CBAM-CNN 97.82
Li et al. (2022) 1D CNN 67.29 It improves classification accuracy quickly, 
which is a new motivation for crop 
classification.
GDSSM 71.26
GDSSM-CNN 91.20
Moreno-Revelo 
et al. (2021)
2D-CNN 81.00 It is capable of dealing with imbalanced classes 
and low-spatial-resolution images.Automated Seasonal Crop Mapping and Acreage Estimation Framework 31
difficult to predict the categorization of crop mapping using these methods than to 
get a general judgment. Fewer characteristics were extracted and examined for crop 
mapping, resulting in a decline in precision. During the growth season, the pheno￾logical stages of a crop have a significant impact on the amount of accuracy acquired 
using present methodologies. For greater precision, the crop’s phenological stages 
must be considered. For all types of crop mapping, a new and universal method 
must be proposed rather than one for a specific crop. Thus, the shortcomings of the 
research work augment the need for creating an approach to perform crop-type map￾ping systems. The observation showed that integrated CNN and DAM got higher 
classification accuracy than other classification techniques. Thus, integrated models 
provide higher accuracy results than individual crop mapping models. In addition, 
appropriate steps should be carefully carried out in the image pre-processing pro￾cess to eliminate the accumulation of errors, and it is important to come up with a 
new automated way to map crop types in a certain area with high accuracy and less 
processing time.
REFERENCES
Adrian, J., Sagan, V., & Maimaitijiang, M. (2021). Sentinel SAR-optical fusion for crop type map￾ping using deep learning and Google Earth Engine. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry 
and Remote Sensing, 175, 215–235.
Akbari, E., Darvishi Boloorani, A., Neysani Samany, N., Hamzeh, S., Soufizadeh, S., & 
Pignatti, S. (2020). Crop mapping using random forest and particle swarm optimization 
based on multi-temporal Sentinel-2. Remote Sensing, 12(9), 1449.
Behera, M. D., Biradar, C., Das, P., & Chowdary, V. M. (2019). Developing quantifiable 
approaches for delineating suitable options for irrigating fallow areas during dry season—
A case study from Eastern India. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 191(Suppl 3), 
805.
Behera, M. D., Tripathi, P., Das, P., Srivastava, S. K., Roy, P. S., Joshi, C., Behera, P. R., Deka, 
J., Kumar, P., Khan, M. L., Tripathi, O. P., Dash, T., & Krishnamurthy, Y. V. N. (2018). 
Remote sensing based deforestation analysis in Mahanadi and Brahmaputra river basin 
in India since 1985. Journal of Environmental Management, 206, 1192–1203.
Belgiu, M., & Csillik, O. (2018). Sentinel-2 cropland mapping using pixel-based and object￾based time-weighted dynamic time warping analysis. Remote Sensing of Environment, 
204, 509–523.
Bunkhumpornpat, C., Sinapiromsaran, K., & Lursinsap, C. (2009). Safe-level-smote: Safe￾level-synthetic minority over-sampling technique for handling the class imbalanced 
problem. In Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(pp. 475–482). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Camps-Valls, G., Gómez-Chova, L., Calpe-Maravilla, J., Soria-Olivas, E., Martín-Guerrero, 
J. D., & Moreno, J. (2003). Support vector machines for crop classification using hyper￾spectral data. In Iberian Conference on Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis
(pp. 134–141). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Chang, Y. L., Tan, T. H., Chen, T. H., Chuah, J. H., Chang, L., Wu, M. C., Tatini, N. B., Ma, S. C., 
& Alkhaleefah, M. (2022). Spatial-temporal neural network for rice field classification 
from SAR images. Remote Sensing, 14(8), 1929.
Chawla, N. V. (2009). Data mining for imbalanced datasets: An overview. Data Mining and 
Knowledge Discovery Handbook. Springer, Boston, MA.  (875–886).
Chawla, N. V., Bowyer, K. W., Hall, L. O., & Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2002). SMOTE: Synthetic 
minority over-sampling technique. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 16, 321–357.32 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Chen, X., Vierling, L., & Deering, D. (2005). A simple and effective radiometric correction 
method to improve landscape change detection across sensors and across time. Remote 
Sensing of Environment, 98(1), 63–79.
Cheng, M., Jiao, X., Shi, L., Penuelas, J., Kumar, L., Nie, C., Wu, T., Liu, K., Wu, W., & Jin, 
X. (2022). High-resolution crop yield and water productivity dataset generated using 
random forest and remote sensing. Scientific Data, 9(1), 1–13.
Crisóstomo de Castro Filho, H., Abílio de Carvalho Júnior, O., Ferreira de Carvalho, O. L., 
Pozzobon de Bem, P., dos Santos de Moura, R., Olino de Albuquerque, A., Rosa Silva, 
C., Guimaraes Ferreira, P. H., Fontes Guimarães, R., & Trancoso Gomes, R. A. (2020). 
Rice crop detection using LSTM, bi-LSTM, and machine learning models from sentinel-1 
time series. Remote Sensing, 12(16), 2655.
De Wit, A. J. W., & Clevers, J. G. P. W. (2004). Efficiency and accuracy of per-field classification 
for operational crop mapping. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 25(20), 4091–4112.
Devadas, R., Denham, R. J., & Pringle, M. (2012). Support vector machine classification of 
object-based data for crop mapping, using multi-temporal landsat imagery. International 
Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, 
39(1), 185–190.
Dhumal, R. K., Vibhute, A. D., Nagne, A. D., Solankar, M. M., Gaikwad, S. V., Kale, K. 
V., & Mehrotra, S. C. (2019). A spatial and spectral feature based approach for clas￾sification of crops using techniques based on GLCM and SVM. In Microelectronics, 
Electromagnetics and Telecommunications (pp. 45–53). Springer, Singapore.
Enderle, D. I., & Weih, R. C., Jr. (2005). Integrating supervised and unsupervised classifi￾cation methods to develop a more accurate land cover classification. Journal of the 
Arkansas Academy of Science, 59(1), 65–73.
Foody, G. M. (2005). Local characterization of thematic classification accuracy through spa￾tially constrained confusion matrices. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 26(6), 
1217–1228.
Fraser, R. S., Ferrare, R. A., Kaufman, Y. J., Markham, B. L., & Mattoo, S. (1992). Algorithm 
for atmospheric corrections of aircraft and satellite imagery. International Journal of 
Remote Sensing, 13(3), 541–557.
Gallo, I., Ranghetti, L., Landro, N., La Grassa, R., & Boschetti, M. (2023). In-season and 
dynamic crop mapping using 3D convolution neural networks and sentinel-2 time 
series. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 195, 335–352.
Hadjimitsis, D. G., Papadavid, G., Agapiou, A., Themistocleous, K., Hadjimitsis, M. G., 
Retalis, A., … & Clayton, C. R. I. (2010). Atmospheric correction for satellite remotely 
sensed data intended for agricultural applications: Impact on vegetation indices. Natural 
Hazards and Earth System Sciences, 10(1), 89–95.
Harris, C., & Stephens, M. (1988). A combined corner and edge detector. Alvey Vision 
Conference, 15(50), 10.5244.
He, H., Bai, Y., Garcia, E. A., & Li, S. (2008). ADASYN: Adaptive synthetic sampling approach 
for imbalanced learning. In 2008 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural 
Networks (IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence) (pp. 1322–1328). IEEE.
Hudait, M., & Patel, P. P. (2018). Acreage analysis of Betel vine crop through Boroj detec￾tion from high resolution imagery and internal architectural layout in Moyna Block of 
Tamluk Subdivision, Purba Medinipur. Geoinformatics for Sustainable Environment 
Management, 1, 69–82.
Hudait, M., & Patel, P. P. (2022). Crop-type mapping and acreage estimation in smallholding 
plots using Sentinel-2 images and machine learning algorithms: Some comparisons. 
The Egyptian Journal of Remote Sensing and Space Science, 25(1), 147–156.
Ibrahim, E. S., Rufin, P., Nill, L., Kamali, B., Nendel, C., & Hostert, P. (2021). Mapping crop types 
and cropping systems in nigeria with sentinel-2 imagery. Remote Sensing, 13(17), 3523.Automated Seasonal Crop Mapping and Acreage Estimation Framework 33
Johansen, K., Dunne, A. F., Tu, Y. H., Almashharawi, S., Jones, B. H., & McCabe, M. F. 
(2022). Dye tracing and concentration mapping in coastal waters using unmanned 
aerial vehicles. Scientific Reports, 12(1), 1–11.
Jothiaruna, N., Sundar, K. J. A., & Karthikeyan, B. (2019). A segmentation method for disease 
spot images incorporating chrominance in comprehensive color feature and region grow￾ing. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 165, 104934.
Kasimati, A., Espejo-García, B., Darra, N., & Fountas, S. (2022). Predicting grape sugar 
content under quality attributes using normalized difference vegetation index data and 
automated machine learning. Sensors, 22(9), 3249.
Khobragade, A. N., & Raghuwanshi, M. M. (2015). Contextual soft classification approaches 
for crops identification using multi-sensory remote sensing data: Machine learning per￾spective for satellite images. In Artificial Intelligence Perspectives and Applications
(pp. 333–346). Springer, Cham.
Kpienbaareh, D., Sun, X., Wang, J., Luginaah, I., Bezner Kerr, R., Lupafya, E., & Dakishoni, 
L. (2021). Crop type and land cover mapping in northern Malawi using the integration 
of sentinel-1, sentinel-2, and planetscope satellite data. Remote Sensing, 13(4), 700.
Kuemmerle, T., Erb, K., Meyfroidt, P., Müller, D., Verburg, P. H., Estel, S., Haberl, H., Hostert, 
P., Jepsen, M. R., Kastner, T., & Levers, C. (2013). Challenges and opportunities in 
mapping land use intensity globally. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 
5(5), 484–493.
Kumar, M., & Singh, R. K. (2013). Digital image processing of remotely sensed satellite 
images for information extraction. In Conference on Advances in Communication and 
Control Systems (CAC2S 2013) (pp. 406–410). Atlantis Press.
Kwak, G. H., Park, C. W., Lee, K. D., Na, S. I., Ahn, H. Y., & Park, N. W. (2021). Potential of 
hybrid CNN-RF model for early crop mapping with limited input data. Remote Sensing, 
13(9), 1629.
Li, H., Lu, J., Tian, G., Yang, H., Zhao, J., & Li, N. (2022). Crop classification based on 
GDSSM-CNN using multi-temporal RADARSAT-2 SAR with limited labeled data. 
Remote Sensing, 14(16), 3889.
Liu, C., Frazier, P., & Kumar, L. (2007). Comparative assessment of the measures of thematic 
classification accuracy. Remote Sensing of Environment, 107(4), 606–616.
Liu, Y., Rao, P., Zhou, W., Singh, B., Srivastava, A. K., Poonia, S., Berkel, P., & Jain, D. V. 
(2022). Using Sentinel-1, Sentinel-2, and Planet satellite data to map field-level tillage 
practices in smallholder systems. PLoS One, 17(11), e0277425.
Liu, Z., Su, B., & Lv, F. (2022). Intelligent identification method of crop species using 
improved U-Net network in UAV remote sensing image. Scientific Programming, 
Article ID 9717843, 1–9.
Liu, Y., Wang, E., Yang, X., & Wang, J. (2010). Contributions of climatic and crop varietal 
changes to crop production in the North China Plain, since 1980s. Global Change Biology, 
16(8), 2287–2299.
Mazarire, T. T., Ratshiedana, P. E., Nyamugama, A., Adam, E., & Chirima, G. (2020). 
Exploring machine learning algorithms for mapping crop types in a heterogeneous 
agriculture landscape using Sentinel-2 data. A case study of Free State Province, South 
Africa. South African Journal of Geomatics, 9(2), 333–347.
Moravec, H. P. (1981). Rover Visual Obstacle Avoidance. In IJCAI (Vol. 81, pp. 785–790).
Moreno-Revelo, M. Y., Guachi-Guachi, L., Gómez-Mendoza, J. B., Revelo-Fuelagán, J., & 
Peluffo-Ordóñez, D. H. (2021). Enhanced convolutional-neural-network architecture 
for crop classification. Applied Sciences, 11(9), 4292.
Moumni, A., & Lahrouni, A. (2021). Machine learning-based classification for crop-type 
mapping using the fusion of high-resolution satellite imagery in a semiarid area. 
Scientifica, Article ID 8810279, 1–20.34 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Mulyono, S. (2016). Identifying sugarcane plantation using LANDSAT-8 images with sup￾port vector machines. In IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science
(Vol. 47, No. 1, p. 012008). IOP Publishing.
Munawar, H. S., Hammad, A. W., Waller, S. T., Thaheem, M. J., & Shrestha, A. (2021). An 
integrated approach for post-disaster flood management via the use of cutting-edge 
technologies and UAVs: A review. Sustainability, 13(14), 7925.
Navalgund, R. R., Jayaraman, V., & Roy, P. S. (2007). Remote sensing applications: An overview. 
Current Science, 93(12), 1747–1766.
Nguyen, D., Zhao, Y., Zhang, Y., Huynh, A. N. L., Roosta, F., Hammer, G., Chapman, S., & 
Potgieter, A. (2022). Crop type prediction utilising a long short-term memory with a 
self-attention for winter crops in Australia. In IGARSS 2022-2022 IEEE International 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (pp. 2742–2745). IEEE.
Ok, A. O., Akar, O., & Gungor, O. (2012). Evaluation of random forest method for agricultural 
crop classification. European Journal of Remote Sensing, 45(1), 421–432.
Pons, X., Pesquer, L., Cristóbal, J., & González-Guerrero, O. (2014). Automatic and improved 
radiometric correction of Landsat imagery using reference values from MODIS sur￾face reflectance images. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and 
Geoinformation, 33, 243–254.
Prins, A. J., & Van Niekerk, A. (2021). Crop type mapping using LiDAR, Sentinel-2 and 
aerial imagery with machine learning algorithms. Geo-Spatial Information Science, 
24(2), 215–227.
Rahman, M. S., & Di, L. (2020). A systematic review on case studies of remote-sensing-based 
flood crop loss assessment. Agriculture, 10(4), 131.
Rodriguez-Galiano, V. F., Ghimire, B., Rogan, J., Chica-Olmo, M., & Rigol-Sanchez, J. P. 
(2012). An assessment of the effectiveness of a random forest classifier for land-cover 
classification. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 67, 93–104.
Rogan, J., & Chen, D. (2004). Remote sensing technology for mapping and monitoring land￾cover and land-use change. Progress in Planning, 61(4), 301–325.
Roy, P. S., Behera, M. D., & Srivastav, S. K. (2017). Satellite remote sensing: Sensors, applica￾tions and techniques. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, India Section 
A: Physical Sciences, 87(4), 465–472.
Rußwurm, M., & Korner, M. (2017). Temporal vegetation modelling using long short-term 
memory networks for crop identification from medium-resolution multi-spectral satel￾lite images. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition Workshops (pp. 11–19).
Saad El Imanni, H., El Harti, A., Hssaisoune, M., Velastegui-Montoya, A., Elbouzidi, A., Addi, 
M., EI Iysaouy, L., & El Hachimi, J. (2022). Rapid and automated approach for early crop 
mapping using Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 on Google Earth Engine; A case of a highly 
heterogeneous and fragmented agricultural region. Journal of Imaging, 8(12), 316.
Schmale Iii, D. G., Dingus, B. R., & Reinholtz, C. (2008). Development and application of an 
autonomous unmanned aerial vehicle for precise aerobiological sampling above agri￾cultural fields. Journal of Field Robotics, 25(3), 133–147.
Seydi, S. T., Amani, M., & Ghorbanian, A. (2022). A dual attention convolutional neural 
network for crop classification using time-series Sentinel-2 imagery. Remote Sensing, 
14(3), 498.
Singh, R. K., Rizvi, J., Behera, M. D., & Biradar, C. (2021). Automated crop type mapping 
using time-weighted dynamic time warping-a basis to derive inputs for enhanced 
food and nutritional security. Current Research in Environmental Sustainability, 
3, 100032.
Siriseriwan, W., & Sinapiromsaran, K. (2017). Adaptive neighbor synthetic minority overs￾ampling technique under 1NN outcast handling. Songklanakarin Journal of Science & 
Technology, 39(5), 565–576.Automated Seasonal Crop Mapping and Acreage Estimation Framework 35
Sonobe, R., Tani, H., Wang, X., Kobayashi, N., & Shimamura, H. (2014). Random forest 
classification of crop type using multi-temporal TerraSAR-X dual-polarimetric data. 
Remote Sensing Letters, 5(2), 157–164.
Sun, Z., Di, L., Fang, H., & Burgess, A. (2020). Deep learning classification for crop types 
in north dakota. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and 
Remote Sensing, 13, 2200–2213.
Susan, S., & Kumar, A. (2021). The balancing trick: Optimized sampling of imbalanced data￾sets—A brief survey of the recent State of the Art. Engineering Reports, 3(4), e12298.
Tomek, I. (1976). A generalization of the k-NN rule. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, 
and Cybernetics, SMC -6(2), 121–126.
Useya, J., & Chen, S. (2019). Exploring the potential of mapping cropping patterns on small￾holder scale croplands using sentinel-1 SAR data. Chinese Geographical Science, 29(4), 
626–639.
Valdar, W., Holmes, C. C., Mott, R., & Flint, J. (2009). Mapping in structured populations by 
resample model averaging. Genetics, 182(4), 1263–1277.
Verma, A. K., Garg, P. K., & Hari Prasad, K. S. (2017). Sugarcane crop identification from 
LISS IV data using ISODATA, MLC, and indices based decision tree approach. 
Arabian Journal of Geosciences, 10(1), 1–17.
Vicente, L. E., & De Souza Filho, C. R. (2011). Identification of mineral components in tropi￾cal soils using reflectance spectroscopy and advanced spaceborne thermal emission and 
reflection radiometer (ASTER) data. Remote Sensing of Environment, 115(8), 1824–1836.
Vieira, S. M., Kaymak, U., & Sousa, J. M. (2010). Cohen’s kappa coefficient as a performance mea￾sure for feature selection. In International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (pp. 1–8). IEEE.
Virnodkar, S. S., Pachghare, V. K., Patil, V. C., & Jha, S. K. (2020). Application of machine 
learning on remote sensing data for sugarcane crop classification: A review. ICT Analysis 
and Applications, 93, 539–555.
Vuolo, F., Neuwirth, M., Immitzer, M., Atzberger, C., & Ng, W. T. (2018). How much does 
multi-temporal Sentinel-2 data improve crop type classification? International Journal 
of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation, 72, 122–130.
Waldner, F., Chen, Y., Lawes, R., & Hochman, Z. (2019). Needle in a haystack: Mapping 
rare and infrequent crops using satellite imagery and data balancing methods. Remote 
Sensing of Environment, 233, 111375.
Wang, Y., Zhang, Z., Feng, L., Ma, Y., & Du, Q. (2021). A new attention-based CNN approach 
for crop mapping using time series Sentinel-2 images. Computers and Electronics in 
Agriculture, 184, 106090.
Wei, S., Zhang, H., Wang, C., Wang, Y., & Xu, L. (2019). Multi-temporal SAR data large￾scale crop mapping based on U-Net model. Remote Sensing, 11(1), 68.
Whyte, A., Ferentinos, K. P., & Petropoulos, G. P. (2018). A new synergistic approach for 
monitoring wetlands using Sentinels-1 and 2 data with object-based machine learning 
algorithms. Environmental Modelling & Software, 104, 40–54.
Wilson, D. L. (1972). Asymptotic properties of nearest neighbor rules using edited data. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 3, 408–421.
Xavier, A. C., Rudorff, B. F., Shimabukuro, Y. E., Berka, L. M. S., & Moreira, M. A. (2006). 
Multi-temporal analysis of MODIS data to classify sugarcane crop. International 
Journal of Remote Sensing, 27(4), 755–768.
Xin, Y., & Adler, P. R. (2019). Mapping miscanthus using multi-temporal convolutional neu￾ral network and google earth engine. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGSPATIAL 
International Workshop on AI for Geographic Knowledge Discovery (pp. 81–84).
Xu, J., Zhu, Y., Zhong, R., Lin, Z., Xu, J., Jiang, H., Huang, J., Li, H., & Lin, T. (2020). 
DeepCropMapping: A multi-temporal deep learning approach with improved spatial gen￾eralizability for dynamic corn and soybean mapping. Remote Sensing of Environment, 
247, 111946.36 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Yan, S., Yao, X., Zhu, D., Liu, D., Zhang, L., Yu, G., Gao, B., Yang, J., & Yun, W. (2021). 
Large-scale crop mapping from multi-source optical satellite imageries using machine 
learning with discrete grids. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and 
Geoinformation, 103, 102485.
You, N., Dong, J., Huang, J., Du, G., Zhang, G., He, Y., Yang, T., Di, Y., & Xiao, X. (2021). The 
10-m crop type maps in Northeast China during 2017–2019. Scientific Data, 8(1), 1–11.
Zhang, H., Gao, M., & Ren, C. (2022). Feature-ensemble-based crop mapping for multi￾temporal Sentinel-2 data using oversampling algorithms and gray wolf optimizer support 
vector machine. Remote Sensing, 14(20), 5259.
Zhao, X., Yuan, Y., Song, M., Ding, Y., Lin, F., Liang, D., & Zhang, D. (2019). Use of unmanned 
aerial vehicle imagery and deep learning unet to extract rice lodging. Sensors, 19(18), 3859.
Zhao, H., Zhang, M., & Chen, F. (2021). GAN-GL: Generative adversarial networks for glacial 
lake mapping. Remote Sensing, 13(22), 4728.
Zhou, Y. N., Luo, J., Feng, L., Yang, Y., Chen, Y., & Wu, W. (2019). Long-short-term-memory￾based crop classification using high-resolution optical images and multi-temporal SAR 
data. GIScience & Remote Sensing, 56(8), 1170–1191.DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-3 37
Artificial Intelligence in 
Precision Agriculture
A Systematic Review on Tools, 
Techniques, and Applications
J. Dhakshayani, B. Surendiran, and J. Jyothsna
3.1 PRECISION AGRICULTURE – AN INTRODUCTION
Precision agriculture (PA) is a comprehensive data and yields production frame￾work. The goal of PA is to increase long-term, site-specific production efficiency, 
economic output, and profit growth while reducing unpredictable consequences 
on wildlife and the environment [1]. Although production has increased thanks to 
genetic advancement, pesticide techniques, irrigation, and farm equipment, this 
hasn’t been enough to keep up with population growth’s constant need. Global food 
security and the environment are both threatened by rising demand. Numerous 
cutting-edge initiatives have been attempted to enable sustainable agricultural 
production. One of the initiatives made during the early 1990s was the Precision 
Farming System (PFS). Based on the information and technology, this manifested 
itself in many ways.
Due to the inputs in the current situation being of the ideal quantity and having 
enhanced yield in comparison, PA in India differs from classic models. Data, inno￾vation, and control from a collaborative system are the fundamental components 
of PA, which increase crop output, production quality, and energy efficiency while 
preserving the environment. While implementing PA, the general public should be 
environmentally conscious. In order to enable the sustainability of natural resources 
(such as water, air, and soil quality), conventional agricultural management must be 
changed. The basic steps followed in PA are illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Further explanation of the five “Rs” in the PA [2] is as follows:
• Right time
• Right input
• Right place
• Right amount
• Right manner
Site-specific management is the term for this. The primary threat to conventional 
agricultural systems is market-based international competition in agricultural goods. 
Hence PA’s focus is on this issue. As we map the factors of soil, crop, and field 
338 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
environment in PA, we must gather enormous amounts of data from various sources. 
PA is referred to as being “information intense” as a result [3]. Figure 3.2 represents 
the overall study of this proposed work.
The structure of this chapter is organized as follows. Section 3.2 presents the tools 
and techniques in PA. In Section 3.3, we present applications of artificial intelligence 
(AI). In Section 3.4, we described the machine learning (ML) and role of ML in PA. 
Sections 3.5 and 3.6 explain the role of big data and cloud computing in PA. We 
deliberated the present status and hurdles of PA in India in Section 3.7.
FIGURE 3.1 Fundamental process of PA.
FIGURE 3.2 Graphical representation of the overall workflow in PA.Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture 39
3.2 TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES IN PRECISION AGRICULTURE
The PA involves various tools and techniques, which are briefed later.
3.2.1 Global Positioning System (GPS)
PA’s key tool is the Global Positioning System (GPS). It is defined as a satellite￾based navigation system that permits the detection of region (100–0.01 m) [3]. This 
includes details about that particular area of the field, including its latitude, longi￾tude, and elevation, to identify information on the crops, water, soil, impediments, 
pest activity, weed invasion, and other pertinent items there. PA is possible for a 
user with an advanced and precise location positioning system. GPS has several 
advantages, including the ability to map soil and crop measurements, apply inputs to 
specific regions, monitor yields, and manage farms. Some of the key ways that GPS 
is used in PA include as follows:
Crop Monitoring: GPS can be used to track the location and growth of crops, 
providing valuable information about crop health and yields. This informa￾tion can be used to optimize planting and harvesting schedules and to iden￾tify areas of the field that may need additional resources or attention [4].
Vehicle Guidance: GPS-based vehicle guidance systems can be used to help farm￾ers navigate their fields, reducing the need for manual labor and improving the 
accuracy and efficiency of planting, harvesting, and other operations [5].
Livestock Tracking: GPS-based tracking systems can be used to monitor the 
location and movements of livestock, helping farmers to manage their 
herds more effectively and to improve the overall health and welfare of 
their animals [6].
Yield Monitoring: GPS-based yield monitoring systems can be used to track 
crop yields in real time, providing valuable information about crop health 
and productivity. This information can be used to make informed decisions 
about fertilizer application, irrigation, and other important aspects of crop 
management [7].
Soil Sampling: GPS-based soil sampling systems can be used to identify 
areas of a field that have different soil properties, such as pH levels, nutri￾ent content, and water retention. This information can then be used to 
optimize fertilization and irrigation practices and to improve crop health 
and yields [8].
Variable Rate Technology: GPS-based variable rate technology (VRT) sys￾tems can be used to apply inputs, such as fertilizer or pesticides, at different 
rates depending on the specific needs of different areas of a field. This helps 
farmers to reduce waste, lower costs, and improve the overall efficiency and 
sustainability of their operations.
Automated Irrigation: GPS-based irrigation systems can be used to automate 
the application of water to crops, reducing the need for manual labor and 
improving the accuracy and efficiency of irrigation practices.40 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
3.2.2 Geographic Information System (GIS)
A rebellious piece of technology that makes it possible to deal with data connected 
to a spatially mapped area of the globe is the geographic information system (GIS). 
It is a repository designed especially to manage map data. Geographical data from 
several sources may be more easily stored and organized in various layers owing to 
GIS software. Each GIS coverage is made up of topologically related geographic 
elements. It possesses computation and analysis power that produces complicated 
field views and creates sound agrotechnological judgments. GIS cannot be confused 
with the actual decision-making systems, though. For data synthesis and decision￾support systems across a range of fields, GIS systems are essential [9]. Many com￾mercial agriculture information management tools are available, including ADAPT, 
SST software, SpiderWeb GIS, AGERmetrix, AgVerdict Inc., WinGIS, Trimble, 
FieldView, and others.
In particular, software-based agricultural management tools [10] promote automa￾tion in gathering and processing of data, monitoring, planning, maintaining records, 
making decisions, and managing agricultural operations. In addition, these systems 
assist with fundamental tracking activities, namely crop production and management, 
field work scheduling, monitoring soil nutrient levels, weather forecasting, field map￾ping, and other intricate activities for automating field management. For various preci￾sion agricultural applications, a specialized GIS was built called the farm management 
information system (FMIS) [11].
Geographic information system (GIS) technology is widely adopted in PA for a 
variety of purposes, including:
Field Mapping: GIS can be used to create accurate, detailed maps of agricul￾tural fields, including information about crop types, soil properties, topog￾raphy, and other relevant features. These maps can be used to plan planting 
and harvesting operations, to monitor crop growth, and to track the move￾ment of machinery.
Crop Monitoring: GIS can be used to track the location and growth of crops 
in real time, providing valuable information about crop health and yields. 
This information can be used to make informed decisions about planting 
and harvesting schedules and to identify areas of the field that may need 
additional resources or attention.
Climate Monitoring: GIS can be used to collect and analyze data on tempera￾ture, precipitation, and other climatic factors, helping farmers to understand 
the impact of weather conditions on crop growth and to make informed 
decisions about planting, harvesting, and other operations.
Soil Sampling: GIS can be used to collect and analyze soil sample data, pro￾viding valuable information about soil properties and fertility, which can 
then be used to optimize fertilization and irrigation practices.
Yield Monitoring: GIS-based yield monitoring systems can be used to track crop 
yields in real time, providing valuable information about crop health and pro￾ductivity. This information can be used to make informed decisions about fer￾tilizer application, irrigation, and other important aspects of crop management.Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture 41
Data Management: GIS provides a powerful platform for managing and ana￾lyzing large amounts of data from various sources, including yield moni￾tors, soil sensors, weather stations, and more. This data can be used to make 
informed decisions about crop management, resource allocation, and other 
important aspects of PA.
3.2.3 Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN)
The efficient implementation of smart farming is hampered by the gathering and 
analysis of vast data generated by IoT networks and wireless sensor networks (WSN), 
including images and other data from Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), satellites. 
Emerging technologies in AI and data mining offer prospective ways to form opin￾ions from this information [12–14]. These methods can help analyze wider and more 
unexpected amounts of data and accurately identify correlations. For various reasons 
examined later, farming has not placed enough value on these methods’ capacity to 
analyze enormous amounts of data.
It possesses computation and analysis power that produces complicated field 
views and creates sound agrotechnological judgments. As a result of advancements 
in sensor development, sensors are now substantially more accurate. In Pennsylvania, 
sensors are mostly used to determine things like humidity, vegetation, temperature, 
texture, structure, physical character, humidity, nutrition profile, water vapor, and air. 
These data are processed and analyzed to produce useful information that supports 
PA’s goals [3].
3.2.3.1 Adoption of WSNs in PA
WSN technology has been widely adopted in PA for a variety of purposes, including 
crop monitoring, environmental monitoring, livestock monitoring, yield monitoring, 
machine monitoring, data management, and more. For example, WSNs can be used 
to monitor the health and growth of crops and to make informed decisions about 
irrigation, fertilization, and other important aspects of crop management. WSNs can 
also be used to monitor the environment in agricultural fields and to optimize plant￾ing and harvesting schedules. Additionally, WSNs can be used to monitor the health 
and behavior of livestock, providing valuable information about animal welfare and 
productivity.
3.2.3.2 Benefits of WSNs in PA
WSN technology provides a wide range of benefits to farmers, researchers, and 
other stakeholders in PA. For example, WSNs provide real-time information about 
the location and status of crops, livestock, and other resources, allowing farmers to 
respond quickly to changing conditions and to make informed decisions in real time. 
Additionally, WSNs provide a powerful platform for collecting and managing large 
amounts of data from various sources, including sensors in the field, yield monitors, 
and weather stations. This data can be used to make informed decisions about crop 
management, resource allocation, and other important aspects of PA.42 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
3.2.4 Drones and Robots
Drones are adaptable and have been used across many industries, including agricul￾ture. Drones’ use in PA has considerably expanded since AI was integrated into them 
since it is practical for farmers. Drones are useful for several tasks, including data 
collecting, disease diagnosis, crop and field monitoring, and many PA procedures, 
such as input spraying and surveillance. The goal of AI has always been to reduce 
the amount of work that humans must do to use this innovative technology. This PA 
sector is the crucial industries that require automation and smart gadgets that can 
carry out tasks that require human intervention [15].
As part of an efficient approach to precision agricultural method, the use of UAVs 
(drones and remote aircraft) in agricultural production is growing steadily. This tech￾nology enables agri-engineers, farmers, and geologists to help their processes while 
using powerful information analytics to gain insightful knowledge about the crops. 
UAVs have made meticulous plant monitoring over vast agricultural land areas fea￾sible, allowing for the identification of optimal crop suggestions and the ability to 
estimate production using more accurate data [16].
Overall, the adoption of drones and robots in PA provides farmers with new ways 
to improve crop yields, reduce waste, and enhance the sustainability of their opera￾tions. As technology continues to evolve, it is likely that drones and robots will play 
an increasingly important role in PA, helping farmers to stay ahead of the curve and 
to take advantage of new opportunities for improvement and innovation.
3.2.5 Satellites
Compared to conventional approaches, satellite data offers various benefits for PA, 
especially in terms of fast decision-making processes, portrayal, and coverage. Many 
crucial issues are addressed with the help of space data, including estimating crop 
area, production, crop stages, obtaining fundamental soil data, crop management 
research, and more [17]. Because satellite photos are used to characterize a grower’s 
fields precisely and are frequently combined with GISs, satellites are also good in 
the form of management tools in PA. With this information, farmers can create com￾prehensive maps of their fields, assess crop health and growth, and identify areas 
that may need extra attention or resources [18]. For instance, satellites can gauge the 
chlorophyll content of crops to determine their health and productivity. This enables 
more intensive and effective cultivation operations [19].
3.2.6 Precision Irrigation System
Precision irrigation systems are an essential component of PA. These systems aim 
to provide the right amount of water to crops at the right time, based on their needs 
and environmental conditions. The system uses advanced sensors and software to 
monitor soil moisture levels, weather conditions, and plant growth and then adjusts 
the amount of water provided to the crops accordingly. This helps to conserve water 
resources, improve crop yields, and reduce the risk of crop damage from over- or 
under-watering. Precision irrigation systems also help to minimize water waste and Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture 43
reduce runoff, which can have significant environmental and economic benefits. 
They can be integrated with other PA technologies, such as GPS and remote sensing, 
to provide a comprehensive approach to managing crop production. In summary, 
precision irrigation systems are a critical component of modern agriculture that 
helps to increase crop productivity while reducing the impact on the environment.
A crucial technology in PA is a sprinkler irrigation system with GPS-based con￾trollers. These irrigation systems use WSNs to monitor the soil and surrounding 
conditions as well as the operating parameters, such as flow and pressure levels, of 
the irrigation system [9].
Several DSS (decision support systems) proposed in the literature take into 
account various use cases with various goals. Using data on soil moisture and cli￾mate [13] built a DSS to predict the periodic irrigation needs for citrus. This uses a 
soil management system to reduce inaccuracies. The effectiveness of the employ￾ment of DSS technologies is influenced by their simplicity, efficiency, financial 
sustainability, significance among farmers.
3.2.7 Software, Open-Source Frameworks, and Toolkits
There are software developed for various purposes, viz., mapping, map generators, 
variable-rate applications, overlay of maps, advanced geostatistical features, and sta￾tistical tools. IoT enables new agricultural management systems, namely remotely 
controlling a safe-driving vehicle, which enhances software maintenance. The 
modern-day IoT and PA’s ability permit concurrent control of numerous equipment 
components [20]. The use of software decision-making tools in PA is considered to 
be important since such technologies improve management effectiveness. However, 
research remains to be performed to make innovation-based tools sufficiently desir￾able, easy to use, and environmentally friendly. However, manufacturers must have 
the proper training for managing such tools.
The PA makes extensive use of contemporary technology, like as information and 
communication technologies, to boost and enhance the effectiveness and productiv￾ity of agro-ecosystems. For data storage, analysis, and decision-making, there are 
various open-source frameworks and toolkits available for PA. Some of the popular 
toolkits are listed in the following:
TensorFlow: It is a free open-source ML framework that can be used to assess 
and forecast outcomes in PA. It, for instance, may be used to determine the 
best season for planting and harvesting based on climatic data or to esti￾mate agricultural yields based on statistics and current climatic conditions. 
Because of its adaptable design, it allows programmers to develop and build 
machine-learning models for a diverse range of agricultural applications.
QGIS: A free, open-source GIS called QGIS is used in precision farming to 
organize and analyze spatial data, including soil, weather, and crop data. 
For representing, analyzing, and transforming geographical data, it offers a 
variety of capabilities. It can be used to make maps, design unique projec￾tions, and do geospatial research. In PA, it can be employed to map and track 
crop development across temporal as well as assess soil type and quality.44 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Agro-Know: An open-source platform called Agro-Know offers various precision 
agricultural technologies and services, such as data management, processing, 
and mapping. With capabilities for data discovery, access, and recovery, it 
offers a single repository for agricultural data. With the help of it, producers, 
researchers, and others may access and evaluate data to make accurate deci￾sions regarding crop management, fertilizer use, and other challenges.
OpenCV: In order to analyze images and videos for applications including 
crop yield prediction and crop monitoring, PA can utilize the open-source 
computer vision library known as OpenCV. A variety of tools for inter￾preting images and videos are provided by it, such as image segmentation, 
object classification, and feature detection. It can be employed in PA to 
analyze aerial photographs of crops to spot regions of disease or damage or 
to calculate crop yields based on the specific plant development patterns.
DIVA-GIS: It is another open-source software package for managing, analyzing, 
and visualizing geographical data. Data processing, visualization of data, and 
data analysis capabilities are all included in DIVA-GIS, which offers a user￾friendly platform for working with geographical data. With the use of DIVA￾GIS, precision farmers can create maps of the soil’s fertility and quality, track 
crop growth over time, and spot disease or stress points on the crops.
R: It is a statistical computing environment and open-source programming lan￾guage that can be used to analyze and interpret enormous volumes of data 
in PA. It provides an extensive set of statistical tools and functions, along 
with a substantial user and development community that contributes tools 
and packages for several applications. This can be used in PA to analyze 
vast volumes of data, including meteorological, soil, and crop data, to help 
farmers decide how best to manage their crops, apply fertilizer, and more.
Each of these tools provides unique capabilities and can be used in different ways 
to support PA and improve the productivity and efficiency of agricultural systems. In 
addition, open-source tools provide the flexibility and accessibility necessary for the 
development of customized and innovative solutions for specific needs and challenges.
3.2.8 Yield Monitoring
The yield monitoring method comprises several parts, including sensors, storage 
devices, user interfaces, computers, and control systems for integrating and coor￾dinating these parts. Yield monitors are mounted to machinery, as tractors or com￾bined harvesters, to collect diversified data, including grain yield, soil parameters, 
moisture content, and much more. In order to offer rich, important data for manage￾ment information and the analysis of regional and temporal patterns, this data has 
been gathered over the course of more than 10 years. A GPS and yield monitoring 
system can be used for yield mapping [21]. The agricultural yield prediction aims to 
assess aspects that affect and impact production, such as irrigation, natural soil con￾tent, physical characteristics of the soil, climate and metrological conditions, crop 
diseases, stress, and pests. It enables effective resource management; early and accu￾rate product estimation may provide decision-makers with a trustworthy platform Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture 45
from which one can determine whether there will be a shortage or surplus and then 
to react suitably in the context of the situation.
3.2.9 Remote Sensing
Remote sensing is advantageous in soil mapping, determination of climate and land 
characteristics, detection of crop nutrients, vegetative analysis, production forecast, 
pest control, evaluation of the viability of the land for agriculture, satellite-based 
agrometeorology services, and flood monitoring. Applications for agricultural remote 
sensing have increasingly used DL and CNNs [22, 23]. In order to produce structural 
features for semantic data, CNN requires a vast amount of data [24]. Artificial satellite￾based remote sensing has played a significant role in the PA by enabling remote access 
to field data. The major satellites producing agriculture data [25], such as multispec￾tral, hyperspectral data, and NIR and RGB data, are the RapidEye constellation sat￾ellite system, GeoEye-1 system, WorldView-3 system, American Landsat satellites, 
etc. Another main application of remote sensing with deep learning in PA is crop 
classification and prediction. Deep learning models can process satellite and aerial 
imagery to identify different crops and estimate their yield, allowing farmers to make 
informed decisions about crop management practices. The use of deep learning algo￾rithms in combination with remote sensing can improve the accuracy and efficiency 
of crop classification and yield prediction, compared to traditional methods [18].
3.3 APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN PA
The bigger goal of digital farming is to automate all PF processes by employing 
all of the knowledge and experience that is now accessible [26]. To gain some use￾ful insights and advance precision farming, it primarily focuses on the “value of 
the data.” Some experts say digital farming combines precision farming with smart 
farming [27]. In some places, digital farming is now a reality: For instance, GPS 
guidance networks for site-specific fertilization, organized traffic farming, or plant 
protection measures are available by means of a whole production cycle through 
unique cloud-based connectivity. Despite this computerized data processing that is 
fully linked, coordinated networks are still in agriculture and agricultural equip￾ment’s near future.
3.3.1 Crop Management
Regarding boosting crop output and quality, crop management is a crucial duty. 
Historical information is essential in crop management for this reason. For each 
step to be as effective as possible, PA needs vision gained from an augmented 
examination of data. Examples include the amount of water needed, when to water, 
how much fertilizer to use, and when to apply pesticides. If appropriate, real-time 
information is provided to the farmer using a sophisticated IoT-based management 
technique via email or SMS. Agriculture, in general, has benefited greatly from the 
use of AI and ML in PA for crop management because many parts of the indus￾try have been improved. Predictive analytics are basically used in crop sowing to 46 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
determine the ideal timing and manner for sowing. Additionally, crops can be sown 
using AI-assisted machinery at appropriate depths and at equal intervals. A key fac￾tor in influencing yield is choosing the right crop, and this decision is manipulated 
by many components, including the topography of the area, climate, kind of soil, its 
composition, and market trends. AI and ML aid in identifying new opportunities for 
all the action in agriculture should be improved [15].
3.3.2 Soil Management
A thorough understanding of soil is required to increase agricultural productivity; 
as a result, correct soil information should be provided to achieve satisfactory soil 
management. Agricultural soil characteristics data, including estimates of soil mois￾ture, dryness, temperature, and other things, are fed into a ML model that acts as a 
trustworthy way to deliver insightful information. As a result, it is easier to use soil 
management to its fullest potential for agricultural purposes [28]. Trace Genomics, 
situated in California, offers services for soil analysis to farmers. Illumina, the com￾pany’s principal investor, contributed to the development of the system that employs 
ML to advise clients about the advantages and disadvantages of their soil. Users 
supposedly obtain an intensive description of their soil components from Trace 
Genomics after sending in a soil sample [9].
3.3.3 Irrigation and Water Quality Management
Sensors frequently measure the temperature and soil moisture content and transmit 
their findings to a processing unit or, in some cases, the sensor itself for interpreta￾tion. Real-time monitoring of water quality is also possible through the aid of the 
same IoT system. All of these considerations basically make irrigation and water 
quality management simpler. Additionally, AI-driven intelligent automated irriga￾tion systems can continuously deliver the exact and ideal irrigation required to 
sustain specified soil conditions. This boosts overall yield while lowering labor 
expenses, manufacturing costs, and water waste. Many scientists think that wise 
water management in such irrigation systems will tend to have a good global water 
effect [15]. A smart irrigation system must be designed and managed using the 
estimation of evapotranspiration; however, this calculation proves challenging. AI 
and ML algorithms that can accurately estimate evapotranspiration can solve this 
problem [28].
3.3.4 Agricultural Robots
Precision farming tools like agricultural robots are getting more crucial, helping 
farmers to improve crop yields and reduce production costs. These robots can per￾form a variety of tasks, including planting, harvesting, pruning, and soil analysis, 
allowing farmers to be more efficient and effective in their operations. One of the 
key advantages of agricultural robots is their ability to perform repetitive tasks with 
high accuracy and speed, reducing the need for manual labor and increasing the 
efficiency of agricultural operations.Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture 47
The agriculture industry is among the most major industries around the world 
that has profited from automation and intelligent devices that can do activities 
that previously required human involvement. Companies are creating and pro￾gramming autonomous robots that can perform crucial agricultural jobs, such as 
harvesting more crops more quickly than human laborer’s, thanks to this game￾changing technology. An illustration of this is the robot RIPPA, which eliminates 
weeds and pests [29].
3.3.5 Plant Disease Prediction, Detection, and Control
Based on computer analysis, predictions are made. The forecasting of illnesses and 
insect assaults makes use of both deep learning and ML techniques. For training the 
system, convolutional neural networks are also used. IoT can alert the farmer using 
his or her phone and a cellular network so they can take the appropriate action [30]. 
A breakthrough in smart, precise agriculture is accurate disease prediction. Better 
quality yields have been encouraged by early disease diagnosis and even disease 
prediction. AI and ML algorithms allow for accurate detection. AI and ML models 
can effectively evaluate noisy and heterogeneous data more effectively [31].
3.3.6 Mitigation of Labor and Human Resource
According to reports, significant farming regions have lost millions of dollars in 
revenue as a result of manpower scarcity. The decline in available labor for agricul￾tural activities has been made up for by machines that are used in intelligent PA. 
Harvest CROO Robotics, particularly useful for harvesting crops, is an example of 
such attempts [9].
3.3.7 Greenhouse Management
The greenhouses’ WSN can track the climate and transfer the data to a facility, 
where it is analyzed using a variety of cutting-edge tools and diagnostic models. 
Numerous aspects, such as the drip irrigation, luminance system, and climate con￾trol system, can be monitored remotely [32]. In a greenhouse, using AI to examine 
operations is essential. The AI-based technology is made for monitoring, main￾taining greenhouse’s climate, focusing on meticulous data analysis to reach a high 
degree of precision. The greenhouse’s climate must be adjusted while taking into 
account a number of factors, making it difficult to complete using conventional 
methods. Fuzzy logic controllers (FLCs) and artificial neural networks (ANNs) are 
two techniques used in this procedure to achieve great precision in managing tem￾perature and humidity [15].
3.4 IoT AND APPLICATIONS OF IoT IN PA
Kevin Ashton mentioned the term “Internet of Things” (IoT) for the first time in 
1999 to explain the process of gathering data from “things,” processing it at the indi￾vidual or collective level and then using AI (usually ML) to make decisions based 48 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
on massive amounts of data and the location of the source (data). Farming became 
intelligent farming. As a result, formerly, PA just considered the data’s position when 
making decisions [33]. IoT allows for real-time data transfer to storage databases, 
where a pre-installed application uses the knowledge it has already been taught 
to make accurate decisions and provide the appropriate information to the user. 
Traditional farming has evolved into a cyber-physical system (CPS, which combines 
software and hardware components). It is now possible to monitor practically all the 
factors, and IoT has enabled farming practices to be automated to a higher degree. 
IoT has therefore strengthened smart farming [34].
3.4.1 IoT Platforms for PA
FarmBeats: An end-to-end IoT platform for agriculture called FarmBeats 
makes it easy to collect data from numerous sensors, cameras, and drones. 
A cheap and accessible IoT arena for agriculture is called FarmBeats. It 
assists TVWS, a cost-effective, long-range technology supporting high 
bandwidth sensors. It combines an intelligent gateway and a weather-aware 
IoT base station to make sure that services are accessible both online and 
off. Novel path-planning algorithms, which increase drone battery life, are 
also included. An IoT platform called FarmBeats achieves the goals in a 
highly changeable and resource-limited setting [35].
SmartFarmNet: A multidisciplinary Australian team called “SmartFarmNet” 
comprised growers, farmers, computer scientists, and crop biologists. In 
terms of the number of users, it is the biggest system in the globe. It offers 
agricultural performance analysis and suggestions. It has sensors attached, 
crops are appraised, and it aids people. It offers solutions for quick and scal￾able data that can handle the huge volume of data (big data) produced by 
millions of IoT sensors.
Infiswift: The revolutionary edge-to-cloud connection, analytics software 
engine, and reliable Intel architecture make up the Infiswift IoT platform.
thethings.iO: It is an IoT application enablement platform that provides several 
protocols, stunning dashboards, and robust APIs to enable quick and scal￾able connectivity of things to the internet (thethings.iO).
Raspberry Pi: Recently, it has become the preferred IoT platform. The Linux￾powered Raspberry Pi also comes with a set of GPIO (general purpose 
input/output) pins that let users explore the IoT with a variety of connect￾ing choices and control electronic components for physical computing. 
Memory storage of up to 8GB (Raspberry Pi). It functions in an open￾source environment because it is closed-source hardware (the board itself 
is not open hardware), which is affordable, adaptable and has received a 
lot of community support because so many IoT projects have already been 
ported to it.
Arduino: Agriculture and Arduino have a very long history together. An 
assortment of electronic boards with microcontrollers makes up the open￾source hardware platform known as Arduino. An adequate combination of 
IoT hardware and software can be found on the user-friendly IoT platform Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture 49
Arduino. It functions using a variety of hardware requirements that are 
familiar to users of interactive electronics. The Arduino software is included 
in the Integrated Development Environment (IDE) design and the Arduino 
programming language for programming microcontrollers. The recently 
released Pro IDE is far more practical and speeds up coding (Geekflare).
3.5 MACHINE LEARNING (ML) AND THE ROLE 
OF MACHINE LEARNING IN PA
Agriculture must adapt to changes that are taking place globally in order to survive and 
get the full benefits of the newest technology. The benefit of the knowledge imparted 
to farmers by professionals who apply ML techniques to the data gathered from agri￾culture and numerous other sources has substantially increased PA. Additionally, 
they infer useful information, and ML models’ implicit prediction capability could be 
integrated into automatic procedures like expert systems. Smart farming, backed by 
high-precision AI/ML algorithms, keeps farmers up to speed with technology and has 
significantly improved the agricultural sector [36]. The following are some examples 
of specific AI and ML applications in PA.
3.5.1 Soil Management
A better understanding of soil is required to increase agricultural productivity since 
the soil is a heterogeneous natural resource that is most important in agriculture. In 
soil, there are intricate processes at work and systems that call for an arduous inves￾tigation. In order to achieve good soil management, information on the available 
soil should be correct. Data on agricultural soil attributes, including estimations of 
soil dryness, quality, temperature, and humidity levels, is loaded into a ML model 
to provide a reliable result and provide insightful information [37]. Trace Genomics, 
a technique that uses ML to detect soil flaws and is akin to the Plantix app, is one 
example of this technology (Plantix). Farmers can get soil analysis services from 
the California-based company Trace Genomics. The system, which employs ML 
to give clients a sense of their soil’s strengths and limitations, was developed with 
assistance from its major investor, Illumina. Users supposedly obtain a compre￾hensive description of the soil components from Trace Genomics after sending in a 
sample of their soil (Home).
3.5.2 Irrigation Management
Intelligent automated irrigation systems powered by AI can deliver the optimal and 
consistent irrigation required to sustain targeted soil conditions. This lowers labor 
expenses, raises production costs, and decreases water waste. Many scientists think 
that the wise use of water in such irrigation systems tends to affect water supplies 
worldwide. It’s vital to estimate evapotranspiration to construct and such system; 
however, precisely calculating it is a difficult procedure. AI and ML algorithms that 
accurately estimate evapotranspiration are used to overcome this problem. Cultyvate 
and DIGITEUM are examples of this technology (NEWA).50 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
3.5.3 Weather Forecasting System
Models for seasonal forecasting aid in boosting agricultural output and accuracy. To 
help farmers make decisions, these models are able to forecast forthcoming weather 
patterns months in advance. For tiny farms that depend on the weather, such as those 
in developing nations like India, seasonal forecasting is very useful. These technolo￾gies include IMD, ViSeed, and NEWA (VineView). Due to its impact on mankind 
worldwide, weather forecasting has attracted the attention of several researchers 
from various research communities. Many studies have been motivated to explore 
hidden hierarchical patterns in the large volume of weather datasets for weather 
forecasting as a result of the recent advancement of deep learning techniques. This 
is due to the widespread availability of tremendous weather data and the emergence 
of information and communication technology.
3.5.4 Agricultural Robots
Autonomous robots that can do crucial agricultural jobs, such as harvesting crops 
at a faster rate and bigger volume than human employees, are being developed and 
programmed by businesses [15]. The “See & Spray” robot was created by Blue River 
Technology (John Deere), and it is said to use computer vision and ML to spray her￾bicide just where it is needed accurately. Many models, including framework, transfer 
function, and black-box simulation, have been used to assist farmers in maintain￾ing appropriate greenhouse conditions. Many models, including framework, transfer 
function, and black-box simulation, have been used to assist farmers in maintaining 
appropriate greenhouse conditions. The mechanism model, like the early static or 
dynamic model described by Bot [38] and the enhanced models proposed by van 
Henten [39] and de Zwart [40], gives a clear scientific interpretation of the greenhouse 
environment. In accordance with the metrological circumstances and the greenhouse 
component values, static and dynamic models are used for this purpose [41, 42]. 
The transfer function model [43] has a straightforward structure, which can only be 
applied to linear systems. While with the black-box model, both linear and nonlinear 
modeling may be done based on input data [44–46]. Therefore, numerous studies 
work to create these models and implement them in greenhouses to appease farmers 
and lower overall costs [47–49]. To simulate the greenhouse temperature in China, 
He and Ma [50] used a neural network with PCA. The findings demonstrated that 
the BPNN based on PCA was more accurate than the stepwise regression technique.
3.5.5 Greenhouse Management
The use of AI in greenhouse operations is crucial. The AI-backed greenhouse tem￾perature control and management system place a strong emphasis on data analysis 
in order to attain high precision. It becomes a laborious process to regulate a green￾house’s climate manually due to the different components that must be considered. 
Some of the techniques used in this process include FLCs and ANNs, achieving high 
accuracy in temperature and humidity regulation [15].Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture 51
3.6 BIG DATA AND ITS ROLE IN PA
The amount of data produced by the globe today is immense, and it is continually 
being recorded and captured. Numerous sources of data result in the generation of 
structured, unstructured, and semi-structured data. Although most of the data gen￾erated is unstructured, some is still structured and kept in conventional relational 
databases or data warehouses. Due to big data, the traditional methods of organizing, 
processing, and interpreting data have undergone a significant transformation. The 
existing methods did not effectively manage the data collected from many sources. 
Deep analysis has the wonderful skills to uncover trends, identify hidden patterns, 
detect hidden connections, disclose new information, extract insight, and improve 
decision-making and automatic processes, among other things. Big data has been 
shown to be crucial for smart agriculture [51].
3.7 CLOUD COMPUTING IN AGRICULTURE
Cropland and biodiversity both continue to be lost on a global scale. If we assume 
that cloud computing technology can be used in real time to create entire ecosys￾tems, then using the appropriate sensors and monitoring software to collect data 
from the field, such as pictures of farmer’s terrains and annotations of human actors 
in the field, feed data repositories with their GPS that coordinates with accuracy. 
For instance, sensors are now capable of locating hay bales in a field and determin￾ing how much moisture they contain. In order to access the data from predictive 
analytics institutions and obtain precise predictions of the products that will be 
in demand across marketplaces, farmers can be enabled to use cloud computing 
techniques [52]. A knowledge-based archive with a plethora of data on agricultural 
techniques, crop inputs, agricultural innovations, insecticides, seeds, composts, 
nutrition, and weed resistance is also urged to be used by farmers. All of this is 
supported by professional assistance from a variety of sources, such as agriculture 
and the processing of agricultural products. The mechanism of cloud computing in 
PA is illustrated in Figure 3.3.
The advantages of cloud computing are listed in the following [53]:
• Enhancement of the GDP of the nation
• Ensured food security and food quality
• Developed economy and financial conditions
• Build-up of worldwide communication
• Accessibility of data at any time, at any location
• Increased market price
• Availability of the data at a faster rate
• Inspiration to scientists and scholars
Furthermore, some of the recent research carried out with the aid of above￾mentioned techniques in the domain of PA are elaborately tabulated, as shown in 
Table 3.1.52 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
3.8 PRESENT STATUS AND HURDLES OF PA IN INDIA
The implementation and progress of PA in India would be influenced by the design 
of the adoption strategies. Planning is essential before providing PA to Indian agri￾culture, which entails carrying out a significant number of experiments and assess￾ments. Using multimedia, seminars, and workshops, the public is made aware of 
the PA idea at this early phase. This entails the creation of adequately expertized 
and specialized personnel, appropriate PA institutions, and consistent crop and soil 
management. To validate computer models with zone-specific data, this is done after 
a stratified random sample within the region that accurately depicts the management 
zone across the entire nation. Agricultural parameters, specialized monitoring and 
control, involving regular grid sampling and monitoring, are duplicated in this stage 
using zone-specific computer models.
The National Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP) has a US$285 million bud￾get that is solely allocated to PA research [65]. The Tamil Nadu government launched 
the “Tamil Nadu Precision Farming Project.” It is currently in use in two districts, 
with plans to expand to six more in the future. It primarily focuses on high-value 
crops such as hybrid tomatoes, capsicum, baby corn, white onions, cabbage, and cau￾liflower. With the support of the Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering and 
the Project Directorate for Cropping Systems Research (PDCSR UP), Bhopal also 
began applying variable rate inputs to various cropping systems (CIAE). Ahmedabad 
has approved testing with the Space Application Center (ISRO) at the Central Potato 
Research Station farm in Punjab, in order to carry out thorough research on remote 
sensing in assessing the diversity in consideration to both time and space. There are 
17 PFDCs (Precision Farming Development Centers); to fulfill PA, different loca￾tions around the nation must satisfy the respective regional standards. Therefore, it 
is crucial for PA to build specialized institutions and a scientific data bank.
FIGURE 3.3 Mechanism of cloud computing in PA.53 Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture TABLE 3.1 Recent Work Carried Out on Precision Agriculture Using AI S. No. Reference Application of AI in PA Techniques Involved Contribution of the Study 1 Karydas et al. [54] Crop management GIS and machine learning A precision fertilization service for crop management, namely “PreFer” as an additional module in a cloud-based farm management system. 2 Thilakarathne et al. [55] Crop recommendation Machine learning Proposed a cloud computing-based crop recommendation system for assisting farmers in decision-making. 3 Afzaal et al. [56] Irrigation and water quality management Deep learning Evapotranspiration estimation using LSTM and bi-LSTM and selection of contributing input through regression analysis. 4 Berger et al. [57] Agricultural robots Unmanned aerial systems (UAS) and deep learning A multiple-cooperative robot system for UAS and UGV with that collaboratively examines the traps in an olive grove. 5 Murugamani et al. [58] Plant disease prediction, detection and control Machine learning and IoT Proposed a machine learning model for detection and classification of cotton leaf disease by monitoring soil quality. 6 Singh et al. [59] Mitigation of loss and quality management Deep learning Analysis of the U-Net, DeepLab, and Mask R-CNN models based on CNN to identify and forecast apple postharvest degradation zones. 7 Sakthi and DafniRose [60] Intelligent decision support system Cloud computing A hyperledger-based knowledge discovery system for the secure and private exchange and storing of sensor data. 8 Bakthavatchalam et al. [61] Yield prediction IoT and machine learning Machine learning model with IoT data for predicting the high-yield crop 9 Ngo et al. [62] Fertilizer recommendation Big data With the proposed EAR and a hive-based warehouse, a fertilizer recommendation system is proposed with the help of statistical models. 10 Cama-Pinto et al. [63] Greenhouse management wireless sensor networks Developed a modeling approach of radio wave attenuation for the purpose of managing the foliage in greenhouses. 11 Qamar and Bawany [64] Crop management Big data Developed a big data-based framework “Agri-PAD” for effective crop management and decision-making system such as precision, recommendation, and enterprise.54 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
REFERENCES
1. Pierce, F. J., & Nowak, P. (1999). Aspects of precision agriculture. Advances in Agronomy, 
67, 1–85.
2. Zimmerman, C. “The Five ‘R’s’ of Precision | Precision,” 11-Nov-2008. [Online]. Available: 
http://precision.agwired.com/2008/11/11/the-five-rs-of-precision/
3. Hakkim, V. A., Joseph, E. A., Gokul, A. A., & Mufeedha, K. (2016). Precision farming: 
The future of Indian agriculture. Journal of Applied Biology and Biotechnology, 4(6), 0–7.
4. Garcia-Sanchez, A. J., Garcia-Sanchez, F., & Garcia-Haro, J. (2011). Wireless sensor network 
deployment for integrating video-surveillance and data-monitoring in precision agriculture 
over distributed crops. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 75(2), 288–303. 
5. Benson, E. R., Stombaugh, T. S., Noguchi, N., Will, J. D., & Reid, J. F. (1998). An evaluation 
of a geomagnetic direction sensor for vehicle guidance in precision agriculture applications. 
ASAE paper, 983203.
6. Berger, R., & Hovav, A. (2013). Using a dairy management information system to 
facilitate precision agriculture: The case of the AfiMilk® system. Information Systems 
Management, 30(1), 21–34. 
7. Jensen, T., Baillie, C., Bramley, R., Di Bella, L., Whiteing, C., & Davis, R.. (2010, 
January). Assessment of sugarcane yield monitoring technology for precision agriculture. 
In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the Australian Society of Sugar Cane 
Technologists (ASSCT 2010) (Vol. 32, pp. 410–423). University of Southern Queensland.
8. Rossel, R. V., & McBratney, A. B. (1998). Soil chemical analytical accuracy and costs: 
Implications from precision agriculture. Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture, 
38(7), 765–775. 
9. Ahmad, L., & Nabi, F. (2021). Introduction to precision agriculture. In Agriculture 5.0: 
Artificial Intelligence, IoT, and Machine Learning (pp. 1–23). CRC Press. Boca Raton 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003125433.
10. Tummers, J., Kassahun, A., & Tekinerdogan, B. (2021). Reference architecture design 
for farm management information systems: A multi-case study approach. Precision 
Agriculture, 22(1), 22–50. 
11. Liu, S., Zhu, Y., & Guo, X. (2020). Key technology and application platform of agricul￾tural economic spatial information service—Chinese agricultural economic electronic 
map. In China’s e-Science Blue Book 2018 (pp. 269–289). Springer, Singapore.
12. Kamilaris, A., Kartakoullis, A., & Prenafeta-Boldú, F. X. (2017). A review on the practice 
of big data analysis in agriculture. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 143, 23–37.
13. Navarro-Hellín, H., Martinez-del-Rincon, J., Domingo-Miguel, R., Soto-Vallés, F., & 
Torres-Sánchez, R. (2016). A decision support system for managing irrigation in agriculture. 
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 124, 121–131.
14. Ip, R. H., Ang, L. M., Seng, K. P., Broster, J. C., & Pratley, J. E. (2018). Big data and machine 
learning for crop protection. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 151, 376–383.
15. Kharkovyna, O. (7). “Reasons Why Machine Learning Is a Game Changer for Agriculture,” 
Towards Data Science, 04-July-2019.
16. Kim, J., Kim, S., Ju, C., & Son, H. I. (2019). Unmanned aerial vehicles in agriculture: A 
review of perspective of platform, control, and applications. IEEE Access, 7, 105100–105115.
17. “Agriculture and Soils – ISRO,” Government of India. [Online]. Available: https://www.
18.
19.
20.
isro.gov.in/AgricultureandSoil.html
Lobell, D. B., & Asner, G. P. (2003). Climate and management contributions to recent 
trends in US agricultural yields. Science, 299(5609), 1032–1032. 
“Agriculture - Earth Online – ESA.” [Online]. Available: https://www.esa.int/Applications/
Observing_the_Earth/Agriculture
“Precision Agriculture Technology: The Future of Precision Farming with IoT – Digiteum,” 
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.digiteum.com/precision-agriculture-technology/Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture 55
21. Bakhtiari, A. A., & Hematian, A. (2013). Precision farming technology, opportunities 
and difficulty. International Journal for Science and Emerging Technologies with Latest 
Trends, 5(1), 1–14. 
22. Kussul, N., Lavreniuk, M., Skakun, S., & Shelestov, A. (2017). Deep learning classifi￾cation of land cover and crop types using remote sensing data. IEEE Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing Letters, 14(5), 778–782. 
23. Ampatzidis, Y., & Partel, V. (2019). UAV-based high throughput phenotyping in citrus 
utilizing multispectral imaging and artificial intelligence. Remote Sensing, 11(4), 410. 
24. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2017). Imagenet classification with deep 
convolutional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 60(6), 84–90. 
25. Brown, M. E. (2015). Satellite remote sensing in agriculture and food security assessment. 
Procedia Environmental Sciences, 29, 307.
26. Shchutskaya, A. V., Afanaseva, E. P., & Kapustina, L. V. (2020). Digital farming develop￾ment in Russia: Regional aspect. In Digital Transformation of the Economy: Challenges, 
Trends and New Opportunities (pp. 269–279). Springer, Cham.
27. “What Is the Difference between Precision, Digital and Smart Farming? – AgroCares.” 
36. Bagchi, A. “Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture-White Paper,” Mindtree-Larsen Toubro 
Group Company. [Online]. Available: https://www.mindtree.com/sites/default/files/2018-
04/ArtificialIntelligenceinAgriculture.pdf.
37. Dakshayini, M., & Balaji Prabhu, B. V. (2020). An effective big data and blockchain 
(BD-BC) based decision support model for sustainable agriculture system. In EAI 
International Conference on Big Data Innovation for Sustainable Cognitive Computing 
(pp. 77–86). Springer, Cham.
38. Mark, R. (2019). Ethics of using AI and big data in agriculture: The case of a large 
agriculture multinational. The ORBIT Journal, 2(2), 1–27. 
39. Torky, M., & Hassanein, A. E. (2020). Integrating blockchain and the internet of things 
in precision agriculture: Analysis, opportunities, and challenges. Computers and 
Electronics in Agriculture, 178, 105476.
40. Kim, H. M., & Laskowski, M. (2018). Agriculture on the blockchain: Sustainable solutions 
for food, farmers, and financing. In: D. Tapscott (Ed.), Supply Chain Revolution. Barrow 
Books http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3028164.
[Online]. Available: https://agrocares.com/what-is-the-difference-between-precision-digital￾and-smart-farming/.
 28. Liakos, K. G., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., & Bochtis, D. (2018). Machine learning 
in agriculture: A review. Sensors, 18(8), 2674. 
 29. “See & Spray Agricultural Machines – Blue River Technology.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.bluerivertechnology.com/
 30. Gutierrez, D. D. (2015). Machine Learning and Data Science: an Introduction to 
Statistical Learning Methods With R. Technics Publications, LLC, Mumbai.
 31. Mehra, L. K., Cowger, C., Gross, K., & Ojiambo, P. S. (2016). Predicting pre-planting 
risk of Stagonospora nodorum blotch in winter wheat using machine learning models. 
Frontiers in Plant Science, 7, 390.
 32. Wolfert, S., Goense, D., & Sørensen, C. A. G. (2014). A future internet collaboration plat￾form for safe and healthy food from farm to fork. In 2014 Annual SRII Global Conference 
(pp. 266–273). IEEE.
 33. Zhiyu, L. (2012). An overview of internet of things. Computer Measurement & Control, 6.
 34. Pradeep, B., Balasubramani, R., Martis, J. E., & Sannidhan, M. S. (2020). Generic IoT 
platform for analytics in agriculture. In Internet of Things and Analytics for Agriculture, 
Volume 2 (pp. 225–248). Springer, Singapore.
 35. Vasisht, D., Kapetanovic, Z., Won, J., Jin, X., Chandra, R., Sinha, S., … & Stratman, S. 
(2017). {FarmBeats}: An {IoT} Platform for {Data-Driven} Agriculture. In 14th USENIX 
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 17) (pp. 515–529).56 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
41. Demestichas, K., Peppes, N., Alexakis, T., & Adamopoulou, E. (2020). Blockchain in 
agriculture traceability systems: A review. Applied Sciences, 10(12), 4113.
42. Patil, A. S., Tama, B. A., Park, Y., & Rhee, K. H. (2018). A framework for blockchain 
based secure smart green house farming. In International Conference on Ubiquitous 
Information Technologies and Applications, International Conference on Computer 
Science and its Applications (pp. 1162–1167). Springer, Singapore.
43. Di Vaio, A., Boccia, F., Landriani, L., & Palladino, R. (2020). Artificial intelligence in 
the agri-food system: Rethinking sustainable business models in the COVID-19 scenario. 
Sustainability, 12(12), 4851.
44. López, E. M., García, M., Schuhmacher, M., & Domingo, J. L. (2008). A fuzzy expert 
system for soil characterization. Environment International, 34(7), 950–958.
45. Li, M., & Yost, R. S. (2000). Management-oriented modeling: Optimizing nitrogen 
management with artificial intelligence. Agricultural Systems, 65(1), 1–27.
46. Tajik, S., Ayoubi, S., & Nourbakhsh, F. (2012). Prediction of soil enzymes activity by 
digital terrain analysis: Comparing artificial neural network and multiple linear regression 
models. Environmental Engineering Science, 29(8), 798–806.
47. Lal, H., Jones, J. W., Peart, R. M., & Shoup, W. D. (1992). FARMSYS—a whole￾farm machinery management decision support system. Agricultural Systems, 38(3), 
257–273. 
48. Song, H., & He, Y. (2005, July). Crop nutrition diagnosis expert system based on artifi￾cial neural networks. In Third International Conference on Information Technology and 
Applications (ICITA’05) (Vol. 1, pp. 357–362). IEEE.
49. Ji, B., Sun, Y., Yang, S., & Wan, J. (2007). Artificial neural networks for rice yield predic￾tion in mountainous regions. The Journal of Agricultural Science, 145(3), 249–261.
50. Balleda, K., Satyanvesh, D., Sampath, N. V. S. S. P., Varma, K. T. N., & Baruah, P. K. 
(2014, January). Agpest: An efficient rule-based expert system to prevent pest diseases 
of rice & wheat crops. In 2014 IEEE 8th International Conference on Intelligent Systems 
and Control (ISCO) (pp. 262–268). IEEE.
51. Balac, N. (2020). Big data. In Intelligent Internet of Things (pp. 315–356). Springer 
International Publishing, Cham.
52. Kamath, S., & Chetan, A. A. (2011). Affordable, interactive crowd sourcing platform for 
sustainable agriculture: Enabling public private partnerships. Cloud Computing Journal, 
9(2), 46–54.
53. Kapse, A. S., Kapse, A. S., & Thakare, V. M. (2022). Importance of cloud comput￾ing technique in agriculture field using different methodologies. In: Cloud Computing 
Technologies for Smart Agriculture and Healthcare. (Eds. Shrawankar U, Malik L and 
54. Karydas, C., Chatziantoniou, M., Stamkopoulos, K., Iatrou, M., Vassiliadis, V., & 
Mourelatos, S. (2023). Embedding a precision agriculture service into a farm manage￾ment information system – ifarma/PreFer. Smart Agricultural Technology, 4, 100175. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atech.2023.100175.
55. Thilakarathne, N. N., Bakar, M. S. A., Abas, P. E., & Yassin, H. (2022). A cloud enabled 
crop recommendation platform for machine learning-driven precision farming. Sensors, 
22(16):6299. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22166299
56. Afzaal, H., Farooque, A. A., Abbas, F., Acharya, B., & Esau, T. (2020). Computation of 
evapotranspiration with artificial intelligence for precision water resource management. 
Applied Sciences, 10(5), 1621. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10051621
57. Berger, G. S., Teixeira, M., Cantieri, A., Lima, J., Pereira, A. I., Valente, A., de Castro, G. 
G. R., & Pinto, M. F. (2023). Cooperative heterogeneous robots for autonomous insects 
trap monitoring system in a precision agriculture scenario. Agriculture, 13(2), 239. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture13020239
Arora, S). CRC Press, Boca Raton. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003203926-7.Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture 57
58. Murugamani, C., Shitharth, S., Hemalatha, S., Kshirsagar, P. R., Riyazuddin, K., 
Naveed, Q. N., … & Batu, A. (2022). Machine learning technique for precision agricul￾ture applications in 5G-based internet of things. Wireless Communications and Mobile 
Computing, 2022, 11.
59. Singh, A., Vaidya, G., Jagota, V., Darko, D. A., Agarwal, R. K., Debnath, S., & Potrich, 
E. (2022). Recent advancement in postharvest loss mitigation and quality management 
of fruits and vegetables using machine learning frameworks, Journal of Food Quality, 
2022, Article ID 6447282, 9. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/6447282
60. Sakthi, U., & DafniRose, J. (2022). Blockchain-enabled smart agricultural knowledge 
discovery system using edge computing. Procedia Computer Science, 202, 73–82.
61. Bakthavatchalam, K., Karthik, B., Thiruvengadam, V., Muthal, S., Jose, D., Kotecha, 
K., & Varadarajan, V. (2022). IoT framework for measurement and precision agriculture: 
Predicting the crop using machine learning algorithms. Technologies, 10, 13. https://doi.
org/10.3390/technologies10010013
62. Ngo, V. M., Duong, T. V. T., & Nguyen, T. B. T. et al. (2023). A big data smart agri￾cultural system: Recommending optimum fertilisers for crops. International Journal of 
Information Technology, 15, 249–265. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41870-022-01150-1
63. Cama-Pinto, D., Damas, M., Holgado-Terriza, J. A., Arrabal-Campos, F. M., Martínez￾Lao, J. A., Cama-Pinto, A., & Manzano-Agugliaro, F. (2023). A deep learning model 
of radio wave propagation for precision agriculture and sensor system in greenhouses. 
Agronomy, 13(1), 244. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy13010244
64. Qamar, T., & Bawany, N. Z. (2023). Agri-PAD: A scalable framework for smart agriculture. 
Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 29(3), 1597–1605. 
65. Ahmad, L., & Nabi, F. (2021). Agriculture 5.0: Artificial intelligence, IoT and Machine 
Learning (1st ed.). CRC Press. https://doi.org/10.1201/978100312543358 DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-4
Chatbot for Smart 
Farming Using AI and 
NLP Techniques
and Sneha Leela Jacob
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Internet connectivity is commonplace in the modern world. As a result, services 
deployed on the internet find great relevance today. An area where web services can 
be essential is the area of smart farming. As the internet becomes more affordable, 
low-income farmers should be able to afford it and benefit from services deployed 
on the Cloud. Web services, in general, can offer reliable and timely assistance to 
end users. One use case for such a service is a chatbot process that answers que￾ries by farmers in a timely manner and/or provides timely assistance from domain 
experts. General purpose search engines do not provide specialized help to the farm￾ers in need. There has been an incremental advancement in chatbots to address this 
problem. However, chatbots today lack in providing reliable and intelligent help. In 
earlier times, it was a common conception that a knowledgeable computer system 
would be the one that had enough facts stored in its memory. However, the advance￾ment and research in the field of artificial intelligence (AI) has reliably shown us that 
learning from experience is a better paradigm than reiterating stored facts.
Chatbots are programs that simulate a conversation with an end user and can assist 
them with a particular enquiry. They can attend to queries tirelessly and in a timely 
manner. In principle, chatbots analyse user input and generate appropriate response. 
They can engage in conversation or act as a classification and routing agent. As a 
classification or routing agent, they discern the intent behind the user input and route 
the enquiry to the designated responder. There has been a shift in chatbot process 
that used to respond from stored database of facts to an agent that uses methods from 
AI to generate responses based on experience. Chatbots can be general purpose (like 
Google Assistant) or special purpose (meant for a single application domain). An 
example of a chatbot that uses static responses is shown in Figure 4.1.
Some of the key terminologies when discussing conversational chatbots are as 
follows:
• User input: Typically, an end user could give their query as a text input, or 
through voice, or through a series of feed-forward questions.
• Training: Based on the training process that has happened for the chatbot, 
the chatbot discerns from the user input the intent behind the query.
4
Parveen Sultana H., Nishant Sharma, Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques 59
• Intent: This is the core intention in the user input.
• Entity: A key aspect of user input other than its intent.
• Dialogue: This is the entire to and fro between the end user and the chatbot 
until the query is resolved. To maintain a conversation, the chatbot may 
need to store context.
We see from Figure 4.1 that the chatbot process employed is not very intelligent. 
The process tries to force an enquiry on the end user. This takes away from the natu￾ral way in which humans interact, making it well known that we are indeed convers￾ing with a limited bot. Asking well-formed queries that should have been answered 
actually breaks the chatbot process. As a result, these processes fail to create a sense 
of reliability on them. The end user is left unsatisfied and wanting to get assistance 
from a real human being.
A good training process can be critical to giving satisfactory responses to the end 
user. A well-trained chatbot could reduce the need for human intervention. Industrial 
sector also recognizes the importance of an automated AI assistant. Therefore, sectors 
like banking, food, agriculture, and airlines have incorporated these types of agents 
in their web services.
An AI technique that helps chatbots is natural language processing. Since one 
of the major components of natural language processing (NLP) is to understand 
the dynamics of language and its usage, it has gained much traction to develop the 
backend of the chatbot process. The challenges involved in using NLP for automated 
processes are discussed through a variety of theories and methods in the domain of 
NLP. Some of these challenges include managing massive amounts of text data and 
structuring highly unstructured data. NLP is proving to be instrumental in changing 
processes from a data-driven approach to an intelligence-driven approach.
A typical chatbot process flow is as follows. A user inputs their query into the 
chatbot’s dialogue management engine. The query is then processed through the 
usage of NLP. This processed query is then converted into an appropriate intent. 
The intent and entity (if any) are either used to generate or retrieve a response, or in 
FIGURE 4.1 An example of an online chatbot process.60 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
case of an AI assistant, the intent and entity may be used to perform an action. An 
appropriate response is given to the end user by the dialogue management engine 
in both these cases. An activity diagram for the chatbot process in an AI assistant 
is shown in Figure 4.2. The user inputs a query into the chatbot’s front end, “Play a 
song on YouTube”. The dialogue management system sends this query to the NLP 
unit that determines the intent of the user input that is to play a song, and the entity 
that is YouTube. Finally, as part of the chatbot process in an AI assistant, the intent 
and the entity are used to play a random song on the YouTube application. The dia￾logue management engine then provides an appropriate response back to the end 
user. One of the key things that must be noted here is that in an effective chatbot 
process, the user only sees the input that they entered and the final response from 
the dialogue management engine. The reliability of the process then rests on the 
effective delivery of the user’s intent.
A chatbot process must include a component for NLP and understanding. This 
component usually consists of a classifier process and an entity detection process. In 
case of an AI assistant, the output from the classifier and entity detection process can 
be used to perform an action, and in the case of a routing chatbot, the output from the 
classifier process can be used to route the query to the designated responder.
The NLP and understanding component of the chatbot process uses an internal 
classifier to find the intent of the user input. A block diagram showing this process 
flow is shown in Figure 4.3.
User input: User input can be text based where the end user inputs the question as 
a text. However, in some cases, it may be desirable to have a front end where the end 
FIGURE 4.2 An activity diagram for the chatbot process in an AI assistant.
FIGURE 4.3 The block diagram for the internal classifier process of the chatbot.Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques 61
user is allowed to ask their query through a microphone and then that audio query 
be converted into the corresponding text. This text can then be fed to the classifier 
process. An example use case is smart farming. Farmers in developing countries may 
have a weak formal education background, thereby making typing not an appeal￾ing user interface to them. A speech recognizer in the front end that can identify the 
native language can be very appealing to the farmers of a particular place. Support 
for classification through native languages is the right future direction. Two methods 
can be explored to provide speech-to-text conversion at the front end of the chatbot 
application. One method is that of a web service such as Google’s Web Speech API 
Demonstration. The other method is through a Python application. For this task, the 
two libraries of Python: pyAudio and Wave come in handy. A .wav file can be recorded 
through the microphone on a smart device. By using the speech-to-text recognition 
library provided by Google, we can convert the audio file to text. An example instance 
of speech-to-text conversion using a Python program on Windows 11 host machine 
is shown in Figure 4.4. We ask one of the questions from the test dataset shown in 
Table 5.6, and we can see that it is correctly transcribed with a confidence of 88.7%.
Speech front ends are way of the future for the chatbots. However, the way of 
speaking for different people may vary even for a popular language such as English. 
The speech-to-text conversion may not be able to properly transcribe the user’s 
speech input. For example, on reading the same test case again but with an absurd 
slang, the transcribed output is shown in Figure 4.5.
To measure the accuracy of the speech-to-text transcription, we can use the measure 
of word error rate (WER). The WER measure is calculated by dividing the number of 
incorrect words in the transcribed output to the total number of correct words in the 
original expected outcome. For example, our test case was as follows: “Which weather 
FIGURE 4.4 An example instance of speech-to-text conversion.
FIGURE 4.5 A mis-transcribed output given by speech-to-text convertor.62 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
is most suitable for harvesting crops?”. The first option given by the speech-to-text con￾vertor is as follows: ‘which weather is more suitable for harvesting cops’. If we ignore 
the punctuation and the case of the words, we can observe WER in the transcribed 
output. The words that correctly match are as follows: ‘which’, ‘weather’, ‘is’, ‘suitable’, 
‘for’, and ‘harvesting’. The words that are mismatched are as follows: ‘more’ for ‘most’ 
in the original query, and ‘cops’ for ‘crops’ in the original query. Therefore, the WER 
is 2 incorrect words in the transcribed output out of the total 8 correct words in the 
original query. This gives the WER as 0.25 or 25%.
Classifier process: Since a classifier is a central process in the chatbot process, it 
is indispensable that this process be as efficient and effective as possible. This process 
is ultimately responsible for how reliable the chatbot will be in either maintaining a 
dialogue or performing a task.
Now, arises another central question. Should we use an existing classifier or 
should we build our own custom classifier. In this regard [1], gives a general rec￾ommendation for building your own classifier if we satisfactorily answer yes to 
most, if not all, of the recommendations against building our own classifier as 
shown in Table 4.1. In this book chapter, we wish to classify a user input as either 
belonging to the category of ‘farming’ or belonging to the category of ‘not farm￾ing’. In essence, we wish to train a binary classifier on our training dataset. In this 
regard, we add tick marks to all those conditions that apply to us or to our use case 
in this chapter.
While the general recommendations given by [1] are to be taken as a guideline, 
it is still obvious that we may build our own classifier to obtain the objective being 
pursued in this chapter. Our responses to the general recommendations also loosely 
validate that we shall build our own classifier for this task.
User’s intent: Once the user intent is identified using the classifier process of 
the chatbot, the identified user intent can be used to either answer the question in 
case of a conversational chatbot, perform an action in case of an AI assistant, or 
route the request to the designated responder in case of a classification and routing 
chatbot.
TABLE 4.1
Use an Existing Classifier or Build Your Own Classifier; General 
Recommendations Are Made Specific to This Chapter
Requirement Preference Fits Our Requirement
Building a conversational AI Use an existing classifier ×
Building a classification and routing assistant Build your own classifier ✓
Not skilled at data science Use an existing classifier ×
Skilled at data science Build your own classifier ✓
If you require complete control over the 
coding of the individual components
Build your own classifier ✓
Low on free time Use an existing classifier ×
Learning for the sake of it Build your own classifier ✓Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques 63
4.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
In this section, we discuss the state-of-the-art in the field of chatbot and its application 
to smart farming. We also discuss the key issues presented by the researchers in the 
domain of chatbot and smart farming.
Unspecialized general purpose virtual assistants cannot be effective in providing 
expert help to the farmers. A chatbot powered by specialized domain knowledge 
is a great solution for this problem. In this regard, there is an incremental progress 
going on in advancing the chatbot technology. The authors of [2] present the history, 
technology, and applications of chatbots. The authors differentiate between pattern￾matching-based response generation and generating responses through AI. Even 
though learning from experience and generative models are essential to create the 
chatbots of the future, popularly today, a lot of chatbots use pattern-matching-based 
responses. This reduces the overhead related to processing and understanding the 
user input and generating complex responses. For pattern-matching-based chatbots, 
the authors compare three popular languages for the representation of the funda￾mental knowledge unit of the chatbot. These languages are Artificial Intelligence 
Markup Language (AIML), RiveScript, and Chatscript. The most popular among 
them is AIML which is like XML. AIML represents the fundamental knowledge unit 
of the chatbot as a category. This category has two subparts: pattern and template. 
The pattern tag clubs together query of the similar type and which can be responded 
to in a similar manner. The template tag provides a response. The response can be 
static, a random choice from a set of choices, or a background generative process.
There is a lack of reliable chatbot applications in the market. In the farming sector, 
this has consequences in that it increases the request load on some popular information 
centre like the Kisan Call Centre (KCC) in India. If more reliable applications enter 
the market, then it will help balance the load of requests and those requests can be 
addressed in a distributed and timely manner. In this regard, the authors of [3] developed 
a conversational AI bot for smart agriculture to answer farmer queries related to farming 
and market analysis. The authors of [4] presented a framework using chatbots to allow 
farmers to get 24/7 service on issues such as fertilizers, diseases, and soil conditions. 
The authors used machine learning and NLP for automatic response generation for its 
users in a language familiar to the end users. The authors of [5] presented a system that 
uses NLP to help the farmers in improving their farming techniques. A chatbot process 
is implemented that generates new responses based on previously collected sets of ques￾tions and answers. The system is presented as a virtual assistant to guide the farmers. 
The authors of [6] presented an agricultural chatbot application built on artificial intel￾ligence that answers queries related to weather, plant protection and usage of fertilizers, 
animal husbandry, market analysis, soil condition, and schemes of government.
There is another set of chatbot processes that are inclined towards helping farm￾ers in maintaining plant health and doing disease detection. The authors of [7] pre￾sented a smartphone application to detect diseases in paddy leaves and to suggest 
pesticides to these farmers. The authors of [8] developed a method using CNN and 
images of tomato leaves for the automatic identification of eight different tomato 
diseases. It also identifies pest categories. The authors also developed a chatbot con￾troller to receive enquiries and send responses using an Instant Messaging Service. 64 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
The authors of [9] used deep learning and neural networks to detect rice diseases 
from paddy field images. The authors of [10] used IoT and Fuzzy Logic to help the 
farmers in better understanding plant health. The authors of [11] also presented an AI 
technique using CNN to detect diseases in plants. They used the dataset from Kisan 
Call Centre which contained logs of calls by farmers. The authors of [12] developed 
a chat room and chatbot using Cloud to help the farmers discuss issues with their 
peers or experts to improve their decision-making. The implementation on the Cloud 
ensures that the client does not need heavy computational resources.
Many research papers, including those presented in this section, have highlighted 
two major points. The first is the inability of the physical centres in providing timely 
and accurate help to the farmers, thereby generating a need for chatbot processes. 
The second is the current inability of the chatbots in providing reliable and compre￾hensive help to the farmers. To make chatbots intelligent, their classification process 
should be reliable, and their response generation should be comprehensive. In this 
chapter, we study the application of two popular classification techniques and present 
their ability to correctly classify the user intent. The first technique is logistic regres￾sion that is traditional machine learning, and the second technique uses sequential 
model from the domain of deep learning.
4.3 TRAINING DATASET
To train our chatbot as a classification and routing agent, we need data. We consider 
two types of tags: ‘farming’ and ‘not farming’. Under the tag of ‘farming’, we put 
questions that adhere to the pattern commonly identified with farming. Similarly, 
under the tag of ‘not farming’, we put questions that do not adhere to the patterns 
commonly identified with farming. We create two custom sets of these question 
patterns. By putting specific keywords into Google, we picked questions that were 
posed publicly under that theme on the knowledge sharing platform called Quora. 
For the farming tag, we included questions related to themes such as future of farm￾ing, smart farming, smart irrigation, cattle farming, bee farming, pest control, seed 
quality and acquisition, cultivation of potatoes, and mixed farming. A few questions 
that are present under the farming tag are shown in Table 4.2. There are a total of 
TABLE 4.2
Questions under the Farming Tag
“What is the future of farming?”
“What should we do to get the maximum yield in agriculture?”
“How do fertilizers increase crop yield?”
“In what ways can technology improve crop yields on a farm?”
“How to control pests and diseases in organic gardening?”
“What are the advantages of a smart irrigation system?”
:
.
“How to design precision irrigation system?”Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques 65
150 questions related to the tag of farming in the training dataset. These questions 
describe the patterns for questions that are related to farming.
Similarly, the questions under the ‘not farming’ tag include questions from a variety 
of interesting themes such as using an online social platform for marketing products, 
philosophy, religion, God, science and mathematics, sports, television, movies, com￾puter games, human languages, and education. Some questions that show the pattern 
for questions related to ‘not farming’ are shown in Table 4.3. Similar to the ‘farming’ 
tag, there are a total of 150 questions in the ‘not farming’ tag.
4.4 TRAINING PROCESS FOR OUR CHATBOT
In this section, we train our chatbot process to correctly distinguish the end-user 
intent, whether it belongs to the ‘farming’ tag or to the ‘not farming’ tag.
Representation of a knowledge unit: Essentially, we are aiming to create many 
fundamental knowledge units for chatbot. This fundamental knowledge unit can fol￾low a structure of a category having as its subfields: pattern and template. The cat￾egory names the fundamental knowledge unit. The subfield pattern provides different 
queries with the same underlying pattern to train the chatbot to respond in the same 
way when a different query similar to this pattern is posed to the chatbot process. In 
this book chapter, we create a classification agent that distinguishes between two cat￾egories: ‘farming’ and ‘not farming’. We represent the class of ‘farming’ patterns as 
0 and that of the ‘not farming’ patterns as 1. Each category contains questions similar 
in pattern to the category under which they are considered. Based on the classification, 
the response by the chatbot is another important aspect. One possible implementation 
of the response is to have a fixed set of responses for a specific category and then 
choose a response randomly to give to the end user. Another possible implementation 
of the response can be to run a subprocess that generates an appropriate outcome. 
While creating a classification and routing agent, the response by the chatbot may be 
to forward the query to the designated responder.
Training data file: Our training data file consists of two types of tags. The first 
tag is named ‘farming’ signifying that it contains all the questions that are related to 
TABLE 4.3
Questions under the ‘Not Farming’ Tag
“How to Use Quora for Marketing”
“What is your philosophy of life and why?”
“What are your thoughts regarding religion?”
“What does music mean to you?”
“What exactly is open source software?”
“Why is a good university so important?”
:
.
“What languages do you know, and why did you learn them?”66 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
farming. The second tag is called ‘not farming’ to signify that it contains questions 
that are not related to farming. Under each of these tags are patterns of questions 
related to that tag. In machine learning terminology, we may envision this as follows: 
each question that has a pattern related to farming has ‘farming’ as its class label. 
The same is true for the ‘not farming’ tag. Each question that has a pattern unrelated 
to farming has ‘not farming’ as its class label [13].
Tokenization: In the process of tokenization, we break up a sentence into its 
constituent parts. These constituent parts can be either words or punctuation marks.
Lemmatization: In the process of lemmatization, we classify a group of words 
by their lemma (or root) so that they may be analysed under the same lemma form.
The natural language toolkit library of Python (nltk) provides an API for 
tokenizing a sentence. Once the sentence is decomposed into individual tokens, 
the process of lemmatization can be carried out. To lemmatize the tokens into their 
respective lemmas, we can ignore the punctuation marks such as “?”, “!”, and “.”. 
WordNetLemmatizer function of the nltk library returns the lemma of the word. 
For example, the words “break”, “broke”, “broken”, or “breaking”, they all come 
from the same root “break”. An example of converting a string to its root is to con￾vert its plural form into its singular form. The lemmatize method by default takes 
care of removing the suffix s. For example, if we use the lemmatize method of 
the WordNetLemmatizer class on the string “samples”, we are returned the string 
“sample” without the suffix s. However, in many cases, the WordNetLemmatizer 
does not give us the correct root for the given word. In some cases, however, we 
may assist the lemmatizer method by doing parts of speech tagging. The lemmatizer 
method recognizes the following parts of speech tags: n for nouns, a for adjectives, 
r for adverbs, and v for verbs. For example, if we use the lemmatize method of the 
WordNetLemmatizer class on the string “doing”, we are returned “doing” back with￾out any changes. However, if we associate the string “doing” with the part of speech 
tag for nouns, i.e., n, then we are effectively returned the string “do” which is the 
correct lemma for the given string “doing”.
4.5 BAG OF WORDS IMPLEMENTATION
All lemmatized keywords from the training data file are considered in the bag of 
words implementation. Consider Table 4.4. It lists some of the words belonging to 
both ‘farming’ and ‘not farming’ tag. As is apparent from this table, a good variety 
of themes have been discussed under both ‘farming’ and ‘not farming’ tags. These 
themes appear in a sorted manner in Table 4.4.
For the training of the chatbot, the bag of words implementation is as follows. 
Let a list T store all lemmatized words from the entire training data file. We convert 
each pattern under a tag into its constituent tokens and then extract the lemma from 
those words. We create a list B for each pattern, the length of which is the same as 
the length of T. B[index] is set to 1 if the lemmatized word T[index] occurs in our 
pattern. If the lemmatized word T[index] does not occur in our pattern, then we set 
B[index] = 0. Against this list B, we create a class label to identify this pattern with 
its respective class label. We do this for each pattern in both the ‘farming’ and ‘not 
farming’ tags.Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques 67
4.6 CLASSIFICATION MODEL
We use two types of training models and compare their results. The first model that 
we use is the logistic regression model and the second is a sequential model with an 
input layer, two hidden dense layers and an output layer.
4.6.1 Binary Logistic Regression
In Binary Logistic Regression (BLR), we assign a probability measure to a categorical 
event based on the value of one or more independent variables. For instance, if we have 
data that states whether a student passed or failed an examination based on the number 
of hours that the student studied. Consider that, in Figure 4.6, there is a student that 
studied for 3.25 hours and passed. Yet, another student that studied for 3.5 hours failed. 
From the data, the logistic regression classifier creates the best fit curve. At some num￾ber of hours of study, for the logistic regression curve that is fit to this data, there will 
be a 50% chance for a student passing or failing the examination. This happens when 
the number of hours is 2.654. On the right of this measure for the number of hours 
spent studying before examination, the student’s chance of passing the examination 
is higher. On the left side of this measure, the student’s chance of failure is higher. 
Although all students that studied for more than 4 hours passed the examination, the 
logistic regression curve is a smooth curve from 4 hours until 5 hours 50 minutes.
4.6.2 Sequential Model
Deep learning is a technique to teach computers to learn by example. Deep learning 
methods have proved to be useful for classification tasks. Deep learning achieves 
impressive results because it uses a large amount of labelled data and heavy com￾putational power. Due to the advancement in GPU technology, which is efficient for 
TABLE 4.4
Some of the Lemmatized Words (in Alphabetic Order) Belonging 
to Either ‘Farming’ or ‘Not Farming’ Tags for the Entire Training File
Agriculture Automatic Beekeeping Cattle
Chemical Code Computer Crop
Cultivate Dairy Disease Education
Engineering Farm Fertilizer Game
Gardening God Herbicide Honey
Irrigation Language Marketing Mathematics
Movie Music Organic Philosophy
Plant Potato Precision Purpose
Series Sowing Soybean Sustainable
Technology Truth Understanding University
Vegetable Virus Water Wheat
Yield68 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
deep learning, deep learning models have gained traction in the modern world. Deep 
learning models use neural network architectures that learn features directly from 
data without the need for manual feature extraction. One such neural network archi￾tecture in deep learning is a sequential model. In a sequential model, the training 
information is passed from one layer to the other in a sequential way. In the sequen￾tial model considered in this chapter, there is one input layer, two dense hidden layers 
and one output layer. A diagrammatic representation of the sequential model used 
in this chapter is shown in Figure 4.7, and the key characteristics of the sequential 
model are given in Table 4.5.
FIGURE 4.6 An example of a logistic curve.
FIGURE 4.7 Sequential model used in the classification process of the chatbot in this chapter.Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques 69
4.6.2.1 Dense Layer
A node in a neural network can create one single decision boundary. Hence, logical 
operations like ‘AND’ and ‘OR’ can be classified using a single node. However, a more 
sophisticated operation such as exclusive or (XOR) cannot be classified using a single 
node in the neural network. It can however be classified using a dense layer with two 
nodes and a separate singular node. Let the two nodes in the dense layer be named x 
and y and the separate singular node be named z. To create a decision boundary for 
an XOR, we need to classify through z in the x-y plane. In this way, the dense layer 
helps shift the perspective of data. Dense layer also has the property that assignment 
of input to many nodes and providing multi-node output to the next layer can happen 
simultaneously. Another aspect of dense layer is the ability to assign probability values 
to each class label and then choose the one with the highest probability as our resultant 
class label. To normalize the resultant values in the output layer, the output layer usu￾ally is activated using the ‘softmax’ function.
4.6.2.2 Dropout Layer
While attempting to improve the accuracy of the model with many features, there 
remains an active chance that overfitting of the model may occur [14]. To reduce 
the chances of overfitting, a strategy may be employed wherein we drop out a given 
percentage of features while training the model in a hidden layer. This ensures that 
we are training our model to classify a class label with a reduced set of features. 
Dropping a given percentage of features has an added benefit that it may reduce 
the variance between the remaining features, thus making the classification pro￾cess timely.
TABLE 4.5
Characteristics of the Sequential Model used in the Book Chapter
Hidden layer 1: Input shape 431
Hidden layer 1: Type Dense
Hidden layer 1: Nodes 128
Hidden layer 1: Activation “relu”
Dropout layer 1: Percentage dropout 50%
Hidden layer 2: Type Dense
Hidden layer 2: Nodes 64
Hidden layer 2: Activation “relu”
Dropout layer 2: Percentage dropout 50%
Output layer: Type Dense
Output layer: Nodes 2
Output layer: Activation “softmax”
Learning method Stochastic Gradient Descent
Learning rate 0.01
Loss Categorical cross entropy
Total number of epochs 200
Batch size 570 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
4.7 TEST DATA
For the testing of the two classification models used in this chapter based on the train￾ing data file containing ‘farming’ and ‘not farming’ tags, we used the ten sentences 
shown in Table 4.6 as test patterns wherein we know their actual pattern class. It is 
hereby noted that this test dataset consists of questions that are custom made by the 
authors to challenge the classifier process, sometimes with the explicit intention that 
they may be a little absurd.
4.8 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
To perform the evaluation for the considered classification models, we consider the 
parameter misclassification count. We compare the predicted value of the classifier 
with the ground truth values for the test patterns. While iterating over the test patterns, 
if the classifier incorrectly predicts the class of the pattern, we increment the misclassi￾fication count by 1. The higher the misclassification count, the weaker the classification 
by the considered training model.
4.8.1 Results from Classification
We use the logistic regression classifier of the scikit-learn library in Python. For the 
given test cases, the classifier can successfully classify all test cases with 0 misclas￾sification. To set up the sequential model, we must set up the TensorFlow in the host 
machine. After that, we can run the Python program that uses the Keras library. 
Even the sequential model can successfully classify all test cases with 0 misclassi￾fication. The sequential model is more elaborate than the logistic regression model. 
It takes a longer time to train. After creating the sequential classification model, we 
can save the fitted model as a .h5 extension file. We can use the saved model for any 
chatbot application.
TABLE 4.6
Patterns for Testing the Efficiency of the Classification Models 
Wherein We Intrinsically Know Their Actual Ground Truth Values
“What do you do for a living?”
“How much do you weigh?”
“Are you a working professional or a student?”
“How many hours do you work in a day?”
“Do your crops demand extra care?”
“Which weather is most suitable for harvesting crops?”
“How much do pesticides cost?”
“What is the core philosophy behind garbage collection?”
“Where should I buy my seeds from?”
“How to make friends and influence people?”Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques 71
4.8.2 Effects of Mis-Transcribed Words on The Classification Process
If the speech-to-text conversion API is not robust, it may lead to higher WER. Some 
words even if they are substituted, inserted, or deleted do not have an impact on the 
classifier process. However, there are certain words that are indispensable to a correct 
classification by the classifier process. When we run the logistic regression classifier 
on the mis-transcribed query as given in Figure 4.5, it misclassifies our tag/category 
to ‘not farming’, when the query is related to the ‘farming’ tag. The substitution of 
the word ‘more’ in the mis-transcribed query in place of the word ‘most’ in the cor￾rect original query has no effect on the classification process. However, the keyword 
‘crops’ is essential to correctly classify the tag of the query as ‘farming’. As is the case 
with Figure 4.5, this word ‘crops’ has been substituted for the word ‘cops’ and thus 
even if we re-substitute the other mis-transcribed word ‘more’ with ‘most’, the overall 
query is still misclassified as ‘not farming’.
4.9 PACKAGING OUR SOLUTION AS A SERVICE
When our solution is ready to be deployed, we may wish to provide our solution as a 
service. A common way today is to deploy that service on the Cloud and let the clients 
access the service from all over the globe. One platform that can assist in that is Docker.
4.9.1 Docker
Docker provides us with a virtual environment on which we can run our software. 
It implements the separation between various virtualized environments by means 
of a container. A container is a self-contained unit that has all that you need to run 
your software image. While performing the experiments for this chapter, the host 
machine that we used is Windows 11 and Docker Desktop version 4.16.3. There 
are three parts that are needed to run an image on a Docker container. The first is 
the image itself that we wish to build. The contents of the image are what form the 
business logic. This could be a Python script, for instance, that achieves a particular 
task. The second part is the container on which the image gets deployed and run. 
The third most essential part is the Dockerfile. The Dockerfile sets up the container 
unit with all the required dependencies before the software image can be success￾fully deployed and run on the container.
4.9.1.1 Case 1: Running and Packaging Classification Task 
Using Logistic Regression inside Docker
Image: Our image is the same as the one that is used in the previous section. It uses 
logistic regression classification model from the scikit-learn library for Python to 
predict the class of ‘farming’ or ‘not farming’ on the set of ten test patterns. The 
classification model was trained on a dataset with 150 patterns each for ‘farming’ 
and ‘not farming’ tags.
Dockerfile: The Dockerfile sets up the Docker container with all prerequisites for 
running our classification model for our chatbot process. The contents of the Dockerfile 
are given in Table 4.7.72 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
There are these following commands with the following intentions in the Dockerfile. 
The FROM command sets up the container to use the Python environment to run the 
image file. Following that, we have a bunch of ADD commands. First, we add our main 
image file classification_logistic_regres sion.py to the current working directory in 
Docker container. Then, we add the pickle files. Following that, we add the intents.json 
file that contains the training data of 150 question patterns each, both for the ‘farming’ 
and ‘not farming’ tag. After the ADD processes, we have the RUN processes that get 
executed on the Docker container during the build process. We ask the Dockerfile to 
install and set up nltk, numpy, and scikit-learn libraries on the container. This setup 
should have been sufficient to finally run the script file using python ./classification_
logistic_regression.py under the CMD tag. The Python script file had instructions 
to download nltk libraries punkt, wordnet, and omw-1.4 using the nltk downloader. 
However, due to special circumstances involved around installing nltk library in the 
correct place, the authors used the following strategy. By downloading punkt, wordnet, 
and omw-1.4 to the working directory on the host machine, two folders by the name of 
tokenizers and corpora were created. Then, these folders were copied as is and in full 
to the/root/nltk_data/directory insider the Docker container. Applying this fix, all setup 
was completed successfully. An image instance of the build is shown in Figure 4.8.
Running the Build Image on the Container: The built image can be run using 
the command Docker run python-classification-lr:latest, and it gives the correct 
output for our test cases. This image is a packaged image and can be deployed as a 
service on the Cloud, which we shall do in the following section.
4.9.1.2 Case 2: Running Classification Task Using Sequential 
Model inside Docker
In this case, we wish only to demonstrate that the same answer is replicated while 
running the classification task using a sequential model inside the Docker container 
powered by TensorFlow as it is when running the program on the host machine with 
TABLE 4.7
Contents of the Dockerfile for Running the Classification 
Process for Our Chatbot inside the Docker Container
FROM python:3.9
ADD classification_logistic_regression.py.
ADD classes.pkl.
ADD words.pkl.
ADD intents.json.
RUN pip install –upgrade pip
RUN pip install nltk
RUN pip install numpy
RUN pip install scikit-learn
COPY ./tokenizers /root/nltk_data/tokenizers
COPY ./corpora /root/nltk_data/corpora
CMD ["python","./classification_logistic_regression.py"]Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques 73
TensorFlow installed. Using the command “docker run -it –rm -v ${PWD}:/tmp -w/
tmp tensorflow/tensorflow”, we can mount the current working directory in the host 
onto the Docker container that contains the TensorFlow setup. Once the working 
directory is mounted, we have access to the training file that uses the sequential 
model and dense layers. The NLP component of the training file requires three mod￾ules installed. They are punkt, wordnet, and omw-1.4. To install these modules, we 
enter the Python interpreter inside the Docker container. We use the nltk.download() 
provided by the nltk library to install these three modules. The successful installa￾tion of each module is characterized by the printing of True on the Docker terminal. 
We can then run our training file inside Docker. The output is correctly replicated 
on the Docker container as shown in Figure 4.9. The output is verbose. However, it 
gives the taste of the bag of words implementation adopted for representing training 
and testing data in this chapter.
4.10 DEPLOYING OUR CLASSIFICATION SERVICE TO THE CLOUD
The Cloud computing paradigm is an essential component for modern-day applica￾tions. Users can access services hosted on Cloud from anywhere via proper authen￾tication. Business can store data on the Cloud that can help them in predicting trends 
and optimizing workflows. Cloud service providers like Google, Amazon, and 
Microsoft provide APIs and frameworks to interact with their services. With Cloud 
computing, the central idea is to do away with buying our own hardware and instead 
use the infrastructure, or platform, or service provided by any of these Cloud service 
providers. Businesses can rent or give up the resources as per their needs and pay 
for only what they use. In this way, Cloud computing provides ubiquitous and on￾demand access to configurable resources such as storage and servers. The resources 
are swiftly assigned based on their availability and terminated with minimum effort 
from the end user. There are several benefits to using Cloud solutions. For low- and 
medium-scale industries, this paradigm of low-cost setup of infrastructure, or of a 
platform, or of a service is very attractive. The responsibility of upgrading resources 
to the latest state-of-the-art is also shifted from these low- to medium-scale industries 
FIGURE 4.8 Build log for the image file python-classification-lr (logistic regression 
classification).74 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
to the Cloud service providers. Other maintenance and growth parameters like scal￾ability of resources and providing security to hardware infrastructure are also respon￾sibilities of the Cloud service providers.
In this section, we wish to deploy our classification service onto the cloud. Due 
to the simplicity of the logistic regression classification model and its ability to suc￾cessfully classify all ten of the test case, we decide to deploy this image as a service 
on the cloud. In this regard, we packaged and built our image using the Dockerfile 
in the previous section.
An image built locally in Docker can be deployed to the cloud as a service. 
Amazon Web Services (AWS) provides a framework to deploy and run the image 
on the Cloud. AWS achieves its objective using the three Es: The Elastic Container 
Registry (ECR), the Elastic Container Service (ECS), and the virtual servers on 
the Cloud (EC2). The interconnection between these three Es is diagrammatically 
shown in Figure 4.10.
FIGURE 4.9 Replication of training process for sequential model inside the Docker container.Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques 75
Following is a brief overview of the processes involved in uploading and running 
the locally built Docker image on virtual servers on the Cloud:
• Elastic Container Registry (ECR): Before pushing the Docker image on 
the cloud, it is good practice to build and run the Docker image locally to be 
sure that there are no errors. After creating a new repository, ECR provides 
us with the commands to push the prebuilt Docker image onto this repository. 
This repository then hosts our image.
• EC2: On EC2, we launch a new instance with the settings for application and 
OS image, the instance type, and the key pair for SSH login. We can make 
changes to the network setting such as adding the inbound rules for SSH traf￾fic. We must make sure that auto assignment of public IP is enabled. After we 
launch the instance, we can make use of an SSH client on the Windows 11 
host machine such as putty to connect to the newly launched instance. On 
clicking the instance, we are given the way to connect through SSH. We shall 
have the key pair downloaded. Through putty, we can enter the hostname, and 
under the SSH, we have an Auth tab, and under credentials, we can browse for 
our key pair under the private key file for authentication tab. On clicking open, 
putty connects us to the EC2 instance, and we may log in as an EC2 user.
• Elastic Container Service (ECS): Under ECS, we set up an EC2 
Linux+Networking Cluster. Similar to EC2 setup, in ECS setup, we can 
choose the appropriate EC2 instance type and key pair, make changes to 
the networking field, and so on. Once we create the cluster, we must reg￾ister an external ECS instance with the cluster. In order to do this, ECS 
provides a command that we may run as root from inside the EC2 instance 
using putty. Once we execute the provided command as a root from inside 
the EC2 instance, it does two things. One, it registers this instance with 
the cluster. The other is that it sets up the EC2 instance with the prerequi￾sites like the required setup and the installation of Docker inside the EC2 
instance. Then, we must create the task definition which we wish to deploy 
FIGURE 4.10 The three Es of the AWS platform.76 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
on our EC2 cluster. The task definition is also of the EC2 type. We choose 
the networking mode to be bridge. Choose a task execution IAM role. Set 
the task memory and task Vcpu. In this task definition, we are asked to add 
a container. The mandatory requirement in the container definition is its 
name and the image that would run on this container. It is in this image tab 
that we enter the image URL from the ECR. Once this setup is done, we can 
finalize the task definition. In our cluster, the EC2 instance is registered, 
our EC2 task is defined, and the container has been loaded with the image 
from the ECR. Now, we run the task. If the task is successfully executed 
on the cluster, then we may proceed to run this task and view results from 
inside the EC2 instance. For this, we log in to our EC2 instance using putty. 
We start the Docker service using the command sudo service docker start. 
Finally, we can run the image hosted on the ECR by running the command 
docker run and using the image URL from the ECR. After running the 
commands, we get the results from our classification program executed as a 
service on the Cloud as shown in Figure 4.11.
4.11 FURTHER EXTENSION TO DOCKER LOGISTIC 
CLASSIFICATION IMAGE USING CLOUD DATABASE
One further extension that can be achieved in the Docker Image for logistic regres￾sion classification is to have an integrated interaction with the Cloud database. In this 
section, we present the re-packaging of the logistic regression classification image 
that provides the classification between ‘farming’ and ‘not farming’ tags for an input 
query inside the Docker environment by having its training dataset drawn from a 
FIGURE 4.11 Running the Docker image on the AWS Cloud.Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques 77
Cloud database. The Cloud database considered here is the Google Cloud Firestore. 
Earlier the training dataset was in the form of the intents.json file which was added to 
our Dockerfile to build the logistic regression classification image. Figure 4.12 shows 
the dataset stored as collections in the Cloud Firestore.
Now, the Dockerfile gets updated from Tables 4.7 to 4.8. The coding changes to 
reflect the integration of Cloud Firestore are as follows. Earlier the intents.json file 
is loaded using the json library in Python and its load method. The intents.json file 
is no longer needed because we get all our patterns and their tags form the Cloud 
Firestore. Here, we first set up the firebase admin app and create two objects named 
farming and not_farming that store all the fields for the document named ‘farming’ 
and ‘not farming’, respectively, from the collection named tag. Now, in a manner 
like the previous process, we tag each pattern with its corresponding label. The rest 
FIGURE 4.12 Patterns under ‘farming’ and ‘not farming’ tags kept in Google Firestore.
TABLE 4.8
Dockerfile Updated to Include the Integration with Cloud Firestore
FROM python:3.9
ADD fir-cloudupload-xxxxx-firebase-adminsdk-xxxxx-xxxxxxxxxx.json.
ADD classification_logistic_regression.py.
ADD classes.pkl.
ADD words.pkl.
RUN pip install --upgrade pip
RUN pip install nltk
RUN pip install numpy
RUN pip install scikit-learn
RUN pip install firebase_admin
COPY ./tokenizers /root/nltk_data/tokenizers
COPY ./corpora /root/nltk_data/corpora
CMD ["python","./classification_logistic_regression.py"]78 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
of the process is like the logistic regression process presented before. In order for 
the Python script to be able to access the collections in Cloud Firestore, it needs 
the credentials file which has been added in row 2 of Table 5.8 to the current build 
process. Another command that has been added to the Dockerfile is the command 
pip install firebase_admin in row 10 of Table 5.8. This is the prerequisite to access 
Cloud Firestore from the Python app. The revised classification model using logistic 
regression that has integration with Cloud Firestore can be re-built using the com￾mand docker build -t python-classification-lr. The program can be run using the 
command docker run python-classification-lr:latest. On running the command, the 
correct output is displayed. This exercise is useful because if this image is deployed 
on the Cloud, for instance on AWS, and since, this image makes use of a Cloud data￾base, we have an all-in-all Cloud solution for our classification process in the chatbot. 
New training data can be added to the Cloud Firestore and that can continuously 
refine the training process for classification process in the chatbot.
4.12 CONCLUSION
The chatbot process finds the user intent in the query by the client and uses this intent 
to either maintain a dialogue with the end user or to take an action based on that 
intent. The core process that helps in generating this user intent is the classification 
process. In this chapter, we create a dataset for two tags: ‘farming’ and ‘not farming’ 
from questions that are publicly posted to a popular knowledge sharing service on 
the internet. Questions under the ‘farming’ tag are meant to train the chatbot in the 
query patterns related to farming. Questions under the ‘not farming’ tag are meant to 
train the chatbot in the query patterns unrelated to farming. We train the classifica￾tion model using a logistic regression technique from the traditional machine learn￾ing domain and a sequential model from the state-of-the-art deep learning domain. 
For our test dataset, both models give a zero-misclassification error. However, the 
sequential model takes longer to train because of the training epoch size of 200. 
Since the logistic regression model is simpler to train and set up, we present a way 
to deploy logistic regression classifier as a service on the Cloud. To achieve this, 
we build the logistic regression classifier image inside the Docker container. After 
checking the image locally for errors and bug-fixes, we present the framework of 
three Es provided by Amazon Web Services that allows the Docker image to be 
deployed on virtual servers on the Cloud. The packaged solution is deployed success￾fully on the AWS EC2 clusters, and they replicate the output like the host machine. 
We provide a heterogeneous integration of the Google Cloud Firestore as a training 
database in the Python script running logistic regression classifier. We package this 
enhanced setup inside the Docker, build and run it successfully. All in all, a blanket 
framework for Cloud-based classification service is presented in this book chapter.
REFERENCES
1. Conversational AI. Freed, Andrew. Simon and Schuster, 2021.
2. Chatbots: History, technology, and applications. Adamopoulou, Eleni and Moussiades, 
Lefteris. s.l.: Elsevier, 2020, Machine Learning with Applications, Vol. 2, p. 100006.Chatbot for Smart Farming Using AI and NLP Techniques 79
3. Farmer’s Friend: Conversational AI BoT for Smart Agriculture. Venkata Reddy, P. S., 
Nandini Prasad, K. S. and Puttamadappa, C. 2022, Journal of Positive School Psychology, 
Vol. 6, pp. 2541–2549.
4. Agrobot: An Agricultural Advancement to Enable Smart Farm Services Using NLP. 
Gounder, Susheel, et al. 2021, Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research. 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3890591
5. Agroxpert-Farmer assistant. Nayak, Vandana, Sowmya, N. H. and others. s.l.: Elsevier, 
2021, Global Transitions Proceedings, Vol. 2, pp. 506–512.
6. Krushi–The Farmer Chatbot. Momaya, Mihir, et al. 2021. 2021 International Conference 
on Communication information and Computing Technology (ICCICT). pp. 1–6.
7. Automatic Rice Disease Detection and Assistance Framework Using Deep Learning 
and a Chatbot. Jain, Siddhi, et al. s.l.: MDPI, 2022, Electronics, Vol. 11, p. 2110.
8. Identifying tomato leaf diseases under real field conditions using convolutional neural 
networks and a chatbot. Cheng, Hsueh-Hung, et al. s.l.: Elsevier, 2022, Computers and 
Electronics in Agriculture, Vol. 202, p. 107365.
9. A system for automatic rice disease detection from rice paddy images serviced via a 
Chatbot. Temniranrat, Pitchayagan, et al. s.l.: Elsevier, 2021, Computers and Electronics 
in Agriculture, Vol. 185, p. 106156.
10. Chatting with Plants (Orchids) in Automated Smart Farming using IoT, Fuzzy Logic and 
Chatbot. Wiangsamut, Samruan, Chomphuwiset, Phatthanaphong and Khummanee, 
Suchart. 2019, Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal, Vol. 4, 
pp. 163–173.
11. Agribot: a natural language generative neural networks engine for agricultural appli￾cations. Arora, Bhavika, et al. 2020. 2020 International Conference on Contemporary 
Computing and Applications (IC3A). pp. 28–33.
12. E-AGRO: Intelligent Chat-Bot. IoT and Artificial Intelligence to Enhance Farming 
Industry. Ekanayake, Jayalath and Saputhanthri, Luckshitha. 2020, AGRIS on-line 
Papers in Economics and Informatics, Vol. 12, pp. 15–21.
13. NeuralNine. Intelligent AI Chatbot in Python. Intelligent AI Chatbot in Python. [Online] 
2020. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1lwddP0KUEg.
14. Heo, Minsuk. [TensorFlow 2 Deep Learning] Dense Layer. [TensorFlow 2 Deep Learning] 
Dense Layer. [Online] 2020. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lor2LnEVn8M&list=
PLVNY1HnUlO25XeZstpj7m-2RTtyOhv6hO&index=4.80 DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-5
Soil Analysis and Nutrient 
Recommendation System 
Using IoT and Multilayer 
Perceptron (MLP) Model
Y.P. Arul Teen, R. Bharathi, C. Justin Dhanaraj, 
and Anchana B.S.
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Agriculture is the backbone of many societies, providing food and nutrition to mil￾lions around the world [1, 2]. As the world’s population continues to grow, it is essen￾tial that we develop better methods of producing food to ensure that all people have 
access to adequate nutrition. To achieve this, we must invest in research to improve 
agricultural methods and increase food production. Advances in technology and 
scientific understanding have led to a greater understanding of soil, crop growth, 
and pest management, which has enabled farmers to more effectively produce the 
food we need [3]. Further investment in research, development, and infrastructure 
is essential to ensuring that the agricultural industry can meet the needs of a grow￾ing global population [4]. Low productivity is the fundamental challenge facing 
the agriculture industry; hence, it is necessary to maximise agriculture production 
per unit of land. Typically, Indian farmers do not determine the nutrient composi￾tion of the soil. To address this issue, investing in soil testing technologies would 
enable farmers to assess the nutrient content in their soil and make more informed 
decisions about which crop to grow and what fertiliser to use. The solution to this 
problem is to adopt smart IoT technology, which will help Indian farmers collect 
soil data quickly, accurately, and efficiently [5]. In addition, using the data collected 
from the soil testing technology, farmers can take proactive measures to enhance 
their crop productivity [6]. This technology not only provides farmers with accu￾rate soil data, but it also enables them to make better decisions about their crops, 
fertilisers, and other agronomic practices [7]. This technology also helps farmers 
save time, money, and labour, as well as reduce the environmental impact of their 
farming activities [8].
If the assessment techniques are not properly used to identify and analyse 
the correct nutrient composition of the land, it can lead to land degradation and 
decreased crop productivity, leading to losses in both the agricultural sector and 
economy [9]. The growth and the production yield of crops depend significantly 
on the nutrient composition of the land [10]. With technological advancements, 
more precise and accurate assessment techniques that can accurately determine the 
5Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 81
nutrient composition of the soil and, based on this, suggest suitable fertilisers to 
use in order to maximise crop yields have been developed. This has enabled farm￾ers to know more accurately what fertilisers and nutrients their land needs so that 
they can use the correct ones for optimal crop yields. As a result, crop cultivation 
has been significantly improved by the development of these precise and accu￾rate assessment techniques, helping farmers use the most appropriate fertilisers for 
optimal yields.
The IoT is an exciting set of technologies that could be leveraged to deliver a 
wide range of agricultural modernisation solutions [11]. IoT offers farmers the 
opportunity to connect various sensors, actuators, and other devices to the internet, 
enabling them to capture real-time data about soil composition, nutrient levels, and 
weather conditions. This data-driven approach to farming allows farmers to make 
informed decisions and take corrective action in a timely manner, potentially result￾ing in increased yields and improved crop quality. Scientific institutions, research 
centres, and universities are playing a key role in the development of IoT-enabled 
solutions for farmers [12]. Moreover, AI can be used to analyse large amounts of 
data and identify patterns that lead to more effective decision-making. This data￾driven approach to farming also reduces the risk of human error, resulting in higher 
yields and improved crop quality. Current soil management systems are highly lim￾ited in their ability to predict soil conditions accurately and effectively due to human 
error and poor sensor performance. IoT is commonly used for soil monitoring and is 
capable of collecting precise and real-time data that can be used to monitor soil con￾ditions. However, IoT alone is not enough to ensure accurate predictions; it requires 
the use of advanced algorithms to analyse the collected data and make reliable 
forecasts [13]. To successfully solve this problem, advanced algorithms, such as 
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning, must be used in conjunction with 
the data collected by IoT sensors.
In this chapter, we used the IoT and a multilayer perceptron (MLP) model to develop 
soil monitoring and nutrition recommendations for different crop varieties. The pro￾posed system uses a soil NPK (Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P), and Potassium (K)) sensor 
to measure the soil water content. The MLP model is then used to recommend the 
optimal fertiliser doses for different crop varieties. The MLP neural network is com￾posed of an input layer, hidden layers, and an output layer, and it uses back propaga￾tion to adjust the weights between neurons. The input layer consists of the features 
extracted from the data collected by IoT sensors, while the hidden layers use activa￾tion functions such as sigmoid and tanh to process the input data. Finally, the output 
layer produces the predictions, which can be used to make decisions about irrigation 
and other soil-related operations. The proposed system is highly efficient, as the MLP 
model is trained to recognise different soil and fertiliser characteristics that are suitable 
for different crop varieties. The proposed system is both cost-effective and depend￾able because it allows farmers to precisely monitor soil nutrient levels in real time and 
recommend the optimal fertiliser dose while using minimal resources. Additionally, 
the proposed system is energy-efficient and eco-friendly, as it does not require any 
additional energy source for its operation. This makes it a great asset for sustainable 
agriculture and helps farmers maximise their yield while using fewer resources and 
reducing their environmental footprint.82 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
5.1.1 Research Background
Soil is a crucial component of the ecosystem that provides essential nutrients for 
plant growth and serves as a foundation for the food chain. However, soil quality is 
under threat from various factors, including climate change, land use, and human 
activities. Monitoring soil nutrient levels and recommending appropriate nutrient 
management strategies can help maintain soil fertility and enhance crop productiv￾ity. Recent advances in IoT technology enable the collection of real-time data on soil 
properties such as pH, temperature, moisture content, and nutrient levels. These data 
can be used to develop models that predict soil quality and nutrient requirements. 
MLP is a type of Artificial Neural Network (ANN) that has been widely used in soil 
science research to model soil properties. By integrating IoT and MLP, an efficient 
and accurate soil analysis and nutrient recommendation system can be developed to 
assist farmers in making informed decisions about crop management. Although pre￾vious studies have investigated soil analysis and nutrient recommendation systems 
using various technologies, there is still a significant research gap in integrating 
IoT and MLP models. Existing systems rely primarily on laboratory analysis, which 
is time-consuming and costly. Moreover, they may not provide real-time feedback 
on soil nutrient levels, leading to suboptimal nutrient management decisions. While 
MLP models have been used to predict soil properties and nutrient requirements, 
most studies have used laboratory data, which may not reflect soil properties in the 
field. Hence, there is a need for a soil analysis and nutrient recommendation system 
that combines the benefits of IoT technology and MLP models to provide real-time 
feedback on soil nutrient levels and accurate nutrient management recommenda￾tions. This system can help farmers make informed decisions about crop manage￾ment, reduce the use of fertilisers and pesticides, and improve soil health while 
protecting the environment.
5.1.2 Research Motivation
The motivation behind the proposed research on developing a soil analysis and nutri￾ent recommendation system using IoT and MLP models is to address the challenges 
faced by farmers in managing soil fertility and improving crop productivity. Soil deg￾radation and nutrient depletion have become major concerns due to factors. Traditional 
methods of soil analysis and nutrient management are time-consuming, costly, and 
may not provide real-time feedback on soil nutrient levels. The integration of IoT tech￾nology and MLP models offers a promising solution to these challenges. IoT sensors 
can provide real-time data on soil properties, and MLP models can process this data 
to predict soil nutrient levels and provide accurate recommendations on nutrient man￾agement strategies. The proposed system can help farmers make informed decisions 
about crop management, reduce the use of fertilisers and pesticides, and improve soil 
health while protecting the environment. Additionally, the system can be easily scaled 
and customised to meet the specific needs of different regions and crops. Overall, the 
research aims to provide a practical and efficient solution to the challenges of soil 
management and crop production, which can have significant implications for food 
security, environmental sustainability, and economic growth.Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 83
The following section discussed the recently developed IoT-based smart farm￾ing systems that use AI algorithms to make precise decisions about irrigation and 
other farming operations. The next chapter will explain the proposed system in more 
detail, discussing the architecture of the system and how it uses AI algorithms to 
make decisions. Section 5.4 presents a comparison of the system with other existing 
technologies. Section 5.5 concludes the chapter by discussing the potential of the 
system and some potential areas for future work.
5.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
This section provides a detailed analysis of the recently published soil analysis and 
nutrient recommendation systems. The analysis includes an overview of the existing 
soil testing methods, their strengths and limitations, as well as their recommenda￾tions for nutrient application.
M. Pyingkodi et al. [14] created a soil nutrient analysis and monitoring system 
using IoT. The system consists of various sensing components, such as soil moisture 
and temperature sensors, an electronic pH metre, and an automatic nutrient delivery 
system. The system also features an automated data collection and processing mod￾ule that collates and stores the data from the sensing components. This data is then 
transmitted wirelessly to the cloud, where it can be accessed by farmers in order to 
analyse the soil conditions and decide on the best course of action for their crops.
Rab Nawaz Bashir et al. [15] proposed IoT-based soil salinity mapping. In their 
proposal, they discussed how to use a remote sensing system coupled with an IoT￾enabled wireless mesh network in order to gather data from various sensors that are 
embedded in the soil. This method employed three types of soil sensors, including an 
electrical conductivity (EC) sensor, a pH sensor, and a total dissolved solids (TDSs) 
sensor. An EC sensor was used to measure the EC of the soil and served as an indica￾tor of salinity; a pH sensor measured the acidity or alkalinity of the soil, and a TDS 
sensor measured the TDS in the soil. This solution characterises the soil salinity, 
moisture, and nutrient levels of the environment.
Blesslin Sheeba et al. [16] evaluated the soil samples with respect to a range of 
fertility parameters, including organic carbon (OC), indices for boron (B), phospho￾rus (P), available boron (B), potassium (K), and soil reaction (pH). The extreme 
learning machine (ELM) is used to classify the soil samples into several categories 
based on the different fertility parameters. In order to optimise the ELM, the results 
of Blesslin Sheeba’s soil evaluation showed that a wide range of fertility parameters 
are necessary to accurately classify the different soil samples.
Burton et al. [17] developed an IoT gardening soil sheet system for soil nutrient 
analysis. The Waspmote ZB Pro SMA 5dBi radio is responsible for transmitting 
data over a long-range wireless network. Additionally, the system is equipped with 
a 6600-mAh rechargeable battery and a 7.4-volt solar panel for continuous energy 
supply. All the components work together in harmony, allowing the sheet system to 
send data over a long-range wireless network while relying on solar power. However, 
these components are only able to perform properly with the appropriate settings, as 
incorrect settings can significantly reduce the performance of the Waspmote ZB Pro 
SMA 5dBi radio.84 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Zhang et al. [18] developed an Internet of Things (IoT)-based soil monitoring 
system for Chinese citrus. The system consisted of a mix of single-point, multilayer, 
sensor nodes for detecting citrus soil temperature and humidity, and a citrus preci￾sion fertilisation. The system also can collect data on soil nutrients and soil moisture 
in real time, analyse and process them using a model-based approach, and then pro￾vide decision support for citrus production. However, there are still some challenges 
to be addressed, such as the calibration of soil sensors, the reliability and accuracy of 
sensor data, and the implementation of a long-term system maintenance plan.
R. Raut et al. [19] developed an IoT-based soil monitoring system to measure soil 
moisture content. The system comprised three primary components: a web server, a 
processing unit (ARM 7), and sensors. The sensors, which included temperature and 
humidity sensors and a moisture sensor, were installed in the soil to detect moisture 
levels. The collected data was transmitted to the ARM 7 processing unit, where it was 
analysed and processed before being sent to the web server. The web server displayed 
the results in a user-friendly format, enabling users to view and analyse the data more 
effectively. Modifications were made to improve the system’s usability and efficiency.
Xin Yi Lau et al. [20] developed an IoT-based intelligent agriculture soil monitor￾ing system that employs a proposed photon counting system and additional sensors 
such as temperature, humidity, and conductivity sensors to measure soil conditions. 
Additionally, a low-cost visible range wavelength (630 nm, 550 nm, and 470 nm) photon 
counting system with an input signal varying from 0 to 200 kHz was used. The sensors 
gathered data from the soil, which was then transmitted to the IoT-based platform for 
processing. The results were sent back to the user’s mobile device in real time, allowing 
them to make informed decisions regarding crop management. Despite the system’s 
usefulness, power consumption and data security remain significant challenges.
Muthumanickam Dhanaraju et al. [21] created a sustainable agriculture system 
based on the IoT. They explored the various tools and technologies available to farm￾ers that could help improve crop production. Specifically, they focused on how wire￾less sensor networks can be used to monitor the health of crops and provide insights 
into the best practices for harvesting, irrigation, and pest management. The authors 
emphasised the need for more research into the use of sensors and other technologi￾cal advancements in order to provide farmers with the necessary tools to produce 
higher yields. The authors also noted that these tools can improve the efficiency of 
farming and reduce the overall environmental impact.
Amna Ikram et al. [22] created a crop production maximisation using an IoT 
Intelligent Decision System. This system uses a dataset of meteorological variables, 
soil condition, and crop productivity information from various fields. The crop pro￾duction maximisation system was tested against the SCS model, which uses an aver￾age of 11 crops’ production over a period of time to make predictions.
Zihuai Lin et al. [23] designed an analysis of soil and environmental variables in 
the IoT smart farming scenario. This study proposed an integrated smart farming 
solution with the capability of monitoring and controlling environmental param￾eters, as well as soil properties. Through their research, they demonstrated the reli￾ability of the system by deploying it in a field test for four weeks. In this study, they 
used the low-cost volumetric water content (VWC) sensor to measure the (VWC) 
of soil. This data was used to optimise the irrigation system, thus increasing the Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 85
efficiency of water utilisation. The team found that the VWC sensor was reliable for 
use in an agricultural setting and showed an accuracy of less than 0.5% when com￾pared to manual readings.
5.3 MATERIALS AND METHODS
The proposed soil monitoring and nutrient recommendation system comprises three 
main modules, soil monitoring, soil data analysis, and recommendation, as shown in 
Figure 5.1. In the soil monitoring layer, key soil parameters, such as pH, EC, organic 
matter (OM), available phosphorus (P), and available potassium (K), are monitored 
in real time using IoT sensors. The collected soil data is then transmitted to a cen￾tralised cloud storage system via the Wi-Fi module for storage. The soil data analysis 
and prediction module uses the collected soil data to predict the current fertility level 
of the soil. This module takes the five key parameters mentioned earlier as input and 
generates predictions for the soil fertility level. With the predicted fertility level, 
farmers can determine the required amount of fertilisers and other nutrients neces￾sary to maintain their soil’s fertility level.
5.3.1 Soil Monitoring
Through the implementation of this IoT soil monitoring layer, the effects of soil deg￾radation can be monitored in real time, providing farmers and other agricultural pro￾fessionals with valuable insight into current soil conditions. The soil monitoring layer 
consists of a broad IoT network architecture that is connected to a variety of IoT soil 
smart sensors (NPK sensor), microcontrollers (Arduino microcontroller), Wi-Fi mod￾ules (ESP8266), and other IoT devices. These soil smart sensors collect and store data 
FIGURE 5.1 Overall architecture of proposed soil nutrient recommendation.86 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
related to the physical and chemical properties of the soil, such as temperature, moisture 
content, pH levels, and nutrient composition. The data collected from these sensors is 
then transmitted to a cloud-based data analytics platform, where it is processed and 
analysed. From the analysis of this data, predictive models can be developed to identify 
patterns and provide early warning signs of potential soil degradation. Figure 5.2 shows 
the architecture of soil monitoring layer.
5.3.2 NPK Sensor
The soil NPK sensor provides an accurate measure of the nutrient content in soil, 
allowing farmers to make well-informed decisions on what crops to plant and how 
much fertiliser is needed [24, 25]. Also, it provides an easy and cost-effective way 
for farmers and gardeners to monitor the fertility of their soil without relying on 
costly, time-consuming chemical testing methods. Using this sensor, agriculturalists 
can determine the precise amount of each nutrient that is present in the soil. This 
data can then be used to determine the precise amounts of nutrients that must be 
given to the soil to ensure maximum yields and crop growth. This saves farmers’ 
time and money by eliminating the need to guess at what fertiliser is needed, as well 
as reducing the risk of over-fertilising, which can cause soil degradation and harm 
local ecosystems. The soil NPK sensor measures three important parameters of soil 
health: phosphorus (P), potassium (K), and nitrogen (N). By providing accurate and 
precise readings of the NPK levels in the soil, agriculturalists are able to apply the 
correct amount of fertiliser, maximising yield and reducing potential harm to local 
ecosystems. The sensors have the additional benefit of being adaptable to different 
soil types, and because it is non-invasive, readings may be taken quickly and simply. 
It is suitable for all kinds of soil, including sandy, clay, and loam soils. Figure 5.3
illustrates the physical structure of the NPK sensor.
The NPK sensor works by emitting an electrical current through the soil, measur￾ing the resistance to the current. This resistance is directly proportional to the nutri￾ent concentration of the soil, allowing for a precise reading of the soil NPK levels. 
FIGURE 5.2 Soil monitoring layer’s architecture.Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 87
NPK sensor can be used with any microcontroller or computer system that has an 
analogue input port.
5.3.3 Arduino Microcontroller
Arduino microcontroller is a basic computer compared to other more powerful 
devices available today; it is an ideal tool for IoT applications such as soil monitor￾ing. Some of the key advantages of the Arduino microcontroller are its ease of use, 
flexibility, and low cost, making it an ideal choice for IoT developers who want to 
quickly prototype and test their ideas. In the context of soil monitoring, the Arduino 
microcontroller is an ideal choice for interfacing with various sensors, such as NPK 
sensors and other environmental sensors, and collecting and processing data from 
these sensors. With the help of the Wi-Fi module, data collected by the sensors can 
be transmitted to the cloud-based data analytics platform for further processing 
and analysis. Moreover, Arduino is an open-source platform, which means that 
developers can use existing libraries and code snippets, which can save time and 
effort during the development process. Additionally, the large community of devel￾opers associated with Arduino ensures that a wide range of online resources, and 
troubleshooting guides are available, making it easier for developers to learn and 
work with the platform. [25].
Arduino’s architecture includes an on-board processor and memory, an open￾source development environment (IDE) for programming, a communication inter￾face for wired and wireless connections, and an open-source I/O library for sensor 
integration. The on-board processor of the Arduino microcontroller helps process 
the raw data collected from the sensors in real time and provides advanced signal 
processing capabilities. Its on-board memory is used to store the data collected by 
the sensors, allowing for efficient data storage. The open-source IDE of the Arduino 
allows users to create their own programmes and upload them to the on-board 
processor. Finally, its open-source I/O library enables easy integration of external 
components such as cameras and GPS modules, allowing for a wide range of appli￾cations. The pins of the Arduino allow users to easily connect sensors, actuators, 
and other components. The architecture of this system allows for both efficient and 
effective data management, as well as the ability to create algorithms to detect subtle 
patterns of soil monitoring over time. The image in Figure 5.4 depicts the Arduino 
microcontroller’s physical architecture.
FIGURE 5.3 NPK sensor.88 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
5.3.4 ESP8266 Wi-Fi Module
The ESP8266 Wi-Fi module is an important part of the Arduino system, as it allows 
for wireless communication with other devices. With this module, users are able 
to connect Arduino boards to the internet and send data from the physical world 
(sensors, actuators, etc.) over the web. Additionally, the ESP8266 Wi-Fi module can 
also be used to allow for remote control of the system. By combining these fea￾tures with the architecture of the system, Arduino users are able to create power￾ful applications that allow for efficient and effective data management, while also 
being able to detect subtle patterns of soil monitoring over time. The architecture 
of the ESP8266 Wi-Fi module includes networking protocols such as TCP/IP, UDP, 
MQTT, and REST APIs. These protocols enable the device to communicate over the 
web, whether it be sending data to a remote server or receiving commands from an 
application. The ESP8266 Wi-Fi module has four pins that allow for a direct connec￾tion to other devices such as sensors, servos, and motors. The first pin is the power 
pin, which provides the necessary electricity to the module, while the remaining 
three pins are I/O pins that allow the ESP8266 Wi-Fi module to receive data from 
and send commands to other devices. Figure 5.5 depicts the physical architecture of 
the ESP8266 Wi-Fi module.
5.3.5 AI Cloud Server
The ESP8266 Wi-Fi module is compatible with the AI cloud server, making it pos￾sible to send data to and receive commands from the cloud server. By connecting the 
ESP8266 Wi-Fi module to the AI cloud server, users can control and monitor other 
devices from any location. This offers a huge advantage for IoT applications, as users 
can access their devices from anywhere with an internet connection. Additionally, 
FIGURE 5.4 Arduino microcontroller.Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 89
with the AI cloud server, users can store and share data collected from their devices 
with other users or applications. The fundamental principle of these AI cloud serv￾ers is to analyse the soil data collected from the IoT sensors. AI cloud servers are 
capable of processing massive amounts of soil data. AI cloud servers offer machine 
learning and AI capabilities to analyse the data collected from the IoT sensors. The 
adaptation of AI cloud servers in soil monitoring provides an efficient method of 
real-time monitoring and managing agricultural land, improving the quality and 
yield of crops.
5.4 PREDICTION MODEL USING MLP
5.4.1 Dataset Details
The dataset used in this investigation was obtained from various regions in the 
Kanyakumari district, situated in the Tamil Nadu state of India. The dataset com￾prised soil nutrient samples gathered from diverse sources, including organic matter 
content, exchangeable cations, EC, TDSs, and pH. IoT soil sensors generate volumi￾nous amounts of noisy data that traditional techniques may find challenging to pro￾cess. This may result in a decline in the efficiency of prediction models. Therefore, 
it is critical to clean and pre-process the noisy data to derive useful insights. In this 
chapter, the principal component analysis (PCA) method was employed to decrease 
the dimensionality of the data, while the min-max normalisation technique was used 
to normalise the soil data.
5.4.2 Dataset Normalisation and Dimension Reduction
Dataset normalisation was also performed in order to make the datasets more suit￾able for training and testing. In this study, dataset normalisation is accomplished 
using min-max normalisation, which transforms each feature in the dataset to a 
value between 0 and 1. This transformation allows for a more uniform representation 
of the data and prevents any single feature from having an outsized influence on the 
training and testing process. The min-max normalisation ensures that all features 
are on the same scale, which helps the algorithms more effectively train and test on 
the dataset. In addition, the min-max normalisation helps prevent large differences 
FIGURE 5.5 ESP8266 Wi-Fi module.90 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
in range between features that can lead to bias in the training process. Ultimately, 
this is beneficial for the algorithm, as it can more effectively identify patterns in the 
data when all features are represented on the same scale:
= −
− X X min(X)
(max(X) min(X) norm (5.1)
For min-max normalisation, use the following formula, where Xnorm is the normalised 
value of the feature X and min( ) X and max ( ) X are the minimum and maximum values 
of the feature X, respectively.
PCA was used to reduce the dimensionality of the soil dataset and enhance the 
accuracy of each algorithm. The principal components, which are the eigenvectors of 
the covariance matrix, form a new coordinate system where the variance in the data 
can be visualised more effectively. In the soil dataset, PCA was employed to merge 
similar features into a single feature that better explains the variation in the data, 
thereby reducing the number of features. The typical soil dataset includes undesired 
features that result from IoT sensor failures and other manual errors, which do not 
affect the classification algorithms. By implementing PCA, the dimensionality of the 
dataset was reduced, and only significant features were retained. The goal of using 
PCA on the soil dataset was to improve the accuracy of each machine learning algo￾rithm by removing noise from unwanted features. The following formula was used 
to compute the principal components from the input data:
= ≤ ∑ ≤
=
,1 ,
1
Y DX i n
i
n
(5.2)
where X represents the dataset. The data dimension is denoted by D D = … ( ) 1,  2 D D. n . 
The actual number of data variables in the data collection is denoted by 
X = … ( ) X X 1 2 , Xn and ( , Y Y = … 1 2 Y Y , ) n is the new data variable produced by the 
PCA. This formula seeks to extract the maximum amount of variance from the input 
data by projecting it onto a new set of orthogonal components that are derived from 
the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix.
5.4.3 Feature Extraction
The efficiency of machine learning and deep learning algorithms is estimated using 
optimal feature selection approaches. The goal of feature selection is to decrease the 
problem’s complexity and focus on a collection of critical variables capable of effec￾tively capturing the correlation between soil characteristics and target variables. 
Incorporating erroneous data into the soil data analysis increases the risk of mis￾takes during the nutrient recommendation. It is necessary to consider which features 
have the most influence on the model’s prediction performance. As a result, feature 
selection methods must be used to choose the most significant features from the soil 
dataset and remove the irrelevant ones. In this study, a multidimensional soil data￾set is used to train the MLP-based prediction model. The dataset was constructed 
by creating a binary matrix of size nxn, where each entry in the matrix indicates Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 91
whether two soil features are highly connected or not. The number of columns, n, 
includes the features obtained from soil samples such as phosphorus (P), nitrogen (N), 
and potassium (K). Each row of the dataset represents a sample collected from a spe￾cific soil region. The dataset also contains the corresponding label for each sample, 
which is the soil classification associated with it. Equation 5.3 is used to represent the 
class labels and features:
1
2
3
.
.
,
1
2
3
.
.
F
f
f
f
fn
C
c
c
c
cm

 
 

=




















=


















(5.3)
The features vectors (F) and class labels (C) each include n and m distinct class 
labels. n and m can vary depending on the nature of the soil parameters. The relation￾ship between F and C is determined by Equation 5.4:
2 2 Cor F F C C
F F C C
fc
i i
i i
∑
∑ ∑
( )
( )
( )
( ) = − −
− −
(5.4)
The observed mean value of the ith soil character is represented by F, while 
the average value of the class label is represented by (C). Using Equation 5.4, we 
can get values ranging from 0 to 1. The association between the soil parameters 
and the class labels impacts these numbers. It returns positive numbers between 
1 and 0, or negative values, depending on how well the soil parameters correlate 
with the class label. Table 5.1 shows the correlations between the class values and 
the soil parameters.
TABLE 5.1
Correlation Coefficients between Soil Parameters and Prediction Values
Similarity Values Similarity Range
1 The value 1 denotes very highly connected soil features means that the features in 
that soil sample are highly correlated.
1–0.8 A value between 1 and 0.8 denotes moderately connected soil features, meaning that 
some of the features are correlated, while others may be relatively independent.
0.6–0.8 A value between 0.6 and 0.8 denotes very small connectivity, which means that the 
features in that soil sample are not correlated to each other.
0 The value 0 denotes very low connectivity of soil features, which means that the 
features in that sample are not as strongly correlated.92 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Correlation coefficients between 1 and 0.5 are employed in this study to train 
MLP models to improve the accuracy of soil nutrient recommendation. By employing 
Equation 5.5, highly associated features are selected in this case:
=
≤ ≤
≤ ≤
≤ ≤





0.6 1;
0.6 1;
0.6 1
H
N
P
K
CF (5.5)
5.4.4 Prediction Model
Deep learning algorithms have been increasingly used to develop predictive models 
for various agricultural applications, such as crop yield forecasting, soil manage￾ment, and disease detection. This chapter incorporates this technology by using a 
pre-trained deep learning model to automatically analyse the soil composition and 
accurately predict the required fertiliser dose. In general, the MLP algorithm has 
been the most popular deep learning algorithm used in agricultural applications 
due to its ability to process complex data, identify hidden patterns, and perform 
automated feature selection. So this chapter uses MLP to predict the fertiliser dose 
according to the soil composition.
5.4.4.1 Multilayer Perceptron
The architecture of a MLP is designed to mimic the structure and function of the 
human brain, using neurons and layers of interconnected nodes to process complex 
data [26]. MLP architecture consists of several layers of neurons, or nodes that are 
interconnected with each other and can receive input from the environment or from 
previous layers in the network [27]. Each node performs simple operations on the 
input data, such as summation or multiplication, and then passes this information 
along to the next layer of nodes in the network [28]. The data that is passed through 
the network is weighted according to its relevance and importance, with more relevant 
and important data being given higher weights. Figure 5.6 represents the overall struc￾ture of the MLP model.
The output of each node is determined by a formula of the form f(w, x), where w 
is a vector of weights and x is the input vector. The primary functions of this MPL 
model are described as follows:
aH H = + f W1( ) a b H H (5.6)
where the activation function is denoted by the formula f1, where ReLU is used in 
the proposed soil nutrient recommendation system. The number of nodes in the input 
layer is represented by a, and H denotes the number of nodes in the hidden layer. 
The error function (E) employed in the system is cross-entropy, which measures the 
disparity between the output of the MLP algorithm and the optimal fertiliser dose. 
Subsequently, the optimal fertiliser dose recommendation is obtained through the 
use of the training feature and the output of the final hidden layer:
=ˆ
Y P at H (5.7)Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 93
where optimal fertiliser dose is represented by the variable ˆ
Y and is determined 
by the output of the MLP algorithm. According to this study, the neural network’s 
weights can be dynamically adjusted, allowing it to detect errors and improve pre￾diction accuracy:
−W = W + L × (𝔼 − 𝕡) × X (5.8)
where W is the weight vector of the MLP algorithm and represents a set of values 
associated with each neuron, indicating the strength of the connection between two 
neurons in an adjacent layer. L is the learning rate parameter, which indicates how 
quickly the weights are adjusted in order to reduce errors and improve prediction 
accuracy. E represents the expected result that the MLP is attempting to predict, and 
P represents the actual result. The difference between the expected and actual results 
(E − P) is known as the prediction error. Figure 5.7 depicts the suggested MLP-based 
soil nutrient recommendation model.
The soil nutrient recommendation model has three layers: the input layer, which 
is composed of the soil composition features; the hidden layers, where the features 
are processed and connected to each other; and finally, an output layer consisting of a 
single node for predicting the optimal. The MLP algorithm is able to learn the nonlin￾ear relationships between the soil composition features and the optimal fertiliser dose 
through multiple iterations, each time updating the weights of its nodes. The MLP algo￾rithm is trained using a training dataset, which consists of samples of soil composition 
and their corresponding optimal fertiliser dose. During the training process, the MLP 
algorithm iteratively updates its weights in order to minimise an error function.
FIGURE 5.6 General architecture of MLP model.94 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
5.4.5 Training the MLP Model
Training is a critical component of MLP as it allows the model to adjust weights and 
biases associated with each neuron such that the desired output can be obtained. 
Through learning, MLP can assign weights to each feature in the dataset such that 
it can accurately determine the soil classification based on its associated charac￾teristics. Using advanced learning algorithms can provide greater accuracy for the 
model, such as back propagation (BP) and stochastic gradient descent (SGD). BP, 
SGD, and the momentum coefficient (MC) are used in MLP in this study to adjust 
the weights associated with each feature of the dataset. The BP algorithm works by 
taking the error of a prediction and sending it back through the neural network in 
order to update the weights associated with each neuron. SGD works by adjusting the 
weights associated with each neuron after evaluating a single training example. By 
adjusting the weights after evaluating a single training example, SGD helps to reduce 
the amount of time necessary to evaluate the entire dataset. The MC is used to help 
the BP algorithm continue in the right direction when it reaches a local minimum, as 
well as to provide smoother convergence of the cost function. With this combination 
of algorithms, the MLP is able to adjust the weights associated with each feature in 
order to accurately predict a result given a set of inputs. The standard BP algorithm’s 
pseudo-code is depicted in Algorithm 5.1.
Algorithm 5.1: Pseudo-code of the traditional BP algorithm
Initialize Weights:
While not StopCriterion do
for all i, j do
 w * E
w
ij
ij
∆ = η
∂
∂






end for;
end while;
FIGURE 5.7 Soil nutrient recommendation model.Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 95
The formula used to adjust the weights in the BP algorithm is given by
+ = − η ( )
( ) ( 1)
1
w w
d E
d w t t (5.9)
where w represents the weights, η is the learning rate, E is the error obtained from 
the output layer. By applying Equation 5.9, weights are adjusted to minimise the 
error of the output, but it takes time to reach the optimal weight values. To reduce 
the time taken to reach optimal SGD is used. SGD randomly selects training samples 
from the dataset, processes them, and updates the weights according to Equation 5.9. 
SGD allows us to quickly adjust the weights so that the error of the output is mini￾mised in a much shorter amount of time than traditional weight updating techniques.
The MC, which is typically set to a value between 0 and 1, is used to modify the 
weight update in order to avoid getting stuck in local minima or increasing the oscil￾lations of the cost function. The MC is denoted by α:
∆ = α∆ − + η ( )
( ) ( 1)
1
w w
d E
d w t t (5.10)
This MC helps SGD by reducing the oscillations and allowing the model to converge 
faster to an optimal set of weights.
5.4.6 Soil Nutrition Recommendation
The recommendation layer of the proposed system displays the data in an easy-to￾understand format, allowing farmers to make informed decisions about their farming 
practices. The system can provide actionable insights about soil nutrition levels and 
other farming metrics, which will help farmers optimise their yields and reduce their 
environmental footprint. Furthermore, the data is continuously monitored and updated 
on an ongoing basis, giving farmers real-time access to the most up-to-date information.
5.5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.5.1 System Setup and Software Tools
Matlab 2018 and Matlab machine learning packages were used in the development of 
this soil nutrient recommendation system. For accelerated training, the MLP model 
was implemented on a desktop computer with 8 GB of RAM, an Intel Core i7 pro￾cessor, and an Nvidia Graphics Processing Unit (GPU).
5.5.2 Accuracy Analysis
The performance analysis of the proposed MLP model for soil nutrient recommen￾dation systems is compared with the most popular machine learning algorithms, 
including support vector machine (SVM), decision tree (DT), k-nearest neighbour 
(KNN), and Naive Bayes (NB).96 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
The most widely used supervised machine learning algorithm is the SVM, which 
is used for both classification and regression tasks [29]. It is used to map a set of 
given data points in an n-dimensional space into two or more classes. By mapping 
the data points onto the classes, SVM is able to draw a boundary line that best sepa￾rates the two classes. With this line, it is then able to determine which data points 
belong to which class by measuring the distance of each point from the boundary 
line. In addition, SVM also takes into account any outliers that may be present in the 
data and assigns higher weights to them so that they don’t get ignored while making 
the decision boundary. In this way, SVM is able to draw a hyperplane that accurately 
predicts the classes of a given set of data points.
DT unlike SVM creates a DT from the training data and uses the DT to make 
predictions [30]. The DT is composed of nodes, each representing a single attribute 
or value of an attribute, and edges that represent the relationships between different 
attributes. DT is able to draw a single, linear decision boundary that separates data 
points into their respective classes by using the hierarchical structure of the DT. 
This is particularly useful when there are a large number of classes in the dataset, 
as it allows for more efficient prediction. In addition, the structure of the DT makes 
it easy to interpret and explain how a model is making predictions. As such, DTs 
have become a popular choice for data scientists and machine learning engineers, 
especially in the fields of finance, healthcare, and marketing.
KNN is a machine learning algorithm that is commonly used for classification 
problems [31]. KNN is a supervised learning algorithm that works by looking at the 
k-nearest points to the data point being predicted and assigning it to whichever class 
those points belong to. KNN is advantageous for its ease of implementation and 
interpretability, as the user only needs to specify the number of neighbours to con￾sider when making a prediction. KNN is particularly useful for datasets with small 
sample sizes, where it can provide more reliable predictions than DTs. KNN is also 
computationally efficient, as the algorithm only needs to look at the k-nearest points 
to make a prediction. Despite its advantages, KNN is not suitable for datasets with 
large numbers of features.
NB is another powerful algorithm that can be used in place of KNN when work￾ing with large datasets [32]. NB is a probabilistic algorithm that uses the Bayes theo￾rem to calculate the probability of an event occurring based on prior knowledge. NB 
is known to be faster and more accurate than KNN when working with datasets con￾taining a large number of features, making it an attractive option for many machine 
learning tasks. NB also has some advantages over KNN, such as not requiring any 
distance calculations. However, one of the biggest drawbacks of NB is that it is a 
supervised learning algorithm, meaning that it requires labelled data to work prop￾erly. Therefore, if the dataset is unlabelled, NB cannot be used, and KNN would be 
the more appropriate choice. Additionally, KNN can be used for regression as well 
as classification problems, whereas NB is primarily a classifier.
The pre-processed dataset was partitioned into distinct training and testing data￾sets. The training dataset was employed to train each of the five algorithms, while 
the testing dataset was reserved to evaluate their performances. Each algorithm was 
trained on the soil dataset using a 10-fold cross-validation technique with a parti￾tioning of 70% training data and 30% testing data. To assess the efficacy of each Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 97
algorithm, key performance indicators such as accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 
score were employed. These metrics served to quantify the algorithms’ abilities to 
correctly classify the soil data and to provide a comprehensive evaluation of their 
respective performances.
5.5.2.1 Accuracy
In soil nutrient recommendations, accuracy is the most important measure of perfor￾mance as it shows how accurately the algorithms can recommend nutrient levels for a 
given soil sample. Thus, the performance of each algorithm was assessed based on its 
accuracy in recommending the correct soil nutrient levels for a given sample. The soil 
nutrient recommendation systems’ accuracy is determined by the following equation:
= +
+ + +
Accuracy
TP TN
TP TN FP FN (5.11)
In soil nutrient recommendations, a “true positive” (TP) means the system correctly 
identifies a soil sample as requiring specific nutrient, and those recommendations are 
indeed accurate, while a “false positive” (FP) refers to the system correctly identifies a 
soil sample as not requiring specific nutrient, and this is indeed accurate. On the other 
hand, FP means the system recommends adding certain nutrients to a soil sample, but 
it’s found that those recommendations were not needed. This can occur when the system 
is not accurate in its assessment of the soil sample’s nutrient needs, while false negative 
(FN) means the system fails to recommend certain nutrients for a soil sample, but those 
recommendations were actually needed. This can occur when the system is not sensitive 
enough to detect the soil sample’s nutrient needs.
5.5.2.2 Precision
Precision is the other most important metric in soil nutrient recommendation systems, 
which is calculated by the ratio of TPs to the sum of TPs and FPs. Precision helps to 
measure how accurately the soil nutrient recommendation systems are able to identify 
what nutrients are actually present in the soil sample. The soil nutrient recommenda￾tion systems’ precision is determined by the following equation:
= +
Precision TP
TP FP (5.12)
5.5.2.3 Recall
Recall is a measure of how effective the soil nutrient recommendation system is in 
identifying all nutrients that should be present in the soil sample, calculated by the 
ratio of TPs) to the sum of TPs and FNs. Thus, the combination of precision and recall 
provides a holistic overview of how effective soil nutrient recommendation systems are 
in accurately determining what nutrients should be present in the soil sample. The soil 
nutrient recommendation systems’ recall value is determined by the following equation:
= +
Recall  TP
TP FN (5.13)98 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
5.5.2.4 F1 Score
The F1 score is a metric that combines precision and recall, providing a measure of 
the balance between them. In soil nutrient recommendation system evaluation, the 
F1 score is important as it takes into account both precision and recall, providing a 
single metric that reflects the effectiveness of the system. A higher F1 score indicates 
better performance of the soil nutrient recommendation system, as it shows that both 
precision and recall are good. This means that the system is accurate not just in iden￾tifying which nutrients are present but also in predicting what other nutrients should 
be present in the soil sample:
( ) − = ×
+
1 2 F score
Recall Precision
Recall Precision (5.14)
The confusion matrices presented in Figure 5.8 provide insights into the perfor￾mance of each machine learning model. The matrices show the TP, TP, true negative, 
and FN rates of each model, as well as the areas of focus for improvement. From the 
confusion matrices, it is evident that the machine learning models achieved varying 
levels of success on the soil dataset. A total of 1500 soil samples are used to evaluate the 
MLP model and other machine learning methods. The confusion matrices show that 
the MLP model had a higher TP rate and a higher true negative rate. This means that 
it correctly identified both positive and negative samples with a high level of accuracy.
On the basis of the confusion matrices, the above mentioned precision metrics 
are calculated.
Figures 5.9–5.12 show the accuracy analysis of proposed model with the existing 
machine learning models. After testing and validating the algorithms on the soil 
dataset, it was found that the proposed MLP outperformed the other algorithms in 
terms of accuracy, recall, precision, and F1 score, suggesting that it is a viable option 
for analysing soil datasets. The MLP model’s accuracy was significantly higher than 
the other machine learning models, and it achieved an overall precision of 0.76, 
which is a considerable improvement over the existing machine learning models. 
These findings suggest that MLP models can be used to effectively analyse soil data￾sets and produce accurate results, making them a valuable tool for scientists and 
engineers working with soil data. This was supported by the confusion matrices, 
which showed that the MLP model had a higher TP rate than all other models, indi￾cating that it was able to accurately identify positive samples more reliably. This 
shows that the MLP model was able to identify both positive and negative samples 
with a high degree of accuracy, outperforming the other algorithms.
5.5.3 Training Efficiency Analysis
A dataset of 1500 samples was used for training the model, with 1000 samples allo￾cated for training and 500 samples for validation purposes. The implementation of 
the model required careful tuning of various hyperparameters. The training process 
employed a combination of BP, SGD, and MC algorithms, with a learning rate of 
0.001 and a batch size of 32. The model was trained for 200 epochs and monitored to 
prevent over-fitting or under-fitting. Following the training phase, the performance of Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 99
the MLP model was evaluated using popular error analysis metrics, including mean 
absolute error (MAE), mean square error, and root mean square error (RMSE). These 
metrics are effective in determining the discrepancy between the predicted values 
and the expected values of the soil nutrient recommendation system, with lower error 
values indicating a higher level of accuracy.
MAE is the most important error metric, as it measures the average magnitude 
of errors in a set of predictions, without considering their direction. The following 
formula is used to determine the MAE values:
= − ∑=
 1
1
MAE n yi yi
i
n
(5.15)
FIGURE 5.8 TP, TN, FP, and FN proportions of proposed MLP and existing machine 
learning models.100 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Mean Squared Error (MSE) is another important metric used to evaluate the per￾formance of the soil nutrient recommendation system. MSE measures the average 
squared error between the predicted and actual values.
= − ∑=
 1 2
1
MSE
N yi yi
i
N
(5.16)
FIGURE 5.9 Accuracy comparison results.
FIGURE 5.10 Recall comparison results.Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 101
In the earlier-mentioned formulas, X is a vector of predictions, and Y is the vector 
of true values.
The more training data there is, the more it influences the AI model’s accu￾racy and the more computer resources it requires (memory and processing power). 
With an increased amount of training data, the MLP proposed in this chapter can 
become more efficient and provide more accurate predictions. This was seen in the 
FIGURE 5.12 Precision comparison results.
FIGURE 5.11 F1 score comparison results.102 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
experimental results, with more data resulting in a decrease in MAE, MSE, and 
RMSE. In order to determine the effectiveness of the soil nutrient recommendation 
model, the dataset has been separated linearly, and training and testing have been 
completed. The partitioning of the dataset is described in detail in Table 5.2.
In order to obtain trustworthy comparison results, as shown in Table 5.2, MLP 
and other machine learning algorithms are trained and evaluated, and their average 
values are used for comparative analysis.
According to Table 5.3, the MAE, MSE, and RMSE values of the presented MLP 
model are relatively low compared to other machine learning algorithms. The results 
of the training showed that the model had an MAE of 0.661, an MSE of 2.924, and 
an RMSE of 0.103, indicating that it had an excellent generalisation ability and was 
able to learn.
The MAE, MSE, and RMSE errors of MLP are lower than those obtained by 
other machine learning algorithms, thus demonstrating the superiority of MLP when 
trained with a large amount of IoT soil data. This suggests that MLP outperforms 
other machine learning algorithms when trained on large training data. There are two 
key reasons for the low error rate of this presented MLP model. Initially, the dataset 
is cleaned of noise using advanced pre-processing techniques. The second essential 
TABLE 5.2
DataSet Partition Ratios
Dataset Partition Ratio 
(Training, Testing)
Fold Name
60:40 Fold 1
65:35 Fold 2
70:30 Fold 3
75:25 Fold 4
80:20 Fold 5
85:15 Fold 6
90:10 Fold 7
95:5 Fold 8
TABLE 5.3
Errors (MAE, MSE, and RMSE) Comparisons When Training 
Soil Data Using MLP and Other Machine Learning Algorithms
Methods MAE MSE RMSE
MLP 0.661 2.924 0.103
SVM 0.673 2.297 0.123
DT 0.728 2.078 0.112
KNN 0.653 2.110 0.109
NP 0.741 2.081 0.117Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 103
aspect is that the combination of SGD and MC improves the training efficiency of the 
BP algorithm. By using a combination of SGD and MC, the MLP model can reach an 
optimal error rate in much less time than would be possible by using BP alone. Both 
of these methods and algorithms efficiently train the critical soil parameters to MLP 
in less time. Furthermore, SGD and MC can be combined to increase the accuracy of 
the model as well.
5.5.4 The Following Are Significant Advantages of the Proposed System
• The proposed architecture allows soil nutrients to be mapped quickly, accu￾rately, and portably.
• This new system can provide farmers with a detailed understanding of 
soil fertility levels, allowing them to make more informed decisions when 
applying fertilisers and other soil amendments.
• This system provides an innovative way for modern farmers to save time 
and money by quickly and easily moving their systems to meet different 
needs.
• The portability of the proposed system has major implications for modern 
farmers, as they can now move their systems to different areas as their 
needs change.
• Anyone can access this data with the help of the internet, and it is beneficial 
for regulatory authorities, researchers, and farmers. It is important to note 
that the data stored in the database can be used to inform decisions and 
plans for improving soil salinity in different parts of the world.
5.6 CONCLUSION
In recent years, the emergence of IoT and AI has brought significant advancements 
in various fields, and agriculture is no exception. IoT technology has enabled farm￾ers to monitor soil conditions and water levels, providing them with insights on 
the best time for planting, irrigation, and harvesting. Soil monitoring is a crucial 
application of IoT technology in farming as it enables farmers to keep track of soil 
nutrient levels and moisture content, thereby improving crop yield. This chapter 
has successfully presented a soil nutrition recommendation system using IoT and 
MLP models, which can be applied to a wide range of agricultural applications. 
Specifically, the NPK sensor was employed to collect essential soil nutrition param￾eters, which were processed using the MLP model to develop the soil nutrition rec￾ommendation system. The accuracy of the system was evaluated with real-time soil 
testing results, enabling an accurate assessment of the effectiveness of the proposed 
system. The proposed soil nutrition recommendation system was tested with experi￾mental data, and the results demonstrated a high degree of accuracy achieved by the 
MLP model. The monitoring system’s collected data can be used to guide farmers’ 
decision-making processes, such as determining when to apply fertilisers or pes￾ticides, or when to plant specific crops. With the system’s assistance, farmers can 
accurately measure soil nutrition levels with minimal effort and cost, making it a 
cost-effective, reliable, and user-friendly system for farmers.104 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
REFERENCES
1. Devaux, A. et al. (2020). Global Food Security, Contributions from Sustainable Potato 
Agri-Food Systems. In: Campos, H., Ortiz, O. (eds) The Potato Crop. Springer, Cham. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-28683-5_1
2. Singh, R., Singh, G.S., “Traditional Agriculture: A Climate-Smart Approach for 
Sustainable Food Production,” Energy, Ecology and Environment, vol. 2, pp. 296–316, 
2017. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40974-017-0074-7
3. Popp, J., Pető, K., Nagy, J., “Pesticide Productivity and Food Security. A Review,” 
Agronomy for Sustainable Development, vol. 33, pp. 243–255, 2013. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s13593-012-0105-x
4. Jacquet, F., Jeuffroy, M.H., Jouan, J. et al., “Pesticide-Free Agriculture as a New Paradigm 
for Research,” Agronomy for Sustainable Development, vol. 42, p. 8, 2022. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13593-021-00742-8
5. Ayyasamy, S., Eswaran, S., Manikandan, B., Mithun Solomon, S.P., Nirmal Kumar, 
S., “IoT based Agri Soil Maintenance through Micro-Nutrients and Protection of 
Crops from Excess Water,” 2020 Fourth International Conference on Computing 
Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC), Erode, India, 2020, pp. 404–409. doi: 
10.1109/ICCMC48092.2020.ICCMC-00076
6. Srivastava, A., Das, D.K., Kumar, R., “Monitoring of Soil Parameters and Controlling of 
Soil Moisture through IoT Based Smart Agriculture,” 2020 IEEE Students Conference 
on Engineering & Systems (SCES), Prayagraj, India, 2020, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/
SCES50439.2020.9236764
7. Athani, S., Tejeshwar, C.H., Patil, M.M., Patil, P., Kulkarni, R., “Soil Moisture 
Monitoring Using IoT Enabled Arduino Sensors with Neural Networks for Improving 
Soil Management for Farmers and Predict Seasonal Rainfall for Planning Future 
Harvest in North Karnataka—India,” 2017 International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in 
Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC), Palladam, India, 2017, pp. 43–48. doi: 
10.1109/I-SMAC.2017.8058385
8. Ramson, R.J. et al., “A Self-Powered, Real-Time, LoRaWAN IoT-Based Soil Health 
Monitoring System,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 9278–9293, 
2021. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3056586
9. Chen, D., Chen, N., Zhang, X., Ma, H., Chen, Z., “Next-Generation Soil Moisture Sensor 
Web: High-Density In Situ Observation Over NB-IoT,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 
vol. 8, no. 17, pp. 13367–13383, 2021. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3065077.
10. Hossain, F.F. et al., “Soil Moisture Monitoring through UAS-Assisted Internet of Things 
LoRaWAN Wireless Underground Sensors,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 102107–102118, 
2022
11. Pal, P., Tripathi, S., Kumar, C., “Single Probe Imitation of Multi-Depth Capacitive Soil 
Moisture Sensor Using Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Network,” IEEE Transactions 
on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 71, pp. 1–11, 2022, Article ID 9504311. doi: 
10.1109/TIM.2022.3156179
12. Quy, V. K., et al., “IoT-Enabled Smart agriculture: architecture, applications, and chal￾lenges,” Applied Sciences, vol. 12, pp. 3396–3415, 2022. doi: 10.3390/app12073396
13. Kumar, A.A., Kumar, N., Fernandez, R.E., “Real Time Sensing of Soil Potassium Levels 
Using Zinc Oxide-Multiwall Carbon Nanotube-Based Sensors,” IEEE Transactions on 
NanoBioscience, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 50–56, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TNB.2020.3027863
14. Pyingkodi, M., Thenmozhi, K., Karthikeyan, M., Kalpana, T., Palarimath, S., Kumar, 
G.B.A., “IoT Based Soil Nutrients Analysis and Monitoring System for Smart 
Agriculture,” 2022 3rd International Conference on Electronics and Sustainable 
Communication Systems (ICESC), Coimbatore, India, 2022, pp. 489–494. doi: 10.1109/
ICESC54411.2022.9885371Soil Analysis and Nutrient Recommendation 105
15. Bashir, R.N., Bajwa, I.S., Abbas, M.Z. et al., “Internet of Things (IoT) Assisted Soil 
Salinity Mapping at Irrigation Schema Level,” Applied Water Science, vol. 12, p. 105, 
2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13201-022-01619-1
16. Blesslin Sheeba, T., Vijay Anand, L.D., Manohar, G., Selvan, S., Bazil Wilfred, C., 
Muthukumar, K., Padmavathy, S., Ramesh Kumar, P., Asfaw, B.T., “Machine Learning 
Algorithm for Soil Analysis and Classification of Micronutrients in IoT-Enabled 
Automated Farms,” Journal of Nanomaterials, vol. 2022, p. 7, 2022, Article ID 5343965. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/5343965
17. Burton, L. et al., “Smart Gardening IoT Soil Sheets for Real-Time Nutrient Analysis,” 
Journal of The Electrochemical Society, vol. 165, no. 8. pp B3157–B3162, 2018. doi: 10.1149/
2.0201808jes.
18. Zhang, X., Zhang, J., Li, L., Zhang, Y., Yang, G., “Monitoring Citrus Soil Moisture and 
Nutrients Using an IoT Based System,” Sensors (Basel), vol. 17, no. 3, p. 447, 2017. doi: 
10.3390/s17030447. PMID: 28241488; PMCID: PMC5375733.
19. Raut, R., Varma, H., Mulla, C., Pawar, V.R. (2018). Soil Monitoring, Fertigation, and 
Irrigation System Using IoT for Agricultural Application. In: Hu, Y.C., Tiwari, S., Mishra, 
K., Trivedi, M. (eds) Intelligent Communication and Computational Technologies. Lecture 
Notes in Networks and Systems, vol. 19. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-981-10-5523-2_7
20. Lau, X.Y., Soo, C.H., Yusof, Y., Isaak, S. (2021). Integrated Soil Monitoring System for 
Internet of Thing (IOT) Applications. In: Proceedings of the 11th National Technical 
Seminar on Unmanned System Technology 2019, NUSYS 2019, Lecture Notes in Electrical 
Engineering, vol. 666. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-5281-6_50.
21. Dhanaraju, M., Chenniappan, P., Ramalingam, K., Pazhanivelan, S., Kaliaperumal, R., 
“Smart Farming: Internet of Things (IoT)-Based Sustainable Agriculture,” Agriculture, 
vol. 12, p. 1745, 2022. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture12101745
22. Ikram, A., Aslam, W., Aziz, R.H.H., Noor, F., Mallah, G.A., Ikram, S., Ahmad, M.S., 
Abdullah, A.M., Ullah, I., “Crop Yield Maximization Using an IoT-Based Smart 
Decision,” Journal of Sensors, vol. 2022, p. 15, 2022, Article ID 2022923. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2022/2022923
23. Placidi, P., Morbidelli, R., Fortunati, D., Papini, N., Gobbi, F., Scorzoni, A., “Monitoring 
Soil and Ambient Parameters in the IoT Precision Agriculture Scenario: An Original 
Modeling Approach Dedicated to Low-Cost Soil Water Content Sensors,” Sensors, vol. 21, 
p. 5110, 2021. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21155110.
24. Liu, R.-T., Tao, L.-Q., Liu, B., Tian, X.-G., Mohammad, M.A., Yang, Y., Ren, T.-L., 
“A Miniaturized On-Chip Colorimeter for Detecting NPK Elements,” Sensors, vol. 16, 
p. 1234, 2016. https://doi.org/10.3390/s16081234
25. Mumtaz, Z., Ullah, S., Ilyas, Z., Aslam, N., Iqbal, S., Liu, S., Meo, J.A., Madni, H.A., “An 
Automation System for Controlling Streetlights and Monitoring Objects Using Arduino,” 
Sensors, vol. 18, p. 3178, 2018. https://doi.org/10.3390/s18103178
26. Taud, H., Mas, J. (2018). Multilayer Perceptron (MLP). In: Camacho Olmedo, M., 
Paegelow, M., Mas, J.F., Escobar, F. (eds) Geomatic Approaches for Modeling Land 
Change Scenarios. Lecture Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography. Springer, Cham. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-60801-3_27
27. Bourlard, H.A., Morgan, N. (1994). Multilayer Perceptrons. In: Connectionist Speech 
Recognition. The Springer International Series in Engineering and Computer Science, 
vol. 247. Springer, Boston, MA. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-3210-1_4
28. Sarker, I.H., “Machine Learning: Algorithms, Real-World Applications and Research 
Directions,” SN Computer Science, vol. 2, p. 160, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-
021-00592-x
29. Awad, M., Khanna, R. (2015). Support Vector Machines for Classification. In: Efficient 
Learning Machines. Apress, Berkeley, CA. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4302-5990-9_3106 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
30. Fürnkranz, J. (2011). Decision Tree. In: Sammut, C., Webb, G.I. (eds) Encyclopedia of 
Machine Learning. Springer, Boston, MA. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-30164-
8_204
31. Taunk, K., De, S., Verma, S., Swetapadma, A., “A Brief Review of Nearest Neighbor 
Algorithm for Learning and Classification,” 2019 International Conference on Intelligent 
Computing and Control Systems (ICCS), Madurai, India, 2019, pp. 1255–1260. doi: 
10.1109/ICCS45141.2019.9065747
32. Yang, F.-J., “An Implementation of Naive Bayes Classifier,” 2018 International Con￾ference on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI), Las Vegas, 
NV, USA, 2018, pp. 301–306. doi: 10.1109/CSCI46756.2018.00065DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-6 107
IoT-Enabled Smart 
Irrigation with Machine 
Learning Models for 
Precision Farming
Sujatha Rajkumar1
, Raghav Biyani2
, 
Shubham Jagtap2
, Nandasai Penumuchu2
, 
1 Associate Professor, School of Electronics Engineering, 
Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, India
2 Student, School of Electronics Engineering, 
Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, India
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Kevin Ashton introduced the idea of the Internet of Things (IoT) in 1999, when he 
was working in an RFID community. IoT has outgrown itself after the rapid growth 
of mobile devices, data analytics, cloud computing, and other new technologies. The 
IoT is a new revolution in computing and communication in which everyday things 
are outfitted with sensors, microcontrollers, and transceivers to sense external param￾eters. Various scientists, engineers, and IT professionals are working to use cutting￾edge technology to improve life on Earth in the recent Fourth Industrial Revolution 
(IR). One of these four IR pillars is the IoT, also known as the fuel of the IR, because 
it effectively connects billions of things and sensors, which collectively produce real￾time data that helps humans to some extent in improvising their work. A continuous 
manual effort was required to monitor the field environmental variables and take 
appropriate action, which is quite impractical and impossible. IoT technology has 
already started improving the lives of individuals in the fields of home appliances, 
transportation, natural calamities, the health sector, etc. In the world, many countries, 
including India, are heavily dependent on agriculture, as it contributes a lot to the 
GDP of the nation. The workforce engaged in agricultural development is diminish￾ing as a result of professionals relocating to urban areas and large cities in search of 
employment opportunities. Also, the use of land for agricultural cultivation is rapidly 
being used up by the development of industrial economies in the region. In response, 
the government has decided to develop a national agricultural policy with three objec￾tives: increasing domestic production, adjusting the balance of supply and demand for 
agricultural products, and ensuring food security. As a result, most agricultural activi￾ties must be automated to meet the demand for food. The earlier-mentioned problems 
6
and Shriram S. S.2108 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
in the agriculture and food industries may be resolved by the IoT and similar tech￾nologies. IoT can assist in increasing farming’s effectiveness and quality, increasing 
agriculture’s competitiveness in the long run. Although the IoT revolution is already 
underway, it will take some time before its benefits become evident.
Precision farming is defined as the implementation of various edge devices and 
software technologies like the internet, cloud, and IoT devices together. IoT technolo￾gies can completely revamp the way agriculture is carried out to make it faster, better, 
and cheaper. By using IoT technologies and edge devices, data can be sensed, col￾lected, and transmitted to an application. The application will then store and process 
the data to identify the optimal ways to enhance agricultural output. The proposed 
IoT solution will help the farmers to remotely observe their crops and make decisions 
accordingly for the future. For example, the farmer can observe the need for irriga￾tion or fertilizer for the crops and take appropriate action based on the information. 
Agriculture meets people’s food needs while also providing raw materials for other 
industries. Traditional farming uses old techniques and methods and is mostly done 
without any assessment of rates in the market, weather reports, market demand, etc. 
However, comprehensive knowledge should be acquired by the farmers regarding 
the usage of smart farming techniques before the proposed system is implemented 
on a wide scale. IoT technology will allow farmers to view and manage their farms 
remotely, while large agricultural farms can be easily implemented and accurately 
monitored. Whenever the moisture in the soil is less than a predetermined value, the 
model will send a signal to start the water pump to maintain the moisture and keep 
the crops healthy. The data can be used by the farmers to determine how many trees 
should be planted to provide a certain amount of oxygen. Based on the information 
collected by the sensors, a farmer might monitor the weather and decide what steps to 
take for the crop. By raising the temperature, the farmer may take measures to shield 
the crop from rain and keep it from freezing. Climate change is the main difficulty 
conventional farming faces. The consequences of climate change include very heavy 
rain, the fiercest storms, heat waves, and less rain, which have led to a significant 
decrease in the production of crops. Crop production prediction is the most difficult 
problem in precision agriculture, and various models have been proposed and success￾fully tested so far. This problem requires the use of many datasets since agricultural 
productivity depends on a wide range of factors, including climate, weather, soil, the 
usage of fertilizers, and seed variety. It can be observed that predicting agricultural 
output is a challenging task that involves several intricate stages. Although greater 
yield prediction accuracy is still needed, today’s crop yield prediction methods can 
fairly anticipate the actual yield. Machine learning (ML) can identify patterns, cor￾relate data, and find information. The model is trained in such a way that the output is 
dependent on past results. There are two types of models in ML: the first is descrip￾tive, which tells about the results that occurred in the past, and the other is predictive, 
which predicts future outcomes. For quick decision-making, it is crucial for decision￾makers at the national and regional levels to predict crop yields. Farmers can decide 
what to plant and when by using a reliable agricultural production forecast model [1].
Sensors and actuators such as the Arduino, PIR sensor, DHT11, relay, motor driver, 
and moisture sensor were used in the proposed method to solve this problem. Since 
soil moisture is essential for effective photosynthesis, respiration, transpiration, and IoT-Enabled Smart Irrigation with Machine Learning Models 109
transfer of minerals and other nutrients throughout the plant, soil PH and moisture 
content are regularly checked. Since soil nutrients like nitrogen (N), potassium (K), 
and phosphorus (P) are lost due to soil erosion but are necessary for plants to thrive, 
the pH level of the soil is also very significant. Knowing about the increasing demand 
for food as the world’s population grows, IoT involvement in agriculture is critical to 
meeting future demands. Therefore, it becomes especially important to protect the 
fields from getting damaged. Another major issue discussed in this chapter is animal 
intrusion. Various wild animals, such as tigers, leopards, and elephants, come to the 
fields near the forest in search of food and then destroy the crops, which eventually 
leads to huge financial losses for farmers. This model was developed to protect the 
farmland from animals using PIR sensors connected to the ESP32, which also sends 
the notification to the farmer’s device. It aims to reduce the burden on the farmer’s 
end, who earlier had to check his or her field many times a day. This model will help 
in gathering field conditions throughout the day. It will also protect the cattle in and 
around the field from wild animals. Water is a limited resource for the whole world, 
but farmers generally switch on the water pumps and leave them in the ON position 
for a long time, which supplies extra water to the crops, which can damage them 
and lead to the wastage of water. Lots of water can be saved if there is a system that 
sends an alert to the farmer when there is a requirement for water in the fields, and 
the water pump can be turned on or off accordingly.
6.2 RELATED WORK
The work proposed by Prathibha et al. [2] involves the use of smart farming solu￾tions, which include employing various sensors and a single CC3200 chip to monitor 
temperature and humidity in agricultural fields. In this article, the camera is con￾nected to the CC3200 so that images can be taken and sent via MMS over Wi-Fi to 
farmers’ mobile phones. This proposed system’s main component, the CC3200, is 
made up of a microcontroller, a network processor, and a Wi-Fi module on one chip. 
It ensures a lightweight, quick, safe, and secure connection that runs on batteries. 
The overall crop output will be influenced by environmental factors and variations.
An IoT-based technique for keeping track of the atmosphere and soil conditions 
for productive crop growth is given by Abhiram et al. [3]. With the help of NodeMCU 
and a collection of sensors attached to it, the built system can monitor changes in 
temperature, humidity, and soil moisture levels. Also, a notification regarding the 
field’s state will be transmitted through Wi-Fi as an MMS to the farmer’s cell phone.
Because of the high cost of electricity, the authors, Gutierrez et al. [4], devised an 
irrigation system powered by photovoltaic solar panels. Here, a microcontroller gate￾way was equipped with an algorithm for efficient and optimal water use, along with 
temperature and soil moisture threshold values. This not only makes it energy efficient, 
but the algorithm also conserves water by only pumping the required amount of water.
The work proposed by Sushanth and Sujatha [5] includes the development of a 
system that uses sensors on an Arduino board to monitor various environmental fac￾tors such as temperature, humidity, and moisture in agricultural fields. The system is 
also capable of detecting the movement of animals that may pose a threat to crops. In 
case of any irregularities, the system is designed to notify the farmer through multiple 110 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
channels, such as SMS and a smartphone application. The notifications are sent using 
available wireless communication technologies such as Wi-Fi, 3G, or 4G. The system 
is equipped with a duplex communication link that uses a cellular internet interface. 
By means of an Android application, this link enables data analysis and program￾ming of irrigation schedules.
The idea of using a wireless smart sensor network based on Zigbee for environmental 
monitoring was initially introduced by Chavan and Karnade [6]. In their model, individ￾ual nodes have the ability to transmit data to a central server, which will then store, pro￾cess, and present the collected data. One limitation of their proposed system, however, 
is the absence of features for determining nutritional content and weather forecasting.
In the research work, a collaborative approach that involved using both wired and 
wireless communication technologies, the Remote Monitoring System (RMS), was 
proposed by the authors Patil and Kale [7]. The main goal is to collect up-to-the￾minute data on environmental conditions relevant to agricultural production so that 
agricultural facilities can easily access it. For example, alerts through Short Message 
Service (SMS) and guidance on weather patterns, crop management, etc. are two 
examples of how this information can be provided.
Here the authors Mat et al. [8] developed a smart farming system based on the IoT 
that is capable of automating irrigation and monitoring crop fields using various sen￾sors, including those for light, humidity, temperature, and soil moisture. By implement￾ing smart technology, farmers may remotely check the state of their fields. This makes 
IoT-based smart farming significantly more effective than the traditional method.
A wireless sensor network that uses ultra-wideband (UWB) technology was sug￾gested by the authors Xu et al. [9]. The grouped signal is duplicated on the stage 
environment to show how analyzing ultra-wideband signals may aid in arranging 
interference identification. The system uses various characteristics that are fed 
into multiple classifiers to detect intrusions. This approach results in an accuracy 
improvement of nearly 16.5% compared to standard feature extraction methods.
To enable irrigation in a proper manner, this research project incorporates a variety 
of features like soil moisture, temperature, and a humidity sensor (HS) by the authors 
C. Mageshkumar and Sugunamuki [10]. Various sensor nodes are to be deployed 
throughout the farm to automate irrigation at any time and from any location via the 
application. This application will give the farmer an overview of all the different data 
measures of the farm at all times, which will be updated in real time as the data is 
being collected by the edge devices.
This work by Marcu et al. [11] proposes a promising strategy for building a reli￾able IoT-based system that leverages Libelium for smart agriculture to monitor the 
key variables that impact crop growth and development. The monitoring system also 
strives to handle irrigation-related agricultural difficulties and evaluates how the 
measured factors affect agriculture, assisting farmers in growing healthy crops.
An IoT-based method for detecting animal intrusion was proposed by the authors 
Divyaet al. [12]. Once an animal is identified by the PIR (passive infrared sensor), 
the signal is sent to the camera via an Arduino Uno microcontroller. The camera 
then captures the animal’s image. The image is classified using sample images that 
are kept in the database. A bright light is used to distract a wild animal that has been 
identified as an elephant, and a loud noise is used to distract a leopard. The system IoT-Enabled Smart Irrigation with Machine Learning Models 111
triggers an SMS to notify forest officials and farmers of any potential threats caused 
by wild animals. This SMS is sent through a GSM module.
In this research, the work proposed by the authors Dahane et al. [13] is built 
on wireless sensor network technology, and its implementation includes three main 
stages: (i) data gathering using sensors placed in an agricultural field, (ii) data clean￾ing and storage, and (iii) prediction processing using some AI techniques.
In the research work, an image processing and ML-based method for animal intru￾sion detection was suggested by the authors Radhakrishnan and Ramanathan [14]. A 
watershed algorithm is used to segment an animal’s image to extract different objects 
from the scene and determine whether any possibly dangerous animals were discov￾ered. The goal of this method is to only draw the contour of the barrier when the 
indicated region encounters other markers.
The report by authors Kim et al. [15] mentioned placing a GPS tracking device 
on the animal that is responsible for leading the group of animals. The protective 
zone is surrounded by an imaginary border. When the leader crosses the boundary, 
an alert message is created, and these signals must be continuously monitored at a 
base station. Keep in mind that in this situation, the group leader is assuming control 
of a group of animals, and that these creatures always approach populated areas in 
packs. With most animals, this is not the case. Finding the animals’ “leader” can be 
difficult because the group may split up and the animals may not follow the animal 
that was designated as the leader.
According to the report by Pampapathi and Manjunath [16], a simple method 
involves installing PIR sensors in the location that must be watched. The sensor 
is positioned in a tower arrangement. This system only carries out the work in one 
direction. This system’s primary goal is to keep an eye on the region and track down 
any unauthorized entrances. The system’s output, which indicates whether an animal 
or a human entered the system, is another outcome. Because the entire system simply 
relies on a sensor tower that distinguishes between the two classes based on the IR 
rays emitted by the object, even an object with comparable kinds of characteristics 
cannot be classified.
A system was built by the author, AshifuddinMondal and Rehena [17], that uses 
sensors, and the irrigation system is automated based on the server’s decision accord￾ing to the sensed data. The sensed data is transmitted using a NodeMCU to a cloud 
on a web server. When moisture and temperature readings change due to environ￾mental conditions, the irrigation is automated. Using an automated system, a smart 
agricultural management system (SAMS) was proposed, which would help farmers 
use natural resources to increase crop production. The system would make use of 
various sensors to gather crop growth-related data, which is then fed into the Firebase.
A cost-effective and time-dependent irrigation scheduler that employs a micro￾controller with a variety of sensors for measuring moisture and temperature has been 
proposed by authors Bhosale and Dixit [18]. Depending on these parameters, this 
system determines the proper actuators (relay, solenoid valves, and motor). Through 
the GSM module, the user receives and stores the captured data in the form of an 
SMS. The use of PCBs in this paper is consistent with previous studies in agricul￾tural technology, highlighting its crucial role in developing cost-effective solutions 
for weather monitoring and irrigation control.112 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
The fundamental notion is to use the IoT and image processing techniques together 
to achieve the desired outcomes. A system proposed by the authors Lakshmi and 
Gayathri [19] comprises information on plant fertilizers, current weather conditions 
by city name, plant health information such as plant growth and illness, and farm 
status information such as sensor and motor status of the farm field. In this control 
system, the Raspberry Pi model is connected to three sensors: a soil moisture sen￾sor, a temperature sensor, and a HS. The Raspberry Pi is connected to the relay and 
the motor in the appropriate ways. By comparing the most recent image acquired 
with the photographs saved in the database, the health of the plant is evaluated. 
The app displays the outcome, and regarding plants, fertilizers were also on display. 
Information about fertilizers is kept in a database. Take a picture of the diseased 
plant and store it in a database to help in disease detection.
For checking soil moisture, a soil moisture sensor-based automated irrigation sys￾tem was proposed by the authors Hanswal et al. [20]. With the help of drip irrigation, it 
is a user-friendly, reliable, and automated water pumping system that enables efficient 
water use as needed. The method proposed by the other author combines a pH sensor 
interface with a PIC microcontroller to produce a sensing module that is 100% stable, 
a module that perfectly calibrates the pH sensor, and a module that can precisely read 
the pH of a nutrient-enriched solution. The system’s central component is an Atmel 
microcontroller, a widely accessible semiconductor with excellent performance and 
low power consumption. It has 14 digital ports, enough to connect up to 18 sensors, 
6 channels of 10-bit analog to digital converters, 1Kb of EEPROM, and 2Kb of RAM.
According to Bowlekar et al. [21], soil moisture is especially important for the 
growth of plants. Today, there are satellites that measure soil parameters and are linked 
to various agriculture stations where data from the region is sent. However, as can be 
seen, the satellite provides data for a large region that is not very precise, and all of the 
farms in the country are not properly connected to the agriculture stations, so most 
farmers do not benefit from the satellite’s soil parameter monitoring. The check gate, 
which is powered by solar energy, controls the water flow to the agricultural field and 
communicates wirelessly with the soil moisture sensors placed in the basin. To operate 
an irrigation event in real time, the gate automatically opens and closes according to a 
predetermined threshold value of the soil moisture sensor readings.
The report by Sharma [22] discusses a low-cost method for automatic animal 
detection on roads that uses digital picture techniques to prevent animal-vehicle col￾lisions. The distance of an animal from the road is also determined using technology 
that can warn the driver. The proposed strategy results in a detection accuracy of 
83% on average.
The authors, Maheswari and Rajan [23], proposed a method for detecting bird 
intrusion in an agricultural area using wireless sensors and buzzers. When the sen￾sors detect a bird, the system generates acoustic sounds to deter the birds. The birds 
are disturbed by this noise. Therefore, when these sounds are produced, birds will 
flee since they cannot adapt to the sound. Thus, it is possible to prevent the damage 
that birds inflict on agricultural fields. These generated acoustic sounds will only be 
made when birds are found, and they will continue for a time until the birds fly away.
This study is based on the Animal Detection System, where a camera will be 
placed further away from the field. When an animal comes into the field of view, IoT-Enabled Smart Irrigation with Machine Learning Models 113
the camera will detect it based on the output images of different animals along with 
their characteristics. If the device recognizes it as a dangerous wild animal, such as 
an elephant or boar, it will raise an alarm so that the farmers get informed about it. 
In this model, the operator has to upload the images and characteristics of all the 
possible animals that can come to that farm, as suggested by the authors Rakesh 
et al. [24]. The characteristics are important because animals such as dogs and cats 
are not harmful to the farmers and their farms, so an alarm does not need to be 
raised. It can also provide information about the animal’s location to help prevent 
human deaths. It helps reduce panic among the public due to fake alarms. It can also 
inform the nearest Forest Department about trespassing.
An idea was proposed by the authors, Prajna et al. [25], for the animal intrusion 
system, where the main components used are a camera and a PIR sensor. These com￾ponents will be placed at the boundary of the field. The camera is powered by a solar 
panel and battery. When an animal is detected, the sensor sends a signal to the camera 
through the microcontroller, and a picture of the area is then captured. The computer 
then verifies the received image with its database. The system contains three functions 
which are the index image function, the retrieve function, and the set image function. 
The set of all images contains databases of images of various animals. The first func￾tion, the image function, is used to create a search, and the retrieved image is a combi￾nation of the image that has been queried and this image is stored in the database. The 
result will vary from 0 to 1; if the value is 0, the image is not matched. If the value lies 
between 0.1 and 0.9, there is a high chance that the image matches the stored image. 
There will be two types of prevention techniques, creating an irritating sound or using 
a high-beam flashlight.
The work prepared by the authors Patil and Ansari [26] describes the animal intru￾sion system in which the area will be divided into many sub-areas where the chances 
of encountering wild animals are high. At each location, PIR sensors will be placed to 
detect the activity. If there is motion detected by the sensor, it will initiate the camera 
to record the live streaming, which will then be stored on the Raspberry Media. After 
the animal is detected, the buzzer will sound or the flashlight will be turned on.
In this work, the value of the soil and temperature sensor was calculated by the 
authors Archana and Priya [27], which is to be implanted in plant roots to manage 
when to supply water and when to stop the supply to save water. The drawback of 
their project is that they did not include any technique to send the status of the agri￾culture field to the user.
Crop yield prediction using intelligent agriculture and the IoT was monitored 
by Tseng et al. [28]. The currently existing prediction models use big data in smart 
agriculture to forecast crop production farms because weather damage to crops is 
a common occurrence. The created model made use of an IoT sensor device that 
sensed air pressure, atmospheric humidity, soil moisture content, atmospheric tem￾perature, and salinity of the soil while monitoring the entire agricultural land. The 
goal of big data analysis in smart farming was to examine environmental varia￾tions as well as analyze and comprehend farmers’ crop-growing practices. The 3D 
cluster evaluation of the relationship between environmental components and the 
subsequent examination of the recommendations from the farmers was a benefit of 
the proposed model.114 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Robust deep learning was used by Fuentes et al. [29] to identify tomato plant dis￾eases and insect infestations in crops. Due to pests and illnesses in crops that signifi￾cantly increased economic loss, the current model had trouble predicting crop yields. 
To predict plant pests, the model developed for this use case introduces a complex 
architecture known as a “meta-architecture.” The developed model considers three 
important indicator characteristics: the single-shot multi-box detector, also known 
as the SSD; a region-based convolutional neural network; and a region-based full 
convolutional neural network. Growing data improves precision while lowering the 
number of errors during training. The created model’s advantage was its success in 
identifying various pests and diseases by handling challenging local circumstances. 
The robust deep learning technique uses advanced pre-processing algorithms, which 
take more time and cost more money to compute.
The crop production and manure recommendations were predicted using ML 
approaches by Bondre and Mahagonkar [30]. The development of a machine learn￾ing system solved the significant problem of yield prediction in agriculture. For pre￾cisely predicting crop production in agriculture, the effectiveness of the constructed 
ML model was assessed. An advantage of the proposed model was that it made use 
of earlier data to predict crops by using various ML algorithms like the random 
forest model and others like SVM. The data also suggested the best fertilizer for 
each specific crop. However, the method of using a smart water irrigation system for 
farms to generate a greater harvest was not used.
The calculation of the mustard crop yield by Pandith et al. [31] from a review 
of the soil made use of ML techniques. The soil has a big role in calculating crop 
production in agriculture, but this was resolved by creating ML technology. To pre￾dict mustard crop output in advance from soil data collection, a number of ML 
techniques were used, including MLR or multinomial logistic regression, k-nearest 
neighbors, also known as KNN, an artificial neural network, or ANN, the random 
forest model, and the Naive Bayes model. The ML model created has the ability to 
estimate crop yield even when different fertilizers are used, which is also used to 
support soil analysis and allow farmers to make better informed decisions in cases 
of low crop prediction.
Table 6.1 highlights the significant conclusions and insights, providing a thorough 
overview of the key contributions in this field.
6.3 CHALLENGES IN THE EXISTING SYSTEM
Although the IoT is having a huge impact on agriculture, farmers still face many 
challenges every day, even today. Agricultural land has decreased due to the growing 
population. Integrating smart IoT technologies with traditional farming methods is 
what makes it viable. First, the cost is a big issue in this field. Farmers cannot spend 
much money on investing in smart technologies as they believe in traditional meth￾ods. So, to get them to use this smart technology, it has to be provided at a reasonable 
price that they can afford without losing much. Scalability is another problem. As the 
farm grows, a larger number of sensors need to be integrated, which is more chal￾lenging. This can affect the collection rate of real-time data as the number of sensors 
and data traffic increases.IoT-Enabled Smart Irrigation with Machine Learning Models 115
In smart agriculture, interoperability is a challenge as there are numerous IoT 
devices and platforms on the market, each with its own protocols and standards. 
This makes communication between devices from different vendors difficult and 
leads to a lack of integration and compatibility between the different systems. The 
type of communication chosen is also crucial, as it is important for the security of 
the data. It is necessary to ensure that the network is reliable and that there is no 
evidence of data theft, hacking, or cyber-attacks. The collected data is stored on a 
cloud platform to perform big data analytics. As scalability increases, more data 
needs to be stored, which in effect requires running a larger number of servers. 
This increases the overall cost of maintaining the system, making it inefficient in 
the long run. IoT devices may therefore have difficulty storing and processing mas￾sive amounts of data, which calls for additional infrastructure and effective data 
management techniques.
TABLE 6.1
Related Works on Smart Agriculture
Ref No Author Title Summary of Findings
[3] Abhiram et al. Smart farming 
system using IoT 
for efficient crop 
growth
This work focuses on an SMS-based notification model 
that uses IoT techniques for monitoring weather and 
soil parameters, such as temperature, humidity, and 
soil moisture, for successful crop development.
[10] Mageshkumar 
and Sugunamuki
IoT-based smart 
farming
This research work includes many aspects like soil 
moisture, temperature, and a humidity sensor to 
automate irrigation at any time as well as from any 
location via the application.
[28] Tseng et al. Applying big data 
for intelligent 
agriculture-based 
crop selection 
analysis
In this work, different environmental parameters were 
monitored like air pressure, humidity, and moisture 
which were then analyzed by performing data 
normalization and 3D clustering to find the 
relationship between different factors.
[11] Marcu et al. IoT-based system 
for smart 
agriculture
The factors that directly affect crops are monitored and 
analyzed in this article, using Libelium for smart 
agriculture as a potential solution for a far more 
reliable IoT-based model for farmers.
[33] Liakos et al. Machine learning 
in agriculture: A 
review
In this work, an automated system as well as a smart 
agricultural management system (SAMS) was 
proposed, to help farmers use natural resources to 
increase crop production. When moisture and 
temperature readings change due to environmental 
conditions, the irrigation is automated.
[32] Kalimuthu et al. Crop prediction 
using machine 
learning
By using machine learning, one of the most cutting￾edge technologies in crop prediction, this research 
provides the farmer with a method that directs them 
toward sowing reasonable crops. A supervised learning 
algorithm called Naive Bayes suggests how to do it.116 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Forecasting using ML algorithms is also a challenging task, as there can be many 
difficulties in accurately predicting crop yields, weather patterns, and other impor￾tant aspects of agriculture. Without access to data and predictive models, it is diffi￾cult for farmers to make informed decisions about crop selection, planting dates, and 
other important agricultural issues. Therefore, farmers need to use predictive models 
and make the right decisions for their fields.
Environmental conditions are crucial for the operation of the different sensors. 
The selected sensors must ensure that they work in all extreme weather conditions 
and harsh environments without any failures. Another important issue these days is 
the feasibility of the current system. The proposed system will ensure a less complex 
system and a more user-friendly model for the farmer. The user interface should be 
simple enough for the farmer to access all functions with a single click and detailed 
enough to provide him with all the important information about his farm.
6.4 FIRMWARE DEVELOPMENT FOR PRECISION FARMING
In the next section, IoT-enabled edge sensors and the embedded software are discussed.
6.4.1 IoT-Enabled Edge Sensors For Smart Farming
Components used in this work are as follows: ESP32, PIR sensor, soil moisture 
sensor, DC motor with relay, DHT-11, Arduino, water pump, and rainfall sensor. 
To do predictive analysis, data needs to be recorded in the field. The primary data 
required is soil moisture, rainfall status (time and date), temperature, and humidity 
of the surrounding environment. Using the mentioned components, the readings 
can be recorded at regular intervals. Sensors such as PIR, soil moisture, rainfall 
sensor, and DHT-11 are connected to the ESP32 microcontroller. The motor is 
powered by an Arduino and controlled using a relay. Whenever the moisture level 
in the field falls below a certain fixed threshold value, the motor pump turns on and 
pumps water into the field. Also, if any motion is detected in the field, a notification 
is sent to the farmer on the website about the intrusion. To get correct data, sensors 
were calibrated by observing multiple readings, and the ESP32 microcontroller 
was used to record this data, which was then uploaded to the website using Firebase 
as the cloud layer. Multiple readings of data from all sensors were collected and 
fed to the Firebase platform for greater accuracy in predicting. A website was cre￾ated using React.js, which was later deployed and can show the current status of 
different field parameters to the farmers and can also send an email or notification 
to the farmer.
6.4.2  Software Integration with Edge Sensors to Enable
Intelligent Cropping
React.js is a JavaScript front-end library that is used to build front-end UI compo￾nents. This makes it easier to build and reuse the code throughout the web applica￾tion. React.js also includes a testing library called the React Testing Library, as well 
as Jest. It is used to test the performance of the website and the general workings of IoT-Enabled Smart Irrigation with Machine Learning Models 117
the website. React Router DOM can be used to route the website’s different pages. 
Bootstrap is a CSS framework that makes it easier to style the basic components of 
the website and makes the website responsive, which means it looks good on both 
mobile and larger screens. It includes built-in components such as cards, buttons, and 
input fields that can be accessed directly from the website. Bootstrap classes, along 
with a few custom styles in CSS, make the UI more beautiful and easier to use. The 
services provided by EmailJS are used to send reports to the farmers through email. 
EmailJS helps in converting the collected variables of data into a proper format for 
the email to the farmer. If the parameters are passed, the email will be automatically 
sent. This type of auto-generated email can be useful for the farmers to look at the 
current data and make decisions.
6.4.2.1 Cloud-Based Remote Monitoring of the Agriculture Fields
The authors used both Firebase authentication and Firebase’s real-time database. 
Firebase authentication was used to allow farmers to log in to their accounts and 
access their farm data. The real-time database stores the values received from the 
sensors via ESP32 in real time, which are updated frequently. This data is then 
captured on the front end and displayed in the form of maps so that the farmer 
can visualize the data. In this model, data from different sensors and devices is 
displayed on a website, and a report can be sent by email. First, all sensors are 
connected to an ESP32 module. This microcontroller is able to transmit data to 
the cloud. In this project, the data is uploaded to Google Firebase. The acquired 
data is continuously recorded in a real-time database in Firebase. Then the data is 
transferred to the website. On the website interface, all real-time data is displayed 
on a tab so that the user can monitor the data. The user can also receive a report 
by email if they wish. It contains all the details about the activities that have taken 
place on the farmland. With the help of sensors and other electronic components, 
IoT technology enables the collection of real-time data in the agricultural field. 
Wireless technologies such as Wi-Fi have been adopted by the peripheral com￾ponent to communicate with the data center through an upgraded IoT gateway. 
The NPK sensor checks the availability of nutrients such as nitrogen, phosphorus, 
and potassium in the soil at any given time. This data can be used to provide the 
required nutrients at any time by simply tapping on it. The amount of soil moisture 
can be measured by a soil moisture sensor, allowing farmers to monitor and adjust 
irrigation on the farm as needed.
6.4.3 Smart Farming IoT System Architecture
Therefore, the authors have developed an IoT-based monitoring system for agricul￾ture, which is needed for continuous monitoring of crops in the field (see Figure 6.1), 
where this IoT server is easily accessible and can be monitored from any location. 
Based on IoT servers and apps, the system can be easily monitored from anywhere 
using mobile phones.
It is not easy to regularly monitor farms for all aspects, such as soil moisture, 
required and actual rainfall, and disturbance from wildlife. A farmer has to spend a 
large part of his meager profit on third-party sensors and updates to find a long-term 118 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
technical solution. Therefore, the chosen method is affordable, easy to use, and read￾ily available via a self-use app that constantly informs about everything and can also 
provide immediate remedies. For example, water is automatically pumped in when 
needed if the humidity or the amount of precipitation is below the preset value. The 
movement of animals in the field also triggers alerts via motion, which can be linked 
to a buzzer in further development.
6.5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The data from the sensors is sent to Firebase’s real-time database, where a template 
is created in the real-time database for all sensor data. Figure 6.2 shows the sensor 
data, such as the HS, the proximity sensor (PIR), the precipitation sensor (RF) (both 
analog and digital values), and the soil moisture sensor (SM).
The data collected in real time is captured on the front-end website using the 
HTTP communication method. Figure 6.3 shows the data, which is presented in a 
simple and understandable format so that the farmer can quickly and easily view the 
data of his farm.
If the farmer wants to receive this data in a clear and readable format for future 
reference, he can email the data to himself using the Generate Report page, as shown 
in Figure 6.4. This feature can help the farmer if they want to keep a record of farm 
data at different points in the crop growth cycle.
A report can be generated and sent to the user as an email with the date and time 
when it was generated. This is done using Email.js’ services.
In this email, as shown in Figure 6.5, all the details of the farmer’s land will be given, 
along with the date and time during which the data was collected. This will help the 
FIGURE 6.1 IoT-enabled smart farming architecture.IoT-Enabled Smart Irrigation with Machine Learning Models 119
farmer keep a record of the data collected at different moments, which will help them 
better understand the farming conditions.
This website is fully secure as each farmer must create their own profile with 
their email and password. Each farmer can only see their data after logging into their 
account. Provisions for changing the password if they forget are also given.
FIGURE 6.3 Real-time data displayed in the web interface.
FIGURE 6.2 Real-time farm data in Firebase.120 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
FIGURE 6.4 Generating and emailing the farm data.
FIGURE 6.5 Sample email of the real-time farm data.IoT-Enabled Smart Irrigation with Machine Learning Models 121
6.6 MACHINE LEARNING MODELS FOR PREDICTIVE FARMING
ML can make farming more efficient and easier, which is a great help to farmers. 
Another major problem in traditional farming is pest and disease control. Most 
farmers spray pesticides and other chemicals evenly on their fields to minimize the 
chances of these pests and viruses affecting their crops and yields. This method is 
not very efficient as it requires a large amount of chemicals, which is not ideal as 
it incurs high financial costs and also has a negative impact on the environment. 
Excessive use of pesticides can also lead to contamination of groundwater, which 
can eventually affect animals and people who consume this water. By making accu￾rate decisions about where and how much chemicals should be sprayed to prevent 
pests and infections, models from ML can reduce these unwanted side effects.
The most important area where ML is used in precision agriculture is predict￾ing yields before harvest. By analyzing various factors such as weather patterns, 
soil moisture, and plant health, ML algorithms can make accurate predictions about 
crop yield. This information can help farmers make decisions about the best time to 
plant and harvest crops, as well as the best fertilizers and pesticides to use and how 
to use them. Another important application of ML in agriculture is soil analysis. By 
analyzing soil samples, ML’s algorithms can determine soil properties such as nutri￾ent content (nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium), pH, and texture. This informa￾tion can be used for precise planning of fertilization to optimize plant growth and 
increase yields.
ML also plays an important role in monitoring plant health and detecting various 
attacks. By analyzing images of crops, ML algorithms can detect negative signs such 
as diseases, pests, and nutrient deficiencies. This information can be used to take 
proactive measures to prevent crop losses, such as spraying pesticides or adjusting 
the composition of fertilizer before applying it to the field. In addition to improv￾ing crop yields and monitoring plant health, ML can also help optimize irrigation 
measures by analyzing data from weather stations. Algorithms from ML can predict 
future weather patterns and determine the optimal amount of water for crops. This 
can significantly improve water use efficiency and reduce unnecessary water waste.
Although ML is very useful in agriculture, one of the biggest challenges of smart 
farming is managing the data. Farmers need to collect huge amounts of data from 
various sources, such as weather stations, soil sensors, and aerial imagery, to make 
optimal decisions about their crops and farmland. To make farmers’ work easier, 
models from ML can be used to automatically process and analyze this data, reduc￾ing farmers’ workload.
One of the biggest challenges is ensuring the accuracy of the algorithms. To be 
effective, ML algorithms need to be trained on high-quality data, which is difficult 
to obtain in the agricultural sector. Farmers also need a certain level of technical 
expertise to use the algorithms effectively, which can be a barrier to large-scale 
deployment of ML. Data privacy and security are also additional challenges for any 
system. As more data is collected and analyzed in smart agriculture, there is grow￾ing concern about potential data breaches, hacking, and unauthorized use of sensi￾tive information. To mitigate these risks, security measures must be put in place to 
prevent information leakage.122 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
To create an ML model for precision farming, it is vital to collect a lot of data and 
create a model based on this existing data. The data fed into an ML model consists 
of examples, and each example has a set of characteristics by which it is classified by 
the ML model. Each of these features is considered a variable, and an ML model will 
consider as many of these variables as possible to classify the data. In the case of smart 
farming, some of the variables would be temperature, season, rainfall, sunlight, soil 
nutrients, and many others. The third stage of building the ML model is generaliza￾tion. The proposed ML model can be used to predict data such as soil parameters, 
expected harvest times, and expected yields. This ML model can be improved through 
deep learning. This can be done by representing the data in a hierarchical flow.
ML models can be broadly split into two main categories which are unsupervised 
and supervised learning. In supervised learning techniques, test data is fed into the 
model along with the expected results. After receiving enough data, the ML model 
generates a generalization of the datasets that can classify all subsequent incoming 
data based on this generalization. In unsupervised learning, the training data is not 
mapped to a specific output before it is fed into the model. The ML model observes 
the data and discovers patterns in the data that can be used to predict the classifica￾tion of future data.
Regression is a supervised ML technique that analyzes data based on a relation￾ship model. This model establishes relationships based on how a dependent variable 
behaves in response to changes in an independent variable. There may be multiple 
independent variables affecting the dependent variable. A scatter plot can be created 
using this data, and a regression line can be found with respect to the plot.
Y = + b b 0 1∗ + X b 1 2∗ + X b 2 3∗ + X b 3 . … … n X∗ +n err
where
Y is the output or the dependent variable like harvest yield;
b0 is the intercept of the regression line;
b1, b2, b3, …., bn are the regression coefficients of the input or independent 
variables like soil moisture, NPK levels in the soil, and rainfall;
err is the error coefficient.
Clustering is one of the unsupervised ML techniques that can be used to make 
better agricultural decisions. In this method, different clusters are formed based on 
certain parameters, starting with a data point. After collecting enough data, the algo￾rithm formed many clusters based on the similarities in the data entries. Clustering 
can be used to analyze soil moisture and nutrient content in different regions of a 
farm. This information can be used to know exactly where to spray pesticides.
A decision tree is another ML algorithm that is one of the most commonly used 
predictive modeling techniques. In this technique, the training data is divided into 
nodes and leaves. The leaves represent the output, and the nodes represent the posi￾tion of the data split between the two data entries. If there are several data entries, the 
model forms a tree, which can then be used for data classification. Classification is 
based on internal nodes and branches. The branches serve as the base rule, which is the IoT-Enabled Smart Irrigation with Machine Learning Models 123
first point of classification for the incoming data. Then each node in that branch clas￾sifies the data based on a specific feature. Nodes can be of two types: selection nodes 
and leaf nodes. The selection nodes make decisions based on the characteristics of the 
incoming data and classify it accordingly, and the leaf nodes are the result of where 
the data lies.
Decision trees are a popular ML technique that can be used in smart agriculture 
for various applications. A decision tree is a tree-like structure that uses a set of deci￾sion rules (branches) to predict an outcome based on input variables. In agriculture, 
decision trees can be used for crop yield prediction, irrigation management, and pest 
control, among other applications. For example, a decision tree model can be trained 
using data on crop yields, weather conditions, soil properties, and other factors to pre￾dict potential yield fairly accurately. The model can be used to make better decisions 
about planting, irrigation, and fertilization to achieve the best possible yield. Decision 
trees can also be used to optimize pest management strategies by predicting the like￾lihood of pest infestation based on weather conditions, crop stage, and other regional 
factors based on previously collected data. The model can help farmers decide when 
and how much pesticide to spray, reducing the amount of chemicals sprayed on crops, 
which in turn reduces costs for the farmer. Decision trees can also be used to pre￾dict crop prices based on past data and current market conditions, which helps farm￾ers make decisions about when and where to sell their crops to maximize revenue. 
Overall, decision trees can be a valuable tool for the development of smart agricul￾ture, helping to increase yields, reduce costs, and promote sustainability.
Some of the popular ML activation functions used in smart agriculture are as 
follows:
1. Sigmoid: Sigmoid activation function is used in binary classification in 
plants such as disease detection. This activation function returns a 0 or a 
1 depending upon the result.
f ( ) x e 1/(1 )
x = + −
2. Tanh hyperbolic sigmoid: Tanh activation function is used in cases where 
there can be a negative outcome or a positive outcome like harvest yield of 
net profit.
f ( ) x e( ) e e /( e ) x x x x = − + − −
3. Softmax: Softmax activation function is used in cases where there are mul￾tiple different classes for the classification or identification of a certain char￾acteristic like plant diseases or types of weeds growing among the crops.
f ( ) x e / ( sum e ) x x =
In summary, ML is a critical technology for the future of smart agriculture. By 
analyzing big data, ML algorithms can help farmers make informed decisions about 
their crops and land, improve yields, and optimize water use. However, to fully 124 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
realize the potential of ML in smart agriculture, challenges related to data accuracy 
and security must be overcome. With continued research and development, ML has 
the potential to revolutionize the agricultural sector and improve the lives of farmers 
around the world.
6.7 CONCLUSION
This chapter provides a detailed account of how agriculture can be made smart by col￾lecting and analyzing real-time data and how ML can be used to better understand the 
data and make future decisions for better yields based on predictive analysis. Smart 
farming using the IoT can solve the problem of frequent field visits, and the farmer can 
get information about the condition of the field through a website or an application on his 
phone. The use of IoT in smart farming can help farmers minimize waste and increase 
production in various areas, such as optimizing fertilizer usage and making efficient 
use of resources such as water and energy. IoT in agriculture is promising and will be 
of great value for generations to come. The authors have developed a budget-friendly 
model for farmers that can be installed in fields and monitored from any location.
REFERENCES
1. Van Klompenburg, T., Kassahun, A., & Catal, C. (2020). Crop yield prediction using 
machine learning: A systematic literature review. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 
177, 105709.
2. Prathibha, S. R., Hongal, A., & Jyothi, M. P. (2017, March). IoT based monitoring 
system in smart agriculture. In 2017 International Conference on Recent Advances in 
Electronics and Communication Technology (ICRAECT) (pp. 81–84). IEEE.
3. Abhiram, M. S. D., Kuppili, J., & Manga, N. A. (2020). Smart farming system using 
IoT for efficient crop growth. In 2020 IEEE International Students’ Conference on 
Electrical, Electronics and Computer Science (SCEECS) (pp. 1–4). IEEE.
4. Gutiérrez, J., Villa-Medina, J. F., Nieto-Garibay, A., & Porta-Gándara, M. (2013). 
Automated irrigation system using a wireless sensor network and GPRS module. IEEE 
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, 63(1), 166–176.
5. Sushanth, G., & Sujatha, S. (2018, March). IoT-based smart agriculture system. In 
2018 International Conference on Wireless Communications, Signal Processing and 
Networking (WiSPNET) (pp. 1–4). IEEE.
6. Chavan, C. H., & Karande, P. V. (2014). Wireless monitoring of soil moisture, temperature 
& humidity using Zigbee in agriculture. International Journal of Engineering Trends and 
Technology (IJETT), 11(10), 493–497.
7. Patil, K. A., & Kale, N. R. (2016, December). A model for smart agriculture using IoT. 
In 2016 International Conference on Global Trends in Signal Processing, Information 
Computing and Communication (ICGTSPICC) (pp. 543–545). IEEE.
8. Mat, I., Kassim, M. R. M., Harun, A. N., & Yusoff, I. M. (2018, November). Smart agri￾culture using internet of things. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Open Systems (ICOS)
(pp. 54–59). IEEE.
9. Xue, W., Jiang, T., & Shi, J. (2017, September). Animal intrusion detection based on con￾volutional neural network. In 2017 17th International Symposium on Communications 
and Information Technologies (ISCIT) (pp. 1–5). IEEE.
10. Mageshkumar, C., & Sugunamuki, K. R. (2020, January). IOT based smart farming. 
In 2020 International Conference on Computer Communication and Informatics (ICCCI)
(pp. 1–6). IEEE.IoT-Enabled Smart Irrigation with Machine Learning Models 125
11. Marcu, I. M., Suciu, G., Balaceanu, C. M., & Banaru, A. (2019, June). IoT based system 
for smart agriculture. In 2019 11th International Conference on Electronics, Computers 
and Artificial Intelligence (ECAI) (pp. 1–4). IEEE.
12. Divya, S., Kiran, U., & Praveen, M. (2018). IoT-based wild animal intrusion detection 
system. International Journal on Recent and Innovation Trends in Computing and 
Communication, 6(7), 06–08.
13. Dahane, A., Benameur, R., Kechar, B., & Benyamina, A. (2020, October). An IoT based 
smart farming system using machine learning. In 2020 International Symposium on 
Networks, Computers and Communications (ISNCC) (pp. 1–6). IEEE.
14. Radhakrishnan, S., & Ramanathan, R. (2018). A support vector machine with Gabor 
features for animal intrusion detection in agriculture fields. Procedia Computer Science, 
143, 493–501.
15. Kim, S. H., Kim, D. H., & Park, H. D. (2010, April). Animal situation tracking service 
using RFID, GPS, and sensors. In 2010 Second International Conference on Computer 
and Network Technology (pp. 153–156). IEEE.
16. Pampapathi, B., & Manjunath, P. (2016). Intrusion detection using passive infrared 
sensor (PIR). Asian Journal of Engineering and Technology Innovation, 4, 134–139.
17. AshifuddinMondal, M., & Rehena, Z. (2018, January). IoT based intelligent agriculture 
field monitoring system. In 2018 8th International Conference on Cloud Computing, 
Data Science & Engineering (Confluence) (pp. 625–629). IEEE.
18. Bhosale, P. A., & Dixit, V. V. (2012). Water saving-irrigation automatic agricultural 
controller. International Journal of Scientific and Technology Research, 1(11), 118–123.
19. Lakshmi, K., & Gayathri, S. (2017). Implementation of IoT with image processing in 
plant growth monitoring system. Journal of Scientific and Innovative Research, 6(2), 
80–83.
20. Hanswal, P., Dale, O., Gupta, D., & Yadav, R. N. (2013, April). Designing a central 
control unit and soil moisture sensor based irrigation water pump system. In 2013 Texas 
Instruments India Educators’ Conference (pp. 306–310). IEEE.
21. Bowlekar, A. P., Patil, S. T., Kadam, U. S., Mane, M. S., Nandgude, S. B., & Palte, N. K. 
(2019). Performance evaluation of real time automatic irrigation system on the yield of 
cabbage (Brassica oleracea L.). International Journal of Pure & Applied Bioscience, 7, 
160–165.
22. Sharma, S. U., & Shah, D. J. (2016). A practical animal detection and collision avoidance 
system using computer vision technique. IEEE Access, 5, 347–358.
23. Maheswari, P. U., & Rajan, A. R. (2016). Animal intrusion detection system using wireless 
sensor networks. International Journal of Advanced Research in Biology Engineering 
Science and Technology (IJARBEST), 2, 10.
24. Rakesh, A., Vinod, A., Madhu, M., Daniel, R., Jose, J., & Joseph, R. (2022). Animal 
trespassing detection system. International Journal of Engineering Research and 
Technology (IJERT), 2278-0181. 
25. Prajna, P., Soujanya, B., & Divya, S. (2018). IoT-based wild animal intrusion detection system. 
International Journal of Engineering Research and Technology (IJERT), 2278-0181.
26. Patil, H., & Ansari, N. (2021, May). Automated wild-animal intrusion detection and repel￾lent system using artificial intelligence of things. In Proceedings of the 4th International 
Conference on Advances in Science & Technology (ICAST2021).
27. Archana, P., & Priya, R. (2016). Design and implementation of automatic plant watering 
system. International Journal of Advanced Engineering and Global Technology, 4(1), 
1567–1570.
28. Tseng, F. H., Cho, H. H., & Wu, H. T. (2019). Applying big data for intelligent agriculture￾based crop selection analysis. IEEE Access, 7, 116965–116974.
29. Fuentes, A., Yoon, S., Kim, S. C., & Park, D. S. (2017). A robust deep-learning-based 
detector for real-time tomato plant diseases and pests recognition. Sensors, 17(9), 2022.126 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
30. Bondre, D. A., & Mahagaonkar, S. (2019). Prediction of crop yield and fertilizer rec￾ommendation using machine learning algorithms. International Journal of Engineering 
Applied Sciences and Technology, 4(5), 371–376.
31. Pandith, V., Kour, H., Singh, S., Manhas, J., & Sharma, V. (2020). Performance evalua￾tion of machine learning techniques for mustard crop yield prediction from soil analysis. 
Journal of Scientific Research, 64(2), 394–398.
32. Kalimuthu, M., Vaishnavi, P., & Kishore, M. (2020, August). Crop prediction using 
machine learning. In 2020 Third International Conference on Smart Systems and 
Inventive Technology (ICSSIT) (pp. 926–932). IEEE.
33. Liakos, K. G., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., & Bochtis, D. (2018). Machine 
learning in agriculture: A review. Sensors, 18(8), 2674.DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-7 127
Leaf-CAP
A Capsule Network-Based 
Tea Leaf Disease Recognition 
and Detection
Alkha Mohan and Jayakrishnan A.
Tea is one of the principal cash crops for exporting and developing nations such as 
India, Sri Lanka, and Bangladesh. Tea production has its socio-economic impact 
as it is a primary source of income for many smallholder farmers and plantation 
workers. Numerous contagious tea diseases have an adverse impact on the quantity 
and quality of tea produced overall. Early detection and prevention of such com￾municable diseases are pivotal for ensuring increased yield and profit. This paper 
proposes a novel tea leaf classification model Leaf-CAP. Leaf-CAP introduces a cap￾sule backbone neural structure combined with a pre-trained VGG-19 feature extrac￾tor, LP pooling, statistical pooling, and dynamic routing. The modifications in the 
dynamic routing module made the proposed model outperform the classical capsule 
networks. The model is evaluated using manually gathered data from the Nilgiris 
region of Tamil Nadu and publicly available “tea sickness dataset” from Mendeley 
data. The Leaf-CAP model is compared against various state-of-the-art techniques 
such as the Fuzzy Rough Set model, support vector machine (SVM), convolutional 
neural network (CNN), VGG-19, Efficient Net, and Conditional Deep Convolutional 
Generative Adversarial Networks (C-DCGAN). The results prove that the model 
demonstrates superior classification and generalisation ability compared to state-of￾the-art classification methods.
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Worldwide, tea is a very significant beverage. Large-scale tea cultivation is practised 
in Assam and Darjeeling in the east, as well as districts of Nilgiris and Kerala in the 
south of India. One of the significant producers of tea worldwide is India. Ensuring 
the quality and amount of tea produced is crucial due to the considerable socio￾economic impact of tea cultivation. Plant researchers and other public-private stake￾holders are eager to increase tea cultivation. Tea leaves are harvested year-round 
and will grow through different seasons and climatic conditions. As a result, tea 
cultivation will be vulnerable to several illnesses that damage the leaves, stems, and 
roots. The primary leaf diseases affecting tea leaves and harming the entire plant are 
the focus of this study. Algal leaf spot, anthracnose, bird’s eye spot, brown blight, 
7128 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
grey blight, red leaf spot, white spot, blister blight, and scab are the main diseases 
that damage tea plants. Identification of these diseases at an early stage can reduce 
the overall plant damage and succeeding economic impacts. The advancements in 
science and technology enable researchers to introduce vision-based disease leaf 
classification techniques.
One of the ways to image classification is to consider it as an image retrieval prob￾lem. The image retrieval system receives the query as a diseased leaf and evaluates it 
with the query ranking system to map it with the most appropriate category. There are 
different methods to perform image retrieval pixel-based techniques, metadata-based 
techniques, morphology-based techniques, and hashing-based techniques. Among 
these, the pixel-based technique was introduced first. Pixel-level matching won’t 
always guarantee the desired classification mapping, and it is error-prone. Metadata￾based image retrieval technique was a transition, but the difficulties in manually tag￾ging the image made this process complex. Hashing techniques are increasingly used 
to provide a distinctive signature for an image. Learning hash codes were a critical 
task in hash-based image retrieval tasks. Wu et al. [1] employed transfer learning 
to learn hashing functions for image retrieval; the network uses pre-trained weights 
from the AlexNet model. Autoencoder-based hashing techniques for image classifica￾tion have also become popular [2]. Shrivastava et al. demonstrate an effective method 
for locating and classifying soybean diseases using texture feature detection and 
background subtraction [3]. Li et al. [4] proposed a similar model based on transfer 
learning. Using fewer layers than the actual base transfer model creates an effect of 
hashing with some layers that only recognise a limited number of yet valuable fea￾tures. However, these models are unable to generalise; hence, there is a growing need 
for more precise models.
Classification using classical machine learning and neural networks has become 
popular, and plant researchers have conducted many studies [5–9]. One well-liked 
supervised learning method is support vector machine (SVM). The classification prob￾lem is solved by SVM by locating a marginal hyperplane that divides the classes. To 
classify tea leaf diseases, the SVM and its variants are used [6]. The detection of dis￾eases is accomplished using a method that combines SVM with k-nearest neighbour 
(KNN) and Kernel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA) [10, 11]. Rumpf et al. com￾bined SVM with Spectral Vegetation Indexes for detecting sugar beet disease [12]. 
Another supervised machine learning method that seeks out the best fit line is sup￾port vector regression (SVR). The possibility of SVR for categorising leaf disease in 
apple plants was investigated by [13]. The requirement of learning samples becomes a 
bottleneck here. With sufficient learning examples, the models become extremely fit. 
The major drawback of these models was the manual feature extraction and curse of 
dimensionality. The amount of learning samples was increased by applying various 
data augmentation techniques. However, the variability introduced by these augmenta￾tion techniques was minimal, and hence the model was suspected of overfitting [6, 8]. 
One way to cope with overfitting and underfitting is by learning more observations. 
Recent advances in deep learning make handling enormous amounts of data easier.
A convolutional neural network (CNN) is a deep learning algorithm that can 
learn a set of input images by extracting features automatically. A CNN assigns Leaf-CAP 129
importance to various aspects or objects in the data and can differentiate one from 
the other. Many researchers used CNN for leaf image disease detection. CaffeNet, a 
variant of AlexNet, is used for classifying 13 different plant diseases [14]. Transfer 
learning based on AlexNet and GoogLeNet is applied for classifying 26 leaf dis￾eases among 14 crop species [3, 15, 16]. A deconvolutional network (DN) approach 
is used to gain an understanding of selected features that are automatically learned 
by a CNN [17]. The pre-trained technique based on AlexNet and VGG16 is used to 
classify six classes of tomato leaf disease (A. K. Rangarajan 2018). Transfer learning 
models based on GoogLeNet and Cifar10 are suggested [18]. The model recognises 
nine different kinds of maize leaf diseases. The model is fine-tuned by adjust￾ing parameters, pooling combinations and dropout. In 2018, Liu et al. exclusively 
employed AlexNet as a transfer learning base for apple leaf disease detection. This 
method learned 13,689 diseased apple leaves data for classifying them into 4 disease 
categories [19]. In a study involving 25 different plant families and 87,848 data, the 
CNN model was proposed to classify 58 disease classes [20]. An analysis of the 
critical factors that affect the design and efficiency of deep neural networks used 
for plant pathology is presented in [21]. This study analysed the learning outcome 
of 50,000 images on four different CNN. The deep CNN technique classified 39 
different plant leaf disease classes [22]. This technique used six different data aug￾mentation techniques to make the model overfit-free. In 2019, Ramcharan et al. put 
forward a CNN object detection model to identify foliar symptoms of diseases in 
cassava in the agricultural field in Tanzania [23]. A model for identifying tea leaf 
diseases based on CNN that requires the least amount of computational complexity 
and resources while producing accurate results is proposed in [24]. Automatic detec￾tion of grape leaf diseases based on image analysis and back-propagation neural 
network (BPNN) is introduced [25]. The technique worked on image samples of five 
disease categories denoised by wiener filtering and segmented by Otsu. The auto￾matic detection and identification of tea leaf disease are proposed using an enhanced 
version of RetinaNet called AX-RetinaNet [26]. AX-RetinaNet uses multiscale fea￾ture fusion and attention mechanisms for classification.
Autoencoder networks vastly improved the classification performance and enabled 
feature reduction. The autoencoder transforms the data into code using only the 
essential features, then decodes the code to produce an output that is a more stan￾dardised version of the original data. The advantage of the autoencoder network was 
its non-linear encoder-decoder architecture compared to principal component analy￾sis (PCA). Several research works have been conducted in classification using autoen￾coders [27, 28]. The introduction of skip connections further improved the accuracy of 
autoencoder-based image classification. Although CNN is the most used method for 
classifying diseased leaves, its computational complexity and generalisability raise 
some concerns. There is no guarantee that the model always performs with minimal 
overfit for all test cases.
The proposed Leaf-CAP, a capsule network-based disease leaf classification, 
considers these concerns and introduces a more effective and efficient disease 
classification. The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section 7.2 details the 
materials and methods used for the proposed architecture. The proposed Leaf-CAP 130 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
architecture, common tea leaf diseases, and dataset details are all covered in this 
section. The result and discussion part (Section 7.3) compares the suggested model 
against state-of-the-art techniques. Finally, Section 7.4 presents the conclusions of 
the study and future directions.
7.2 MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 7.1 illustrates the standard framework for the proposed classification of tea 
leaf diseases. Three main blocks make up the method. Dataset identification and 
loading come first, followed by pre-processing, which involves scaling, augmenta￾tion, and normalising the data. The final module is the capsule network architecture 
for disease prediction.
7.2.1 Tea Leaf Disease under Study
Nine of the most widespread leaf diseases that afflict tea plants are attempted to be 
classified in the proposed research. The investigated disease includes algal leaf spot, 
anthracnose, bird’s eye spot, brown blight, grey blight, red leaf spot, white spot, 
blister blight, and scab. This section summarises the disease’s causes, symptoms, 
and treatments.
7.2.1.1 Algal Leaf Spot
The alga Cephaleuros virescens causes the algal leaf spot. The diseased leaf has an 
orange-brown rusty appearance and typically manifests itself in a circular pattern on 
the upper surface of the tea leaf. The spots are around 2 cm in diameter and don’t have 
any clear geometric patterns. An algal leaf spot is also known as a green scarf because 
it can appear crusty, fuzzy, or flaky. The illness typically occurs in the summer and 
spreads during the rainy season. The tea plant is especially susceptible to this algal 
disease because of its dense leaf structure. The algal leaf spots reduce the photosyn￾thetic surface area of plants by partially or entirely affecting the leave. Tea plants are 
more vulnerable to algal leaf spot infection due to poor soil drainage, unbalanced 
nutrition, and exposure to relatively high temperatures and humidity. The treatments 
FIGURE 7.1 Overall architecture of the proposed tea leaf disease identification.Leaf-CAP 131
for preventing this algal illness include early discovery, the use of pesticides, adher￾ence to appropriate cultivation techniques, and adequate fertilisation.
7.2.1.2 Anthracnose
Anthracnose is a prevalent foliar disease that first appeared in various tea-growing 
regions of China. The family of Colletotrichum fungus is responsible for this infection, 
which leads to a loss in the vigour of tea trees and may significantly lower the quality 
and yield of tea produced throughout the growing season. Once affected, the overall 
yield damage could be slashed to anywhere in the range of 30–75%. At first, diseased 
leaves typically have water-soaked sores, but as the disease progresses, the size of the 
lesions increases. If the condition is not swiftly diagnosed, it will spread uncontrol￾lably throughout the tea estate. Fungi that cause anthracnose reside in plant waste. 
Pruning dead leaves and twigs at the appropriate time is one of the best ways to stop 
its spread. Sufficient availability of sunlight and air also helps to prevent anthracnose.
7.2.1.3 Bird’s Eye Spot
Bird’s eye spot disease in tea plants is caused by the fungus Cercospora theae’s spread. 
This infection affects younger leaves initially, later confined to mature leaves and 
bare stalks, which in turn affects the yield potential. More sporadic cases of this dis￾ease were discovered in the plantations of India’s southern states. The cell-degrading 
enzymes released by the phytopathogen cause necrotic spots of brown to black colour 
with a red border to appear on the damaged leaves. The illness spread is made worse 
by climate variations in the amount of sunlight, humidity, and rainfall. The disease 
can be controlled by providing the right amount of shade, drainage, soil aeration, and 
fertilisation, particularly with potassium for tea plants.
7.2.1.4 Brown Blight and Grey Blight
Brown and grey blight are caused by the pathogen Colletotrichum and Pestalotiopsis. 
Improper caring of plants is the root cause of this disease. These pathogens usually 
make entry through the wounds and cuts in the plant leaf and stem. These infections 
are also favoured by poor air circulation, high temperature, high humidity or pro￾longed periods of leaf wetness. Both brown and grey blight affect leaves at any stage 
of growth. Young, damaged leaves often have tiny, oval, light yellow-green dots with 
a short yellow border. Concentric rings with irregular, small black dots become visible 
as the disease progresses; the spots enlarge and turn dark or grey, and eventually, the 
dried tissue collapses, causing defoliation. The prevention method for this kind of dis￾ease is to space tea bushes apart sufficiently to allow for adequate sunlight and airflow.
7.2.1.5 Red Leaf Spot
The red leaf spot is caused by the pathogen Macrophoma theicola Petch. It damages 
foliage by producing large, cigar-shaped spores. Small red or reddish-brown leaf 
patches with a tan centre are the disease’s visible signs. Several spots develop at 
random locations on the leaf, and all over it, they grow together and spread, leading 
to complete damage and yield loss. The early detection and application of correct 
pesticides is the one solution, whereas natural prevention can be done by providing 
sufficient sunlight and air circulation.132 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
7.2.1.6 White Spot
Phyllosticta theifolia Hara fungi cause white spots in tea leaves. Several circular 
white-coloured spots are observed in random locations on the leaf surface, hence the 
name white spot. Older spots may get dark edges and lose their centres. Such lesions 
resemble bullet holes. Additionally, this illness impacts photosynthetic activity, yield, 
and leaf quality.
7.2.1.7 Blister Blight
The pathogen Exobasidium vexans is responsible for the most severe disease to harm 
tea leaves, blister blight. This pathogen will seriously reduce agricultural yields and 
degrade leaf quality. The disease spreads the most during the rainy seasons when 
there is little sunlight and constant leaf moisture. The pathogen directly penetrates 
the leaf surface, mainly through tender leaves. The sickness will first appear as tiny, 
pinhole-sized spots, which will grow into large, transparent brownish spots as the 
illness progresses. The lower surface of leaves exhibits formations like blisters; 
when the fungal spores continue to be secreted, the blisters eventually turn brown 
and ultimately destroy the leaf.
7.2.1.8 Scab
Leaf scab is caused by the pathogen Elsinoe theae. Scab is a serious disease that 
adversely affects tea production and quality. Tiny circular or elliptical spots of yellow 
or reddish-brown colour develop in the leaves during the early stage. The affected 
areas become scabby and merge. This disease affects tender leaves mostly. The leaves 
eventually shrivel into a cup-like shape.
7.2.2 Dataset Description
The Leaf-CAP model is evaluated using manually gathered data from the Nilgiris 
region of Tamil Nadu and publicly available “tea sickness dataset” from Mendeley 
data [29]. The benchmark “tea sickness dataset” is diverse and has eight categories: 
algal leaf spot, anthracnose, bird’s eye spot, brown blight, grey blight, red leaf spot, 
white spot, and healthy. The proposed method takes 100 red, green, and blue (RGB) 
images from each class as input to the pre-processing stage. The input images for the 
training are resized to 300 × 300 sizes and passed to a data augmentation module 
that creates new learning samples from existing samples. This will improve the gen￾eralisation capability of the learning system. Six different augmentations, including 
four random rotations, one random Gaussian blur, and one random crop, are applied 
to each leaf sample. The augmented dataset is further standardised with a mean and 
standard deviation of 0.485 and 0.229 for each channel. Data normalisation enables 
the proposed Leaf-CAP module to learn faster with lesser computational overhead. 
The total sample size is increased to 4,800 samples by the six levels of augmentation 
(600 images per class).
The manually collected dataset from Nilgiris consists of samples for three 
major diseases: blister blight, scab, and spot. Twenty images for each foliage dis￾ease class are gathered, and the augmentation technique produces 480 images. The Leaf-CAP 133
normalisation procedure used on this dataset is similar to that used on the tea illness 
dataset. The disease samples from both datasets are depicted in Figure 7.2. The train￾test-validation split used by the suggested Leaf-CAP model is 80:10:10. Table 7.1
tabulates the disease labels and train-test-validation number for both datasets after 
augmentation.
FIGURE 7.2 Sample images from the tea sickness dataset and manually collected dataset. 
(a) Algal Leaf Spot, (b) Anthracnose, (c) Bird's eye spot, (d) Brown blight, (e) Gray blight, 
(f) Red leaf spot, (g) White spot, (h) Blister blight, (i) Scab and (j) Healthy.
TABLE 7.1
Disease Classes with Train-Test-Validation Splits (After Augmentation)
Disease Class Training Samples Test Samples Validation Samples Total
Tea Sickness Dataset
Algal leaf spot 400 100 100 600
Anthracnose 400 100 100 600
Bird’s eye spot 400 100 100 600
Brown blight 400 100 100 600
Grey blight 400 100 100 600
Red leaf spot 400 100 100 600
White spot 400 100 100 600
Healthy 400 100 100 600
Manually Collected Dataset
Blister blight 96 12 12 120
Scab 96 12 12 120
Spot 96 12 12 120134 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
7.2.3 Capsule Network
To address the shortcomings of traditional CNN, the capsule network is suggested as 
a superior alternative [30]. A capsule network consists of several autonomous com￾putational structures called capsules. For an object detection task, the initial layers 
of CNN extract simple morphological features such as edges and structure, but the 
deeper layer extracts more complex information. These features are used in the test 
stage to recognise objects without considering the order or arrangement of features. 
This is one of the most severe flaws of conventional CNNs, and they do not consider 
spatial consistency during the prediction or classification process. A straightforward 
example is that if CNN is used for face detection, they will only look for the presence 
of eyes, nose, lips, etc., despite their global arrangement. These limitations in under￾standing and prioritising spatial feature relationships were solved by the introduction 
of capsule networks.
The capsules in the capsule network evaluate not only the features but also the 
parameters associated with them, such as order and orientation. The capsule neural 
network performs classification differently from the previous face detection exam￾ple. The capsules in the neural network primarily look for the presence of peculiar 
facial traits.
They are not limited to just primary feature identification; they also evaluate the 
morphological arrangement characteristics of the face, such as the order of eyes, 
nose, and lips. Therefore, the network only recognises a face when the capsules 
determine that the components of that face are arranged correctly.
Max polling layers in CNN cause information delay, as they only choose to pass 
information from most active neurons. This polling operation causes considerable 
deprivation of spatial information. The introduction of “routing-by-agreement” 
marginalises this loss. This means that lower level features will only get sent to 
a higher level layer that matches its contents. If the features resemble an eye or a 
mouth, it will be classified as a “face”; if it contains fingers and a palm, it will be 
classified as a “hand”. Spatial information is encoded into features via this com￾prehensive solution.
The need for more efficient algorithms and sufficient computational powers were 
the limiting factors in implementing capsule networks. Capsule network imple￾mentation became more resilient with the introduction of dynamic routing [31] 
and advanced expectation maximisation routing techniques. The dynamic routing 
iteratively transfers output vectors from lower level capsules to upper levels. The 
algorithm selects the most appropriate parent capsules, and the iterative operations 
introduce the sparse connection between routing layers. While comparing to CNN, 
two major technological innovations happened, one was the replacement of max￾pooling layers by dynamic routing, and the other was the introduction squashing 
process that replaced the scalar output feature detectors of CNN with vector output 
capsules. These developments allowed capsule networks to perform better and out￾perform CNNs when it comes to certain object categorisation tasks. More sparse 
connections necessitate more iterations of routing, which further increases memory 
and computational costs.Leaf-CAP 135
7.3 LEAF-CAP ARCHITECTURE
Three crucial architectural layers make up the suggested Leaf-CAP model. A VGG￾19 feature extractor first handles the normalised input data before feeding it to several 
primary capsules and, lastly, to the class-defining output capsules. VGG-19 is a pre￾trained model trained on ImageNet [32]. This pre-trained CNN helps extract valuable 
features from the newly provided unseen samples of leaves. The number of classes 
of the multiclass problem defines the number of output capsules. This will change 
depending on the datasets being used. The input samples of 300 × 300 images are fed 
in 64 batches for the training process. First-level features are extracted using the VGG 
pre-trainer, which creates 256 feature maps. The first 2D convolution is designed with 
64 kernels of size 3 × 3, with padding and stride set to 1. Batch normalisation is also 
incorporated in this layer. A 2D power average LP layer with a 3 × 3 mask and stride 
one is used for pooling. The downscaled output of this LP pooling layer is supplied to 
the following 2D convolution layer having 16 kernels of size 3 × 3 with padding and 
stride 1. All convolution operation uses Exponential Linear Unit (ELU) activation 
functions. The 2D features that were retrieved are sent into a statistical pooling layer 
and a series of 1D convolutions. For each 1D convolution, eight kernels of size 5 × 1 
and one kernel of size 3 × 1 are used. Stride and padding are set to 2 for the initial 
1D convolution and 1 for the subsequent 1D convolution. Dynamic routing is used to 
discover the key capsule, and the flattened features from each capsule are then com￾bined and sent to a softmax for the final class label. The detailed architecture of the 
proposed leaf-CAP is shown in Figure 7.3.
7.3.1 Primary Capsules
The outputs of the VGG-19 feature extractor are fed to several primary capsules. 
The number and initial weights of these primary capsules are one of the hyperpa￾rameters deciding the accuracy of the model. In this Leaf-CAP model, we choose ten 
primary capsules having random weight initialisation. Random initialisation assigns 
random weights that are too close to zero. This weight initialisation method intro￾duces irregularity and ensures that different neurons are not performing the same 
weighted multiplications.
A series of 2D convolutions, statistical polling, and 1D convolutions constitute 
the primary capsules of the Leaf-CAP model. The primary capsules are connected 
to the class-defining output capsules via a dynamic routing algorithm. The activation 
on these output capsules passed through softmax activation for generating class prob￾ability. The convolution operation glides over the input data in a top-to-bottom left-to￾right pattern to learn feature maps. A batch normalisation layer and ELU activation 
function are placed after each 2D convolutional layer [33]. The pooling procedure 
used to subsample the feature maps is LP pooling (learned-norm pooling) [34]. Batch 
normalisation standardises the inputs to a layer for each mini-batch. This helps to 
reduce training duration and allows faster learning rates.
The same effects of batch normalisation are introduced by ELU but at a reduced 
computational cost. ELUs have negative values in contrast to ReLUs, allowing them 136 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture FIGURE 7.3 Proposed Leaf-CAP: A Capsule Network-Based Tea Leaf Disease Recognition and Detection.Leaf-CAP 137
to bring mean unit activations closer to zero. The Exponential Linear Unit activation 
function ELU(x) is defined by Equation (7.1) as follows:
( ) = >
α − <







 ( )
  0
. 1   0
ELU x
x x
e x x (7.1)
where α is a hyperparameter that defines the levels of activation.
The LP pooling aggregated activations in the LP norm way, which can be seen 
as an adjustment between max and average pooling controlled by the parameter p. 
The p-value ranges between 1 and ∞, as the p-value is chosen as 1, it produces output 
equivalent to max pooling, and for ∞, it makes sub-scaling equivalent to sum poll￾ing. The performance of the diseased leaf classification is further enhanced by the 
LP pooling operation, which unifies max and average pooling. The mathematical 
representation of the LP pooling operation is shown in Equation (7.2).
= ∑∈
LP( ) X Z p
x X
p (7.2)
Pooling layers reduce the number of parameters to learn and the amount of 
computation performed in the network. The feature maps are downscaled to 
achieve this. Additionally, a small amount of information loss may result from this. 
The pooling layer summarises the features present in a region of the feature map 
generated by a convolution layer. Further convolution operations are performed 
on summarised features instead of precisely positioned features generated by the 
convolution layer. This makes the model more robust to variations in the position 
of the features in the input image. However, the choice of pooling operation affects 
the results.
Recognising the textural difference between diseased and healthy parts of the 
leaf is the key to an efficient classification. The morphological variations and 
colour patterns need to be distinguished statistically. Thus, rather than using 
standard pooling layers, mean and variance statistics can be used. The statistical 
pooling layer computes the means and variances of each filter and is shown in 
Equations (7.3) and (7.4)
:
1
1 1
Mean
X Y k k Tkij
j
Y
i
X
( ) µ µ = × ∑∑= =
(7.3)
:
1
    1 
2 2 2
1 1
Variance
X Y k k Tkij k
j
Y
i
X
( ) σ α = ∑∑( ) × −
− σ
= =
(7.4)
In Equations (7.3) and (7.4), k denotes the layer index, T denotes the two-dimensional 
kernel, and Y and Z are the length and width of the filters.138 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
7.3.2 Dynamic Routing Algorithm
Depending on the input, each primary capsule extracts a distinct feature. For example, 
one primary capsule might be highly effective at extracting “grey blight” features, while 
another may significantly extract “red leaf spot” features. This results from the random 
weight initialisation done at the individual capsules, which enables individual capsules to 
learn different features for the same input. The features from each capsule are combined 
by the dynamic routing method. The effectiveness of this feature fusion has an impact 
on classification accuracy as well. The “agreement” between all primary capsules is 
calculated and routed to the appropriate output capsule. This algorithm aims to reach a 
consensus because the primary capsules may have different opinions, and some may be 
incorrect. The activation of the output capsules further determines the output probability.
The length of the output vector of a capsule denotes the likelihood that the item it 
represents is present in the current input. A non-linear “squashing” function ensures that 
short vectors get shrunk to almost zero length, and long vectors get shrunk to a length 
slightly below 1. The squashing operation at the capsule is shown in Equation (7.5), 
where vj and sj denote the capsule’s vector output and total input.
=
1+
2
2 v
s
s
s
s
j
j
j
j
j
(7.5)
The total input sj for all the capsule except first layer capsules is the weighted 
sum of all “prediction vectors” ˆuj i| from precious layer and shown in Equation (7.6):
ˆ , ˆ sj i c uj j| | i j u W i ij i u
i
= = ∑ (7.6)
where cij are coupling coefficients that are determined by the iterative dynamic rout￾ing process. The coupling coefficients cij are determined by a “routing softmax”, the 
initial logits bij of which are the log prior probabilities that capsule i being coupled to 
capsule j, shown in Equation (7.7):
∑
( )
( ) = exp
exp
c
b
b
ij
ij
ij k
(7.7)
The implemented dynamic routing algorithm is shown next.
Procedure (dynamic routing)
1. for all capsule i in layer l and capsule j in layer (l +1) set bij = 0
2. for n iterations do
3. for all capsule i in layer l find ci (shown in Equation 7.7)
4. for all capsule j in layer (l +1) find total input sj (shown in Equation 7.6)
5. for all capsule j in layer (l +1) find outpt vj using squashing (shown in 
Equation 7.5)
6. for all capsule i in layer l and capsule j in layer (l +1) find = + ˆ . b b ij ij u v j i| j
7. return vjLeaf-CAP 139
Softmax function is applied to each dimension of the output capsule vector, and 
the mean of all softmax output produces the prediction vector or output vector. The 
output vector is shown in Equation (7.8)
softmax 1 , , , . (1) (2) (3) ( )
1
y n v v i i v v i i
n
i
n
= … ∑ ( ) …
=
(7.8)
7.4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The proposed Leaf-CAP: A capsule network-based tea leaf disease identifica￾tion architecture is compared against six state-of-the-art classification techniques, 
including the Fuzzy Rough Set model, SVM, CNN, VGG-19, Efficient Net, and 
Conditional Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks (C-DCGAN). 
The cross-analysis of various evaluation parameters reveal that the suggested Leaf￾CAP exhibit superior classification performance. The parameters Overall Accuracy 
(OA), Average Accuracy (AA), and Kappa statistics (K) are used to compare the clas￾sification performance of the proposed model to other cutting-edge approaches. The 
OA, which is equal to the sum of true positives and true negatives divided by the total 
number of individuals tested, is the percentage of correctly identified samples. AA 
denotes the mean of class-wise accuracy; this metric is desirable to analyse the clas￾sification performance of multiclass problems. The likelihood of agreement between 
the categorised result and the actual result is represented by the confusion matrix’s 
row and column sum. K is the difference between these two values. OA, AA, and K 
are computed from the confusion matrix.
Tables 7.2 and 7.3 tabulate the training and testing values obtained for various eval￾uation parameters of a different disease classification technique and proposed Leaf￾CAP. The statistics in the tables strongly suggest that, compared to current approaches, 
the Leaf-CAP model significantly improved overall performance. Leaf-CAP obtained 
training accuracies of 95.85% (OA) and 94.71% (AA) for the benchmark tea sickness 
TABLE 7.2
Comparison of Training Evaluation Parameters for Tea Sickness Dataset and 
Manually Collected Dataset Using Different Methods
Methods
Tea Sickness Dataset Manually Collected Dataset
OA (%) AA (%) K (%) OA (%) AA (%) K (%)
Fuzzy Rough Set 71.30 79.03 73.14 67.33 73.45 71.11
SVM 75.48 81.14 77.96 70.15 77.18 73.48
CNN 81.10 84.58 79.98 74.45 78.19 74.66
VGG-19 84.41 86.23 84.11 79.68 80.65 77.93
Efficient Net 88.19 88.43 87.07 83.77 83.24 82.16
C-DCGAN 90.21 92.59 89.01 86.36 87.11 87.75
Proposed Leaf-CAP 95.85 94.71 93.76 92.74 89.79 90.05140 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
dataset in the multiclass classification problem. Additionally, it displays a superior 
K value of 93.76% for this dataset. The number of samples in the manually col￾lected dataset is relatively small, affecting the classification performance. However, 
the proposed method managed to produce superior performance while comparing 
other methods in the study. The manually gathered dataset yielded values of 92.74% 
(OA), 89.79% (AA), and 90.05 (K). The approach maintained quality performance 
even for the test set, demonstrating its robustness and effectiveness. Both datasets’ 
testing results showed performance metrics of 93.32% (OA), 92.20% (AA), 91.19 (K) 
and 89.08% (OA), 88.49% (AA), 89.31 (K), respectively. The accuracy and loss curves 
for the train and test are shown in Figure 7.4 along with the number of epochs. Initial 
epochs of the test had lower test accuracy, but later epochs had an increase in accuracy 
that eventually caught up to training accuracy. (Epoch 33, Epoch 50).
7.5 CONCLUSION
This study proposes a new capsule network-based model, Leaf-CAP, for predicting 
tea leaf disease. The Leaf-CAP model is a multiclass classification solution that deals 
with various disease classes such as algal leaf spot, anthracnose, bird’s eye spot, 
brown blight, grey blight, red leaf spot, white spot, blister blight, scab, and healthy. 
The six-way augmentation process increased the sample size and facilitated better 
learning. The Leaf-CAP model exhibit superior performance over state-of-the-art 
techniques. The model is trained on single leaves of the tea plant. Different diseases 
may affect the tea twig. The same leaf, for instance, may exhibit both brown and grey 
blight. Hence the study can be further extended by collecting disease tea twigs and 
training them to identify and classify diseases in a group. Another future direction of 
study is using a multi-spectral camera for leaf image capturing, enabling the model 
to extract 3D spectral features. The model can be further optimised to run on mobile 
devices and deployed in the fields to detect early-stage tea leaf diseases and initiate 
timely remedies.
TABLE 7.3
Comparison of Testing Evaluation Parameters for Tea Sickness Dataset and 
Manually Collected Dataset Using Different Methods
Methods
Tea Sickness Dataset Manually Collected Dataset
OA (%) AA (%) K (%) OA (%) AA (%) K (%)
Fuzzy Rough Set 69.13 73.13 70.37 65.72 71.42 69.04
SVM 71.45 77.27 72.92 68.48 74.65 70.83
CNN 75.67 79.65 76.85 72.11 73.18 73.32
VGG-19 79.48 79.37 81.75 77.36 78.57 75.66
Efficient Net 86.33 83.19 84.66 79.27 81.38 80.06
C-DCGAN 89.56 85.05 87.12 84.57 84.77 85.22
Proposed Leaf-CAP 93.32 92.20 91.19 89.08 88.49 89.31Leaf-CAP 141
REFERENCES
1. W.J. Li, S. Wang, and W.C. Kang (2015). Feature learning based deep supervised 
hashing with pairwise labels. In: Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (IJCAI’16), AAAI Press, pp. 1711–1717.
2. M. Carreira-Perpiñán and R. Raziperchikolaei (2015). Hashing with binary autoencoders. 
In: 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Boston, 
MA, pp. 557–566. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298654
3. S. Shrivastava, S.K. Singh, and D.S. Hooda (2017). Soybean plant foliar disease detection using 
image retrieval approaches. Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 76, pp. 26647–26674. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-016-4191-7
FIGURE 7.4 Train – Test accuracy and loss against epoch.142 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
4. Y. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Huang, H. Zhu, and J. Ma (Feb. 2018). Large-scale remote sensing 
image retrieval by deep hashing neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 950–965. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2017.2756911
5. B. Karmokar, M. Ullah, Md. Siddiquee, and K. Alam (2015). Tea leaf diseases recogni￾tion using neural network ensemble. International Journal of Computer Applications, 
vol. 114, pp. 975–8887. doi:10.5120/20071-1993
6. S. Hossain, R. M. Mou, M. M. Hasan, S. Chakraborty and M. A. Razzak (2018). 
Recognition and detection of tea leaf’s diseases using support vector machine. In: 2018 
IEEE 14th International Colloquium on Signal Processing & Its Applications (CSPA), 
Penang, Malaysia, pp. 150–154. doi: 10.1109/CSPA.2018.8368703
7. R. Meena, G.P. Saraswathy, G. Ramalakshmi, K.H. Mangaleswari and T. Kaviya (2017). 
Detection of leaf diseases and classification using digital image processing. In: 2017 
International Conference on Innovations in Information, Embedded and Communication 
Systems (ICIIECS), Coimbatore, pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/ICIIECS.2017.8275915
8. C. Dhaware and K. Wanjale (2017). A modern approach for plant leaf disease classifi￾cation which depends on leaf image processing. In: 2017 International Conference on 
Computer Communication and Informatics (ICCCI), pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/ICCCI.2017.
8117733
9. X. Sun, S. Mu, Y. Xu, Z. Cao and T. Su (2019). Image recognition of tea leaf diseases 
based on convolutional neural network. In: 2018 International Conference on Security, 
Pattern Analysis, and Cybernetics (SPAC), Jinan, China, 2018, pp. 304–309. doi: 10.1109/
SPAC46244.2018.8965555
10. R. Muralidharan, and C. Chandrasekar (2011). Object recognition using SVM-KNN 
based on geometric moment invariant. International Journal of Computer Trends and 
Technology, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 215–220.
11. R. Muralidharan, and C. Chandrasekar (2011). Object recognition using support vector 
machine augmented by RST invariants. International Journal of Computer Science Issues 
(IJCSI), vol. 8, no. 5, p. 280.
12. T. Rumpf, A.-K. Mahlein, and U. Steiner et al (2010). Early detection and classifica￾tion of plant diseases with support vector machines based on hyperspectral reflectance. 
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 74, pp. 91–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.compag.2010.06.009
13. E. Omrani, B. Khoshnevisan, and S. Shamshirband et al., (2014). Potential of radial basis 
function-based support vector regression for apple disease detection. Measurement, vol. 55, 
pp. 512–519. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2014.05.033
14. S. Sladojevic, M. Arsenovic, A. Anderla, D. Culibrk, and D. Stefanovic (2016). Deep neural 
networks based recognition of plant diseases by leaf image classification. Computational 
Intelligence and Neuroscience, vol. 2016, pp. 1–11.
15. S. P. Mohanty, D. P. Hughes, and M. Salathé (2016). “Using deep learning for image￾based plant disease detection. Frontiers in Plant Science, vol. 7, pp. 1–10.
16. A. K. Rangarajan, R. Purushothaman, and A. Ramesh (2018). Tomato crop disease classi￾fication using pre-trained deep learning algorithm. Procedia Computer Science, vol. 133, 
pp. 1040–1047.
17. S. H. Lee, C. S. Chan, S. J. Mayo, and P. Remagnino (2017). How deep learning extracts 
and learns leaf features for plant classification. Pattern Recognition, vol. 71, pp. 1–13.
18. X. Zhang, Y. Qiao, and F. Meng et al., (2018). Identification of maize leaf diseases using 
improved deep convolutional neural networks. IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 30370–30377. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2844405
19. B. Liu, Y. Zhang, D. He, and Y. Li (2018). Identification of apple leaf diseases based on 
deep convolutional neural networks. Symmetry, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 11.
20. K. P. Ferentinos (2018). Deep learning models for plant disease detection and diagnosis. 
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 145, pp. 311–318.Leaf-CAP 143
21. J. G. Barbedo (2018). Factors influencing the use of deep learning for plant disease 
recognition. Biosystems Engineering, vol. 172, pp. 84–91.
22. G. Geetharamani, and A. Pandian (2019). Identification of plant leaf diseases using a 
nine-layer deep convolutional neural network. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 
vol. 76, pp. 323–338.
23. A. Ramcharan, P. McCloskey, K. Baranowski, N. Mbilinyi, L. Mrisho, M. Ndalahwa, J. 
Legg, and D. P. Hughes (2019). A mobile-based deep learning model for cassava disease 
diagnosis. Frontiers in Plant Science, vol. 10, pp. 1–8.
24. S. Bhowmik, A.K. Talukdar, and K Kumar Sarma (2020). Detection of disease in tea 
leaves using convolution neural network. In: 2020 advanced communication technologies 
and signal processing (ACTS), IEEE, Silchar, India, pp. 1–6.
25. J. Zhu, A. Wu, X. Wang, and H. Zhang (2020). Identification of grape diseases using 
image analysis and BP neural networks. Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 79, 
pp. 14539–14551. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-018-7092-0
26. W. Bao, T. Fan, and G. Hu et al., (2022). Detection and identification of tea leaf diseases 
based on AX-RetinaNet. Scientific Reports, vol. 12, p. 2183. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-022-06181-z
27. V. Zilvan et al., (Jun. 2022). Convolutional variational autoencoder-based feature learn￾ing for automatic tea clone recognition. Journal of King Saud University - Computer and 
Information Sciences, vol. 34, no. 6. Elsevier BV, pp. 3332–3342. doi: 10.1016/j.jksuci.
2021.01.020
28. K. Trang, L. TonThat and N. G. Minh Thao (Jun.2020). Plant leaf disease identification by 
deep convolutional autoencoder as a feature extraction approach. In: 2020 17th International 
Conference on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and 
Information Technology (ECTI-CON), IEEE. doi: 10.1109/ecti-con49241.2020.9158218
29. Gibson Kimutai and Anna Förster (2022). Tea sickness dataset. Mendeley Data, vol. V2. 
doi: 10.17632/j32xdt2ff5.2
30. G.E. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, and S.D. Wang (2011). Transforming auto-encoders. In 
Honkela, T., Duch, W., Girolami, M., Kaski, S. (eds) Artificial Neural Networks and 
Machine Learning – ICANN 2011. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6791. 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 44–51. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-21735-7_6.
31. S. Sabour, N. Frosst, and G.E. Hinton (2017). Dynamic routing between capsules. In I. 
Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, & R. Garnett 
(Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 30, https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/2cad8fa47bbef282badbb8de5374b894-Paper.pdf.
32. K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman (2014). “Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large￾Scale Image Recognition.” arXiv, 2014. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1409.1556
33. D.-A. Clevert, T. Unterthiner, and S. Hochreiter (2015). “Fast and Accurate Deep 
Network Learning by Exponential Linear Units (ELUs).” arXiv, 2015. doi: 10.48550/
ARXIV.1511.07289
34. Z. Gao, L. Wang, and G. Wu (2019). LIP: Local importance-based pooling. In: 2019 
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Seoul, Korea (South), 
pp. 3354–3363. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2019.00345144 DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-8
Agri Retail Product 
Management System
Sawant Swara Anant, Manav Goyal, and Deraj RM
8.1 INTRODUCTION
In the agricultural sector, the farmers sell their production, i.e. vegetables and fruits, 
to third person who then sells those to other shop-keepers and takes a high margin 
of the farmer’s profit due to which many Indian farmers are facing financial losses. 
This takes place because of loss of facts and for that reason middlemen input at every 
level from the manufacturers to the consumers, which no question aggregates the 
product however additionally will increase the stairs into the chain that will increase 
wastage and makes the machine much less transparent. An imaginative and prescient 
of a machine and intervention of generation can efficiently result in an exceptional 
alternate with inside the manner matters are currently going on. The venture pursuits 
to expand an interface. Previously crop models are used various essential tools to 
analyze the effects of climate changes on crop growth and development impact of 
adaptation strategies. We have described smart agri-food in other countries.
Malaga, Spain, for agri-food committee did work on digitalization and new tech￾nologies in agricultural food in 2019. Research works which have been done on agri￾culture were performed in 2019 at Florence. In Bilbao, active committee focused 
on smart platform with specialization in agri-food. In the year 2018, June 11th at 
Finland semi-annual working committee discussed S3P agri-food. Systematic review 
described the crop model with uncertainty decomposition. The gaps present in the 
systems of the survey were, while they have addressed the issue of how the agricul￾ture products can be collected and sold, they don’t address the issue of how each of 
the products can be made easily accessible to be bought by a public user. To over￾come these issues, the proposed system is described in this system.
There are three types of users who interact with the system:
1. Mobile users’ application and web portal.
2. Managing the administrators portal.
3. Farmers are considered primary owners.
This system provides validation of the experiments conducted and based on that 
innovative practices are followed to improve both cultivation and production. Farmers 
are provided with consultancy support to monitor and innovate the production.
This chapter consists of four sections. Section 8.2 describes the related work. 
Proposed methodology is presented in Section 8.3. Section 8.4 gives the results and 
discussion. Section 8.5 concluded this chapter.
8
Perepi Rajarajeswari, Vinila Jinny S., R. Saraswathi, Agri Retail Product Management System 145
8.2 RELATED WORK
Gomathy et al, focused on e-commerce agriculture system. They have focused on 
technologies to help the farmers by selling their products on digital platforms. It 
can be more useful for making their business more efficiently and to speed up their 
marketing process.
As discussed in [8] describe the design and implementation of e-commerce web 
application. This chapter introduced data mining-oriented features and system 
structure of e-commerce system in online mode. It will help the development of the 
enterprises depending on such type of business [12]. Grubs and medicine details are 
stored in database. Cryptography principles were used for encrypting and decrypting 
the submitted data.
Harmani et al [1] focused on applying artificial intelligence in precision agriculture 
which supports farmers to increase agriculture land and increases the plant growth. 
The optimization expected by the farmers can be achieved with a correct model.
Patil et al [2] presented a smart agriculture work by using cloud-based IOT. This 
technique supports the farmer in monitoring and controlling the land from any loca￾tion and at any time. The use of smart phones makes the effort easier and possible. 
But the farmer affording the supporting device and its installation and maintenance 
are not considered.
Moutsinas et al [3] suggested an AgroNIT which considers all aspects in agricul￾ture. It monitors the management of pesticide and fertilizer use. But automated alert 
will help take immediate action which is missing.
Rahmouni et al. suggested the use of two mega-digital concepts leading to a 
highly affected agricultural environment. Productivity is the major factor in agricul￾ture system which is met using AIoT framework. But AI concept makes the system 
more expensive.
Cao et al [14] suggest a blockchain technology-based platform that includes inter￾net of things to overcome the difficulties which exist in traditional supply chain. The 
system takes into account multi levels that are two-level supply chain featured for 
buyer and created formalized game models using and not using blockchain tech￾nique. Study shows that the engrossment of the blockchain-based plan can clue to 
amplified manufacture amount and entire leftover of the supply chain. It also stimu￾lates added sustainability venture to harvest greener foods. Remarkably, we exhibit 
the cost of the blockchain-based policy diminutions in the reliability of the com￾mercial situation in which the source sequence activates. Additionally, the consumer 
will continuously profit from the recognized blockchain-based policy; however, the 
supportive can profit in most cases but could be inferior off under definite circum￾stances. The acceptance and operative prices could compensate the profits produced 
by the accumulation of the blockchain-based policy.
Carolin et al. [15] excel that the digital technologies influence invention in all 
segments of the family, with outdated ones such as cultivation, the motorized indus￾try, and marketing. Similar trends across sectors include that the Internet of Things 
and data are becoming key involvements for invention, innovation cycles are accel￾erating, services innovation is gaining importance, and collaborative innovation 
matters more. A sectoral method is desirable when scheming invention strategies 146 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
in some provinces, particularly proposed data admission and digital technology 
embracing strategies. The present concentration of invention policies on enhancing 
R&D to chance R&D intensity targets also wants scrutiny. Anshari et al [16] sug￾gest Cardinal bazaar with Fintech-empowered force convert agriculture’s profes￾sional method into added sustainability in stretch of finance and spreading. FinTech 
propositions share croppers’ opportune ways of receiving foundations of funding 
through crowdfunding and cardinal imbursement scheme. Thus, ordinal market can 
act as a policy for FinTech to assimilate the ground-breaking monetarist answer 
into wider agriculture’s ecology. This study recommends a signifying digital mar￾ket with FinTech permitted particularly crowdfunding and imbursement scheme in 
order to provision agriculture’s sustainability. The classic attaches all performers 
(agriculturalists, property owners, stakeholders, and customers) into a policy that 
can endorse limpidity, authorization, inventiveness, and free assignation in agricul￾ture. Andrea et al. [17] suggest that blockchain with Artificial Intelligence can enor￾mously donate to refining the agri-food sequence: though they feature significant 
supremacy tests, which can prime to unwanted re-intermediation belongings (for 
blockchain); and damage of operator autonomy and activity, as well as confidential￾ity and honesty (for Artificial Intelligence). Lastly, if any answer that trusts on digi￾tal technologies resolves essential to be comprehensive, then the danger will be to 
broaden the digital gulf: more usually, FoodTech wants to grow in way that is well 
matched with all Sustainable Development Goals SDGs, not only those connected 
to sector of agri-food.
8.3 PROPOSED SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The suggested design includes five important actors:
a. Cloud agro-marketing and information module
b. Nodal center
c. Transport
d. Farmers
e. Customers
This representation is based on Perishable Agricultural Product (PAP) shop 
partakers.
The work, expected from this component, is as follows:
a. Cloud agro-marketing and information is a user interface module that is 
trained to reach the farmers in their native language.
b. Nodal center plays a major role and it performs the following actions:
It collects and distributes products to the needy customer with the optimum 
market amount. It is a highly established organization that has the facil￾ity for cold storage and amenities to the farmers for selling purpose.
c. For supplying, the items produced to the respective nodal center for market￾ing with optimum cost required transportation services are available.Agri Retail Product Management System 147
d. Farmers are serviced in their native language.
e. Customers are presented with products of optimum cost.
Farmers facing current challenges are met with ICT [4, 5].
As shown in Figure 8.1, the information processing module forms the main source 
of agricultural information system which supports their stakeholders by providing 
messages related to cost-effectiveness by various procedures and actions through 
network mode. Instant messaging to farmers by providing voice response that tells 
the soil managing details and crop managing details, various procedures about pro￾tecting plant, details on weather prediction, current rates in market, details about the 
crop and people, possibilities for career, available welfare scheme from government 
etc. Emerging techniques help in updating the requirements of the farmers through 
voice messages based on the feedback from the customers. The union of farmers 
preserves the helpful schemes to meet the temporary credits of agriculturist for pro￾duction of crop and its supportive activities.
8.3.1 Farmers
The farmers can able to register their details (name, mobile number, account num￾ber, land type, land size, etc.). Cultivation can be made for product details such as 
type and variety, like the production type and variety, quantity, quality, price, and 
availability. Sales markets produce their product for money. They have to maintain 
agricultural information to solve the queries of customers.
8.3.2 Customers
The customers can able to register their details (name, mobile number, account number) 
and are one who may be the Wholesaler or Retailer. For safekeeping, they have to pay 
the amount during registration and money back scheme at nodal center. They have 
FIGURE 8.1 Proposed system architecture.148 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
made requirements of agricultural production to maintain agricultural report require￾ments on weekly basis.
8.3.3 Transport System
This module includes all activities related to transportation. It includes the informa￾tion of customers, possible transportation and the capacity of the transport, pos￾sibility of group loads, and time period of availability, expenses caused for each 
movement of load.
8.3.4  Information System – Cloud-Based Virtual
Agricultural Marketing
This module helps in satisfying customer needs and stores all available data that are 
related to the customer in the center location [6]. It links all the available nodal cen￾ters, which helps in sharing the data with all kind of people. Nodal center with the 
client application helps the users to reach the server. Concurrency lock is set to avoid 
updating of data by multiple users. It makes the required resources like I/O devices 
and memory devices available.
8.4 PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE DESCRIPTIONS
8.4.1 End-User Application
The application of functions of trading agricultural products can be performed by 
using the end-user applications. These types of software applications are applied with 
the support of cloud-based technology that are operated by the transport domain [7], 
farmers, and wholesalers. Consumer presentation includes the modules of forecaster, 
advertisement, and demand details. Instant and dynamic presentations are effectively 
presented live based on predictions from orders and demand of the plants.
Farmer applications include module for prediction of production and its infor￾mation with advertising details. The information on production tells the type of crop 
production, variety of crops, techniques of cultivation, images of production and 
product and content describing production. The advertising module has all templates 
of agricultural products, their details and thus exposing its details. These also include 
farmers needed details like prediction of quantity of production, quality, availability 
period and cost. It gives instant prediction and reporting of production details to each 
provider. The application of production forecast is same as application of customer 
forecast. A separate module for instant prediction for approximating the production 
of perishables of specific earner is offered.
Transport presentation consists of firm profiles and scheduling module of trans￾port marketing product for different product loads and needs of effective scheduling 
forecasts for each vendor’s production. The production prediction presentation is 
same as the customer prediction presentation. This presents a lively forecasting ele￾ment for approximating the manufacture of consumable goods from each vendor. 
The transportation application consists of company profiles and transportationAgri Retail Product Management System 149
marketing product planning modules for different product loads and effective plan￾ning needs.
8.4.2 Supporting Facilities
Supporting Facilities are based on advertising and information structure mechanisms 
for admission and facility control. It delivers agricultural knowledge components, 
marketing components, and data components, predicting component and agricultur￾alists association module.
8.4.2.1 Webpage for Production of Marketing Component:
The website allows farmers to enter personal and production data to reach customers. 
Customers can use their personal information to order the items they want. Farmer 
details and customer details calculate current demand for available products. If you 
have requirements, we will connect with other node centers to meet your product needs.
8.4.2.2 Weather Forecast
This is a presentation of science and technology to forecast the atmospheric circum￾stances of a specific setting. These methods are included in informal, quantitative 
methods using current data from test manufacturers.
8.4.2.3 Crop Insurance Management
This is an assurance preparation aimed at moderating farmers’ economic damages 
from crop damage or destruction as a consequence of several manufacturing risks. 
Delivers crop insurance coverage and economic help to farmers due to any of their 
reported crop failures due to natural disasters, pests, or diseases. Crop advances are 
accessible to farmers who need advances for agricultural contributions such as diesel 
fuel for fertilizers, irrigation, and seeds.
8.4.2.3.1 Crop Income Tax
Farmers can make report income and expenses based on business.
Cultivation cost and production cost are to be calculated with crop growth based 
on the farmers’ decisions due to weather information. Soil information and monitor￾ing growth of crops at different regions is irregular.
8.4.2.3.2 Supply Chain Management Effect on Agricultural Product
Persons in the agriculture industry have also learned how crucial contemporary tech￾nologies can be in maximizing the integration of supply chain. Agricultural busi￾nesses are able to reduce inventory costs, increase product value, extend resources, 
shorten the time to market, and keep consumers thanks to today’s information￾driven, interconnected supply chains.
Additionally, a considerable amount of the cost incurred at one link in the chain is 
determined by the actions taken or not performed at one or more links in the chain. 
For the whole supply chain, including forecasting, production, purchase scheduling, 
product introduction, sales promotion, and more, appropriate coordination and plan￾ning are crucial.150 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
However, the COVID-19 pandemic epidemic had a detrimental effect on the 
worldwide SCM market for agriculture. The implementation of the global lockdown 
led to a number of travel and transportation limitations, which ultimately interrupted 
the global agriculture supply chain. The market was also hindered on a global scale 
by a lack of aggregators, labor shortages, problems with the configuration of trans￾port vehicles, price volatility, ineffective cold chain facilities, increase in the cost 
of fertilizers and pesticides, and other concerns. However, the major market players 
are presently concentrating on innovative approaches to deal with the loss, which 
is causing the worldwide agriculture SCM market to rapidly recover. Additionally, 
agricultural businesses are spending money on integrated SCM systems for better 
advancements.
Additionally, agricultural businesses are spending money on infrastructure and 
integrated SCM systems. A variety of models are emerging, including those where 
farmers or growers must adhere to specific guidelines, fruit and vegetable retail stores 
that directly purchase products from farmers through contractual agreements, and 
contemporary infrastructures that include cold storage, ripening rooms, and controlled 
atmosphere chambers. Contract farming for fruits and vegetables is one of these that is 
already used in a number of economies. The development of the worldwide agriculture 
SCM industry is being accelerated by these models one after another.
8.5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Agricultural system is implemented in cloud environment. We use cloud sim toolkit 
for the implementation of system in java environment [9–13]. This system imple￾mentation includes agricultural website details such as user login, product details, 
purchase details, and payment details. Figures 8.2 to 8.11 show the results of these 
system implementation.
1. Agricultural Front Page
FIGURE 8.2 Agricultural website.Agri Retail Product Management System 151
The previous figure shows the fertilizers details, equipment’s, seeds, and disease 
control details. These details are entered through website of the system.
2. Sign in page:
User can log-in into account. User has email address and password. Existing cus￾tomers have login page details. User can log-in into account. User has email address 
and password. New customers have login page details.
Agricultural products details are displayed. Here a number of agriproducts are 
given. User selected neem plant with color, size, and cost. The details are given in the 
following.
FIGURE 8.3 Agricultural login page.
FIGURE 8.4 Agricultural products.152 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Properties of neem plant are displayed, such as color, size, and cost.
The previous figure shows the shopping cart has neem plant and total cost of 
shopping can be displayed.
The previous figure shows the item details and their reviews and payment etc. 
It includes fertilizers details, review cart items, and pay.
FIGURE 8.5 Neem plant.
FIGURE 8.6 Shopping cart.
FIGURE 8.7 Cart items and payment.Agri Retail Product Management System 153
The previous figure shows the payment details through UPI QR. It includes with 
pay with UPI QR code on your phone.
The previous figure shows the order details. It incudes with ordered, name, amount, 
and details.
FIGURE 8.8 Payment details.
FIGURE 8.9 My order details.
FIGURE 8.10 Order details.154 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
The previous figure shows the order details and gives the overall the order cost 
details. It includes item description, quantity, and item total.
The previous figure shows the update of your account with delivery details. It includes 
name, email, phone, and pin code.
8.6 CONCLUSION
Cloud computing techniques are used to store large amount of data and access the 
data at any time. Agricultural system can be used to sell their products with offer in 
the price and delivered the items to customers within the given time. In this chapter, 
we have given the process of virtual agricultural marketing and information system 
in cloud environment. We have to monitor crop growth, crop production according 
to weather conditions by using proposed agricultural system.
REFERENCES
1. Harmani, V.P., Himawan, B.M., Alhadi, M.A., Gunawan, A.A.S., Anderies, “Systematic 
Literature Review: Implementation of Artificial Intelligence in Precision Agriculture,” 2022 
5th International Conference on Information and Communications Technology (ICOIACT), 
Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 2022, pp. 479–484. doi: 10.1109/ICOIACT55506.2022.9971917
2. Keru Patil, R., Patil, S.S., “Cognitive Intelligence of a Cloud-Based Internet of Things in 
Precision Agriculture Applications,” 2022 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain 
and Distributed Systems Security (ICBDS), Pune, India, 2022, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/
ICBDS53701.2022.9935964
3. Moutsinas, I. et al., “AgroNIT: Innovating Precision Agriculture,” 2022 Global Infor￾mation Infrastructure and Networking Symposium (GIIS), Argostoli, Greece, 2022, 
pp. 6–12. doi: 10.1109/GIIS56506.2022.9937000
4. Rahmouni, M., Hanifi, M., Savaglio, C., Fortino, G., Ghogho, M., “An AIoT Framework 
for Precision Agriculture,” 2022 IEEE Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure 
Computing, 2022, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/Cy55231.2022.9927989
5. Sinha, G.R.: ICT Enabled Agriculture Transforming India. CSI Communication, 27–28 
(October 2013)
FIGURE 8.11 Update your account.Agri Retail Product Management System 155
6. Costopoulou, C.I., Lambrou, M.A.: An Architecture of Virtual Agricultural Market
Systems: The Case of Trading Perishable Agricultural Products. Journal of Information
Services and Use 20(1), 39–48 (2000)
7. Chaudhuri, S., Nath, B.: Application of Cloud Computing in Agricultural Sectors for
Economic Development. Journal of Management and Social Science 1(2), 79–93 (2014)
8. https://cloudtweaks.com/cloud_computing_growth_infographic/
9. https://www.bsa.org/files/reports/BSA_2018_Global_Cloud_Scorecard.pdf (2012)
 10. Alia, S.Z., Sidhub, R.S., Vatta, K.: Effectiveness of Minimum Support Price Policy for
Paddy in India with a Case Study of Punjab. Agricultural Economics Research Review
25(2), 231–242 (2012)
 11. Sujatha, D.C., Satheesh, A., Kumar, D., Manjula, S.: Smart Infrastructure at Home using
Internet of Things. In: Satapathy, S.C., Avadahani, P.S., Udgata, S.K., Lakshminarayana, 
S. (eds.) ICT and Critical Infrastructure: Proceedings of the 48th Annual C Annual
Convention of CSI – Volume II. AISC, vol. 249, pp. 627–634. Springer, Heidelberg (2014)
12. www.javatpoint.com
 13. Dennis John Frailey, Stephen G. MacDonell, and Andrew Gray, Software Engineering
Management, Guide to the Software Engineering Body of Knowledge (SWEBOK V3.0)
Edition: 2004 Version Chapter: 8. IEEE Computer Society,
 14. Cao, Y., et al.: An Analysis on the Role of Blockchain-Based Platforms in Agricultural
Supply Chains. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review
163, 102731 (2022)
 15. Paunov, C., Planes-Satorra., S. “How are digital technologies changing innovation?:
Evidence from agriculture, the automotive industry and retail.” OECD Science, Technology 
and Industry Policy Papers 74, OECD Publishing (2019)
 16. Anshari, M., et al.: Digital Marketplace and FinTech to Support Agriculture Sustainability. 
Energy Procedia 156, 234–238 (2019)
 17. Renda, A.: The Age of Foodtech: Optimizing the Agri-Food Chain with Digital
Technologies. Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals through Sustainable Food
Systems 171–187 (2019)156 DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-9
Challenges and Prospects 
of Implementing 
Information and 
Communication 
Technology for 
Small-Scale Farmers
Karthikeyan Kaliyaperumal, V. Mahalakshmi, 
P.M. Sithar Selvam, T. Priya, B. Lakshmi Narayana, 
and T. Pradeep
9.1 INTRODUCTION
Even though up-to-date weather and climate data is crucial to the success of farm￾ers’ agricultural endeavors, farmers often struggle with climate-smart agriculture 
due to a deficiency of clear knowledge and clarifications of this data. The capacity 
of farmers to make a living is at risk when crops are damaged or yields are dimin￾ished as a result of high weather events or interannual changes in rainfall and tem￾perature. Directly or indirectly, farmers may contribute to ecosystem degradation 
and habitat loss when they employ practices that reduce soil water retention and 
crop yield potential.
Farms having 2 ha below of cropland typically aim to produce staple crops 
for domestic use [1]. The lack of capital (a low asset base), skills, land, and labor 
is identified as one of the most critical issues facing small-scale farmers in the 
World Bank Rural Development Strategy [2]. Owing to urbanization and rapid 
industrialization, farm sizes across Asia have decreased significantly, especially 
in China (from 0.56 ha in 1980 to 0.4 ha in 1999), Pakistan (from 5.3 ha in 1973 
to 3.1 ha in 2000), the Philippines (from 3.6 ha in 1971 to 2 ha in 1991), and India 
(from 2.2 ha in 1950 to 1.33 ha in 2001). According to recent estimates, 87% of 
the world’s 500 million small-scale farmers live in Asia and the Pacific. One hun￾dred and ninety-three million Chinese people are involved in agriculture, making 
them the world’s largest population of small farmers (93 million). Many people in 
the populations of Indonesia (17 million), Vietnam (17 million), and Bangladesh 
(17 million) depend on farming as their primary source of income (10 million). 
The “Green Revolution” has helped several Asian countries thanks to the work of 
9Challenges and Prospects 157
individual farmers. In India, for instance, small-scale farmers account for half of 
agricultural GDP but only use 44% of the available land due to greater labor costs 
and a lower index of cropping intensity and variety.
Increases in temperature, shifts in rainfall patterns, and more intense and fre￾quent flash floods and droughts are only some of the climate change effects that are 
predicted to impact the farming community [3, 4]. They threaten millions of people’s 
ability to eat and survive [5]. To some extent, farmers can mitigate the effects of 
climate change on their livelihoods by becoming more attuned to seasonal patterns 
and adjusting their planting, watering, and harvesting practices accordingly [6, 7]. In 
most cases, either too much or too little water is used to irrigate the field, depending 
on whether the farmers are trying to combat dry weather or prepare for rain. Soil 
moisture, plant development, and available sunlight all play a role in determining 
when and how much water to apply [8]. Automatic irrigation, enabled by information 
and communication technology (ICT) advancements, can further facilitate this com￾prehensive use of watering systems. Farmers can improve their knowledge of when 
and how much to water their plants, as well as which crops and varieties to plant, 
by adopting this strategy. Expert systems, completely automated fertigation with the 
right sensors, and smart, optimized water irrigation are just a few of the methods for 
effective water management addressed in this chapter. There is a self-sufficient ecol￾ogy contained within this framework.
9.2 CHALLENGES FOR SMALL-SCALE FARMERS
Numerous challenges stand in the way of small-scale farmers’ efforts to reliably feed 
their community. They are especially susceptible to climate change effects because 
they lack the information and resources accessible to large-scale farmers [9].
9.2.1 Water Management and Water Shortage
Many Asian countries suffer from lower agricultural output during the dry season due 
to ineffective water management practices like flood irrigation [10, 11]. Due to the 
rise in demand for irrigation water from sources other than agriculture, water scarcity 
has become a significant obstacle to the industry’s growth. As a result of excessive 
use and over-pumping, groundwater levels may drop. Due to the large suction head, 
small-scale farmers can only use more expensive pumps. Fertilizer and pesticide use 
that isn’t strictly necessary can also pollute water and reduce crop yields [12].
9.2.2 High-Value Agricultural Products
Producing high-value agricultural goods can be difficult for small-scale farmers 
because of rules pertaining to food safety and quality that are both labor-intensive 
and demanding, as well as the significant volatility of commodity prices [13–15]. 
The semi-arid region’s small farmers are particularly susceptible to the crop shocks 
brought on by natural calamities (e.g. Flash floods in Bangladesh, the Tsunami 
in Southeast Asia, and El Nino in the Philippines). Using ICT to predict natural 158 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
disasters and implementing the appropriate preventative measures are two of the 
main challenges facing small-scale farmers today.
9.2.3 Climate Change Effects
The effects of climate change are being felt keenly on the ground by farmers, espe￾cially those in developing nations. Due to their low heat tolerance, wheat, maize, and 
rice can be severely impacted by even a small change in temperature (≅1°C for maize, 
wheat, and ≅2°C for rice) [16, 17]. However, small-scale farmers may struggle to fig￾ure out how to modify their greenhouse settings to meet the needs of plants and crops 
that thrive in mild warming because of limited resources and funding.
9.2.4 Innovations on Productivity
New agriculture, dominated by value chains, can increase productivity on a small 
scale, which is beneficial to consumers and the farmers themselves. Promoting 
contract farming presents the greatest difficulty. High-value exports are made 
possible by both corporate and governmental sector actions along these supply 
chains [18].
9.2.5 Affordability
The value farmers place on the technology and the cost at which it may be bought all 
play a role in the spectrum of preferences and levels of willingness to pay for smart 
agriculture practices among farmers [19, 20]. Technology adoption by farmers is 
influenced by many factors, including their demographics (age, gender, landholding 
size, income, agricultural system, geography, etc.), as well as the level and kind of 
government and semi-government financial incentives.
9.3 INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT)
Agricultural input and output prices, weather forecasts, and technological choices 
can all be disseminated to small-scale farmers with the help of ICT [21]. There are 
increasingly numerous cases where farmers on the small scale have benefited from 
the use of ICT. The “agribusiness” section of the Indian Tobacco Company (ITC) 
reached 38,000 villages and 4 million farmers in 9 different states of India by means 
of 6400 e-Choupals (Internet kiosks). Initiated in 2000 with an initial projected 
duration of five years, the initiative has since been extended twice. Due to its success, 
additional two years were added to its original duration. Free training and data on 
local and worldwide market pricing, as well as weather and best farming methods, 
are provided to the farmers in this initiative. With the e-Choupal platform, they’ve 
made purchases totaling about $400 million [22, 23]. As a result of the prolifera￾tion of “smart agriculture,” which involves the use of cutting-edge ICTs to update 
conventional farming methods, significant gains have been made in agricultural pro￾duction and sustainability. The adoption of ICT in farming has led to a reduction in 
negative effects on the natural environment [24]. As technology evolves, it becomes Challenges and Prospects 159
possible to set up a remote and constantly updated sensor network to keep tabs on 
the farm around the clock.
9.3.1 Remote Monitoring and Control
Sensing and acting on the environment are crucial components of smart farming. Costs 
for sensors continue to drop precipitously as semiconductor technology develops.
9.3.1.1 Sensors and Actuators
In a network of nodes, a sensor is one that can observe changes in its surroundings 
and report them to other nodes in the network, such as a local gateway. To put it sim￾ply, “a sensor node is comprised of four core modules: sensor/actuator module, com￾munication module, processing module, and power source module” in a Wireless 
Sensor Network (WSN). While the sensing part of a WSN is in charge of gathering 
information about occurrences, the connecting part is in charge of communicating 
that information to other nodes. The power supply module keeps the sensor node 
functioning, while the processing module collects data, processes it, and formats 
notifications. Sensors for measuring temperature, humidity, water level, conductiv￾ity, salinity, and more are included in Table 9.1.
A machine’s actuator is the part of the machine that actually does something when 
it gets a command, such as moving or controlling another part of the machine [25, 26]. 
Opening a window for ventilation and turning on an irrigation system’s valve are also 
examples of tasks that could be handled by an actuator module. Actuators, like sen￾sors, need a communication module to receive remote instructions and report on their 
current condition as necessary.
Sensor data collection and remote control of actuators deployed at a farm can both 
benefit greatly from the availability of wireless communication technologies [27, 28]. 
Today, most sensors have a tiny connection module that transmits detected data to a 
faraway location, thanks to the rapid development of technology. In order for a sensor 
communication module to talk to other nodes in a WSN, several different communi￾cation protocols are currently available. They include ZigBee, Bluetooth, Wibree, and 
WiFi. The capacities and ranges of these many forms of communication technology 
are extremely diverse.
TABLE 9.1
Variety of Sensors for Gathering Various Data
Sensors Used in 
Agriculture
Using the Appropriate Sensor, we can Obtain 
the Necessary Information
Soil Estimation of water stress, rain/water flow, conductivity, 
temperature, water level, salinity, and dielectric permittivity
Plant Conditions like as humidity, moisture, temperature, CO2
concentration, hydrogen, and photosynthesis
Weather Changes in factors like light, temperature, humidity, wind 
speed and direction, and atmospheric pressure160 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
The range of a wireless network determines its classification, which can range 
from “Wide Area Network” (WAN) to “Local Area Network” (LAN) to “Personal 
Area Network” (PAN). In Table 9.2, authors have a comparison of several wireless 
communication methods. ZigBee is often regarded as the most cost-effective and 
energy-efficient communication network technology [29–31].
9.3.1.2 Technologies of Wireless Communication
Low data rate at ZigBee, low power consumption, and long battery life make it useful 
in areas as diverse as smart farming, smart home automation, and industrial automa￾tion [32, 33]. ZigBee’s protocol stack is simple compared to that of other technologies 
(e.g. Bluetooth or Wireless). Approximately 65,000 devices can be connected to a 
network using ZigBee. Low and extremely low-duty cycles are supported by ZigBee 
nodes, extending battery life. ZigBee’s ad hoc network architecture and support for 
multi-hop routing make it well suited for deployment in a dynamic setting [34, 35].
Bluetooth low energy is intended to deliver a high data rate over limited distance, in 
contrast to ZigBee. Low-cost options are available for devices that have limited battery 
life yet nevertheless need to be portable [36]. This allows for rapid data transfer between 
nearby Bluetooth devices, as well as the establishment of point-to-point and point-to￾multipoint wireless connections. ZigBee and BLE were both developed to function in 
the unlicensed scientific, unrestricted industrial, and medical (ISM) spectrum, which 
enables communications over short distances. Low-data-rate short-range communication 
technologies include HomeRF, the Association of Infrared Data, and Z-Wave. The most 
popular wireless PAN protocols are IrDA, BLE, ZigBee, Z-Wave, and HomeRF [37].
WiFi, which stands for “wireless fidelity,” is an IEEE 802.11-based wireless com￾munication standard for LANs. IEEE 802.11 specifications come in a number of 
varieties, each with its own range and data-transfer-rate requirements (for example, 
802.11a, 802.11n, and 802.11ah). IEEE 802.11 allows for both device-free (ad hoc) and 
infrastructure-based (standard) networks. Both infrastructural mode, where an access 
point controls communication between devices in the network via a WiFi interface, 
TABLE 9.2
Comparison of Communication Technologies
Variable
ZigBee 
(IEEE 802.15.4)
Wibree 
(Baby 
Bluetooth)
Bluetooth 
Low Energy 
(BLE)
WiFi 
(IEEE 
802.11) LoRaWAN
WiMAX 
(IEEE 
802.16)
Frequency 
band 
range
868/915/
2400 MHz
2.4 GHz 2400 MHz 2.4 GHz EU: 868 MHz 
and 433 MHz 
USA:915 MHz 
and 433 MHz
2–66 GHz
Data rate 20/40/250 Kbps 1 Mbps 1024 Kbps 11–54 Mbps 250 bps–5.5 kbps 75 Mbps
Cover age 
range
1–100 m 5–10 m 30–300 ft 40 m (indoor) 
140 m 
(outdoor)
Urban (3–6 km) 
Rural (15 km)
3 miles
Cost Low Low Low High Very low HighChallenges and Prospects 161
and client mode, where each device in the network must relay packets from the others, 
are possible for LAN connection [38]. Hundreds of clients can be supported by a 
single base station (BS) (access point). WiFi’s capacity to distinguish between eight 
distinct quality-of-service (QoS) classes means it can accommodate a diverse set of 
user-endpoint applications. A wireless access point uses only 10–13 W of electricity, 
and devices use even less power when communicating, allowing for longer periods of 
time between charges.
With WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access), devices within 
range of a WiMAX BS can establish a point-to-multipoint connection. When using 
the 2–66 GHz spectrum for transmission, a BS’ signal has the potential to travel 3 km 
while carrying 75 Mbps of data. WiMAX wireless networks can function in both 
licensed and unlicensed band (ISM) frequencies, with the latter being the more popu￾lar option. The data rate that each station in the BS’ coverage area uses can be adjusted 
by the BS based on the quality of the signal it is receiving [39]. WiMAX also offers 
five QoS classes, which means the network can accommodate applications with var￾ied QoS requirements, such as media content, web surfing, and streaming media [40]. 
WiMAX is categorized as a Wireless MAN (WMAN) because of its widespread use.
The LoRa Alliance has created a long-distance wireless system called Long Range 
WAN (LoRaWAN). Because of its extended range and single frequency, a single LoRa 
BS can link a large number of devices. In contrast to the 915 MHz used in the United 
States and the 433 MHz used in Asia, the 868 MHz used in Europe is for some rea￾son considered the “European” standard. Although a LoRaWAN gateway can receive 
up a signal from an end-device up to 15 km distant in a rural setting, that distance 
shrinks to just 2–5 km in an urban setting. Distance and message duration are both 
factors in determining data transfer speeds. The data speeds of LoRaWAN, as stated 
by Lora Alliance, are between 0.3 and 50 kbps. The average data transfer rate in the 
United States is 0.9 kbps, while in Europe it ranges from 0.3 to 22 kbps. For long￾distance communication, RuBee, like LoRaWAN, employs a very lower frequencies 
(131 kHz) carrier, which enables the transfer of 128-byte data packets. The RuBee 
interface has a minimal power need; therefore, the sensor’s battery can persist for 
years without being changed (long-lasting battery life is possible for sensors with 
RuBee interfaces).
9.3.2 Data Aggregation
As ICTs play an increasingly vital role in precision agriculture (PA), sensor plat￾forms that can collect data from a wide variety of sensors, manage the actuators, 
make decisions based on the collected data, eliminate any unnecessary informa￾tion (preprocess the data), and then send it on to the applications used by the end 
users are in high demand. A gateway, often situated close to the agricultural plant, is 
required for the sensor platform to begin collecting data from the sensors and issuing 
commands to the actuators. In addition, the time series sensor data can be saved by 
having this local gateway talk to the corresponding applications hosted in the cloud. 
Two potential results are shown in Figure 9.1. As shown in Figure 9.1a, the first pos￾sible setup has all sensors and actuators communicating with the gateway via a PAN 
network interface (such as Zigee), while the gateway then communicates with the BS 162 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
FIGURE 9.1 Smart farming makes use of wireless communication technologies such as: 
(a) sensors/actuators talking to the gateway via a wireless PAN; (b) sensors/actuators talking 
to each other over a WMAN interface.Challenges and Prospects 163
via a WMAN connection (like WiMAX). The PAN transmits its coverage area data 
in an ad hoc fashion. The BS’ job is to relay information to a distant cloud server 
once it has received it. The only difference between the two cases is how the data 
from sensors and actuators is transmitted. In this case, information is transmitted to 
the BS directly via the WMAN interface. Gateway capability for farming data col￾lecting can be implemented without the need for a dedicated gateway device.
The gateways allow for regular data collection from the sensors. Several factors, 
such as the precision of the rate of change, the capacity of the gateway’s storage and 
processing units, the availability of the network, and the sensors’ batteries, might 
affect the intervals at which their data is polled (battery life for sensors might suffer 
if they were polled more frequently). In an alternative to regularly polling each sen￾sor, data may be sent to the gateway only when a predetermined condition is met. 
The term “trap mechanism” is commonly used to describe this method. The amount 
of sensors and actuators on a farm can tax the capabilities of the local gateway. A 
local gateway would be necessary in this situation.
The increasing number of Internet of Things (IoT) devices has highlighted the 
need to boost processing power and data storage close to the network’s periphery and 
entry points. Cisco came up with the term “Fog computing” to describe the small 
computing facilities embedded in edge and access network equipment (such as BSs, 
switches, and routers) that are used to accomplish this. Without sufficient processing 
power at the local gateway, data aggregation and preprocessing may be delegated to 
the edge and access routers and switches.
The capacity of networking equipment has been greatly leveraged by the unstop￾pable expansion of the semiconductor research sector. The network’s data aggregation 
gateway may perform preparatory work before proceeding with the processing (e.g. 
storing or analyzing). As part of the preliminary processing, the data may be filtered 
dynamically (e.g. data cleaning, including elimination of duplicates, mistakes, and 
gaps). In this way, the gateway could lessen the burden on its resources required to 
process and store data. In addition, the gateway may serve as the nerve center for man￾aging all of the actuators in a smart farm. If an indoor farm needs airflow, for instance, 
it can remotely operate the facility’s windows or its irrigation system to provide it.
Both aerial and ground-based farms can benefit from data aggregation gateways’ 
many applications (for tasks like weed detection and terrain leveling). If sensor data 
is not especially time-sensitive, it could be collected by a drone or other agricultural 
vehicle and used in smart farming.
A variety of sensor systems featuring a wide range of features are currently acces￾sible. Smart farm net, sensor cloud, and IBM Bluemix are just a few examples of 
popular sensor platforms. In Table 9.3, we can get an overview of the existing sensor 
platform’s gateway’s functional capabilities.
9.3.3 Cloud Computing in Agriculture
As a result of cloud computing, users can access their services whenever and from 
whatever location they choose. This would provide farmers access to cutting-edge 
tools that analyze sensor data to draw conclusions about the state of their farms and 
help them make more informed decisions. Everywhere we go, the cloud is helping 164 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
to boost other businesses, as well as the entertainment industry and the healthcare 
sector. Similarly, cloud will help improve agricultural outputs with fewer negative 
effects on the environment, time, money, and risk. The following are some major 
niches that cloud can successfully exploit.
9.3.3.1 Farming Automation
Contextualizing data and integrating information from disparate sources are two of the 
many capabilities of cloud services (see Figure 9.2). That this can be done on the cloud 
is a crucial factor in the development of several automation systems (e.g. automation 
systems for the home and workplace). As the price of sensors continues to drop and the 
need to increase output in both quantity and quality increases, agriculture is poised to 
become increasingly dependent on data-driven and data-enabled decision-making in 
the near future. Information collected by sensors installed in a farm building and sent 
to the cloud will be used to make crucial agricultural decisions. Multiple programs can 
coexist in the cloud, and each one will make decisions based on the information it gets. 
Some examples of actuators that can be controlled by cloud at a farm site are aerial 
drones and autonomous tractors (a tractor that drives itself to the field).
9.3.3.2 Experience Sharing
In this case, farmers would upload data collected by their various sensors to the 
cloud. In addition, this can be used to record the farmers’ vast knowledge. A single 
farmer or an entire community of farmers could receive instruction. The various 
available alternatives for connecting and exchanging data include text messaging 
service, interactive video conferencing service, and voice-based service.
9.3.3.3 Computational and Storage Support
Recent years have seen extensive research and modeling into agricultural output loss 
due to factors, including pests, plant diseases, and meteorological pattern. These studies 
TABLE 9.3
Capabilities That Function As a Gateway
Important Functionalities Description
Monitor Monitor sensors’ reading.
Control A farm’s installed actuators can be controlled according to a set 
of rules.
Data processing Data cleansing, data analysis (including supporting data 
visualization), data format modification, etc.
Data security Safety and authenticity of sensor data. Data confidentiality is 
ensured by encrypted and decrypted transmissions.
Communicate with cloud and clients’ 
devices (e.g. mobile phone, tab)
Cloud computing allows you to send raw or partially processed 
data and obtain feedback. Learn from rural dwellers.
Data and instruction storage Information and instructions can be stored for later use.
Instant decision-making Act quickly on the basis of the information you have gathered 
(e.g. ventilation achieved by opening a window).Challenges and Prospects 165
demonstrate how farmers can reap the benefits of simulation software by improving 
their decision-making processes, leading to higher crop yields and less environmental 
damage. Furthermore, a significant amount of the dataset is required to comprehend 
biological systems and their relationships (the size of this dataset has ballooned during 
the previous five years). Large computation and storage facility are in high demand 
due to the growing need for data-intensive computation (such as computer simula￾tions of farms and biological systems). The agriculture industry can gain from the 
utility model of compute and storage offered by cloud computing. Depending on the 
situation, cloud computing can provide its customers with highly scalable and avail￾able services. The agriculture industry may benefit greatly from this, as it may spur 
rapid expansion. Data from the farm and other sources is gathered by an application 
(a procedure) hosted in the cloud and processed there (such as pollution patterns, pest, 
disease-related information, and weather forecasts). From Figure 9.3, we can infer that 
such a procedure would take place. Intelligent farming is possible with the help of the 
semantic web and machine learning (data interpretation, knowledge acquisition, and 
appropriate action).
One of the smart agricultural sensor cloud systems that employs the principles of 
the semantic web is smart farm net, which is able to infer meaning from raw sensor 
data. In this short chapter, we’ll discuss some of the ways in which the cloud could 
improve the state of modern agriculture.
FIGURE 9.2 Using data to improve farming techniques.166 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
• Analyzing data: Predictive modeling and crop failure risk analysis models 
provide for the insightful interpretation of massive amounts of data.
• Pest and diseases modeling: Modeling pests and illnesses is becom￾ing increasingly vital for farmers to make informed business decisions. 
Farmers need to fully understand the potential effects of environmental 
concerns including soil pH, climate change, pollution, and invasive species 
before making any major decisions about crop production. Analyzing data 
from a variety of sources (such weather forecasts and air pollution levels) is 
required to obtain such insights. The cloud may serve as a hub for cutting￾edge data and expertise, allowing for more precise disease and pest fore￾casts to be made. In the event of a pest or disease outbreak, farmers will be 
able to minimize financial loss by following recommendations on when and 
how much fertilizer and insecticides to apply to their farm’s soil. Based on 
the data it receives, the platform may be able to anticipate pest and disease 
attack patterns and offer preventative measures to farmers.
FIGURE 9.3 Cloud-assisted smart precision farming.Challenges and Prospects 167
• Fault identification: Considering the vast computing resources available in 
the cloud, it stands to reason that pre- and post-processing of data will be 
much enhanced by using the cloud. It is expected that the cloud will be able 
to correlate sensor and actuator data during the preprocessing step, provid￾ing a better understanding of any inaccurate readings. All management mis￾takes on farms should be easily detected as well. With more time to make 
adjustments to the farm’s operating plan after a catastrophic failure has been 
identified, the farm’s output will improve.
• Intelligence accumulation: Cloud integrates data from multiple sources 
(see Figure 9.3). For instance, a cloud-hosted agricultural app may include 
the weather API in its calculations to figure out how much water has to 
be irrigated into a field in a given amount of time to reach a desired soil 
moisture level.
• Real-time monitor and operational decision: Because of the abundance of 
data storage and processing power, farmers will be able to monitor their 
operations in near real time. By way of illustration, the electrical surge 
caused by a lightning strike may fry expensive electronic equipment if it 
were left outside. For instance, in such a scenario, a cloud-based applica￾tion used for monitoring and deciding on a farm might either take the 
appropriate action remotely or notify the farmers that they need to take 
such action.
• Crop harvesting period selection: Harvesting at the optimal moment, in 
terms of things like yield and revenue, may be a recommendation made 
by cloud-hosted software (yield market value). The software hosted on the 
cloud may recommend the best time to harvest the crops in order to maxi￾mize things like yield and revenue (yield market value).
9.4 ROLE OF ICT IN AUTOMATED AGRICULTURE
A wide range of farm duties can be handled by a robot specifically built for the agri￾culture industry. Now more than ever, machines are permeating every facet of soci￾ety because to the rapid development of new technologies. In instance, industrial and 
agricultural productions have both experienced phenomenal expansions. Numerous 
nations are seeing an increase in their elderly population alongside a decrease in 
their birthrate. As a result, fewer people are entering the labor force in those nations. 
The number of people living on Earth is also rising quickly. These factors, and more, 
are driving rapid advancements in the study and implementation of automated agri￾culture. The term “automated equipment” is used to describe machinery in a farm 
that functions independently of human input. Robotic harvesters, autonomous trac￾tors and sprayers, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are just a few examples 
of the increasingly prevalent use of automation in agriculture. Images captured by 
drones might be analyzed using image recognition software to help diagnose plant 
illnesses, and an expert-based decision support system (DSS) could then offer guid￾ance. Additionally, a pre-installed irrigation system can adjust its water delivery 
according to the prevailing conditions.168 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
9.4.1 Automatic Irrigation
Decisions on when and how much water to apply during irrigation have to be made 
based on factors such as soil, crop, and weather conditions. Automatic irrigation has 
gained popularity as a means to reduce reliance on human judgment when making 
irrigation schedule decisions. Table 9.4 explains the differences between fixed-rate 
and variable-rate automatic irrigation systems. Computers and other forms of elec￾tronic communication help streamline the operation of farms. Connectivity inter￾faces link all the automated devices (sensors, actuators). It is possible to automate 
the management of a gateway or cloud-based intelligent application. The model for 
an irrigation-based DSS make use of information gathered via a wireless data col￾lection network to make recommendations about when and how much water should 
be used. By using Bluetooth and GPS technology, we were able to remotely track 
the location of each sprinkler and keep tabs on the soil’s hydration, temperature, and 
weather conditions. Based on data from field sensors and weather forecasts, created 
an IoT-based smart irrigation system that makes soil moisture predictions.
Real-time monitoring and decision-making of irrigation activities were both 
enhanced by the established smart irrigation system’s usage of a site-specific irriga￾tion controller and sensor output in the field. It is important to consider the energy 
requirements for autonomous operation during every phase of the sensor node devel￾opment process (including design, development, communication, and deployment). 
Due to their inefficiency, batteries are rarely used in WSN nodes, which instead rely 
on solar power.
In the last decade, crop system models like DSSAT, APSIM, CropSyst, EPIC, 
STICS, DSSAT-GREET, and DSSAT-CSM have seen rapid growth as tools for sim￾ulating agricultural production systems. However, there has been a limited focus on 
enhancing the models themselves.
TABLE 9.4
Types of Automatic Irrigation System
Fixed Rate Variable Rate
It’s more cost-effective due to the consistent regulation 
of water usage. There is no relationship between water 
use and weather.
Optimal water usage based on weather 
conditions that minimizes costs.
Time and water pressure for irrigation are controlled 
permanently.
Variable control of irrigation time and 
water flow.
In order to operate, irrigation systems use ON/OFF 
switches. The controllers’ performance degrades when 
the time delay or other system parameters change.
The use of an ANN in a sophisticated 
control system for irrigation efficiency.
Developed using an open-loop controller architecture. Its 
operations, such as when to begin and terminate watering 
and at what intervals, are programmed in advance. In this 
situation, it makes no difference whether or not the 
intended result or objective is accomplished.
Created using a feedback loop with no open 
points. Such a controller relies on sensors 
to determine the optimal watering 
schedule for plants.Challenges and Prospects 169
9.4.2 Automatic Fertigation
Automatic fertigation eliminates the need for the time-consuming and labor-intensive 
process of applying fertilizers (including manual spreading, broadcasting, and spray￾ing) to increase soil fertility. Both plant development and plant production are sensi￾tive to a wide range of environmental factors, including the quantity of nutrients, 
the length of their delivery, the water flow, and many more. Fertilizer application to 
the root zone of a plant is an inefficient and error-prone human process, but sensors 
have made it fast and easy. Using GPS, real-time sensing, and Bluetooth technolo￾gies, created a decision support, input, and output module for an automated fertilizer 
applicator. A DSS regulates the fertilizer application rate by establishing the best 
possible dosage and pattern of application from real-time sensor data collected via 
Bluetooth connection modules. This data is mandatory and must be provided by 
the input module. Using sensors that evaluated PH value, humidity, soil moisture, 
air temperature, illumination, conductivity, CO2 concentration, temperature, etc. in 
real time, he and his colleagues created and integrated a DSS for effective fertiliza￾tion. An IEEE 802.11-based wireless sensor LAN and a GPS analysis server were 
employed in this setup (WiFi).
9.4.3 Precision Agriculture (PA)
Target farming, prescription farming, and information-intensive agriculture are all 
names for PA. To maximize productivity, site-specific and efficiency of entire-farm 
production and profitability while minimizing harmful effects on wildlife and the 
environment, PA is an “integrated information and production-based farming sys￾tem,” as defined by Taylor and Whelan. The importance of production, economic, 
and ecological improvements in agriculture has PA on the cusp of becoming the next 
great agricultural revolution. With the use of GPS-guided grid sampling, inputs like 
fertilizer can be used more efficiently and applied at different rates across a field, 
which is great for combating plant diseases and enhancing the quality of the soil. 
Automation in mapping and data gathering, sensing technologies, computer-aided 
controls for variable rate application of agricultural inputs, and geospatial deter￾mination are the four key information technologies that make up PA technology 
(through GPS). When compared to the other four options, more farmers have opted 
to use GPS and GIS to increase their agricultural and livestock yields. On top of that, 
this method can be used to lessen the effects of leaching.
9.5 CHALLENGES IN ICT-BASED PRECISION FARMING
Before the full promise of ICT-based precision farming can be realized, a number of 
hurdles must be cleared. This chapter discusses several issues that warrant immedi￾ate attention and additional study.
• Sensor network security: The vast majority of farms’ network sensors 
are exposed and therefore open to tampering. Since sensors have limited 
processing and power resources, it can be difficult to construct a reliable 170 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
security mechanism management system. Since most WSN communication 
is broadcast, the network is susceptible to attack. Attacks on WSN typically 
take the form of eavesdropping, denial of service, or manipulation of data. 
In the case of automated agriculture facilities, for instance, if an attacker 
manipulates or injects misleading data into a WSN, the facility may make 
the wrong operational option. The potential dangers are facing an auto￾mated agricultural plant (some of them could be deliberate or accidental). 
Establishing potential safeguards against security threats is crucial.
• Reliable and available network infrastructure: As automated farms 
become more common, real-time monitoring and management are becom￾ing increasingly important. Building a functional automated agriculture 
facility requires a robust communication network. Having a reliable con￾nection between BS and the faraway cloud is essential. An automated 
farm could lose access to its central monitoring and control system in 
the event of a communication network failure. Critical data from sensors 
and actuators in agriculture systems must be protected (decision-makers 
should have the data within a reasonable amount of time). A breakdown 
in a communication network infrastructure could be caused by a num￾ber of different things, including a malfunctioning application, network 
device, network interface, or communication line. The farming operation 
requires a network design that ensures constant connectivity and mini￾mal downtime. It’s important to remember that increasing capital and 
operational expenditures is the main way we can get a highly stable and 
available network.
• Cost of sensors and actuators: At the moment, farmers in undeveloped 
and underdeveloped nations cannot afford the high cost of sensors and 
actuators.
• Power supply availability: Having a constant supply of electricity from the 
grid is essential for many pieces of machinery at a farm. The loss of elec￾tricity, whether from an accident or a natural calamity, would have a devas￾tating effect on the farm as a whole. Hence, a storage and renewable power 
source must be built to ensure constant electricity to the farm.
• Educating farmers: The rate of technological development is breathtaking. 
Unfortunately, many farmers in third world and poor nations lack formal 
education. As a result, new technologies wouldn’t be widely adopted.
Farmers with less education would be less likely to accept ICT-based 
farming management. We need to improve farmers’ ICT knowledge, aware￾ness, and education in the field in the future.
• User-friendly applications: A number of farmers are technologically illit￾erate. As a result, they could be hesitant to adopt ICT for farm manage￾ment. The farm management software should be simple enough for the 
farmers to use.
• Metadata, semantics, and ontology: Research in this area has progressed 
significantly, resulting in cutting-edge intelligent systems built on a founda￾tion of existing data and knowledge. However, additional study is required 
to implement smart, automated farming.Challenges and Prospects 171
• Fast fault identification: Future studies should investigate methods for more 
efficiently locating broken sensors/actuators, farm machinery, and commu￾nication network hardware.
• Analysis paralysis: Large volumes of data from sensors/actuators and other 
resources must be gathered for smart farming to be implemented, but this 
data is useless without a practical method to analyze it. Locating relevant 
information requires digging through data (and knowledge).
9.6 OPPORTUNITIES OF IMPLEMENTING ICT 
FOR SMALL-SCALE FARMERS
Implementing ICT can provide numerous opportunities for small-scale farmers, 
including:
• Access to information: ICT tools such as mobile apps and websites can 
provide small-scale farmers with real-time information on weather, market 
prices, pest and disease outbreaks, and other important agricultural data.
• Improved communication: ICT tools such as SMS messaging and social 
media can help small-scale farmers communicate with each other, exten￾sion workers, and buyers more effectively, facilitating the exchange of 
knowledge and market information.
• Increased efficiency: ICT tools such as precision farming technologies and 
farm management software can help small-scale farmers optimize their use 
of resources, improve crop yields, and reduce their costs.
• Improved market access: ICT tools such as e-commerce platforms and 
mobile payment systems can help small-scale farmers connect with buyers 
and sell their products more efficiently, reducing the need for intermediar￾ies and improving their profit margins.
• Better risk management: ICT tools such as remote sensing and data analyt￾ics can help small-scale farmers identify and mitigate risks such as drought, 
flooding, and pest outbreaks, reducing the impact of these events on their 
crops and livelihoods.
Overall, the implementation of ICT can help small-scale farmers overcome many 
of the barriers they face, including limited access to information, finance, and mar￾kets. By providing small-scale farmers with the tools and information they need to 
improve their productivity and profitability, ICT can play a critical role in promoting 
sustainable agriculture and reducing poverty in rural communities.
9.7 CONCLUSION
Benefiting greatly from improved water management made possible by ICT and 
data management are small-scale farmers in both developed and developing nations. 
Greater crop yields and a boost to the economy could result from the widespread 
adoption of remote sensing and automation tools in agriculture. Cameras, UAVs, 
climate-based intelligent irrigation systems, insider information, and constant remote 172 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
monitoring using smart handheld devices are all part of the toolkit. These advance￾ments in practices and technology are providing a boost to small-scale farmers, and 
they are also providing consistent support to a wide variety of other interested parties, 
from gardeners to politicians. The potential exists for expanding ICT to all parts of 
the globe. Problems arise when trying to make these technologies accessible to small￾scale farmers while keeping their price at a reasonable level and raising awareness 
about them through a variety of channels. Using these cutting-edge methods of agri￾culture not only boosts crop yields but also contributes to environmental sustainability.
REFERENCES
1. A. I. Sourav, A. W. R. Emanuel and D. B. Setyohadi, “Smart system architecture design 
in the field of precision agriculture based on IOT in Bangladesh,” ICIC Express Lett, 
vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 1111–1118, 2022. doi: 10.24507/icicel.16.10.1111
2. A. Neef, K. Mizuno, I. Schad, P. M. Williams and F. Rwezimula, “Community-based 
microtrade in support of small-scale farmers in Thailand and Tanzania,” Law Dev Rev, 
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 80–100, 2012. doi: 10.1515/1943-3867.1148
3. F. Peprah, S. Gyamfi, M. Amo-Boateng, E. Buadi and M. Obeng, “Design and construc￾tion of smart solar powered egg incubator based on GSM/IoT,” Sci Afr, vol. 17, 2022. 
doi: 10.1016/j.sciaf.2022.e01326
4. E. A. Abioye et al., “Precision irrigation management using machine learning and digi￾tal farming solutions,” AgriEngineering, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 70–103, 2022. doi: 10.3390/
agriengineering4010006
5. J. Lloret, S. Sendra, J. García-fernández, L. García and J. M. Jimenez, “A wifi-based sen￾sor network for flood irrigation control in agriculture,” Electron, vol. 10, no. 20, 2021. 
doi: 10.3390/electronics10202454
6. D. Vijendra Babu, K. V. Shijin, N. S. Sreejith, A. V. Sureshbabu and C. Karthikeyan, 
“Automatic irrigation systems for efficient usage of water using embedded control systems,” 
IOP Conf Ser: Mater Sci Eng, vol. 993, no. 1, 2020. doi: 10.1088/1757-899X/993/1/012077
7. J.-J. Su, S.-T. Ding and H.-C. Chung, “Establishing a smart farm-scale piggery wastewa￾ter treatment system with the internet of things (IoT) applications,” Water (Switzerland, 
vol. 12, no. 6, 2020. doi: 10.3390/w12061654
8. B.-H. Kim and J.-R. Kim, “Implementation of smart agricultural water manage￾ment system using IoT-based remote monitoring,” Int J Adv Sci Technol, vol. 28, no. 5, 
pp. 44–52, 2019 [Online]. Available: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-
85080089043&partnerID=40&md5=a0dad130b4ae22511a482d843657cefd
9. S. Abba, J. W. Namkusong, J.-A. Lee and M. L. Crespo, “Design and performance evalua￾tion of a low-cost autonomous sensor interface for a smart IoT-based irrigation monitoring 
and control system,” Sensors (Switzerland), vol. 19, no. 17, 2019. doi: 10.3390/s19173643
10. Y. D. Chuah, J. V. Lee, S. S. Tan and C. K. Ng, “Implementation of smart monitoring 
system in vertical farming,” IOP Conf Ser: Earth Environ Sci, vol. 268, no. 1, 2019. doi: 
10.1088/1755-1315/268/1/012083
11. M. Ashwini, S. Gowrishankar and Siddaraju, “Internet of things based intelligent moni￾toring and reporting from agricultural fields,” Int J Control Theory Appl, vol. 9, no. 10, 
pp. 4311–4320, 2016 [Online]. Available: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=
2-s2.0-84989271329&partnerID=40&md5=d906632e85f235be4d32e412809baffd
12. S.-O. Chung, S.-W. Kang, K.-S. Bae, M.-J. Ryu and Y.-J. Kim, “The potential of remote 
monitoring and control of protected crop production environment using mobile phone 
under 3G and Wi-Fi communication conditions,” Eng Agric Environ Food, vol. 8, no. 4, 
pp. 251–256, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.eaef.2015.04.007Challenges and Prospects 173
13. B. J. P. Quezada and J. Fernández, ‘Automation of agricultural irrigation system with 
open source’, in IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology, vol. 427. 
pp. 232–233, 2014. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-55128-4_36
14. K. M. Al-Aubidy, M. M. Ali, A. M. Derbas and A. W. Al-Mutairi, ‘Real-time monitoring 
and intelligent control for greenhouses based on wireless sensor network’, in 2014 IEEE 
11th International Multi-Conference on Systems, Signals and Devices, SSD 2014, 2014. 
doi: 10.1109/SSD.2014.6808765
15. D. Van Greunen and A. Fosu, ‘ICT adoption challenges: Case of rural small-scale farmers 
in the Amathole District Municipality of South Africa’, in 2022 IST-Africa Conference, 
IST-Africa 2022, 2022. doi: 10.23919/IST-Africa56635.2022.9845556
16. X. Li, A. Sarkar, X. Xia and W. H. Memon, “Village environment, capital endowment, and 
farmers’ participation in e-commerce sales behavior: A demand observable bivariate pro￾bit model approach,” Agriculture, vol. 11, no. 9, 2021. doi: 10.3390/agriculture11090868
17. T. Gbangou, R. Sarku, E. Van Slobbe, F. Ludwig, G. Kranjac-Berisavljevic and S. 
Paparrizos, “Coproducing weather forecast information with and for smallholder farmers 
in Ghana: Evaluation and design principles,” Atmosphere (Basel), vol. 11, no. 9, 2020. doi: 
10.3390/atmos11090902
18. A. Abid, S. Jie, W. Aslam, S. Batool and Y. Lili, “Application of structural equation 
modelling to develop a conceptual model for smallholder’s credit access: The mediation 
of agility and innovativeness in organic food value chain finance,” PLoS One, vol. 15, 
no. 8, 2020. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0235921
19. A. Oliveira Jr et al., “IoT sensing platform as a driver for digital farming in rural Africa,” 
Sensors (Switzerland), vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 1–25, 2020. doi: 10.3390/s20123511
20. L. Karanja et al., “Impacts and challenges of ICT based scale-up campaigns: Lessons 
learnt from the use of SMS to support maize farmers in the UPTAKE project, Tanzania,” 
Data Sci J, vol. 19, no. 1, 2020. doi: 10.5334/dsj-2020-007
21. H. El Bilali, F. Bottalico, G. Ottomano Palmisano and R. Capone, ‘Information and com￾munication technologies for smart and sustainable agriculture’, in IFMBE Proceedings, 
2020, vol. 78, pp. 321–334. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-40049-1_41
22. B. Matsenjwa, S. S. Grobbelaar and I. A. Meyer, “Pro-poor value chains for small scale 
farming innovation: Sustainability improvements through ICT,” South Afr J Ind Eng, 
vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 156–171, 2019. doi: 10.7166/30-4-2176
23. A. Camacho and E. Conover, “The impact of receiving SMS price and weather infor￾mation on small scale farmers in Colombia,” World Dev, vol. 123, 2019. doi: 10.1016/
j.worlddev.2019.06.020
24. D. P. Rubanga, K. Hatanaka and S. Shimada, “Development of a simplified smart agricul￾ture system for small-scale greenhouse farming,” Sens Mater, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 831–843, 
2019. doi: 10.18494/SAM.2019.2154
25. B. Vandana and S. S. Kumar, ‘A smart phone based information sharing system in preci￾sion agriculture’, in AIP Conference Proceedings, 2018, vol. 2039. doi: 10.1063/1.5078961
26. P. Gyeltshen and K. Osathanunkul, ‘Linking small-scale farmers to market using ICT’, 
in 3rd International Conference on Digital Arts, Media and Technology, ICDAMT 2018, 
2018, pp. 120–125. doi: 10.1109/ICDAMT.2018.8376507
27. M. Krone and P. Dannenberg, “Analysing the effects of information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) on the integration of East African farmers in a value chain context,” 
Z Wirtschgeogr, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 65–81, 2018. doi: 10.1515/zfw-2017-0029
28. U. Deichmann, A. Goyal and D. Mishra, “Will digital technologies transform agricul￾ture in developing countries?” Agric Econ (UK), vol. 47, pp. 21–33, 2016. doi: 10.1111/
agec.12300
29. S. Hudson, N. Krogman and M. Beckie, “Social practices of knowledge mobilization for 
sustainable food production: Nutrition gardening and fish farming in the kolli hills of 
India,” Food Secur, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 523–533, 2016. doi: 10.1007/s12571-016-0580-z174 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
30. E. T. Lwoga, P. Ngulube and C. Stilwell, “Managing indigenous knowledge for sustainable 
agricultural development in developing countries: Knowledge management approaches 
in the social context,” Int Inf Lib Rev, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 174–185, 2010. doi: 10.1080/
10572317.2010.10762862
31. G. M. M. Alam, M. N. Khatun, M. N. I. Sarker, N. P. Joshi and H. Bhandari, “Promoting 
agri-food systems resilience through ICT in developing countries amid COVID-19,” 
Front Sustain Food Syst, vol. 6, 2023. doi: 10.3389/fsufs.2022.972667
32. V. Okpukpara, B. C. Okpukpara, E. E. Omeje, I. C. Ukwuaba and M. Ogbuakanne, 
“Credit risk management in small-scale farming by formal financial institutions dur￾ing the COVID-19 era: Nigerian perspective,” Agric Finance Rev, 2023. doi: 10.1108/
AFR-07-2022-0089
33. D. Moyer, M. Ostertag and J. Gershenson, ‘Mitigation intermediary transactions within 
Kenya’s agricultural supply chain’, in 2022 IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology 
Conference, GHTC 2022, 2022, pp. 250–256. doi: 10.1109/GHTC55712.2022.9910996
34. L. Selaledi, M. Maake and M. Mabelebele, “The acceptability of yellow mealworm as 
chicken feed: A case study of small-scale farmers in South Africa,” Agric Food Secur, 
vol. 10, no. 1, 2021. doi: 10.1186/s40066-021-00288-8
35. C. Futemma, D. C. Monteiro Tourne, F. A. Vasconcelos Andrade, N. M. Dos Santos, G. 
S. S. Rosa Macedo and M. E. Pereira, “The Covid-19 pandemic and small-scale farmers: 
Surpassing or failing?” Bol Mus Para Emílio Goeldi Cienc Hum, vol. 16, no. 1, 2021. doi: 
10.1590/2178-2547-BGOELDI-2020-0143
36. C. Spurk, P. Asule, R. Baah-Ofori, L. Chikopela, B. Diarra and C. Koch, “The status 
of perception, information exposure and knowledge of soil fertility among small-scale 
farmers in Ghana, Kenya, Mali and Zambia,” J Agric Educ Ext, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 141–161, 
2020. doi: 10.1080/1389224X.2019.1656089
37. G. Mwanga, E. Mbega, Z. Yonah and M. G. G. Chagunda, “How information communi￾cation technology can enhance evidence-based decisions and farm-to-fork animal trace￾ability for livestock farmers,” Sci World J, vol. 2020, 2020. doi: 10.1155/2020/1279569
38. S. Shams, S. H. S. Newaz and R. R. Karri, “Information and communication technology 
for small-scale farmers: Challenges and opportunities,” Model Optim Sci Technol, vol. 17, 
pp. 159–179, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-37794-6_8
39. N. Odoi, “The information behaviour of Ugandan banana farmers in the context of par￾ticipatory development communication,” Inf Res, vol. 22, no. 3, p. 759, 2017 [Online]. 
Available: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85029688587&partne
rID=40&md5=798ce4a5af52e274836e5f7efee559d6
40. O. Akinbo, A. A. Adenle and D. Makinde, ‘An effective regulatory regime supported by 
research and development is key to adoption of GM technology in west Africa: Burkina faso 
and nigeria as case studies’, in Genetically Modified Organisms in Developing Countries: 
Risk Analysis and Governance, 2017, pp. 271–282. doi: 10.1017/9781316585269.024DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-10 175
Navigating Ethical and 
Legal Challenges in 
Smart Agriculture
Insights from Farmers
S. Mayakannan, M. Saravanan, R. Arunbharathi, 
V. Prasanna Srinivasan, S Venkatesa Prabhu, 
and Rakesh Kumar Maurya
10.1 INTRODUCTION ABOUT CHALLENGES FOR NEW 
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES TO THE FARMERS
Agricultural services, goods, inventions, decision-making, profits, and productivity 
have all benefited from the widespread adoption of digital technologies [1]. However, do 
minimum-holder farmers actually gain anything at all from data sharing? Is this infor￾mation equally accessible and under the control of all agricultural stakeholders? How 
concerned are farmers about their data being secure, private, and under their control?
Every agricultural operator, but especially farmers, must deal with data obstacles 
such as a lack of transparency on these issues and the question of whether or not 
farm data can be labelled “personal”. In addition, the current legal framework for 
data exchanges is based on contracts and license agreements with intricate terms and 
conditions [2–4]. It’s clear that a lack of trust is at the heart of these partnerships, 
leaving smallholder farmers with very little leverage in negotiations [5–7].
Short-term, intervention-focused development options are unlikely to yield sustain￾able answers for farmers [8–10]. In deliberative democracies, where discussion and 
compromise are valued during decision-making, and where long-term, systemic aid 
is prioritized over short-term initiatives, farmers should be able to have a say in the 
development processes that affect them [11]. Farmers should be involved in consensus 
decision-making for climate-smart agriculture because farming is a locally specific 
problem that defies universal answers [12]. The developed world has an ethical obliga￾tion to help the small farmers in low-income countries who are particularly vulnerable to 
exploitation (not least because the wealth of developed countries is in part based on the 
import of food products from these very countries) [13, 14]. Promoting climate change 
adaptation agendas in the agricultural sector, notably through the concept and practice 
of climate-smart agriculture, is a crucial step in fulfilling this ethical duty [15–17].
In the process of implementing climate-smart agriculture, certain influential 
people may misuse their influence, leading to increased inequality and negatively 
10176 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
impacting farmers’ rights and well-being [18, 19]. For instance, farmers may be 
compelled to sell their land to agribusinesses if climate-smart agriculture practices 
become mandatory [20, 21]. On the other hand, climate-smart agriculture devel￾opment programs promise to work toward alleviating poverty, ensuring adequate 
nutrition, and fostering economic independence [22]. Because development has 
become a “business”, it may be difficult to deliver on the promises made for these 
types of projects, which can have disastrous results [23]. Therefore, intervention￾specific development choices are not likely to provide farmers with long-term, viable 
answers [24]. Instead of focusing aid on individual farmers or on specific projects, 
it is essential to offer structural support for all farmers [25–28]. Since farming is 
inherently a regionally specific problem, it can’t be solved with a general method, 
and so farmers must actively participate in consensual decision-making for climate￾smart agriculture [29].
Least developed country agricultural systems, in particular, confront new prob￾lems, such as increasing production to feed a growing population, especially in sub￾Saharan Africa, adapting to climate transformation and its variability, and dropping 
the greenhouse gas emissions that agriculture causes (the three pillars of Climate 
Smart Agriculture) [30]. In light of these factors, it is essential that all systems of 
agriculture can demonstrate their diversity adjustment [31]. The goal of current R&D 
efforts is to improve the mobilization of ecological processes as one of the potential 
routes to such a change [32]. The primary motivation behind this is to help farmers 
raise more food and make more money by increasing productivity and making it 
more resilient to external factors [33, 34]. It’s also important to improve agricultural 
systems’ other performance metrics, such as their ability to make efficient use of 
resources and their effect on the environment [35].
This unequal distribution of wealth is largely attributable to the widespread mis￾understanding of data rights and usage (especially among farmers) [36]. A wide￾spread belief exists in the agricultural sector that the benefits and costs of data 
creation, collecting, distribution, and utilization are not shared fairly. Not all farmers 
have simple access to digital tools and the data they produce, revealing global power 
disparities [37–39]. The digital farming sector faces resource constraints, leading to 
a “digital divide” that separates developed and developing nations due to farmers’ 
limited access to scientific data skills. [40, 41]. Since only large farms can afford 
the fee of getting the data-based information, small-scale farms in underdeveloped 
countries have less influence [42, 43]. Additionally, the demands of small farms are 
not always met by data-based recommendations [44, 45]. To add insult to injury, 
farmers have no leverage to alter the default terms of data licenses held by giant 
agribusinesses that regulate the agricultural technology sector [46–48]. The effects 
of these moral worries on society are undeniable. According to authors [49], “a lot is 
pre-supposed about the desirability of diverse implications of smart farming on soci￾ety” when people talk about whether or not data should be shared and with whom, or 
whether or not different power (re)distributions are desirable [50].
To the general public, it may seem as though farmers have little say over how 
their personal data is collected, used, or shared [36]. Uncertain data supremacy and 
dangers of data misappropriation on the one hand, and the difficulty of obtaining Navigating Ethical and Legal Challenges in Smart Agriculture 177
critical data provided by others on the other, provide obstacles to their data sharing. 
Disparities in access to information underpin both forms of difficulty.
In this chapter, authors look first at barriers to digital technology adop￾tion among farmers, with a focus on smallholder farmers. Though the benefits 
of digital agriculture are well known, why aren’t farmers more involved in its 
planning, development, and oversight? In Section 13.2, authors go over how the 
Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition (GODAN) inventiveness is try￾ing to make it easier for farmers to use data-driven agriculture by defining who’s 
responsible for what and finding a middle ground between the advantages of shar￾ing data and the risks that come with it, as well as the rights of communities and 
businesses. Data governance (access, control, and permission) and practices will 
be discussed in detail.
GODAN/CTA/GFAR developed a toolbox on agricultural codes of conduct and 
other governance mechanisms that could allow for a more equitable distribution of 
benefits. The final section offers some final thoughts.
10.2 GODAN METHOD
A multinational coalition, the GODAN initiative 1, encourages the widespread dis￾semination of open data in agriculture with the goal of boosting global innovation 
and production in the field. Its current global network consists of approximately 1100 
institutions (ranging from government and international organization to the private 
sector and educational institutions) spread across 118 countries.
To be more specific, GODAN backs international initiatives to make data with 
relevance to agriculture and nutrition freely accessible and usable everywhere in 
the globe. The primary objectives of this work are the open data in both the public 
and private sectors and to produce comprehensive policy. The major objective is to 
educate the public on ongoing efforts, recent innovations, and effective strategies. 
Authors should advise and help corporate and public sector organization on open 
data and open access policies, with an emphasis on fostering capacity development 
and diversity among open data users, in order to increase open data’s accessibility, 
consumption, engagement, and awareness [51]. Finding a medium between the obvi￾ous advantages of accessible data and realistic concerns relating to privacy, security, 
community rights, and economic interests is essential if authors are to realize the 
full potential of this data revolution.
GODAN’s vast international stakeholder network has improved communication 
and collaboration amongst influential groups, leading to an agreement on the legal, 
ethical, and societal implications of, for example, agricultural data ownership, data 
rights, privacy, and responsibilities. Such organization as the GODAN, the Global 
Forum on Agricultural Research (GFAR), the Technical Centre for Agricultural and 
Rural Cooperation ACP-EU (CTA), and the Kuratorium für Technik und Bauwesen 
in der Landwirtschaft (KTBL) convened in 2018 to discuss the moral, governmen￾tal, and legal ramifications of open data for smallholder farmers. Collective action 
was taken in the form of holding workshops and webinars, attending large confer￾ences, advising on data policy at the national and international levels, and bolstering 178 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
the capabilities of farmer groups and farmer associations. In general, this study 
addressed issues of food security and sustainability in poor nations by making 
farmers’ data more easily accessible and shareable.
This chapter details some of the learnings GODAN gained via these interactions, 
focusing on issues and problems that are relevant to farmers’ rights and the future of 
research that hopes to recycling data collected from farmers.
10.3 PROBLEMS ON THE MORAL SIGNIFICANCE
Concerns regarding the possible exploitation or misuse of data were generally rel￾egated to the back burner until recently, when they were finally acknowledged at 
all. Yet, as smart farming’s use of big data grows, it’s more important than ever 
to consider the legal and moral implications of data governance (access, control, 
permission). Agribusiness can benefit from big data by increasing profits and out￾put. However, there are a few obstacles to be aware of, including data ownership 
and rights, data governance, and the distribution of benefits. Questions, like “What 
opportunities do digital technology provide?”, must be answered. To what extent 
does each participant in the value chain have access to the same data and analy￾sis? How do large agribusinesses win the trust of individual farmers? It’s common 
knowledge that whoever has access to the data also has the power to influence the 
conclusions drawn from it. The collection and use of data, how to bridge the digital 
divide, how to create transparency and build trust among stakeholders, and so on can 
all be illuminated if the right ethical questions are asked and if all stakeholders in the 
agricultural field (specifically farmers) are engaged in an open dialogue.
Due to its wide scope, agriculture encompasses a wide variety of farming prac￾tices and realities. Digital solutions should be developed keeping the needs of rural 
communities in mind if they are to fulfil their full potential. This is especially true in 
Africa, where the agricultural potential is still largely unrealized despite widespread 
illiteracy and a lack of familiarity with digital technologies. To ensure that invest￾ments pay off, smallholder farmers must face down obstacles and take calculated 
risks. The first obstacle is gaining access to the necessary information and services 
that are being offered by others; the second is ensuring that the information being 
shared will not be used against them.
Monopolies, knowledge gaps, and inequalities are all problems plaguing the 
agriculture industry. For smallholder farmers with minimal resources to reap the 
benefits of technology, they must first open up their most private farm data. Those 
with the expertise to turn raw data into actionable insights are notoriously tight￾lipped about their back-end procedures and data storage plans. As a result, authors 
must consider whether or not the benefits to farmers outweigh the price of imple￾menting this technology. Farmers should be able to provide input on data usage in a 
way that makes them feel like they are part of the decision-making process. Many 
people are interested in realizing the benefits of sharing their data and gaining 
access to useful information, but they want to feel secure in their right to privacy 
and control over their data at the same time. The openness and trustworthiness of 
their contacts with service providers; the importance they place on adaptability Navigating Ethical and Legal Challenges in Smart Agriculture 179
and individualization. So that they can spend as little time as possible dealing with 
bureaucratic formalities.
The aforementioned predicament has prompted serious concerns, including the 
following:
• When it comes to information, who owns it?
• Who gets to keep the data profits?
• What plans do authors have for using or sharing that information?
• Why isn’t there more emphasis on secure storage of personal information? 
Why do authors care about farmers’ access to information?
• What is the current status of national and international acknowledgment of 
these rights?
• So, what exactly does the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) do 
for farms?
• What laws, guidelines, and policies can be put in place to ensure that these 
rights are respected and upheld both domestically and internationally?
• How can farmers be made a part of data collection, analysis, transmission, 
and utilization?
Those working in agriculture have long faced these challenges. Yet, these issues 
must be properly and promptly addressed today if farmers’ rights are to be protected. 
It is common knowledge that the concept of ownership is intricate, and farming 
records are not often considered the kind of property that can be owned. When 
applied to data, intellectual right property provides the same level of security as 
physical property. But none of these adequately protects individual data ownership. 
Data ownership can be established in a number of ways, including through the use 
of copyright; however, data is not always or even usually safeguarded by copyright. 
Statistics, mathematical formulas, geographical data, and news articles are all exam￾ples of facts that cannot be protected by intellectual property laws.
Because not all databases qualify as creative works under copyright law, the 
European Parliament’s Database from 1996 creates sui generis, or new, rights in 
databases. Those responsible for creating databases can restrict access to their work 
by preventing the copying or redistribution of all or a significant portion of the data 
contained therein. The databases prove that sufficient effort was expended in acquir￾ing, verifying, or presenting the data in order to qualify for this privilege. The 15-year 
duration of protection can be renewed if the database owner makes material changes 
to the database’s contents. The freedom to exploit data connected to agricultural 
inventions is restricted by patents and plant breeders’ rights, despite the fact that 
neither directly protects data.
In the case of agricultural data, defining who owns what can be quite a chal￾lenge. For instance, even in the context of copyright-protected data, copyright own￾ership might be shifted through contractual agreements. Instead of questioning who 
“owns” data, it would be more productive to inquire as to who controls and has 
access to information regarding farms. Farmers often own the data produced by their 
farms, but they have limited say in who else can access or utilize that data.180 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
10.4 RESOLUTIONS FOR RULES OF ENGAGEMENT
A dearth of regulation concerning data collection, dissemination, and utiliza￾tion of agricultural data, despite the increasing prevalence of rules and regula￾tions protecting personal data (such as the European General Data Protection 
Regulation, GDPR3).
The latest EU Regulation on the free transit of non-personal data and its impli￾cations for digital agriculture, however, need to be debated. The European Union 
published a guideline on the handling of non-personal data a year after the General 
Data Protection Law entered into effect, and within it, a description of precise agri￾cultural data as non-personal data is included. This underscores the necessity for 
further study on distinguishing between personal and non-personal agriculture data 
in order to help relieve future privacy concerns. By encouraging the development of 
industry-specific standards of behaviour that enable service providers to share data 
in an open, structured, and unobtrusive manner, the new law appropriately high￾lights the need of self-regulation within the data economy.
Transparent standards of behaviour for data sharing and self-regulation that are 
sensitive to the state and requirements of societies and strike a balance in the dis￾semination of advantage throughout locations in the agricultural chain are essential 
for steering a new paradigm in agricultural data governance. Since no laws have 
been passed to standardize data-sharing contracts, voluntary codes of behaviour 
have emerged to do so. In their contracts, those who have signed, subscribed, or 
joined commit to upholding the ideals outlined in these rules. Farming data is an 
example of the kind of sensitive data that circulates. Information collected on farms 
is shared with a wide range of third parties, including extension workers, consul￾tants, agri-tech companies, farmer groups, banks, the government, and others, who 
then aggregate and combine the data and deliver it back to the farms as a service. 
The data that is made available as a result of these flows may be useful, but it must 
be protected by being anonymised or only shared under certain situations or with 
certain actors. However, smallholder farmers are in the worst position to convert 
their data privileges due to the fact that their agricultural data typically overlaps with 
home and personal data.
The European Union’s Code of Conduct for Transparent and Equitable Sharing of 
Agricultural Data Through Contractual Agreement; The French Agricultural Data 
Use Charter (Charte sur utilization des données agricoles); and Australia’s Farm 
Data Code, which will go into effect in 2020. Figure 10.1 depicts the important 
features of agricultural conduct codes. There are already codes of conduct in place 
that handle issues like terms, data ownership, data rights, privacy concerns, security, 
consent, disclosure, and openness. Compliance standards like this attempt to strike a 
compromise between farmers’ wants and the benefits of Ag-data. These regulations 
are an example of industry and agribusinesses self-regulating, with the help of their 
own good intentions and sense of social responsibility; as such, they are not legally 
binding; though they do educate data providers, primarily farmers, on their legal 
protections, increase transparency in agricultural data flows, and change the way 
agribusinesses see data.Navigating Ethical and Legal Challenges in Smart Agriculture 181
10.5 GODAN/CTA/CFAR GUIDELINES
The GODAN, CTA, and GFAR held a meeting with legal and policy experts in July 
2018 to address the moral, legal, and regulatory implications of information sharing 
among farmers. It was proposed that people work together to help farmers by sharing 
information more fairly.
Authors envision a world where smallholder farmers, who are particularly vulner￾able to inequitable data flows, are not left behind as a result of larger scale efforts to 
improve the agri-food system as a whole.
Facilitating fair and ethical benefit distribution through transactions built on 
mutual interest and trust is a crucial component of such empowerment. GODAN, 
CTA, and GFAR have come together to improve data management by establish￾ing and enforcing codes of behaviour, voluntary standards, and principles for the 
collection, use, and sharing of agricultural data. While there is currently no estab￾lished legal structure for farming information sharing, it has been proposed that 
codes of conduct, voluntary standards, and principles be developed to address this 
gap. An online resource for agricultural rules of behaviour was released in May 
2020 by GODAN, CTA, and GFAR. When developing this resource, authors first 
looked at other relevant codes of conduction, rules, and values for sharing farm 
data that had already been developed. During the course of the GODAN/CTA Sub￾Group on Data Encryptions of Behaviour’s deliberations, it was drafted for the 
purpose of public comment. The intended users of this resource are the farmers, 
agribusinesses, and associations that gather, manage, and share data. It also serves 
FIGURE 10.1 Important features of agricultural conduct codes.182 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
a more immediate purpose by laying the groundwork conceptually for broad, scal￾able recommendations for all parties involved in agricultural data generation, own￾ership, sharing, and use.
The results of the evaluation agribusinesses and Ag tech corporations are the 
primary audiences for current agricultural data codes; neither farmers nor farm￾ers’ organizations were consulted throughout their development. Companies can use 
codes of conduct as a tool to facilitate data sharing with farmers after earning the 
farmers’ trust through open documentation of best practices. Indirectly, they help 
farmers become more familiar with their data rights without being created specifi￾cally for farmers (especially smallholder farmers at this moment). This resource 
provides associations of smallholder farmers in developing countries with generic, 
scalable instructions for utilizing, adjusting, negotiating, and establishing a farmer￾centred farm data-sharing code. Among the most important aspects of these rules 
is the responsibility of credible organizations like farmers’ associations to interpret, 
contribute to, and negotiate the code on behalf of its farmer members.
Protocols for cooperatively gathering and sharing agricultural data. In particular, 
they are anticipating:
• Raise consciousness about the importance of farm data collection, utiliza￾tion, and sharing.
• Authors need more openness, honesty, and precision in how authors gather, 
use, and share data about farms.
• Support the equitable and fair gathering, utilization, and exchange of farm 
data for agricultural purposes.
• Create an environment where farmers feel safe and secure sharing their 
data in order to maximize its potential for agricultural benefit.
• Providers should be given leeway in determining how best to gather, use, 
and share data from farms; therefore, it is important to allow for this flex￾ibility in implementation.
There are 17 different clauses available within the tool, and consumers should be 
able to find one that applies to their scenario before proceeding to the checkout page. 
Specifically, the clauses are as follows:
1. Definitions: Words and phrases with agricultural significance defined (For 
instance, who will be collecting the data, what kinds of data will be col￾lected, and how they will be classified as either personal, agricultural, indi￾vidual farm, raw, aggregated, etc.).
2. Farmers, and more specifically anyone who has created or gathered data 
about their farming operations, whether technically or manually, or com￾missioned data providers for this purpose, play an essential role in determin￾ing who has access to and uses data from their business, and who stands to 
gain from sharing that data with any partner that wishes to do so, due to their 
capacity for management and access. If providers want to provide farmers 
peace of mind, they should make sure they can still decide who gets access 
to data collected on their farms. However, it is in the farmer’s best interest to Navigating Ethical and Legal Challenges in Smart Agriculture 183
negotiate data use and sharing with any parties who have a monetary stake 
in the topic, such parties could include a tenant, landowner, cooperative, 
hardware owner of a precision agricultural system, and Ag Tech Provider.
3. Approval to collect, access, and exercise control: Only with the farmer’s 
express permission may data about their farm be collected, accessed, or used 
in any way. The originator of agricultural data must give their informed con￾sent for it to be collected, accessed, stored, and used in accordance with a 
legally binding contract. Consent needs to be voluntarily provided, specific, 
informed, and unambiguous. Consent must be freely granted and explicitly 
given by the individual giving it. The word “free” suggests that the farmer has 
a genuine say in the matter. When consent is given under improper circum￾stances, such as when there is undue pressure or impact that could change 
the result of the choice, it is not valid. To ensure that the farmer’s consent is 
both informed and specific, it is necessary to include at least the following 
details regarding the provider, the data to be processed, the recipients of the 
data, and the intended use or disclosure of the data. The farmer also has the 
right to revoke approval at any moment, which should be made clear to them.
4. Purpose limitation: The collected, used, or shared data by providers shall 
be used exclusively for the purposes communicated to the farmer at the 
time of data collection. No data may be reused in ways inconsistent with 
the original agreement.
5. Notice: Farmers have the right to know if and how their personal informa￾tion is being gathered.
6. Integrity and constancy: Farmers should be made more aware of the types of 
agricultural data being gathered by agribusinesses and ATPs, as well as the 
reasons for collecting, using, and sharing this data (e.g. algorithms). Farmers 
also need to know how to get in touch with the providers if they have any 
queries or complaints, such as via the ATPs, and what third parties have 
access to their data and the potential risks associated with sharing data with 
the providers.
The guiding principles and daily operations of all involved agribusinesses and Ag 
Tech Providers must be open and in line with the stipulations of the contracts. Unless 
both parties agree to a contract amendment, it will not go into effect.
1. Data creators’ legal protections: The data provider (the farmer) should be 
entitled to the following protections under the terms of the agreement and 
the retention policy.
• Right to portability: It is the responsibility of data providers to make 
farmer-specific information readily available.
• Except for data that has been anonymised or aggregated and is no lon￾ger uniquely identifiable, a farmer must have access to his or her own 
farm data for the purposes of archiving or utilizing in other systems, in 
either its raw or processed (cleaned) form.
• Data subjects have the right to have their data forgotten (erased), 
deleted, or returned to them.184 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
2. Right to benefit: When providing their services, businesses should respect the 
rights of data creators to profit from or be compensated for the use of their work.
3. Limits on revelation, exploitation, and dissemination: No agricultural com￾pany or Ag Tech Provider will sell or disclose any farmer’s personal infor￾mation without first obtaining an enforceable agreement from that third 
party to be destined by the similar standards and regulations as the ATP’s 
agreement with the farmer. If a sale of this kind is planned, farmers must 
be informed and given the chance to prevent it or have their information 
deleted. In accordance with the terms of their agreement with the farmer, 
an Ag Tech Supplier will not distribute or reveal any confidential informa￾tion about the farm to any outside parties. It is the responsibility of the ATP 
to present the farmers with the third-party rule for acceptance or refusal if 
they differ from those of the ATP agreement.
4. Data retention and availability: When requested by the farmer or after a spec￾ified amount of time has passed, each agribusiness and Ag Tech Provider 
should delete or return the farmer’s personal farm data. The ATP should 
stipulate that during the data retention term, the data held by the ATP must 
be made available to the farmers.
5. Contract termination: If it is clearly mentioned in the agreement and the data 
originator is made aware of the repercussions, then farmers should be given 
the option to opt out of the contract and cease the collection and use of their 
data. There ought to be a detailed outline of the steps required to cancel 
service in the contract.
6. Fraudulent or anti-competitive behaviour: Any illegal or anti-competitive use 
of data is unacceptable, such as when agribusinesses or Ag Tech Providers 
use agricultural data for commodity market speculation (e.g. discrimination 
in pricing).
7. Data protection safeguards: Data users/providers should be held account￾able for their roles in protecting the privacy, security, and confidentiality 
of farmers’ information in the contract. Safeguards should be in place to 
prevent farm records from being accidentally or maliciously deleted, cor￾rupted, lost, or used without permission. Policies and procedures for breach 
notification should be put in place.
8. Protecting intellectual property and limiting liability: Liability terms need 
to be established. All parties’ rights to prevent the further use or processing 
of sensitive information should be recognized in the contract. Protecting 
private information, financial information, trade secrets, and intellectual 
property from unauthorized changes is essential.
9. Simple and understandable contracts: Suppliers need to be accountable 
for drafting contracts that are not just comprehensible but also written in 
plain English for farmers to read. All ag data contracts should be writ￾ten in clear and straightforward English. More specifically, contracts will 
define (1) key concepts and definitions; (2) the reason for data collection, 
sharing, and processing; (3) the rights and responsibilities of each party 
in regard to data; (4) the details of how ag data will be stored and used; Navigating Ethical and Legal Challenges in Smart Agriculture 185
(5) methods by which the data’s originator can ensure its accuracy; and 
(6) clear procedures for incorporating new applications.
10. Certification schemes: Transparency and confidence in data uses are bolstered 
by data certification program. In order to ensure that contracts adhere to codes 
or certification standards, a separate Supervisory Authority can be set up. It’s 
important to provide incentives for following the rules of conduct. In accor￾dance with these principles, all parties involved should have their agreements 
and guidelines reviewed by a third-party auditing team from a recognized, 
credible body. A certificate of compliance will be issued upon review.
11. Agreement with the national and international rule: When working on or 
creating a Code of Conduct, all parties involved must adhere to all appli￾cable laws, both domestic and foreign.
Terminology, security, authorization, ownership, and authentication of data, as 
well as certification methods are only some of the major themes that these prin￾ciples and recommendations cover in an effort to establish universal standards for 
data-sharing contracts. Clause 2 makes mention of accessing and controlling. It is 
explicitly detailed that farmers should retain ownership of their data. All data gener￾ated by a farmer’s operations remains the farmer’s property, and only that data will 
be used and shared if the farmer gives permission. Clause 3 should need farmers’ 
permission before collecting, accessing, or using their personal data. To the extent 
that aggregated data is not relevant to farmer ownership, it should be made imme￾diately and adequately available to farmers. Farmers must be compensated for their 
data and must be informed of the collection, use, and sharing of their data in a clear 
and unambiguous manner. Putting farmers in charge of their data and giving them 
options for how it’s shared with others is one method to earn their trust in data shar￾ing and reaping the benefits of big data. Third parties collecting information on 
farming should also have a contract in place with the farmer to protect the latter’s 
right to have access to and management of his data.
Because of this, the farmer would have a larger voice in decision-making, and 
more say over who sees and how the data generated by his or her technological gad￾gets and machines is used. Throughout farming activities involving numerous stake￾holders, it is essential that farmers be able to benefit from the sharing and utilization 
of data created on their farms. Agreements should be stated in simple, plain English 
and specify the data’s permitted uses. This ensures that any changes or transfers of 
data can be traced back to their original source.
Codes of conduct also encourage the growth of certification programs, which is a 
really positive thing. With the use of certifications, farmers can choose tech compa￾nies whose data management methods meet the standards specified by an authorita￾tive organization. Specifically, these norms address data storage and security, data 
processing and sharing, and data gathering.
The Ag-Data Transparency Assessor is one such tool. In 2016, a system was 
established to validate the contracts of Ag Tech Suppliers that met the 13 Privacy and 
Security Principles of the American Farm Bureau Federation (“Principles for Farm 
Data”, 2014). The American Farm Bureau Federation developed this instrument with 186 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
support from a coalition of organizations serving the agricultural sector, commod￾ity exchanges, and ICT companies to evaluate ATPs’ data contracts on a voluntary 
basis. The Evaluator provides ATPs with a tool to gauge their level of compliance 
with the Principles for Farm Data.
The law company, Janzen Agricultural Law LLC, functions as an independent 
administrator to assess the provided responses to these queries and the ATP’s con￾tracts and processes. After being analysed, the findings are published online so 
that farmers and other agricultural stakeholders can examine them. The “Ag-Data 
Transparent” seal can be used by ATPs if they have been granted permission to do so 
by Janzen Agricultural Law LLC. By displaying the seal, farmers will know that the 
ATP follows the Principles for Farm Data in its data management practices.
The “Ag Data Transparent” authorization and valuation method has been revised 
as of January 2020 to account for the rising prominence of personally protect￾ing data rights. The agricultural banking industry is becoming a target for Ag Data 
Transparency assessments. The decision was made to expand the Seal’s use to the agri￾cultural financial sector in order to better protect farmers’ personal information. Novel 
and restructured queries about data collection, use, sharing, and security for farmers 
have been added for technology providers seeking accreditation. Accurate information 
about the data’s format or the identity of its primary user has been added in the revi￾sions. The practice of firms selling data to third parties is considered, as is the query 
of who possesses the information and whether or not users have the option to “opt out”.
These GFAR/GODAN/CTA/provisions are not meant to be exhaustive, and they 
cannot replace a solid institutional structure that can guide and operationalize deci￾sions about privacy, ethics, and other sensitive topics. In sum, these recommenda￾tions lay forth a discretionary plan of action for exchanging agricultural data. Their 
purpose is to be used and consulted in accordance with national legislation. In addi￾tion to the already existing legally obligatory documents, this online resource will 
describe the duty of many different sectors. Standards of behaviour for more equi￾table and accountable data management are described, and the necessity for collabo￾ration is acknowledged.
It’s also a work in progress, with suggestions for how to make the tool even bet￾ter at meeting farmers’ requirements for ethical data sharing with the addition of 
a generic, scalable code of conduct template. Together, GODAN and Youths in 
Technology and Development Uganda (YITEDEV) will develop a toolkit on codes 
of behaviour to educate and inform smallholder farmers, particularly young people 
and women, of their rights in negotiations with other parties. A recommendation 
to use Uganda as a test case for the moral, permitted, and strategic consequences 
of data allotment distressing farmers was presented during the 2018 Bonn Expert 
Consultation. To better acquaint farmers with open data, privacy, and data rights, a 
virtual session will be held. In order to further refine the codes of conduct toolbox 
and hear the opinions of the farmers, a second workshop will be held.
10.6 CONCLUSION
The effectiveness and promise of today’s agricultural technologies are beyond dis￾pute. Efficiency, productivity, and profitability are all enhanced by the advent of Navigating Ethical and Legal Challenges in Smart Agriculture 187
digital innovations such as artificial intelligence (AI), the internet of things (IoT), 
blockchain, and autonomous systems. Technology is advancing at an ever-faster 
clip, and that trend shows no signs of abating. The complexity of the agri-food data 
value chain makes data challenges in agriculture more difficult to solve than in other 
industries. Many farmers, especially smallholders, feel helpless in today’s digital 
age because they don’t immediately gain from the ubiquitous data sharing and inter￾change. Some of the most fundamental challenges that farmers face in regard to 
digital agriculture include monopolies, data asymmetries, discrimination, a lack of 
transparency and trust, and a lack of legislation and regulation on data ownership, 
data rights, and privacy issues. Because they are uncertain of the worth of their data 
or worry about its security, many people are hesitant to volunteer it. This disinclina￾tion is compounded by the fact that they gain nothing from it.
Because they are excluded from the design and control of the processes involved 
in digital agriculture, smallholder farmers are unable to fully realize its benefits. 
Data governance is really about people, not just about tools and systems. While the 
aforementioned are undoubtedly important, they are not the exclusive determinants 
of a process’s or an organization’s projects’ success.
Issues that farmers have had with the introduction of digital technologies into 
agriculture have been discussed in this chapter. Our research focused on governance 
models that pave the way for more equitable distribution of resources and transac￾tions based on genuine concern and confidence among all parties involved. Creating 
standards for behaviour in farming is one such method. By providing a framework for 
more equitable and transparent data contracts in the agriculture sector, these principles 
and recommendations can help farmers strengthen their relationships with technol￾ogy vendors and increase their comfort with the use of digital tools. The participation 
of stakeholders at all levels (including and especially farmers) in open dialogue to find 
solutions to their varied needs and concerns is essential to the success of any agricul￾tural code of conduct, even if such codes are not mandated by law. Additionally, this 
method has the potential to increase confidence all across the data value chain.
REFERENCES
1. L. Galetto et al., “Risks and opportunities associated with pollinators’ conservation 
and management of pollination services in Latin America,” Ecol Austral, vol. 32, no. 1, 
pp. 55–76, 2022. doi: 10.25260/EA.22.32.1.0.1790
2. N. Boltyanska, H. Podashevskaya, O. Skliar, R. Sklyar and O. Boltianskyi, “Problems 
of implementation of digital technologies in animal husbandry,” CEUR Workshop Proc, 
vol. 3109, pp. 75–82, 2022.
3. K. Charvát et al., “INSPIRE Hackathons and SmartAfriHub – Roadmap for addressing 
the agriculture data challenges in Africa,” Agris On-Line Pap Econ Inf, vol. 13, no. 4, 
pp. 33–48, 2021. doi: 10.7160/AOL.2021.130404
4. M. S. Khan, N. Koizumi and J. L. Olds, “Biofixation of atmospheric nitrogen in the 
context of world staple crop production: Policy perspectives,” Sci Total Environ, vol. 701, 
2020. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.134945
5. P. Singh, ‘Genetically modified crops in India: Politics, policies, and political economy’, 
in Policy Issues in Genetically Modified Crops: A Global Perspective, 2020, pp. 75–96. 
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-820780-2.00004-2188 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
6. H. El Bilali, F. Bottalico, G. Ottomano Palmisano and R. Capone, “Information and 
communication technologies for smart and sustainable agriculture,” IFMBE Proc, vol. 78, 
pp. 321–334, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-40049-1_41
7. F. K. van Evert, S. Fountas, D. Jakovetic, V. Crnojevic, I. Travlos and C. Kempenaar, “Big 
Data for weed control and crop protection,” Weed Res, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 218–233, 2017. 
doi: 10.1111/wre.12255
8. B. J. Shaw, ‘Terre de Liens – Facilitating access to land for farmers into the long-term’, 
in The Science and Practice of Landscape Stewardship, 2017, pp. 328–330. doi: 10.1017/
9781316499016.032
9. M. N. Garcia-Casal et al., “Staple crops biofortified with increased vitamins and minerals: 
Considerations for a public health strategy,” Ann N Y Acad Sci, vol. 1390, no. 1, pp. 3–13, 
2017. doi: 10.1111/nyas.13293
10. P. Rose, M. Bhat, K. Vidhani, N. Ajmeri, A. Gole and S. Ghaisas, ‘Intelligent informatics 
platform for nano-agriculture’, in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Nanotechnology, 
2011, pp. 916–919. doi: 10.1109/NANO.2011.6144536
11. P. Benson, “Tobacco talk: Reflections on corporate power and the legal framing of 
consumption,” Med Anthropol Q, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 500–521, 2010. doi: 10.1111/j.1548-
1387.2010.01120.x
12. H. Azadi and P. Ho, “Genetically modified and organic crops in developing countries: A 
review of options for food security,” Biotechnol Adv, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 160–168, 2010. 
doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2009.11.003
13. R. Mrabet and R. Moussadek, ‘Development of climate smart agriculture in Africa’, in 
Conservation Agriculture in Africa: Climate Smart Agricultural Development, 2022, 
pp. 17–65. doi: 10.1079/9781789245745.0002
14. W.-M. Cheng et al., ‘A real and novel smart agriculture implementation with IoT technology’, 
2021. doi: 10.1109/ICOT54518.2021.9680638
15. A. Tendolkar and S. Ramya, ‘CareBro (Personal Farm Assistant): An IoT based 
Smart Agriculture with Edge Computing’, in MPCIT 2020 – Proceedings: IEEE 3rd 
International Conference on ‘Multimedia Processing, Communication and Information 
Technology’, 2020, pp. 97–102. doi: 10.1109/MPCIT51588.2020.9350481
16. I. BbudiIman, “Climate-smart agriculture policy and (in)justice for smallholders in 
developing countries,” Futur Food J Food, Agric Soc, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 31–41, 2019. doi: 
10.17170/kobra-2018122074
17. Y. Mohamed Hamada, ‘Risk management in agriculture: Production and technical risk 
management’, in Risk and Contingency Management: Breakthroughs in Research and 
Practice, 2017, pp. 300–335. doi: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3932-2.ch016
18. J. Anand, M. Dhanalakshmi and P. P. J. Raja, “Smart indication system for spinal cord 
stress detection,” Int J Recent Technol Eng, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 6164–6168, 2019.
19. H. Shilomboleni, ‘Political economy challenges for climate smart agriculture in Africa’, 
in Social Innovation and Sustainability Transition, Springer, 2022, pp. 261–272.
20. E. N. Sadjadi and R. Fernández, “Challenges and opportunities of agriculture digitaliza￾tion in Spain,” Agronomy, vol. 13, no. 1, 2023. doi: 10.3390/agronomy13010259
21. D. Duc Truong, T. Tho Dat and L. Huy Huan, “Factors affecting climate-smart agricul￾ture practice adaptation of farming households in coastal central Vietnam: The case of 
Ninh Thuan Province,” Front Sustain Food Syst, vol. 6, 2022. doi: 10.3389/fsufs.2022.
790089
22. M. Uddin, A. Chowdhury and M. A. Kabir, “Legal and ethical aspects of deploying 
artificial intelligence in climate-smart agriculture,” AI Soc, 2022. doi: 10.1007/s00146-
022-01421-2
23. R. Kibugi, “Assessing Kenyan law and practice in the mainstreaming of a low carbon 
development pathway in Agriculture,” Carbon Clim Law Rev, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 60–79, 
2021. doi: 10.21552/cclr/2021/1/8Navigating Ethical and Legal Challenges in Smart Agriculture 189
24. M. A. Soharwardi, A. Firdous and A. R. Gill, “Are environment, informal sector and 
poverty interrelated?” Int J Agric Ext, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 277–284, 2021. doi: 10.33687/ijae.
009.02.3579
25. J. Anand, A. Jones, T. K. Sandhya and K. Besna, ‘Preserving national animal using 
wireless sensor network based hotspot algorithm’, in 2013 International Conference on 
Green High Performance Computing (ICGHPC), 2013, pp. 1–6.
26. S. Jarial, “Internet of Things application in Indian agriculture, challenges and effect on 
the extension advisory services–a review,” J Agribus Dev Emerg Econ, 2022, vol. 13, 
no. 4, 505–519.
27. H. F. Williamson and S. Leonelli, Towards Responsible Plant Data Linkage: Data 
Challenges for Agricultural Research and Development, Springer Nature, 2023.
28. M. Amiri-Zarandi, R. A. Dara, E. Duncan and E. D. G. Fraser, “Big data privacy in smart 
farming: A review,” Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 15, p. 9120, 2022.
29. G. V. Fedotova, R. H. Ilyasov, N. E. Buletova, T. A. Yakushkina and T. K. Kurbanov, ‘AI as 
a breakthrough technology of agriculture development’, Advances in Intelligent Systems 
and Computing, vol. 1100, AISC, pp. 384–393, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-39319-9_44
30. I. F. Gorlov, G. V. Fedotova, A. V. Glushchenko, M. I. Slozhenkina and N. I. Mosolova, 
“Digital technologies in the development of the agro-industrial complex,” Lect Notes 
Netw Syst, vol. 87, pp. 220–229, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-29586-8_26
31. R. Dhanalakshmi and J. Anand, ‘Big data for personalized healthcare’, in Handb Intell 
Healthc Anal Knowl Eng with Big Data Anal, Wiley, pp. 67–92, 2022. doi: 10.1002/
9781119792550.ch4
32. L. Goparaju and F. Ahmad, “Analyzing the risk related to climate change attributes and 
their impact, a step towards climate-smart village (CSV): A geospatial approach to bring 
geoponics sustainability in India,” Spat Inf Res, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 613–625, 2019. doi: 
10.1007/s41324-019-00258-0
33. J. Anand and K. Sivachandar, “Diverse sorting algorithm analysis for ACSFD in wireless 
sensor networks,” Int J Eng Adv Technol, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 57–59, 2013.
34. M. Jastrzębska, M. Kostrzewska and A. Saeid, ‘Sustainable agriculture: A challenge 
for the future’, in Smart Agrochemicals for Sustainable Agriculture, Elsevier, 2022, 
pp. 29–56.
35. B. K. Manik, “Revisit to policy formulation for climate-smart agriculture in India,” Int J 
Innov Technol Explor Eng, vol. 8, no. 7C2, pp. 144–151, 2019.
36. R. Dhanalakshmi, J. Anand, K. Poonkavithai and V. Vijayakumar, ‘Cloud-based glau￾coma diagnosis in medical imaging using machine learning’, in Artificial Intelligence for 
Innovative Healthcare Informatics, Springer, 2022, pp. 61–78.
37. F. A. Khan, A. Abubakar, M. Mahmoud, M. A. Al-Khasawneh and A. A. Alarood, 
“Cotton crop cultivation oriented semantic framework based on IoT smart farming appli￾cation,” Int J Eng Adv Technol, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 480–484, 2019.
38. F Sarro, A Rainer, K Jan-Stol, D O’Connor, N Power ‘ACM International Conference 
Proceeding Series’, 50-100 2018 (200).
39. J. Verschuuren, “Towards an EU regulatory framework for climate-smart agricul￾ture: The example of soil carbon sequestration,” Transnatl Environ Law, vol. 7, no. 2, 
pp. 301–322, 2018. doi: 10.1017/S2047102517000395
40. R. Sharma, S. K. Chauhan and A. M. Tripathi, “Carbon sequestration potential in agro￾forestry system in India: An analysis for carbon project,” Agrofor Syst, vol. 90, no. 4, 
pp. 631–644, 2016. doi: 10.1007/s10457-015-9840-8
41. C. Negra, S. Vermeulen, L. G. Barioni, T. Mamo, P. Melville and M. Tadesse, “Brazil, 
Ethiopia, and New Zealand lead the way on climate-smart agriculture,” Agric Food 
Secur, vol. 3, no. 1, 2014. doi: 10.1186/s40066-014-0019-8
42. Y. Ren and S. Wang, “Reliability analysis of godan graphs,” Discret Appl Math, vol. 307, 
pp. 180–190, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.dam.2021.10.022190 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
43. H. Zhang, S. Zhou and Q. Zhang, “Component connectivity of alternating group networks 
and godan graphs,” Int J Found Comput Sci, 2022. doi: 10.1142/S0129054122500228
44. K. Kimbrough, ‘Staging senseless violence: Early jōruri puppet theater and the culture of 
performance’, in The Tokugawa World, 2021, pp. 578–593. doi: 10.4324/9781003198888-40
45. S. R. Luhar and D. Nimavat, “Destroying and recreating myths: A subversive response to 
caste ideology,” Contemp Voice Dalit, 2021. doi: 10.1177/2455328X211050750
46. S. Siddiqi, “Spatial distribution analysis of unigrams and bigrams of Hindi literary 
document,” Int J Adv Comput Res, vol. 8, no. 35, pp. 97–109, 2018. doi: 10.19101/IJACR.
2018.835003
47. R. Musker and B. Schaap, “Global open data in agriculture and nutrition (Godan) initia￾tive partner network analysis [version 1; peer review: 2 approved with reservations],” 
F1000Research, vol. 7, 2018. doi: 10.12688/F1000RESEARCH.13044.1
48. R. Y. Pochekaev, ““King” Godan: Status of the ruling chinggisid in Mongolian and 
tibetan sources,” Zolotoordynskoe Obozr, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 6–17, 2018. doi: 10.22378/
2313-6197.2018-6-1.6-17
49. S. Mulchand and M. Seema, “Formulation of polyherbomineral matrices for treatment of 
osteoporosis,” Asian J Pharm Clin Res, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 217–223, 2018. doi: 10.22159/
ajpcr.2018.v11i1.21777
50. A. Powell, “CABI’s innovative use of technology, data, and knowledge transfer to reduce 
crop losses in the developing world,” Food Energy Secur, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 94–97, 2017. 
doi: 10.1002/fes3.113
51. A. Ponmalar, P. Saravanan, S. Deeba, B. R. Jyothi and J. Anand, ‘IoT Enabled 
Inexhaustible E-vehicle using Transparent Solar Panel’, in 2022 International Conference 
on Communication, Computing and Internet of Things (IC3IoT), 2022, pp. 1–5.DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-11 191
Decision Support System 
for Smart Agriculture 
in Predictive Analysis
Nestor Ulloa, R. Sharmila, E. Brindha, 
R. Deepalakshmi, R. Arunbharathi, 
and K. Divya Vani
11.1 INTRODUCTION
The effects of climatic change and its increased variability will be felt differently 
by the agricultural sectors of various nations [1]. Growers and farmers need to think 
about the environmental implications that could result from changes in management 
regimes, as well as the potential benefits and drawbacks to crop yields and financial 
stability posed by future weather patterns [2]. Extreme heat waves, protracted drought, 
and milder winters are all possible manifestations of these trends. Incorporating les￾sons from climate and environmental science into farm-scale management is difficult, 
notwithstanding breakthroughs in applying research and analyses over the previous 
half-century [3]. In many cases, crucial information and data are lacking, making 
it difficult to identify the repercussions of shifts in management techniques across 
multiple dimensions [4].
As precision farming, mobile devices, and data management software continue 
to gain popularity, there is a greater need than ever for a unified data platform to 
facilitate the communication of management decisions made at the farm level and 
resulting behaviour changes in response to location-certain bio-physical informa￾tion and systematic tools [5–8]. With the help of technology, information gathered 
at the farm level may be combined with publicly available data on a regional scale to 
strengthen evidence-based policy and promote environmentally responsible manage￾ment of agricultural areas [9].
This chapter’s major objective is to show how tradeoffs brought on by climatic 
shifts at the size of individual farms can be mitigated through the use of decision sup￾port systems [10]. Authors also investigate how the farm-level tools might integrate 
with regional-level analysis to provide the data necessary for more effective evidence￾based policymaking. We demonstrate how the aforementioned three factors can be 
considered with AgBiz LogicTM platform and decision-support framework designed 
to assist farmers in assessing the viability of existing and potential future management 
strategies in light of varying climate projections. These decision-making instruments 
are useful for assessing climate-smart choices since they consider the effects of cli￾mate change on the environment. Our example case mirrors the Pacific Northwest, a 
major producer of dryland Barley in India.
11192 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
11.2 AgBiz LOGIC: SUPPORTING CLIMATE-AWARE 
AGRICULTURE DECISIONS
AgBiz Logic is a unified learning tool that stores and tracks financial information from 
growers and businesses [11]. Economic, financial, climate, and environmental modules 
can all benefit from the saved plans and scenarios. Farmers can learn more about the 
potential financial and economic impacts of climate change on their farms by using 
economic and financial calculators [12, 13]. This research delves deeper into the parts. 
The economic and financial calculators included in AgBiz Logic are as follows
AgBizProfit™ is a resource for assessing the viability of various investments over 
the long-, medium-, and short term. This section analyses the potential financial ben￾efits of an investment using standard economic concepts like the total present range, 
yearly equivalent, and interior rate of yield.
Agricultural businesses can benefit from AgBizLease™ because it facilitates the 
creation of fair lease agreements for the use of agricultural assets such as crops, live￾stock, and other capital investments. This unit applies the principles of net present 
range analysis to the economics of a cash rent or crop-share lease between a tenant 
and landlord [14].
Financial liquidity, farm efficiency, profitability, and solvency or ranch’s company 
are all factors considered by AgBiz Finance TM when advising agricultural produc￾ers on investment decisions [15]. Using the results of an AgBiz Finance analysis, 
farmers and ranchers can decide whether to make modifications to their agricultural 
and livestock systems or whether to invest in new technologies. Modifications to 
financial ratios and performance indicators are also computed [16–18].
AgBiz Logic has just added two new modules, AgBizClimate™ and 
AgBizEnvironment™, to its decision-support platform to better assist farmers [19].
Farmers and landowners can use AgBizClimate to revise their budgets in light of 
climate change’s potential effects on crop yields. Using data unique to their enterprises, 
farmers may maximize net returns under a variety of climate change scenarios [20, 21]. 
While making decisions, AgBiz Environment considers a wide range of environmen￾tal impacts, including those related to soil erosion, soil loss, soil carbon sequestration, 
and greenhouse gas emissions, by employing environmental models and other forms of 
ecological accounting [22, 23].
AgBiz Logic allows you to deliver high-quality data faster and at a lesser price [24]. 
Eventually, a statistically representative “panel” of agricultural decision-makers might 
benefit from near real-time insights into management decisions thanks to linked farm 
management software with an encrypted database, as shown in Figure 11.1. AgBiz 
Logic’s use of specific management data would give the granularity required for 
analysis with a technology like tradeoff analysis model for multi-dimensional impact 
assessment (TOA-MD) to be effectively implemented [25, 26]. Moreover, since users 
of AgBiz Logic would be basing their management decisions on the information they 
submit, they would have every reason to be as precise as possible. Finally, with AgBiz 
Logic, farmers have a simple, effective method of data entry, drastically cutting down 
on data-collecting expenses.
Farmers and researchers interested in how climate change and related policies 
are affecting international agricultural markets will find the AgBiz Logic platform Decision Support System for Smart Agriculture 193
invaluable [27, 28]. The downscaled view of climate change affects projections of 
output and production inputs. The potential effects on yield encourage producers to 
make adjustments to input use, management, and technology use [29].
11.3 CONSIDERATION OF THE TRADEOFFS ASSOCIATED 
WITH CLIMATICALLY VARIED AT THE FARM SCALE
When it comes to analysing the effects of climatically varied and making investment 
decisions on a farm size, AgBiz Logic provides a uniform approach. AgBizClimate 
is a useful tool for agriculturalists, growers, and land owners to investigate average 
weather condition estimates (such as growth degree days and chilling days) that 
are pertinent to a commodity in their area [30]. Understanding how these predicted 
shifts will effect their output and risk allows users to make informed decisions 
about where to place their capital and how to allocate their yields and inputs for 
production [31]. When AgBizClimate is coupled with AgBiz Logic, customers are 
able to look ahead 20–30 years to see if their current businesses and operations will 
still be lucrative in that time, and if not, whether they need to make any long-term 
planning decisions now.
Researchers looked at how climate change might affect the profitability of both 
conventional and sustainable crop rotations [32–34]. Following an introduction to 
the AgBizClimate module for estimating the impacts of climate change on truck 
costs, crop yields, tractor, and other productivity inputs, we’ll walk through the 
AgBizProfit module for determining whether or not a shift in crop rotation will 
increase profitability.
FIGURE 11.1 Logic system for AgBiz.194 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
11.3.1  Effects of Climate Change and Investments in New Farming
Methods Under Investigation
We then consider how these variable yields influence overall earnings. The eco￾nomic benefits of growing different crops are also studied. Adapting to the changing 
environment by planting winter Barley and Brassicaceae annually has been proved 
to be beneficial for farmers in this region [35]. Particularly in areas where dryland 
farming techniques are popular, Brassicaceae is being explored as a potential source 
of biodiesel fuel for aircraft.
It is possible to create what-if reports with the help of the Ag BizProfit add-on. 
Each scenario includes one to five alternative strategies that can be compared and 
contrasted with one another [36]. The current winter Barley fallow system in 2022 is 
compared to two alternative plans that improve Barley yields by 25 and 18%, respec￾tively, and a fourth plan that changes to a rotation that includes both winter Barley 
and Brassicaceae. Lower soil moisture in the later cropping strategy will reduce 
Barley yields from 50 to 39 bushels per acre (about 14%), but this loss will be more 
than made up for by the higher income from the Brassicaceae crop [37–39]. For this 
scenario, a brand-new crop budget is being prepared for this program.
Changes in production, tractor, truck miles, and predicted years of life are just 
some of the impacts of switching to an annual cropping system with Brassicaceae 
shown in Table 11.1. Because of its high yield of 37 bushels (1,800 lbs/ac) and low 
trading rate, Brassicaceae can be cultivated in place of fallow during the winter 
Barley and Brassicaceae cycle [40]. The net returns from Barley are less than they 
would have been with contributions from net returns from Brassicaceae because 
of lower Barley yields and greater mechanical costs (Table 11.1). There will be an 
annual production of 38.71 barrels as a result.
Both the winter Barley and fallow cycles in 2045 account for the rising costs asso￾ciated with weed, disease, and insect infestations as a result of warmer temperatures 
and greater precipitation. The price per acre of things to control pests and diseases 
and the price per treatment for an extra herbicide and pesticide application are all 
factored in. This means that in 2045, more hours will be spent operating tractors and 
sprayers on Barley and fallow fields to accommodate for these additional applica￾tions. Brassicaceae’s inclusion in an annual cropping system eliminates the need for 
four different herbicides, cutting down on the time spent on the tractor and sprayer 
each year by a significant amount.
AgBiz Climate’s Table 11.2 compares four cropping systems that involve both 
owned and leased land, including the net yield, total adjustable cash costs, and per￾acre returns of each. Winter Barley and fallow cycles yielded mean net return of 
₹483,570/ac on privately retained property in 2022, compared to ₹241,785/ac on 
rented land.
Low Barley yields (only 49.50 bu./ac) are a major factor in the dismal bot￾tom line. Now consider the outcomes of climate change, which result in increased 
Barley harvests. In 2045, when yields are increased by 21.2% to 60.24 bushels, 
after-cost returns amount to ₹7,613 and ₹3,929/ac on owned property and rented 
land, respectively. We also provide our results for a case in which yield changes 
owing to climate change are less dramatic. Barley yields increased by only 18% 195 Decision Support System for Smart Agriculture TABLE 11.1 Variations in Estimated Service Life and Annual Mileage for Tractors, Combines, Other Heavy Equipment, and Trucks Yield (bu/ac) Base: Barley and Fallow Rotation, 2022 Barley 21.2% and Fallow Revolution, 2045 Barley 18% and Fallow Revolution, 2045 Barley and Brassicaceae Revolution, 2045 Brassicaceae yield 38 Barley yield 55 65 59 41 Yield increase 11 8 27 Lifespan and Annual Usage of Machinery Machine Size Hours of Miles of Annual Use Expected Life (Yrs) Hours of Miles of Annual Use Expected Life (Yrs) Hours of Miles of Annual Use Expected Life (Yrs) Hours of Miles of Annual Use Expected Life (Yrs) Truck 21/2 ton. older 2,400 20.0 2,887 16.6 2,760 17.4 3,622 13.3 Rotary mower 27′ 168 16.0 168 16.0 168 16.0 NA NA Additional Combine 32′ Hillside NA 163 6.7 Field sprayer 90′ 183 15.0 275 10.0 275 10.0 46 59.8 Combine 30r Hillside 109 10.0 109 10.0 109 10.0 163 6.7 Air seeder 46′ 98 16.0 98 16.0 98 16.0 195 8.5 Bank out wagon 860 bu. capicity 122 21.0 145 17.6 140 18.5 183 15.5 Tractor-rubber tracked 485 hp 568 16.0 685 13.6 678 13.6 589 15.4 Truck and trailer Semi, used 3,000 21.0 3612 17.5 3462 18.5 4532 14.2196 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture TABLE 11.2 Yields/ac, Total Returns and Total Variable Cash Expenses Were Calculated for Crops Grown-Up on Owned and Rented Land, as well as Annual Cropping Systems of Winter Barley and Brassicaceae and Cycles of Winter Barley and Fallow 2022 2045 2045 2045 Winter Barley Fallow Winter Barley (21.2%) Fallow Winter Barley (18%) Fallow Winter Barley Brassicaceae Yield ₹27,342 ₹0 ₹32,008 ₹0 ₹30,780 ₹0 ₹21,120 ₹22,594 Net returns ₹16,864 (₹5,239) ₹21,530 (₹5,976) ₹20,302 (₹5,976) ₹10,151 ₹9,987 Average net returns ₹6,057 ₹7,777 ₹7,122 ₹9,823 Crops Yield on Rented Land 2022 2045 2045 2045 Winter Barley Fallow Winter Barley (21.2%) Fallow Winter Barley (18%) Fallow Winter Barley Brassicaceae Yield ₹17,600 ₹0 ₹21,120 ₹0 ₹20,220 ₹0 ₹13,753 ₹17,682 Net returns ₹9,905 (₹4,011) ₹12,525 (₹4,666) ₹11,542 (₹4,666) ₹4,666 ₹6,631 Average net returns ₹2,947 ₹3,929 ₹34,38 ₹5,812Decision Support System for Smart Agriculture 197
from the 2022 crop cycle, leading to a decline in net returns. A farmer who works 
his or her own land may expect to earn ₹85/ac in profit, while a landlord would 
bring in only ₹3,438/ac.
By assessing the prospective costs and advantages of climate change, we take into 
account the economic viability of modifying the agricultural system or adjusting 
management to account for unforeseen weather patterns.
Growing evidence suggests farmers in this region could reap the benefits of climate 
change by switching to an annual agricultural strategy centred around winter Barley 
and Brassicaceae [41]. One can make ₹10,069/ac on their own property and ₹5,812/ac 
on rented land, respectively (−₹327), by rotating winter Barley and Brassicaceae. The 
output from AgBiz Climate is seen in Figure 11.2 and Potential and Existing Effects 
of Climate Change on Annual Cropping Systems. Net returns’ sensitivity to shifts in 
production and input costs is not addressed in this chapter; however, the authors are 
prepared to supply this information upon request.
This example demonstrates how ownership versus leasing might affect prof￾its by comparing two cropping systems: fallow/winter Barley and Brassicaceae/
winter Barley. While it is possible to mimic a wide variety of alternative cropping 
systems, we only included the winter Barley/Brassicaceae combination because it 
is the one most farmers in this area employ [42, 43]. The impact of climate change 
on annual crop rotations of winter Barley and Brassicaceae increase net returns per 
acre regardless of whether the property is owned or leased, as is typically the case 
in this region.
FIGURE 11.2 AgBiz climate output results.198 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
11.3.2 Implementing Investment Strategies Profitably
The profitability of the winter Barley and Brassicaceae rotation for a single farmer 
has not been determined, despite our demonstration that it yields greater average net 
returns. The producer would have to buy a second combine and a vehicle if he wanted 
to move to an annual cropping method that contains Brassicaceae [44]. The timing of 
the cash flows is crucial to the success of this venture. Instead of investing in costly 
machinery, you may employ a specialized operator to gather your Brassicaceae crop, 
but this comes with its own set of risks, including the possibility that they won’t be 
available when you need them [45]. The foundations of picking investments that will 
improve the company’s financial performance are an economic profitability analysis 
and a financial feasibility study. If an option is economically viable, it will become 
apparent. However, an investment may not be viable if it cannot generate adequate 
cash flows to cover its ongoing principal and interest obligations. Additionally, adap￾tion tactics may cause modifications to agricultural leases due to the increased inputs 
and expenditures required by the landowner or tenant. The per cent of the crop yield 
or annual cash leased paid to a tenant or landowner rises in proportion to the amount 
contributed by the tenant or landowner during the term of the lease.
An AgBizProfit analysis of the capital expenditures for the various adaption strat￾egies is shown in Figure 11.3. With a discount rate of 5% and a research duration 
of eight years, the current Barley and fallow rotation yield an NPV of ₹382819/
ac. Costing ₹3,358,247/ac, an extra combine and truck would increase the annual 
cropping system’s net present value by a significant amount. Net income (NPI) of 
₹28,652/harvested acre can be made from Brassicaceae through tailored harvesting. 
Implementing an annual farming system and purchasing new equipment would be 
the most financially prudent choice. However, a shift in crop rotations may not be 
possible if the producer has the financial resources to purchase the supplementary 
FIGURE 11.3 Results of AgBizProfit for owned land.Decision Support System for Smart Agriculture 199
machinery essential to the new system. The switch to a Brassicaceae rotation’s via￾bility can be calculated with the help of the AgBizFinance module.
If you want to do an AgBizFinance study, you’ll need a comprehensive financial 
statement, a description of all outstanding loans and leases, and a rundown of all 
cash flows for every aspect of your farm business. Unless you have access to exten￾sive farm-specific data, it will be impossible to illustrate and understand the results 
of such an investigation. This chapter does not provide an AgBizFinance analysis or 
expand upon the topics raised within.
11.3.3  Analysing the Effect of Climatically
Change on Agricultural Leases
Typically, contemporary farm leases are based on long-standing practices and norms. 
As profit margins shrink and climate change affects yields, production inputs, and 
crop rotations, it’s possible that future leases will be based more on equitability, 
where the tenant and landowner are reimbursed more equally for their efforts into 
the lease. A part of AgBiz Logic called AgBiz Lease can help you decide if a lease is 
reasonable. Unfortunately, tenants of leased land often find that the net returns they 
receive do not adequately reward them for the financial risk they take by cultivating 
the land. Currently, crop leases are typically negotiated on the basis of the parties’ 
respective contributions to overall costs, which results in fair arrangements for all 
parties involved. This resource would help tenants examine their land leases and 
make informed decisions about whether or not they are fair for the long run. For 
instance, if the need of pesticides and fungicides is increased in the future owing to 
climate change, the associated costs could be divided proportionally among farmers 
according to their harvest shares. These AgBiz Climate budgets could be used by 
AgBiz Lease to assess the fairness of present lease terms in light of fluctuating input 
costs and the impact on net returns.
For this winter Barley fallow rotation, the current crop-share lease is reasonable 
(see Figure 11.3), but it provides no financial benefits to either the renter or the land￾lord. Tenant and landowner will earn ₹8,677 and ₹3,438/ac, respectively, during the 
life of a ten-year lease. The production costs, including the tenant’s share of fertil￾iser, herbicide, crop insurance, and the landowner’s return on investment, exceed the 
yields and prices. A change from the crop-share lease to an annual cropping system 
of winter Barley and Brassicaceae with the same distribution of crop and production 
inputs would result in a net benefit of ₹13,835/ac for both the tenant and the landlord. 
In a fair crop-share lease, the tenant receives 73% of the harvest and the landowner 
receives 27%, as determined by AgBizLease’s analysis. Based on their respective 
shares of the annual produce, the tenant would get ₹24,231/ac and the landowner 
would receive ₹7,285/ac (Figure 11.3) and probability of changing to an annual crop￾ping system on owned land.
We demonstrate how a well-tuned integrated decision support tool can inform 
farmers and ranchers on how climate change will affect their businesses and the 
environment. Using AgBizClimate, we were able to show how climate change could 
reduce Barley production. To show how a firm may be adapted to the annual agri￾cultural cycle, we used AgBizProfit. You can use AgBizFinance to prove that buying 200 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
11.3.4 Base Scenario and Preliminary Setup
The 3800-ac farm receives between 12 and 18 in. of rain each year; thus, it is man￾aged as a traditional dryland Barley farm. To preserve soil moisture, boost Barley 
yields, decrease erosion, and cut fuel costs, the farmer alternates winter Barley and 
fallow crops through direct sowing and chemical fallow. Glyphosate is used during 
the fallow year, and additional herbicides are used as needed throughout the crop 
year, to control weed growth. When necessary, pesticides are used. Planting with 
a direct-seed drill allows for the incorporation of any necessary fertiliser. On aver￾age, the farm harvests 49.5 bushels of winter Barley per acre. The farm owner leases 
out half of the land and owns the other half. The tenant is responsible for all of the 
expenditures involved with weed management, manure, and crop assurance, whereas 
the landowner keeps a third of the yield and is responsible for a third of the costs. 
These harvests correspond with those reported in the DA’s Agricultural Census of 
2007 for this area. If the crop and livestock enterprise budgets generated by AgBiz 
Logic, don’t accurately reflect the grower’s actual returns and expenses, the farmer 
can choose a more accurate one from a previous set of budgets. These predetermined 
FIGURE 11.4 AgBizLease: The outcome of switching from a barley-and-fallow crop rotation 
to an annual farming scheme.
supplemental equipment for your yearly cropping system is a good financial move. 
While AgBiz Environment demonstrated how to achieve a compromise between eco￾nomic growth and ecological sustainability, AgBizLease demonstrated how switch￾ing to an annual farming system affects harvest distribution as shown in Figure 11.4.Decision Support System for Smart Agriculture 201
spending plans provide a benchmark against which to measure future net returns after 
environmental factors are accounted for. Afterwards, the closest weather station is 
chosen using AgBizClimate for the agricultural or livestock businesses. This provides 
the producer with downscaled, location-specific weather forecast information that can 
be used to assess the potential effect of climatically change on their farm or business.
By the 2045s, the low emissions future predicts an annual drop in the number of 
nights below freezing of 29 nights and the high emissions future predicts a decrease 
of 34 nights from the historical baseline (Figure 11.6). This data allows for the use of 
crop models or grower/expert assessments to project the effect of this weather vari￾able on Barley yields in the future. The yields in this case study rise by 20% because 
of the reduction in the number of subfreezing nights; analysing the sensitivity of 
variations in yields can integrated into forthcoming assessments.
Figure 11.7 shows the changes in Fahrenheit degrees over the years. Under high 
emissions scenarios, the number of rising degree from March 1 to November 1 is 
projected to grow by 620° h by the 2030s, while under minimum emissions scenarios, 
same number is projected to climb by 525° h. Assuming a linear relationship, higher 
numbers of collected degree days above 50 increase Barley yields by 18%. Precipitation 
totals are shown monthly in Figure 11.8. The low emissions future and the high emis￾sions future both predict an increase of 0.4 in. in accumulated water year precipitation 
relative to the historical baseline. An increase in precipitation, especially during the 
growing season, is predicted to boost Barley yields by 25%, according to the producer.
Table 11.3 illustrates that the visualization is contingent on crop models, the level 
of farmer engagement, and the estimates derived from various weather variables.
We have estimated how average crop yields might change by the 2045s in this sce￾nario. It will take “Your Changes” to yield into account. Growers can make a well￾informed decision about the potential influence on Barley yields using data from 
Figure 11.5 shows the steps for selecting ABL predicted expense.
11.3.4.1 Logical Work of AgBiz
Later determination, which weather station is nearest to his or her farmland, the 
farmer can next priorities up to three meteorological factors that will have the great￾est effect on Barley production. Here, we pick total number of frosty nights, the total 
number of rising degree days, and the total amount of seasonal precipitation.
Key climatic factors with the potential to significantly impact agricultural and 
livestock production yields and quality include:
• Accumulated growing degree days
• Accumulated seasonal precipitation
• Number of nights below freezing
Figures 11.6–11.8 depict the unique effects of several meteorological factors. 
Figures 11.7 and 11.8 show average values for the selected weather variables from 1972 to 
1999, which serve as the model’s baseline weather condition. For both the high and low 
emission scenarios, the average of the estimated future climatic variable is calculated 
for the years 2025–2059. The solid green and marron colour indicate the mean, with the 
shade representing the 5–95% limits of findings from 20 distinct climatically models.202 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
FIGURE 11.5 Steps for selecting ABL predicted expense.Decision Support System for Smart Agriculture 203
FIGURE 11.6 Potentially impacting crop and livestock companies are weather factors that 
can affect yields and product quality.
FIGURE 11.7 Predictive factors of the weather that could affect crop and livestock businesses’ 
yields or product quality.204 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
focus and the grower’s own estimations indicated in Figures 11.6–11.8. Then, based 
on the most recent production forecast, a farmer revises their financial plan (“Your 
Changes”). It will be used to adjust the figures in all the various budgets considered. 
The user concurs with the Crop Models’ prediction of a 21.2% rise in Barley yields 
in the illustrative scenario. The user compares this new Barley budget to the 15.0% 
figure established by the Grower Focus Group. Users of AgBizClimate can gener￾ate new budgets by changing certain inputs that have a one-to-one correlation with 
outputs (Figure 11.9). Examples of inputs that vary with output include custom hay or 
Barley harvesting, where payment is made per tonne of harvested product.
FIGURE 11.8 Potentially impacting crop and livestock companies are weather factors that 
can affect yields and product quality.
TABLE 11.3
Factors in the Environment that can Affect the Quantity 
and Quality of Crops and Animals
Winter Barley Owned Winter Barley Rented
Crop modelling +21.2% +21.2%
Grower focus groups +16.0% +16.0%
Weather Var. 1 +21.0% +21.0%
Weather Var. 2 +16.0% +16.0%
Weather Var. 3 +26.0% +26.0%
Your changes +21.2% +21.2%Decision Support System for Smart Agriculture 205
11.3.5 Assessing Environmental Impacts
Assuming farmers maximize net returns over time, AgBiz Logic modules track the 
difference between revenue and cash costs. This represents the static short-run net 
returns. Some examples of how a producer could classify their earnings are soil car￾bon, environmentally friendly production, environmental impact, and other sustain￾ability and risk-management factors.
Whether environmental effect is considered an input or an output influences which 
of several approaches the AgBiz Environment module represents. Growers’ bottom 
lines are influenced by “natural capital,” which includes factors like environmental/
land quality (such the quality of their soil). One of the byproducts of this indus￾trial approach is improved ecological conditions. Way (2022) outlines three methods 
for maximising profits while considering environmental concerns at the corporate 
level. The first is the standard method, where adjustments to natural capital variables 
FIGURE 11.9 By adjusting 2015 harvest budgets obtain 2045 output.206 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
reflect changes in environmental quality; the second is the multiple output produc￾tion method, where adjustments to environmental characteristics are best reflected; 
and the third is the constrained profit maximization method, where environmental 
regulations limit both choice and production volume. Environmental outcomes from 
production procedures and/or potential effects on producers’ net returns are neces￾sary for each of these strategies.
In order to measure environmental effects such changes in greenhouse gas emis￾sions, soil erosion, carbon soil sequestration, and energy usage, the AgBiz Environment 
module may employ preexisting environmental models or calculators to do so. 
Extensive examples of such tools include the COMET-GHG farm inventory system, the 
Cool Farm Tool for estimating GHG emissions, and the Universal Soil Loss Equation. 
The outputs of these models and calculators can be used as either production inputs 
or (desired or undesirable) final products. Soil erosion, pesticide use, and soil carbon 
are all examples of inputs; while greenhouse gas emissions and soil carbon credits are 
more commonly thought of as outputs, soil carbon can also be an input depending on 
the context. Table 11.4 provides a brief summary of the several environmental model￾ling tools made accessible by AgBiz Environment and describes how they might be 
used to aid farmers in making well-informed decisions.
Financial and material savings connected with adopting a conservation manage￾ment approach for the winter Barley-fallow cycle were calculated employing the 
AgBiz Environment module and its related environmental calculations. We used 
AgBiz Profit data to estimate the potential financial benefits of switching to no-till 
farming for farmers in the mid-Columbia (a more conservation-focused, water-con￾serving management method). No-till farming reduces labour and material require￾ments because it requires no tilling before or after harvest. No-till farming requires 
more herbicide use than conventional farming methods, as weeds are air-seeded 
rather than dug out and buried. A meta-analysis of scientific trials found that the 
yields of Barley grown using both systems were nearly the same in this microre￾gion, coming in at around 63 bu./ac. Its yield is greater than the previous example’s 
49.5 bu./ac, which was calculated using data from the Ag Census in 2007. As the 
greater yields from the research trials are more typical of the conditions in this micro￾region, we chose to incorporate them into the AgBiz Environment (Table 11.4).
Cost differences between the two systems account for the difference in net returns 
in the baseline state, where yields and revenues are assumed to be similar. For this 
baseline scenario, conventional tillage’s yield advantage would need to be around 
6–7 bu./ac bigger than no-till for net returns to be equal, or no-net till’s returns would 
TABLE 11.4
The AgBiz Environment Toolkit Synopsis
Tool Environmental Parameter
USLE Soil Erosion
CFT GAS emissions/Carbon Confiscation
EIQ value Pesticides
COMET-farm GAS emissions/Carbon ConfiscationDecision Support System for Smart Agriculture 207
be higher by roughly ₹2,374/ ac. If no-till farming is so beneficial, why isn’t it being 
used by more farmers? It’s possible that balancing danger with knowledge is the key. 
AgBizProfit does not currently include risk analysis in regard to managerial experi￾ence. Potential greenhouse gas emissions and soil erosion are further causing for worry.
Estimating shifts in soil erosion using the USLE. According to our preliminary 
findings, no-till increases soil carbon by 0.2 ton/year/ac compared to regular tillage. 
Since COMET-Farm does not account for variations in energy consumption, the 
results do not consider the resulting increases or decreases in carbon dioxide emis￾sions. Based on climatic and soil models, COMET-Farm solely takes into consider￾ation the levels of nitrous oxide and soil carbon activity. Normal tillage can cause an 
average of 5.19 tonnes of soil to be lost per acre per year, while no-till practices only 
lose about 1.04 tonnes of soil per acre per year due to erosion. Consequently, no-till 
is more eco-friendly than traditional tillage in these two regards.
This farm has Walla Walla silt loam soil, and its long-term mean soil loss with 
traditional tillage is 5.21 tons/ac/year, which is more than the 5.0-ton/ac/year crite￾rion for maintaining productivity. That traditional tillage farms can maintain yields 
that are competitive with no-till farms, which is seriously called into question. The 
discrepancy between the two systems’ yields is likely to expand over time if farmers 
adopt a multi-year net returns model instead of a no-till method.
This case study offers a methodology for assessing the relative merits of alternative 
management strategies, and it establishes the foundation for tracking shifts in soil carbon 
or other environmental results that can inform carbon accounting policies. Future stud￾ies should focus on integrating the economic and financial modules with AgBiz Climate 
and AgBiz Environment to create a fully integrated decision-support framework for pro￾ducers, considering the effects of both on yield projections and environmental results.
11.4 LINKING TO THE TRADEOFF ANALYSIS MODEL FOR 
MULTI-DIMENSIONAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (TOA-MD) 
PLATFORM FOR LANDSCAPE-SCALE TRADEOFF ANALYSIS
This section provides a brief overview of how the TOA-MD framework can be used 
to combine data from individual farms that have used software like AgBiz Logic to 
gather data with data from larger geographic areas in order to assist policy research at 
the regional level (tradeoff analysis model for multi-dimensional impact assessment – 
TOA-MD). This brief study provides an overview of the TOA-MD model and explores 
the information it requires, as well as the ways in which AgBiz Logic information could 
provide support. Authors read for a more in-depth explanation of how the TOA-MD 
model can be used to analyse climate-aware agriculture and for a specific case study.
To simulate how global warming and other environmental factors might affect 
a group of farms, the TOA-MD model was developed. The TOA-MD framework, 
which depends on the spreading of projected economical returns across the area 
agricultural population, can help farmers or growers decide whether to stick with the 
current production method (winter Barley fallow) or transition to a different system 
(annual cropping; winter Barley Brassicaceae).
TOA-MD is able to simulate a regional adoption rate because, unlike AgBiz 
Logic, it is not based on a single farm or a “representative” farm, but rather on a 208 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
population of farms. TOA-MD uses data collected from the farming community to 
inform its recommendations. Statistics about the population, such as means, stan￾dard deviations, and correlation coefficients between the economic parameters in the 
models and the associated result changeable of interest, are among the most funda￾mental factors. These statistical characteristics can be estimated using a combination 
of observational data from a current production system and experimental, modelled, 
or expert data from a novel system that has not yet been deployed and is therefore 
not observable provided that sufficient biophysical and economic data is available.
Agricultural decision-makers must study the interplay between the consequences 
of adopting a new technology and the underlying biophysical and economic vari￾ables in order to assess the regional implications of adopting the technology. It is 
essential for the TOA-MD study that accurate projections of the impact of the new 
“technology” on agricultural production and profitability be made. There are several 
possible places to find such information, including formal crop and livestock simula￾tion models, experimental or observational data, and expert assessment.
“Adoption-based tradeoffs” are a useful use of the TOA-MD model. When the 
pace at which a technology is adopted shifts in response to a financial incentive or 
some other element influencing adoption, we say that this shift is based on adop￾tion. Take, for example, the scenario where farmers are offered a contract to absorb 
carbon from the atmosphere in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. A classic 
case of a compromise necessitated by widespread adoption. In this form of research, 
farmers’ input and output costs are held constant, allowing us to isolate the effect of 
the incentive to shift management practices that boost soil carbon accumulation on 
their observed behaviour. Long-term climatic shifts can also spur adoption.
11.5 INFORMATION NEEDED FOR THE TOA-MD 
MODEL AND IT INTERACTS WITH AGRICULTURAL 
DECISION-MAKING SOFTWARE
The TOA-MD model takes as inputs the means, standard deviations, and correla￾tions of outcomes of interest and economic returns from various production systems. 
Use a sizable sample of agriculture, and gather data over an extended enough time 
duration to statistically reason for seasonal volatility and further parameters that may 
have affected the reported findings. These categories serve as useful data subsets:
1. costs, yields, and production costs for all manufacturing processes;
2. factors such as farm size, family size, and revenue from sources other than 
agriculture;
3. in addition to any other social or environmental results.
The standard method of collecting statistics on agricultural output is through 
periodic government surveys. These forms of information have some restrictions. 
The first is that researchers typically have to wait a long time to access these data 
because they are only collected at irregular intervals (for example, in India, agri￾cultural census is conducted every five years) and then released. The lack of granu￾larity in these data is a significant drawback, especially when it comes to making Decision Support System for Smart Agriculture 209
managerial decisions about things like fertiliser and chemical application, gear use, 
and agricultural labour. The third drawback is the high cost of conducting such sur￾veys, both for the people being surveyed (to complete lengthy, detailed question￾naires) and the entities interested in the results.
Integration of AgBiz Logic into the TOA-MD framework presents a number of 
challenges. The first stage in conducting a landscape size research is recruiting a 
representative sample of farms to use AgBiz Logic and contribute data for analysis. 
To do so, we’d need to choose a subset of farms using a method similar to that used in 
a census of agricultural output. The second step in estimating TOA-MD parameters 
without violating farmers’ privacy would be to create software that facilitates com￾munication and compiles data from individual farms into a database. Keep in mind 
that in most instances, data would need to be gathered over the course of numerous 
growing seasons, so that crop rotations and other variables in the farming system 
may be considered. Household characteristics of farmers could be gathered either as 
part of AgBiz Logic or with a different survey tool. It would be necessary to collect 
data on environmental and social outcomes in a way that is specific to the type of 
variable of interest. Samples of soil might be taken in the field and analysed in the lab 
to determine the amount of organic matter present; this could be done in conjunction 
with modelling or the application of specialized sensors.
Extrapolating from current biophysical and socio-economic variables allows 
for future forecasting. This is currently being done on a global scale using two 
novel scenario concepts: representative concentration pathways and shared socio￾economic pathways. To translate these hypothetical future pathways into ones with 
the additional detail required for agricultural evaluations, “representative agricul￾tural pathways” are now being built. These estimations, together with data gathered 
via technologies like AgBiz Logic, can now be used in regional integrated evalua￾tions thanks to new approaches developed as part of the Agricultural Model Inter￾comparison and Improvement Project.
11.6 CONCLUSIONS
Farmers can benefit from using AgBiz Logic and other decision support systems to 
learn more about the relative effect of adjusting to a change, whether that change is 
in the form of future climatic circumstances, future policy, pricing, and cost shifts, or 
future lease terms. Researchers can use it to learn how producers’ decisions on new 
programmes, management options, technology, and varieties affect their bottom lines 
and lead them to embrace either conventional or sustainable farming methods. These 
decision-making instruments are useful for assessing climate-smart solutions at the 
farm level because they consider the effects of climate change and the environment.
AgBiz Logic is one such solution that can help improve and update data on 
landscape-scale and regional technology evaluation. By linking farm management 
software to a trusted database, a data system can offer time series insights into 
management decisions to a statistically illustrative “panel” of agricultural decision￾makers. Furthermore, the implementation of analyses employing a technology like 
TOA-MD necessitates a higher level of specificity than what AgBiz Logic’s usage of 
precise management data would provide. Inputting accurate information into AgBiz 210 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Logic is in everyone’s best interest, as it will be used to inform future management 
decisions. Finally, with the help of programmes like AgBiz Logic, farmers have an 
easy way to enter data rapidly, saving them time and money.
REFERENCES
1. A. Ghahramani and A. D. Moore, “Impact of climate changes on existing crop-livestock 
farming systems,” Agric. Syst., vol. 146, pp. 142–155, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2016.05.011
2. A. Baig et al., “Dietary habits of lesser bandicoot rat (Bandicota Bengalensis) in an agro￾ecosystem, Pothwar Plateau, Pakistan,” Brazilian J. Biol., vol. 84, 2024. doi: 10.1590/1519-
6984.251410
3. X. Xu and B. Mola-Yudego, “Where and when are plantations established? Land-use 
replacement patterns of fast-growing plantations on agricultural land,” Biomass Bioenergy, 
vol. 144, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.biombioe.2020.105921
4. P. Cottney, L. Black, E. White, and P. N. Williams, “The correct cover crop species 
integrated with slurry can increase biomass, quality and nitrogen cycling to positively 
affect yields in a subsequent spring barley rotation,” Agronomy, vol. 10, no. 11, 2020. 
doi: 10.3390/agronomy10111760
5. S. Spatari et al., “The role of biorefinery co-products, market proximity and feedstock 
environmental footprint in meeting biofuel policy goals for winter barley-to-ethanol,” 
Energies, vol. 13, no. 9, 2020. doi: 10.3390/en13092236
6. D. Nilsson, H. Rosenqvist, and S. Bernesson, “Profitability of the production of energy 
grasses on marginal agricultural land in Sweden,” Biomass Bioenergy, vol. 83, pp. 159–168, 
2015. doi: 10.1016/j.biombioe.2015.09.007
7. A. Bomanowska, A. Rzetelska, and A. Rewicz, “Morphological variation of Bromus 
Hordeaceus subsp. Hordeaceus (Poaceae) in varied agricultural habitats,” Fragm. 
Florist. Geobot. Pol., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 185–198, 2013, [Online]. Available: https://www.
scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84893633067&partnerID=40&md5=b44a09
32f56ea430185c6e7a976f5d20
8. J. J. Koritschoner, J. I. Whitworth Hulse, A. Cuchietti, and E. M. Arrieta, “Spatial patterns 
of nutrients balance of major crops in Argentina,” Sci. Total Environ., vol. 858, 2023. doi: 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.159863
9. A. Kosolapova, V. Yamaltdinova, E. Mitrofanova, D. Fomin, and I. Teterlev, “Biological 
activity of soil depending on fertilizer systems,” Bulg. J. Agric. Sci., vol. 22, no. 6, 
pp. 921–926, 2016, [Online]. Available: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=
2-s2.0-85006997566&partnerID=40&md5=fa8ae7eed1487eb6d47e73a4601d88b3
10. I.-K. Hong, H.-K. Yun, Y. Chae, S.-M. Lee, Y.-B. Jung, and M.-R. Lee, “A study on 
the utilization of urban garden design derived from the traditional farming method 
Gyeonjongbeop from the Joseon period: Focused on Imwongyeongjeji Bolliji,” J. People, 
Plants, Environ, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 423–432, 2020. doi: 10.11628/ksppe.2020.23.4.423
11. J. Liu, R. L. Desjardins, S. Wang, D. E. Worth, B. Qian, and J. Shang, “Climate impact from 
agricultural management practices in the Canadian Prairies: Carbon equivalence due to 
albedo change,” J. Environ. Manage., vol. 302, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.113938
12. V. G. Ambrosini et al., “Effect of diversified cropping systems on crop yield, legacy, and 
budget of potassium in a subtropical Oxisol,” F. Crop. Res., vol. 275, 2022. doi: 10.1016/
j.fcr.2021.108342
13. H. H. Lee et al., “Mitigation of global warming potential and greenhouse gas intensity 
in arable soil with green manure as source of nitrogen,” Environ. Pollut., vol. 288, 2021. 
doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117724
14. S. K. Motarjemi, A. E. Rosenbom, B. V. Iversen, and F. Plauborg, “Important factors when 
simulating the water and nitrogen balance in a tile-drained agricultural field under long￾term monitoring,” Sci. Total Environ., vol. 787, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.147610Decision Support System for Smart Agriculture 211
15. V. A. Lavrinova and T. S. Polunina, “Effect of combined treatments and chemicalization 
agents on soil mycobiota in spring barley crops,” E3S Web Conf., vol. 254, 2021. doi: 
10.1051/e3sconf/202125405005
16. R. A. Wieme, J. P. Reganold, D. W. Crowder, K. M. Murphy, and L. A. Carpenter-Boggs, 
“Productivity and soil quality of organic forage, quinoa, and grain cropping systems 
in the dryland Pacific Northwest, USA,” Agric. Ecosyst. Environ., vol. 293, 2020. doi: 
10.1016/j.agee.2020.106838
17. S. A. Salman, S. Shahid, H. A. Afan, M. S. Shiru, N. Al-Ansari, and Z. M. Yaseen, 
“Changes in climatic water availability and crop water demand for Iraq region,” 
Sustainability, vol. 12, no. 8, 2020. doi: 10.3390/SU12083437
18. R. S. Abbood, “Production of wheat and barley crops in Maysan governorate for the 
period 2014–2018,” Int. J. Innov. Creat. Chang., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 73–82, 2020, [Online]. 
Available: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85084456985&partne
rID=40&md5=2c42469fe590d34309cc4c64c280d09d
19. R. A. Wieme, L. A. Carpenter-Boggs, D. W. Crowder, K. M. Murphy, and J. P. Reganold, 
“Agronomic and economic performance of organic forage, quinoa, and grain crop rota￾tions in the Palouse region of the Pacific Northwest, USA,” Agric. Syst., vol. 177, 2020. 
doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2019.102709
20. M. Nouri and M. Bannayan, “On soil moisture deficit, low precipitation, and temperature 
extremes impacts on rainfed cereal productions in Iran,” Theor. Appl. Climatol., vol. 137, 
no. 3–4, pp. 2771–2783, 2019. doi: 10.1007/s00704-019-02766-3
21. U. M. Sainju, A. W. Lenssen, B. L. Allen, W. B. Stevens, and J. D. Jabro, “Nitrogen balance 
in dryland agroecosystem in response to tillage, crop rotation, and cultural practice,” Nutr. 
Cycl. Agroecosystems, vol. 110, no. 3, pp. 467–483, 2018. doi: 10.1007/s10705-018-9909-7
22. A. Gobin, “Weather related risks in Belgian arable agriculture,” Agric. Syst., vol. 159, 
pp. 225–236, 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2017.06.009
23. F. Kosmowski, J. Stevenson, J. Campbell, A. Ambel, and A. Haile Tsegay, “On the ground 
or in the air? A methodological experiment on crop residue cover measurement in Ethiopia,” 
Environ. Manage., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 705–716, 2017. doi: 10.1007/s00267-017-0898-0
24. S. Oberholzer, V. Prasuhn, and A. Hund, “Crop water use under Swiss pedoclimatic 
conditions – Evaluation of lysimeter data covering a seven-year period,” F. Crop. Res., 
vol. 211, pp. 48–65, 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.fcr.2017.06.003
25. M. V. Arokiamary and J. Anand, “Analysis of dynamic interference constraints in 
cognitive radio cloud networks,” Int. J. Adv. Res. Sci. Commun. Technol., vol. 6, no. 1, 
pp. 815–823, 2021.
26. M. Geethalakshmi, J. A. Kanimozhiraman, R. Partheepan, and S. Santhosh, “Optimal 
routing path using trident form in wearable biomedical wireless sensor networks,” 
Turkish Online J. Qual. Inq., vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 5134–5143, 2021.
27. D. L. Liu, K. T. Zeleke, B. Wang, I. Macadam, F. Scott, and R. J. Martin, “Crop residue 
incorporation can mitigate negative climate change impacts on crop yield and improve 
water use efficiency in a semiarid environment,” Eur. J. Agron., vol. 85, pp. 51–68, 2017. 
doi: 10.1016/j.eja.2017.02.004
28. P. Thiebeau and E. S. Recous, “Crop residues decomposition dynamics in farms practis￾ing conservation agriculture in the Grand Est region, France,” Cah. Agric, vol. 26, no. 6, 
2017. doi: 10.1051/cagri/2017050
29. A. Marczuk, J. Caban, P. Savinykh, N. Turubanov, and D. Zyryanov, “Maintenance 
research of a horizontal ribbon mixer,” Eksploat. i Niezawodn., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 121–125, 
2017. doi: 10.17531/ein.2017.1.17
30. K. Jones et al., “Evidence supports the potential for climate-smart agriculture in Tanzania,” 
Glob. Food Sec., vol. 36, 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.gfs.2022.100666
31. Y. Sun, E. Nurellari, W. Ding, L. Shu, and Z. Huo, “A partition-based mobile -crowdsensing￾enabled task allocation for solar insecticidal lamp internet of things maintenance,” IEEE 
Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 20, pp. 20547–20560, 2022. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2022.3175732212 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
32. J. Sun, D. Gong, K. Yao, B. Lu, C. Dai, and X. Wu, “Real-time semantic segmentation 
method for field grapes based on channel feature pyramid,” Nongye Gongcheng Xuebao/
Transactions Chinese Soc. Agric. Eng., vol. 38, no. 17, pp. 150–157, 2022. doi: 10.11975/
j.issn.1002-6819.2022.17.016
33. B. Wen, R. Cao, Q. Yang, J. Zhang, H. Zhu, and Z. Li, “Detecting leaf disease for Panax 
notoginseng using an improved YOLOv3 algorithm,” Nongye Gongcheng Xuebao/
Transactions Chinese Soc. Agric. Eng., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 164–172, 2022. doi: 10.11975/
j.issn.1002-6819.2022.03.019
34. M. Devkota, Y. Singh, Y. A. Yigezu, I. Bashour, R. Mussadek, and R. Mrabet, 
“Conservation agriculture in the drylands of the middle East and North Africa (MENA) 
region: Past trend, current opportunities, challenges and future outlook,” Adv. Agron., 
vol. 172, pp. 253–305, 2022. doi: 0
35. P. N. Koundinya, N. T. Sanjukumar, and P. Rajalakshmi, “A comparative analysis of 
algorithms for pedestrian tracking using drone vision,” in 2021 IEEE 4th International 
Conference on Computing, Power and Communication Technologies, GUCON 2021, 
2021. doi: 10.1109/GUCON50781.2021.9573995
36. S. Krug, S. Miethe, and T. Hutschenreuther, “Comparing BLE and NB-IoT as communi￾cation options for smart viticulture IoT applications,” in 2021 IEEE Sensors Applications 
Symposium, SAS 2021 - Proceedings, 2021. doi: 10.1109/SAS51076.2021.9530069
37. S. Niranjana, S. K. Hareshaa, I. Basker, and J. Anand, “Smart monitoring system for 
asthma patients,” Int. J. Electron. Commun. Eng., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 5–9, 2020.
38. A. Ponmalar, P. Saravanan, S. Deeba, and B. R. Jyothi, “IoT enabled inexhaustible E-vehicle 
using transparent solar panel,” in 2022 International Conference on Communication, 
Computing and Internet of Things (IC3IoT), 2022, pp. 1–5.
39. M. Geethalakshmi, J. Venkatesh, R. U. Mageswari, A. Mahalakshmi, J. Anand, and R. 
Partheepan, “Fuzzy based route optimization in wearable biomedical wireless sensor 
network,” in AIP Conference Proceedings, 2023, vol. 2523, no. 1, p. 20156.
40. B. Chatterjee et al., “Context-aware collaborative intelligence with spatio-temporal in￾sensor-analytics for efficient communication in a large-area IoT testbed,” IEEE Internet 
Things J., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6800–6814, 2021. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2020.3036087
41. R. J. O. Ogola and K. O. Ouko, “Expert’s opinion on Irish potato farmers awareness and 
preferences towards climate smart agriculture practices attributes in Kenya; A conjoint 
analysis,” Cogent Food Agric., vol. 7, no. 1, 2021. doi: 10.1080/23311932.2021.1968163
42. B. Quete et al., “Understanding the tradeoffs of LoRaWAN for IoT-based Smart 
Irrigation,” in 2020 IEEE International Workshop on Metrology for Agriculture 
and Forestry, MetroAgriFor 2020 - Proceedings, 2020, pp. 73–77. doi: 10.1109/
MetroAgriFor50201.2020.9277566
43. E. M. Kenny et al., “Bayesian case-exclusion and personalized explanations for sustain￾able dairy farming (extended abstract),” in IJCAI International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, 2020, vol. 2021-Janua, pp. 4740–4744. [Online]. Available: https://
www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85097344843&partnerID=40&md5=
cf2f86fd145e98f25410d538f6aace38
44. J. Lewis and J. Rudnick, “The policy enabling environment for climate smart agriculture: 
A case study of California,” Front. Sustain. Food Syst., vol. 3, 2019. doi: 10.3389/fsufs.
2019.00031
45. E. M. Kenny et al., “Predicting grass growth for sustainable dairy farming: A CBR system 
using bayesian case-exclusion and post-hoc, personalized explanation-by-example (XAI)”, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 11680 LNAI. pp. 172–187, 2019. 
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-29249-2_12DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-12 213
Broad Framework 
of Digital Twins in 
Agricultural Domain
S. Muthukaruppasamy, G. Arun Sampaul Thomas, 
J. Nandha Gopal, S. Ravindra, and K. Saravanan
12.1 INTRODUCTION
Agriculture performs a significant part in the growth of several nations and is cru￾cial to reaching Endurable Progress Goal 2 of “Zero Hunger” [1]. The Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO) forecasts that agronomic yield should upsurge by 
41% between 2011 and 2051 to meet the demands of a populace that is expected to 
reach 10 billion people by 2051 [2]. One tactic for increasing output is the inventive 
application of technologies, like drones, apps, and machines, along with utilitarian 
revolutions and public support. Agriculture uses 70% of the fresh water that people 
use worldwide [3]. This provides compelling evidence in favour of the advancement 
of technology like the internet of things (IoT) that would enable farms to produce 
more food while using less water. The bulk of garden-fresh water in marine terrain 
is used via irrigation structures, and 40% of the fresh water used in emerging states 
is lost owing to leaks and over-irrigation [4]. Since insufficient or excessive watering 
affects crop productivity, field sensors must control irrigation in agriculture effec￾tively [5, 6]. By gathering data on the state of the plant and scaling it with elevated 
function and cost-effectiveness, maintaining vintage at regular standards, minimiz￾ing water waste, and finally improving the availability of filtered aquatic, artificial 
intelligence (AI) can enhance agrobusiness development in this environment [7]. To 
capitalize on this global issue, farms can use a digital twin (DT) prototype based 
on the IoT to effectively recognize their existing surroundings. This implies that 
a computer-generated illustration of a grange should be proficient enough to act in 
accordance with the analysis and decisions made by the system as well as acquire 
data from the farm. The main progress of a DT for smart agriculture that uses the IoT 
in an irrigation system depends on agriculturalist and/or AI decisions.
Digital farming techniques can stipulate agriculturalists with beneficial knowledge 
on a variety of topics, including (i) how to use irrigation administration policies, seeds, 
fertilizers, and chemicals; (ii) how to protect the environment; (iii) how to manage 
weather, crop scrutiny, and irritants; (iv) and how to meet consumer demands and deal 
with business conditions [8]. However, due to their complexity and dynamic nature, 
agricultural production systems require sophisticated management. It is projected that 
digitalization initiatives will improve decision-making support, monitoring, and data 
analysis and optimization capabilities. To improve the proficiency of these systems, 
12214 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
the “digital twin,” a novel idea, consumes projected and applied in digital farming. 
NASA was the first organization to offer a simulated or digital depiction of corporeal 
organizations that replicates the behaviour of the original structure [9, 10]. As shown in 
Figure 12.1, the components of the DT can be seen by a network of linkages connect￾ing both actual and virtual objects [11]. The physical coordination or physical planet in 
farming, which is a multifaceted and self-motivated environment, comprises essential 
information and characteristics of the object or tool, including its substantiality, living 
entities, shape, locality, and chiller [12]. A crucial component is the physical system; a 
DT without a physical world is only a prototypical, and a DT’s system limits are estab￾lished using the factual physical world [13].
The physical system might consist of a complete thing or only a single component 
that is dispersed over physical space. In agriculture, the physical world can include 
workers as well as people, robots, and agricultural equipment, including tractors, 
harvesters, and fertilizers. A crop with variable irrigation environments, weather, 
and mud or an animal with its unique structures, feeding schedules, and population 
of animals are other examples of such things [14]. A full entity (such as a finished 
machine), a component portion, or a single asset connected to other things can all be 
part of the physical universe. A component of the irrigation environments, weather, 
mud, or the figure of an animal might all be considered physical systems in an agri￾cultural environment. To gather and obtain data from tangible things, the physi￾cal world requires sensors and measurement technology. A few instances of DTs in 
shrewd farming are the food supply chain, mud and climate radars for crops, Bayer 
sensors for ammonia water, moistness, and warmth, the GPS (Global Positioning 
System), and kinematic-global course-plotting protectorate for monitoring farming 
robots. The interaction between the real and virtual worlds is made possible by the 
DT that was created. This module enables data exchange amid computer-generated 
and corporeal structures. It analyses the information gleaned from the physical sys￾tem, changes the state of the virtual system, and relays feedback from the virtual 
system to the physical system. According to the source, kind, and volume of the data, 
the rate and speed of data transfer, as well as the shortest practical delay between 
data collection and feedbacks, the connection components can be changed.
DTs of agricultural concepts have been linked between the real and virtual 
worlds using wireless and IoT technologies [15]. In a virtual system, models and data 
from the real world are exemplified. The virtual world also includes elements like 
FIGURE 12.1 Depiction of Digital Twin Concept.Broad Framework of Digital Twins in Agricultural Domain 215
software, machine learning, data mining, AI models, and various modelling and pro￾cessing techniques. To aid in management and give the physical structure feedback, 
several researchers have suggested employing AI techniques for data processing and 
analytics. The simulated twin may mimic and control the antedate matters, augment 
a progression, and provide actual structures that aren’t yet obvious in the actual sys￾tem. For instance, the presentation level of a DT stipulates that farmers have cloud 
dashboards for tracking weed growth, crop development, and expected yield in real 
time. A graphic of the DT notion in farming is exposed in Figure 12.2.
DT technologies can help farmers by continually monitoring the farming land and 
apprising them of the condition of the virtual world as the next stage of the digitiza￾tion paradigm. Managers of agricultural farms have benefited from using digital tech￾nology by increasing productivity, production, and lowering losses. As the next stage 
of digitalization in the agricultural industry, there are various sorts of digital farming 
paradigms that can be applied to DT notions. The findings of this study demonstrate 
that research has not yet fully used DT principles in agricultural and food process 
mechanisms. Different levels of digital farming present different research opportuni￾ties and challenges. DT concepts can be effective in the agricultural area for soil and 
irrigation, plants, robotic systems, agricultural inputs, and food production. In this 
regard, the majority of reviews have concentrated on the creation of DTs by taking a 
few specific agricultural sectors into consideration. It might assist farmers in reduc￾ing the economic strain on the agricultural industry and labour concerns, and it might 
assist policymakers in their efforts to enhance the agricultural industry for the benefit 
of environmental and food security. Additionally, it makes it easier for academics to 
FIGURE 12.2 An illustrative picture of the agricultural digital twin system.216 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
investigate ways to manage and monitor agricultural and post-harvest products, farm 
machinery, and crop yields, as well as ways to cut back on water, pesticides, and usage 
of energy in digital farming.
12.2 INTERNET OF THINGS IN AGRICULTURE
Evidently, the outbreak of IoT sensors is segment of making DT feasible. As IoT 
things are processed, digital-twin scheme could add minimal group of devices, pro￾viding more advantages to farmers. DTs could be implemented to forecast specific 
results depending on data. Along with data analytics, DTs amend an IoT formation 
to get good efficiency. Also, it aids organization to analyse the operation before the 
physical deployment. The majority of IoT-based agricultural technology develop￾ments consist of exploratory research that presents technologies in scaled-down pilot 
projects. When it comes to the application of IoT in agriculture, two kinds of equip￾ment and devices have been developed that are used on farms to collect data about the 
climate, mud, yield characteristics, and other aspects [16]. The creation of platforms 
for data storage, organization, analysis, and visualization to aid in decision-making 
is included in the second category [17]. Although the phrase “smart farming” has 
been around for a while, a precise description that covers the technologies now used 
in the agriculture sector is still required. Smart farming comprises integrating intel￾ligence and interaction technology into equipment, device, and radars to incorporate 
them into the cyber-physical farm administration cycle. [18]. Many technologies are 
seen to fall under this category, including (AI), Progression Executive, IoT, and big 
data. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) usage in agriculture is a 
booming industry with a lot of benefits, despite some remaining challenges.
12.3 SMART AGRICULTURAL-AIDED DIGITAL TWIN
Using technologies like AI, big data, IoT, and data analytics, a DT may connect the 
details of the farming land and freeholder. Then, it reacts to an autonomous choice 
created by the system. By giving the idea of smart farming, a DT for a smart farming 
is provided. A cyber-physical system is used to combine diverse services to figure out 
the information of a distinct system (i.e., an irrigation system and seeding system) and 
create a digital smart farm. It integrates several systems and gives agriculturalist a 
complete awareness condition of their crops. To adapt to environmental changes, the 
farm could be changed. Smart farming is built on the IoT, which has been used in sev￾eral analyses of studies [19]. The fabrication progression of the malt firm is mimicked 
using AI algorithms and a range of malting processing parameters [20]. The prime 
situations and plans are therefore advised for the greatest consequences. The process 
culminates in the creation of malt, which contains the most alcohol. Additionally, the 
machine learning techniques are used to forecast the middling warmth of the jot heap 
using the environmental data. Analysis of this temperature, a key indication of the 
condition of the grain, is necessary for the functioning of grain storage.
The usage of cutting-edge resolutions in intricate links to industrial applications 
is also supported by evidence. AI, cloud computing, augmented reality, the IoT, inter￾face technologies, ingrained technologies, large data processing techniques, data Broad Framework of Digital Twins in Agricultural Domain 217
security, and other technologies are all included in DTs [21]. DT is a type of adap￾tive prototype living or non-living physical system that attempts to build, monitor, 
and improve the performance of its physical components and provide users with a 
pragmatic experience [22]. For instance, DT may at any moment be compared to the 
lifespan of a genuine machine. DT may be used in the product design to improve the 
physical model and carry out proactive conservation. However, the influence of DT 
technology on the fields of medication, farming, and health care is still in its infancy. 
DT expertise is vigorously involved in the development and commercialization of a 
variety of industrial and aeronautical processes [23]. Numerous factors, such as the 
mobility of resources (such as cattle), a lack of funding, an unstable environment, 
ongoing climate change (which affects soil quality), a lack of preparedness to share 
one’s grange information, and a lack of methodological expertise among farmers, to 
name a few, may contribute to the slow growth of agriculture. The DT model and 
the IoT technology might be used to connect various resources to offer a more com￾prehensive perspective. Farmers will get an understanding of various criteria and 
factors that determine how a farm operates, the final yield that is produced, and the 
amount of resources that are used. So, farmers can make better decisions and have a 
smaller impact on the environment and natural resources.
12.3.1 Soilless vs. Soil-Based Agriculture
Agricultural practices that increased production in ways that were previously unfea￾sible were made possible by industrial agriculture. The creation of settings that enable 
crops to thrive as effectively as possible is aided by biological developments. Due to 
faulty agricultural methods and overfarming in rural areas, more fertilizer must be 
used. Soilless agriculture is far superior to soil-based agriculture in many ways [24]. 
Soil-based agriculture and soilless agriculture differ significantly from one another. 
The differences are frequently found in the use of irrigation smooth, manure, and the 
capability to use unusable land, lower labour needs, and higher output. The pollution 
and environmental harm caused by soil-based agribusiness is another element influ￾encing the emergence of diverse farming techniques, including conservatory or dim￾ness net agrobusiness and vertical agriculture [25]. A land-saving method for farming 
that is suitable for greenhouses or tight spaces in cities is a vertical farm [26].
Vertical farming combines AI, big data analytics, robots, and the IoT. Erecting 
agricultural structures must amalgamate various hardware and data, make it easy 
to analyse data, and offer automated control of the system’s installed components. 
Studies [27] show that vertical farming is not a viable solution for producing huge 
crops or low-value goods. Due to the installation of controlled-environment build￾ings, the preservation of current equipment, and other variables, erecting farms 
requires a significant investment. Researchers are combining various data sources, 
automating actuator reactions, and improving real-time data collection to create effi￾cient vertical farming technologies. Due to the installation of controlled-environ￾ment buildings, the maintenance of existing equipment, and other reasons, vertical 
farming requires a significant investment [27]. Researchers are combining various 
data sources, automating actuator reactions, and improving real-time data collec￾tion to create efficient vertical farming technologies. A few of the vertical farming 218 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
technologies that have lately experienced substantial breakthroughs are hydroponics, 
aeroponics, and aquaponics. Plant roots are immersed in a nutrient elucidation in 
hydroponics, a method of soilless growing [28]. In an aeroponic structure, the herbal 
extractions are continually misted with a nutrient solution to keep them alive. This 
makes it possible for the hanging roots to get enough oxygen through aquaponics and 
combines aquiculture. Using this mode, hydroponic plants are fed.
12.3.2 Hydroponics
One of the well-liked methods of soilless farming for growing plants indoors that 
uses less fertilizer and offers better protection from pests and bad weather is hydro￾ponics [29]. High-value veggies can be grown hydroponically better than low-value 
field crops. When used in conjunction with a controlled environment, such as a 
greenhouse, hydroponic technology produces produce of the highest quality [30]. 
Different cool-season vegetables were tested using vegetative and yield metrics in 
open fields and naturally ventilated polyhouses at farming systems [23]. According 
to traditional agronomical methods, climatic variations, pests, and diseases have a 
significant impact on a crop’s yield, which leads to low-quality yield. The availabil￾ity, placement, and method of nutrient solution administration on plant roots are used 
to categorize the hydroponic approaches. The many hydroponic system types are 
clearly described in [31]. The resource needs of traditional agriculture and hydropon￾ics have been contrasted by the paper’s authors.
The operation of several hydroponic systems, including taper structures, and 
aquatic civilization is thoroughly detailed in [32]. Crops grown in hydroponic sys￾tems were found to produce more continuously throughout the year and require less 
growing time than crops grown in traditional systems. In hydroponics, the growing 
medium directs water and nutrients while allowing plenty of oxygen to reach the 
roots of the plant. Different growing media are effective in various hydroponic system 
types. The advantages and disadvantages of organic versus inorganic growing mate￾rial are discussed for aquiculture in terms of managing marine and nutrients [33]. 
Different benefits of hydroponically cultivated crops over conventionally cultivated 
yields are examined [34]. While soilless growing methods, like hydroponic systems, 
are free of soil-borne vermin and syndromes, they can carry some dangers, such as 
those associated with waterborne infections. In hydroponic systems with recirculat￾ing systems, where viruses can accumulate over time, these hazards have more pro￾found impacts. The difficulties with hydroponics also arise from the need for capital 
investments and knowledge on how to operate the control systems. The many hydro￾ponic fertilizer usage reduction approaches that are described [35] prevent nutrient 
discharge into the environment.
12.4 DIGITAL TWIN IN CROP CULTIVATION
The adoption of digital devices in crop-making technologies, in particular, farming 
machines (tractors, fertilizers, and sprayers) plays an important role in enhancing 
performance by lowering the price of fuel, fertilizer, labour, and other factors that 
impinge on manufacturing performance and tenability [36]. Farming machinery Broad Framework of Digital Twins in Agricultural Domain 219
applications and management regulations have been transformed by digitalization 
using obtained data and leading-edge data analysis techniques. It enables the func￾tion of contemporary manufacturing tools to be improved.
For instance, a digital farm machine can support and assist operation by post￾ing and collecting data through sensing instruments and digital devices to set up 
the best and most efficient use of appliances, and the technology should enable the 
programmed function of the machines, according to the European Agricultural 
Machinery Association [36]. Due to the implementation of cutting-edge IoT tech￾nologies, agricultural technology has seen significant changes with the emergence of 
self-governing systems. The function of farming machines in the adoption of digitized 
agriculture was assessed in the information of data from sensors placed on self-gov￾erning agricultural machinery and uploaded through IoT channels [36, 37]. The data 
was then examined using data technologies to assist markets, customers, and farmers. 
In this scenario, farmers may be able to perform tasks more productively and improve 
the quality of their production by combining digital tools with robots and autonomous 
machinery [38]. New developments in digital technology enable the use of DT tech￾niques to visualize the status of intelligent farm equipment in real time.
By extracting all data gathered from agriculture machinery, crops, robots, and 
automation models, IoT, satellite, and drone information, and reap climatic changing 
condition simulations in the virtual world, the DT of reap production may enable the 
identification of exotic and invisible issues before they manifest in the real world. 
Farming things, and crops in particular, require periodic data collection to aid report 
analysis and decision-making mechanisms [39], which can enhance tenable cultivat￾ing standards and lower crop production energy costs. Given this, more work should 
be done in the future to define and develop frameworks for DT paradigms that are 
more successful and useful. Even though digital sensors would not be able to capture 
and monitor every aspect of crop farming, collecting data from several sources can 
develop the digital depiction of the farm environment and operations [40]. Regular 
supervision of saplings in DT systems could aid in identifying anomaly from the 
proper healthiness of the saplings and predict the progress stages to decrease the prob￾lems of climatological and atmospheric effects. This is done by simulating dynamic 
farm conditions, taking into account how climatological and atmospheric conditions 
affect crop growth, and using data-accelerated models and sensor-interfacing tech￾niques. Various DT concepts may be used in crop farming in the future to recreate the 
complex actual system in virtual space and use appropriate sensors, data collection 
systems, modelling, predicting, and simulation paths.
12.5 AGRIFOOD PRODUCTION SYSTEMS AND SUPPLY 
CHAIN DIGITAL TWINS
DTs modernize cultivation systems in agrifood production, controlling greenhouse 
gas (GHG), wastages of food, and undernutrition. Although the potentiality of cutting￾edge virtual concepts needs to be envisaged, the agrifood manufacturing systems and 
supply networks are not yet on line to meet the objectives of tenable progress. They fall 
short of their most basic goal of giving safe and nutritional food to a growing global 
population, leaving 900 million people undernourished. They fail on numerous other 220 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
fronts as well as being inefficient and toxic, breaking planetary boundaries. A com￾mon solution is transformation through improvements in digital technologies. Such 
recommendations strongly favour digital technologies, along with embedded systems, 
intelligent sensors, and AI. Despite its potency and expanding adoption across indus￾trial domains, the potential of DT technology is examined for improving the sustain￾ability of the agrifood sector, specifically through alleviating malnourishment and 
undernourishment, curtailing GHG exhalation, and averting loss of food.
12.5.1 Benefits of Virtualized Supply Chains and Agricultural Systems
DTs are digital simulations of real-world items. The accuracy and “liveness” of their 
digital counterparts are guaranteed by the employment of sensors that recognize liv￾ing and good atmospheric aspects of items in livelihood state. In such cyber-physical 
designs, adjustments to the actual system alter its virtual duplicate concurrently and 
repeatedly. In present years, DTs are repurposed to focus on issues like bad climato￾logical and atmospheric issues in challenging natural areas. DTs were first developed 
as experimental designs for satellites, spacecraft, societal infrastructures, and general 
civil engineering. By simulating the state of physical systems, advanced modelling 
approaches can be used to query DTs and identify the optimal behaviour. To recom￾mend the most effective control strategies to the physical equivalent in DTs, rein￾forcement learning (RL), an area of AI that improvises self-ruling agents to decide 
solutions in critical systems, can be applied. The present state of a process is used 
as an input by real-time learning agents to forecast forthcoming action sequences 
that would optimize the process’s performance. Self-governing agents can perform 
a range of control processes to determine which best coordinates with the control 
principles before directing the actual system.
12.5.2  Factors That Support and Restrict Virtualized
Agrifood Value Chains
“Live” DTs grant extensive methods of computing the ecosystems for the simulation 
of saplings, plants, reaping machinery, store houses, and distribution of system. For 
trustworthy digital replication, sufficient scope of sensors and flawless contingency 
assessment are two prerequisites. To provide the optimum control strategies while 
using a DT, advanced decision-making systems must contain sensors that are suf￾ficiently predicting the agent’s aims. For instance, the DT of farming food storage 
depot can be used to forecast food wasting when it monitors pertinent factors like 
heat, food kind, and age of commodity. With significant scope of sensor, the DT 
could never be a precise representation of the physical system; hence, its state rendi￾tion and prospective projections are always speculative. In response, researchers sug￾gest designing DTs by Bayesian methods; yet, it is still challenging to come up with 
trustworthy methods for managing DT uncertainty and decision-making.
To address these issues, it is crucial to implement DTs that accurately express 
uncertainty. A similar amount would need to be spent on data infrastructures, such 
as cloud computing and plant sensors, to create “actual” model of whole inventory 
chains that include distribution facilities like food store and kitchens in low-income Broad Framework of Digital Twins in Agricultural Domain 221
neighbourhoods. It’s likely, nevertheless, that firms at the forepart of DT research 
and advancement would reduce the motive to lay in cyber-physical systems that serve 
humanitarian and ecological changes, including agro-biodiversity. This might pre￾vent DTs from being used to reform the agrifood sector, especially where it is most 
required. Second, the model is supported by temporally accurate, low-latency data 
streams in contemporary DT technologies. When sensors break down or fail to log 
data for extended periods of time, the design premise of the DT is violated in prac￾tice. If agents decide on control actions based on a model that incorporates false 
information from sensor, uncertain behaviour is likely to occur.
The requirement for technical innovation in the design of DTs that are resilient 
to periods when sensor is unavailable represents a substantial barrier to increased 
implementation. Third, modelling flaws can also be caused by mistakes in the design 
of the model, human coding errors, or a combination of error-free but inconsistent 
data or procedures. For instance, a minor notational mistake in the code of a com￾putational structure for irrigation system forecasting maintenance could result in 
ill-cautioned decisions that cause failed crop yields and provide losses. Combining 
models that were created individually may be difficult due to the lack of general mod￾elling criteria for DTs. For example, if a new item of cooling device is patched into 
present cold chain that normalize temperature in degrees Celsius but the designer 
intended it to supervise temperature in degrees Fahrenheit for eliminating obstruc￾tions, the food will start to degrade right away. DTs are currently not being widely 
and significantly deployed in the global food business due to numerous barriers.
12.6 MODERN POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND DIRECTIONS
In post-harvest activities, a “digital twin” is a computer state of harvested farming 
commodity based on data obtained from the products. The following components 
could be included in the DT study for food process mechanisms: (i) information gath￾ered from an actual system (food processing mechanism) through sensors. It moni￾tors the characteristics and variables of the commodities and atmospheric parameters; 
(ii) information provided by an IoT architecture for sensor contact, data repository, 
and big data analysis; and (iii) information used as input by a simulation platform for 
testing and optimization using data from the physical system. To support food process 
mechanisms by improvising DT architecture, it is essential to have exact information 
describing the product’s production processes, such as labour and equipment, and to 
produce practical models with all of the current limitations and constraints [41].
12.6.1 Discussion of Grain Elevator Function
The three main categories of fundamental operations are input, throughput, and out￾put. Grain receipt, also known as input, is the process by which a cargo of grains 
arrives at the elevator, typically by truck or rail car. The load of the shipment is 
noted, and samples are obtained to be tested for factors, including humidity state 
and dockage. If the grain is approved, the truck returns to the weigh station to collect 
a receipt for the sale. It is also maintained for the elevator’s inventory governance. 
Depending on the outcomes of the grain’s laboratory examination, the cargo may 222 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
require cleaning or drying, both of which elevators frequently perform. After that, the 
grain is moved about the plant using a variety of conveyance methods before being 
sent to the right storage bins. Sensors are frequently used in post-harvest storage to 
keep an eye on the grain’s conditions (moisture and temperature) and identify the 
movement and real inventory inside the elevator. Blending decisions are frequently 
guided by worker experience or safe-storage requirements, which can assist to fore￾cast the quality variation in the inventory. Before being sold, grain is blended to pro￾vide more specialized items for a customer by blending grains with different qualities 
(grade, protein content, etc.). The process of removing grains from the facilities that 
have specific, mutually agreed-upon characteristics is known as outcome (among 
buyer and seller, with principles and terminology given by government). The most 
common modes of transportation for grain are trucks, train carriages, and boats [42].
12.6.2 Management of Inventories and the Supply Chain
The conventional techniques for keeping track of inventories include weight scale 
tickets and tracking entering/exiting weights. In addition, cables and some volume 
sensors are available to help elevators to estimate grain heights in bins, but typically, 
workers will tap the flank of the bin to make a sound to direct the level of grain. 
Also, they can use a tape to calculate from peak of the bin to the bottom of the grain. 
These practices are extremely labour-profound, put people in danger, and are also 
exceedingly inaccurate. Modern elevator inventory management relies mostly on 
guesswork and is hinged on scale and humidity readings. These measurements are 
the cornerstone of inventory tracking and it has major ramifications. First, the client 
will search for a precise grain variety with a definite quality while purchasing grain. 
Elevators must therefore avoid (i) offering higher quality grain at a lower rate and 
(ii) having the cargo trashed because the standard is below the established standard.
Grain dockage, or the production of a blend of high- and low-quality grains, 
is the cause of these problems. The quantity of each ingredient employed deter￾mines the features of mixture. While the proportions increased and the amount 
at which the components extract from each bin are off, the final commodity won’t 
fulfil the proper standard requirements. To get the purity of grain being sold during 
the blending process, precise sensors will be used to check grain standard and flow 
rate. To track changes in grain, three types of sensor technologies (flow and identi￾fication sensors, bin level sensors) can be used. They can complement one another, 
each focusing on a different aspect of inventory management, to create a clearer 
picture of grain functions inside an elevator. They are also designed for bulk solids 
and liquids, such as grain elevators, which are the focus of most industry research 
and development. The most general type is bin-level sensors. Laser sensors, acoustic 
3D imaging, and non-contact radar are a few examples of commercially available 
alternatives [43–45]. It has been investigated how well laser sensors can gauge the 
quantity of grain on surfaces with irregular shapes. It noted issues like field-of￾view impediments (particularly while the grain’s cone was higher than the eaves), 
dust in the bin’s headspace interfering with operations, and long procedure times 
that could not be computed. In addition, industry research indicates that the grain 
silo environment poses difficulties for ultrasonography and remaining non-sensor Broad Framework of Digital Twins in Agricultural Domain 223
systems. Mechanical things, like weights and cable devices, named “plumb-bob,” 
could typically give straightforward measurements if the grain surface is even [45, 46]. 
Studies on the reliability of these cable systems for recording grain inventory have 
been conducted; reliability was found to be impacted by grain topology, bin diam￾eter variation, and inaccurate bulk density determination. As stated before, bulk 
sensors compute the size of grain or volume; this should be emphasized. These 
estimations could not be changed to grain mass since the bulk solid’s weight would 
cause a packing gradient inside the grain silo. Instead, it is necessary to use math￾ematical models to translate volume and bulk density to mass of grain [47–49].
12.6.3 Sensors for Secure Storage after Harvest
Grain bins are an intricate ecosystem that requires ongoing monitoring since they 
have many existent and non-existent elements that can interact to alter the situation 
so that grain is secured [50]. It is possible to monitor certain ecological traits to tell 
whether a grain bin is going to spoil. The majority of heat and relative humidity 
sensors can be found within grain bins, installed at consistently separate “nodes” in 
the cord that swing downward from the grain bin’s apex. These sensors may provide 
information on the grain’s temperature and moisture content [51, 52]. Another typi￾cal sensor that checks the heat and moisture of the air present in the aeration is a 
weather station, which can be used with cord for drying system automation [53, 54]. 
Grain breathes while being kept in a bin. Insect or mould damage may be indicated 
by fluctuations in CO2 levels above normal respiration, according to several CO2
sensors that have been created [55]. Bug traps are another device that could identify 
bugs by automated counting. The aforementioned detectors are still the ones that are 
most frequently used in industry, despite the fact that there are now marketable elec￾tromagnetic imaging devices [56, 57] that exhibit tremendous potential for inventory 
control and 3D moisture detection. The grain quality sensors under development con￾sist of (i) fibre optic temperature and humidity sensors for spoilage detection and laser 
sensors to evaluate the risk of dust explosions [58–62]; (ii) hyperspectral imaging and 
machine vision to detect foreign objects, disease symptoms, or fungi; (iii) nano sen￾sors to locate and determine the cause of the rotting; and (iv) PID controllers for dryer 
systems that are AI-optimized.
12.7 CONCLUSION
Digital technology aids agriculture by enhancing productivity, production, and 
reducing losses. There are numerous digital farming paradigms that might be used 
to digitally twin ideas as the next level of digitization in the agricultural sector. The 
outcome of this study depicts that DT ideas have not yet been fully applied in agri￾cultural and food processing studies. Different facets of digital farming offer vari￾ous problems and opportunities for research. DT paradigms are applicable to soil 
and irrigation, crop, robotics and agricultural machinery, and post-harvest food pro￾cessing in the farming sector. In this regard, the majority of studies concentrate on 
the advancement of DTs by taking into account a few particular agricultural areas. 
Modern technology, including AI, complex statistical and optimization methods, big 224 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
data analysis, and dimensional simulators, creates new ideas for the advancement 
of agriculture management. Using continuous and real-time data on agricultural 
resources, digital models can forecast and resolve unforeseen chaos on the farm 
land. It might help farmers lessen the financial burden on the agricultural sector and 
labour issues, and it might comfort policymakers to improve the agricultural sector 
for the sake of the environment and food security. It also makes it simpler for aca￾demics to research ways to control and keep track of farm equipment, crop yields, 
and agricultural and post-harvest products. It also enables them to look at ways to 
reduce the use of water, pesticides, and energy in digital farming. Advancement of 
DT systems is essential for monitoring, recording, and analysing the data to forecast 
and execute the pertinent solution for digital farming management.
REFERENCES
1. United Nations, “Goal 2: Zero Hunger,” [Online] Available: https://www.un.org/
sustainabledevelopment/hunger/
2. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, The State of Food and 
Agriculture: Leveraging Food Systems for Inclusive Rural Transformation, 2017, vol. 2, 
no. 7929. [Online]. Available: http://www.fao.org/
3.
4. J. Panchard, S. Rao, T.V. Prabhakar, J. Hubaux and H. Jamadagni, “Common sense net: 
A wireless sensor network for resource-poor agriculture in the semi-arid areas of devel￾oping countries,” Inf. Technol. Int. Dev., vol. 4, pp. 51–67, 2007.
5. A.C. Charles, A.A. Namen and P.P.G.W. Rodrigues, “Comparison of data mining 
models applied to a surface meteorological station,” Rbrh, vol. 22, pp. 1–9, 2017.
6. S. Mohammed, A. Elbeltagi, B. Bashir, K. Alsafadi, F. Alsilibe, A. Alsalman, 
M. Zeraatpisheh, A. Széles and E. Harsányi, “A comparative analysis of data min￾ing techniques for agricultural and hydrological drought prediction in the eastern 
Mediterranean,” April 2022, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2022.106925
7. F.A. Ward and M. Pulido-Velazquez, “Water conservation in irrigation can increase 
water use,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., vol. 105, no. 47, pp. 18215–18220, 2008.
8. N. Chergui, M.-T. Kechadi and M. McDonnell, “The Impact of Data Analytics in Digital 
Agriculture: A Review,” In Proceedings of the 2020 International Multi-Conference on: 
Organization of Knowledge and Advanced Technologies (OCTA), Tunis, Tunisia, 6–8 
February 2020, pp. 1–13.
9. M. Grieves and Vickers, “Mitigating unpredictable, undesirable emergent behaviour in 
complex systems,” in Transdisciplinary Perspectives on Complex Systems, Springer, 
Cham, Switzerland, 2017, pp. 85–113.
10. E. Negri, L. Fumagalli and M. Macchi, “Review of the roles of digital twin in CPS-based 
production systems,” Procedia Manuf., vol. 11, pp. 939–948, 2017.
11. Y. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, L. Zhou, L. Ren, F. Wang, R. Liu, Z. Pang, M.J. Deen, 
“A novel cloud-based framework for the elderly healthcare services using digital twin,” 
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 49088–49101, 2019.
12. M.G. Juarez, V.J. Botti and A.S. Giret, “Digital twins: Review and challenges,” J. Comput. 
Inf. Sci. Eng., vol. 21, p. 030802, 2021.
13. J. Lu, X. Zheng, L. Schweiger and D. Kiritsis, “A cognitive approach to manage the 
complexity of digital twin systems,” Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 2021.
14. S. Neethirajan and B. Kemp, “Digital twins in livestock farming,” Animals, vol. 11, 
p. 1008, 2021.
United Nations, “AQUASTAT,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.fao.org/aquastat/
en/Broad Framework of Digital Twins in Agricultural Domain 225
15. S.K. Jo, D.H. Park and S.H. Kim, “Smart livestock farms using digital twin: Feasibility 
study,” In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Information and 
Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC), Jeju Island, Korea, 17–19 October 
2018, pp. 1461–1463.
16. R.R. Agale, “Automated Irrigation and Crop Security System inAgriculture using 
Internet of Things,” 2017 International Conference on Computing, Communication, 
Control and Automation (ICCUBEA), pp. 1–5, 2017.
17. S.V. Suakanto, J. Engel, M. Hutagalung and D. Angela, “Sensor Networks Data 
Acquisition and Task Management for Decision Support of Smart Farming,” 2016 
International Conference on Information Technology Systems and Innovation, ICITSI 
2016 - Proceedings, 2017.
18. S. Wolfert, L. Ge, C. Verdouw and M.J. Bogaardt, “Big data in smart farming – 
A review,” Agric. Syst., vol. 153, pp. 69–80, 2017.
19. M. Ayaz, M. Uddin, Z. Sharif, A. Mansour and E.M. Aggoune, “Internet-of-things 
(IoT)-based smart agriculture: Toward making the fields talk,” in IEEE Access, vol. 7, 
pp. 129551–129583, 2019.
20. R Dolci, “IoT Solutions for Precision Farming and Food Manufacturing: Artificial 
Intelligence Applications in Digital Food,” 2017 IEEE 41st COMPSAC, Turin, 2017, 
pp. 384–385.
21. Qi Qinglin, “Enabling technologies and tools for digital twin,” J. Manuf. Syst., pp. 1–18, 
March 2021. 10.1016/j.jmsy.2019.10.001
22. B.R. Barricelli, E. Casiraghi, D. Fogli, “A survey on digital twin: Definitions, characteristics, 
applications, and design implications,” in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 167653–167671, 2019.
23. B. Sam and S. Regeena, “Comparative performance evaluation of cool season vegeta￾bles under poly house structure and in open field,” IJERD, vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 13–18, 
December 2015.
24. AGRITECTURE. “Soilless Agriculture: An In-depth Overview,” [Online] Available: 
25. G.M. Kumar and G. Sreedhar, “Vertical Farming Using Information and Communication,” 
infosys.com, White Paper, 2019. [Online] Available: https://www.infosys.com/industries/
agriculture/
26. K. Benke and B. Tomkins, “Future food-production systems: Vertical farming and 
controlled-environment agriculture,” Sustain.: Sci. Pract. Policy, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 13–26, 2017.
27. F. Kalantari, O.M. Tahir, A.M. Lahijani, S. Kalantari, “A review of vertical farming 
technology: A guide for implementation of building integrated agriculture in cities,” Adv. 
Eng. Forum, vol. 24, pp. 76–91, 2017.
28. A. Kheir. “The vertical farm: A review of developments and implications for the vertical 
city,” Buildings, vol. 8, no. 2, p. 24,2018.
29. J. Jones, “Hydroponics: A Practical Guide for the Soilless Grower,” CRC Press, 2016, 
pp. 1–30.
30. S. Nisha, A. Somen, K. Kaushal, S. Narendra and O. Chaurasia, “Hydroponics as an 
advanced technique for vegetable production: An overview,” J. Soil Water Conserv., 
vol. 17, pp. 364–371, 2019.
31.
32. “Basic Hydroponic Systems and How They Work.” Simply Hydroponics LLC. [Online] 
Available: https://www.simplyhydro.com/system/n.
33. J.S. Rubio-Asensio, M. Parra and D.S. Intrigliolo, “Open field hydroponics in fruit 
crops: Developments and Challenges,” in Fruit Crops, Elsevier, Netherlands, 2020, 
pp. 419–430.
34. P. Wootton-Beard, “Growing without soil: An overview of hydroponics”, Farming 
Connect, September 2019.
https://www.agritecture.com/blog/2019/3/7/soilless-agriculture-an-in-depth-overview
“Hydroponics” Environment and Ecology. [Online] Available: https://environment.co/
environmental-benefits-of-hydroponics/226 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
35. M. Rufí-Salís, M.J. Calvo, A. Petit-Boix, G. Villalba and X. Gabarrell, “Exploring nutri￾ent recovery from hydroponics in urban agriculture: An environmental assessment,”
Resources, Conservation and Recycling, vol. 155, p. 104683, 2020.
36. A.V.D. Reis, F.A. Medeiros, M.F. Ferreira, R.L.T. Machado, L.N. Romano, V.K. Marini and 
T.R. Francetto, “Technological trends in digital agriculture and their impact on agricultural
machinery development practices,” Revi. Ciência Agronômica, vol.51, pp. 1–12, 2021.
37. CEMA. European Agriculture Machinery Association, Digital Farming: What Does It
Really Mean? 2017. [Online] Available: https://www.cema-agri.org/
38. S. Rotz, E. Gravely, I. Mosby, E. Duncan, E. Finnis, M. Horgan, J. LeBla, R. Martin,
H.T. Neufeld, A. Nixon, L. Pant, V. Shalla and E. Fraser, “Automated pastures and the
digital divide: How agricultural technologies are shaping labour and rural communities,” 
J. Rural Stud., vol. 68, pp. 112–122, 2019.
39. V. Komasilovs, A. Zacepins, A. Kviesis, A. Nasirahmadi and B. Sturm, “Solution for remote
real-time visual expertise of agricultural objects,” Agron. Res., vol. 16, pp. 464–473, 2018.
40. M. Jans-Singh, K. Leeming, R. Choudhary and M. Girolami, “Digital twin of an urban￾integrated hydroponic farm,” Data-Cent. Eng., vol. 1, p. e20, 2020.
41. J.A. Hunt, “Level sensing of liquids and solids – A review of the technologies,” Sens.
Rev., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 200–206, 2007.
42. J.A. Voigt, “Introduction to Grain Operations Webinar Series: GEAPS 500,” [Online]
43. Gholizadeh, Mohammad Haji, Assefa M. Melesse and Lakshmi Reddi, “A comprehen￾sive review on water quality parameters estimation using remote sensing techniques.”
Sensors vol. 16, no. 8 p. 1298, 2016.
44. BinMaste, Sensors, software & systems to transform supply chain. Available https://
www.binmaster.com/products/ (October 2021).
45. J.D. Lewis, “Technology review level measurement of bulk solids in bins, silos and hoppers,” 
Monitoring Technologies, LLC, 2004.
46. J. Nie et al. “Artificial intelligence and digital twins in sustainable agriculture and
forestry: a survey,” Turk. J. Agric. For., vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 642–661, 2022.
47. ASABE, “Procedure for Establishing Volumetric Capacities of Cylindrical Grain Bins,
ASABE EP 413, 2nd Edition, 2019.
48. R. Bhadra, M.E. Casada, A.P. Turner, M.D. Montross, S.A. Thompson, S.G. McNeill,
R.G. Maghirang and J.M. Boac, “Stored grain pack factor measurements for soybeans,
grain sorghum, oats, barley, and wheat,” Trans. ASABE, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 747–757, 2018.
49. S.A. Thompson, C.V. Schwab and I.J. Ross, “Calibration of a model for packing whole
grains,” Appl. Eng. Agric., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 450–456, 1991.
50. F. Jian and D.S. Jayas, “The ecosystem approach to grain storage,” Agric. Res., vol. 1,
no. 2, pp. 148–156, 2012.
51. C. Gilmore, M. Asefi, J. Paliwal, J. LoVetri, “Industrial scale electromagnetic grain bin
imaging,” Comput. Electron. Agric., vol. 136, pp. 210–220, 2017.
52. G. Dyck et al. “Digital twins: A novel traceability concept for post-harvest handling,”
Smart Agric. Technol., p. 100079, 2022.
53. C.B. Singh and J.M. Fielke, “Recent developments in stored grain sensors, monitoring
and management technology,” IEEE Instrum. Meas. Mag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 32–36, 2017.
54. A. Tzachor, C.E. Richards and S. Jeen, “Transforming agrifood production systems and
supply chains with digital twins.” Sci. Food, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 47, 2022.
55. S. Neethirajan and D.S. Jayas, Sensors for grain storage, in: 2007 ASABE Annual
International Meeting, Technical Papers, 2007, 076179.
56. M. Asefi, I. Jeffrey, J. LoVetri, C. Gilmore, P. Card and J. Paliwal, “Grain bin monitoring 
via electromagnetic imaging,” Comput. Electron. Agric., vol. 119, pp. 133–141, 2015.
57. W. Purcell, T. Neubauer and K. Mallinger, “Digital twins in agriculture: challenges and
opportunities for environmental sustainability,” Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain., vol. 61,
pp. 101252, 2023.
Available: https://www.geaps.com/course/introduction-to-grain-operations/Broad Framework of Digital Twins in Agricultural Domain 227
58. L. Zhao, J. Wang, Z. Li, M. Hou, G. Dong, T. Liu, T. Sun and K.T.V. Grattan, “Quasi 
distributed fiber optic temperature and humidity sensor system for monitoring of grain 
storage in granaries,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 20, no. 16, pp. 9226–9233, 2020.
59. C. Pylianidis, S. Osinga and I.N. Athanasiadis, “Introducing digital twins to agriculture,” 
Comput. Electron. Agric., vol. 184, p. 105942, 2021.
60. P. Angin, M. H. Anisi, F. Göksel, C. Gürsoy and A. Büyükgülcü, “A digital twin frame￾work for smart agriculture,” J. Wirel. Mob. Networks Ubiquitous Comput. Dependable 
Appl., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 77–96, 2020.
61. W. Purcell and T. Neubauer, “Digital twins in agriculture: A state-of-the-art review,” 
Smart Agric. Technol., vol. 3, p. 100094, 2022.
62. T.R. Sreedevi and M.B. Santosh Kumar, “Digital Twin in Smart Farming: A Categorical 
Literature Review and Exploring Possibilities in Hydroponics,” 2020 Advanced Computing 
and Communication Technologies for High Performance Applications (ACCTHPA) (2020), 
pp. 120–124.
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
Dr. S. Muthukaruppasamy (M.E., Ph.D., M.I.S.T.E.) received B.E degree in 
Electrical and Electronics Engineering from Manonmaniam Sundaranar University 
and M.E degree in power electronics and drives from Sathyabama University in 
2000 and 2005, respectively. He completed Ph. D in Electrical Engineering from 
Anna University, Chennai, India. He has published many research papers in inter￾national journals.
Dr. G. Arun Sampaul Thomas (M.E., Ph.D., M.I.S.T.E. M.I.E.T.) received 
B.E. degree in Information Technology, and M.E. and Ph.D. degrees in Computer 
Science and Engineering from Anna University, Chennai, in 2006, 2010, and 2018, 
respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor and HOD in the department 
of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, J.B. Institute of Engineering and 
Technology, Hyderabad, India. He has had an overall teaching experience of more 
than ten years. His research areas include computer networks, data science, big data 
analytics, and IoT. He presented papers at five international conferences and various 
national conferences. His papers were published in various international journals. He 
attended several seminars and workshops. He is an active life member of ISTE & IET.
Dr. J. Nandha Gopal (M.E., Ph.D.) received his B.E degree in Electronics 
and Communication Engineering from Odaiyappa College of Engineering and 
Technology, Theni, India in 2005 and M.E degree in Power Electronics and Drives 
from Anna University, Chennai, India in 2011. He received PhD degree from Anna 
University, Chennai, India in 2021. His current research area is Power Converters for 
renewable energy resources.
Dr. S. Ravindra (M.E., Ph.D.) received his M.E degree in Power Electronics 
and Drives from Sathyabama University. He completed Ph. D degree from JNTUK, 
Kakinada, India. His current research area is Power System, Security, Power system 
Stability, PMU placement.228 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Dr. K. Saravanan, (M.E., Ph.D) is working as an Associate Professor, Department 
of Computer Science & Engineering at College of Engineering, Guindy, Anna 
University, Chennai, Tamilnadu. His research interests include Cloud Computing, 
Software Engineering, Internet of Things, Smart cities. He has published papers 
in 20 international conferences and 35 international journals. He has also written 
20 book chapters and edited 12 books with international publishers. He has done 
consultancy work for Municipal Corporations and Smart City schemes. He is an 
active researcher and academician. Also, he is reviewer for many reputed journals 
in Elsevier, IEEE etc. He is Fellow of IEI and member of ISTE, ISCA, ACM, etc.DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-13 229
Predictive Analytics 
of Climate Change
The Future of Global Warming 
Lies in Data Analytics
G. Arun Sampaul Thomas, S. Muthukaruppasamy, 
S. Sathish Kumar, K. Saravanan, 
and Beulah J. Karthikeyan 
13.1 INTRODUCTION
We are the final generation that can take action to prevent the worst effects of climate 
change and the first one that can abolish poverty. If we don’t live up to our moral and 
historical obligations, future generations will judge us harshly.
Ban Ki-moon, former UN Secretary General
Climate change is one of the most pressing global issues facing humanity today. 
Predictive analytics, a subfield of data analytics, is increasingly being used to help 
predict and mitigate the impacts of climate change. This approach involves analys￾ing vast amounts of data from a variety of sources, such as satellite images, weather 
sensors, and climate models, to make predictions about future climate patterns and 
impacts. In recent years, there has been an emergent form of investigation exploring 
the potential of predictive analytics in the context of climate change.
The motivation behind exploring the potential of predictive analytics from the 
perspective of climate change lies in the urgent need to address the impacts of 
global warming on our planet. As climate change continues to have significant 
influences on humanoid civilization and the natural ecosystem, there is a grow￾ing recognition of the importance of developing accurate models that can predict 
future climate patterns and assess the potential influence of climate change on 
various sectors of society. Predictive analytics offers a powerful tool for achieving 
these goals, by harnessing the power of data to develop accurate and reliable mod￾els that can inform policy and decision-making related to climate change mitiga￾tion and adaptation.
Data scientists and analysts are no longer the only ones who use data [1]. Data 
is accessible to anyone. People are better able to make reasoned judgments when 
they have straightforward approach to comprehensible climate facts. Average folks 
can make up good quality, more informed conclusions about the world we live 
in when they have simple access to digestible weather facts. People can truly see 
13230 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
all of the factors impacting their environment, how they interact and make their 
own decisions about how we should go about addressing the climate catastrophe 
when they need entry to instinctive climate assessment tools that offer helpful data 
visualizations.
Innovation is at the core of accessible data. Modern climate analysis indicator tools 
and technologies are capable of ingesting enormous earth observation and climate 
data sets to analyse and describe the dynamic relationship between society and nature 
quickly and ascertain whether actions addressing climate change are succeeding or 
failing to mitigate it. A single, collaborative, and interactive platform may be used to 
carry out all these tasks.
Do you know that during the past 20 years, approximately 70% of all extreme 
weather occurrences have been attributed to climate change [2]? “Global warm￾ing” describes a rise in the climate’s median long-term temperature. The emergence 
of physical components like carbon dioxide (CO2), CH4, and N2O has significantly 
changed the environment. Since 1990, increased greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
have caused a dramatic increase in earth’s temperature [3, 4]. In the past 100 years, 
the standard temperature of the Globe has rocketed by 1 degree Celsius. Over the sub￾sequent 200 years, the middling global temperature is projected to upsurge by around 
6 degree Celsius, according to climatologists. For countries to effectively tackle global 
warming, they need an action plan. For this, they mostly use real-time data analytics. 
Predictive analytics has enormous potential for forecasting patterns related to global 
warming. There is a reason why climatologists are using ML and data analytics more 
frequently. Numerous studies have shown that these models are much more precise 
and more priced in the resulting states:
• Typical figures are not noteworthy adequate to prototypical structures, 
when there are immense expanses of data.
• While there are excellent prototypes, computing them using traditional pro￾duction techniques is extremely expensive.
Data analytics has been used by climate scientists to distinguish pollution 
sources, organize crop cover, and standardize satellite sensors. Deep learning 
with neural networks, one of the most important branches of ML for data analysis, 
can pace up data analytics in the field by helping with pattern recognition, super￾resolution, and global warming predictions. Innovative methods and technology 
are being developed by both governmental and private sector groups to combat 
global warming. The storage and real-time analysis of vast volumes of data relate 
to many factors, including temperature change, sea levels, carbon emissions, and 
forest cover. These technologies can find correlations between data, provide useful 
insights, and produce patterns and forecasts. In this method, prompt preventive 
measures or safeguards can be taken.
The equilibrium of energy entering and leaving the system of the planet con￾trols its temperature [5]. Temperatures of the globe while solar energy is entering 
are captivated by the planet system. The globe does not warm when solar energy 
is bounced into space. The earth cools as engrossed energy is emanated back into Predictive Analytics of Climate Change 231
space. There are several natural and human factors that can alter the planet’s energy 
balance, including:
• Changes in the amount of energy from the sun that reaches earth as well as 
the planet’s atmosphere and surface reflectivity.
• Modifications to the greenhouse effect, which alters how much heat is trapped 
by the atmosphere on earth.
Earth’s microclimate is changing more quickly than it ever has throughout the 
record of modern-day evolution, and this change is mostly due to human activity [5]. 
The influences of climate change have already been felt in every part of the biosphere, 
and they are likely to worsen with time. These industries are crucial to contemporary 
society, and they encompass human health, food production, security, transportation, 
energy, ecosystems, and water supply.
13.1.1 Curbing Emissions
Industry, energy, forestry, waste, agriculture, and land use all contribute to global 
GHG emissions. These sectors are significantly impacted by using energy in 
industrial and domestic buildings, deforestation, landfills, cattle and manure, road 
traffic, aircraft, and other issues. Remote sensors on satellites, aircraft, and drones 
are used to measure the emissions from these areas. Remote monitoring of emis￾sions from any source on the earth is possible using this spaciotemporal data in 
conjunction with IoT and climate data analysis technologies. To hold companies 
and organizations accountable, it is necessary to be able to identify the sources and 
amounts of emissions. Consumers may choose which companies are turning green 
and which to support by having easy access to emissions data, which promotes 
openness.
13.1.2 Temperature Trends
Is the weather becoming warmer? What are the changes in value? What will their 
increase be? We employ trend analysis to provide answers to these queries. Simple linear 
regression is used to determine linear trends and statistical importance using historical 
and present temperature data obtained from sensors and satellites. The significance of 
a monotonic trend may also be determined using the Mann-Kendall test [6]. Although 
it may appear difficult, it is not necessary to manually analyse time series of climate 
data. These capabilities are integrated into modern visual analytics systems, which can 
rapidly and impeccably ingest and fuse temperature data into a single location where 
users can make use of data discovery tools to examine their data in collaborating repre￾sentations that highlight trends and patterns. We can determine when and where there 
is a connection between specific behaviours and rising temperatures by combining this 
information with emissions data.232 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
13.1.3 Rising Sea Levels
Rising sea levels and their effects on coastal towns are among the most worrisome 
elements of climate change [1]. We can record sea levels over time in large part 
thanks to GIS (geographic information systems) [7], satellite altimeters, radio waves, 
and distant tide gauges. Fleets of aquatic robots are used to assess water tempera￾tures, and microwave remote sensing data may be extracted from GIS and used to 
monitor sea ice. Not only can this data be used to make forecasts using predictive 
models, but it can also be used to simulate floods using software. Why is this crucial? 
Perception. It probably won’t make much of a difference if you simply inform folks 
that sea levels are increasing and provide them with a worksheet of statistics. The 
real ramifications, however, are probably more significant if you present them with 
predicted data in the form of flood simulations, and the typical person is more prone 
to take the certainty of the climate problem into account in real-life situations.
13.1.4 The Heavy AI Differences
We have access to a lot of data that can be used to fight climate change. However, the 
value of such information depends on our capacity to apply it to derive practical con￾clusions. Combining tried-and-true environmental effect measurement techniques 
with cutting-edge technology offers us the ability to unearth previously undiscovered 
insights and solutions. A tool that can cope with the diversity, amount, and velocity 
of ecological data that we are now dealing with is required for climate change data 
analysis technologies and approaches.
It takes a cutting-edge solution to help us connect the dots between the vast 
amount of climate data, map out many circumstances with climate situation assess￾ment tools, and forecast events before they occur to develop an effective plan to 
deal with a catastrophe of this size. HEAVY.AI [7] supports all of this and more. 
Beyond the capabilities of common analytics tools, real-time data insights are 
discovered with HEAVY.AI. The large dimensions of data gathered by latter-day 
ecological scrutinizing IoT devices and sensors quickly overpower older GIS sys￾tems, whereas forecasters can cross-filter billions of position data chronicles, poly￾gons, and other properties using HEAVY.AI’s climate data analysis capabilities 
in milliseconds.
Because of the software, indigenous raster and earth surveillance and imaging 
data can now be quickly imported into HEAVY.AI 6.0. Our geospatial data plat￾form, with the help of artificial intelligence (AI), can easily map and analyse your 
biggest geographical and time-series information in ways that were previously not 
conceivable. The complex interaction between the world and humanity is shown in a 
dynamic, engaging way through HEAVY.AI’s interactive data visualizations.
Overall, these studies demonstrate the potential of predictive analytics in the con￾text of climate change. By analysing vast amounts of data, researchers can develop 
models that help predict and mitigate the bearings of climate change on anthropo￾logical culture and the natural atmosphere. As such, predictive analytics is likely to 
play an increasingly important role in the combat in contradiction of climate change 
in the years to come.Predictive Analytics of Climate Change 233
13.2 IMPACT CLIMATE CHANGE POLICY WITHOUT 
A TECHNOLOGY PREDICTION
Without big data and predictive analytics, it should go without saying that any policies or 
strategies to combat climate change would be extremely limited and one-dimensional. 
Without considering big data, the following hypothetical scenarios may be possible:
• The estimated amount of carbon emissions that must be reduced glob￾ally may be significantly off. Consider a situation where nations decide to 
reduce carbon emissions from all sources, such as automobiles, air condi￾tioners, and industrial facilities, by 2% over the course of the following five 
years, even though, given the existing situation, a minimum reduction of 
5% is required. Insufficient emission reduction results in increased global 
warming, sickness, and other issues.
• Sea levels are increasing because the glaciers melting more quickly than 
before. Coastal regions are particularly in danger because of this. Proactive 
measures, like home relocation, rehabilitation planning, and other activities, 
might be inadequate or delayed without reliable analytics and projections.
• A lot of environmental changes and ecological imbalances might go unre￾ported across the planet. The proper viewpoint might not be developed if 
up-to-date, data-based perspectives are not given to the appropriate forum. 
Data comparison and tracking of environmental and ecological changes 
throughout time are crucial.
13.2.1 Predictive Analytics-Based Impression of Big Data
and Climate Transformation Strategies
Predictive analytics-based big data had a considerable influence on plans and campaigns 
envisioned to address the global climate variation problem. Innovative tools and tech￾nologies are being developed by both public and private sector organizations to aid in 
the creation of cutting-edge climate change policies. Big data is used in the development 
of these applications and systems. Massive volumes of information are continuously 
acquired and assessed about a variety of elements, such as carbon emanations, tempera￾ture differences, sea level changes, and forest asylum. These tools may determine the 
relationships between various factors and offer useful information, forecasts, and trends 
based on which preventative or safety measures can be taken. The contributions of a few 
of the following tools and technologies can aid in a better understanding of how the fight 
against climate change is being impacted predictive analytics and big data.
13.2.1.1 Surging Seas
The interactive map and application were made by the independent non-profit group 
Climate Central. Surging Seas provides information on the escalating sea levels in 
the United States. As seen in Figures 13.1 and 13.2, the map may be used to see 
embedded widgets such as flood alarms, action plans, sea level trends, historical data, 
and precise sea levels at various locations. Big data analysis is the sole technique, 
in accordance with Richard Wiles, vice president for strategic communications and 234 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
director of research at Climate Central, to inform people about their local climate in 
a way that they can understand.
13.2.2 A World without Data Analytics
Plans and programmes to combat global warming become one-dimensional without 
data analytics [2]. The following hypothetical scenarios are possible:
• The computations for lowering carbon emissions may remain impacted. 
Consider a system where firms consistently agree to implement a rule that 
demands industrial facilities, autos, and other sources to cut carbon emis￾sions by 3% during the ensuing ten years.
FIGURE 13.2 CO2 surging sea levels.
FIGURE 13.1 Greatest Miami Beach will be underwater beneath estimated 5-ft sea level 
upsurge.Predictive Analytics of Climate Change 235
• As a result of incorrect calculations, global warming will worsen because 
sea levels are rising faster than previously, and glaciers are melting swiftly, 
placing coastal areas at great risk. The actual need was a 6% reduction in 
carbon emissions. The appropriate authorities might not implement proac￾tive housing relocation and rehabilitation planning measures if predictive 
analytics are not used.
13.3 TECHNOLOGY BEHIND CLIMATE CHANGE: 
A COMPARATIVE STUDY
The existence of programmes [8], like Worldwide Jungle Lookout [9], Microsoft 
Research’s Maddingley Exemplary [10], and the Google Earth Engine [11], is evi￾dence that significant effort has already been made on this front over the years. We 
must act quickly considering the speed of climate change. Predictive analytics and big 
data-based technologies have made it feasible for stakeholders to analyse enormous 
dimensions of information quickly and engender meaningful intuitions. Antennas 
remain gathering information on different factors, including rainfall, soil, and forest 
cover, and assisting in the establishment of connections across datasets. Big data and 
predictive analytics are two of the most critical tools that administrations will utilize 
as they search for ways to decrease the consequences of climate change.
13.3.1 Google Earth Engine
The Google Earth Engine relates environmental conditions across years or decades 
and pinpoints issues so that they can be rectified. Iran’s Lake Urmia, a salt lake, 
serves as an illustration of how this operates. According to Google Earth, the lake 
had a turquoise tint in 1984 years or decades and pinpoints issues so that they can 
be rectified. After a while, the colour turned green. In 2012, everything is brown. 
Like this, Amazonian deforestation has been monitored. The engine gathers openly 
accessible satellite imagery to pinpoint environmental problems worldwide.
13.3.2 Climate by Data.Gov
http://www.data.gov/ has a massive compilation of more than 192,289 datasets on 
a range of subjects. Naturally, the weather is included in all these datasets. These 
databases offer reliable, current information on a variety of climate-related sub￾jects. You could be prepared for live coverage of earthquakes occurring all around 
the world, time-lapse maps displaying how the Great Lakes’ temperature varies 
throughout the year, and fertilizer awards, for example. A tiny project created in 
2006 shows how helpful the input from this website could be. It dealt with a device 
that assessed how climate change affected crops. As a result, Monsanto bought the 
influence tool.
13.3.3 Worldwide Forest Power
It is a technique that aids footprint the world’s reforest concealment. It provides a 
collaborative map with a plethora of evidence, such as the amount of forest cover, the 236 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
amount of deforestation in a certain area, and forest fires. This programme, which 
is well liked, is used by several organizations, including Nestle, Unilever, and the 
Indonesian government.
13.3.4 Opower
A decrease in energy use is good for the environment. Every citizen must become 
involved in the effort to reduce energy use. The energy usage of neighbours frequently 
has an impact on residents. This behavioural pattern was employed by Opower, a busi￾ness that specializes in energy analytics, to combat climate change. Citizens receive 
individualized data from Opower that compares their energy use to that of their neigh￾bours and it is producing outcomes. Since its debut in 2007, Opower is capable to 
keep around 6 billion kilowatts of energy, which is adequate to power an urban of 
1 million people for an entire year. Behavioral nudging, according to Opower’s head 
of engineering, Rick McPhee, “helps minimize user consumption and is friendlier 
than mandatory blackouts.”
Recent years have seen an emergent frame of study exploring the potential of 
predictive analytics in the context of climate change. In [12], Fu et al. developed 
a model using ML algorithms to accurately predict drought events several months 
in advance in the Yellow River basin of China. In [13], Tian et al. used predictive 
analytics to gauge the bearing of climate change on crop yields in China, developing 
a random forest model that predicted future crop yields under different climate sce￾narios. In [14], a study by Zhang et al. explored the use of deep learning algorithms 
to predict extreme heat events in urban areas of the United States, demonstrating the 
potential of these models to improve early warning systems for heat-related health 
impacts. These studies demonstrate the continued relevance of predictive analyt￾ics in the background of climate change, highlighting the potential of data-driven 
approaches to inform policy and decision-making related to climate change mitiga￾tion and adaptation.
13.4 DATA ANALYTICS CONTEST AGAINST 
CLIMATE CHANGE ON OUR BEHALF
On February 26, 2021, an iceberg with a surface area of 1,270 square kilometres 
detached from an Antarctic ice shelf which is greater than New York City [15]. For 
many people, this news may not be alarming when taken in isolation. Sadly, this 
is the result of a series of climate change-related incidents. One of the most hotly 
contested issues today is climate change. Scientists continue to call for action to stop 
climate change, while governments and regular people continue to dismiss the issue 
and ignore these warnings.
No matter what other people may think, climate change is a reality that could get 
worse if we do nothing to stop it. Scientists believe that human activity will have 
raised the universal warmth by 2.5 to 4 degree Celsius by the wind-up of the span, 
causing an uncontrollable restraint of occurrences that might render lifespan on 
earth for all incarnate things pretty much impossible. We must use every tool avail￾able to us to provide a harmless atmosphere for forthcoming compeers. Big Data Predictive Analytics of Climate Change 237
analytics is a piece of technology that can aid in the fight against climate change and 
global warming.
An essential step in the healing process is examining the harm done by our pre￾vious errors. We’ve all made a lot of mistakes as people. The main ones include 
cutting down our forests, polluting the climate with fossil fuel pollution, and leaving 
plastic garbage in the ecosystem. But estimating the consequences of our errors is 
a difficult challenge. Scientists gather information on these impacts using sensors, 
satellite photos, and other instruments. The harm might then be assessed using this 
information, and future climate changes may be predicted. For instance, forest envi￾ronmentalists have been analysing the magnitude of destruction to our forests, which 
are basically the globe’s heart since they control atmospheric CO2, using the data 
gathered from these endpoints. Environmental organizations operating in Antarctica 
were also able to foresee how warming temperatures would affect the pole’s glaciers.
By identifying these implications of climate change, we can inform policymakers 
and the public and encourage them to act in the battle in contradiction of weather 
transformation. Additionally, the information gleaned from these analytics may be 
used to improve the strategies we undertake to safeguard the environment.
There remains time to make alternatives that will progress our efforts to mitigate 
global warming, even though some of the effects of our mistakes are long-lasting. By 
converting to cleaner, more natural energy sources to meet our needs, we can reduce 
emissions, a major cause of global warming. To provide us with energy, natural energy 
sources like wind and solar power require certain arrangements. We can choose the 
optimum locations for wind and solar farms so that they can supply us with the sus￾tainable energy we need by using data analytics. Data analytics are being used by 
businesses all around the world to determine their carbon footprint. Businesses may 
use this information to establish best practices to reduce their environmental impact.
Climate variation is one of the most imminent extortions now confronting civ￾ilization. In the eras of reckless choices, behaviour have enhanced global warm￾ing, which might mark life for imminent generations tremendously difficult, if not 
impossible. Thankfully, there is still time for us to make restitution. Big Data analyt￾ics might be a very helpful tool in this process.
Using data analytics, the hazards of global warming may be mitigated [2]. One sig￾nificant example is the research done by the private non-profit organization Climate 
Central. They created Surging Seas, an interactive map that displays data on United 
States’ increasing sea levels. By exploring the map, one could see specific sea levels 
in different regions together with historical data, plans for response, and flood alerts. 
Miami Beach may soon be underwater, according to the application, because of ris￾ing sea levels. One of the main causes contributing to deforestation is illegal logging. 
Rainforest Connection (RFCx) uses data analytics and mobile devices to stop defores￾tation. To protect a rainforest region, they developed acoustic monitoring devices that 
gave them access to real-time alerts and improved their ability to react. RFCx analyses 
forest sounds in real-time using the TensorFlow ML framework to recognize noises that 
resemble logging trucks, chainsaws, and other sounds associated with illegal activities.
AI, data analytics, and ML were used to investigate Maria’s impacts on Puerto 
Rico’s El Yunque National Forest by Maria Uriarte, and Tian Zheng, a professor 
of statistics at the Data Science Society. The report’s objective was to determine 238 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
how tropical hurricanes impact both global warming and climate change as well as 
the spread of various tree species [16]. However, factors other than COP26 are also 
important for any climate policy’s effectiveness, including local and regional poli￾tics, advances in science and technology, and, most importantly, solid, reliable data.
Whether it’s to persuade decision-makers of the seriousness of the situation, coun￾ter the misinformation propagated by bad-faith players, or build solutions that may 
help us avoid worst case situations, data science and its surrounding fields have been 
essential to climate talks. Due to Hurricane Maria’s tremendous destruction, search￾ing through many high-resolution photographs was the only practical approach to 
identifying the impacted species. However, there remained a specific problem: How 
to tell one species from another when there was simply a green mass visible across 
a vast area?
They contrasted the high-resolution photos with a dataset that recognized and 
mapped each tree species in specific plots using AI and data analytics. They were 
able to analyse the aerial photos and ground data from fixed fields to identify how 
various species appeared from above.
The warming effects of CO2 are one of several aspects of climate change that are 
hotly contested [17]. Contrary to popular belief, some argue that changes in tempera￾ture cause changes in atmospheric CO2, rather than CO2 causing a rise in global tem￾perature. The study of historical climate change using ice core analysis revealed that 
CO2 lags temperature. As a result, some argue that CO2 lags the warming effects of 
CO2. Since there is a positive feedback loop between CO2 and global temperature, both 
sides of the debate are valid. In other words, when the temperature rises, CO2 levels 
rise as well. This cycle of positive feedback worsens the impacts of global warming.
Global warming requires research into how the composition and distribution of 
forests are impacted by contemporary storms. When a cyclone destroys a forest, the 
plant is forced to degrade, which increases the quantity of CO2 that is released into 
the sky. Trees retain less carbon when they regenerate after a storm because of their 
reduced size. As a result, as storms increase due to climate change, less carbon will 
be stored and more will be released, which will accelerate global warming.
The development of more habitable and environmentally friendly communities 
may greatly benefit from data analytics [3]. By analysing data gathered from IoT 
devices like smart meters, it can improve a city’s energy efficiency. In this way, it can 
predict energy demand. Authorities may be enabled by clever solutions to model pro￾spective zoning regulations, construct flood plains, and work on disaster prepared￾ness and urban planning. To make cities more livable and effective, a sustainable 
city’s administration can envision a cutting-edge analytics dashboard that displays 
real-time data on energy consumption, water availability, weather, and traffic.
The Green Horizon project (created by IBM) in China can track by forecasting 
air pollution and suggest alternative strategies [2]. To reduce pollution levels in a cer￾tain region, for example, it may be desirable to limit driving or close certain power 
plants. IBM is developing a new method to help communities forecast upcoming heat 
waves. It would explore a wide range of solutions to see how they reduce heat waves 
while simulating the environment on an urban scale. For instance, data analytics and 
ML algorithms might classify the optimum places to plant new trees to increase the 
number of trees in a region and lower the amount of heat generated by paving.Predictive Analytics of Climate Change 239
13.5 MACHINE LEARNING USE CASES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
For instance, a study by Fu et al. [12] used predictive analytics to forecast drought 
events in the Yellow River basin of China. The biographers used a combination 
of meteorological data, satellite imagery, and machine learning (ML) algorithms 
to develop a model that accurately predicted droughts several months in advance. 
Another study by Tian et al. [13] used predictive analytics to evaluate the influ￾ence of climate change on crop yields in China. The authors used a combination 
of climate data and ML algorithms to predict future crop yields under different 
climate scenarios.
Predictive analytics has also been used to predict the blowout of contagious sick￾nesses in the context of climate change. For example, a study by Leclerc et al. [18] 
used ML algorithms to predict the spread of dengue fever in Brazil based on weather 
and climate data. The authors were able to accurately predict the number of dengue 
cases several weeks in advance. In addition, a study by Hosseini et al. [19] used pre￾dictive analytics to evaluate the influence of climate change on the spread of malaria 
in Iran. The authors used climate data and data analytics-based ML algorithms to 
predict the imminent spread of the disease under different climate scenarios.
Climate change is a significant global issue that has far-reaching repercussions, 
including rising sea levels, melting ice caps and glaciers, more frequent and intense 
storms and hurricanes, increased occurrences of droughts and wildfires, and altered 
precipitation patterns across different regions. To mitigate these risks, it is essential 
to reduce GHG emissions and adapt to the effects of climate change. In recent years, 
there has been growing attention towards using data science, advanced analytics, 
ML, and AI to address climate change, after decades of application in various indus￾tries such as finance and healthcare [20].
With respect to climate change, some cases of the key uses are as follows: [21]
• Predicting climate change impacts on crop yields;
• Identifying climate-vulnerable regions;
• Globally predicting wildfire risk;
• Predicting sea ice loss due to climate warming;
• Detecting climate change-induced drought;
• Predicting sea level rise.
13.5.1 Predicting Extreme Precipitation
Several 24-hour periods throughout which the quantity of rain or snowfall sur￾passes the normal for that place is considered an extreme precipitation event. The 
augmented vanishing of water from bushels and other bodies of water is partly 
to blame for the general rise in frequency and intensity of these catastrophes. 
Condensation occurs as water vapour ascends into the sky, creating clouds. These 
clouds may produce significant amounts of precipitation when they are driven 
over land by the wind. The increased frequency of severe precipitation events is 
believed to be related to climate change. Storm intensity increases when the atmo￾sphere warms because it can store more water vapour. Flooding from excessive 240 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
precipitation can result in both property damage and fatalities. It may also cause 
avalanches and mudslides, which can both block entire populations from necessary 
services. Extreme precipitation even has the potential to interfere with vital infra￾structure like transportation.
ML methods and climate models can be used to anticipate extreme precipitation. 
The ability of climate models to forecast weather and climatic trends is improving. 
They still struggle to correctly predict severe precipitation, though. To anticipate 
future life-threatening rainfall occurrences, the climate exemplary incorporates cli￾matological factors, such as humidity, surface pressure, and temperature, towards esti￾mate how frequently a region would experience heavy rainfall or snowfall, the ML 
approach is fed historical data on daily weather patterns as well as climate change 
forecasts of GHG emissions.
We may attain several reasons (glitches or chances) and Key Performance Indicator 
(KPIs) connected to excessive rainfall while reasoning from fundamental principles, 
and we can traject them to arrive at suitable AI and ML resolutions. Some of the KPI 
values can be predicted using ML algorithms. Here are a few specifics:
• According to NOAA’s Weather Prediction Center’s Dr. David Novak, many 
instances of excessive rainfall share traits like high humidity and an air 
commotion (such as a winter storm, warm, or heavy cyclone). The more 
intense the rainfall you’re likely to experience, the longer these circum￾stances last in the same location. Additionally, as it is well known that 
warmer air can contain more dampness, it makes sense that a warmer atmo￾sphere might produce more intense rainfall. To determine the association 
among severe precipitation, air moisture, and warmer air, we will thus wish 
to develop and carry out hypothesis testing around these variables. To cre￾ate prediction models for predicting severe precipitation, employ the associ￾ated characteristics.
• As was said in the preceding paragraph, warmer air can store moisture, 
which may eventually lead to significant rains. What then causes the air to 
get warmer? One of the causes is the existence of greenhouse vapours in the 
troposphere, which heat the atmosphere by absorbing infrared contamina￾tion from the superficial. The objective is to identify the causes of GHGs, 
develop and test hypotheses related to those causes, and then effectively use 
the knowledge to develop predictive or AI&ML models.
13.5.2 Demonstrating Carbon Confiscation
It is a technique for forecasting the amount of carbon that will be captured from 
the air and stored. The climate of the planet has fluctuated back and onward amid 
ice eternities and interglacial eras (warm epochs). This results from variations in 
earth’s orbital path around the sun. Due to their extreme sensitivity to temperature 
fluctuations, climate models are unable to forecast what the climate will be like in 
100 or 1000 years. ML algorithms are being used by researchers to simulate carbon 
sequestration and its long-term effects on climate change.Predictive Analytics of Climate Change 241
To develop predictive models for carbon sequestration, it would be necessary to 
comprehend some of the following while making assumptions based on fundamental 
principles:
• What may indicate whether carbon sequestration is successful? How can 
carbon sequestration technologies’ effectiveness be modelled?
• What are all the types of carbon that can be treated using the carbon con￾fiscation technique?
• How should the carbon forms be graded?
• What numerous kinds of carbon sequestration techniques are there, and 
what are the KPIs for each of them?
13.5.3 Forecasting CO2 Emissions
When fuels are burned, the greenhouse vapours CO2, CH4, and N2O are released. 
The bulk of GHG emissions from stationary combustion sources are made up of CO2. 
The primary source of CO2 emissions is the scorching of remnant oils. Researchers 
are estimating the maximum amount of CO2 that may be emitted while still meet￾ing a certain climatic target using climate models and ML algorithms (i.e., residing 
below 2 degree Celsius). The primary focus of carbon reporting is on this, with the 
following objectives:
• To prevent carbon emissions from going above a certain threshold that 
would cause an increase in the global temperature of about 1.5 degree cel￾sius, what is the carbon budget globally at any given time?
• How much CO2 is emitted by each nation, area, etc.? Different features of 
carbon accounting, such as those described earlier, can be predicted using 
AI and ML models. There are several ways to calculate GHG emissions at 
any given period, including the following:
• Direct measurement: A continuous emissions monitoring system 
(CEMS) is used to detect CO2 emissions directly.
• Fuel input analysis: This method effectively uses a mass balance approach 
to calculate emissions by applying carbon content factors to the fuel input.
• In the fuel input analysis approach, relevant equations, such as the subse￾quent ones, may be cast off to compute emanations depending on the data 
available on the properties of the fuel being used. You may read the spe￾cifics in this chapter. The amount of CO2, CH4, or N2O released is used to 
compute emissions.
13.5.4 Forecasting Greenhouse Vapour Absorptions
Because GHGs prevent heat from escaping into space, the globe’s weather remains 
warmhearted enough for life as we distinguish it. Future GHG concentrations are 
predicted by researchers using climate models. To make climate model forecasts 
more quickly and effectively, ML techniques are applied.242 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
According to article [10], the next image depicted in Figure 13.3 illustrates the 
three main absorptions of GHG emanations, including CO2, CH4, and N2O. Other 
main gases include sulphur hexafluoride, perfluorocarbon, and hydrofluorocarbon 
gases. The amount of heat that any GHG can trap in the atmosphere is determined 
by its global warming potential (GWP), which varies across all GHGs.
On occasion, it may be necessary to estimate or anticipate the concentrations depicted 
in the picture; in these situations, algebraic and ML approaches can be of great use.
13.5.5 Forest Deprivation
Many ways to addressing climate change and forest degradation depend heavily on 
forests. They provide oxygen, support plant and animal habitats, and aid in control￾ling the planet’s temperature. However, the rate of forest deprivation is worrying. A 
significant issue that subsidizes climate variation is forest degradation. When forests 
are harmed or devastated, usually because of human activities, it happens. Forest 
degradation is mostly brought on by deforestation, forest fires, pests, and inadequate 
forest management. The local climate can be significantly impacted by the removal 
of trees and other plants. Trees and plants also serve to control warmth and precipita￾tion intensities in addition to absorbing CO2.
These crucial services are jeopardized by forest degradation, which contributes 
to climate change. As a result, the earth is getting warmer, and less CO2 is being 
extracted from the atmosphere. Additionally, soil erosion brought on by forest degra￾dation has been linked to desertification and a decline in biodiversity. To safeguard 
our ecosystem, it is crucial to discourse the issue of forest deprivation.
Stopping the loss of forests and establishing new ones must be the two halves of 
the answer to forest deprivation, which has a significant influence on climate change. 
FIGURE 13.3 Green-house-gas-emissions-concentrations.Predictive Analytics of Climate Change 243
We requisite first lessen our reliance on wood products to stop forest damage. This 
may be accomplished by buying recycled paper goods, purchasing items with a for￾est certification, and investing in forest management methods. By establishing pro￾tected areas, encouraging forest conservation, and lowering deforestation-related 
emissions, we must also safeguard forests. Additionally, we must try to rebuild the 
damaged forest ecosystems and replace trees. Reforestation activities will assist in 
reducing climate change, providing habitat for species, and generating employment 
in the communities that rely on their forests. Here are some of the theories that, taken 
together, might lessen the destruction of forests.
• Reduced reliance on wood products;
• Early identification of forest degradation;
• Affinity of sites where shrubs can be regenerated.
Given the techniques for solving the problem, it is crucial for conservational 
researchers to be proficient in identifying forest deprivation as early and simply as 
conceivable so that some of the solutions can be used to lessen the effects of climate 
change. To automate this procedure, researchers use ML algorithms to create models 
using satellite data, such as high-pixeled photos from the Landsat series of satellites.
13.5.6 Identifying Climate-Vulnerable Regions
Regions that are susceptible to the impacts of climate change are referred to as cli￾mate vulnerable. These areas are often characterized as low-lying coastal regions, 
small island states, or tropical developing nations. Climate change manifests in 
various ways in these regions, including rising sea levels, intensified frequency of 
extreme weather events, changes in precipitation patterns, and decreased water avail￾ability. Identifying climate-vulnerable regions is a crucial initial step in addressing 
the issue of climate change. By pinpointing areas that are most at risk, resources 
and aid can be more effectively directed. Nevertheless, as climate change is a global 
issue, its impacts will ultimately affect all locations, exacerbating existing issues 
such as poverty, water scarcity, and food insecurity.
13.5.7 Predicting Wildfire Risk Globally
Wildfire danger has been connected to climate change. A wildfire is an untamed 
fire that began on poorly kept or unprepared property. They often happen when it’s 
hot and dry, in late summer or early fall. Wildfire activity has recently increased 
all around the world, and experts think that climate change is a significant reason. 
Wildfires may have catastrophic effects, destroying natural areas and residential 
structures. Additionally, they contribute significantly to climate change by releasing 
massive volumes of CO2 into the atmosphere.
We must act to stop wildfires from spreading and becoming more catastrophic 
because of climate change. Reducing the quantity of GHGs, we release into the envi￾ronment is one approach to achieving this. Lessening the use of fossil fuels, grow￾ing more trees, and preserving natural places can all help with this. By establishing 244 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
fire-resistant areas surrounding our homes and towns, as well as by putting an emer￾gency plan in place, we may also be prepared for wildfires. By adopting these actions, 
we can reduce the danger of wildfires and safeguard our loved ones and property. 
Predicting wildfire risk is more important than ever as the wildfire season lengthens 
and gets worse. A potent technique for finding patterns and making predictions is ML. 
ML can assist in identifying at-risk locations and the variables that cause wildfires by 
examining data from previous wildfires. Predictive models may then be developed 
using this data to assist decision-makers in taking action to put out wildfires.
13.5.8 Predicting Climate Change Impacts on Crop Yields
Making forecasts regarding upcoming crop production is known as agricultural yield 
forecasting. Making forecasts about future crop yields requires a rigorous examina￾tion of previous crop yields and weather patterns. With the continued warming of the 
planet’s climate, farmers may use this approach to prepare for droughts, heat waves, 
and other extreme weather occurrences. Crop production prognostication is a difficult 
task that considers a variety of influences, including rainfall, soil humidity intensities, 
solar contamination, and weather. However, the reliability of the climate in a certain 
area might affect how accurate a forecast is. As an illustration, agricultural produc￾tions in the Sahel area of Africa vary greatly year after year because of the erratic 
nature of the rainfall. Forecasting agricultural production in this area is, therefore, 
very difficult. Nevertheless, predicting crop production is a useful contrivance that 
can assist farmers in adjusting to a varying environment.
13.5.9 Forecasting Sea Ice Loss Due to Climate Thawing
There is broad systematic agreement that mortal actions like deforestation and the 
depletion of remnant gases are causing climate variation. Sea ice loss is the most 
obvious consequences of climate change. Sea ice is created when saltwater freezes, 
and it is crucial in controlling the temperature of the planet. The earth is kept cold by 
the reflection of sunlight by sea ice. Dark ocean water is revealed when sea ice melts, 
and this water absorbs more heat, warming the earth even more. In the upcoming 
years, sea ice is expected to continue to decrease, increasing climate change’s effects 
and causing even more extreme weather patterns.
13.5.10 Improving Estimates of Carbon Emissions
A heat-trapping GHG called CO2 is released into the atmosphere when people engage 
in activities like using motor vehicles, scorching coal or natural gas for vigour, and 
deforestation. To increase estimates of carbon emissions by 50% over current practices, 
scholars have built a climate-carbon cycle prototypical using AI&ML techniques.
13.5.11 Detecting Climate Change-Induced Drought
Drought brought on by climate change is a major source of worry. Climate change 
refugees may flee their homes due to drought, which can also affect agricultural Predictive Analytics of Climate Change 245
output and cause famines. It is crucial to quickly identify droughts brought on by 
climate change so that proper action may be taken in regions that may experience 
these droughts soon. Drought brought on by climate change may be identified using 
a variety of deep learning approaches. Algorithms for image recognition can be used 
to find droughts brought on by climate change. For illustration, CNNs (Convolutional 
Neural Networks), which are renowned for their precision and enactment, might assist 
individuals in swiftly identifying regional changes brought on by climate change.
13.5.12 Climate Change Action Plan
Plans to combat climate change may be included in national government plan or 
neighbourhood-level ingenuities like installing green ridges and reducing urban heat 
islands. Building data models on a variety of aspects, such as city infrastructure and 
vegetation, may be done using deep learning techniques.
13.6 PREDICTING CHANGES IN WEATHER TEMPERATURE 
USING MACHINE LEARNING MODELS
13.6.1 Problem Introduction
We attempt to solve the challenge of estimating the middling temperature of globe’s 
land and waters using more than a century of historical weather data [22]. We’re 
going to pretend that there are no weather forecasts available to us. We have usage 
of historical world temperature averages for the past 100 years, including global 
maximum and minimum temperatures as well as ocean temperatures and global 
land. With everything said, we may conclude that the problem is one requiring 
regression techniques from ML. The goal makes this a regression job because it is 
continuous, and the fact that we have both the characteristics and the target that we 
want to forecast makes it supervised. Multiple regression models will get both the 
features and the targets in training phase, and they must figure a way to translate 
the data into a prediction. Additionally, because the target value is continuous, 
this is a regression problem (as opposed to discrete classes in classification). The 
backdrop we require is mostly complete, so let’s begin! ML process, we need to 
clearly define our goals before getting started with the programming. Now that we 
are aware of our problem and model, the stages that form the backbone of my ML 
workflow are as follows:
1. State the query and choose the essential data (completed).
2. Get the data.
3. Recognize and fix any irregularities or missing data points.
4. Clean up and organize the data for the AI/ML/Data Science Model.
5. Create a reference model.
6. Use the training data to train the prototypical design.
7. Built on test data and make predictions.
8. Estimate enactment metrics and compare forecasts to the goals in the actual 
test set.246 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
9. If performance is subpar, tweak the model, get new data, or attempt an 
alternative modelling approach.
10. Interpret the model and provide the numerical and visual findings.
13.6.2 Data Gathering
We need data to get started. We have received temperature information from 
Berkeley Earth Climate Change. To use a real-world example, see the Earth Surface 
Temperature Dataset on Kaggle.com. We assume the data in the dataset is correct as 
it was produced by one of the most renowned research universities in the world [23].
13.6.3 Making Better Predictions
Motivation for using data analytics builds on work done in the field of climate infor￾matics, a topic created in 2011 that combines data analysis with climate research arch 
[2]. A wide range of topics are covered in this area, including improved flood predic￾tion, paleoclimatology (reproducing historical climate conditions using data such as 
ice cores and climate shrinking), the use of large-scale models to make predictions 
at the hyperlocal scale, and the socioeconomic impacts of climate and weather. Data 
analytics can use a large amount of problematic climate and global warming simu￾lations generated by climate models to uncover hidden and important information.
Among the earliest simulations of climate change, these models [10] of ice, cryo￾sphere, land, oceans, and atmosphere were created at Princeton University in the 1960s. 
Claire Monteleone, a professor of computer science at the University of Colorado, 
Boulder, is unsatisfied with the correctness of these assumptions, even though fun￾damental scientific presumptions are generally accepted. This is especially true for 
long-term forecasts. “There is a lot of uncertainty,” she continued. Even the future 
course of precipitation is up for debate. Monteleone has combined the projections of 
over 30 climate models [24] using data analytics to produce more accurate forecasts.
13.7 CONCLUSION
Every component of the industrial system requires a unique solution, but unfortu￾nately, solutions are seldom straightforward and often come with significant difficul￾ties and expenses. We recognize that individual efforts, even with the best intentions, 
are outweighed by the magnitude of necessary reforms in politics, economics, and 
technology. Effective policy is key to creating genuine change, and altering policy 
requires convincing elected officials that the public is concerned about the climate 
crisis and that their success depends on tackling it directly. The ability of big data 
analytics and ML models to process vast amounts of complex climate data, uncover 
hidden patterns, and provide real-time insights is critical. It has become an essential 
part of strategies and protocols aimed at mitigating and predicting trends in global 
warming. However, data analytics has limitations, and the decision to implement it 
for maximum benefit ultimately rests with the relevant authorities. Big data and ana￾lytics are redefining government policies around climate change. The use of big data 
in climate policies is becoming increasingly important, with its capacity to handle Predictive Analytics of Climate Change 247
massive amounts of complex climate data, identify correlations as needed, and offer 
real-time insights. Although nearly all tools have been successful in providing real￾time data, stakeholders must now determine specific measures to take while consid￾ering all available facts. It is undeniable that data analytics is transforming climate 
change policies.
REFERENCES
1. https://www.heavy.ai/blog/the-latest-on-climate-data-analysis-what-it-means-for￾humankind
2. https://medium.com/swlh/the-future-of-global-warming-lies-in-data-analytics￾63d255d6b62c
3. Arun Sampaul Thomas, G., & Harold Robinson, Y. (2020). IoT, big data, blockchain 
and machine learning besides its transmutation with modern technological applica￾tions. In Internet of Things and Big Data Applications. Springer Intelligent Systems 
Reference Library Book Series (ISRL) (Vol. 180, pp. 47–63). Springer, Cham. Print 
ISSN: 978-3-030-39118-8.
4. https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/data-science-in-climate-change-7ba2dd948aa7
5. https://medium.com/mytake/understanding-climate-change-with-machine-learning￾fb45a047dd2b
6. https://www.statisticshowto.com/mann-kendall-trend-test/
7. https://www.heavy.ai/technical-glossary/gis
8. https://www.kdnuggets.com/2015/12/big-data-predictive-analytics-climate-change.html
9. https://www.globalforestwatch.org/
10. https://www.princeton.edu/news/2018/01/19/syukuro-manabe-wins-crafoord-prize￾fundamental-contributions-climate-change
11. https://earthengine.google.com/
12. Fu, Y., Li, C., Li, H., Li, L., Wang, Q., Zhang, Y., & Li, J. (2020). Forecasting drought 
using machine learning approaches: A case study in the yellow River basin, China. 
Journal of Hydrology, 590, 125450.
13. Tian, Y., Sun, H., Zhou, J., & Liu, X. (2021). Predicting crop yield under climate change 
scenarios with a random forest model. Journal of Cleaner Production, 281, 125148.
14. Zhang, J., Yang, Y., Li, H., Li, J., & Wang, Z. (2022). Predicting extreme heat events in 
urban areas using deep learning: A case study of the United States. Science of the Total 
Environment, 804, 150017.
15. https://seleritysas.com/blog/2021/04/15/how-data-analytics-can-support-our-fight￾against-climate-change/
16. https://towardsdatascience.com/the-data-science-climate-change-curriculum-e93b2ba1b969
17. https://towardsdatascience.com/interpreting-climate-change-through-data-science￾321de6161baf
18. Leclerc, Q.J., Fuller, N.M., & Knight, G.M. (2019). What datasets exist to support model￾ing of mosquito-borne disease transmission in urban environments? Journal of the Royal 
Society Interface, 16(159), 20190265.
19. Hosseini, S.M., Maleki, M., & Hajivand, M. (2020). The impact of climate change on 
malaria transmission in Iran: A data-driven modeling approach. Environmental Science 
and Pollution Research, 27(23), 29156–29166.
20. Arun Sampaul Thomas, G., & Harold Robinson, Y. (2020). Real-time health system 
(RTHS) centered Internet of Things (IoT) in healthcare industry: Benefits, use cases 
and advancements In. Multimedia Technologies in the Internet of Things Environment 
(Scopus Indexed). Springer, Singapore. ISSN: 978-981-15-7965-3.248 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
21. https://vitalflux.com/machine-learning-use-cases-climate-change/#Predicting_extreme_
precipitation
22. https://medium.com/swlh/predicting-weather-temperature-change-using-machine￾learning-models-4f98c8983d08
23. https://www.kaggle.com/berkeleyearth/climate-change-earth-surface-temperature-data
24. https://unfoundation.org/blog/post/intergovernmental-panel-climate-change-30-years￾informing-global-climate-action/
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
Dr. G. Arun Sampaul Thomas (M.E., Ph.D, M.I.S.T.E., M.I.E.T.) received 
B.E. degree in Information Technology, and M.E. and Ph.D degrees in Computer 
Science and Engineering from Anna University, Chennai, in 2006, 2010, and 2018, 
respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor and HOD in the department 
of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, J.B. Institute of Engineering and 
Technology, Hyderabad, India. He has overall teaching experience more than ten 
years. His research areas include Computer Networks, Data Science, Big Data 
Analytics, and IoT. He presented papers in five international conferences and vari￾ous national conferences. His papers were published in various international jour￾nals. He attended several seminars and workshops. He is an active life member of 
ISTE and IET.
Dr. S. Muthukaruppasamy (M.E., Ph.D) received B.E. degree in Electrical 
and Electronics Engineering from Manonmaniam Sundaranar University and 
M.E. degree in Power Electronics and Drives from Sathyabama University in 2000 
and 2005, respectively. He completed Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from Anna 
University, Chennai, India. He has published 12 research papers in international 
journals.
Mr. S. Sathish Kumar (M.E., Ph.D) received B.E. degree in Computer Science 
and Engineering, and M.E. degree in Software Engineering from Anna University, 
Chennai, in 2010 and 2014, respectively. He is currently an Assistant Professor in 
the department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, J.B. Institute of 
Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad, India. He has overall teaching experi￾ence more than five years. His research areas include Machine Learning, Deep 
Learning, Computer Vision, Big Data Analytics, and IoT. He presented papers 
in four international conferences and various national conferences. His papers 
were published in various international journals. He attended several seminars and 
workshops.
Dr. K. Saravanan, (M.E., Ph.D) is working as an Associate Professor, Department 
of Computer Science & Engineering at College of Engineering, Guindy, Anna 
University, Chennai, Tamilnadu. His research interests include Cloud Computing, 
Software Engineering, Internet of Things, Smart cities. He has published papers 
in 20 international conferences and 35 international journals. He has also written 
20 book chapters and edited 12 books with international publishers. He has done Predictive Analytics of Climate Change 249
consultancy work for Municipal Corporations and Smart City schemes. He is an 
active researcher and academician. Also, he is reviewer for many reputed journals 
in Elsevier, IEEE etc. He is Fellow of IEI and member of ISTE, ISCA, ACM, etc.
Mrs. Beulah J Karthikeyan (M.E.) received B.E. degree in Computer Science and 
Engineering, and M.E. degree in Computer Science and Engineering from Anna 
University, Chennai, in 2017 and 2020, respectively. She is currently an Assistant 
Professor in the department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, J.B. 
Institute of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad, India. Her research areas 
include Machine Learning, Deep Learning, Computer Vision, Big Data Analytics, 
and IoT. She attended several seminars and workshops.250 DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-14
Applications of Drones 
in Predictive Analytics
Dhiraj Kapila, Nestor Ulloa, S. Anita, 
R. Siva Subramanian, Priti Kandewar, and P. Sujatha
14.1 OVERVIEW OF DRONES
Technology has come to play a crucial part in modern society, allowing people to 
pursue their endeavours with greater ease and efficiency. To improve productivity, 
humans are increasingly automating routine tasks so that they can devote their 
time and energy to more cerebral pursuits [1–3]. Drones and other unmanned aerial 
vehicles (UAVs) are rapidly expanding in significance as part of this automation 
toolset. This is due to the fact that drones offer numerous benefits, especially in 
challenging tasks, such as speed, efficiency, and lower danger. Drones are becom￾ing increasingly useful, and it is for this reason that we wish to suggest a novel 
application in a novel setting, quantifying the associated benefits and hazards [4]. 
The agriculture industry is selected from the many possible settings. Agricultural 
tasks are becoming increasingly automated since they are physically demanding for 
people, hence it is preferable if machines perform these tasks instead. In addition, 
they are endeavours that need for ever-increasing efficiencies that can’t be provided 
by mere human might [5].
Because of urbanization, the amount of land available for farming has decreased 
along with the global population, but the resulting increase in consumers’ need for 
goods is a boon for the economy [6]. Consequently, intensive agriculture, as opposed 
to the conventional, extensive farming methods, must be used to maximize output 
while minimizing land use [7]. The obvious goal is to make this type of agriculture 
long-lasting while simultaneously protecting natural resources. One of the many facets 
of agriculture that we cover in this book is the effort to eradicate parasites. As a mat￾ter of fact, they can wipe out entire farms and render them unproductive [8]. Recently, 
this has become a major issue. Consider the entire olive groves that were wiped off in 
Puglia when the Xylella parasite struck, or the countless palm trees that were cut down 
when the “Red Punteruolo” pestilence swept through.
Types of drones, degrees of autonomy, drone sizes/weights, as well as types of 
power sources all help to categorize drones into distinct groups. Range, flight time, 
and payload capacity are all crucial characteristics of a drone [9].
Drones used to only be used for military, industrial, and meteorological purposes. 
Toy stores now sell mini UAVs for a few hundred dollars that can take live videos 
and photos [10].
A drone is a UAV that can be piloted from a distance and used to take still pho￾tographs or record video of a specific area, which can then be uploaded to a server. 
Drones are typically operated by a radio controller, smartphone, or tablet [11].
14Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 251
What is possible and legally permissible in today’s society is constrained by tech￾nology and legal issues [12]. In the United States, for instance, the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) mandates that all drones be registered and must activate 
within visual line of sight of a pilot at all times [13]. Figure 14.1 depicts a likely 
future scenario for the application of drones in both public and private sectors.
Drones can be sorted in several ways according to their various qualities, including 
size, controls, wings, and more. On the basis of information acquired in, Tables 14.1
and 14.2 summarize these primary features.
Electronic components have become ever more affordable, smaller in size and 
less taxing on resources as a result of recent technical advancements [14]. Multi-rotor 
designs are replacing fixed-wing aircraft because of the increased specific energy 
made obtainable by lithium-ion batteries.
Aero-photogrammetry, thermal dispersal studies of the ground structures, and 
air quality analysis are only some of the remote sensing applications made possible 
by these aircraft [15]. The adoption of stabilization technologies and reliable flying 
helped make them a success, making it possible to use the aircraft safely even in 
bad weather. In addition, the multi-rotor aircraft’s vertical flight capacity allows it to 
operate in confined locations while yet maintaining the same compact configuration 
as a conventional fixed-wing aircraft [16]. Finally, the capability for stable flying 
(hovering) enables more precise data from the sensor, and the potential of piloting 
remotely from ground position facilitates the completion of missions in hostile pol￾luted places without placing the human operator in harm’s way.
Several publications [17–19] propose using drones in the agricultural domain 
when it is required to keep an eye on crops or other items on the ground. Farmers 
FIGURE 14.1 Estimates of the number of UAVs in service from 2015 to 2035.252 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
are frequently confronted with a wide variety of challenges, including parasites and 
unexpected climatic changes, all of which may have devastating effects on the qual￾ity of agricultural products [10]. Drones with targeted sensors, cameras, and fertiliz￾ers can help farmers combat these risks and, in this case, eradicate parasites that pose 
a particular danger to crops in the field. Imagine we had a garden with a particular 
number of plants spaced out over the space. Some parasites may choose to colonize 
the area in order to feast on the local flora and spread their own kind. Timely and 
effective countermeasures may be warranted in this instance. Parasites can hide in 
the ground and travel and reproduce in a dispersed fashion, so their precise location 
is unknown [20]. A team of drones can be quite helpful in this scenario, as they can 
monitor the entire area and pinpoint the exact location of the attacked plants or the 
parasites as they move from plant to plant using the cameras. Unfortunately, drones 
in the real world are powered by batteries that have a finite lifespan and can quickly 
run out of juice, rendering them immobile. In addition, the insecticide is restricted 
due to the low weight limits of the drones.
TABLE 14.1
Variation for Weight
UAS 
Specification
Mission 
Endurance 
(Hours)
Mission 
Speed 
(Miles per 
Hour)
Weight 
(Pounds)
Mission 
Altitude 
(Feet Above 
the Surface)
Mission 
Radius 
(Miles)
Overall 
Size 
(Feet)
Mission 
Endurance 
(Hours)
Nano <1 <25 <1 <400 <1 <1 <1
Micro 1 10–25 1–4.5 <3,000 1–5 <3 1
Small UAS 1–4 75–150 4.5–5.5 <10,000 5–25 <10 1–4
Ultralight 
Aircraft
4–6 75–150 55–255 <15,000 25–75 <30 4–6
Light Sport 
Aircraft
6–12 75–150 255–1,320 <18,000 50–100 <45 6–12
Small Aircraft 24–36 100–200 1,320–12,500 <25,000 100–200 <60 24–36
Medium 
Aircraft
TBD TBD 12,500–41,000 <1,00,000 TBD TBD TBD
TABLE 14.2
Variation for Control
Remote human pilot Real-time control by remote pilot
Autonomous Automated operation after human initiation
Swarm control Cooperative mission accomplishment via control among the vehicles
Remote human operator Human provides the flight parameters to invoke the built-in functions for 
vehicle control
Semi-autonomous Human-controlled initiation and termination, autonomous mission executionApplications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 253
Due to these limitations, it is important to coordinate drones across the cultivated 
area so that they do not repeatedly fly over the same areas. Also, keeping track of 
how much pesticide was used and who was responsible for conducting monitoring 
can be a difficult coordination work [21, 22]. In order to provide drone coordination 
strategies for the precision agricultural area, this simulator needs parasites and drone 
movement modules. Additionally, standardized drone communication modules for 
sharing maps and topologies are necessary for reducing drone traffic, averting pesti￾cide waste, and decreasing energy consumption. Given the newness of the field and 
the increasing interest from both industry and academics, we are unaware of any 
simulator that incorporates these modules at this time [23].
One of the earliest descriptions of a simulator accounts for the impact of parasites, 
plants, and drones in contemporary agricultural precision [24]. The possible applica￾tions of sensors and on-board cameras for agricultural drones are discussed, expand￾ing upon prior studies. The simulator’s issue statement has also been expanded to 
cover all relevant variables for assessing coordinating methods [25, 26].
14.2 AGRICULTURAL PRECISION
This paragraph serves as an introduction to some of the more fascinating uses of agri￾cultural precision. Interest in “smart farming” and “precision agriculture” has been 
rising steadily in few years. As Internet of Things (IoT) promises to usher in a plethora 
of innovative products and services, businesses and academic institutions are investing 
more money into making it happen. As a result, product costs can be reduced while 
yields are raised and quality is improved.
In order to lessen the strain on already overworked human resources, modern 
advancements in communication technology have made it possible to offer unique 
solutions for the constant monitoring of agriculture, livestock, and the water system. 
As a result, the precision agricultural industry is adopting cutting-edge systems that 
use embedded technology and machine-to-machine (M2M) connections. In fact, it is 
crucial to keep a close eye on the weather in this industry. The communication pro￾tocols may allow for more efficient use of network resources by lowering the amount 
of data generated. These methods help to increase crop yields and ensure their trace￾ability by enhancing environmental and agricultural sustainability [27–29].
Obviously, as the global population rises, so does the need for food. However, agri￾cultural land is shrinking at an alarming rate. Consideration is given to potential solu￾tions that could improve productivity and resource use in certain locations. Because 
of these concerns, farmers are always looking for ways to boost the productivity of 
their crops [30].
As a result, there are numerous areas of focus among researchers and businesses 
that can aid in agricultural process optimization. Resource management is a major 
focus in precision agriculture since more efficient use of available resources directly 
correlates to greater yields. The availability of water is one of the most significant 
resources. It’s obvious that more resource-conserving practices need to be put in 
place. Typical methods of regulating irrigation are extremely wasteful. By coordi￾nating amongst devices with different but equally important monitoring and actua￾tion responsibilities, a smart irrigation control system may ensure that no water is 254 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
wasted during the distribution process. Activation of the irrigation system is typi￾cally based on technician perceptions rather than weather forecasts, plant health, or 
environmental factors.
Full automation of a crop-field monitoring and irrigation system based on the IoT 
necessitates a deeper understanding of the surrounding ecosystem. By learning more 
about the surrounding environment, we may implement a more optimal strategy for 
the crops and their yields. These systems are made up of a network of interconnected 
smart devices that share data to improve each other’s understanding of their sur￾roundings and the quality of their collective decision-making. The system for global 
management and the adoption of global strategies, which may relate to the choice of 
the area to use and how these must be governed, can be completed by the addition of 
a software framework. The reliability of the communication networks in this broad, 
rural area remains an open subject.
With cellular networks increasing their coverage regions and introducing new 
technologies, users can take advantage of the improved quality of service that comes 
with the greater availability of features like low latency and high bandwidth, we may 
be able to let out a sigh of relief. machine-to-machine (M2M) communications pro￾vide for a wide variety of possible protocols. Message Queue Telemetry Transport 
(MQTT) and Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) are heavily employed by 
these advantages. In specific, MQTT is used since it is accessible and efficient. An 
intermediary, or “broker,” controls who can connect to which topics, and who can 
post new topics. Embedded-technology-based “smart” gadgets may aid in achieving 
better outcomes through the intelligent application of specialized approaches. It has 
been successful in lowering the need for additional labour, water, and fertiliser.
Figure 14.2 depicts an example of a smart device used to perform a task related 
to water management. In this case, sensors are used to track crop data via M2M pro￾tocols. Data is collected and stored by remote services. Environmental information, 
such as the current weather and the accessibility of water, is also gathered simultane￾ously. In the event of a water shortage, the flow of water is controlled by an algorithm.
14.2.1 Insights from Video Analysis Systems to Aid Precision Farming
One of the most critical issues in modern farming, whether it be crops or cattle, is 
that of tracking their health and development. Taking measurements based on images 
and employing intelligent data mining are necessary if we are to learn more about 
our environments and improve our understanding of them. UAV can be employed to 
capture aerial views of agricultural landscapes and livestock farms.
The Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) is a common tool for gaug￾ing the flora’s vitality and, by extension, the ecosystem’s health. While this metric 
is helpful for assessment, it is insufficient for implementing a truly effective solution 
to raise output and product quality. Differencing zones allows for the application 
of effective policies. Using NDVI and classification algorithms, we may split crop 
fields into zones based on their similarities in a variety of ways. This can aid farm￾ers in deciding what to do in each area [31]. Predicting the planting yield variation 
with NDVI data is an excellent way to go [32]. The analysis of collected images 
allows one to ascertain the health of plants. The NDVI index can be computed using Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 255
Equation 14.1 if the red channel is accessible, and using Equation 14.2 if only the 
blue spectra is available, as shown in the two recently published publications.
= −
+
NDVI NIR Red
NIR Red (14.1)
= −
+
NDVI NIR Blue
NIR Blue
(14.2)
Video analysis has the potential to aid in the development of plantations in other 
vital domains, such as the identification of weeds in agriculture fields. The best 
way to identify this plant life is still up for debate. Herbicides are the go-to solution 
FIGURE 14.2 Network design based on machine-to-machine (M2M) interaction.256 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
for dealing with a weed problem. A number of drawbacks have been noted with 
this approach. There is an urgent need to increase productivity while decreasing 
expenses. Over the past two decades, advancements in precision farming technol￾ogy have been dramatic. In particular, weeds are plants that diminish crop yields 
by competing for water, nutrients, and space. Alternative, real-time solutions can 
be developed to help eliminate the need for herbicides. These devices use optical 
sensors and cameras to analyse their surroundings and pinpoint the exact location 
of any infection. By author [33], for instance, a machine visioning system is devel￾oped for a sprayer that is capable of pinpoint accuracy. Using a Gabor filter and blob 
detection, it can tell the difference between a plant and a weed. The use of UAVs has 
the potential to aid in the detection of weeds and plantation issues in this sector. A 
smart camera and infrared (IR) sensors are installed on a terrestrial UAV [34]. Here, 
information is transferred to the computational component to be classified. The use 
of herbicide by the UAV is permitted in the event of weeds.
Figure 14.3 depicts a terrestrial drone used for weed identification. This drone has 
a number of sensors built into it for taking readings on things like temperature and 
FIGURE 14.3 Terrain-based drone design used in precision farming.Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 257
humidity. In addition, it has a high-tech camera for capturing live views of the fields. 
The elaboration unit receives the images and does the video analysis, feature extrac￾tion, and object classification. The primary objective here is to locate weed plants 
and determine how numerous they are. Decision-making algorithms receive this 
information and use it to determine whether or not the drone should spray pesticides.
Precision livestock farming applications have proliferated in the recent decade. 
The encouraging findings that have been obtained explain the recent uptick in inter￾est in this area.
Constant checks on animal development allow for better management of the farm’s 
resources like food, water, and medical attention. For instance, the authors [35] offer 
an adaptive monitoring and analysis system for detecting objects and measuring pigs’ 
development. During flight, a specialized 3-D camera captures photos to evaluate 
things by taking use of their depth. Once the depth photos are collected, an adjusted 
watershed algorithm is used to separate each animal into its own image. Pigs are 
hard to tell apart because of their similar appearance and their unpredictable lifestyle. 
Thus, state-of-the-art sensors like the time-of-flight camera are chosen because they 
provide the 3-D position data in the depth image rather than the RGB image [36].
14.2.2 Usage of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle in Agricultural Precision
UAVs have improved their contribution to large-scale agriculture by allowing for more 
precise crop-field surveillance in recent years [37]. By leveraging M2M and IoT technolo￾gies, we may gain a deeper understanding of the surrounding world, which will allow us 
to develop more nuanced algorithms for the various stages of decision-making [38, 39]. 
For example, pesticide pollution is still an issue today [40]. There are a number of 
changes that can be made to advance the mission. Long-term missions necessitate 
thoughtful solutions that support energy harvesting technology, such as calculating 
the energy needs of UAVs. Although UAV systems are designed to operate indepen￾dently, several questions remain to be answered, containing some technical worries 
and questions about the normative laws of flying things [41]. UAVs are in high demand 
for agricultural insurance surveys, crop monitoring, and spraying. Using UAVs with 
high-resolution cameras is typical practice for area scanning [42, 43]. An aviation-based 
service is proposed by a number of products. Drones’ missions often begin with them 
launching into flight and using GPS to navigate their surroundings. Flight control ser￾vice has selected several waypoints across the map and set a predetermined route.
14.3 COORDINATION TECHNIQUES BASED ON ROUTING
Coordination methods are procedures used to maintain order within a collective. 
The term “coordination” is used in the drone industry to describe the process of 
leading a team of drones to achieve a single objective. As a result, packet exchange 
makes coordination possible. Drones are mobile nodes; therefore, communication 
with them is enabled using a wireless interface. The acronym “MANET” refers 
to “Mobile Ad Hoc Network,” which describes this specific sort of network. This 
form of network is designed for ever-changing conditions. Drones’ inherent mobil￾ity and finite energy resources present the primary challenge for MANET routing 258 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
management. Routing updates in a dynamic network are provided by the periodic 
exchange of packets. When this occurs, routing algorithms need to do the following:
• Ensure routing tables are kept at a manageable size;
• Make the smartest decision for connecting to other nodes;
• Facilitate the upkeep of accurate routing tables;
• Get there quickly by transmitting few packets and at the ideal rate, the sev￾eral routes and their associated expenses should be presented.
14.3.1 Methods of Routing
In general, we can divide routing protocols into subsequent categories:
• In proactive algorithms for MANETs, mobile nodes periodically send pack￾ets to each other. Because of this, routing may be done right away. In theory, 
every node’s routing table would always reflect the most recent configura￾tion. Characteristics of proactive protocols include as follows:
• The transmission of packets occurs at regular intervals;
• Applying Tables;
• Refreshing Tables.
Some benefits of using proactive measures include as follows:
• Due to their periodic updates, routing tables include the actual network 
architecture and allow for instantaneous routing of informative packets.
The following are some of the drawbacks of using proactive protocols:
• Excess packet traffic.
• High signalling traffic.
• Reactive: Paths between nodes can be generated on demand via reactive 
protocols. Since MANET networks are always evolving, this is a plus. The 
following describe how a packet is transmitted using reactive protocols:
• The process of determining the numerous routes between the origin 
and the destination nodes is known as route discovery.
• The following are some benefits of reactive protocols that proactive 
protocols lack.
• They only create new connections when necessary and remove heavy 
network traffic.
• Currently, there are no databases that can be used to store routing 
information.
• Hybrid: The benefits of proactive protocols and those of reactive proto￾cols are combined in hybrid protocols. Zone Routing Protocol (ZRP) and 
Location Aided Routing (LAR) [33] are two examples of algorithms that 
make use of hybrid approaches.
• Hierarchical: The packet overhead of proactive protocols is decreased by 
using hierarchical protocols. They categorize nodes and keep track of which Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 259
category each node’s entry belongs to. Clusters are formed in the network, 
and a cluster with the most votes becomes the leader. This method creates 
a unified framework that is easier to expand. Proactive methods are used in 
each cluster to ensure that at least certain pathways are always reachable. 
We employ reactive methods of inter-cluster communication [44].
• Based on location: Based on the physical location of each node, these pro￾tocols are constantly revising the routing tables (GPS). The routing zone is 
where the routing protocol is intended to function, and it contains the expected 
zone, which is where the routing protocol supposes to evaluate the destination 
point [45].
• Aware of power – Conscious of power consumption: Each node in these 
approaches is conscious of the amount of energy it can consume. With this 
knowledge, the node may determine for itself, for example, whether to keep 
its power on or off, or which path will result in the lowest operating costs. 
The Power-Aware Routing Optimized (PARO) is one example of a power￾aware approach [46].
14.3.2 Routing Type
The function of routing algorithms is to build and maintain up-to-date routing tables. 
There are two potential outcomes in the following:
• Statical routing: Static routing involves permanently storing a routing table 
on each node. Typically, the routing table’s configuration is handled by an 
administrator. A manual update of the routing table is required if the network’s 
topology is altered. This is why this method is used for mostly unchanging 
local area networks. Due to the elimination of unnecessary packet exchange 
caused by the modified routing table, this approach is actually quite efficient. 
Savings in bandwidth, processing power, and memory are only some of the 
benefits of static routing.
• Dynamic routing: A routing algorithm running on the node generates and 
updates the tables used in dynamic routing. Packets are exchanged between 
nodes, which increases the demand for network resources such as CPU and 
RAM. Algorithms of this kind are resilient to the ever-shifting nature of net￾works, allowing them to discover alternate routes to the same goal. Centralized 
and decentralized dynamic routing are two other categories that describe it.
14.3.3 Synopsis of the Coordination Issues Concerning UAV
In the event of a parasite attack, our method uses a routing algorithm to coordinate 
the flights of drones, allowing for an accurate headcount to be collected.
14.3.4 Drones
Each drone is fortified with its own little batteries, pesticide tank, and Wi-Fi module 
for coordinating with others in the region. Insecticide pumping and data transmis￾sion use up portion of the battery power, as does drone movement (Figure 14.4).260 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
The primary states of drones are either constant motion or a pause while spraying 
insecticide on diseased plants. Depending on its task, the drone can move anywhere 
from very slowly to very quickly. The drone’s current charge determines how quickly 
it can go to its destination after being recruited by another drone. More speed means 
more energy used by the UAV. When a drone’s fuel tank or power supply is critically 
low, it automatically returns to base to be replenished. In the event of an emergency 
or if the drone has found parasites but the pesticide tank is empty or the battery is 
low, it might resort to the recruitment procedures. Drones are allowed to fly at any 
altitude between plant height and the maximum altitude. The height of each individual 
drone varies. To prevent accidental crashes, the drones are all flying at various heights. 
FIGURE 14.4 Common scenarios involving plants, explored cells, uncharted cells, and 
plant infections: (a) before the map swap; (b) after the map swap.Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 261
To increase its visual range in the search for parasites, each drone is designed to posi￾tion its camera in a slightly different way as it rises from the ground. The greater its 
height, the more inaccurate its parasite detection will be, leading to more garbage. 
Drones coordinate their efforts and share data wirelessly to accomplish their mission. 
Particular routing protocols are used to coordinate the flow of data. Several methods, 
including local floods and the link state, will be employed in this chapter. Thus, we 
aim to calculate the effect of different parameter settings on the two methods and draw 
comparisons where appropriate. There are two basic goals to this information sharing:
• Waste minimization by coordinated drone flight: Here, drones in close 
proximity to one another engage in a tidal wave of communication to help 
them decide what to do next; in this example, they decide to seek assistance 
from other drones.
The following are examples of how the drones’ energy is lost:
• To stay airborne and move, drones waste energy. It has been found that the 
height of the drone has a direct proportional relationship to this loss.
• A greater altitude requires more power from the UAV because of the rar￾efied air; the drone uses more power to operate the pesticide pump.
• Drones use energy whenever they use the wireless module to send packets, 
and this usage was correlated with the amount of pesticide to be sprayed in 
millilitres.
The drones can conduct their parasite-hunting in two ways: at random or with the 
help of a distributed search algorithm (explained later).
Imagine a squadron of UAVs whose goal is to scout a region and wipe off any plant 
parasites they find. When an UAV spots a parasite, it uses the insecticide it carries to 
try to wipe off the infestation. Unfortunately, each drone only has so much insecticide 
on board. After a drone detects parasites in a specific location, it assumes leadership 
and must organize a coalition to combat the infestation using only the pesticides and 
energy at its disposal. The drone also shares some details about the parasites it has 
found with other drones. As a group, the drones will evaluate whether or not they have 
the equipment necessary to follow the pioneer.
It’s important to keep in mind that the alliances created are only ephemeral in 
nature; once the parasites have been eliminated, the members of the coalition can go 
on to other endeavours.
Parasites are drawn to the dispersed plants in the field. It is considered that para￾sites do not coordinate their actions with one another but instead act according to the 
extent of their immediate environment. It faces just one direction and is restricted 
to the area immediately in front of it, which we will suppose to be three cells. The 
parasite, while in motion, can enter a neighbouring cell that it can see.
14.3.4.1 Parasites Mobility Model
Parasites are drawn to the dispersed plants in the field. It is considered that parasites 
do not coordinate their actions with one another but instead act according to the extent 262 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
of their immediate environment. The parasites in Figure 14.5 are believed to be unaf￾fected by their surroundings, to be facing a specific direction, to be able to see up to 
three cells in front of them, and to be able to migrate into any of the visible and neigh￾bouring cells. An illustration of parasite migration is shown in Figure 14.5(a). The 
parasite’s orientation is to the north-west (NW); however, it has decided to relocate to 
the north (N), at which point it has already begun to shift its focus and new cells have 
begun to appear in its immediate vicinity. Cells with the ability to see are blue.
FIGURE 14.5 (a, b) Movement of the parasite; (b) the presence of a single plant; (c) the pres￾ence of a greater number of cells; (d) the absence of any cells.Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 263
Potential migration routes for the parasite are as follows:
• Case 1: Like in Figure 14.5(b), the parasite only infects one of the visible 
cells, and it moves directly onto that cell.
• Case 2: More cells than depicted in Figure 14.5(c) contain plants, and the 
parasite randomly moves within one of these cells.
• Case 3: No readily apparent cells have a plant similar to that seen in 
Figure 14.5(d). The parasite takes a random path.
• If the new position is different from the old one, the parasite will go in 
that direction, and if it encounters a plant while doing so, it will feed on it.
• Unless something changes, it will keep moving in the previous direction.
14.4 PRECISION FARMING WITH SIMULATED UAV
14.4.1 UAVS Simulator
In this scenario, we think of a fleet of UAVs/drones whose job is to keep an eye on a 
farm in order to wipe off any plant parasites they might find. When a UAV finds para￾sites, it sprays them with the insecticide it carries in an attempt to kill them. However, 
there is a finite supply of insecticide on board each drone. When a drone identifies par￾asites in a zone, it must organize a coalition depending on the available pesticides and 
energy sources, and it must also broadcast some information (such as its position, type, 
and no of capabilities) to the another Unmanned Aerial Network. The other drones are 
able to assess whether or not they have the means to contact the leader. It is important 
to note that the coalitions created are transient in nature; after the discovered parasites 
have been killed, the members of the coalition can conduct other responsibilities.
Drone navigation is simulated using an on-board topographic map. This map keeps 
track of the fields that have been explored so far, whether or not there are plants in 
the immediate area (cell), and whether or not any of those plants have been infected. 
All of this data is only available for as long as the simulator allows. The time it takes 
for an insect to reattach to a plant or for a new crop to be sown in the field is a reflec￾tion of the real world. Each square cell in the matrix represents a different section of 
the playing field, making up the map. A central location in the holding area has been 
hypothesized for the drone. What kind of plant is present, if any parasites are present, 
and, by extension, how susceptible the plant is to infection are all examples of infor￾mation that could be stored in the cells of the plant. Additionally, the information in 
the cell can convey whether or not the plant is being cared for or whether or not the 
cell has been explored. After being moved, the drone’s map is updated, wiping away 
any previous data and replacing it with fresh data. The drone can use this neighbour￾hood map to determine which field (cell) it needs to investigate next. When choosing 
a field, it picks a cell that hasn’t been investigated yet.
Each of the blank cells is a potential winner. The probability of selection can be 
redistributed once certain cells have been visited. When the cell selection probability 
is set to 100%, all cells in the local map are unavailable. Maps can be shared between 
UAVs (drones within the drone’s transmission range). It’s possible that this will allow 
drones to quickly converge on the status of all cells in a given area without having to 264 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
individually inspect each one. In addition, we consider the widespread presence of 
plants in the field that may serve as bait for the parasites. It is considered that para￾sites do not coordinate their actions with one another but instead act according to the 
extent of their immediate environment. It faces just one direction and is restricted 
to the area immediately in front of it, which we will supposed to be three cells. The 
parasite, while in motion, can enter a neighbouring cell that it can see.
14.4.2 Simulator Indicators in the GUI
Each drone can fly and navigate its way around the area of interest thanks to its own 
batteries. It has a Wi-Fi module for coordinating with nearby drones and a pesticide 
tank for spraying the parasites. It is presumed that the communication range of each 
UAV is little. Yet, UAVs can communicate with one another through a chain of links. 
Millilitres (ml) are used to measure the fuel tank, while Watts (W) are used to mea￾sure battery power (W). In the front-end of the simulator, a graphical user interface 
(GUI) is used to set all these settings before evaluating the simulation. Drone move￾ment, pesticide spraying, and communication all use up battery power in different 
ways (through radiation, signal processing, and other circuitry).
The user-friendly simulator interface assumes that a predetermined dose of pesti￾cide is required to exterminate a given parasite. It is believed that drones can travel 
steadily from one cell to another, pausing only long enough to spray the poison on 
the tree where the parasites have attached themselves. The recommended simulator 
model would still work without this assumption, and the mobility model may be 
expanded even further. Using the simulator, you can also set a lower limit on how 
much pesticide to use (it is defined by GUI). In addition, the drone must return to its 
home base when the fuel tank drops below a certain threshold (set in the user inter￾face). In the simulator, you can also determine how long it will take to fully charge 
the drone and refuel it. All drones have indicators that can change colour based on 
the quantity of remaining insecticide or the battery level, making for a user-friendly 
graphical interface.
Since Figure 14.6 is already available, we simply published it to facilitate com￾prehension of UAV levels. In addition, Figure 14.7(a) shows a coloured circle, repre￾senting the amount of pesticide left behind after each drone was flown, considering 
the definitions done for the colours. If you prefer visuals, Figure 14.7(b) shows the 
percentage of available charge for each drone in the i (Pi
) series. Tree health indica￾tors are also used to show the level of resistance to parasite assault (Figure 14.7(c)). 
When trees are infested with parasites, their health deteriorates proportionally to the 
amount of parasites present and the length of time they remain there. We denote the 
present health status of the ith tree as Hi
, and the initial health status as H.
14.4.3 Front-End Simulator
Using the simulator’s primary user interface, users can specify spraying areas, the 
number of drones to be sent, the distribution of parasites, and the locations of the 
base stations from which the drones will take off and return to refuel and replenish 
their pesticide supplies. Furthermore, as demonstrated in [37], the expected lifespan Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 265
FIGURE 14.6 The UAV level examples.
FIGURE 14.7 It’s worth noting that the reference configuration provided. These include 
(a) a pesticide indicator, (b) a battery indicator, and (c) a tree health indicator.266 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
of a tree and the damage caused by parasites to trees can be defined to evaluate the 
efficacy and efficiency of the coordination strategy among, for instance, the amount 
of pesticide available (ml), the maximum and minimum battery levels of a drone, the 
number of trees in the area under consideration, the tree’s current health status after 
a parasite attack, and the drone’s maximum and minimum battery level. A preview 
of the simulator’s GUI is provided, allowing users to pick and create simulation 
parameters (including some described earlier in the text).
14.4.4 Methodologies for Recruiting New Protocols
Here, we detail the procedures followed during a comparison. We contrast reactive 
protocols, compare, and contrast reactive methods, like flooding, with proactive meth￾ods, such as link state routing, to see the distinctions between them.
14.4.4.1 Coordinating Drone Operations via Reactive Flooding
As demonstrated in Figure 14.8, the drone in need of assistance initiates a timeout 
and broadcasts a request for assistance. Once the maximum number of hops has been 
reached, any drones that have received the message will either save it or broadcast it 
to their neighbours. In Figure 14.9, we see the procedure by which the drone in need 
FIGURE 14.8 Drone 1 broadcasts an LSA packet.
FIGURE 14.9 Recruitment request from drone 1 to drone 5.Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 267
of assistance reads the responses it has got and selects the drone that has the most 
pesticide. If two or more drones contain the same amount of pesticide, the one with 
the higher maximum battery life is picked. In a situation where two drones have the 
same amount of energy, the one that is closer to the controller will be selected. The 
drone with the quickest response time is the one it picks. Figure 14.10 shows the help￾ing request for drone 1.The drone that needs assistance returns to its home base to 
refuel after sending a recruitment request to the drone it has determined to be the best 
candidate for the job. Upon receiving a request for assistance, any nearby drones will 
travel to the location specified by the request. In the event that the drone in need of 
assistance does not receive a response before the timeout expires (because no other 
drones are within range), it will save its current location so it can return after it has 
been recharged.
Recruitment packets employed in this protocol are as follows:
• Help packet: This datagram is transmitted in order to solicit assistance or to 
enlist the services of a specific drone out of the many that have responded to 
the call for assistance. This packet has a total of 28 bytes and is structured 
as follows:
• Destination IP Source IP Tagging, Tracking, and Location (TTL) X coor￾dinate Y coordinate.
The “destination IP” column will provide the drone’s final destination address. The 
inclusion of the network’s broadcast address is mandatory when sending a request for 
assistance over a network. It is mandatory to mention the recruited drone’s IP address 
in the recruitment request. The drone in need of assistance is revealed in the Source 
IP field. The “TTL” parameter shows the maximum hop count that can be achieved. 
The X and Y coordinate fields show locations of the parasites.
• Help response: The free drone has received an assistance packet with a 
broadcast address as the destination, prompting it to send this packet. It has 
a weight of 52 bytes and the following structure:
• Destination IP Source IP TTL Pesticide energy X coordinate Y coordinate 
Z coordinate.
FIGURE 14.10 Drone 1 has sent a request for help.268 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Both the IP address of the recipient and the IP address of the sender must be 
entered. The hop count limit is indicated by the TTL parameter. The amount of 
pesticide (in millilitres) that the sender possesses is shown in the pesticide field. The 
sender’s energy field is measured in joules. It is the sender’s location that the X, Y, 
and Z variables represent (recruiter).
14.4.4.2 Link State
The link state protocol is used in this form of recruitment to keep nodes’ rout￾ing tables current and accurate. Once a node detects a memory change, it will 
broadcast an Light sport Aircraft (LSA) packet to the network. The LSA packet 
forwarding method is depicted in Figure 14.10. When a drone moves, when it kills 
parasites, or when the state of a known network graph changes, an LSA packet is 
transmitted. Then, every drone is aware of the reachable network graph and the 
remaining pesticide stock for each node in that graph. Each drone keeps track 
of the IP addresses of the nodes it can access, the sequence numbers of the LSA 
packets it has received, and the pesticide stock remaining in its database. In times 
of crisis, this database will be used to select the most qualified drone recruits. The 
most generous pesticide-carrying drone wins. Dijkstra’s algorithm is used to find 
the optimal route through the network graph to the drone of choice. As soon as 
a node receives a recruitment packet, it uses the Dijkstra algorithm to determine 
the next hop in the network and sends the packet to the correct destination. You 
can see this behaviour depicted in Figure 14.11, where the receiving node caches 
the packet and, if it’s in range, heads to the area of the field where the drone in 
trouble is located.
Recruitment packets employed in this protocol are:
• LSA packet: This message will cause all nodes to revise their routing table. 
The anode will delete the original packet if it receives a copy. Leaving 
away the network diagram, this packet has the following components and a 
weight of 24 bytes:
• Source IP Prop. IP TTL Sequence number Pesticide Graph.
FIGURE 14.11 Drone 1 approaches drone 4 for employment.Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 269
Drone’s original location is indicated in the “Source IP” section. In the LSA 
packet’s “Propagator IP” field, the address of the drone that carried the message 
onwards is listed. The “TTL” field indicates the maximum number of hops allowed. 
The packet’s sequence number is stored in the sequence number field. The amount 
of pesticide (in millilitres) that the sender possesses is shown in the pesticide field. 
Each node in the graph represents an IP address for a drone, and each edge indicates 
a direct connection between two of those nodes.
• The last of the aid packages: This datagram was sent by the drone that 
needed assistance. Only a neighbour found using the Dijkstra algorithm 
will disagree with you. Every node is capable of calculating the next hop. 
This data packet has a total of 24 bytes and is structured as follows:
• Source IP Destination IP X coordinate Y coordinate.
An employed drone is indicated in the destination IP column. Drone’s source IP 
address indicates which drone required assistance. In the X and Y fields, parasite 
locations are indicated.
14.4.5 Analysis of Capabilities Using a Virtual Environment
Parameters for the simulators are defined in Figure 14.12; we make use of an enhanced 
version of the simulator to generate novel findings in the context of interest. Following 
are some simulation results relating to energy used, parasites killed, and pesticides 
used. To evaluate how well the crew explored the region and salvaged the plants, we 
put the simulator’s parameters and approach to the test.
Power consumption for both procedures is displayed in Figure 14.13(a). Reactive 
flooding outperforms the link state protocol in terms of performance. This is because 
reactive flooding makes use of shared maps, limiting the number of times a drone 
needs to move around an area being mapped. Figure 14.13(b) displays the temporal 
distribution of recruiting request counts. While the difference between the reactive 
flooding protocol and a protocol based on the link state paradigm is small, it is easy 
to see that the former yields a higher number.
A visual representation of the relative effectiveness of the two treatments under 
consideration is shown in Figure 14.13(c). This graph shows that the reactive flooding 
protocol outperforms the link state algorithm in terms of system performance, result￾ing in more parasite deaths. Lastly, Figure 14.13(d) demonstrates how the reactive 
flood technique permits a minimal quantity of communicated bytes in comparison 
to the link state-based protocol, which requires sending substantially extra packets to 
exchange data among drones.
14.5 CONCLUSIONS
Our research presents a novel simulator for precision agriculture, one that can 
assess the efficiency and cost of a fleet of drones outfitted with a wide range of 270 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
sensors and actuators. This study suggests cutting-edge methods for UAV teams 
to coordinate and control their operations. As a result, this work centres on the 
struggle against parasites, which are a serious threat because of their potential to 
wipe out an entire crop. The inspiration for the core idea comes from practical 
experience and need. After an attack by the Xylella a few years ago, several olive 
groves in Puglia were wiped out. Further, “Red Punteruolo” attacks cause the 
collapse of several palm fronds. We build a simulator to evaluate our method’s 
efficacy by considering its financial and operational implications. This is a neces￾sary step before using advanced technologies in the actual world. Results from 
multiple modelling programmes are discussed, including energy usage, para￾site mortality, and pesticide use. Parameters and methods are analysed with the 
team’s exploration capacity and resource conservation in mind. Results show that 
the proposed method is useful, and it performs well in terms of resource effi￾ciency in networking during message exchange. In addition, we reduce emissions 
and extend the time that UAVs can spend in service. This expands the device’s 
usefulness and increases its potential to eradicate parasites within the scope of 
its potential use.
FIGURE 14.12 Using the graphical user interface, the simulation’s parameters can be 
changed, including the drone, parasites, plant, wireless network, energy levels, searching task, 
pesticides oil, protocol setup, and flooding range. From a User Interfaces (UI) perspective, the 
simulator setup process remains the same.Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 271
FIGURE 14.13 (a) No of killed parasites; (b) No of recruit requests; (c) Power consumption 
of transmitting bytes.; and (d) minimal quantity of transmitting bytes.272 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
REFERENCES
1. G. Dolias, L. Benos and D. Bochtis, ‘On the routing of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) 
in precision farming sampling missions’, in Springer Optimization and Its Applications
(vol. 184), 2022, pp. 95–124. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-84152-2_5
2. J. Anand, M. Dhanalakshmi and P. P. J. Raja, “Smart indication system for spinal cord 
stress Detection,” Int J Recent Technol Eng, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 6164–6168, 2019.
3. H. Ajay, A. R. Rao, M. Balavanan and R. Lalit, “A novel cardiac arrest alerting system 
using IoT,” Int J Sci Technol Eng, vol. 3, no. 10, pp. 78–83, 2017.
4. M. Tropea and A. Serianni, ‘Bio-inspired drones recruiting strategy for precision 
agriculture domain’, 2020. doi: 10.1109/DS-RT50469.2020.9213516
5. F. De Rango, G. Potrino, M. Tropea, A. F. Santamaria and P. Fazio, “Scalable and ligth￾way bio-inspired coordination protocol for FANET in precision agriculture applications,” 
Comput Electr Eng, vol. 74, pp. 305–318, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.compeleceng.2019.01.018
6. G. Potrino, A. Serianni and N. Palmieri, ‘Drones coordination protocols in the precision 
agriculture context’, in Proceedings of SPIE – The International Society for Optical 
Engineering, 2019, vol. 11008. doi: 10.1117/12.2518973
7. A. Mukherjee, A. K. Panja, N. Dey and R. G. Crespo, “An intelligent edge enabled 
6G-flying ad-hoc network ecosystem for precision agriculture,” Expert Syst, 2022. doi: 
10.1111/exsy.13090
8. N. Palmieri, A. F. Ganazhapa and L. M. S. Campoverde, ‘UAVs support in a sensors’ 
island for plants and crops monitoring’, in Proceedings of SPIE – The International 
Society for Optical Engineering, 2021, vol. 11758. doi: 10.1117/12.2590036
9. U. R. Mogili and B. Deepak, ‘An intelligent drone for agriculture applications with 
the aid of the MAVlink protocol’, in Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering, 2020, 
pp. 195–205. doi: 10.1007/978-981-15-2696-1_19
10. J. Anand, R. P. Perinbam and D. Meganathan, “Q-learning-based optimized routing in 
biomedical wireless sensor networks,” IETE J Res, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 89–97, 2017.
11. R. C. Brito, J. F. Loureiro, A. Guedes and E. Todt, ‘Optimization system for dynamic 
flight planning for groups of drones using cooperation with mobile recharge bases by 
means of multiagent system and recursive auctions’, in Proceedings – International 
Computer Software and Applications Conference, 2019, vol. 2, pp. 537–542. doi: 10.1109/
COMPSAC.2019.10262
12. R. Dhanalakshmi, J. Anand, A. K. Sivaraman and S. Rani, ‘IoT-based water quality mon￾itoring system using cloud for agriculture use’, in Cloud and Fog Computing Platforms 
for Internet of Things, Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2022, pp. 183–196.
13. M. Tropea, A. F. Santamaria, G. Potrino and F. D. Rango, ‘Bio-inspired recruiting proto￾col for FANET in precision agriculture domains: Pheromone parameters tuning’, in IFIP 
Wireless Days, 2019. doi: 10.1109/WD.2019.8734209
14. M. Lowry, T. Pressburger, D. Dahl and M. Dalal, ‘Towards autonomous piloting: 
Communicating with air traffic control’, 2019. doi: 10.2514/6.2019-2207
15. R. Dhanalakshmi and J. Anand, ‘Big data for personalized healthcare’, in Handb Intell 
Healthc Anal Knowl Eng with Big Data Anal, wiley, 2022, pp. 67–92.
16. J. Anand, R. P. P. Jeevaratinam and M. Deivasigamani, “Performance of optimized rout￾ing in biomedical wireless sensor networks using evolutionary Algorithms,” Comptes 
rendus l’Académie Bulg des Sci, vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 1049–1055, 2015.
17. C. Cambra, J. R. Díaz and J. Lloret, ‘Deployment and performance study of an ad hoc 
network protocol for intelligent video sensing in precision agriculture’, in Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture 
Notes in Bioinformatics) (vol. 8629), 2015, pp. 165–175. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-46338-3_14
18. R. Fu, X. Ren, Y. Li, Y. Wu, H. Sun and M. A. Al-Absi, “Machine learning-based UAV 
assisted agricultural information security architecture and intrusion detection,” IEEE 
Internet Things J, p. 1, 2023. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3236322Applications of Drones in Predictive Analytics 273
19. P. Bhowmick, S. Bhadra and A. Panda, “A two-loop group formation tracking control 
scheme for networked tri-rotor UAVs using an ARE-based approach,” Asian J Control, 
vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 2834–2849, 2022. doi: 10.1002/asjc.2722
20. M. D. Antunes and J. Panagopoulos, “Spatial distribution of kiwifruit quality and yield 
as affected by edaphoclimatic factors in northwest Portugal,” Acta Hortic, vol. 1342, 
pp. 123–128, 2022. doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.2022.1342.17
21. E. V. Vazquez-Carmona, J. I. Vasquez-Gomez, J. C. Herrera-Lozada and M. Antonio￾Cruz, “Coverage path planning for spraying drones,” Comput Ind Eng, vol. 168, 2022. 
doi: 10.1016/j.cie.2022.108125
22. H.-S. Lee, B.-S. Shin, J. A. Thomasson, T. Wang, Z. Zhang and X. Han, “Development of 
multiple UAV collaborative driving systems for improving field phenotyping,” Sensors, 
vol. 22, no. 4, 2022. doi: 10.3390/s22041423
23. M. Mammarella et al., “3D map reconstruction of an orchard using an angle-aware cover￾ing control strategy,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 55, no. 32, pp. 271–276, 2022. doi: 10.1016/
j.ifacol.2022.11.151
24. M. E. Minano, P. F. Pena, Z. He and D. M. Gomez, ‘Self-awareness approach for complete 
coverage metrology using autonomous systems’, in 2022 IEEE 9th International Workshop 
on Metrology for AeroSpace, MetroAeroSpace 2022 – Proceedings, 2022, pp. 13–17. doi: 
10.1109/MetroAeroSpace54187.2022.9856278
25. T. Elmokadem and A. V. Savkin, “Computationally-efficient distributed algorithms of 
navigation of teams of autonomous UAVs for 3d coverage and flocking,” Drones, vol. 5, 
no. 4, 2021. doi: 10.3390/drones5040124
26. D. Avola, L. Cinque, A. Fagioli, G. L. Foresti, D. Pannone and C. Piciarelli, “Automatic esti￾mation of optimal UAV flight parameters for real-time wide areas monitoring,” Multimed 
Tools Appl, vol. 80, no. 16, pp. 25009–25031, 2021. doi: 10.1007/s11042-021-10859-3
27. A. G. Slongo, D. D. Moraes, L. Q. Mantovani and M. S. Venturini, “Handling qualities 
analysis of an unmanned aircraft vehicle for agricultural spraying,” J Aerosp Technol 
Manag, vol. 12, no. SpecialEdition, pp. 38–51, 2020. doi: 10.5028/jatm.cab.1150
28. G. Castellanos, M. Deruyck, L. Martens and W. Joseph, “System assessment of WUSN 
using NB-IoT UAV-aided networks in potato crops,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 56823–56836, 
2020. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2982086
29. U. R. Mogili and B. Deepak, ‘Study of takeoff constraints for lifting an agriculture pes￾ticide sprinkling multi-rotor system’, in Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering, 2020, 
pp. 203–210. doi: 10.1007/978-981-15-1307-7_22
30. A. Akarsu and T. Girici, “Fairness aware multiple drone base station deployment,” 
IET Commun, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 425–431, 2018. doi: 10.1049/iet-com.2017.0978
31. H. Griffiths, H. Shen, N. Li, S. Rojas, N. Perkins and M. Liu, ‘Vineyard manage￾ment in virtual reality: Autonomous control of a transformable drone’, in Proceedings 
of SPIE – The International Society for Optical Engineering, 2017, vol. 10218. doi: 
10.1117/12.2267726
32. A. E. Morel et al., ‘Enhancing network-edge connectivity and computation security in 
drone video analytics’, in Proceedings – Applied Imagery Pattern Recognition Workshop, 
October 2020-. doi: 10.1109/AIPR50011.2020.9425341
33. A. Refaai, V. S. Dattu, N. Gireesh, E. Dixit, C. H. Sandeep and D. Christopher, 
“Application of IoT-based drones in precision agriculture for pest Control,” Adv Mater 
Sci Eng, vol. 2022, 2022. doi: 10.1155/2022/1160258
34. M. Ghamari, P. Rangel, M. Mehrubeoglu, G. S. Tewolde and R. Simon Sherratt, 
“Unmanned aerial vehicle communications for civil applications: A review,” IEEE 
Access, vol. 10, pp. 102492–102531, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3208571
35. C. Sastre, J. Wubben, C. T. Calafate, J. C. Cano and P. Manzoni, ‘Collision-free swarm 
take-off based on trajectory analysis and UAV grouping’, in Proceedings – 2022 IEEE 
23rd International Symposium on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks, 
WoWMoM 2022, 2022, pp. 477–482. doi: 10.1109/WoWMoM54355.2022.00074274 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
36. F. Pasandideh, J. P. J. da Costa, R. Kunst, N. Islam, W. Hardjawana and E. Pignaton 
de Freitas, “A review of flying ad hoc networks: Key characteristics, applications, and 
wireless technologies,” Remote Sens, vol. 14, no. 18, 2022. doi: 10.3390/rs14184459
37. D. Nath, A. Bandyopadhyay, A. Rana, T. Gaber and A. E. Hassanien, “A novel drone￾station matching model in smart cities based on strict preferences,” Unmanned Syst, 
vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 261–271, 2023. doi: 10.1142/S2301385023500115
38. C. P. L. de Jong, B. D. W. Remes, S. Hwang and C. De Wagter, “Never landing drone: 
Autonomous soaring of a unmanned aerial vehicle in front of a moving obstacle,” Int J 
Micro Air Veh, vol. 13, 2021. doi: 10.1177/17568293211060500
39. W. Raza, A. Osman, F. Ferrini and F. De Natale, “Energy-efficient inference on the 
edge exploiting TinyML capabilities for UAVs,” Drones, vol. 5, no. 4, 2021. doi: 10.3390/
drones5040127
40. T. Yoo, S. Lee, K. Yoo and H. Kim, “Reinforcement learning based topology control for 
UAV networks,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 2, 2023. doi: 10.3390/s23020921
41. S. Singh and M. K. Sandhu, “Multi-level fuzzy inference system based handover decision 
model for unmanned vehicles,” Int J Electr Electron Eng Telecommun, vol. 12, no. 1, 
pp. 35–45, 2023. doi: 10.18178/ijeetc.12.1.35-45
42. S. T. Muntaha, S. A. Hassan, H. Jung and M. Shamim Hossain, “Energy efficiency and 
hover time optimization in UAV-based HetNets,” IEEE Trans Intell Transp Syst, vol. 22, 
no. 8, pp. 5103–5111, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TITS.2020.3015256
43. A. O. Lebedev and V. V. Vasil’ev, “UAV control algorithm in automatic mode using 
computer vision,” Optoelectron Instrum Data Process, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 406–411, 2021. 
doi: 10.3103/S8756699021040075
44. G. Raja, S. Anbalagan, A. Ganapathisubramaniyan, M. S. Selvakumar, A. K. Bashir and 
S. Mumtaz, “Efficient and secured swarm pattern multi-UAV Communication,” IEEE 
Trans Veh Technol, vol. 70, no. 7, pp. 7050–7058, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TVT.2021.3082308
45. N. Kankanawadi, G. Karinagshetru, L. Patil, B. Ultheru, J. Baruch and T. Nallusamy, 
‘Conceptual design of a fixed wing vertical take-off and landing unmanned aerial vehicle’, 
in AIP Conference Proceedings, 2021, vol. 2341. doi: 10.1063/5.0050366
46. P. Samarakkody, S. Guruge, D. Samaradeera, E. Jayatunga and P. Porambage, ‘Enhance 
data collection process of a UAV-aided low power IOT wireless sensor network’, 2021. 
doi: 10.1109/WCNCW49093.2021.9419977DOI: 10.1201/9781003391302-15 275
Design of Autonomous 
Unmanned Ground 
Vehicles (UGVs) in 
Smart Agriculture
Yogesh Gangurde, Syam Narayanan S., 
Rajalakshmi P., and Naga Praveen Babu Mannam
15.1 INTRODUCTION
As the dawn rises over countryside hills and golden fields, a fleet of tiny robots awaken 
from their sleep and start their daily routine with a soft hum, rolling through the fields 
doing their job. These autonomous Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) are the most 
recent advancement in agricultural technology and are revolutionizing farming.
The era of manual labor and back-breaking work is over. Farmers may now rely 
on intelligent machines to execute a variety of activities thanks to the introduction of 
UGVs in agricultural applications (Figure 15.1). These robots can do everything from 
planting and harvesting to managing pests and weeds. They can detect and react to 
changes in soil characteristics, moisture levels, and more thanks to their advanced 
sensors and machine vision capabilities, ensuring that crops get the attention and care 
they require to thrive.
However, it goes beyond production and efficiency. The use of UGV in agricul￾ture has the potential to increase sustainability and reduce adverse environmental 
effects of farming methods. These devices can support soil health and biodiver￾sity by reducing the usage of chemical pesticides and fertilizers. Additionally, they 
can increase the safety and well-being of farm workers by lowering the demand for 
manual labor. Using UGVs for agricultural purposes heralds a new age in farming in 
which technology and nature coexist peacefully to make a sustainable self-sufficient 
world. We may anticipate a time when farming is more productive, profitable, and 
secure. Implementing UGVs in agriculture offers farmers the chance to broaden the 
scope of their operations and improve the effectiveness of their crop production as a 
result of the UGVs’ capacity to work nonstop and with consistent precision. Because 
the machines can work around the clock, jobs that would have taken a long time to 
accomplish by hand can now be finished in a fraction of the time it would have taken 
previously. This may result in a considerable reduction in the expenditures associ￾ated with labor as well as an increase in overall productivity.
The ability of UGVs to collect and analyze enormous amounts of data is another 
advantage that they offer in the agricultural sector. These machines are able to acquire 
data about the growth patterns of crops, the moisture content of the soil, and other 
15276 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
factors that influence crop yield because of the sophisticated sensors and machine 
learning algorithms that they are equipped with. This data can be used to improve and 
optimize farming techniques, which will ultimately result in increased crop yields 
and improved production quality. In addition to this, UGVs have the potential to assist 
in alleviating manpower shortages in the agriculture industry. The use of autonomous 
UGVs can provide a solution to the problem of decline in the number of young people 
entering the agricultural industry that is occurring in many countries. These UGVs 
can fill the gap left by the aging population and perform tasks that would otherwise 
require the use of manual labor.
The use of UGVs in agricultural applications is a fascinating technology that pos￾sesses the potential to completely revolutionize the farming industry. These machines 
can help farmers grow more crops with minimum resources by enhancing efficiency, 
productivity, and sustainability. Moreover, they can improve working conditions and 
promote environmental conservation. All of these benefits can be achieved simultane￾ously. We can anticipate seeing an increase in creative uses of UGVs in agriculture as 
technology advances, ultimately leading to a more profitable and eco-friendly future 
for the farming industry.
FIGURE 15.1 Futuristic UGVs on farms (AI-generated image).Design of Autonomous UGVs in Smart Agriculture 277
As interesting as the use of UGVs in agriculture may be, there are also some 
problems that need to be solved. One of the biggest challenges is the high cost of 
investment required to purchase and maintain these machines. As with any new 
technology, the upfront costs can be prohibitive for small- and medium-sized farms, 
which make up the majority of the agricultural sector. To ensure that UGVs are 
accessible to all farmers, it will be important to develop cost-effective models and 
financing options.
Another difficulty is ensuring that UGVs can work well in a variety of environ￾ments and weather conditions. Agriculture is a complicated business; crops grow in 
many different places and climates, which can be hard for machines to deal with. 
To solve this problem, UGVs need to have strong sensors and navigation systems that 
can adapt to different environments and terrains.
Concerns have also been raised about how the use of UGVs in agriculture will 
affect ethics and society. For example, more automation in farming could cause 
people to lose their jobs and make things even worse in rural areas. Concerns 
have also been raised about the privacy and security of data, since UGVs collect 
and send sensitive information about crops and farming methods. These worries 
must be taken care of by using and managing UGVs in a responsible and ethical 
way. Even with these problems, you can’t ignore the potential benefits of UGVs in 
agriculture. With their ability to make farming more efficient, less harmful to the 
environment, and more productive, these machines show how farming could be 
more sustainable and productive in the future. By working with farmers, industry 
leaders, and policymakers, we can make sure that the use of UGVs in agriculture is 
guided by ethical, responsible, and sustainable principles. This will lead to a more 
prosperous and fair future for everyone.
15.2 SIGNIFICANCE AND EVOLUTION OF AGRICULTURE
Humans have been performing agriculture for approximately 12,000 years [1], i.e. 
since the Neolithic age, causing them to form permanent settlements on river banks 
having highly fertile soil and hence being highly arable, while changing their tra￾ditional hunter-gatherer lifestyle. The advent of agriculture in itself has been so 
significant that the revolution it caused has been termed Neolithic Revolution, refer￾ring to the era it occurred in [1]. The population has grown from about 5 million to 
nearly 7 billion in the last 10,000 years and still keeps growing. Currently, the global 
population is 7.6 billion people and is projected to reach about 9.8 billion people, an 
increase of 28.94% [2], by the year 2050 by the United Nations [2]. As the population 
increases, naturally the demand for food increases too. By 2050, the United Nations 
estimates that the global food demand will be doubled [2] in comparison to current 
food demand. According to the United Nations, urbanization is on rise too. It esti￾mates that by 2050, 68% [2] of the world’s population will be living in urban areas. 
This gives us an idea of some of the long-term problems posed by the progressing 
world in the area of agriculture. The availability of manual labor is on decline as 
it is, while as suggested by the United Nations, it will keep on decreasing in the 
future as well. Current agricultural practices in most parts of the world depend a lot 
on manual labor, except in developed countries like the USA, which have already 278 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
deployed automated or semi-automatic machines and other technologies to reduce 
human labor. In traditional agriculture, pesticide spraying is done to keep pests like 
rodents and insects away from the farm crops to ensure maximum and healthy yield. 
The pesticide being sprayed is harmful for the humans who are operating the spray￾ing machine, as well as for the environment due to excessive spraying [3, 4].
15.3 TECHNOLOGIES USEFUL FOR SOLVING THE PROBLEMS 
POSED BY THE CURRENT AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES
There are ways through which, by introducing the current technologies into the area 
of agriculture, much of the current problems can be solved, which in turn would also 
produce higher and safer yield, thereby also providing solutions to the previously 
discussed long-term problems. Technologies, like IoT (Internet of Things), use of 
various sensors like humidity sensors to detect the moisture content in the soil, use of 
robots for various operations like harvesting, spraying, and plowing, are the building 
blocks of smart agriculture [5]. UAVs (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles) and UGVs can be 
used for various purposes in agriculture. These technologies are useful in assisting 
farmers while requiring just a little involvement and effort from them [6–10].
15.4 USE OF ROBOTICS IN THE FIELD OF SMART AGRICULTURE
Robots are a key technology in smart agriculture that may assist in improving farming 
operations’ productivity, efficiency, and sustainability (Figure 15.2). The advancement 
of robotics technology over the past several years has allowed for more accurate and 
productive agricultural methods, which has significantly improved agriculture [10, 11].
FIGURE 15.2 Smart agricultural processes.Design of Autonomous UGVs in Smart Agriculture 279
The following are some applications of robots in smart agriculture:
Precision farming: Robotic technology can assist farmers in increasing the accuracy 
of their farming operations [12]. Robots with artificial intelligence (AI) and sensors 
can continuously monitor the health of the soil and crops, and they can also make exact 
modifications in reaction to shifting conditions. Using better resources like water, fer￾tilizer, and pesticides, farmers may be able to increase yields while reducing expenses.
1. Autonomous farming: As autonomous robots may work without human 
supervision, farmers can automate time-consuming and monotonous opera￾tions. In contrast, drones can monitor agricultural health and spot pests and 
illnesses, while autonomous tractors can sow and collect crops. Productivity 
can rise, and labor expenses can be decreased as a result.
2. Soil and crop monitoring: Robotic technology may be used to keep an eye 
on soil conditions and crop development, giving farmers important infor￾mation about the health of their crops. Drones can record high-resolution 
photographs of crops, enabling farmers to identify issues like nutrient defi￾cits or disease outbreaks. Sensor-equipped robots can evaluate soil mois￾ture, nutritional levels, and temperature [13, 14].
3. Weed and pest control: Weed and pest management may be handled by 
robots, which eliminates the need for dangerous chemicals that are bad for the 
environment and human health. Robotic weeders, for instance, can precisely 
detect and eliminate weeds, while robotic sprayers can administer pesticides 
just where they are required, minimizing waste and harm to the environment.
4. Harvesting: By automating the harvesting process, robotic technology can 
assist farmers in maximizing their crops. Robotic arms, for instance, can 
select produce precisely, lowering waste and raising yields. Moreover, auto￾mated harvesting lowers labor expenses and enables farmers to rapidly and 
effectively harvest crops.
5. Greenhouse and indoor farming: Robot technology is very helpful in indoor 
farming and greenhouse operations, where crop development is mostly 
dependent on climate management and illumination. While sensors and AI 
can assist in maintaining ideal growth conditions, robots can be used to 
automate chores like watering, fertilizing, and trimming.
Overall, robotics technology assists farmers greatly by providing more exact and 
effective agricultural methods that can boost yields, lower costs, and promote sus￾tainability. As technology advances, we may anticipate seeing even more creative 
answers to the particular problems faced by smart agriculture [15].
15.5 HISTORY OF USE OF UGVs IN AGRICULTURE
Historically, farmers have plowed their fields and transported commodities with the 
help of animals like horses and oxen. Ground vehicles have been used in agriculture 
for ages. The invention of tools like tractors and combines during the Industrial 
Revolution transformed farming by boosting production and efficiency. These ground 
vehicles’ potential for automation and autonomy was nonetheless constrained since 280 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
they still needed a human operator. Precision agriculture’s progress can be linked to 
the development of UGVs in agriculture [16]. With this method, soil and crop data 
are analyzed using technologies like Global Positioning System (GPS) and sensors, 
enabling the targeted and exact administration of inputs like fertilizers and insecti￾cides. UGVs were invented as a result of the necessity for more accurate and efficient 
vehicles to apply these inputs brought on by the growth of precision agriculture.
Simple vehicles that could use GPS to follow a pre-programmed course were the 
first UGVs used in agriculture. These trucks were employed for activities, including 
field mapping, crop monitoring, and pesticide application. They still needed human 
operators to plan and manage their operations, though.
UGVs evolved with technology, becoming more capable of executing increasingly 
difficult jobs. They could identify and avoid obstacles, move across fields, and carry 
out duties like planting and harvesting crops thanks to their sensors and cameras. 
Robotic arms were added to certain UGVs, enabling them to carry out activities like 
fruit harvesting and trimming.
A variety of causes, including labor shortages, the need to boost production and effi￾ciency, and the desire to reduce farming’s environmental effect, have contributed to the 
development of UGVs in agriculture. UGVs have the ability to boost yields, decrease 
the demand for manual labor, and use less inputs like pesticides and fertilizers.
In conclusion, the necessity for more effective, accurate, and autonomous vehicles 
has spurred the progression of ground vehicles to UGVs in agriculture. We may 
anticipate seeing more advanced and capable UGVs produced and used in agricul￾ture as technology develops, further transforming the sector.
15.6 AUTONOMOUS NAVIGATION FOR UGVs
The capacity of a robot or a vehicle to travel through an area without human assistance 
is known as autonomous navigation. UGVs can be guided by autonomous naviga￾tion to carry out operations, including planting, harvesting, spraying, and monitoring 
crops in the context of smart agriculture. These UGVs could be holonomic or non￾holonomic systems [17] (Figure 15.3). Holonomic systems are the ones where the 
FIGURE 15.3 Non-holonomic and holonomic drive systems.Design of Autonomous UGVs in Smart Agriculture 281
controllable DOF is equal to the DOF of the system, whereas a non-holonomic system 
is where the controllable DOF is not equal to the DOF of the system. Autonomous 
navigation has the potential to boost productivity, cut expenses, and boost crop yields 
in smart agriculture [18]. For UGVs used in smart agriculture, autonomous naviga￾tion involves a number of components. Perception, mapping, journey planning, and 
control are a few of them.
1. Perception: The UGV’s capacity for perception is what allows it to perceive 
and comprehend its surroundings. Cameras, LiDAR (light detection and 
ranging), GPS, and IMU are a few examples of sensors that may be used to 
do this (inertial measurement unit). The location, orientation, and surround￾ings of the UGV are all made known by these sensors.
2. Mapping: A depiction of the area around the UGV is made by mapping. 
Techniques like simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) can be 
used for this. SLAM requires localizing the UGV inside the environment 
while also creating a map of the environment. This is accomplished by fus￾ing movement data with sensor data from the UGV.
3. Path planning: Choosing the best route for the UGV to take is known as 
path planning. The UGV’s present position, destination, and any potential 
roadblocks are taken into account in this process. The UGV’s capabilities 
and limitations, like its top speed, turning radius, and capacity to go across 
various terrain types, are taken into account by path planning algorithms.
4. Control: Control is the UGV’s capacity to carry out the intended course. 
Control algorithms that choose the UGV’s speed and steering directives are 
used to achieve this. These algorithms consider the UGV’s present condi￾tion, the planned route, and any sensor feedback. The UGV must stay on 
the intended path while avoiding hazards and keeping a safe distance from 
other objects. This is the responsibility of the control algorithms.
There are a number of difficulties that must be overcome for UGVs in smart 
agriculture to successfully navigate autonomously. They consist of the following:
1. Environmental variability: Agricultural ecosystems are very varied, with 
alterations in the landscape, the topography, and the weather. To be effec￾tive, autonomous navigation systems must be able to adjust to these changes.
2. Sensor reliability: Environmental variables like temperature, moisture, and 
dust all impact the sensor’s accuracy and dependability. This may affect the 
UGV’s capacity to correctly assess its surroundings.
3. Safety: Autonomous UGVs must function in a safe manner while around 
people and other things. They must be able to recognize impediments, 
avoid them, and operate within established safety parameters.
4. Scalability: To support huge agricultural fields and a large number of UGVs, 
autonomous navigation systems must be scalable.
Besides these difficulties, there have been a number of successful UGV imple￾mentations of autonomous navigation. For instance, John Deere has created a fleet 282 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
of autonomous tractors that are capable of harvesting, spraying, and sowing seeds. 
These tractors can accurately traverse through fields and carry out chores thanks to a 
mix of GPS, LiDAR, and cameras. The TerraSentia robot created by the University 
of Illinois is another such example. The purpose of this robot is agricultural phe￾notyping, which entails assessing numerous plant characteristics, including height, 
leaf area, and biomass. The TerraSentia robot navigates around fields and gathers 
information on crops using a mix of LiDAR, cameras, and GPS.
15.7 ROBOT OPERATING SYSTEM (ROS)
Robot Operating System (ROS) is a free and open-source meta-operating system 
for robots. It offers all the features an operating system should have, such as hard￾ware abstraction, low-level device control, common functionality implementation, 
message-passing between processes, and package management. Moreover, it offers 
resources and libraries for finding, creating, writing, and executing code across sev￾eral machines. ‘Robot frameworks’, like Player, YARP, Orocos, CARMEN, Orca, 
MOOS, and Microsoft Robotics Studio, are comparable to ROS in various ways. 
The ROS runtime ‘graph’ is a loosely linked peer-to-peer network of processes using 
the ROS communication infrastructure that may be deployed across several com￾puters. Asynchronous data streaming over topics, synchronous RPC-style commu￾nication through services, and data storage on a parameter server are just a few of 
the communication modes that ROS provides. Our Conceptual Overview goes into 
deeper information about them. Although it is feasible to connect ROS with real￾time programming, ROS is not a real-time framework. The pr2 etherCAT system, 
used by the Willow Garage PR2 robot, carries ROS signals into and out of a real￾time operation. The Orocos Real-time Toolkit and ROS are seamlessly integrated. 
Supporting code reuse in robotics research and development is the main objective 
of ROS. Executables may be independently written and freely connected at runtime 
thanks to ROS, a distributed architecture of processes (also known as Nodes). These 
operations may be organized into Stacks and Packages that are simple to share and 
distribute. Moreover, ROS provides a federated network of code repositories that 
permits distributed cooperation. This approach allows for autonomous decisions to 
be made about development and implementation at every level, from the file system 
to the community, yet it can all be combined via ROS infrastructure tools [19, 20].
The ROS file system is a critical component that enables effective communication 
and data sharing between robots and other devices. Although the ROS file system is 
comparable to the Unix file system, it has certain special features that make it more 
appropriate for robotics applications. Packages are collections of files comprising 
code, configuration files, data, and other resources required to operate a particular 
ROS node or application. These are how the ROS file system is structured. Each 
package has its own directory, which is home to a number of subdirectories that 
specify the functionality and organizational elements of the package [21]. One of the 
key benefits of the ROS file system is that it makes it simple to exchange and reuse 
packages among various robots and applications. The ROS package manager, which 
automates the process of obtaining, building, and installing packages from the ROS 
distribution, may be used to install and manage packages. Support for rosbag, a Design of Autonomous UGVs in Smart Agriculture 283
program that enables users to record and playback data from an active ROS system, 
is another essential component of the ROS file system. As it allows developers to 
record and examine sensor data, robot statuses, and other system events, this is very 
helpful for testing and debugging reasons.
15.8 SIGNIFICANCE OF ROS IN UNMANNED GROUND VEHICLES
1. The following are some crucial elements that make ROS significant for 
robotics in general: Standardization: The development, integration, and 
testing of UGV systems are made simpler by the standardized set of inter￾faces and tools provided by ROS. This lessens the difficulty and expense of 
creating and maintaining specialized robotic software.
2. Modularity: ROS is built to be modular, and its adaptable architecture enables 
developers to disassemble big robotic systems like UGVs into smaller, easier￾to-manage parts. This makes it simpler to test and troubleshoot individual 
system components, as well as to replace or update them as necessary.
3. Reusability: ROS promotes the creation and exchange of reusable code 
and libraries since it is open-source and modular. By using pre-existing 
software components rather than beginning from scratch, developers can 
reduce the amount of time and resources needed for development.
4. Community: ROS has a sizable and vibrant group of users, academics, and 
developers who work together to build and advance the framework. This 
community offers assistance, information, and tools to new users so they 
can get started and fix issues.
5. Interoperability: ROS offers a common framework for communication that 
enables various components of a UGV system to talk to one another using 
a predetermined set of protocols. This facilitates the creation of more ver￾satile and adaptive UGV systems by making it simpler to combine various 
hardware and software components from various manufacturers.
In general, ROS is important because it offers a strong and adaptable framework 
for creating, integrating, and managing complicated robotic systems like UGVs. It is 
a vital tool for robotics researchers, developers, and consumers because of its stan￾dardization, modularity, reusability, community support, and interoperability.
15.9 USABILITY OF ROS IN UNMANNED GROUND VEHICLES
Several robotics applications, including those involving autonomous cars, drones, 
industrial robots, and personal robots, heavily use ROS. The modular and adapt￾able design that ROS offers is one of its main features. This enables programmers 
to design complicated robot applications by combining many modules or packages, 
each with a distinct set of functionalities. Developers may use their favorite pro￾gramming languages with ROS because it supports a wide range of them, includ￾ing C++, Python, and Java. The capability of ROS to manage sophisticated robot 
hardware and sensors is another important benefit. Robots can communicate with a 
variety of sensors and devices thanks to the collection of drivers provided by ROS. 284 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
In contrast to the hardware interfaces, this enables developers to concentrate on the 
application logic and algorithms. A strong set of simulation and visualization capa￾bilities are also included with ROS. Before putting their programs on actual robots, 
developers may test and debug them using these technologies in a virtual environ￾ment. This decreases the possibility of mistakes while saving time and money. In 
the development of autonomous cars, ROS has been crucial. Drones, autonomous 
vehicles, and self-driving automobiles are all controlled by ROS-based software. 
The navigation of autonomous vehicles requires a collection of tools for mapping, 
localization, and path planning, all of which are provided by ROS. Industrial robot 
development frequently makes use of ROS. Robot movement and communication 
with other equipment on the production floor are both managed by software built on 
the ROS platform. Moreover, ROS offers a selection of management and monitoring 
tools for industrial robots, assuring their dependability and safety.
Being a versatile and modular framework for creating complicated robot applica￾tions, ROS has emerged as a crucial tool in the robotics sector. Developers find it 
appealing because of its capacity for managing sophisticated hardware and sensors, 
support for several programming languages, and availability of robust simulation and 
visualization tools. In the creation of autonomous cars, drones, and industrial robots, 
ROS has been crucial, and its importance is only going to increase in the future [22].
15.10 USE OF ROS ENABLED AUTONOMOUS 
UGVs FOR SMART AGRICULTURE
As a potent tool for creating robotic systems capable of monitoring crops, planting, 
harvesting, and applying pesticides, ROS has become more popular in agriculture. 
Autonomous cars that can travel across fields and carry out activities with a high 
degree of precision and efficiency are being developed by using ROS-based tech￾nologies. The ability to integrate various sensors and hardware, such as cameras, 
LiDAR, and GPS, is one of the main benefits of using ROS in agriculture. These 
sensors give the robots vital information about their surroundings and allow them to 
carry out operations like mapping, localization, and obstacle recognition. For devel￾opers to build complicated agricultural robots, ROS offers a set of tools for combin￾ing various sensors and hardware. The path planning and navigation features that 
ROS offers are also crucial for agricultural robots [23]. These devices provide the 
robots the ability to move through fields, avoid hazards, and carry out duties effec￾tively and accurately. In order to reduce the need for manual labor and the usage of 
pesticides, ROS-based systems may be used to build autonomous vehicles that can 
execute activities like agricultural spraying with extreme precision [2, 24, 25].
Moreover, ROS may be used to create robotic systems that can monitor crops 
and give farmers useful information. For instance, soil moisture, temperature, and 
other environmental variables may be tracked using ROS-based systems. By using 
this information to optimize irrigation and fertilizer application, crop output may be 
increased while wasting less water and fertilizer. By enabling the creation of com￾plex robotic systems that are capable of carrying out activities with a high degree of 
accuracy and efficiency, the use of ROS in agriculture has the potential to completely 
transform the sector. With its capacity to manage sophisticated sensors and hardware, Design of Autonomous UGVs in Smart Agriculture 285
support different programming languages, and offer potent simulation and visualiza￾tion tools, ROS offers a versatile and modular foundation for the creation of agri￾cultural robots. We can anticipate seeing more advanced and functional ROS-based 
agricultural robots being created and used in the field as technology develops [26].
Since ROS offers a flexible and modular framework for creating and combin￾ing software components for UGV control and navigation [27, 28], it is especially 
well suited for UGVs. Following are some explanations for why ROS is particularly 
advantageous for UGVs:
1. Support for sensors and actuators: ROS offers a variety of drivers for sensors 
and actuators, including GPS, LiDAR, IMU, and cameras that are often used 
in UGVs. As a result, it is simpler to operate and interact with these devices 
in a standardized manner.
2. Navigation stack: ROS has a navigation stack that comprises algorithms 
for motion control, obstacle avoidance, and local and global path planning. 
These algorithms may be modified and refined to meet the unique require￾ments of a UGV, including the kind of terrain, the size and weight of the 
vehicle, and the mission requirements.
3. Testing and simulation: Before putting UGV software on a real robot, 
developers may test it in a simulation environment provided by ROS called 
Gazebo. By allowing developers to debug and improve software components 
in a secure and controlled environment, this can help save time and costs.
4. Flexibility and modularity: With a decentralized architecture that enables 
developers to split up UGV software into smaller, more manageable compo￾nents, ROS is meant to be modular and adaptable. This makes it simpler to 
switch out or update components as needed, as well as to integrate and test 
various software modules.
5. Community support: ROS has a sizable and vibrant developer and user com￾munity that actively contributes to the growth and development of the frame￾work. This community offers assistance, information, and tools to new users 
so they can get started and fix issues.
Overall, ROS is a strong and efficient platform for creating software for UGVs 
thanks to its support for sensors and actuators, navigation algorithms, simulation and 
testing tools, flexibility and modularity, and community support.
15.11 ROS NAVIGATION STACK AND ITS SIGNIFICANCE
Robots using the ROS can navigate thanks to the robust ROS Navigation Stack archi￾tecture. A collection of software packages called the navigation stack enables a robot to 
navigate from one place to another while avoiding risks and other obstacles. The parts 
that make up the ROS Navigation Stack are described in the following succinct manner:
1. Costmap: A 2D or 3D depiction of the robot’s immediate surroundings is 
called a costmap. Each cell on the map is given a cost that represents how 
challenging it is for the robot to go through that space. Data from numerous 286 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
sensors, including cameras and laser scanners, are combined to create the 
costmap.
2. Localization: This process determines the robot’s posture (position and 
orientation) in relation to its surroundings. It updates the robot’s estimated 
posture using sensor data and keeps a precise map of the robot’s position.
3. Path planning: Using the costmap and any impediments in the route, the 
path planning component creates a path from the robot’s present location 
to its desired location. In order to choose the best path across the environ￾ment with the lowest cost of movement, it employs algorithms like A* or 
Dijkstra’s algorithm.
4. Motion control: The motion control part instructs the robot’s motors or 
controllers to move along the path that was produced. It keeps track of the 
robot’s position and speed, adjusting the velocity orders as necessary to 
keep the intended trajectory.
5. Obstacle avoidance: The obstacle avoidance component keeps an eye out 
for any potential barriers or other dangers that the robot’s sensors may pick 
up on. It plans a safe route that avoids obstacles while still getting to the 
destination using the costmap.
6. Global planner: The global planner creates a high-level plan to guide the 
robot from its starting point to its destination. Based on the robot’s capa￾bilities and any barriers in the area, it chooses the best route. The global 
planner employs a global path planning method, such as A* or Dijkstra’s 
algorithm, to plan the path using the costmap.
7. Local planner: The local planner creates a low-level plan that is used to exe￾cute the global planner’s high-level plan. It considers potential obstructions 
as well as the mechanics of the robot. A local path planning algorithm, such 
as Dynamic Window Approach (DWA) or Timed Elastic Band, is often 
used by the local planner (TEB).
8. Recovery behaviors: The robot can use recovery behaviors to get out of tricky 
situations like being trapped or losing localization. They act as a safety net 
to guarantee that the robot can navigate even in the event of unforeseen 
circumstances.
9. Map server: The navigation stack may store and retrieve maps using the 
map server. Maps can be read from a file or created instantly using sen￾sor data.
The ROS Navigation Stack offers a thorough and adaptable foundation for robot 
navigation overall. It has been effectively applied to a variety of robotic systems, 
including ground robots, aerial robots, and underwater robots. It is widely used in 
robotics research and industry.
The ROS Navigation Stack has the following benefits and significance:
1. Modularity: The ROS Navigation Stack was created with a modular archi￾tecture, allowing for easy customization and adaptation to various robotic 
systems. The ability to replace or alter any portion of the stack, including 
the costmap, path planner, and obstacle avoidance, makes it simpler to cre￾ate a navigation system that meets the special needs of a certain robot.Design of Autonomous UGVs in Smart Agriculture 287
2. Flexibility: The ROS Navigation Stack is very adaptable, enabling develop￾ers to design navigation systems using a variety of sensors and hardware. 
It works with a range of robotic platforms, including terrestrial, aerial, and 
underwater robots, and supports a number of sensors, including laser scan￾ners, cameras, and ultrasonic sensors.
3. Robustness: Even in demanding and dynamic contexts, the ROS Navigation 
Stack is built to be durable and dependable. It employs cutting-edge algorithms 
for path planning, localization, and obstacle avoidance to make sure that the 
robot can move around in complicated situations safely and effectively.
4. Open-source: The ROS Navigation Stack is an open-source project, making 
it accessible to the robotics community without charge. As a result, innova￾tion and development in the field of robots are accelerated. Developers can 
now work together, share code, and build on previously completed projects.
5. Testing and simulation: Before implementing their navigation systems on a 
real robot, developers can test and validate them in a virtual environment 
thanks to the tools and packages provided by the ROS Navigation Stack. 
This makes it simpler to find mistakes, correct them, and improve perfor￾mance prior to deploying a system in a real-world setting.
6. Community support: The ROS Navigation Stack has a sizable and vibrant 
developer and user community that actively supports the project by pro￾viding code, documentation, and assistance. Developers who are creating 
navigation systems can take advantage of the expertise and experience of 
other community members, which is a valuable resource.
15.12 SIMULTANEOUS LOCALIZATION AND MAPPING 
(SLAM) AND ITS USE FOR SMART AGRICULTURE
SLAM is a robotics technique that creates a map of an uncharted area while keeping 
track of the robot’s location.
When a robot is placed in an environment that was not previously known to it and 
must explore and navigate through it in order to complete tasks like object recogni￾tion, path planning, and obstacle avoidance, the SLAM problem occurs. The robot 
must create a map of the environment and keep track of its own location inside it 
in order to accomplish this. In order to create a map of the surrounding area and 
determine the robot’s position, SLAM algorithms often include a variety of sensors, 
including laser scanners, cameras, and odometry sensors. The sensors measure the 
robot’s mobility and environment, which then use this data to estimate the robot’s 
position and the locations of objects in the environment.
There are two main steps in the SLAM process:
1. Mapping: The robot uses its sensors to construct a map of its surroundings 
in this step. Techniques, like grid-based mapping, feature-based mapping, 
or occupancy grid mapping, can be used for this.
2. Localization: In this phase, the robot determines its location inside the 
environment using the map it created in the previous phase. Techniques, 
like probabilistic localization, feature-based localization, or Monte Carlo 
localization (MCL), can be used for this.288 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
Robotics depends heavily on SLAM because it allows machines to function 
autonomously in unpredictable and changing settings. It has a wide range of applica￾tions in many industries, including construction, search and rescue, and agriculture, 
where robots must operate in difficult and unexpected settings.
With the development of autonomous robots, which are able to complete tasks 
without human assistance, SLAM has grown in significance. Drones, autonomous 
underwater vehicles, and self-driving automobiles all rely on SLAM to navigate and 
function in their particular surroundings. One of SLAM’s main benefits is its real￾time operation, which enables it to produce maps and estimate the robot’s position as 
it moves through the environment. This is essential for applications like autonomous 
vehicles, which need real-time feedback to operate safely and efficiently. SLAM has 
a number of difficulties, including sensor noise, measurement error, and computing 
complexity. To overcome these difficulties and boost the precision and effectiveness 
of SLAM, researchers are constantly creating new algorithms and methodologies [29].
SLAM has a number of possible uses in smart agriculture, such as:
1. Crop monitoring and mapping: With the help of SLAM, agricultural robots 
or drones may map an entire field, assess the health of the crops, find signs of 
plant disease, and calculate the yield. Farmers can use this knowledge to better 
inform their decisions on the use of pesticides, fertilizer, and irrigation, which 
will result in a more effective use of resources and increased crop yields.
2. Precision farming: High-resolution maps of the agricultural field can be cre￾ated using SLAM and used in precision farming. The application of fertiliz￾ers, herbicides, and other inputs can be precisely and accurately prescribed 
using these maps.
3. Autonomous navigation: Agricultural robots with SLAM capabilities can 
move across a field on their own while avoiding hazards and according to a 
predetermined route. This could decrease the demand for manual work and 
boost farming’s effectiveness.
4. Harvesting: One of the most important uses of SLAM in smart agriculture 
is autonomous harvesting. Robots can move around a field, recognize and 
gather ripe crops, and protect the plants by employing SLAM. By doing 
so, the demand for physical labor may be lessened and the efficiency of the 
harvesting process may be improved.
By providing high-resolution maps of the field, enabling precision agriculture [30], 
enabling autonomous navigation, and increasing the effectiveness of the farming pro￾cess, SLAM can be very helpful in smart agriculture.
15.13 ROS2 AND NAV2 VS. ROS1 NAVIGATION STACK
The new ROS (ROS2) was developed to overcome the shortcomings of the origi￾nal ROS, including real-time performance, security, and scalability. An open-source 
framework called ROS2 is used to create robotic software applications. A more flex￾ible architecture, compatibility for numerous operating systems, and improved net￾working are just a few of the enhancements it offers over ROS. ROS2 Nav2, also Design of Autonomous UGVs in Smart Agriculture 289
known as Navigation2, is a navigation stack for ROS2 that offers cutting-edge capa￾bilities for mobile robots’ autonomous navigation. It is based on the ROS2 frame￾work and provides better performance, dependability, and adaptability than the ROS 
navigation stack, which it succeeded.
ROS2 Nav2 has a number of important properties, including:
1. Modular: The Nav2 stack is modular, enabling users to quickly add or remove 
components in accordance with their needs. This gives it a lot of flexibility 
and customization.
2. Improved path planning: Route planning has been improved, and Nav2’s 
algorithms produce efficient and slick courses for the robot to follow.
3. Advanced localization: The MCL technique, which gives precise localiza￾tion in dynamic situations, is one of the advanced localization algorithms 
that Nav2 offers.
4. Support for many robots: Nav2 supports multiple robot systems, enabling 
several robots to navigate independently of one another at the same time.
5. Improved scalability: Nav2 is made to be very scalable and is capable of 
handling huge, complicated landscapes with a variety of obstacles.
15.14 USE OF AUTONOMOUS MOBILE ROBOT (CLEARPATH 
HUSKY) FOR AGRICULTURAL SPRAYING APPLICATION
A spraying mechanism can be developed on top of Clearpath’s Husky robot which 
is a good mobile platform that is capable of traversing on moderately rough ter￾rain. It comes with the capability to perform autonomous navigation based on SICK 
LMS 151 LiDAR. The sensors that it generally uses include SwiftNav Real-Time 
Kinematics (RTK) GPS and SICK LMS1XX LiDARs. The top of the robot has a 
lot of area where multiple mountings can be made for carrying the mission payload 
which could vary from different sensors to different actuators, like robotic arms for 
harvesting, or a spraying mechanism for spraying (Figure 15.4).
The exact and targeted administration of insecticides, herbicides, or fertilizers to 
crops based on the real requirements of the plants is known as precision spraying. 
This method aims to maximize crop productivity, eliminate waste, and lessen the 
negative effects of agricultural activities on the environment.
Regardless of the real demands of the plants, the previous spraying technique 
required dispersing the same amount of chemicals across the entire area. As a result, 
some areas had excessive spraying, which may harm the crops, while other areas 
received little spraying, which may result in reduced yields. Also, it resulted in chem￾ical runoff, which could pollute the land and water and harm the environment.
Contrarily, precision spraying entails analyzing the unique requirements of the 
crops, such as growth rate, nutrient levels, and pest infestations, using sensors 
and other technologies. The right amounts of chemicals are then applied to each 
plant based on this information, resulting in optimal crop development, increased 
yields, and little environmental effect. Many techniques, including aerial spray￾ing, ground-based machinery, and even robotic systems, can be used for precision 
spraying. The unique application and the state of the technology determine the 290 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
method to be used. In general, precision spraying is a very productive agricultural 
technique that can maximize crop yields while minimizing its negative environ￾mental effects. It enables farmers to use chemicals more effectively and efficiently, 
leading to better crops, greater earnings, and an agricultural system that is more 
sustainable.
A more specialized and targeted approach to managing infestations can be offered 
to farmers using computer vision and AI, which can be used to identify pests in a 
range of crops. In order to detect symptoms of pest damage or infestations, machine 
learning algorithms are used to evaluate crop photos or videos.
Here are some of the steps involved in using computer vision and AI to detect pests:
1. Data gathering: The initial phase entails gathering a sizable dataset of pic￾tures or videos of both healthy and pest-free crops. The machine learning 
algorithm is trained using this data to identify the telltale indications of 
pest damage.
2. Pre-processing: To improve the quality of the data and make it simpler for 
the algorithm to detect the pests, the photos or video recordings are first 
processed. Techniques, like filtering, cropping, or altering the contrast and 
brightness, may be used for this.
3. Training the algorithm: The machine learning algorithm is then trained 
to recognize the pests using the pre-processed data. In order to do this, 
FIGURE 15.4 Clear path Husky with smart spraying setup.Design of Autonomous UGVs in Smart Agriculture 291
captioned photos or videos that show which areas are and are not affected 
by pests are sent into the algorithm.
4. Testing and validation: After the algorithm has been trained, it is put to the 
test and validated using a new dataset of photos or videos. This makes it 
easier to verify that the algorithm correctly recognizes the pests and does 
not produce false positives or false negatives.
5. Implementation: Using cameras or other sensors to take pictures or videos 
of the crops, the trained algorithm can then be put into practice in real time. 
The program analyzes the data in real time and spots any indications of 
infestations or damage from pests.
In the implementation part mentioned earlier, a pump can be switched on and off 
based on whether the crop needs to be sprayed or not, or how much spray it needs. This 
way the problem of excessive spraying gets solved. The robot can travel along the crop 
rows autonomously once the waypoints and goal locations are given, using the ROS 
navigation stack (Figure 15.5).
15.15 RAPID PROTOTYPING UGV FOR SMART 
AGRICULTURE (CASE STUDY)
15.15.1 Design Approach
Following are the parameters that were considered while designing the autonomous 
UGV/rover:
1. Payload capacity:
The size, shape, and design of the rover depend upon the required payload 
capacity for the specified mission of the rover. The autonomous rover being 
FIGURE 15.5 Path planning on Clearpath Husky using ROS navstack.292 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
discussed in this chapter is designed to carry a maximum payload of about 
120 kg maximum. This capacity is enough to accommodate the generally 
used sensors like LiDAR and camera, while it even leaves room for add￾ing an additional computer for complex computing tasks like performing 
SLAM and adding medium-sized manipulators as well. The robot has a 
plate on top with various holes that will act as a provision to install required 
payload/sensors.
2. Driving terrain:
The rover is designed to run on flat surfaces, i.e. on-road conditions, and 
does not have a suspension on any of its wheels. The rover’s chassis is driven 
by four wheels and all of them are powered by individual motors that are 
controlled by two Robo Claw 2x30A motor controllers. On on-road condi￾tions, the rover has the capability to reach the maximum speed of 1.977 m 
per second or approximately 7.1892 kilometer per hour. The rover was 
also able to traverse on short grass, although it was observed that the tires 
slipped on the grass while trying to move, which caused errors in the GPS 
waypoint navigation in auto mode, while manual mode did not face much 
issues, since the operator can adjust the speed accordingly to avoid slippage. 
The approach and departure angles are suitable for on-road application.
3. Mission requirements:
Autonomous rovers are required to perform missions as a UGV in dirty/
infeasible/dangerous environments. This rover was designed keeping in 
mind the ability to be able to go to such places. Its medium size lets it fit into 
these places with ease. The material of the robot was chosen to be stainless 
steel for enough rigidity while also being anti-rust.
15.15.2 Hardware Used
The electronic hardware and sensors used with the rover are as mentioned in Table 15.1.
TABLE 15.1
List of a Hardware Components in UGV
Sl. No. Electronic Hardware and Sensors Quantity
1. Pixhawk4 controller 1
2. RoboClaw 2x30A motor controllers 2
3. Raspberry Pi companion computer 1
4. Geared motors 4
5. LiFePO4 Battery pack 1
6. Power module 1
7. Here3 GPS antenna 1
8. Single-point LiDAR 1
9. IP Camera 1
10. 4S LiPO Base station battery 1Design of Autonomous UGVs in Smart Agriculture 293
15.15.3 Hardware Description and Function
1. Pixhawk 4:
Pixhawk is an open-source autopilot hardware, under BSD license, and is 
generally used with UAVs, i.e. drones, and less commonly with rover plat￾forms. It has the capability to navigate the robot according to the provided 
inputs in manual as well as automatic mode, using computer teleoperation 
commands and GPS waypoints, respectively. It comes with different firm￾wares among which the Ardurover firmware was suitable for our applica￾tion. The hardware is easy to use, has all the connections required (like 
GPS, PWM pins for motor control) on the same board, and can be operated 
using the open-source QGC (QGroundControl) software. Hence, this hard￾ware was the preferred choice.
2. RoboClaw 2x30A:
The robot chassis is driven around using four wheels that are powered by 
four geared motors. The amount of power supplied to the motor is con￾trolled by two RoboClaw 30A motor controllers. The motor controller can 
supply a current of 30 A continuous and 60 A peak per channel.
3. Raspberry pi companion computer:
A Raspberry pi board is being used to pass the communication between 
pixhawk and the remote base station that is being in turn passed to QGC 
on the remote computer/laptop. The data are sent over a Wi-Fi connection 
instead of radio, as the base station is equipped with a high gain antenna that 
increases operational range up to 1 km. This connection can be bypassed if 
operation via radio telemetry modules is required for a particular mission. 
The system was tested with a pair of 3DR 915MHz radio telemetry modules 
and it performed well, as expected.
4. Geared motors 300 W:
The rover is an autonomous four-wheeled differential drive robot actuated 
using four geared electric motors, one for each wheel. The differential type 
drive was used for this robot as it makes it highly maneuverable and easy 
to control using the Ardupilot’s rover firmware, with the downside being 
that the differential drive arrangement draws more current while turning in 
place due to high dynamic friction.
5. LiFePO4 battery:
A Lithium Ferro-Phosphate battery was used with 54 Ah Capacity and an 
output voltage of 24 V. This battery provided the rover with a total runtime 
of approximately 4–4.5 hours and the charging time was close to 8 hours.
6. Power module:
A power module is used for supplying power to all the electrical and 
electronic components on the rover.
7. Here3 GPS antenna:
Here3 GPS is a GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite system) antenna which 
supports RTK getting location information from the GPS as well as the 
Russian GLONASS (Global’naya Navigatsionnaya Sputnikovaya Sistema) 
to get location information. If an RTK base station is included in the system, 294 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
the GPS signals are expected to be accurate up to 2–3 cm; however, for this 
version of the UGV, RTK is not used and is a part of the future scope.
8. Single-point LiDAR:
A single-point LiDAR has been installed on the front face of the robot, at 
its horizontal center. The maximum range of the LiDAR is about 6 m. And 
detected distance is directly shown on the QGC software once the option 
is enabled.
9. IP camera:
An IP camera is mounted on the top of the rover, facing to the front side. 
The camera feed can be acquired on the remote PC using the Real-Time 
Streaming Protocol (RTSP), with a very low latency. The RTSP feed can be 
directly viewed in the QGC software upon entering the RTSP address and 
enabling the feed.
10. Lithium Polymer 4S battery for base station:
A LiPo 4S battery is used to power the Wi-Fi base station. The capacity 
of the battery is 6200 mAh (milliampere-hour) and is observed to last for 
about 20 hours of continuous use.
15.15.4 Software Description
The QGC software was used for sending and receiving data to and from the vehicle. 
This is an open-source software and has cross-platform support, including Windows, 
Ubuntu, and MacOS. It is a powerful ground control station and was used for deploy￾ing waypoints for GPS navigation.
15.15.5 Experimental Analysis
Max average velocity test: This test was carried out to find out the maximum average 
velocity of the UGV. The UGV was manually operated and gave maximum thrust 
covering a stretch of 43 m available at our facility, in approximately 22 seconds. 
Hence, the maximum average velocity was found to be about 1.95 m/s or 7 km/h.
Payload test: The UGV was loaded with payloads that increased in weight gradu￾ally until the vehicle stopped performing locomotion nominally. This threshold was 
found out to be 110 kg.
Camera feed streaming: The IP camera installed on the UGV can be used for moni￾toring where the UGV is going while it is BVLOS (Beyond Visual Line Of Sight) so 
as to ensure proper control in order to avoid any physical damage to the hardware or 
living beings around the UGV. The IP camera’s feed was obtained via RTSP on the 
QGC software.
Single-point LiDAR: The single-point LiDAR installed on the horizontal center of 
the front end of the robot was used to obtain data on the QGC software. The software 
displayed the distance in numbers. This is useful while operating the UGV BVLOS.
GPS navigation: The vehicle is fitted with a Here3 GPS antenna commonly used 
with DIY or hobby drones. The rover was made to traverse on plain roads as well 
as on grass (uneven terrain), and a significant difference was observed between the 
operation on the two terrains. The rover struggled to reach the goal once it was Design of Autonomous UGVs in Smart Agriculture 295
set into auto mode, while being operated on grass. The wheels kept slipping while 
turning, introducing errors in the navigation. Several waypoints were collected and 
physically marked with chalk on the ground on a plane road by manually driving 
the rover at locations and noting the waypoints. The rover was then made to travel 
to these waypoints autonomously using the QGC from the first waypoint, i.e. the 
takeoff/launch location. Figure 15.6 shows the route that was followed by the UGV 
via the waypoints given on a regular road. The path is traced on the QGC software 
display as the UGV travels along the waypoints it was given. The figure has orange 
lines that indicate the ‘straight-line path’ it was ideally supposed to take, while the 
red lines show the path that was actually taken by the UGV.
Figure 15.7 shows the path taken by the vehicle on uneven terrain. A grass patch 
was chosen to simulate uneven terrain for the experiment. The scheme here is the 
same as Figure 15.7, i.e. the ‘straight-line path’ that UGV was ideally supposed to 
take from one waypoint to another is shown with orange lines, while the path that 
was actually taken by the vehicle is tracked within the QGC software display with 
red lines. The differences between the red and the orange lines for both the sce￾narios, i.e. regular terrain (roads) and irregular terrain (grass patch), are discussed in 
detail in the observation section (refer Section 15.15.6).
In future, a planar LiDAR can be integrated into the UGV, and with higher 
computational power, the UGV can have the ability to perform SLAM as well.
15.15.6 Observations
The rover designed here uses Pixhawk4 to generate and follow a path to the given 
waypoints on a regular terrain – tar roads in this case. The rover’s deviation from the 
intended straight-line path is less in the case of regular roads, while it is more in the case 
of irregular terrain like grass can be visually observed in Figures 15.6 and 15.7 each.
FIGURE 15.6 Path traveled by UGV via GPS waypoints on regular terrain roads.296 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
In both cases, i.e. regular as well as irregular terrain, the UGV was observed to 
deviate from the ideal straight-line path between the individual waypoints; however, 
the deviation was observed to be a lot more on irregular surfaces as compared to 
the deviation of regular surface as can be seen while comparing both Figures 15.6
and 15.7. It was also observed that these deviations were small wherever the way￾points were placed far away from one another (~7–8 m), compared to the deviations 
when the waypoints were placed close to one another (~2–3 m). Placing an adequate 
number of waypoints at about 4–5 m appeared to be a good configuration for the 
best possible navigation.
The body and design of the rover are rugged enough to traverse through plain 
roads while carrying 100–110 kg of weight on top of the rover’s body. While the 
robot goes BVLOS, i.e. Beyond Visual Line Of Sight, the robot can be properly 
driven using the RTSP, i.e. Real-Time Streaming Protocol – camera feed. Using the 
camera for correct guidance (manually), the rover can be operated from as far as 300 m 
with the help of the Wi-Fi base station and its long-range antenna. It can perform 
autonomous waypoint navigation using GPS waypoints provided using the QGC 
software. The rover follows a straight path to far away waypoints (>4 m) efficiently, 
yet faces difficulty navigating through close waypoints and turns.
15.16 CONCLUSION
Autonomous UGVs have the potential to change the agriculture industry by enhancing 
efficiency, decreasing costs, and raising productivity. Using advanced technologies 
such as GPS, sensors, and machine learning algorithms, these vehicles can conduct a 
variety of activities with precision and accuracy, including soil analysis, planting, and 
harvesting. This can assist farmers in optimizing agricultural yields, decreasing their 
dependency on human labor, and minimizing their environmental effect. In addition, 
FIGURE 15.7 Path traveled by UGV via waypoints on irregular terrain (Grass patch).Design of Autonomous UGVs in Smart Agriculture 297
autonomous UGVs may operate 24 hours a day, seven days a week, minimizing the 
amount of time required to accomplish jobs and accelerating output. Before the wide￾spread use of autonomous UGVs in smart agriculture, several obstacles still need to 
be resolved. Concerns concerning the possible displacement of human workers must 
also be addressed. Despite various limitations, the benefits of employing autonomous 
UGVs in smart agriculture are substantial and cannot be overlooked. As technol￾ogy continues to improve and more study is undertaken in this field, the agricultural 
industry may embrace more autonomous UGVs, resulting in higher efficiency, pro￾ductivity, and sustainability.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to express their gratitude to the National Mission – 
Interdisciplinary Cyber-Physical Systems (NM-ICPS), TIHAN, Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT) Hyderabad for providing facilities for the conduct of this research.
REFERENCES
1. Tauger, Mark B. Agriculture in World History. Routledge, 2020.
2. United Nations. “World urbanization prospects: The 2018 revision.” Economic and Social 
Affairs 1 (2018): 1–2. Working Paper No. ESA/P/WP.252).
3. Damalas, Christos A., and Ilias G. Eleftherohorinos. “Pesticide exposure, safety issues, 
and risk assessment indicators.” International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health 8.5 (2011): 1402–1419.
4. Dhanalakshmi, R., Jose Anand, Arun Kumar Sivaraman, Sita Rani, and Alex Khang. “IoT￾Based Water Quality Monitoring System Using Cloud for Agriculture Use”, in: Pankaj 
Bhambri, Sita Rani, Gaurav Gupta, Cloud and Fog Computing Platforms for Internet of 
Things, 1st Edition, Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, May 2022.
5. Vikram, P.R.K.R. “Agricultural Robot – A pesticide spraying device.” International 
Journal of Future Generation Communication and Networking 13.1 (2020): 150–160.
6. Bak, T., and H. Jakobsen. “Agricultural robotic platform with four wheel steering for 
weed detection.” Biosystems Engineering 87.2 (2004): 125–136.
7. Blackmore, B.S., H. Have, and S.A. Fountas. “Specification of Behavioural Requirements for 
an Autonomous Tractor”, in: Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Fruit, Nut 
and Vegetable Production Engineering conference, Germany, Institute für Agrartechnik 
Bornim e.V.
8. Bogue, R. “Robots poised to revolutionise agriculture.” Industrial Robot International 
Journal 43.5 (2016): 450–456.
9. CEMA–European Agricultural Machinery: Mechanization: a game-changer for sustainable 
agrifood systems. https://www.cema-agri.org/publications/31-press-releases-publications/
927-mechanization-a-game-changer-for-sustainable-agrifood-systems
10. Goel, Raj Kumar, et al. “Smart agriculture–Urgent need of the day in developing countries.” 
Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 30 (2021): 100512.
11. Ramya, E., Jose Anand, R. Renugha Devi, K. RoshniPrasenth, and Neethu Anna Issac. 
“Solar Grass Cutter with Water Spraying Vehicle”, in: Proceedings of IEEE International 
Conference on Advancements in Electrical, Electronics, Communication, Computing 
and Automation (ICAECA)), p. 6, 8–9 Oct 2021.
12. Ruckelshausen, A., P. Biber, M. Dorna, H. Gremmes, R. Klose, and A. Linz, et al. An 
autonomous field robot platform for individual plant phenotyping. Precision Agriculture 
9 (2009): 841–847.298 Predictive Analytics in Smart Agriculture
13. World Health Organization. WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard. 2023. 
Available online: https://covid19.who.int/ (accessed on 17 February 2023).
14. Zhang, Xin, and Eric A. Davidson. “Improving nitrogen and water management in crop 
production on a national scale.” AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts 2018 (2018). B22B-01. 
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018AGUFM.B22B..01Z
15. Oliveira, Luiz F.P., António P. Moreira, and Manuel F. Silva. “Advances in agriculture 
robotics: A state-of-the-art review and challenges ahead.” Robotics 10.2 (2021): 52.
16. Perez-Ruiz, M., P. Gonzalez-de-Santos, A. Ribeiro, C. Fernandez-Quintanilla, A. 
Peruzzi, and M. Vieri, et al. Highlights and preliminary results for autonomous crop 
protection. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 110 (2015): 150–161.
17. Lakkad, S. Modeling and simulation of steering systems for autonomous vehicles. mas￾ter thesis. The Florida State University, US; 2004 Gonzalez-de-Santos P., Ribeiro A., 
Fernandez-Quintanilla C., Lopez-Granados F., Brandstoetter M., Tomic S., et al. (2017) 
Fleets of robots for environmentally-safe Pest control in agriculture. Precision Agric 18, 
574–614.
18. O’Connor, M., T. Bell, G. Elkaim, and B. Parkinson. “Automatic steering of farm 
vehicles using GPS”, in: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Precision 
Agriculture, Minneapolis, USA, pp. 767–777, 1996.
19. Chitta, Sachin, et al. “Ros_Control: A generic and simple control framework for ROS.” 
The Journal of Open Source Software 2.20 (2017): 456–456.
20. Nicolopoulou-Stamati, Polyxeni, et al. “Chemical pesticides and human health: The 
urgent need for a new concept in agriculture.” Frontiers in Public Health 4 (2016): 148.
21. Quigley, Morgan, et al. “ROS: An open-source robot operating system.” ICRA Workshop 
on Open Source Software 3.3.2 (2009).
22. Jose Anand, C. Aasish, S. Syam Narayanan, and R. Asad Ahmed, “Drones for Disaster 
Response and Management”, in: Saravanan Krishnan, M. Murugappan, Internet of Drones, 
1st Edition, CRC Press, pp. 173–196, 15 May 2023.
23. Pak, Jeonghyeon, et al. “Field evaluation of path-planning algorithms for autonomous 
mobile robot in smart farms.” IEEE Access 10 (2022): 60253–60266.
24. Gonzalez-de-Santos, Pablo, Roemi Fernandez, Delia Sepúlveda, Eduardo Navas, 
and Manuel Armada. (2020). Unmanned Ground Vehicles for Smart Farms. 10.5772/
intechopen.90683.
25. Vetter, A.A. “Quantitative evaluation of DGPS guidance for ground based agricultural 
applications.” Applied Engineering in Agriculture 11.3 (1995): 459–464.
26. Mahmud, Mohd Saiful Azimi, et al. “Robotics and automation in agriculture: present 
present and future applications.” Applications of Modelling and Simulation 4 (2020): 
130–140.
27. Wang, Huijuan, Yuan Yu, and Quanbo Yuan. “Application of Dijkstra Algorithm in 
Robot Path-Planning”, in: 2011 second international conference on mechanic automation 
and control engineering, IEEE, 2011.
28. Wonnacott, Dereck, et al. “Autonomous Navigation Planning with ROS.” Michigan 
Technological University, pp. 2–12, 2012.
29. Grisetti, Giorgio, Cyrill Stachniss, and Wolfram Burgard. “Improved techniques for grid 
mapping with rao-blackwellized particle filters.” IEEE Transactions on Robotics 23.1 
(2007): 34–46.
30. Sundari, M.S., A. Jose Anand, and T.S. Nagarajan. “Smart Aerial Imaging Solution 
in Precision Agriculture”, in: 2022 International Conference on Data Science, Agents’ 
Artificial Intelligence (ICDSAAI), Chennai, India, pp. 1–3, 2022.299
Index
A
Accuracy analysis, 95
Acreage estimation, 20–36
Actuators, 159
Affordability, 158
Agricultural decision-making 
software, 208
Agricultural precision, 253
Agriculture, 150, 213–224
Agriproduct, 146
AI cloud server, 88
Aid precision farming, 254
Algal leaf spot, 130
Amazon Web Service (AWS), 74
Analysing the effect of climatically 
change, 199–200
Analysis of capabilities, 268
Anthracnose, 131
Anthropological culture, 229–246
Applications, 45
Arduino microcontroller, 87
Artificial Intelligence, 45, 229–246
Artificial Intelligence Markup 
Language (AIML), 63
Assessing environmental impacts, 205
Atmospheric correction, 24
Automated seasonal crop mapping, 20–36
Automatic fertigation, 169
Automatic irrigation, 168
Autonomous navigation, 280
Aware agriculture decisions, 192–193
B
Back propagation (BP), 94
Bag of words implementation, 66
Base scenario, 200
Big data, 51, 216–217
Big data analytics, 229–246
Binary logistic regression, 67
Bird’s eye spot, 131
Blister blight, 132
Brown blight, 131
C
Capsule network, 134, 135
Carbon budget, 240
Carbon dioxide, 234
Chatbot process, 58
Chatbots, 58
Classifier process (Chatbot), 62
Clearpath Husky, 289
Climate change, 233–234
Climate change effects, 158
Climate data analysis, 230–231
Climate models, 230–231
Climate patterns, 230–232
Cloud, 73, 107, 108, 111, 115–117
Cloud computing, 51, 52, 154, 216–217
Cloud computing in agriculture, 163
Cloud database, 76
Clustering, 122
Cohen’s kappa coefficient, 28
Computational support, 164–167
Consideration of the tradeoffs, 194
Convolutional Neural Network 
(CNN), 27–28
Coordinating drone operations, 266
Coordination issues concerning, 259
Coordination techniques, 257
Crop, 213–224
Crop management, 45
D
Data aggregation, 162
Data analytics, 230
Data scientists, 230
Dataset normalization and dimension 
reduction, 89
Decision tree (DT), 96, 122, 123
Deforestation, 242–243
Degrees of freedom, 281
Dense Layer, 69
DHT-11 Digital Temperature and 
Humidity Sensor, 11
Dialogue, 59
Differential drive, 293
Digital farming, 213–215, 224
Digital twin, 213–224
Docker, 71
Docker container, 71
Docker image, 71
Dockerfile, 71
Drones, 42, 259
Dropout layer, 69
Drought events, 244–245
Dynamic routing, 138300 Index
E
Earth observation, 239
EC2, 75
Ecommerce system, 153
Edge sensors, 116
Effects of climate change, 194
Elastic Container Registry (ECR), 75
Elastic Container Service (ECS), 75
Emissions data, 241
Energy balance, 230–231
Entity, 59
Environment, 214, 216, 218–224
ESP8266 Wi-Fi module, 88
Experience sharing, 164
Exponential linear unit, 137
Extreme weather, 245–246
F
F1 score, 98
Farmers, 154
Farming automation, 164
Feature extraction, 90
Firebase, 111, 116–118
Five R’s, 37
Food process, 220–221, 223
Front-end simulator, 264
G
Geographic Information Systems 
(GIS), 40, 231–234
Global warming, 231–233
GODAN method, 177–178
GODAN/CTA/CFAR guidelines, 181–186
GPS, 39
Grain, 221–223
Greenhouse gas emissions, 241–242
Grey blight, 131
H
Harvest, 221–224
High-value agricultural products, 157–158
Historical obligations, 229–230
Holonomic, 280
Human detection, 7
Hydroponics, 218
I
Ice core analysis, 236–238
Implementing investment strategies 
profitably, 168
Innovations on productivity, 158
Intent, 59
Internet of Things (IoT), 1, 107–110, 112–117, 
124, 145, 213–224
IOT application, 47
Irrigation system, 42, 46, 49
K
K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), 2, 96
L
Leaf-CAP, 135, 136
Lemmatization, 66
LiDAR, 281–282, 284, 294
Link state, 268
Localization, 284, 286–287
Logical work of AgBiz, 201
Long short-term memory (LSTM) 
classification, 26–27
LP pooling, 137
M
Machine learning, 49–50, 121
Machine learning algorithms, 20–36
Mann-Kendall test, 231
Mapping, 287
Mean absolute error (MAE), 99
Mean squared error (MSE), 100
Methodologies for recruiting new protocols, 266
Methods of routing, 258
Momentum coefficient (MC), 94
Mosaics, 23–24
Multi-dimensional impact assessment, 207
Multilayer perceptron (MLP), 92
N
Naive Bayes (NB), 95–96
Natural language processing, 59
New farming methods under investigation, 194
Node MCU (Node Micro Controller Unit), 11
Non-holonomic, 280
NPK sensor, 86
O
Odometry, 287
Optimization, 221, 224
Overall accuracy, 28, 30
Oversampling methods, 23
P
Parasites mobility model, 261
Performance measures, 28, 30
Plant disease, 47Index 301
Platforms, 48
Post-harvest, 216, 221–223
Precision, 97
Precision agriculture (PA), 37, 169
Precision farming, 116
Prediction model, 92
Predictive analytics, 233–235
Preliminary setup, 200
Principal component analysis (PCA), 89
Problems on the moral significance, 178–179
Producer’s accuracy, 30
Pseudo-code of the traditional BP algorithm, 94
Q
QGC (Q-Ground Control), 293–295
R
Radiometric correction, 24, 25
Random forest (RF) classification, 25, 26
Rapid prototyping, 291
Real-time data, 232–235
Recall, 97
Red leaf spot, 131
Regression, 122
Remote monitoring, 117
Remote sensing, 45
Resampling, 22, 23
Resolutions for rules of engagement, 180–181
Rising sea levels, 232–234
Root mean square error (RMSE), 99
ROS (Robot Operating System), 282, 283, 
284–285
Routing type, 259
S
Satellite data, 242–243
Scab, 132
Sea ice loss, 244
Sensor, 216, 219–223
Sensors, 159
Sequential model, 67
Simulated UAV, 263
Simulator indicators, 264
SLAM (simultaneous localization 
and mapping), 287
Smart agriculture, 284, 291
Smart farming, 61, 116, 117, 216
Softmax, 139
Software, 43–44
Soil management, 46, 49
Soil monitoring layer, 85
Soil nutrition, 95
Soil parameters and prediction values, 91
Soil smart sensors, 85
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD), 94
Storage support, 164–167
Support vector machine (SVM) classification, 26
Support vector machine (SVM), 96
Synthetic aperture radar (SAR), 22
T
Tea sickness dataset, 132
Technologies of wireless communication, 160
Temperature trends, 231
Tokenization, 66
Toolkits, 43–44
Tools, 32–45
Training MLP model, 94
Training efficiency analysis, 98
Transport system, 148
U
UAVs simulator, 263
UGV (Unmanned Ground Vehicle), 283–284
Undersampling methods, 23
U-Net, 27
Unmanned aerial vehicle, 257
V
Vertical farming, 217
Video analysis systems, 254
Virtual system, 214
W
Water management, 157
Water shortage, 157
Waypoint, 291
Weather forecast, 149
Weather forecasting, 50
Weather sensors, 229–230
White spot, 132
Wildfires, 239
Word error rate, 61
Worldwide Jungle Lookout, 235–236
WSN, 41
Y
Yellow River basin, 236, 239
