Principles of Argument StructureLinguistic Inquiry Monographs
Samuel Jay Keyser, general editor
A complete list of books published in the Linguistic Inquiry Monographs series 
appears at the back of this book.The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
Chris Collins
Principles of Argument Structure
A Merge-Based Approach© 2024 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND license.
This license applies only to the work in full and not to any components included with 
permission. Subject to such license, all rights are reserved. No part of this book may 
be used to train artificial intelligence systems without permission in writing from the 
MIT Press.
The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided com￾ments on drafts of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential for 
establishing the authority and quality of our publications. We acknowledge with grati￾tude the contributions of these otherwise uncredited readers.
This book was set in Times New Roman by Westchester Publishing Services.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Collins, Chris, 1963– author.
Title: Principles of argument structure : a merge-based approach / Chris Collins.
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, 2024. | Series: Linguistic 
inquiry monographs | Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2023036900 (print) | LCCN 2023036901 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9780262548274 (paperback) | ISBN 9780262379137 (epub) | 
ISBN 9780262379120 (pdf)
Subjects: LCSH: English language—Passive voice. | English language—
Verb phrase. | English language—Syntax. | Construction grammar. 
Classification: LCC PE1285 .C65 2024 (print) | LCC PE1285 (ebook) | 
DDC 425—dc23/eng/20231206 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023036900
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023036901This monograph is dedicated to my three great syntax teachers: Noam Chomsky, 
Richard Kayne, and Paul Postal. Their influence can be felt on every page.Series Foreword ix
Acknowledgments xi
1 A Merge-Based Approach to Argument Structure     1
2 The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument     15
3 Secondary Predicates and the Implicit Argument     39
4 A Theory of Implicit Arguments     53
5 Out of Africa     79
6 By-Phrases     85
7 Derivations     107
8 Two Conceptions of VoiceP     119
9 The Dative Alternation     135
10 On the Tension with Formal Semantics     147
11 Conclusion     163
Appendix: Internet Searches as a Tool in Syntactic Research 169
References 175
Author Index 187
Subject Index 191
ContentsWe are pleased to present the eighty-seventh volume in the series Linguistic 
Inquiry Monographs. These monographs present new and original research 
beyond the scope of the article. We hope they will benefit our field by bring￾ing to it perspectives that will stimulate further research and insight.
Originally published in limited edition, the Linguistic Inquiry Monographs
are now more widely available. This change is due to the great interest engen￾dered by the series and by the needs of a growing readership. The editors 
thank the readers for their support and welcome suggestions about future 
directions for the series.
Samuel Jay Keyser
for the Editorial Board
Series ForewordI thank Nikos Angelopoulos, Mark Baker, Adriana Belletti, Guglielmo Cinque, 
Selikem Gotah, Erich Groat, Anders Holmberg, Richard Kayne, Hilda Koop￾man, Richard Larson, Olivia Ndapo, Paul Postal, Andrew Radford, Tom 
Roeper, Abdul-Razak Sulemana, Thomas Stroik, Gary Thoms, and Arhonto 
Terzi for discussing the issues in this book with me.
My collaboration with Nikos Angelopoulos and Arhonto Terzi on the com￾parison of Greek and English (Angelopoulos, Collins, and Terzi 2020) was 
especially valuable in helping me to understand the cross-linguistic scope of 
the principles involved. My collaboration with Adriana Belletti on the OUP 
smuggling volume (Belletti and Collins 2020) was useful to me in sharpening 
my ideas on the dative alternation and smuggling more generally.
Thanks also to the participants of my NYU seminars on argument struc￾ture (Fall 2018 and Fall 2021) for their useful feedback on the data and on the 
developing ideas. The Fall 2018 participants were Omar Agha, Gurprit Bains, 
Karoliina Lohiniva, Kate Mooney, Yining Nie, Dan Simon, and Hongchen 
Wu. The Fall 2021 participants were Rachel Christensen, Mica Clausen, 
Selikem Gotah, Stephanie Harves, Soo-Hwan Lee, John David Storment, and 
Gary Thoms. I also presented various sections in other syntax courses (includ￾ing the undergraduate course Grammatical Analysis II, Spring 2018, 2023 
and the graduate course Syntax I, Fall 2020, 2022). Thanks to the students of 
those courses for their feedback.
I benefited from the feedback of members of the audiences at the Brussels 
Conference on Generative Linguistics (BCGL) (October 6, 2022), NYU Syn￾tax Brown Bag (September 23, 2022), UCONN Department of Linguistics 
(February 7, 2020), and the University of the Basque Country (February 10, 
2022), where I presented various parts of this monograph.
Chapters 5 and 8 incorporate material from the following two published 
papers, respectively.
Acknowledgmentsxii Acknowledgments
Angelopoulos, Nikos, Chris Collins, and Arhonto Terzi. 2020. Greek and English 
Passives and the Role of by-Phrases. Glossa 5(1): 90, 1–29.
Collins, Chris. 2020. A Smuggling Approach to the Dative Alternation. In Smuggling 
in Syntax, edited by Adriana Belletti and Chris Collins, 96–107. Oxford: Oxford Uni￾versity Press.
Finally, the monograph has benefited from two rounds of reviewing and 
five separate reviewers at the MIT Press. I am grateful to the reviewers for 
their expertise and for their time and effort in providing me with feedback, and 
to Philip Laughlin (Senior Acquisitions Editor, MIT Press), who shepherded my 
manuscript through the whole process.1.1 Leading Ideas
This book investigates principles of argument structure in minimalist syntax 
through an in-depth analysis of certain properties of the English passive con￾struction, illustrated in (1):
(1) a. John wrote the book. (active)
b. The book was written by John. (passive)
c. The book was written. (short passive)
The paradigm in (1) raises questions about argument structure. First, is the 
underlying syntactic position of the determiner phrase (DP) John in (1a) the 
same as or different from the underlying syntactic position of the by-phrase in 
(1b)? Another way to put the question is this: Is the external argument pro￾jected in the same way in the active and the passive? Furthermore, what 
principles of Universal Grammar (UG) determine these positions?
The relation between the passive and active was addressed in Chomsky 
(1957). His analysis is summarized in (2):
(2) If S1
 is a grammatical sentence of the form
 NP1 − Aux − V − NP2,
then the corresponding string of the form
 NP2 − Aux + be + en − V − by + NP1
is also a grammatical sentence.
(pgs. 42–43, 78–81, 112)
In this formulation, the passive is derived from the active, so that (3) is 
trivially true.
(3)  The external argument of the passive is projected in exactly the same way 
as the external argument of the active.
1 A Merge-Based Approach to Argument Structure2 Chapter 1
Chomsky (1957:42–43) gives a famous argument for the transformational 
rule in (2) based on selectional restrictions: “Finally, note that in elaborating 
(13) [C.C., a grammar containing only rewrite rules, no transformations] into 
a full-fledged grammar we will have to place many restrictions on the choice 
of V in terms of subject and object in order to permit such sentences as: ‘John 
admires sincerity,’ ‘sincerity frightens John,’ ‘John plays golf,’ ‘John drinks 
wine,’ while excluding the ‘inverse’ non-sentences ‘sincerity admires John,’ 
‘John frightens sincerity,’ ‘golf plays John,’ ‘wine drinks John.’ But this whole 
network of restrictions fails completely when we choose be + en as part of the 
auxiliary verb. In fact, in this case the same selectional dependencies hold, 
but in the opposite order.”
Essentially, Chomsky argues for the transformational rule of the passive in 
(2) on the basis of selectional restrictions. The passive and the active show the 
same selectional restrictions, and this fact can be captured if the passive sen￾tence is derived from an active sentence by transformation (which by implicit 
assumption does not change selectional restrictions).
In this monograph, I will argue for (3) (contra Bruening 2013; Legate 2014; 
and Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and Schäfer 2015) and show how (3) fol￾lows from UG principles (outlined in the next two sections).
The paradigm in (1) also raises the issue of implicit arguments. In (1c) an 
implicit argument can be detected through entailments. In this case, we have 
the entailment in (4):
(4) The book was written. ⊨ Somebody or something wrote the book.
If it is true that the book was written, then it is true that somebody or 
something wrote the book. Because of this entailment, we know that there is 
an implicit argument in (1c). What is the syntactic and semantic status of that 
implicit argument? Furthermore, what principles of UG determine the status 
of implicit arguments?
For Chomsky (1957), the implicit argument in the short passive comes about 
by ellipsis:
(5)  “The sentences of (104) without the parenthetical expression are formed 
by a second ‘elliptical’ transformation that converts e.g., ‘the boy was 
seen by John’ into ‘the boy was seen.’ ” (pgs. 81, 89–90)
For example, Chomsky (1957:89) discusses the following paradigm:
(6) a. The picture was painted by a new technique.
b. The picture was painted by a real artist.
He comments as follows: “[6b] is the passive of ‘a real artist painted the 
picture.’ . . . ​[6a] is formed from, e.g., ‘John painted the picture by a new A Merge-Based Approach to Argument Structure 3
technique’ by a double transformation; first the passive, then the elliptical 
transformation . . . that drops the ‘agent’ in the passive.” The point of the exam￾ple is that the two sentences in (6) differ in the transformations that apply to 
derive them.
In the framework of Chomsky (1957), the only way to get an implicit argu￾ment in the passive is through ellipsis. So, the implicit argument must have 
been syntactically projected (before being elided):
(7) The implicit argument in the passive is syntactically projected.
In this monograph, I will argue for (7) (again contra Bruening 2013; Legate 
2014; and Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and Schäfer 2015) and show how it 
follows from UG principles. As we shall see, (3) and (7) are closely related 
and follow from the same UG principle: the Argument Criterion/Theta￾Criterion, as explained in the next section.
1.2 Argument-Introducing Heads
I adopt an approach to argument structure arising from Larson 1988 (which 
builds on Barss and Lasnik 1986), which shows that c-command asymmetries 
in double object constructions can be analyzed in terms of VP shells, where 
different arguments are introduced in different VP shells. Subsequent work 
developing that general framework includes Hale and Keyser 1993, 2002, 
Bowers 1993, Marantz 1993, Chomsky 1995, Collins and Thráinsson 
1996, Kratzer 1996, Baker 1997, Travis 2000, Gruber 2001, Harley 2002, 
2011, 2013, Borer 2020, Collins 2005a, Pylkkänen 2008a, Ramchand 2008, 
and many others. The fundamental assumption is that there is a series of verbal 
projections that introduce arguments, including at least v and Appl. I will call 
these argument-introducing heads (see Pylkkänen 2008a:8 for additional kinds 
of argument-introducing heads; see Bowers 1993 on PredP).
Even though I focus mostly on v and Appl in this monograph, the results 
should apply generally to any system that uses such argument-introducing 
heads. For example, the Argument Criterion below would also apply in Ram￾chand’s (2008) system based on Init (initiator), Proc (process), and Res (result) 
projections (see Ramchand 2008:60). Therefore, any such system (based on 
argument-introducing heads) would need to adopt the conclusions in this 
monograph about implicit arguments, KPs, and the role of voice.
The discussion in this monograph focuses mostly on external arguments 
(e.g., implicit external arguments and by-phrases), so I do not say much about 
internal arguments (e.g., themes, patients). For simplicity, I assume that there 
is a lexical transitive verb write that introduces an argument as a complement: 
[VP write [DP the book]]. This is a huge simplification. Rather, such arguments 4 Chapter 1
should also be introduced by various argument-introducing heads in the spirit 
of Ramchand 2008. I briefly return to this issue at the end of chapter 4 (see 
section 4.7, “Complement Deletion”).
Highly relevant for the issue of internal arguments is Postal’s (2010) three￾way classification of objects into 2, 3, and 4 objects. In the foreword of Postal 
2010, Collins remarks “The challenge, then, is to match up the 2, 3, and 4 objects 
to positions within the system of VP shells and to show how their syntactic 
behavior (with respect to passivization, relativization, etc.) can be explained on 
the basis of this matching.” I leave this challenging project to future research.
1.3 Principles of Argument Structure
In this section, I outline the principles relevant to deriving (3) and (7) above. 
First, I discuss the relationship between Merge and argument structure. Merge
is defined as follows (see Collins and Stabler 2016 for a formalization):
(8) Merge(A,B) = {A,B}
Chomsky (2005:14; see also Chomsky 2004:111; Chomsky 2021; Chomsky, 
Gallego, and Ott 2019:242) observes that “External Merge correlates with 
argument structure, internal Merge with edge properties, scopal or discourse 
related (new and old information, topic, etc.).” Strengthening Chomsky’s 
observation, I propose that the only way to build argument structure is by 
external Merge. I call this the Merge-based theory of argument structure. The 
core of this thesis can be formalized as follows.
First, I define what it means for a head to introduce an argument:
(9)  A head H introduces an argument A if A externally merges with a projec￾tion of H.
The definition in (9) is purely terminological. It just defines what it means 
for a head to introduce an argument by specifying a particular structural 
configuration.
As noted above, I am assuming that there is a series of argument-introducing 
heads, including v and Appl (among others). These heads are designated as 
argument-introducing heads as part of UG. Other heads such as Pl (the plural 
head), T (the tense head), Asp (the aspect head), and Foc (the focus head) are not 
argument-introducing heads. Pl takes an NP (not a DP complement), and the 
specifier of Foc is filled by internal Merge (of the focused constituent) not exter￾nal Merge.
But (9) does not say anything about whether or not an argument needs 
to be introduced by an argument-introducing head, or whether or not an A Merge-Based Approach to Argument Structure 5
argument-introducing head needs to introduce an argument. The following 
condition answers these questions:
(10) Argument Criterion
a. Each argument is introduced by a single argument-introducing head.
b. Each argument-introducing head introduces a single argument.
I take arguments to be nonexpletive DPs (e.g., John, nobody, the dog), pro￾nouns, KPs (e.g., passive by John to be discussed in chapter 6 and dative to 
John to be discussed in chapter 8), and some kinds of clauses (e.g., that John 
is late). AdjPs (adjective phrases), NPs, and other kinds of predicative expres￾sions are not arguments. This list is sufficient for the purposes of the mono￾graph, so I do not attempt a formal definition.
(10) is the fundamental thesis of the monograph. While it is simple and 
seemingly obvious, I will show that it has far-reaching empirical and theoreti￾cal consequences and rules out many widely accepted analyses.
The Argument Criterion is closely related to the Theta-Criterion (on a 
recent revision of the Theta-Criterion, see Chomsky 2021):
(11) Theta-Criterion (First Version)
Each argument bears one and only one theta-role, and each theta-role is 
assigned to one and only one argument.
(Chomsky 1981:36)
But the formulation in (11) raises difficult questions about individuating 
theta-roles. For example, what is the theta-role of John in “John deliberately 
rolled down the hill”? Is John a theme, an agent, or some kind of composite 
(see Chomsky 1981:139, fn. 14 for discussion). The formulation of the Theta￾Criterion in Chomsky 1986 sidesteps this kind of question entirely by focus￾ing on theta-positions, not theta-roles:
(12) Theta-Criterion (Second and Final Version)
Each argument α appears in a chain containing a unique visible 
theta-position P, and each theta-position P is visible in a chain contain￾ing a unique argument α.
(Chomsky 1986:97)
This formulation of the Theta-Criterion says nothing about particular theta￾roles, or what a theta-role is, or even whether theta-roles exist. It does not pre￾suppose a way to distinguish particular theta-roles (e.g., locations from goals, 
or themes from patients, or experiencers and causers from agents). Rather, it 
talks about theta-positions, which are just the external Merge positions of 
arguments. In other words, (12) forces the external Merge of arguments in cer￾tain positions.6 Chapter 1
The difference between the Argument Criterion (10) and the second ver￾sion of the Theta-Criterion (12) is that the Argument Criterion focuses on the 
argument-introducing heads. In effect, the argument-introducing heads define 
the theta-positions. If the system were formalized (e.g., as in Collins and Sta￾bler 2016), the Argument Criterion would be an axiom (a principle of UG) and 
the Theta-Criterion would be a theorem (derived from the Argument Crite￾rion and other definitions and principles). I will not give a proof here. In this 
monograph, I will often discuss the Theta-Criterion since it is already widely 
referred to in the syntax literature. I will refer to AC/TC (Argument Criterion/
Theta-Criterion) where the difference between them is not relevant.
The effect of the Argument Criterion is to force a bijection (one-to-one onto 
function) between argument-introducing heads and arguments. Therefore, 
there are four ways to violate it. Case 1: Some argument-introducing head does 
not introduce an argument. Case 2: Some argument-introducing head introduces 
two arguments (e.g., in a multiple-specifier configuration). Case 3: Some argu￾ment is not introduced by an argument-introducing head. Case 4: Some 
argument is introduced by two argument-introducing heads.
In this monograph, we focus mostly on case 1. I show that blocking case 1 
has concrete implications for the theory of implicit arguments. Case 4 occurs 
when an argument occupies two theta-positions. I assume this is ruled out, 
but I do not discuss it in this monograph (see Hornstein 1999).
The AC/TC are closely related to the configurational approach to theta￾theory outlined in Chomsky 1995:313 (see also Hale and Keyser 1993:68, 69 
for a related conception):
(13)  “A theta-role is assigned in a certain structural configuration; β assigns a 
theta-role only in the sense that it is the head of that configuration.”
Chomsky continues in the next paragraph: “theta-relatedness is a property 
of the position of merger and its (very local) configuration.” The configura￾tional approach has the following two properties:
(14)  a. ­ There is a syntactic configurational relation between an argument and 
an argument-introducing head.
b. That relation is unique.
(14a) already follows from the Argument Criterion. But why is (14b) true? 
Why is the syntactic relation unique? Why couldn’t there be several different 
syntactic relations between little v and DP that would all yield an agentive 
interpretation? The Argument Criterion says that each argument-introducing 
head introduces a single argument, but it does not stipulate a unique posi￾tion for the introduced argument. Curiously, (14b) does follow from the A Merge-Based Approach to Argument Structure 7
Theta-Criterion, since the Theta-Criterion is defined in terms of positions. I 
propose that uniqueness in (14b) follows in part from economy.
Here are some possible syntactic relations (I will return to adjunction struc￾tures shortly):
(15) a. DP is the complement of v.
b. DP is the first (inner) specifier of vP.
c. DP is the second specifier of vP.
d. DP is the third specifier of vP.
e. DP is the first specifier of the first specifier of vP.
f. DP is the second specifier of the first specifier of vP.
g. DP is the first specifier of the complement of v.
h. DP asymmetrically c-commands vP in a phase.
i. DP asymmetrically c-commands vP in a phase with no intervening DP.
j. DP asymmetrically c-commands vP in a clause.
In fact, there are an unlimited number of conceivable syntactic configura￾tional relations between v and the external argument DP, so why is only (15b) 
chosen? The question is even more acute under a theory eliminating labels 
(Collins 2002) or introducing labels by a labeling algorithm (Chomsky 2013). 
In that kind of theory, Spec vP is undefined; rather, Spec vP corresponds to 
the second merged XP:
(16) {DP, {v, VP}}
So why is the DP in (16) the only possible argument position for v? First, I 
put aside the possibility of {VP, {v, DP}} (VP is the specifier). I assume that 
this configuration is never allowed. The generalization is the following: in the 
extended projection of a verb V, the arguments introduced must c-command 
V. I put aside how this follows from general principles (such as labeling or 
economy). Second, I propose that the proximity of DP to v and the uniqueness 
of the position (Spec vP) are both the result of economy considerations. Basi￾cally, DP is being merged as close to v as possible (given that v takes a VP 
complement), and there is only one such closest position (shown in (16)). On 
external Merge being constrained by economy, see Collins 1997:75–78 and 
Collins 2022.
A reviewer raises the possibility that the passive by-phrase could be an 
adjunct to vP, formed by Pair-Merge. Applied to by-phrases, this would yield 
the adjunction structure [vP vP [by John]]. An empirical problem with the 
adjunct analysis is that it yields the wrong c-command facts. If the by-phrase 
is right-adjoined to the vP, this incorrectly predicts that the by-phrase will 
c-command things to the left. But standard c-command tests show this 8 Chapter 1
prediction does not hold. This point is already made in Collins 2005a:86, 
(10). See also chapter 7, example (14).
More generally, adjunction and Pair-Merge play no role at all in the princi￾ples of argument structure that I lay out in this chapter. Rather, the theory that 
I propose is based solidly on (nonpair) set Merge. In fact, for Chomsky (2004), 
Pair-Merge concerns “predicate composition” and not argument structure, 
which is built by Merge (see also Chomsky, Gallego, and Ott 2019:249):
(17)  “Recall that the strong interface condition (however formulated pre￾cisely) requires sufficient diversity at SEM. Possibly richness of expres￾sive power requires an operation of predicate composition: that is not 
provided by set Merge, which yields the duality of interpretation dis￾cussed earlier: argument structure and edge properties. But it is the 
essential semantic contribution of pair Merge. If the C-I-system imposes 
this condition, then the existence of a device to yield predicate composi￾tion would conform to SMT—a promissory note, given the limitations of 
understanding of C-I, but not unreasonable.”
(Chomsky 2004:118)
According to Chomsky (2004), argument structure is accounted for by (Set) 
Merge, and predicate composition is accounted for by Pair-Merge. Going even 
further, Collins (2017:52) notes: “Pair-Merge is a completely different opera￾tion from Merge, and would have to be stipulated as an independent operation 
of UG (going against the SMT as defined in section 1).” Lastly, Sportiche 
(2017b) argues that “There are no adjuncts, there is no adjunction.” If Spor￾tiche is right, by-phrases could not be adjuncts since adjuncts don’t exist. In 
summary, for a variety of empirical and theoretical reasons, I reject the pro￾posal that the passive by-phrase is an adjunct to vP formed by Pair-Merge.
An alternative way to state the Theta-Criterion might be in terms of fea￾tures, such as [+D] (requiring a DP argument). In effect, such an account 
would be treating the Theta-Criterion in terms of c-selection (category￾selection). However, I reject this alternative because it would allow different 
kinds of lexical items that should be excluded. For example, all of the follow￾ing would be possible feature specifications for an argument-introducing 
head: [+D], [(+D)], [−D], [+/−D]. Are all these different systems attested? Since 
the D is a category feature, presumably such an account would also allow any 
category label as a c-selectional feature (e.g., [+C], [+Adj]). Also, there are 
other technologies accompanying the use of features (e.g., feature inheritance, 
feature percolation, Agree, valued versus unvalued features, interpretable ver￾sus uninterpretable features, feature deletion) all of which seem completely 
irrelevant to argument structure.A Merge-Based Approach to Argument Structure 9
The only assumption I need is that certain heads are designated as 
argument-introducing heads as part of UG. Once a head is classified as an 
argument-introducing head, it then obeys the AC/TC. One can call this prop￾erty a feature (informally), but there is no reason to say that there is anything 
like the formal syntactic symbol +AIH (“argument-introducing head”) that is 
a component part of the lexical item. And since the formal syntactic symbol 
+AIH does not exist as part of lexical items, none of its variants (such as 
−AIH, +/−AIH, etc.) exists either. Nor is there any reason to suppose that any 
of the common operations on features (e.g., Agree, inheritance, percolation, 
deletion, valuation) will be able to take place either.
There are people who deny the existence of the Theta-Criterion (see chap￾ter 10 for a detailed discussion). For example, Bruening (2013:23) gives the 
following statement (see also Heim and Kratzer 1998:51):
(18) “Because there are no syntactic thematic roles in this system, there is also 
no θ-Criterion. Elements will either combine semantically, or they will 
not. If a head is a function that calls for an argument and an argument of 
the appropriate type combines with it, the semantics will be well-formed. 
If a predicate calls for an argument and no argument combines with it, it 
will be ill-formed. If there is an argument that does not serve as the argu￾ment of any predicate in the semantics, the result will also be ill-formed. 
All the work of the θ-Criterion is done by the semantics.”
A similar sentiment can be found in Myler and Mali 2021:3 (see also Harley 
2011:430):
(19)  “Also, the Theta-Criterion has no status in this conception: all that is 
required is that the structure compose successfully in the semantics (Full 
Interpretation; see also Baker 1997:121–122; Heim and Kratzer 1998: 
53–58).”
Bruening and others try to make the case that the Theta-Criterion can be 
eliminated and replaced by the assumptions of formal semantics. Nothing 
more needs to be said. However, I will argue that analyses that do not assume 
the Theta-Criterion (e.g., the analysis of the passive in Bruening 2013) make 
the wrong empirical predictions with respect to the distribution of reflexives, 
reciprocals, pronouns, Helke expressions, and secondary predicates (see 
chapters 2 and 3). Therefore, the chapters of this monograph can be seen as a 
direct empirical argument for the Theta-Criterion. I return to a discussion of 
the tension between the Merge-based approach to argument structure and for￾mal semantics in chapter 10.
A direct consequence of AC/TC is the following (see (7) above):10 Chapter 1
(20) Implicit arguments are syntactically realized.
Here is the argument that (20) follows from the Argument Criterion in 
(10). Consider again the passive in (1). In the active in (1a), John is exter￾nally merged as Spec vP (by assumption). This shows that little v is an 
argument-introducing head (by (10a)). I assume that little v is also present in 
the passive (on the basis of semantic entailments and the possibility of a by￾phrase). Furthermore, there is no special passive flavor of little v. Rather, the 
same little v is used in the passive and active. Therefore, in the short pas￾sive in (1c), little v must introduce an argument (by (10b)). Therefore, in 
(1c), there must be a syntactically present, but phonologically null, implicit 
argument.
In the above argument, I have claimed that little v is also present in the pas￾sive, based on semantic entailments and the possibility of the by-phrase. A 
version of this assumption is shared by all the analyses considered in this mono￾graph. For example, for Bruening (2013:22), VoiceP introduces the external 
argument in the active, and this same VoiceP is present in the passive.
Here is the closely parallel argument that (20) follows from the Theta￾Criterion. Consider again the passive in (1). In the active in (1a), John is 
externally merged as Spec vP (by assumption). This shows that Spec vP is a 
theta-position. I assume that little v is also present in the passive (on the basis 
of semantic entailments and the possibility of a by-phrase). Furthermore, 
there is no special passive flavor of little v. Rather, the same little v is used in 
the passive and active. Therefore, in the short passive in (1c), Spec vP is also 
a theta-position. Therefore, in (1c), there must be a syntactically present, but 
phonologically null, implicit argument occupying Spec vP.
In light of these arguments, consider the sentence “The toy broke.” A 
reviewer notes: “Given how we conceive of the world there must be some cause 
to the toy breaking, so there is some kind of implicit agent or cause. Yet I do not 
think there are grounds to conclude that this implicit agent or cause is syntacti￾cally represented . . .”. The reviewer’s example is important. When I say implicit 
arguments are syntactically projected, what exactly do I mean by “implicit argu￾ment”? I agree with the reviewer’s judgments and conclude that implica￾tions alone are not sufficient to justify the projection of an implicit external 
argument.
For the reviewer’s example (“The toy broke”), I find the following accept￾able: “It broke by itself/on its own.” This could be said if something about the 
material or technological composition of the toy was defective, and it just 
stopped working. But I find a clear contrast with “It was broken by itself/on its A Merge-Based Approach to Argument Structure 11
own.” The latter sentence seems to me to be gibberish, because it is contradic￾tory. In other words, the toy cannot break on its own if somebody breaks it.
So, these considerations show that we need to draw a distinction between 
an implicature based on real-world knowledge (which can often be canceled), 
and an entailment based on syntactic structure (in this case, a syntactically 
projected external argument in the short passive) that cannot be canceled. See 
also the related discussion of complement deletion in section 4.7.
As I will show in chapter 4, the principle in (20) covers the implicit argu￾ment in the short passive, but other cases of implicit arguments as well (see 
Elbourne 2021 and Bhatt and Pancheva 2017 for surveys). Consider the fol￾lowing examples:
(21) a.  Libertarian doctrine never advocates the promotion of oneself at the 
expense of others.
b. Letters to oneself compose quickly.
(Stroik 1992:129)
c. It was upsetting to see herself in the newspaper.
(See Landau 2010 and Epstein 1984 on control by experiencers.)
The prediction of (20) is that all such implicit arguments are syntactically 
represented. In (21a), the noun promotion has an implicit external argument. 
We know that the implicit argument is syntactically present since it binds the 
reflexive oneself. Similarly, in (21b), the middle verb compose has an implicit 
external argument whose syntactic presence is felt as the antecedent for the 
reflexive oneself. Lastly, in (21c), upsetting has an implicit argument that con￾trols PRO in the infinitival clause.
An important question is whether all such implicit arguments have the 
same syntactic and semantic properties or whether there are subtypes of 
implicit arguments. For example, is there a unified theory of licensing for all 
the implicit arguments in (21)? Are the implicit arguments in (21) syntacti￾cally active to the same extent? Do all implicit arguments have the same phi￾features? I will return to these and other questions in chapter 4, where I 
present a new theory of implicit arguments consistent with the AC/TC.
Another consequence of the AC/TC is that passive by-phrases are exter￾nally merged into Spec vP. More generally, the following principle holds:
(22) KPs are arguments (and hence obey the AC/TC).
A KP is a projection with a semantically vacuous head (e.g., passive by, 
dative to, some uses of of   ) that is part of the extended projection of the DP. 
In the context of the passive, (22) makes the claim that the by-phrase is an 12 Chapter 1
argument (see (3) above). In the active in (1a), John is externally merged as Spec 
vP (by assumption). This shows that Spec vP is a theta-position. Therefore, in 
the passive in (1c), Spec vP is also a theta-position. Therefore, in (1c), the by￾phrase is externally merged into Spec vP (satisfying the AC/TC).
Lastly, this monograph will discuss the relation between voice and argu￾ment structure with the following conclusion (contra Kratzer 1996; Pylk￾känen 2008a; Bruening 2013; Legate 2014; Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and 
Schäfer 2015; and Sigurðsson and Wood 2021):
(23) Voice is independent of the projection of arguments.
Although I only discuss passive voice in this monograph, I allow the for￾mulation in (23) to cover all kinds of voice (active, middle, nonactive, anti￾passive, inverse, etc.). Basically, arguments are projected in exactly the same 
way in the active and the passive. Based on the empirical evidence I give, it 
is not the case that the external argument is projected in the active, while 
remaining unprojected in the passive (contra Bruening 2013). Therefore, 
voice is independent from the projection of external arguments, and more 
generally, it is independent from argument structure. Voice and argument 
structure are two independent but interacting systems. They should not be 
conflated.
Why is voice independent of argument structure? Why doesn’t UG allow 
for the external argument to be projected in Spec VoiceP (allowing for many 
different kinds of interactions between voice and the projection of the exter￾nal argument)? I argue that the AC/TC severely limits the way in which argu￾ments can be projected. The kinds of analyses proposed in the literature 
involving VoiceP projecting an external argument violate the AC/TC. I return 
to a detailed discussion in chapter 8.
See chapter 11 for a more detailed exposition of the principles of argument 
structure argued for in this monograph.
1.4 Overview of Monograph
In chapter 2, I investigate the phi-features of the implicit argument in the 
short passive in English, using the distribution of reflexives (Principle A), pro￾nouns (Principle B), and bound pronouns (Helke expressions) as diagnostics. 
I show that there are three cases: (a) null versions of generic one and you
(dubbed progen), (b) a null existentially bound pro with no-phi features (dubbed 
proun where un stands for unspecified), and (c) a null definite pro with any 
combination of phi-features (dubbed prodef). This chapter supports the claim 
that the implicit argument in the short passive is syntactically projected A Merge-Based Approach to Argument Structure 13
(contra Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and Schäfer 2015; Bruening 2013; Leg￾ate 2014; and Pylkkänen 2008a).
In chapter 3, I discuss the distribution of secondary predicates in the short 
passive. Based on a systematic discussion of the existing literature, and new 
data from the Internet, I establish that secondary predicates can modify the 
implicit argument in the short passive (contra Pylkkänen 2008a). Chapters 2 
and 3 together show that many different tests (the distribution of reflexives, 
reciprocals, pronouns, Helke expressions, and secondary predicates) converge 
on the same result: there is a syntactically projected implicit external argu￾ment in the short passive in English.
In chapter 4, I embed the results of chapters 2 and 3 in a general theory of 
implicit arguments. I argue that implicit arguments are syntactically projected, 
including implicit arguments with evaluative predicates, middles, nominaliza￾tions, and passives. I propose that implicit arguments are covert pronominals 
(pro) lacking a structural Case feature. Using the wedge argument, I argue that 
syntactically projected implicit arguments are made available by UG.
In chapter 5, I provide cross-linguistic support for the theory of implicit 
arguments from three African languages: Buli (Sulemana 2022), Oshiwambo 
(Ndapo 2022), and Ewe (Gotah 2022). Reporting on recent work, I discuss 
how in the short passive in Buli and Oshiwambo, and in the Ewe middle, the 
implicit external argument must be syntactically projected.
In chapter 6, I discuss the by-phrase in the passive. A common position 
taken in recent literature on the passive is that by-phrases are adjuncts (Bru￾ening 2013; Legate 2014). Chapter 6 shows that passive by-phrases differ from 
adjuncts in terms of binding phenomena. From these facts, I conclude that 
by-phrases are not adjuncts, but rather arguments. I briefly report on data 
from Angelopoulos, Collins, and Terzi 2020 on modern Greek that reach 
the same conclusion. These conclusions dovetail with the conclusions of 
chapters 2–5 by showing that the passive always has a syntactically projected 
external argument (whether or not a by-phrase is present).
Chapter 7 combines the results of the preceding chapters and gives full 
derivations of several passive sentences, stating clearly all the technical 
assumptions and discussing several differences from Collins 2005a.
In chapter 8, I compare two distinct conceptions of VoiceP. In one concep￾tion, the external argument is projected (externally merged) into Spec VoiceP 
(Kratzer 1996, and much related work). In the other conception, VoiceP plays 
no role in the projection of arguments, but determines how the arguments are 
realized in various A-positions. I dub these two theories the projection theory 
and the realization theory, respectively. I present several empirical reasons for 
preferring the realization theory. Basically, since the external argument is 14 Chapter 1
projected in the same way in the active and the passive, there is no reason 
to assume that the external argument is externally merged in Spec VoiceP 
(where its occurrence would naturally depend on the particular kind of voice 
head). Furthermore, I show that the projection theory is inconsistent with the 
AC/TC.
In chapter 9, I give an analysis of the dative alternation, which I analyze as 
a kind of “inner passive.” On the basis of traditional c-command tests, I show 
that the prepositional dative is derived from an underlying structure where 
the goal is projected higher than the theme. Just as with the passive, I motivate 
a smuggling analysis, where a VP containing the theme is moved over the 
goal. I present additional evidence for this analysis from Hallman 2015.
In chapter 10, I discuss the tension between the Merge-based theory of 
argument structure and a theory of argument structure constrained only by 
formal semantics. First, I respond to Heim and Kratzer’s (1998) critique of the 
Theta-Criterion and point out some problems with their arguments. Second, I 
discuss a range of cases in the syntax/semantics literature where people have 
relied heavily on formal semantics to explain argument structure phenomena. 
Third, I discuss the status of UTAH in the Merge-based framework. Lastly, I 
outline the main conceptual problems with adopting formal semantics as the 
sole basis for a theory of argument structure.
In chapter 11, I summarize the principles discussed throughout this 
monograph.2.1 Introduction
It has been claimed in the generative syntax literature that the implicit argu￾ment of a short passive can bind a reflexive pronoun. Some cases follow:
(1) a. Such privileges should be kept to oneself.
(Baker, Johnson, and Roberts 1989:228; Roberts 1987:162)
b. Damaging testimony is always given about oneself in secret trials.
(Roberts 1987:162)
Because reflexive pronouns are subject to Principle A of the Binding The￾ory, these examples suggest that the implicit argument of the short passive is 
syntactically present. In this account, the implicit argument of the passive 
verb kept binds the reflexive oneself.
Principles A and B of the Binding Theory are stated for convenience 
below. I use the standard formulation from Sportiche, Koopman, and Sta￾bler 2014:
(2) a. Principle A: An anaphor must be bound in its domain.
b. Principle B: A pronoun cannot be bound in its domain.
Such a conclusion about the sentences in (1) is contrary to recent claims 
by Bruening (2013); Legate (2014); and Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and 
Schäfer (2015) that there is no syntactically represented implicit argument in 
the short passive. Rather, in these theories, the implicit argument is not syn￾tactically projected, but is semantically existentially closed.
Some quotes illustrating these claims follow:
(3)  “I propose that passive is a head (Pass) that selects a projection of Voice 
that has not yet projected its external argument.”
(Bruening 2013:22)
2 The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument16 Chapter 2
(4)  “In chapter 2, I argued for a new analysis of the implicit initiator in pas￾sives: this is present on the Voice head, both as a T-role, introduced but 
not assigned to any DP, and as features restricting this T-position.”
(Legate 2014:141)
But the data in (1) are incompatible with such analyses. Because a reflexive 
pronoun requires a syntactic antecedent, the passive verbs in (1a,b) need syn￾tactically present external arguments. For example, in (1a), oneself is bound 
by the implicit external argument, which is syntactically projected as pro (see 
chapter 4 on the general theory of implicit arguments).
Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and Schäfer (2015:131) suggest for data like 
(1) that the reflexive is a logophor (see also Reed 2011; Schäfer 2012:214, fn. 2):
(5) “the English data might also find a quite different explanation, as they could 
arguably involve a logophor instead of an ordinary reflexive pronoun.”
In section 2.8, I argue against the claim that the reflexives in (1a,b) can be 
analyzed as logophors. For the moment, I point out that the reflexive in (1a) is 
an inherent reflexive and so cannot be analyzed as a logophor or exempt ana￾phor (see Büring 2005:22 for a discussion of inherent reflexives). The expres￾sion to keep privileges to requires that the complement of the preposition to be 
coindexed with the external argument. Because of this requirement, the only 
possible complement of to is a reflexive pronoun. For example, substituting a 
nonreflexive pronoun would meet the coindexation requirement, but would 
violate Principle B, as shown in (6b). Substituting an R-expression for the 
reflexive, as in (6c), would violate the coindexation requirement.
(6) a.  John1
 keeps such privileges to himself1
.
b. *John1
 keeps such privileges to him1
.
c. *John1
 keeps such privileges to Mary2.
The binding of the reflexive pronoun is entirely parallel in (1a) and (6a). In 
(1a) and (6a), the reflexive must be locally bound by the external argument 
(because it is an inherent reflexive): it is not a logophoric or an exempt ana￾phor. In (1a) (as in (6a)) requirements of both the reflexive pronoun (subject to 
Principle A) and the expression to keep privileges to (requiring coindexation) 
are satisfied if there is a syntactically projected implicit external argument 
binding the reflexive pronoun.
But the presence of a syntactically present implicit argument in short pas￾sives raises the question of what the possible phi-features of that implicit 
argument are. In this chapter, I sort through the various possibilities and show 
that there are three cases: (a) null pro versions of generic one/you (progen), (b) 
a null pro lacking phi-features (proun), and (c) a null definite pro with any 
combination of phi-features (prodef).The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument 17
The rest of the chapter is structured as follows. Section 2.2 gives further 
generic examples, such as those involving the reflexive oneself. I dub the 
generic implicit argument progen. Section 2.3 discusses existential implicit argu￾ments. The main claim in this section is that the existential implicit argument 
is a null pronoun pro that lacks phi-features, which I dub proun (for unspeci￾fied). Section 2.4 discusses a new class of cases that has not, to my knowl￾edge, been previously discussed, where the implicit argument is a definite 
pronoun, which I dub prodef. Section 2.5 shows the implicit argument in the 
passive can bind reciprocals. Section 2.6 argues that the implicit argument of 
the passive can be bound. Section 2.7 addresses the issue of whether there are 
any animacy restrictions on the implicit argument of the passive and con￾cludes that there are no such restrictions. Section 2.8 gives five arguments 
against analyzing the reflexives in (1a,b) as exempt anaphors with a logoph￾oric interpretation. Section 2.9 is the conclusion.
2.2 Generic pro
It is relatively easy to find examples involving oneself like (1a,b) on the Inter￾net. A few such examples follow (on the general methodology of using the 
Internet for syntactic research, see the appendix):
(7) Increased privacy and individuality result in more time spent on oneself.
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2452315116000035)
(8) Anything done for another is done for oneself.
(https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Talk:Pope_John_Paul_II)
(9)  Depression is anger turned against oneself.
(https://www.slideshare.net/saita1991/mood-disorders-48816847)
(10)  An e-mail sent to oneself as a “memo to file” is considered a university 
record if it documents university business.
(http://ipo.info.yorku.ca/tool-and-tips/tip-sheet-5-email-management/)
(11)  We know that, in general, humor aimed at oneself is well received by others.
(https://www.humormatters.com/articles/crisis.htm)
(12)  Therefore, certain private matters must be kept to oneself and remain 
untouched.
(https://dokumen.pub/the-zaza-kurds-of-turkey-a-middle-eastern
-minority-in-a-globalised-society-9780755609376-9781845118754.html)
(13)  If feelings and emotions and fears and frustrations are to be kept inside 
oneself, those emotions are often also kept away from God.
(https://books.google.com/books?isbn=1929626177)18 Chapter 2
(14)  and when that feeling overflows and cannot be kept inside oneself 
anymore
(https://livinginsentences.tumblr.com/)
These examples are all acceptable to me. And in each case, the antecedent 
of the reflexive is clearly the implicit argument of the short passive, as indi￾cated by the interpretation. For example, in (10) the sender (the implicit argu￾ment) and the receiver (oneself ) are the same person. The sheer number of 
such examples, and the ease with which they are found on the Internet, makes 
it impossible to claim that (1a,b) are infrequent fixed expressions (and hence 
ignorable when constructing a theory of UG). Rather, the examples in (7–14) 
suggest that principles of UG must make it possible for the implicit argument 
in the passive to bind a reflexive.
Some of the previous examples are reduced relatives modifying nouns. A 
reviewer suggests that the use of such examples may give rise to complica￾tions. Commenting on (9), the reviewer points out: “it is not out of the ques￾tion that the head noun has a covert possessor argument, something like ‘pro’s 
depression is pro’s anger turned against oneself’, with the covert possessor 
binding the anaphor oneself, rather than a null nominal in Spec vP, as the 
author assumes.” Because I give examples of both regular passives (e.g., (8)) 
and reduced relatives, I don’t think there is a problem with the data. Also, in 
some cases it is easy to paraphrase without a reduced relative (“If an e-mail is 
sent to oneself as a memo file”).
What phi-features are involved in these kinds of examples? First, oneself is 
singular (as indicated by the use of the form oneself, rather than oneselves). 
Second, it is third person (with a semantic connection to the speaker, as 
described in Moltmann 2006). Third, it is human and animate. Fourth, it has 
a feature [+generic] (following Moltmann 2006:262; see also Rizzi 
1986:512), which I will analyze as a kind of phi-feature (because it determines 
the form of the pronoun one). Moltmann claims that “formally this means that 
generic one as well as arbitrary PRO should carry the feature [+gn] as a for￾mal agreement feature which will require those pronominal elements to be 
bound by a generic operator carrying that feature as well (but as an interpre￾table feature).” I follow Moltmann in all these assumptions.
According to Moltmann (2006:260): “Generic one, we can thus say, acts as 
a variable ranging over individuals, a variable bound not by a universal quanti￾fier, but rather by a generic quantifier that allows for exceptions and has itself 
modal force. Without going into any further detail about the nature of that 
quantifier, let us simply say it is the generic quantifier Gn as commonly used in 
the linguistic semantic literature on generic sentences (cf. Krifka et al. 1995).”The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument 19
Putting these ideas together, I assume that the implicit argument in the 
short passive in these cases is a null version of the pronoun one, which I will 
call progen (on null generic pronouns, see Rizzi 1986; on “pronouns with arbi￾trary reference,” see Chomsky 1986:117; on the syntax and semantics of 
impersonal pronouns cross-linguistically, see Fenger 2018). In interpretation, 
this null pronoun is very closely related to PROarb (arb stands for arbitrary) 
from the syntax literature on nonobligatory control.
(15) Generic Implicit Argument (progen)
a. progen is a DP.
b. Phi-features: third person, singular, human, animate, generic
c. Intepretation: progen is of type <e> and is bound by a generic operator 
Gen.
A partial tree diagram for examples like those in (1a) is shown below:
(16) vP
DP1 v’
progen
v VP
…. to oneself1…
Crucially, the reflexive and the implicit argument agree in phi-features. I 
assume that this agreement is governed by the Pronominal Agreement Condi￾tion (PAC):
(17) The Pronominal Agreement Condition
An anaphor agrees in phi-features with its antecedent.
(See Collins and Postal 2012:92; Sportiche, Koopman, and Stabler 
2014:168.)
The reflexive oneself in (16) is locally bound and agrees in phi-features 
with its antecedent. That is why (1a) is grammatical. See Collins and Postal 
(2012) for discussion of apparent counterexamples to (17).
The second-person singular pronoun you occurs in generic contexts as a 
colloquial substitute for one. There are examples that correspond to those in 
(7–14) using second-person reflexives:
(18) Time spent on yourself is time well spent.
(https://carsontate.com/work-life-balance-how-to-balance-your-life-like
-the-four-seasons/)20 Chapter 2
(19) Some things are better kept to yourself.
(https://www.morningcoach.com/blog/what-you-should-keep-to-yourself)
(20)  In the case of an e-mail sent to yourself, it decides to show it in Inbox, 
even if its true location is in Sent Mail.
(https://github.com/nylas/nylas-mail/issues/2456)
Like earlier one examples, these reflexives cannot be analyzed as exempt 
anaphors. First, example (19) involves the fixed expression keep x to self that 
does not allow a logophoric or exempt anaphor (see the discussion of (6)).
Second, replacing the reflexive with a nonreflexive pronoun yields a differ￾ent interpretation, which would not be predicted if the reflexives were exempt 
anaphors. Consider the result of replacing yourself by you in example (20) 
(see also (49)):
(21) In the case of an e-mail sent to you
In (21) the sender of the e-mail is different from the recipient. This clearly 
contrasts with the interpretation of (20), where the sender is the same person 
that yourself refers to. The disjoint reference in (21) follows from Principle B 
if there is a syntactically projected implicit argument: *[In the case of an 
e-mail sent pro1 to you1 ].
Because of these examples, we can adjust (15) to also include second-person 
singular generic pronouns. More concretely, I assume that there is a colloquial 
generic operator that has second-person singular features. That generic opera￾tor binds an implicit argument with second-person singular features.
2.3 Existential pro
Now consider the following nongeneric examples of passives:
(22) a. The proposal was criticized at the meeting.
b. The package was sent this morning.
c. John was killed this morning.
Example (22a) can be true if either a man or a woman criticized the proposal. 
Furthermore, it can also be true if either one person or more than one person 
criticized the proposal. Similarly, I can say (22b) to my boss if I myself have 
sent the package (with my boss understanding that nobody but me could 
have sent the package). So (22b) does not exclude the speaker from being the 
sender (see also Bianchi 2015:6). Sentence (22c) is consistent either with a report 
of a murder (animate agent) or death by a natural force (inanimate causer). 
These sentences show that the existential implicit argument is either ambiguous 
in its feature specifications for phi-features—person, number, gender, and The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument 21
animacy—or unspecified for those feature values. In this section, I will argue 
that the existential implicit argument is unspecified for phi-feature values.
These observations are consistent with McCawley’s (1988:82) remarks 
about implicit arguments in passives:
(23) “If reduced passives are to be analyzed as having underlying subjects, the 
underlying subject must be something more indefinite than any expression 
of English is: it must be neutral with regard to whether it refers to human 
or non-human entities, and with regard to whether its referent is the same 
as or different from other individuals mentioned in the discourse. I will 
invoke a deux ex machina at this point and simply assume that such an 
element, hereby christened UNSPEC, is available, and will set up deep 
structures having UNSPEC as subject in the case of reduced passives.”
I will call the existential implicit argument in short passives proun (for 
unspecified) (partly following Johnson and Postal (1980)).
As Grinder (1971:186) points out, there is a striking difference between the 
implicit argument of a passive and an overt indefinite. The following sen￾tences are based on his examples:
(24) a. Someone1
 stole the painting, and he1
 left his fingerprints on the wall.
b. The painting was stolen by someone1
, and he1
 left his fingerprints on 
the wall.
c. The painting was stolen, and he left his fingerprints on the wall.
Although someone can be the antecedent of he in (24a,b), it is much more 
difficult for the implicit argument in the passive to be the antecedent of he in 
(24c). Grinder (1971) explains this difference in terms of his Chaining Con￾straint, which informally says that if an indefinite is the antecedent of a pro￾noun, then the indefinite cannot undergo deletion (where implicit arguments 
are assumed to be indefinites that undergo deletion).
The contrast can be replicated with intrasentential anaphora:
(25) a.  If somebody1
 sends an e-mail to his1 mother, how long does it take to 
arrive?
b. If an e-mail is sent to his mother, how long does it take to arrive?
Example (25b) cannot have the same interpretation as (25a), suggesting that 
the implicit argument of the passive cannot bind the possessive pronoun his in 
(25b).
What accounts for the constraint illustrated in (24) and (25)?
Koenig (1998), Koenig and Mauner (2000), and Creissels (2008) (see also 
Kayne 1975:196, fn. 154 on intraclausal anaphora) notice a similar constraint 
on the impersonal pronoun on when it is used existentially in French. In fact, 22 Chapter 2
Koenig (1998:243) himself makes this connection: “I close this section by 
pointing out the strong similarities between French ultra-indefinite on and 
(prototypical) short passives.” It is possible that the explanation I give for (24) 
and (25) in terms of the PAC in (17) can be carried over to the anaphoric pos￾sibilities with French on.
I suggest that the facts in (24) and (25) can be explained in terms of the 
PAC in (17) on the assumption that proun, the existential implicit argument in 
the short passive, does not have any phi-features (see Bianchi 2015:8, which 
reaches the conclusion that the implicit argument of the passive is not speci￾fied for participant features). The relevant part of the structure of (25b) will be 
the following (I assume proun linearly follows the participle, just as an overt 
by-phrase would):
(26) *If an e-mail is sent pro1
 to his1 mother
But because proun does not have phi-features, (26) violates (17), requiring 
phi-feature agreement between the possessive pronoun his (third-person mas￾culine singular) and its antecedent proun.
I assume that proun’s lack of phi-features is the reason that it can be used 
in such a wide variety of situations, as described in (22, 23). proun lacks phi￾features because it is bound by an unrestricted existential operator (on the 
exact implementation of these ideas, see section 4.5). The assumptions about 
proun are summarized here:
(27) Existential Implicit Argument (proun):
a. proun is a DP.
b. Phi-features: none
c. Interpretation: proun is of type <e> and is bound by an existential 
operator.
See Fenger 2018, which claims that impersonal pronouns in Germanic that 
can take an existential interpretation do not have phi-features. See Holmberg 
and Phimsawat 2017 for the claim that there is a generic null subject pronoun 
without phi-features.
An alternative theory of the existential interpretation of the passive is that 
there is no syntactically realized implicit argument at all. I will call this the 
nonprojection theory. In this case, Spec vP is empty, but it is existentially 
closed. Such a theory would automatically account for Grinder’s (1971) gener￾alization. Because Spec vP is empty, there is no antecedent for a pronoun. I 
reject this analysis because it is not compatible with the other cases discussed 
in sections 4.2 (generic implicit arguments) and 4.4 (definite implicit argu￾ments). In my analysis, in all cases there is a syntactically projected DP as the 
implicit argument.The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument 23
Another reason to reject the nonprojection theory is that proun plays a role 
in obligatory control:
(28)  Once it had been decided to build a walled enclosure, new possibilities 
opened up.
(www.paulgough.org/places_of_peace/sites.htm)
In this example, the implicit external argument of decided controls PRO of 
the infinitival complement of decided. Furthermore, the implicit argument 
seems to be existential (as opposed to generic or definite). If obligatory con￾trol is a syntactic phenomenon, then this example argues against the nonpro￾jection theory of implicit arguments. See section 4.7 for more on control by 
implicit arguments.
2.4 Definite pro
Helke (1973) investigates a class of possessor pronouns that have the require￾ment of being bound locally. Consider the following examples of the idiomatic 
expression to lose one’s mind (see Helke 1973:11):
(29) a. *The lady hopes that the gentleman won’t lose her mind.
b. *The man who found the girl lost her mind.
c. *The girl’s father lost her mind.
d. *The girl and the boy lost her mind.
Example (29a) shows that there is a locality (clausemate) constraint on the 
relation between her and its antecedent the lady. Examples (29b,c,d) show that 
there is a c-command condition. For example, in (29c), the possessor DP the 
girl does not c-command her, and the example is unacceptable. I will call 
such pronouns bound possessor pronouns.
From this point of view, consider the expression on my own in the following 
examples:
(30) a.  I did the homework on my own.
b. *I did the homework on John’s own.
c. *Mary said I did the homework on her own.
d. *John’s mother did the homework on his own.
e. *Somebody did the homework on my own.
f. *It rained on my own.
Example (30a) shows the use of on my own. Example (30b) shows that the 
possessor must be a pronoun bound by the subject. Example (30c) shows a 
locality effect: (30c) is only acceptable if on her own modifies the matrix VP, 
not the embedded VP. Example (30d) illustrates a c-command effect: his is 24 Chapter 2
not c-commanded by John, and so the sentence is unacceptable. In (30e,f), 
there is no possible local antecedent for the possessor.
So, the following syntactic generalization holds:
(31)  In the expression on X’s own, X is a locally bound pronominal possessor.
Given this condition, consider the following example:
(32)  A:  Did you get help on this assignment?
B: No, it was done on my own.
While B’s response might be a bit awkward, it is grammatical. It may improve 
if certain modifiers such as completely or all are added before on my own. In an 
informal Facebook survey, out of eight native speakers of English, four said it 
was fine, and four others rejected it to varying degrees (ranging from ? to *). 
Furthermore, such examples are easy to find on the Internet. These facts sug￾gest that there are people for whom (32B) is completely acceptable. However, 
there is definitely some variation that would be worth investigating.
Assuming that (32B) is acceptable, given condition (31), there must be an 
implicit argument binding the possessor my. Therefore, by condition (17), 
that implicit argument must be a first-person singular pronoun.
Such examples do not seem any worse with other person-number 
combinations:
(33)  a.  It was done on your own, right?
b.  It was done on his own, right?
c. Homework done on one’s own is never easy.
Here are related examples from the Internet, all of which I find acceptable:
(34)  I’m not even going to lie, but the solo has been the hardest to create and 
perform as everything was done on my own.
(https://www.mandy.com/aa/news/dancer-yukiko-masui-interview-hip
-hop-contemporary)
(35)  This was done on my own time and with no reimbursement for my 
gasoline.
(https://books.google.com/books?isbn=311097391X)
(36)  Occasionally, he was able to study formally with an accomplished artist, 
but much of his training was done on his own.
(https://helpinghandhomeschool.com/vincent-van-gogh-artist-study
-activities/)
(37)  This work was written on my own during the summer and fall of 1963.
(www.smcq.qc.ca/smcq/en/oeuvres/216/87.php)The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument 25
(38)  First, the research framework was created on my own.
(https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/634/hse_ethesis
_12502.pdf?isAllowed=y&sequence=1)
The distribution of bound possessor pronouns in the short passive shows 
that there is another kind of implicit argument, described in (39). I use the term 
definite to distinguish these cases from the generic and existential implicit 
arguments discussed in sections 2.2 and 2.3.
(39)  Definite Implicit Argument (prodef):
a. prodef is a DP.
b.  Phi-features: any non-null combination of phi-features (other than 
[+generic])
c. Interpretation: prodef is of type <e>.
But if such definite pronominal implicit arguments are possible, can they 
bind reflexive pronouns? Consider first the following examples involving first-
 and second-person reflexives:
(40)  E-mails sent to myself go to my junk folder.
(https://forums.xfinity.com/conversations/email/emails-sent-to-myself
-go-to-my-junk-folder/6196a96663ac0d5bf9faee94)
(41)  Finding ways to balance time spent on myself and time spent on others is 
hard.
(https://www.trainerroad.com/forum/t/explaining-to-the-mrs-mr/22423
/17)
(42)  Most of this blog is self-deprecating humor aimed at myself as much as 
others.
(http://eveoganda.blogspot.com/2016/01/rixx-in-local.html)
(43)  Please understand that my family does not excuse her mistakes. She 
knows she made them, and she knows that she should not have gotten 
pregnant so young. I would really appreciate it if any negative feelings 
you have toward teen mothers were kept to yourselves.
(https://www.disboards.com/threads/the-multi-reason-special-family
-wdw-trip.1800085/)
It is also possible to find third-person reflexives bound by the implicit argu￾ment of the passive:
(44)  In a blistering farewell e-mail sent to himself, Jones defended his stance 
against further cuts.
(http://www.notthelatimes.com/fired.html)26 Chapter 2
(45)  He is so self-involved he could not even think of a title for a song dedi￾cated to himself other than his own name.
(https://www.thequiz.com/finish-the-lyrics-disney-edition/)
(46)  Gore delivered the message with a mix of seriousness, humor aimed at 
himself, and measured alarm.
(https://newspaperarchive.com/santa-ana-evening-blade-aug-28-1996
-p-13/)
(47)  Rumor has it that Mike Tyson bought over 200 cars throughout his 
career, totaling $4.5 million. Many were bought for himself and others 
as gifts for his friends and family.
(https://gazettereview.com/2016/06/mike-tyson-net-worth/)
(48)  His interest in hockey, soccer, and chess was never displayed and was 
kept to himself.
(www.biography.co.in/justin-bieber-biohraphy.html)
I did an informal survey of seven people on these sentences. I asked them 
to rate the sentences from 1 (acceptable) to 5 (unacceptable). Every sentence 
had an average less than 2: ((40): 1.7), ((41): 1.7), ((42): 1), ((43): 1), ((44): 1.4), 
((45): 1), ((46): 1.1), ((47): 1), and ((48): 1.1). Furthermore, for every sentence 
and every speaker, the most natural interpretation was that the implicit argu￾ment binds the reflexive.
The implicit argument in the passive also gives rise to Principle B effects. 
For example, consider the following example (see also (21)):
(49)  In a blistering farewell e-mail sent to him (compare to (44))
In (49), the most natural interpretation is that the sender (the implicit argu￾ment) is not the recipient (him). This is exactly the expected interpretation if 
there is an implicit argument giving rise to a Principle B effect:
(50)  *In a blistering farewell e-mail sent pro1
 to him1
Note that in these cases it is not possible to describe the reflexive argument 
as logophoric. For example, in (47) the implicit argument is not describing the 
thoughts of Mike Tyson. Rather, the sentence describes the thoughts of the 
narrator discussing Mike Tyson. Consider also example (48), which once 
again uses the fixed expression keep x to self. This expression does not allow 
a logophoric or exempt use (see the discussion of (6)). Furthermore, the Helke 
expression on my own does not seem to allow any long-distance binding at all 
(unlike reflexives).
A similar test for the implicit argument can be found in the following 
examples from Stroik 2000:148, example (15):The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument 27
(51)  a.  John1
’s first novel was translated into Polish by himself1
.
b. Pat1
 told me that her1 father was fired by herself1
.
c. Such things are to be done by yourself.
Stroik argues convincingly that the by-phrases here are what he calls agent￾related manner adverbials that you find in nonpassive examples like those in 
(52). The presence of all in the examples in (52) is an important test distin￾guishing the manner adverbial from the passive by-phrase:
(52)  a.  I did it (all) by myself.
b.  Mary translated the book into Polish (all) by herself.
As Stroik shows, the reflexive in these agent-related manner adverbials 
obeys Principle A of the Binding Theory (see page 151, example (22)):
(53)  a.  *John did it (all) by myself.
b. I
1
 did it (all) by myself1
.
c.  *Mary wrote it (all) by yourself.
d. You1
 wrote it (all) by yourself1
.
e.  *Mary’s father translated the book (all) by herself.
f.  Mary1
 translated the book all by herself1
.
(151, example (22))
In (53a,c) there is a mismatch in phi-features between the pronoun and its 
antecedent. And the reason that (53e) is ungrammatical is that the reflexive 
does not have a c-commanding antecedent. In this explanation, I employ the 
standard Binding Theory, in contrast to Stroik, who makes reference to Rein￾hart and Reuland 1993. The difference does not matter for the points that I am 
raising.
Stroik goes on to argue that the reflexives in (51) take the implicit argument 
in the passive as their antecedent, with the following representations:
(54)  a.  John’s first novel was translated into Polish PRO by himself.
b.  She told me her father was fired PRO by herself.
c. Such things are to be done PRO by yourself.
(155, example (24))
Crucially, Stroik’s conclusions only hold if the implicit argument of the 
passive is like a definite pronoun with the phi-feature sets third-person mas￾culine singular (see (51a)) and third-person feminine singular (see (51b)). In 
principle, the second-person singular phi-features in (51c) are ambiguous 
between an indexical use and a colloquial generic use. Stroik’s paradigm in 
(51), based on agent-related manner adverbials, strongly supports the conclu￾sions based on the other tests discussed in this chapter.28 Chapter 2
Putting together the results from Helke expressions, from reflexives and 
pronouns, and from agent-oriented manner adverbials, I conclude that the 
implicit argument in this case can be a null pro with any non-null combina￾tion of phi-features (except [+generic]). A partial syntactic tree for an example 
like (44) would be
(55) vP
DP1 v’
pro[3SG]
v VP
….to himself1…
Putting together the results of section 2.3 and the current section, the pre￾diction about the interpretation of these reflexive pronouns is the following:
(56) a. An existential implicit argument cannot bind a reflexive, or 
equivalently:
b.  If a reflexive is bound by an implicit argument, the implicit argument 
is interpreted as generic (bound by a generic operator) or definite.
Recall that the existential implicit argument has no phi-features (27), and 
so it cannot be the antecedent of a pronoun that has phi-features.
It is clear in all of these cases that the implicit argument is not understood 
existentially. For example, in (47), himself refers to the buyer, who is Mike 
Tyson.
2.5 Reciprocals
It is easy to find examples similar to the examples already presented, where 
the implicit argument binds a reciprocal:
(57)  Unfortunately, the extra work of parenting a child with ADHD can use 
up parents’ time and energy that could otherwise be spent on each other.
(https://impactparents.com/blog/adhd/adhd-makes-sex-even-more
-important-four-big-ideas/)
(58)  Enjoy shared experiences which excite you both. Shared experiences 
go a long way in bolstering relationships. That could be a reasonable 
dinner at a meaningful place or going to a museum or play which you 
both enjoy. Or, maybe it’s a glass of wine after putting the kids to bed. The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument 29
Remember the point is to be together, because time spent on each other 
is a valuable gift in and of itself.
(https://www.carinekeenanmft.com/blog)
(59)  My friend recently showed me a WhatsApp conversation between her 
and a friend of hers. It was essentially a series of voice notes sent to each 
other at disparate times of the day.
(https://medium.com/atta-girl/4-reasons-why-switching-over-to-voice
-notes-is-a-must-9467e94cd7ce)
In all three examples, the implicit argument binds the reciprocal, satisfying 
Principle A of the Binding Theory.
In all three examples, the implicit argument pro seems to be definite with a 
particular combination of nongeneric phi-features. In (57), the implicit argu￾ment is null pro whose antecedent is parents (third-person plural). In (58), the 
implicit argument takes the DP you both (second-person plural) as an ante￾cedent. In (59), the implicit argument seems to take the DP her and a friend of 
hers (third-person plural) as antecedent.
The fact that reciprocals can be bound by the implicit argument provides 
further evidence for the hypothesis that the implicit argument in the passive is 
syntactically projected.
2.6 Binding the Implicit Argument
In the preceding sections, I investigated the kinds of pronouns that an implicit 
argument can bind. A related question is whether the implicit argument can 
be bound. Consider the following example (see Baker, Johnson, and Roberts 
1989:226 for an analysis of similar facts based on the definition of chains):
(60)  John was killed.
a.  “John was killed by somebody.”
b.  Not: “John killed himself.”
Because (60) is not a generic sentence, the implicit argument could only be 
proun or prodef. But proun would yield the interpretation in (60a), not the bound 
interpretation in (60b).
Now consider the possibility of prodef (once again, the implicit argument is 
placed linearly in the same position as a by-phrase would be):
(61)  John1
 was killed pro1
.
While this representation yields the interpretation in (60b), it violates Princi￾ple B of the Binding Theory because John1
 binds pro1
 in its domain (the finite 
TP). So, it follows that (60a) and not (60b) is the right interpretation of (60).30 Chapter 2
Williams (1987:155) claims that the implicit argument in the passive is never 
bound (see also Bruening 2013:19; Bhatt and Pancheva 2017:16). Consider the 
following sentence:
(62)  John wants Mary to be seen.
About (62), Williams says:
(63)  “When an implicit argument is existentially quantified, it acts like an R 
expression, in that it is disjoint from c-commanding NPs. . . . The unas￾signed Agent is understood as disjoint from John, or at least is vague on 
that point in the same way that John wants Mary to be seen by somebody 
is; neither means John wants to see Mary.”
This result is perplexing when compared to the results of section 2.4. 
Example (64a) with prodef (with the interpretation of (64b)) should be a possi￾ble representation of (62):
(64)  a.  John1
 wants Mary to be seen pro1
.
b. John1
 wants Mary to be seen by him1
.
But (62) does not seem to have the interpretation in (64). Rather, (62) seems 
to have the same interpretation as
(65)  John wants Mary to be seen by somebody.
But there are other cases in which sentences similar to (62) have an inter￾pretation where the implicit argument is taken to be identical to the matrix 
subject. Consider the following sentences:
(66)  a.  I set myself some health-related goals and I want those goals to be 
met by the new year.
b. I plan on going on vacation to Jamaica this summer, so I want all 
revisions to be made on my thesis before then.
In these cases, the implicit argument is taken to be identical with the matrix 
subject. No other interpretation makes sense. How could I want somebody else to 
meet my health goals? However, (66) could still be consistent with Williams’s 
claim in that what is expressed could be that the speaker wants somebody to meet 
those goals, and the only person who could possibly meet them is the speaker.
More convincingly, there are embedded passive sentences involving reflex￾ives and bound possessor pronouns that do allow the matrix subject to bind 
the implicit argument of the passive:
(67)  He reveals to Skyler in the end that everything was done for himself, as 
it made him feel alive.
(villians.wikia.com/wiki/Walter_White)The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument 31
(68)  He is so self-involved he could not even think of a title for a song dedi￾cated to himself other than his own name.
(https://www.thequiz.com/finish-the-lyrics-disney-edition/)
(69)  a.  John1
 thought that a friendly e-mail sent to himself1
 would cheer 
him1
 up.
b. Every corporate manager has been advised that e-mails sent to 
himself can be used as incriminating evidence.
In (69a), the antecedent of himself is the implicit argument of send, and that 
implicit argument takes John as an antecedent, a clear counterexample to Wil￾liams’s generalization in (62) (see also Roeper 2022 for a different set of 
data that are problematic for Williams’s generalization). In fact, example (69b) 
shows that the implicit argument can have a quantificational antecedent, and 
so it is interpreted as a bound variable (which in turn binds the reflexive).
Our results in this section seem to conflict with Müller’s (2019:60) conclu￾sion that the implicit argument in the German passive cannot be bound by a 
quantifier in the higher clause. The next step would be to look at sentences 
like (67–69) in German.
How then can we account for Williams’s observations about the interpreta￾tion of (62)? I suggest that the definite interpretation of the implicit argument 
is made clear when the implicit argument binds a reflexive or a pronoun. So, 
in (69), the implicit argument is pro[3SG] and it binds the reflexive pronoun 
himself. In Williams’s example (62), the implicit argument does not bind a 
reflexive or a pronoun, so the existential interpretation is preferred.
Now consider again the contrast in (25), repeated here as (70):
(70)  a.  If somebody1
 sends an e-mail to his1 mother, how long does it take to 
arrive?
b.  If an e-mail is sent to his mother, how long does it take to arrive?
Recall that (70b) lacks the interpretation of (70a). I accounted for this by 
claiming that the implicit argument in (70b) is proun. But now there is an alter￾native representation involving prodef:
(71)  If an e-mail is sent pro1
 to his1 mother,
Nothing rules out representation (71). The possessor his could agree in phi￾features with its null pro antecedent. And I believe that in the right context 
(70b) has this interpretation. But for (70b), presented with no linguistic con￾text and especially in comparison with (70a), the most natural interpretation 
is the one where the implicit argument is existentially bound, that is, proun. 
And in that case, (70b) (with the interpretation of (70a)) is unacceptable 
(because it violates the PAC in (17)).32 Chapter 2
2.7 The Inanimacy Gap
Can the null definite pro be an inanimate pronoun? It is difficult to find rele￾vant examples. One way to try would be to first look for examples with an 
inanimate by-phrase binding a reflexive and then drop the by-phrase. Con￾sider the following Internet examples (from Angelopoulos, Collins, and Terzi 
2020):
(72)  You find yourself rising and being pulled by the sun toward itself. 
(pg. 12, (39))
(73)  The most direct way to determine it is to examine the far distant behav￾ior of the magnetic field generated by the black hole around itself. 
(pg. 12, (40))
(74)  More recently oxytocin has been found to be released by the brain into 
itself. (pg. 12, (42))
(75)  But soon also this will be sucked up by the earth into itself. (pg. 12, (43))
(76)  For that which is decidedly thick and earthy in nature, and has entirely 
escaped alteration in the liver, is drawn by the spleen into itself. (pg. 12, 
(46))
Dropping the by-phrase in these examples yields unacceptable results. And it 
is perhaps impossible to find the relevant acceptable examples on the Internet.
(77)  *You find yourself rising and being pulled toward itself.
(78)  *The most direct way to determine it is to examine the far distant behav￾ior of the magnetic field generated around itself.
(79) *More recently oxytocin has been found to be released into itself.
(80)  *But soon also this will be sucked up into itself.
(81)  *For that which is decidedly thick and earthy in nature, and has entirely 
escaped alteration in the liver, is drawn into itself.
Examples (77–81) are unacceptable when the reflexive is bound by the 
implicit external argument. I put aside the reading of the reflexive bound by 
the subject (e.g., in (79) itself is bound by oxytocin). The question is how to 
explain the unacceptability of (77–81). There are three cases to consider: 
(a) null generic progen, (b) null existential proun, and (c) null definite prodef. Only 
the last case is relevant. The null generic must be human, and the null existen￾tial has no phi-features. So, the question is what rules out the following repre￾sentation where prodef is (3SG, inanimate):The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument 33
(82)  *The magnetic field generated pro1
 around itself1
.
I am not entirely convinced that this representation is ungrammatical. It 
may just be hard to interpret for a confluence of reasons. First, the existential 
interpretations are more accessible than the null definite pro interpretations 
(see the discussion following (69)). Second, the inanimate itself also has the 
inanimate subject as a possible antecedent, making the choice of the implicit 
argument as the antecedent difficult. For example, in (80), a possible anteced￾ent of itself is the subject this. Third, in examples (77–81), there is no anteced￾ent for the implicit arguments.
If there is an overt antecedent present for the implicit argument, the exam￾ples become better:
(83)  a.  A black hole1
 can be measured if one examines the far distant behav￾ior of the magnetic field generated pro1
 around itself1
.
b. A black hole1
 can be measured if one examines the far distant 
behavior of the magnetic field generated pro2
 around it1
.
(Gary Thoms, personal communication)
As these examples show, both reflexive and nonreflexive pronouns are pos￾sible. But the difference may be correlated with different implicit arguments. 
In (80a), the black hole generates the magnetic field. In (80b), something else 
(not the black hole) generates the magnetic field. This difference is confirmed 
in the following example:
(84)  A black hole1
 can be measured if one examines the far distant behavior 
of the magnetic field generated by the simulation program around 
it1
/*itself1
.
(Gary Thoms, personal communication)
When there is an explicit by-phrase, the nonreflexive pronoun is accept￾able, and the reflexive is worse (because the reflexive pronoun cannot be 
bound by the simulation program).
2.8 Logophoricity
Given the discussions in this chapter, I return to (1a,b) and discuss whether 
they can be analyzed as exempt anaphors with a logophoric interpretation:
(85)  a.  Such privileges should be kept to oneself.
(Baker, Johnson, and Roberts 1989:228; Roberts 1987:162)
b. Damaging testimony is always given about oneself in secret trials.
(Roberts 1987:162)34 Chapter 2
I have analyzed the reflexives in examples like (85a,b) (and many others 
throughout the chapter) as cases of locally bound reflexives, bound by the 
syntactically projected implicit external argument of the passive. An alterna￾tive is that in these kinds of examples, there is no syntactically projected 
implicit external argument, but rather that the reflexives are exempt anaphors 
(not subject to Principle A), and they are interpreted as logophoric, referring 
back to an individual whose thoughts (or perspective) are being reported. 
Under this analysis, the reflexive pronouns in (1a,b) would be similar to mor￾phologically logophoric pronouns in the West African language Ewe. See 
Charnavel and Zlogar 2015 and Charnavel and Bryant 2022 for recent discus￾sions of logophoric interpretations of reflexives in English.
In this section, I will give five reasons for not adopting the logophoric 
analysis (in addition to the issues surrounding inherent reflexives outlined in 
section 2.1).
First, exempt anaphors do not show Principle B effects with their anteced￾ents (see Lebeaux 1984:346; Charnavel and Bryant 2022:fn. 31):
(86)  a.  Bill1
 said that the rain had damaged pictures of himself1
/him1
.
b. In her1
 opinion, physicists like herself1
/her1
 are rare.
c. Max1
 boasted that the Queen invited Lucie and himself1
/him1
 for a 
drink.
For example, in (86a), either the reflexive himself or the pronoun him can 
take Bill as an antecedent. The reason for this is that Bill is not in the same 
local domain as the pronoun in (86a), and so no Principle B effect is triggered. 
A similar account holds for (86c). But as I have shown a number of times in 
this chapter (see (21) and (49)), the implicit external argument of a passive can 
give rise to Principle B effects. This makes sense if the implicit external argu￾ment of the passive is syntactically present and can locally bind a reflexive 
(satisfying Principle A) or a pronoun (violating Principle B). In other words, 
a pronoun whose antecedent is the implicit argument in the passive shows 
Principle B effects with its antecedent, but a pronoun replacing a logophoric 
reflexive does not show Principle B effects with its antecedent (as shown in 
(86a,c)). This is a very clear generalization that is absolutely devasting for 
any view seeking to explain away the data ((1a,b) = (85a,b)) in terms of 
logophoricity.
Second, many of the examples involving reflexives in this chapter do not 
express the thoughts or perspectives of the individual referred to by the reflex￾ive, as already pointed out for example (47).
Third, we have seen in this chapter that the bound pronoun in Helke expres￾sions can be bound by the implicit external argument in the passive. But The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument 35
unlike reflexives in English, there are no exempt or logophoric uses of Helke 
expressions. Putting aside passives, when a Helke expression is used, the pro￾noun is always bound by a local syntactically present antecedent. Therefore, 
if the bound pronoun in a Helke expression can be bound by the implicit argu￾ment in the passive, there is no reason why a reflexive pronoun should not be 
able to be bound in the same way. In chapter 3, I will show that the implicit 
argument in the passive is also visible to secondary predicates.
Fourth, I have shown that even inanimate implicit external arguments can 
bind reflexives. But as stressed by Charnavel and Zlogar (2015) and Charna￾vel and Bryant (2022), inanimate DPs cannot be the antecedent of exempt 
anaphors interpreted logophorically, because inanimates do not denote objects 
with thoughts or perspectives.
Fifth, from a cross-linguistic perspective, Gotah (2022:16) shows that the 
implicit argument in the Ewe middle can be the antecedent of a reflexive pro￾noun. But the interesting thing about reflexive pronouns in Ewe is that they 
have no exempt or logophoric uses, as Gotah notes. Rather, in Ewe there is a 
dedicated logophoric pronoun (completely independent from reflexives). If 
implicit arguments in Ewe can bind reflexives, there is no reason why that 
possibility should not exist in English. The Ewe data provide striking support 
for the analysis of implicit arguments in this chapter, and therefore for the 
whole Merge-based framework. A similar argument can be run for Buli (see 
Sulemana 2022). See chapter 5 for more discussion of these cases.
Even though the reflexives in this chapter cannot be analyzed as exempt 
anaphors with a logophoric interpretation, there are related examples that do 
seem to involve exempt anaphors with logophoric interpretations:
(87)  Wrong done to oneself by others is hard to forget.
(Andrew Radford, personal communication)
(88)  One should not seek revenge for the harm done to oneself by others.
(https://jainqq.org/explore/001520/92)
In these examples, oneself does not refer to the doer (others), but to a differ￾ent individual. In this case, it seems reasonable to suppose that oneself refers 
to a generic individual whose thoughts or perspective are being expressed by 
the sentence. In other words, in these examples the reflexive does seem to be 
logophoric.
I have not investigated this type of sentence extensively. In my dialect of 
English, the examples (87–88) are not completely acceptable. Here is a near 
minimal pair comparing the two different interpretations of the reflexive (that 
is, locally bound by an implicit argument versus logophoric):36 Chapter 2
(89)  a. A book of stories written about oneself should be brief and honest.
b.  ?A book of stories appearing about oneself should be brief and honest.
The most natural interpretation of (89a) is that the reflexive is bound by the 
implicit external argument (the writer). No such interpretation is possible in 
(89b), so it has to have the logophoric interpretation. For the speakers of Amer￾ican English that I have consulted, (89a) is perfect, but (89b) is marginal.
Such examples in (87–89) do not contradict the general claims of this chap￾ter. They just show that reflexives in passives can have two different uses, 
either as locally bound reflexives bound by the syntactically projected implicit 
external argument or as exempt anaphors with a logophoric interpretation. A 
similar situation arises for picture noun phrases (as discussed recently by 
Charnavel and Bryant 2022), where the reflexive in a picture noun can either 
be locally bound by the possessor or have a logophoric interpretation, depend￾ing on the antecedent (see Charnavel and Bryant 2022:153, ciii).
What remains to be done is to show that (87–88) can be fit into a general 
theory of exempt anaphora (see Reinhart and Reuland 1993 for a well-known 
theory). That is, which syntactic contexts allow exempt anaphora, and which 
do not? I leave this large and ambitious topic for future work.
2.9 Conclusion
In this chapter, I have shown that there are three possibilities for the phi￾features of the implicit argument of the short passive. I summarize the results 
here. See section 4.5 for some additional discussion of (90b).
(90)  a.  Generic Implicit Argument (progen):
 i. progen is a DP.
 ii. Phi-features: third person, singular, human, animate, generic
iii. Intepretation: progen is of type <e> and is bound by a generic 
operator Gen.
b.  Existential Implicit Argument (proun):
 i. proun is a DP.
 ii. Phi-features: none
iii. Interpretation: proun is of type <e> and is bound by an existential 
operator.
c.  Definite Implicit Argument (prodef):
 i. prodef is a DP.
 ii.  Phi-features: any non-null combination of phi-features (other than 
[+generic])
iii. Interpretation: prodef is of type <e>.The Phi-Features of the Implicit Argument 37
These three cases divide up perfectly the possible phi-feature sets of the 
implicit argument:
(91) Implicit Arguments
Empty Existential
Phi-Features
Definite
Non-Empty
Generic
In each case, I showed the existence of the implicit argument using a vari￾ety of different diagnostics (e.g., Principle A, Principle B, Helke expressions). 
The trickiest case is (81b). Because the existential proun lacks phi-features, 
one cannot use the Binding Theory or Helke expressions to diagnose its 
existence. However, such implicit arguments can still be controllers and they 
can be modified by a depictive secondary predicate (see chapter 3). Therefore, 
I claim that even in (90b) there is a syntactically present implicit argument.
The typology raises the question of why the existential interpretation requires 
a pro that does not have any phi-features. I return to this issue in chapter 4.
A consequence of this work is that English has pro. English is not a null sub￾ject language, in the sense of Italian, Spanish, and other well-known languages, 
but there are certain contexts where pro can appear. For example, the implicit 
argument of the passive is pro. Another such case is the implicit dative argument 
described by Epstein (1984), Landau (2010), and Rizzi (1986:550). If English has 
pro, then why isn’t it a null subject language? In other words, if pro can be an 
implicit argument, then why can’t it be a null subject (in the sense of Italian and 
Spanish)? In chapter 4, I will return to this question and place the empirical results 
of this chapter in the larger context of a theory of implicit arguments.
In this chapter, I have shown that implicit arguments are syntactically pro￾jected, using Principles A and B and the distribution of Helke expressions as 
diagnostics. All of these topics need to be looked at from a cross-linguistic per￾spective. See Gotah 2022, Ndapo 2022, and Sulemana 2022 for some 
preliminary studies (see chapter 5). Müller (2019:58) claims that the implicit 
argument in the passive can bind reflexives and reciprocals in German. Shäfer 
2012 is a rich source of cross-linguistic data on reflexives in both impersonal 
and personal passives. However, he gives a nonsyntactic account based on 
the assumption that “a variable can be reconstructed on conceptual grounds” 
(pg. 244). It is unclear how such an approach would extend to reciprocals, Prin￾ciple B effects, and Helke expressions. Also, Shäfer’s analysis ends up giving 
two completely different ways that reflexives can be bound, either by Agree 
(pg. 238) or on “conceptual grounds” (pg. 244). In the theory presented here, non￾logophoric reflexives are always locally bound by a c-commanding antecedent.3.1 Introduction
The fundamental question that this monograph addresses is how external 
arguments are represented in passive constructions. Collins (2005a) argues 
that the external argument in the passive is merged in the same way as it is in 
the active, namely in Spec vP (following the spirit of Chomsky 1957). Con￾sider (1a,b):
(1)  a.  John wrote the book.
b. The book was written by John.
The proposal in Collins 2005a has the consequence that the DP John is 
merged into Spec vP in (1b) in the same way as it is in (1a). Another conse￾quence of the proposal in Collins 2005a is that the short passive has a syntac￾tically present null external argument, analyzed there as arbitrary PRO (but 
see chapter 4 for a discussion of implicit arguments as PRO versus pro).
The structure of (2a) is then either (2b) or (2c), depending on the position of 
PRO. The precise position of the null implicit argument in the short passive is 
a tricky issue, since it is covert, and is not relevant for the points made in this 
chapter.
(2)  a.  The book was written.
b.  The book was [PRO written].
c.  The book was [written PRO].
One important piece of evidence in Collins 2005a:101 for this analysis of 
short passives is based on the distribution of depictive secondary predicates:
(3)  At the commune, breakfast is usually eaten nude.
(3) shows that the implicit argument in a passive can license a depictive 
secondary predicate, just like the overt subject argument in an active can:
3 Secondary Predicates and the Implicit Argument40 Chapter 3
(4)  At the commune, the campers usually eat breakfast nude.
On the assumption that secondary predicates need to be licensed by a local 
c-commanding DP, it follows that in (3) there must be a syntactically present 
null argument. Surprisingly, a number of authors have claimed that depictive 
secondary predicates cannot modify the implicit argument of the short passive 
(including Williams 1985, Chomsky 1986, Pylkkänen 2008a, Landau 2010). 
Most of this chapter attempts to establish the following generalization:
(5)  Depictive secondary predicates can modify the implicit argument of the 
short passive.
The rest of the chapter is structured as follows. In section 3.2, I present all 
the cases of depictive secondary predicates found in short passives that I can 
find in the syntax literature. I augment this list with naturally occurring 
examples found on the Internet. Section 3.3 reviews the syntax literature that 
rejects (5). Section 3.4 presents a formal analysis of depictive secondary pred￾icates and shows how to account for the generalization in (5). Section 3.5 
shows that there is an important difference between passives and unaccusa￾tives with respect to the distribution of secondary predicates. Since unaccusa￾tives do not have an implicit argument (unlike the short passive), they do not 
permit secondary predicates. Section 3.6 is the conclusion.
3.2 Secondary Depictive Predicates in the Short Passive
In this section, I present data concerning secondary depictive predicates in 
short passives. First, I review the examples given in the linguistics literature. 
Then I present some naturally occurring examples from the Internet.
A number of examples are given in Roeper 1987:297:
(6)  The game was played drunk/nude/sober/angry.
Baker (1988:318) gives the following examples:
(7)  a.  This song must not be sung drunk.
b. Such petitions should not be presented kneeling.
Collins (2005a:101) adds the following example:
(8)  At the commune, breakfast is usually eaten nude.
Meltzer-Asscher (2012:281) adds the following examples:
(9)  a.  Traditionally, the koto was played seated on the floor.
b. The hula is danced barefoot.
Stroik (1992:132, fn. 7) adds the following examples:Secondary Predicates and the Implicit Argument 41
(10)  a.  The painting was painted blindfolded.
b. I can tell that this letter was written in a good mood.
c. This bank-job wasn’t done alone.
Naturally occurring examples can easily be found on the Internet (see also 
Müller 2008 for additional English examples found on the Internet). See the 
appendix of this monograph on the general methodology of using Internet 
searches for syntactic research.
First, I present a list of generic examples, then a list of episodic examples. 
All the following examples are completely acceptable for me (a native speaker 
of English). The following examples are all generic, describing an activity 
that is usually done in a certain way (or should be done in a certain way):
(11)  If beach volleyball was played nude, I would never leave my house.
(http://imgur.com/gallery/fPIhe)
(12)  So here’s looking at top 15 sports that should be played nude.
(http://www.thesportster.com/entertainment/top-15-sports-that-should
-be-played-nude/)
(13)  Originally the game was played naked in the burning sun.
(https://en.uncyclopedia.co/wiki/Australia)
(14)  Musical chairs must be played fully clothed.
(https://www.thingsinsquares.com/letter/rules-years-office-christmas
-party/)
(15)  At the refugee camp, soccer was played barefoot,
(https://www.socceramerica.com/publications/article/23353/the-soccer
-life-soccer-smoothes-the-path.html)
(16)  Next the procession headed for the Chapel of the Burning Bush, which 
was entered barefoot.
(https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.7312/char13230-013/pdf)
(17)  Coffee will be served topless.
(https://www.robertcookofnorthbucks.com/hate-male-2-2/)
(18)  It really should be sung drunk, or not at all.
(https://twitter.com/stephenkb/status/781142776570339328)
(19)  Our album is meant to be listened to stoned.
(http://www.nme.com/news/music/warpaint-61-1293400)
(20)  Morning prayer was sung together at 6:55 a.m. before going to work.
(http://www.walsinghamcommunity.org/about-us/history/the
-cornerstone-community)42 Chapter 3
(21)  Dinner was eaten together.
(http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/a-different-kind-of-dinnertime
-grace_us_58f51c4fe4b04cae050dc9df)
(22)  A duet can’t be sung alone.
(http://archiveofourown.org/works/11051532/chapters/24638334)
(23)  Completion of the hike must be done unassisted.
(http://www.margarita-adventures.com/faq/)
Simpson (2005:89) notes that depictive predicates in passives are often 
improved by modality and negation:
(24)  a.  ?The song was sung drunk.
b. This song can’t be sung drunk.
Simpson proposes that in the case of (24b), there is a higher ModalP, and that 
the secondary predicate is adjoined to that ModalP as a “conditional attribute.” 
Even if the syntactic position of the secondary predicate in (24b) is different 
from that in (24a), it is still able to pick out the implicit external argument of the 
passivized verb, which is the fact that needs to be accounted for.
In fact, Demonte (1986:58) claims for Spanish that secondary predication 
of implicit arguments in the passive is acceptable in sentences with a modal 
and unacceptable without one. As the following examples show, no such con￾straint exists for English.
The following examples are all episodic.
(25)  At one place in one year, everything I saw was performed nude—a dou￾ble bill of Baal and Woyzek, cabaret and improvisational dance.
(https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/marks-for-the-nude
-artists-and-beer-glass-hurler/163984.article)
(26)  The field was crowded onto a relatively clear stretch of sand, the game 
was played barefoot, . . .
(https://rosethomson.wordpress.com/tag/spirit-circles/)
(27)  All of this very important work was done shirtless (natch), giving Zac 
plenty of opportunity to show off his newly acquired six-pack.
(http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/zac-efron-body-chest-shirtless
-pictures-baywatch_uk_56dfffd2e4b05c52666e6558)
(28)  Minaj admitted that the lapdance was completely choreographed, and 
was performed drunk.
(https://uinterview.com/news/nicki-minaj-twerks-and-gives-drake-a-lap
-dance-in-anaconda-video/)Secondary Predicates and the Implicit Argument 43
(29)   . . . ​and I’m pretty sure most of the part of Benjy in The Sound and the 
Fury was written drunk.
(https://arstechnica.com/civis/viewtopic.php?f=23&t=710318)
(30)  The majority was written sober. Some of it was written drunk.
(https://www.glamourmagazine.co.uk/article/aiden-grimshaw-interview
-misty-eye-2012)
(31)  It seems appropriate that this one was done stoned; going into alternate 
mindstates is a large part of the trade of the mystic.
(https://silicon-dawn.livejournal.com/1906.html)
(32)  Everything was written sober. Everything was performed sober.
(https://wmmr.com/2019/07/15/brent-smith-relapsing-before-latest
-shinedown-album/)
(33)  The first verse was sung alone, with instrumental accompaniments, then 
gradually the choir joined in.
(http://libera-historicaltimelinepart7.blogspot.com/2013_12_01_archive
.html)
(34)  It was done BLINDFOLDED, and this is one of the hardest Chopin etudes.
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zW5Y1Cx4zQw)
(35)  However, Carlsen won the second encounter, which was played 
blindfolded.
(https://anmachriel817.amebaownd.com/posts/30746523/)
(36)  All this was done unarmed!
(https://afrolegends.com/2009/12/03/the-forgotten-angel-of-rwanda-capt
-mbaye-diagne/)
(37)  Almost all the lifting was done unassisted.
(https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/nioshtic-2/00231105.html)
(38)  Seven of his “buzzer beating” shots were made unassisted.
(https://stepienrules.com/most-buzzer-beaters-nba/)
(39)  It was done unprepared and with hardly any script at all.
(https://blog.ivercy.com/page/3/)
For the purposes of this chapter, I have limited attention to adjectival second￾ary depictive predicates (including adjectival passives). I have yet to investigate 
examples with prepositional phrases (PPs) (e.g., in a good mood, in shorts) and 
-ing participles (e.g., singing, standing, sitting) as secondary predicates.
A number of generalizations can be drawn about the data above. First, using 
depictive predicates in the short passive seems to be a productive process. A 44 Chapter 3
wide range of adjectives are permitted, in both generic and episodic contexts. 
The adjectives found in the examples above are naturally grouped into various 
categories: state of clothing (nude, naked, fully clothed, barefoot, topless, shirt￾less), state of intoxication (drunk, stoned, sober), number (alone, together), 
and adjectival passives (unassisted, blindfolded, unarmed, unprepared). The 
examples do not seem to be idiomatic or fixed expressions.
I was unable to find a comprehensive list of adjectival secondary predicates 
for English. Most syntax papers that deal with the issue repeat the same hand￾ful of examples (e.g., using nude and drunk). Therefore, it is not possible to 
know at this point if there are systematic gaps between the kinds of secondary 
predicates that can modify the subject in active sentences and those that can 
modify the implicit argument in passive sentences. A large-scale corpus study 
of this issue would be quite useful.
Second, all the above examples also admit a by-phrase. In the following 
example, the campers are nude.
(40)  a.  Breakfast is usually eaten nude by the campers.
b. Breakfast is usually eaten by the campers nude.
Third, all of the examples work in the active:
(41)  The campers usually eat breakfast nude.
Fourth, if a secondary depictive predicate is not possible in the active, then 
it will not be possible in the passive either. For example, as Simpson (2005:93) 
notes: “Adjectives that can appear as depictives or resultatives are those that 
denote a transitory, bounded, temporally-restricted state, so-called stage-level 
predicates.” (42a) below is from Simpson and (42b) is the passive variant. As 
predicted, both are unacceptable:
(42)  a.  He read the book *intelligent/*knowing/*knowledgeable.
b. The book was read *intelligent/*knowing/*knowledgeable.
In the next section, I address a number of cases from the literature in which 
it has been claimed that a depictive secondary predicate is possible in the 
active, but not the passive.
3.3 Some Counterproposals
The data in section 2 show that depictive secondary predicates can modify the 
implicit argument of a passive. Despite this, there are numerous claims in the 
syntax literature that deny this possibility.
Williams (1985:308) considers the following example, attributed to Roeper:Secondary Predicates and the Implicit Argument 45
(43)  The game was played nude.
Williams proposes that “rather than saying that the adjective nude modifies 
the implicit agent of played we might say that it modifies the (overt) subject 
game, since one may call a game nude if it is played by nude people.”
In response to this argument, Bhatt and Pancheva (2006:585, fn. 11) note: 
“We find The movie was watched nude . . . acceptable. However, it seems a 
much greater stretch to refer to a movie that is watched nude as a nude movie.” 
Similarly, considering (29) above, saying that the part of Benjy is drunk seems 
nonsensical (see also Roeper 1993:213 for a similar point).
Williams (1985:309) also gives the following sentence (but see Roeper 
2020:301):
(44)  *The game was played mad at Bill.
He explains that (44) is odd because one cannot say “The game was mad at 
Bill.” I find this sentence strained as well, and I have been unable to find 
Internet examples with mad used as a secondary predicate in short passives. 
Meltzer-Asscher (2012:282) claims that the unacceptability of (44) is due to 
semantic or pragmatic factors: “Whether the players are mad at Bill has, in 
most contexts, no relevance to their playing the game.”
Alternatively, it may be that various classes of adjectives are not acceptable 
for modifying the implicit argument of the passive for independent reasons. 
For example, it is difficult to find naturally occurring depictive adjectives that 
assign an experiencer theta-role to their argument (mad, angry, happy).
Note, however, that Roeper (1987) uses angry in the example in (6), which 
assigns an experiencer theta-role. Furthermore, while (44) does seem to be 
degraded, Mica Clausen (personal communication, September 2021) has 
found examples involving experiencer adjectives, which I find acceptable:
(45)  a.  A game played angry isn’t as fun.
b. Apparently, revenge is a dish best served angry.
(torontosun.com/2014/09/28/matthew-stafford-stellar-for-detroit-lions)
The contrast between Williams’s unacceptable example and Clausen’s 
acceptable examples raises the general issue of when experiencer adjectives 
make good secondary predicates. I will not pursue that issue here.
Chomsky (1986:121) gives the following example (see also Jaeggli 1986:614, 
which provides similar data based on leave and endorses Chomsky’s conclusion):
(46)  a.   They expected [PRO to leave the room angry].
b. *The room was left angry.
c. *The book sank angry.46 Chapter 3
He states: “The adjective phrase angry is predicated of PRO, not they, and 
only a syntactically present element can be its subject.”
There are a few things to say about (46b). Passivizing this use of leave is 
marginal for some people (even without the secondary predicate):
(47)  a.  ?The room was left by everybody.
b.  ?The room needs to be left early.
Second, in hearing (46b), one wonders who is angry. The interpretation that 
immediately comes to mind is that the room itself is somehow angry. So, the 
interpretation would be parallel to the construction in (48a), which passivizes 
easily, as shown in (48b):
(48)  a.  I left the room messy.
b. The room was left messy.
But even if example (46b) is fixed to avoid these issues, it is still difficult to 
find examples on the Internet of experiencer adjectives like angry modifying 
the implicit argument of the short passive. As noted above, an independent 
constraint might be at work.
In a footnote, Chomsky (1986:211) discusses Roeper’s data:
(49)  “Roeper (1984) notes such examples as ‘the game was played barefoot 
(nude),’ which seems to violate the paradigm illustrated. Luigi Rizzi 
suggests that ‘nude’ may actually be adverbial, not adjectival, despite the 
morphology, as in some other languages.”
Chomsky does not say what criteria are used here to classify nude as adver￾bial. There seem to be clear differences in meaning between secondary predi￾cates and adverbs. Consider the following examples from Roeper 1993:192:
(50)  a.  The game was played drunk.
b. The game was played drunkenly.
(50a) means that at the time the game was played, the players were drunk. 
(50b) can imply (50a), but has a meaning related to the manner in which the 
game was played (e.g., screaming, yelling, exaggerated movements, lack of 
respect for the rules, slurred speech). Or to put it another way, (50b) does not 
entail that the players were drunk while playing the game (see also Aarts 1995:90 
and Schultze-Berndt and Himmelmann 2004:61 for related discussion).
Another possibility for construing nude as an adverb in (49) is to suppose 
that it applies to an event: an event can be characterized as nude if the agent of 
the event is nude. This idea is different from Williams’s proposal in that it 
relates the secondary predicate to the event described by the verb, and not 
to the derived subject. Also, even though nude would be an event predicate, 
it would not describe the manner of that event. Formally, this could be Secondary Predicates and the Implicit Argument 47
presented as follows. O is a type shifter, which takes the semantic value of an 
adjective and shifts it to a function that takes event arguments.
(51)  For all e, if e is in the domain of Agent, then O(P)(e) iff P(Agent(e)).
So, in (49) above, the type shifter applies to nude, and the resulting predicate 
applies to the event described by the passive verb played. Such an analysis of 
secondary predicates makes no reference to a syntactically projected implicit 
argument.
The prediction of this account is that in general DPs describing events 
(event descriptions) should be possible as the arguments of adjectives that 
describe the agent of the event. Generally, the examples are understandable, 
but marginal or ungrammatical:
(52)  a.  *The game/race/World Cup/competition was nude/naked.
b.  *The first verse/performance/song/race was alone/together.
c.  *The final piece/first movement/concert was blindfolded.
But note that such event descriptions can appear with predicates (like take 
an hour) that take events as arguments (this is similar for other predicates 
such as started at 6:00, involved many participants, took place last year).
(53)  a.  The game/race/World Cup/competition took one hour.
b.  The first verse/performance/song/race took one hour.
c.  The final piece/first movement/concert took one hour.
Under the theory in (51), it is unclear what would account for the clear differ￾ence in grammaticality between the sentences in (52) and the sentences in (53).
Lappin and Shlonsky (1993:10) claim that for English (but not for German) 
“The passive morpheme is −TRB [cc. theta-role bearer], and so it cannot serve 
as the external argument of a circumstantial predicate.” They give the follow￾ing examples:
(54)  a.  *The concert was played formally dressed.
b. *The lecture will be given naked.
While (54a) does seem a bit strained (as does the active variant), (54b) is 
acceptable, or at least not any worse than its active variant. I presented accept￾able Internet examples involving naked above.
Pylkkänen (2008a:22) characterizes the distribution of depictive secondary 
predicates as follows:
(55)  “This state can be predicated of either an internal or an external argument, 
although if the external argument is implicit, as in a passive, it cannot be 
modified by a depictive.”
She provides the following example:48 Chapter 3
(56)  *This letter was written drunk.
For me, this sentence is a bit strained, but not ungrammatical. Gary Thoms 
and Andrew Radford state that it is acceptable (personal communication). 
Richard Kayne suggests that (56) improves if one adds it is obvious, or obvi￾ously. I gave numerous Internet examples with drunk above, all of which are 
grammatical. The Internet examples provide a linguistic context, which tends 
to ameliorate the acceptability of the secondary predicate.
Citing Chomsky’s (1986) discussion, Landau (2010:359) makes a distinc￾tion between two types of implicit arguments (see also Landau 2013:72, 180, 
185, 228). Then in (57) he stipulates that secondary predicates cannot modify 
weak implicit arguments:
(57)  a.  Strong Implicit Arguments (SIA):  PRO, pro
b.  Weak Implicit Arguments (WIA):  passive agent, implicit object
(58)  An implicit argument must be strong to license a secondary predicate.
Landau (2010:360) provides the following two sentences to illustrate his 
claims:
(59)  a.  *The issue was decided unassisted.
b. *The game was played shoeless.
First, these sentences are both a bit strained, but not unacceptable for me. 
Second, (59a) without a secondary predicate is not completely felicitous out of 
the blue (“The issue was decided.”). Third, an episodic sentence with unas￾sisted is given in (37) above. Fourth, (59b) gets better if one uses barefoot
instead of shoeless; see the example in (26).
Landau notes in a footnote “See Roeper 1987:297–298 for a different view.” 
In addition to Roeper 1987, evidence contrary to (58) had already been pre￾sented by Baker (1988), Roeper (1993), Collins (2005a), Bhatt and Pancheva 
(2006) and Müller (2008). See chapter 4 for more discussion of Landau 2010.
This section has discussed all the cases in the syntax literature (that I know 
of) that purport to show that an implicit argument in the passive cannot be mod￾ified by a secondary predicate. In all cases, the conclusion is unwarranted. 
Rather, the discussion in this section supports the conclusion in (5): depictive 
secondary predicates can modify the implicit argument of the short passive.
3.4 Analysis
So far, the following generalization has been established:
(60)  A depictive secondary predicate can modify the implicit argument of a 
short passive.Secondary Predicates and the Implicit Argument 49
In this section, I lay out the assumptions about depictive secondary predi￾cates and the passive that allow us to explain (60).
Based on binding, agreement, and other data, Legendre (1997) convinc￾ingly argues that depictive secondary predicates are small clauses with a PRO 
subject (Dep is defined below in (64b)):
(61)  They1
 played the game [Dep [PRO1
 nude]].
Exactly what the internal structure of [PRO nude] is, and what the label of the 
small clause is, are beyond the scope of this chapter (see Bowers 1997 for an 
analysis of resultative secondary predicates based on PredP). There is no evi￾dence that depictive secondary predicates are nonobligatory control structures 
(e.g., long distance control, PROarb interpretations). Therefore, I assume that 
the relationship between they and PRO in (61) is obligatory control. This 
assumption entails three properties commonly ascribed to obligatory control 
(see Hornstein 1999 for an overview of properties of obligatory control; Bowers 
1993:628 on the MDP and promise; and Landau 2013: section 5.1.3 for argu￾ments against (62c)):
(62)  a.  PRO1
 requires a controller DP1
.
b. The controller DP1
 c-commands PRO1
.
c. Minimal Distance Principle: no DP can intervene between the 
controller DP1
 and PRO1
.
In (62c), intervention is defined in terms of asymmetric c-command: A 
intervenes between B and C iff B asymmetrically c-commands A, and A 
asymmetrically c-commands C.
The properties are illustrated below:
(63)  a.  *It rained [PRO sad].
b.    John’s mother1
 wrote the book [PRO1
 drunk].
c.    [John and Mary]1
 wrote the book [PRO1
 drunk].
d.    John said that Bill1
 left [PRO1
 angry].
In (63a), PRO has no antecedent, so the example is unacceptable. In (63b), 
the only antecedent of PRO is John’s mother, not John. John cannot be the 
antecedent of PRO because John does not c-command PRO. Similarly, in 
(63c), both John and Mary have to be drunk, not just John. In (63d), if angry
is in the embedded clause (when Bill left, somebody was angry), then its ante￾cedent must be Bill, not John. In other words, (63d) cannot mean “John said 
Bill left while he (John) was angry.”
In addition to these assumptions, the temporal dependence of the second￾ary predicate on the main verb needs to be captured. Following Pylkkänen 
(2008a:23), I assume that there is a head Dep that introduces the depictive 50 Chapter 3
(and that binds its situation variable). Pylkkänen notes that depictive predi￾cates get essive case in Finnish and assumes that it is assigned by the Dep 
head. The semantic values of the adjective and the Dep head are given below:
(64)  a. ⟦nude⟧ = λx.λs.nude(s,x)
b.  ⟦Dep⟧  = λP.λe. ∃s.P(s) and e°s
The raised circle symbol in (64b) is the temporal overlap relation, “employed 
to capture the fact that the depictive describes a state that holds during an 
event.” When the two morphemes are combined, we get the following (sup￾pose that PRO denotes John):
(65) ⟦DEP⟧  (⟦[PRO nude]⟧) = λe.∃s.[nude(s, John) ˄ e°s]
This expression is a predicate of events, such that the event overlaps with a 
state where John is nude. I also assume the following syntactic condition, moti￾vated by the semantic value in (65) (see Andrews 1982 and Roberts 1988 for 
syntactic tests indicating the position of depictive secondary predicates). In this 
definition, verbal projection refers to any projection of V, v, ApplP, PartP (par￾ticiple phrase), or VoiceP (any projection in the extended projection of the VP).
(66)  DepP is the sister of a verbal projection.
Given these assumptions, and assuming Collins’s (2005a) theory of the 
passive, a partial representation of the sentence in (67) is given in (68):
(67)  The game was played nude.
(68) vP
DP1 v’
pro
v PartP
PartP DepP
Part VP [Dep [PRO1 nude]] -ed
V DP
play
D NP
the game
This structure is the underlying structure for the passive in the theory of 
Collins 2005a. As in Collins 2005a, I assume that the external argument (in Secondary Predicates and the Implicit Argument 51
this case pro) is projected in the same place in the passive as in the active, 
Spec vP. In chapter 4, I give a general theory of implicit arguments, where I 
analyze them as instances of pro.
Later operations move PartP to Spec VoiceP (not shown in the diagram), 
and the object DP to Spec TP (VoiceP and TP are not shown in (68); see Col￾lins 2005a and chapter 7 for details). I have represented the DepP as right￾adjoined to PartP, although other positions are possible (e.g., adjoined to VP).
Consider how all the requirements of the depictive predicate are satisfied. 
First, PRO has a c-commanding controller, satisfying (62a,b). Second, no 
other DP intervenes between the implicit argument and PRO, satisfying (62c). 
Third, DepP is a sister of PartP, satisfying (66). So, all conditions on depictive 
predicates are satisfied, and (67) is acceptable.
Other uses of adjectives should be distinguished from depictive secondary 
predicates:
(69)  a.  Drunk, the world is beautiful.
b. If one is/you are drunk, the world is beautiful.
(69a) could be paraphrased as in (69b). One difference between (69a) and 
the examples of depictive predicates is that it involves an extra semantic rela￾tion between the adjective and the rest of the clause (indicated by the transla￾tion as a conditional). I assume that (69a) involves ghosting in the sense of 
Collins and Postal 2012, and that the syntactic structure is similar to the sen￾tence (69b), except the string <if one is/you are> has been deleted.
3.5 Unaccusatives
Since unaccusatives lack an implicit external argument, the above theory of 
secondary predicates makes the prediction that unaccusatives should not 
license secondary predicates in the same way as short passives. The following 
examples show that there is a difference between passives and unaccusatives 
in the distribution of secondary predicates:
(70)  a.      The toy truck was rolled across the sand barefoot.
b. *The toy truck rolled across the sand barefoot.
(71)  a.      The tree was chopped down naked.
b. *The tree fell naked.
(72)  a.      The tires must have been rotated stoned.
b. *The tires must have rotated stoned.
There is a clear difference in acceptability between the (a) and (b) exam￾ples above. In an out-of-the-blue context, the (a) examples may be a little 52 Chapter 3
awkward, but the (b) examples are gibberish. For example, the only way to 
make sense out of (70b) is if the toy truck itself is barefoot. Similarly, for 
(71b), the tree itself would have to be somehow naked (e.g., stripped of leaves 
and bark).
These examples show that as opposed to passives, unaccusatives have no 
syntactically projected implicit external argument. From this I conclude that 
unaccusatives lack an argument-introducing head for external arguments. I 
leave it to further research to explore the argument structure of unaccusatives 
within the Merge-based framework.
3.6 Conclusion
I have demonstrated the following generalization:
(73)  A depictive secondary predicate can modify the implicit argument of the 
short passive.
I then proposed a theory of secondary predicates and passives that allowed 
one to account for this generalization. Briefly, secondary predicates are small 
clause structures (e.g., [PRO nude]) where the subject PRO is controlled by 
either the subject or the object. In the passive, the implicit argument is syntacti￾cally projected, and so is able to control PRO. The data in this section converge 
in a striking fashion with the data adduced in chapter 2 based on reflexives, 
reciprocals, pronouns, and Helke expressions. In all cases, the diagnostics show 
that there is a syntactically projected implicit external argument in the passive.
An important question for future work is what the cross-linguistic scope of 
the generalization in (73) is. Müller (2019:57) reports that secondary predi￾cates can modify the external argument in the passive in German (DPext is the 
implicit argument):
(74)  Die Daten wurden DPext1 [PRO1
 nackt] analysiert.
the data were naked analyzed
‘The data were analyzed by someone who was naked.’
For similar results, see Sulemana 2022 for Buli and Gotah 2022 for Ewe. 
Angelopoulos et al. (2023) report a more complicated set of facts for Greek, 
where only nonagreeing secondary predicates can modify the external argu￾ment of the passive.The purpose of this chapter is to provide a general theory of implicit argu￾ments consistent with the empirical results of chapters 2 and 3. In particular, 
in those chapters I showed that the implicit argument of the passive is a 
syntactically active argument (for secondary predicates, Principle A, Princi￾ple B, and Helke expressions). From this, I concluded that the implicit argu￾ment is syntactically projected. In this conclusion, I differ from researchers 
who claim that implicit arguments are not syntactically projected, including 
Williams (1987:151): “implicit arguments, which we will take to be simply 
unassigned theta-roles.”
First, I explain which principles of UG force implicit arguments to be pro￾jected syntactically. Then, I discuss formal licensing and interpretation. 
Lastly, I survey various kinds of implicit arguments in English and demonstrate 
how the general theory applies in each case.
The strength of the theory proposed here is that it covers not only the pas￾sive, but also other cases of implicit arguments in English, including implicit 
arguments found with evaluative predicates, dative controllers, middles, and 
nominalizations. Furthermore, as I explain below (using the wedge argu￾ment), implicit arguments are made available by UG, and should be syntacti￾cally projected in a wide variety of constructions across all languages.
Chapter 5 discusses some cross-linguistic evidence based on several Afri￾can languages for the theory of implicit arguments presented here.
The rest of the chapter is structured as follows. Section 4.1 compares the 
semantic account of implicit arguments in Bruening 2013 with the Merge￾based theory. Sections 4.2 and 4.3 present the general theory of implicit argu￾ments, including an account of licensing and interpretation. The key claim 
here is that implicit arguments are pro, and that they lack a uCase (unvalued 
Case) feature. Section 4.4 surveys various implicit arguments found in 
English, including analyses of evaluative adjectives, implicit datives, middles, 
4 A Theory of Implicit Arguments54 Chapter 4
and nominalizations. Section 4.5 revisits the existential interpretation of the 
implicit argument in the short passive and shows how it fits into the general 
theory. Section 4.6 presents the wedge argument, which extends the conclu￾sions about implicit arguments from the passive in English to a wide variety 
of constructions cross-linguistically. Section 4.7 discusses the tricky case of 
complement deletion in English (e.g., John ate), and evaluates it in terms of the 
general theory of implicit arguments. Section 4.8 is the conclusion.
4.1 Principles of UG and Implicit Arguments
What principles of UG force implicit arguments to be syntactically projected? 
The answer was presented briefly in the introduction of the monograph, but I 
will give a more detailed version here in terms of the Theta-Criterion.
In an active sentence, the external argument is projected in Spec vP, as 
shown below:
(1) vP
DP v’
v VP
From this we know that Spec vP is a theta-position. We know this because 
that position is occupied by an argument, and by the Theta-Criterion, argu￾ments must occupy (be externally merged into) theta-positions.
From this point of view, consider the passive in the examples below:
(2) a. The book was written by John. (long passive)
b. The book was written. (short passive)
I assume that both forms of the passive (with or without the by-phrase) 
involve vP. After all, in (2a) the external argument is realized as a by-phrase, 
and in (2b) the external argument is detectable through entailments (e.g., the 
book was written iff somebody or something wrote the book). If there were no 
vP in (2a,b), then there would be no evidence for the presence of an external 
argument (e.g., no by-phrase and no entailments).
But if (2a) and (2b) involve vP, then an argument must fill Spec vP by the 
Theta-Criterion (because Spec vP is a theta-position). Therefore, both forms 
of the passive in (2) will involve a syntactically projected external argument. 
But this means that the implicit argument in (2b) will be syntactically pro￾jected. As noted in chapter 1, a parallel argument can be given based on the 
Argument Criterion. We will return to by-phrases in chapter 6 and show that 
a similar argument holds for projecting them in Spec vP.A Theory of Implicit Arguments 55
To clarify these issues, compare the analysis outlined above with the 
account of implicit arguments in Bruening 2013. Bruening gives the follow￾ing structure for implicit arguments (modified slightly):
(3) PassP
Pass VoiceP
Voice VP
V DP
About this structure, he proposes “that passive is a head (Pass) that selects a 
projection of Voice that has not yet projected its external argument” (pg. 22). 
He elaborates on how the structure is interpreted as follows: “Although Pass 
syntactically selects an unsaturated Voice projection, it has the property of 
requiring that all of the arguments be saturated. This means that if the external 
argument of Voice has not been saturated, Pass will have to saturate it. It does 
this by existentially binding it. As stated earlier, all the evidence indicates that 
the external argument of a short passive is existentially quantified” (pg. 23).
Sigurðsson and Wood (2021:584), who adopt a very similar system, put this 
as follows: “In both the active and the passive structures, there is a Voice head 
that introduces agentive semantics. In actives, the agent is projected syntacti￾cally in Spec, VoiceP. In passives, the agent remains part of the semantics of 
Voice, but is not projected syntactically.” In fact, they characterize this view 
as the “standard view”: “the standard view is that in languages like English 
(with periphrastic, participle-based passives), a Passive head attaches outside 
of a specifierless VoiceP” (pg. 602). As with Bruening (2013), Legate (2014), 
and Pylkkänen (2008a), Sigurðsson and Wood (2021) fail to discuss the well￾known Binding Theory data discussed in example (1), chapter 2.
The structure in (3) is a violation of the Theta-Criterion. In Bruening’s sys￾tem, the external argument in the active is merged into Spec VoiceP, therefore 
Spec VoiceP is a theta-position. But in (3), Spec VoiceP is not projected. 
Therefore, the Theta-Criterion is incompatible with such representations.
Bruening’s generalization that the external argument of the short passive is 
existentially quantified is found fairly frequently in the literature (e.g., Wil￾liams 1987:155). However, as shown in chapter 2, the claim is not correct. 
There are in fact three different cases of implicit arguments in the passive: 
generic, existential, and definite.
Putting aside this issue of interpretation, consider the semantic values that 
Bruening gives for Pass (passive), PassP, and Voice (for the example “The 
senator was bribed.”).56 Chapter 4
(4) a. ⟦Voice⟧ = λfλxλe.f(e) & Initiator(e,x)
b. ⟦Pass⟧  = λfλe.∃x:f(e,x)
c. ⟦PassP⟧ = λe.∃x:bribing(e,the senator) & Initiator(e,x)
Notice that in (4c) the argument of Initiator has been satisfied, yet no external 
argument has been merged into the syntactic representation (rather, the argu￾ment of Initiator has been existentially closed). Syntactically, Voice is an 
argument-introducing head, but it has not introduced an argument in (3), violat￾ing the Argument Criterion. This is another way to look at the incompatibility 
of Bruening’s theory with the Merge-based theory of argument structure.
To summarize the discussion, we have the following two theories and their 
properties:
(5) Collins 2005a (see also Angelopoulos, Collins, and Terzi 2020):
a. Principles: Argument Criterion/Theta-Criterion
b. Prediction: Implicit arguments are syntactically projected.
c.  Empirical support: distribution of reflexives, reciprocals, pronouns, 
Helke expressions, and secondary predicates in the short passive in 
English
(6) Bruening 2013 (see also Legate 2014 and Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, 
and Schäfer 2015):
a. Principles: no Argument Criterion/Theta-Criterion, only formal 
semantics
b. Prediction: Implicit arguments are not syntactically projected.
c.  Empirical problems: distribution of reflexives, reciprocals, pronouns, 
Helke expressions, and secondary predicates in the short passive in 
English
4.2 Licensing Implicit Arguments
Following Rizzi (1986:518), a general theory of any kind of empty element 
will have to specify (a) how they are formally licensed, and (b) how they are 
interpreted. Rizzi puts it this way: “The minimal contribution that is to be 
expected from a theory of a null element is that it should specify (a) the condi￾tions that formally license the null element (the conditions that allow it to 
occur in a given environment) and (b) the way in which the content of the null 
element (minimally, its phi-features) is determined or ‘recovered’, from the 
phonetically realized environment.”
As explained in the discussion of the Merge-based theory of argument 
structure above, implicit arguments are syntactically projected elements. A Theory of Implicit Arguments 57
Therefore, in formulating a theory of implicit arguments, we need to address 
the following three questions:
(7)  a.  What kind of empty element is an implicit argument?
b.  How is it licensed syntactically?
c.  How is it interpreted?
As for (7a), it is clear that implicit arguments are pronominal in nature. 
They can be understood indexically to be first- or second-person pronouns, 
or they can have antecedents or they can be bound by a quantifier phrase. So, 
the choice is between the two pronominal empty categories: small pro and big 
PRO. Prototypical cases of PRO are licensed in the specifier of an infinitival 
TP, unlike all of the cases of implicit arguments discussed in this chapter. 
Furthermore, although implicit arguments can be bound, they are never oblig￾atorily controlled (unlike PRO). And if Hornstein 1999 is on the right track, 
obligatory control (OC) PRO reduces to a copy left by A-movement. There￾fore, I will analyze implicit arguments as pro, not PRO (see also Borer 2020 
for relevant discussion of this issue), contra Collins 2005a:104, keeping in 
mind that the distinction is subtle.
Implicit arguments are similar to nonobligatory control (NOC) PRO. Horn￾stein (1999:91) notes: “I have said very little about NOC PRO. I have silently 
assumed that it is identical to pro, the null pronominal found in various 
Romance and East Asian languages. This pro can be interpreted as a pronoun, 
either definite (hence similar to he, they, she, etc.) or indefinite (like English 
one). The latter underlies the so-called arbitrary reading. This requires assum￾ing that pro can be licensed in English in NOC configurations.”
It may be that NOC PRO has the same analysis as the implicit arguments 
discussed in this chapter, and that a unified theory of both—that is, implicit 
arguments and NOC PRO—can be formulated. I will leave a more detailed 
comparison of implicit arguments and NOC PRO to future work.
What is the syntactic category of an implicit argument? Is it DP or NP or 
something else? I assume that arguments are DPs (see Gambarage and Mat￾thewson 2022), and that pronouns are arguments. Therefore, pronouns in gen￾eral (whether overt or covert) are DPs. Since implicit arguments are covert 
pronouns, they are also DPs. Empirically, implicit arguments can take DP 
antecedents, bind reflexives and pronouns (which are DPs), and have definite 
interpretations (e.g., as indexicals), so it makes sense to analyze them as DPs. 
I will take the strong position that all three types of implicit arguments 
(generic, existential, and definite) are DPs.
As for licensing, I propose that implicit arguments are caseless. In mini￾malist syntax, being caseless comes down to lacking an uninterpretable 58 Chapter 4
structural Case feature [uCase] (for a precursor, see Epstein 1984:503, fn. 8, 
which gives the filter *[pro + Case]; see also Borer 1998:81, Borer 2020:127).
(8)  Implicit argument pro lacks a structural Case feature [uCase].
Nothing special needs to be said about UG or particular I-languages (on 
I-languages, see Chomsky 1986) to allow (8). Pronouns are defined by various 
sets of features (person, number, gender, case). (8) specifies just one of the pos￾sible ways of defining a pronoun in terms of features. In other words, the 
existence of a pronoun lacking [uCase] is an immediate consequence of a UG 
that allows for pronouns defined by various sets of features. A particular 
I-language could only exclude implicit arguments defined as in (8) if there 
was some way for a child to learn that there were no syntactically projected 
implicit arguments, which seems highly unlikely. Therefore, I speculate that 
implicit arguments exist in all I-languages, and in each I-language they are 
characterized by (8) (see the wedge argument in section 4.6 below).
From the assumption in (8), I draw the following conclusions about implicit 
argument pro (but not about the pro found in null subject languages, like 
Spanish or Italian for Finnish):
(9)  a.  Implicit arguments are null.
b. Implicit arguments cannot be the goal for Agree.
c. Implicit arguments are always in situ.
d. When the implicit argument alternates with an overt argument, 
the overt argument is a PP or a KP, not a DP.
Overt DPs such as John or the dog all bear Case. In fact, the Case Filter is 
often stated with a proviso about phonetic overtness (see Chomsky 1995:111 
for a discussion of this):
(10)  ­Every phonetically realized NP must be assigned (abstract) Case.
Putting aside the issue of the distribution of PRO, and assuming (10) to be 
at least descriptively accurate, it follows that implicit arguments will never 
be overtly realized, because they do not have a structural Case feature. This 
statement might seem like a tautology, because “implicit” means “not overly 
realized.” However, the point is that the null arguments of the passive (and 
other constructions, such as nominalizations) will not alternate with overt 
pronouns, precisely because they lack Case and so cannot be realized overtly. 
In this property, implicit arguments differ from pro in null subject languages, 
which do have a uCase feature (see Holmberg 2010:97, 99).
If we assume that Agree needs an unchecked Case feature (the Activity 
Condition), then it follows that an implicit argument will never be the goal for A Theory of Implicit Arguments 59
Agree. Therefore, an implicit argument will never agree with T (the tense 
head). In this way, implicit arguments are very different from the null sub￾jects found in Italian and Spanish, which do agree with T (see Holmberg 
2010:97). So, even though English has implicit arguments, it does not count as 
a null subject language in the classical sense.
Furthermore, if we assume that A-movement requires Agree, then no 
A-movement will be possible. From this, it follows that implicit arguments 
never appear in positions normally associated with the structural Cases: nomi￾native, accusative, or genitive. Rather, implicit arguments are forced to remain 
in situ in their theta-position (externally merged position). For example, in the 
passive, the implicit argument pro remains in Spec vP.
Could an implicit argument undergo A’-movement? I assume that this is 
impossible, perhaps because implicit arguments lack any kind of [uWH] 
(unvalued WH) feature that would allow them to be active for A’-movement 
(assuming an Activity Condition for A’-movement). See Müller 2019:61 for 
compelling evidence that the implicit argument in the passive cannot undergo 
A’-movement to Spec CP (giving rise to V/2).
Most of the examples of implicit arguments surveyed below have the prop￾erty that they alternate with PPs or KPs of various kinds (on KPs, see chap￾ters 6 and 9 for examples). For example, the implicit argument in the passive 
alternates with a by-phrase. The dative implicit argument alternates with a 
to-phrase (see section 4.4.2 below). Since these PPs and KPs lack structural 
Case, it is not surprising to find them alternating with implicit argument pro, 
which also lacks Case. This shows that there are two ways for an argument in 
Spec vP to lack a structural Case feature: either Spec vP is the DP pro lacking 
Case, or it is a KP with a DP complement (a by-phrase).
A related theory would be that all implicit arguments are actually accom￾panied by a null K. For example, in the passive the implicit argument would 
be [KP by pro], where by is unpronounced. This theory (the covert KP theory) 
has the benefit of making implicit arguments completely parallel to overtly 
occurring arguments (by-phrases) in the passive and other constructions. It 
also does not need to assume that pro lacks a structural Case feature, since 
pro is the complement of by, which can presumably check/value/assign struc￾tural Case. It also explains why implicit arguments appear in non-Case posi￾tions, because they are KPs that by assumption do not have a Case feature. 
However, the covert KP theory needs to explain how the preposition comes 
to be null (see Collins 2007 for a discussion of the licensing conditions of 
null prepositions). While this theory is an interesting approach, I will not 
pursue it here.60 Chapter 4
4.3 Interpreting Implicit Arguments
Setting aside the existential interpretation of the implicit argument in the pas￾sive (see section 4.5 below for discussion), implicit arguments can be inter￾preted in the same way as any other pronoun (including small pro). They may 
be understood indexically (referring to the speaker or hearer). They may be 
understood by virtue of an antecedent (either in the same sentence or in earlier 
sentences). Lastly, they may be understood as bound variables. A special case 
of the bound variable interpretation is the generic interpretation (binding by a 
null generic operator Gen). These interpretations are the following:
(11)  a.  indexical interpretations
b. coreferential with antecedent
c. bound variable
d. generic
Other than the existential interpretation, these seem to be the same inter￾pretations found in null subject languages with small pro. In particular, in a 
string of papers Holmberg and his colleagues have documented that in so￾called “partial null subject languages” (e.g., Finnish); the small pro subject can 
have a generic interpretation (see Holmberg 2005, 2010; Holmberg, Nayudu 
and Sheehan 2009; Holmberg and Phimsawat 2017).
Holmberg (2010:93) claims that “Null existential indefinites do not exist in 
active clauses in any language that I have encountered, and there is some rea￾son to believe that they do not exist at all.” This is a sharp contrast to implicit 
arguments, which can be understood as bound by an existential operator in 
the short passive. I speculate that this gap is related (at least in part) to agree￾ment. Subject pro agrees with T in languages like Italian and Finish, but I 
have argued that the existential implicit argument has no phi-features, mak￾ing agreement impossible.
The only type of interpretation that implicit arguments lack (but overt pro￾nouns possess) seems to be the deictic pointing interpretation illustrated here:
(12)  HE is guilty! (pointing to the criminal)
The constraint can be illustrated with the passive:
(13)  a.  John was seen. (pointing to the person who saw John)
b.  John was seen by HIM. (pointing to the person who saw John)
While (13b) is acceptable in a pointing context, (13a) is not. This shows that 
implicit arguments cannot be used in a deictic pointing context.
This prohibition seems to be closely related to another property of implicit 
arguments:A Theory of Implicit Arguments 61
(14)  Implicit arguments cannot be focused.
This property of implicit arguments follows from the assumption that focus 
requires an intonational contour realized by an overt DP. In other words, (14) 
is part of a larger generalization prohibiting covert arguments from being 
focused (including all kinds of pro and PRO).
4.4 A Survey of Implicit Arguments in English
The assumptions (8–11) above constitute a general theory of implicit argu￾ments. In this section, I discuss a range of constructions having implicit argu￾ments and show how the assumptions given in (8–11) apply in each case. I will 
discuss evaluative adjectives, implicit datives, middles, and nominalizations.
4.4.1 Evaluative Adjectives
Evaluative adjectives provide a prominent example of implicit arguments in 
English (see also Kimball 1971; Roeper 1987:275; Bhatt and Pancheva 2017):
(15)  a.  It is fun to play baseball.
b.  (∀x) if x plays baseball, it is fun for x.
As Epstein (1984) argues, the interpretation of (15a) is given in (15b). In 
other words, (15) involves an implicit argument pro of fun, which controls the 
PRO subject of the embedded infinitival clause. Epstein proposes that pro is 
a universal quantifier: “in the correct S-structure representation of the sen￾tence, so-called PRO is controlled by (obligatorily controlled with) a base￾generated quantificational empty category, namely, pro, occupying the governed 
complement NP position to the adjective” (pg. 502).
However, it is clear that evaluative predicates do not always involve univer￾sal quantification, as in the following example:
(16)  a.  It was fun to promote myself at the conference.
b. It was fun pro1
 [PRO1
 to promote myself at the conference.]
c. John said it was fun to promote himself at the conference.
d. John1
 said it was fun pro1
 [PRO1
 to promote himself at the conference].
I assume that pro in (16b) occupies a theta-position of the adjective phrase 
headed by fun, and so appears in situ in a caseless position, alternating with a 
for-phrase. In (16b), in order to account for the first-person singular form of 
the reflexive, we must analyze pro1
 as an indexical referring to the speaker 
and controlling PRO. In (16d), the implicit argument is bound by its anteced￾ent John.
It is also possible for the implicit argument to be bound by a quantifier:62 Chapter 4
(17)  a.  ­Every boy said it would be fun to promote himself.
b.  [Every boy]1
 said it would be fun pro1
 [PRO1
 to promote himself].
In (17b), the implicit argument is bound by the quantifier phrase every boy, 
and receives a bound variable interpretation.
Therefore, I claim that in (15a) the implicit argument is just a pronoun (and 
not a universal quantifier, contra Epstein 1984), and it can be interpreted in 
the same way as other pronouns. When there is a universal reading, there is a 
generic null operator Gen in the sentence binding pro (just as the implicit 
argument of the passive can be bound by a null generic operator; see chap￾ter 2). This approach seems more plausible (and uniform across the various 
examples in (16) and (17)) than Epstein’s approach, where he assumes that 
“This element (pro) receives a universal quantifier interpretation in English 
only if it is antecedentless” (pg. 502, fn. 6). (See also Bhatt and Pancheva 
2017:24, which also invokes a generic operator for evaluative predicates.)
As shown above, the implicit argument for evaluative predicates can receive 
a generic, definite, or bound variable interpretation. Can it be understood exis￾tentially? In their overview, Bhatt and Pancheva (2017:25) conclude that “Exis￾tentially quantifying the implicit argument results in a meaning that is too 
weak.” Consider the following example:
(18)  Context: We are all going out to a bar, but we need to choose a desig￾nated driver for the way home. I say one of the following to our group:
a. It is important to not drink tonight.
b. For one of us, it is important to not drink tonight.
(18b) fits the context, but not (18a). Rather, (18a) uttered in the given context 
implies that the speaker or people in general should not drink tonight. In other 
words, (18a) does not seem to be existentially interpreted; rather, it seems 
stronger (in that it entails an existential interpretation).
The examples in (18) are in the present tense. But a similar lack of existential 
interpretation also arises for evaluative predicates in past tense sentences:
(19)  Context: Yesterday, I went to a baseball game. When a batter hit a home 
run in the fourth inning, a fan seated high up in the bleachers caught it. 
The next day, I report what happened as follows:
a. Yesterday, it was great to catch that home run in the fourth inning.
b. Yesterday, for somebody or the other, it was great to catch that home 
run in the fourth inning.
Although (19b) seems OK in context, (19a) does not seem to fit the context. 
Rather, (19a) uttered in the given context implies that the speaker or addressee 
caught the home run. (19a) does not seem to have an interpretation involving A Theory of Implicit Arguments 63
existential interpretation. To get the existential interpretation, an explicit 
phrase such as somebody or the other in (19b) needs to be added.
Another example of a past tense sentence is given below (thanks to Frie￾derike Moltmann for discussing this issue):
(20)  Context: There was an exercise class. Some people are in shape and had 
an easy time. Others are out of shape and had a difficult time.
a.  Yesterday it was easy to do the workout, and it was difficult to do it.
b. Yesterday, for some, it was easy to do the workout, for others it was 
difficult.
(20b) reports on the situation accurately, but (20a) seems to be reporting on 
contradictory opinions of a single person (e.g., the speaker). In other words, 
(20a) does not seem to have the interpretation in (20b); rather, (20a) means 
something like “In some respects, it was easy to do the workout and in some 
respects it was difficult to do it.”
The generalization seems to be that the implicit argument of evaluative 
adjectives cannot be an existentially bound variable. If true, such facts sug￾gest that the existential interpretation of an implicit argument is not possible 
across all constructions. Rather, where it exists, it must be licensed by some 
particular morpheme that denotes an existential operator. No such morpheme 
is present with evaluative predicates. I return to the existential interpretation 
of implicit arguments in the passive in section 4.5 below.
4.4.2 Implicit Datives
A similar case occurs with the dative argument of verbs of saying (for discus￾sion see Landau 2010; Rizzi 1986):
(21)  a.  John signaled (to Mary) to leave.
b.  John whispered (to Mary) to leave.
c.  John said (to Mary) to leave.
In these cases, the implicit dative argument obligatorily controls PRO in 
the embedded infinitival clause. Consider the following example from Lan￾dau 2010:367:
(22)  a.  Mary hated it when we said to behave herself.
b. Mary1
 hated it when we said pro1
 [PRO1
 to behave herself].
In (22b), Mary binds the implicit dative argument of say, which in turn 
controls PRO. This analysis makes the prediction that if the implicit argu￾ment of say is replaced by an overt argument, control by Mary should be 
blocked:64 Chapter 4
(23)  *Mary1
 hated it when we said to Jim [PRO1
 to behave herself ].
About control by an implicit argument, I agree with Landau (2010:357), 
who argues: “Although they participate in control relations, implicit argu￾ments are standardly viewed as unprojected theta-roles, absent from the 
syntax. I challenge this view and argue that implicit arguments are syntacti￾cally represented.”
However, the theory developed in this chapter (as well as other theories in 
this monograph) differs from Landau’s. In particular, Landau claims that 
there are two types of implicit arguments, weak implicit arguments and strong 
implicit arguments. Furthermore, he claims that the implicit argument in the 
passive is a WIA and cannot be modified by a secondary predicate. But chap￾ter 3 showed the implicit argument in the passive can be modified by a sec￾ondary predicate. So, I reject Landau’s classification of the implicit argument 
in the passive as a WIA, and correspondingly I reject his division between 
WIAs and SIAs. In my theory, there is only one type of implicit argument 
governed by the assumptions in (8–11).
The example in (22) shows that implicit dative arguments can be inter￾preted as definite. Can they also be existential and generic? I have not yet 
investigated this issue.
4.4.3 Middles
Stroik (1992, 1995, 1999, 2000, 2005, 2006) (see also Hoekstra and Roberts 
1993; Postal 2010) argues that the external argument in the middle is syntacti￾cally realized as PRO (but see Newman 2020 for a very rich empirical discus￾sion that assumes that the external argument is not projected). The example 
below is from Stroik 1992:134, (20):
(24)  a  Bureaucrats bribe easily.
b.  [IP bureaucrats [I’I [VP [VP bribe easily] PRO]]]
The arguments that Stroik gives for a syntactically present external argu￾ment involve Principle A of the Binding Theory and control of PRO in adjunct 
clauses. For example, consider the following example involving a reflexive 
pronoun contained in the subject (from Stroik 1992:129):
(25)  Letters to oneself compose quickly.
According to Stroik the DP letters to oneself starts out in object position 
and moves to subject position. When in object position, the reflexive is bound 
by the implicit argument.
We can strengthen this argument by looking at Principle B effects:A Theory of Implicit Arguments 65
(26)  a.  Letters to yourself compose more quickly than letters to other people.
b. Letters to you compose more quickly than letters to other people.
My intuition about these examples is that yourself refers to the composer in 
(26a), but you does not refer to the composer in (26b), just exactly as would be 
predicted by Principle B if there were an implicit external argument referring 
to the composer in both. If the reflexive pronoun was a logophor in (26a), 
there is no reason it would show a Principle B effect (see section 2.8 for dis￾cussion of logophoric interpretations).
Stroik (1995:168) also shows that control into adjunct clauses is possible 
with middles (see also Vinet 1987). Stroik analyzes these cases as control of 
PRO by the implicit argument of the middle:
(27)  a.  Most physics books read poorly even after reading them several times.
b. Bureaucrats bribe easily after doing them a favor or two.
Stroik argues that the implicit argument is PRO, which occupies an adjunct 
position (adjoined to VP). I reject this part of Stroik’s analysis, and propose 
instead that the implicit argument is caseless pro, which is merged into Spec 
vP, as with all external arguments. In other words, the external argument in 
the middle is projected exactly in the same way as in the active.
I do not take up the interpretation of the implicit argument in middles. For 
some discussion, see Ackema and Schoorlemer 2017:10: “A type I middle 
expresses a generic modal reading that can be roughly paraphrased as ‘any￾one could V (Adv)’. For example, this meat cuts easily can be paraphrased as 
‘anyone could cut this meat with ease’.” Their paraphrase of the middle sug￾gests that middles are always interpreted generically. From our perspective, 
the issue is whether the implicit argument in middles has existential, generic, 
and definite interpretations, just like the implicit argument in the passive. I 
have not yet investigated this issue.
4.4.4 Nominalizations
The examples in (28) show that the implicit argument in nominalizations is 
syntactically active (for control, binding, and secondary predicates) (see also 
Borer 2020 on the implicit argument of nominalizations).
(28)  a.  The attempt to leave (Williams 1987:51)
b.  Respect for oneself is important. (Williams 1987:51)
c.  Discussion of these issues stoned (Safir 1987:582)
In the theory I am developing, the representation of these examples is as 
follows:66 Chapter 4
(29)  a.  The pro1
 attempt [PRO1
 to leave]
b.  [pro1
 respect for oneself1
] is important.
c.  [pro1
 discussion of these issues [AdjP PRO1
 stoned]]
In (29a), the implicit argument controls PRO of the embedded infinitival clause. 
In (29b), the implicit argument binds the reflexive oneself. In (29c), the implicit 
argument is modified by a secondary predicate internal to the nominalization.
A famous contrast by Ross (1969:195) gives further support for implicit 
arguments in nominalizations (see also Sichel 2009 on Principle C effects in 
nominalizations):
(30)  a.  *The knowledge that Fred1 will be unpopular doesn’t bother him1
.
b. The knowledge that he1 will be unpopular doesn’t bother Fred1
.
(31)  a.       The possibility that Fred1 will be unpopular doesn’t bother him1
.
b. The possibility that he1 will be unpopular doesn’t bother Fred1
.
In (30a), the implicit argument of knowledge gives rise to a Principle C 
effect. Since possibility does not have an implicit external argument, there is 
no similar Principle C effect in (31a). This is another illustration of the syntac￾tic activity of implicit arguments. The representation of (30a) is as follows:
(32)  *The pro1
 knowledge that Fred1 will be unpopular doesn’t bother him1
.
Williams does not accept that implicit arguments are syntactically pro￾jected, but he does this at the cost of having to radically modify the Binding 
Theory: “I will explore here the possibility that the binding theory (plus con￾trol) applies not to NPs, but to the theta roles that are assigned to the NPs” 
(1987:151). In this monograph, I adopt a standard version of the Binding The￾ory (not involving theta-roles).
The structure of (29a) is given in (33) (leaving out irrelevant details; see 
Bruening 2018 and Fu, Borer, and Roeper 2001 for related proposals):
(33)
 
DP
D NP
the
N vP
∅
DP1 v’
pro
v VP
V TP
attempt
DP1 T’
PRO
T VP
to leaveA Theory of Implicit Arguments 67
In (33), the implicit argument pro is in situ in Spec vP, a caseless position—
that is, it does not have genitive Case).
Depending on the determiner and linguistic context, the implicit argument 
can be interpreted as definite (34a), bound variable (34b), generic (34c,d), or 
existential (34e):
(34)  a.  The constant promotion of himself at conferences hurt John’s career.
b. Every player was involved in the promotion of himself at matches.
c. Any attempt to promote oneself is met with opposition.
d. The exclusion of girls from school entails the denial of education.
(Borer 2020:117)
e.  ­There was an attempt to breach the fence this morning. (I don’t 
know by whom).
In (34a), the antecedent of himself is the definite implicit argument of pro￾motion. This is the same in (34b), but in this case the implicit argument is 
bound by the quantifier phrase and gets a bound variable interpretation. In 
(34c), the antecedent of the reflexive oneself is the generic pro (equivalent to 
generic one; see chapter 2 on the passive). The most natural interpretation of 
the implicit arguments in (34d) also seems to be generic pro (“One’s exclusion 
of girls from school . . .”). Lastly, the implicit argument in (34e) is existential, 
as shown clearly by the continuation.
On the existential and generic interpretations of implicit arguments in 
nominalizations, see Borer 2020. Borer argues that nominalizations lacking 
an overtly expressed external argument (short argument structure nominals) 
are actually nominalizations of verbal passives. If so, the existential interpre￾tations of implicit arguments in nominalizations could have the same analysis 
as the existential interpretations arising in the passive.
Borer (2020:116–117, 128) does not seem to recognize definite interpreta￾tions for the implicit argument in passives or nominalizations. But chapter 2 
showed that definite interpretations are possible for the passive, and (34a) 
shows a definite interpretation for the implicit argument in a nominalization.
Much more work is needed on the syntactic mechanisms giving rise to these 
interpretations (generic, existential, definite), the contexts that bring them out, 
and the syntactic diagnostics (e.g., pronoun binding) that distinguish them.
4.5 Revisiting the Passive
Consider again the passive, discussed in chapters 2 and 3:
(35)  That book was written in 1784.68 Chapter 4
Out of the blue, the most obvious interpretation of (35) is that the external 
argument is existentially quantified:
(36)  Somebody wrote that book in 1784.
The question is how the existential interpretation arises in the theory of 
implicit arguments laid out in the preceding sections. So far, in chapter 2, I 
have been assuming that in this case there is a null pronoun (proun) that is 
bound by an existential operator. The purpose of this section is to revisit this 
assumption in more detail.
First, note that overt pronouns do not generally have an existential interpre￾tation. In other words, the sentence “He left” does not have the existential 
interpretation that somebody left (unlike definite and generic interpretations, 
which overt pronouns have). So how does the implicit argument in the passive 
come to be interpreted existentially?
In line with the Merge-based approach to argument structure, I assume that 
the existential interpretation is not the result of some purely semantic rule 
(see chapter 10 for a discussion of the tension between the Merge-based 
approach and formal semantics). Rather, I assume the following:
(37)  In the existential interpretation of the passive, there is a morpheme in 
the syntactic representation that denotes an existential quantifier.
Given this general background assumption, we can divide the possibilities 
for capturing the existential interpretation in the passive into the following:
(38)  (a)  The external argument is not projected.
(Bruening 2013; Legate 2014; Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and 
Schäfer 2015; Pylkkänen 2008a)
(b)  The external argument is projected as a null pronoun.
(Collins 2005a; Borer 2020)
(c)  The external argument is projected as a null quantifier expression.
This monograph argues extensively against (38a). See the beginning of this 
chapter for a critical discussion of Bruening 2013, for example. So, here I will 
just consider (37) combined with either (38b) or (38c). As it turns out, both are 
consistent with the Merge-based approach.
Consider first (38b), which is consistent with the general theory of implicit 
arguments that treats them as caseless pro. There are two possibilities consis￾tent with the assumptions in (37) and (38b). First, there could be a null opera￾tor (similar to the generic operator Gen in chapter 2, following Moltmann 
2006) that unselectively binds the implicit argument pro. Second, there could 
be a head (similar to Bruening’s Pass and Pylkkänen’s VoicePass; see also A Theory of Implicit Arguments 69
Borer 2020:127), that unselectively binds the syntactically projected implicit 
argument pro.
Under either approach, I assume that the existential quantifier is unre￾stricted, accounting for (a) the wide-ranging domain of quantification (see 
McCawley’s remarks in (23)), and (b) the lack of phi-features of an existen￾tially bound implicit argument.
Consider the possibility that there is an existential operator OP unselec￾tively binding the implicit argument pro. The structure is given below:
(39) vP
OPi vP
DP v’
proi
The model for this kind of analysis could be Diesing’s (1992:6) analysis of 
indefinites (see also Zimmermann 2007): “Here the variable introduced by 
the indefinite is bound by an implicit existential quantifier that ‘existentially’ 
closes off the nuclear scope, preventing the occurrence of unbound variables.” 
Crucially, Diesing (1992) does not link such an existential interpretation to 
the passive, but rather to the indefinite arguments dominated by VP: “existen￾tial closure applies to nuclear scopes (or VPs) only, as implied by the tree￾splitting algorithm” (pg. 57). For an application of existential closure in 
Diesing’s sense to the implicit argument in the passive, see Murphy 2015.
One question this approach raises is what determines the syntactic distri￾bution of the existential OP. Can it adjoin to any maximal projection? Or is it 
restricted to VPs only? A closely related question is whether existential inter￾pretations are available for implicit arguments in general (no matter what con￾struction they appear in). If the existential interpretation were freely available, 
tied only to the presence of existential OP adjoined to XP, it is not clear why 
an existential interpretation is missing for evaluative predicates (as discussed 
earlier in this chapter). Another question is whether it is ever possible for a 
single existential operator to unselectively bind two implicit arguments at the 
same time.
Consider now the possibility that there is a functional head introducing the 
existential quantifier. One possibility is that Voice (in the sense of Collins 
2005a) itself introduces the existential interpretation. So, in the structure 
[VoiceP Voice [vP pro v’]], Voice would be an unselective existential quantifier 
binding the implicit argument pro. But not all passives involve an existential 
interpretation. For example, when the by-phrase is present, there is no exis￾tential interpretation (unless the by-phrase itself contains an existential 70 Chapter 4
quantifier phrase). Also, as shown in chapter 2, sometimes short passives are 
interpreted with a generic or definite external argument. So, there would have 
to be two different Voice heads: one that unselectively binds a variable, and 
the other that does not. Alternatively, there would have to be a Voice head 
with an optional existential quantifier feature. This analysis raises the ques￾tion of which functional heads could have an optional existential quantifier 
feature. It also involves an instance of syntactic bundling of two very differ￾ent syntactic functions onto one syntactic head: Voice plus existential quanti￾fication (see the discussion in section 8.6 on semantic decompositionality, and 
Kayne 2005:212 on the Principle of Decompositionality).
An alternative is to optionally generate a functional projection between 
Voice (in the sense of Collins 2005a) and vP that existentially closes the 
implicit argument of the passive. The structure would be as follows:
(40) VoiceP
Voice ∃P
∃i vP
DPi v’
pro
The two issues that need to be addressed in such an analysis are: (a) What 
is the syntactic distribution of ∃P? Is it limited to the passive, or is it more 
widely available? Can it appear with any vP (as the discussion in Diesing 1992 
seems to suggest)? (b) Why is the existential quantifier the head of a clausal 
functional projection in (40), whereas it seems to head a QP (quantifier phrase) 
in other uses (e.g., some boys)?
Let us now consider possibility (38c): the implicit external argument in the 
passive is a null quantifier expression. For convenience, let’s call this expression 
UN, which stands for unspecified quantifier. English has a variety of contexts 
that permit null existential quantifiers. For example, Collins and Postal (2014) 
analyze negative existentials such as no boy as having the structure [[NEG SOME] 
boy], where some is a covert existential quantifier. The claim of (38c) is that the 
implicit argument of the passive can also be a null existential quantifier.
Furthermore, I assume that UN is unrestricted (there is no domain restric￾tion), accounting for (a) the wide-ranging domain of quantification (see McCaw￾ley’s remarks in (23)), and (b) the lack of phi-features of the implicit argument.
The problem with this approach is that if UN is available for the passive, 
why is it not available for all the implicit argument constructions? I pointed 
out above that evaluative adjective constructions are not interpreted existen￾tially. If UN is possible, then why isn’t the following representation possible?A Theory of Implicit Arguments 71
(41)  It was fun UN1
 [PRO1
 to swim].
Intended: “For somebody, it was fun to swim.”
I propose that the existential reading of the passive is given by UN (a kind 
of null argument), but that UN itself is only licensed in Spec vP. In section 6.7, 
I propose that by-phrases are constrained to Spec vP because they have the 
c-selectional feature [__vP]. The simplest assumption for UN is that it has the 
same syntactic c-selectional feature.
In summary, I have proposed two possible sources for the existential inter￾pretation of the implicit argument in the passive.
(42)  a.  Existential quantifier binding pro
b.  Existential quantifier argument (UN) in Spec vP
I assume that both (42a,b) are consistent with the general Merge-based 
framework I outline in this monograph. They also happen to be very closely 
related. In both cases, an unrestricted existential quantifier with no phi￾features binds a variable. The only difference is whether the variable is a null 
pro (proun) or a trace/copy left by QR (quantifier raising) of UN. I leave it to 
other linguists to articulate the different predictions of these two possibilities. 
For example, there is the issue of how these various possibilities dovetail with 
theories of narrow scope indefinites (bare plurals) and wide scope indefinites 
(see Heim 2011 for discussion of these topics).
4.6 The Wedge
In proposing a general theory of implicit arguments, it could be argued that I 
am overgeneralizing. Even though the implicit argument in the English pas￾sive is syntactically projected (as demonstrated by the diagnostics in chap￾ters 2 and 3), perhaps there may be many other kinds of implicit arguments 
that are not syntactically projected. Perhaps there are other languages differ￾ent from English where implicit arguments are not projected syntactically at 
all (even in passives and nominalizations, for which the evidence in English 
is very strong). To find out, one would need to look at constructions and lan￾guages on a case-by-case basis and apply the tests available in each language. 
However, I want to take the strongest possible position (and therefore, the 
most easily falsifiable) and claim that all implicit arguments in all languages 
are syntactically projected.
In chapters 2 and 3, I argued that the implicit argument in the passive is syn￾tactically projected on the basis of the distribution of reflexives, reciprocals, 
pronouns, Helke expressions, and secondary predicates. I will now argue that 
all implicit arguments (across different constructions and different languages) 72 Chapter 4
are syntactically projected, whether or not any syntactic data actually support 
that conclusion for a particular construction in a particular language. I will call 
this argument the wedge, because of its far-ranging consequences. The metaphor 
is that the generalizations about the English passive help to pry open a much 
larger generalization concerning implicit arguments cross-linguistically.
At least in the case of the passive, it is far from clear that a child would have 
adequate access to the relevant data to actually learn that the implicit argu￾ments are syntactically projected. Consider the well-known sentences dis￾cussed in chapter 2, repeated below:
(43)  a.  Such privileges should be kept to oneself.
(Baker, Johnson, and Roberts 1989:228; Roberts 1987:162)
b. Damaging testimony is always given about oneself in secret trials.
(Roberts 1987:162)
Exactly when would a child have access to this kind of data (involving a pas￾sive, a verb with a PP argument, and the reflexive oneself ), which seem to be 
rather complex sentence types? And if somehow the child did hear these kinds 
of sentences, would they understand them in context? And if they understood 
them in context, would they parse them correctly? And if they parsed them 
correctly, would they thereby draw the conclusion that the implicit argument is 
syntactically projected (or would they chalk the data up to exempt anaphora)? 
Although I have not done a corpus study, my suspicion is that the relevant data 
are vanishingly rare, especially in child-directed speech.
Rather, it is more plausible to assume that the child does not have to learn 
anything at all about implicit arguments. Suppose the child hears an example 
of the passive, even a very simple one such as (44):
(44)  ­These peas have not been eaten.
If the child understands that the external argument is involved—that is, 
somebody has not eaten the peas—then given the AC/TC from chapter 1, they 
automatically assume that there is a syntactically projected implicit argument. 
So, instead of being guided by empirical phenomena related to whether or not 
implicit arguments are syntactically projected, the child is guided by princi￾ples of UG.
In other words, data from implicit arguments support a classical poverty of 
stimulus argument for a principle of UG. Principle P (implicit arguments in 
the passive are syntactically projected) is not learnable from the primary lin￾guistic data, therefore P must be a principle of UG or must follow from princi￾ples of UG (in this case the AC/TC).
But if the AC/TC holds, it entails that implicit arguments are syntactically 
projected. Therefore, it follows that across different kinds of constructions A Theory of Implicit Arguments 73
(e.g., evaluative adjectives, implicit datives, middles, nominalizations) and dif￾ferent languages (e.g., English, Italian, Greek, Ewe, Buli, Oshiwambo) implicit 
arguments are always syntactically projected.
Here is the wedge argument laid out step-by-step:
(45) a. The distribution of reflexives, reciprocals, pronouns, Helke expressions, 
and secondary predicates shows that the implicit argument in the 
English short passive is syntactically projected.
b. The child does not have access to the relevant data. That is, the 
child does not have access to the data that require a syntactically 
represented external argument (i.e., the distribution of reflexives, 
reciprocals, pronouns, Helke expressions, and secondary 
predicates).
c.  Therefore, there is a principle of UG (AC/TC) forcing implicit 
arguments to project syntactically in the passive in English.
d.  Principles of UG are not specific to the passive, or any other con￾struction (because particular constructions are not part of UG).
e. Principles of UG hold for all I-languages.
f. Therefore, implicit arguments are syntactically projected in a wide 
variety of constructions across all I-languages.
This argument goes from particular facts about the English passive to a 
general cross-linguistic theory of implicit arguments.
4.7 Complement Deletion
Consider the case of the verb eat (and related verbs such as bake and read; see 
Levin 1993:33 for a list of additional verbs):
(46)  a.  John ate.
b. John ate something.
c.  John ate *(it) raw.
It seems as if (46a) entails (46b), in the sense that whenever (46a) is true, so 
is (46b). Therefore, on the basis of this entailment, one may want to say that 
(46a) has a syntactically projected implicit theme argument (i.e., the thing 
eaten). However, the ungrammaticality of (46c) without the pronoun casts 
doubt on that conclusion. If there were a syntactically present implicit argu￾ment in (46a), then it should be able to be modified by the object-oriented 
secondary predicate (see chapter 3, where it is shown that the implicit argu￾ment in the passive can be modified by a secondary predicate). But (46c) is 
completely unacceptable without the pronoun, suggesting that there is no syn￾tactically projected implicit argument in (46a).74 Chapter 4
An alternative, which I will not pursue, is that there is a syntactically pro￾jected implicit argument in (46a), but it is somehow inaccessible to secondary 
predicates and control. I leave this kind of analysis to others.
Rather, I propose that (46a) has no implicit argument at all, syntactically or 
semantically. And furthermore, the truth conditions of (46a,b) are as in (47a,b):
(47)  a.  ⟦John ate.⟧ = ∃e[eat(e) ˄ Agent(e,John)]
b. ⟦John ate something.⟧ = ∃e∃x[eat(e) ˄ Agent(e,John) ˄ 
Theme(e,x)]
In other words, in (46a) there is neither a syntactic nor semantic implicit 
theme. But then how can one account for the entailment relation between 
(46a) and (46b)? I suggest that it is a matter of real-world knowledge that when 
one eats, something needs to be eaten. But this information is not reflected 
in any way in the syntactic representation or in the semantic values of the 
intransitive verb. My approach is similar to that of Fodor and Fodor (1980:760), 
who account for the entailment in terms of meaning postulates: “the entail￾ments of verbs are handled not by lexical rules which associate quantifica￾tional structure with syntactic form, but rather by rules of logical inference.” 
(See also Williams 2015:106 for relevant discussion.)
Some support for this analysis comes from the following examples (on the 
use of resultatives with unspecified object verbs, see Levin and Rappaport 
Hovav 1995:37–39):
(48)  a.    He ate his way across the buffet table.
b. *He ate rice his way across the buffet table.
(49)  a.      He ate himself sick.
b. *He ate meat himself sick.
(50)  a.      He ate us out of house and home.
b. *He ate our food us out of house and home.
There are lots of uses of eat, which seem to retain the core meaning of 
eat but are impossible with any kind of expressed theme (the object being 
eaten). I suggest that these uses of eat have no syntactic or semantic theme 
whatsoever.
Consider also the fact that the understood argument of eat can never be real￾ized with any kind of KP or PP (unlike by-phrases in passives). This fact would 
be explained if there were no syntactic argument to project in the first place.
(51)  a.  *I ate by the food.
b. *I ate with the food.
c. *I ate to the food.A Theory of Implicit Arguments 75
d. *I ate for the food.
e. *I ate of the food.
Intended: “I ate the food.”
The proposal that intransitive eat has the semantic value in (47a) supports 
an approach to internal arguments where they are introduced by argument￾introducing heads separate from the lexical verb (see Ramchand 2008 for a 
concrete proposal). In other words, in (46b) the internal argument something
is introduced by an argument-introducing verbal head vTHEME or vIA (IA =
internal argument). This head is syntactically and semantically distinct from 
the external argument little v and also from Appl. When vIAP is present, there 
is a syntactically projected internal argument, and the interpretation is (47b). 
When vIAP is absent, there is no syntactically projected internal argument, 
and the interpretation is (47a).
The analysis is illustrated below:
(52)  John ate the rice.
(53) TP
DP T’
T vP
<DP> v’
v vIA P
DP vIA’
the rice vIA VP
eat
Similar remarks hold for Rizzi’s (1986:503) discussion of the following 
English cases:
(54)  a.     This leads people to the following conclusion.
b.     This leads to the following conclusion.
c.       This leads people [PRO to conclude what follows].
d.  *This leads [PRO to conclude what follows].
The example in (54d) is important in that it shows that obligatory control is 
syntactic. Even if there were a pragmatic inference from (54b) to the proposi￾tion that somebody was led to a certain conclusion, such a pragmatic infer￾ence is not sufficient to license control of PRO in (54d). In other words, 
whenever there is obligatory control, we can be certain that the antecedent in 
that obligatory control relation is a syntactically projected DP.76 Chapter 4
Why are sentences parallel to (54d) acceptable in Italian (see Rizzi 1986:503, 
example (8))? I assume that Italian has a null direct object form of the generic 
pronoun one, which English lacks. It is unclear to me what accounts for this dif￾ference, although it is plausibly related to the fact that Italian independently has 
null subjects, which are pro with a uCase feature. A cross-linguistic survey of 
the relationship between null subjects and null objects is needed.
The difference between Italian (presence of syntactically projected implicit 
theme) and English (absence of syntactically projected implicit theme) might 
correspond to the difference noted by Baker (2015:203) between Shipibo and 
Godoberi in the licensing of ergative case. In Shipibo, “A pro object triggers 
ergative case on the subject.” Crucially, this generalization also holds for “an 
indefinite, existentially bound null object of a verb like ‘eat’ ” (see also Baker 
2014:350). In contrast, in Godoberi, “optionally transitive verbs with agentive 
subjects have subjects in absolutive case when they are used intransitively” 
(204). Although much more work is needed on implicit arguments in these 
languages, one way to think of this contrast is that Shibipo is like Italian, with 
null pro for objects, while Godoberi is like English with no null pro for objects.
To tie up loose ends, how does the proposed difference between English 
and Italian fit in with the very strong wedge argument (45) in the preceding 
section? More concretely, in hearing the sentence, “John ate,” why isn’t the 
child compelled (by semantic entailments) to represent this sentence with a 
syntactically projected null internal argument? It is unlikely that the child 
notices that (46c) above is absent in the data that they hear. In other words, 
just as the implicit argument in the passive can control PRO, the implicit argu￾ment in (54d) would control PRO. The representation would be:
(55)  *This leads pro1
 [PRO1
 to conclude what follows].
Note here that the object of lead is a Case position. It alternates with an 
accusative marked DP pronoun, for example. Therefore, pro in (55) does not 
qualify as an implicit argument according to the assumption in (8), since the 
pro in (55) does not lack a structural Case feature [uCase]. In general, English 
does not have structurally Case-marked pro.
The direct object position of a verb is different from Spec vP (the position 
for the implicit argument in the passive), in that it is a Case position (it gets 
its accusative Case from v). But this property prevents the implicit argu￾ment pro (available as part of UG) from appearing there. In order for a lan￾guage to license null objects, there must be some independent system of 
licensing null objects (like the null generic object in Italian, or like the 
indefinite object drop in Spanish; see Campos 1986). If a child hears “John 
eats” in a language L and there is no independent evidence for null objects A Theory of Implicit Arguments 77
in L, then (since implicit object pro is impossible) they will simply assume 
that the argument-introducing head vIA is absent, yielding a language like 
English.
4.8 Conclusion
In this chapter I presented a general theory of implicit arguments: an implicit 
argument is pro without a [uCase] feature. As such, it cannot appear in any 
position associated with Case assignment (Spec of finite TP, Spec DP). As a 
pronoun, it can be interpreted as (a) indexical, (b) coreferential with an ante￾cedent, or as (b) a bound variable. Although I have only discussed English in 
this chapter, I put forth the strongest possible hypothesis that such an analysis 
of implicit arguments holds as part of UG, hence for all human languages. If 
this is true, then all languages have null pro. This means that the terms null 
subject language and pro-drop parameter need to be taken as applying spe￾cifically to languages that have pro bearing an uninterpretable Case feature 
(e.g., Italian, Spanish).
In this chapter, I have not discussed intransitive verbs with definite implicit 
arguments (e.g., notice, join in, approve, watch, apply). Fodor and Fodor 
(1980) describe this class of verbs as follows: “The sentence John ate (or, at 
least, John is eating) can be used to initiate a discourse, but the sentence John 
noticed cannot; it needs some suitable prior context, such as Bill was nervously 
biting his nails, or The audience was quietly creeping out of the emergency 
exit. A natural way to describe this would be to say that John noticed entails 
not John noticed something but John noticed it; that is, that the entailed object 
of a notice-class verb is definite.” Fillmore (1986) calls these cases definite
null complements.
It is unclear how this class of verbs fits into the theory outlined in this chap￾ter. Much further work is needed. For example, does the possibility of having 
a definite null complement need to be lexically specified? What kinds of 
thematic roles can such null complements have? What kinds of syntactic 
categories can be null complements (DPs, PPs, CPs, etc.)? How does their 
interpretation differ from that of an overt definite pronoun? Do they pass any 
diagnostics for being syntactically active? For further discussion, see Fill￾more 1986, Fodor and Fodor 1980. See also Williams 2015: chapter 5 for a 
detailed discussion of possible analyses.So far in this monograph, I have focused entirely on English. I have shown 
that the implicit argument in the passive is syntactically realized, because it 
licenses secondary predicates and Helke expressions and it gives rise to Prin￾ciple A and B effects.
Recall the wedge argument from chapter 4. The conclusion of that argu￾ment was
(1)  Implicit arguments are syntactically projected in a wide variety of con￾structions across all I-languages.
The purpose of this chapter is to start to give some empirical evidence for this 
conclusion. I will present cross-linguistic evidence from three African lan￾guages: Buli (Gur: Northern Ghana) from Sulemana 2022, Oshiwambo (Bantu: 
Angola, Namibia) from Ndapo 2022, and Ewe (Kwa: Ghana, Togo, Benin) from 
Gotah 2022. Each of these three languages provides striking support for (1). I 
limit the discussion below to diagnostics for implicit arguments.
For preliminary work showing how the framework works for Indo￾European languages, see Storment 2022 for Spanish and Angelopoulos et al. 
2023 for Greek. For similar conclusions about the implicit argument in the 
German passive, see Müller 2019.
5.1 Buli
Sulemana (2022) notices the following alternation (tonal morphology plays no 
role in Sulemana’s account, so I leave out tone marking):
(2)  a. Asibi bɔni lammu.
Asibi chop meat.DEF
‘Asibi chopped the meat.’
b.  Lammu bɔni.
meat.DEF chop
‘The meat was chopped.’
5 Out of Africa80 Chapter 5
Sulemana argues that (2b) is the short passive, and not a middle. Further￾more, he shows that it is impossible in (2b) to project the external argument 
overtly. For example, no by-phrase is allowed. So, Buli only has a short pas￾sive (with no by-phrase), but no long passive.
Sulemana uses a wide range of diagnostics to show that even though the 
external argument does not appear overtly in (2b), there is a syntactically pro￾jected implicit argument. The diagnostics he makes use of are the following:
(3)  a.  entailments,
b. Principles A,B of the Binding Theory,
c.  the distribution of “for X’s own sake,”
d. control into purpose clauses, and
e. the distribution of secondary predicates.
I will illustrate just one of them here.
Consider the distribution of the phrase “for X’s own sake”:
(4) Asibi1 bɔni lammu wa1
-dek-nyiŋ.
Asibi chop meat.DEF 3SG-SELF-body
‘Asibi chopped the meat for his own sake.’
Sulemana carefully shows that the 3SG pronoun wa in wa-dek-nyiŋ can 
only be bound by a local c-commanding antecedent. Given that constraint, 
consider the passive. The context for the following sentence is that I saw Asibi 
chopping some meat in the kitchen, and I asked my friend if he was helping 
his mother cook. My friend responds:
(5)  Lammu bɔni wa1
-dek-nyiŋ.
meat.DEF chop 3SG-SELF-body
‘The meat was chopped for his own sake.’
The only possible interpretation of this sentence is that the antecedent of 
third-person singular wa is the chopper. This fact strongly suggests a syntac￾tic representation in which the implicit argument is syntactically projected, 
binding the pronoun.
Sulemana shows that when a verb lacks an external argument (overt or 
covert), “for X’s own sake” is not licensed:
(6)  *Li:ka mɔbi wa1
-dek-nyiŋ.
pot.DEF break 3SG-SELF-BODY
Intended: ‘The pot broke for his own sake.’
In English, just as in Buli, the pronoun in “for X’s own sake” can be bound 
by an implicit argument, as shown in (7).Out of Africa 81
(7)  A second inadequate (I think) interpretation has it that by helping friends 
and country, you are helping yourself. The problem with this is that it 
makes helping others something that would be done for one’s own sake.
(http://faculty.smcm.edu/mstaber/ne-8&9.htm)
In this example, the pronoun one in for one’s own sake is bound by the 
implicit argument progen of the passive be done. Such examples can be found 
on the Internet, and they are acceptable.
So, this adds another test to the tests already developed in chapters 2 and 3 
for the presence of a syntactically projected implicit argument in the short 
passive in English.
5.2 Oshiwambo
Ndapo (2022) discusses the passive construction in the Oshingandjera dialect 
of Oshiwambo. Unlike Buli, Oshiwambo allows an overt by-phrase. The 
active, short passive, and long passive are illustrated below:
(8)  a.  Ndapewa o-kw-a-lesh-a e-mbo. (active)
Ndapewa AFF-SM1-PST-read-FV CL5-book
‘Ndapewa read the book.’
b.  E-mbo o-ly-a-lesh-w-a. (short passive)
CL5-book AFF-SM5-PST-read-PASS-FV
‘The book was read.’
c. E-mbo o-ly-a-lesh-w-a ku-Ndapewa.
CL5-book AFF-SM5-PST-read-PASS-FV by-Ndapewa
‘The book was read by Ndapewa.’
The ku- in the passive by-phrase in (8c) is morphologically the class-17 loca￾tive marker.
Ndapo considers two diagnostics for the syntactic status of the implicit 
argument in the short passive:
(9)  a.  the expression “on X’s own,” and
b. reciprocals.
I will illustrate (9a) here.
Consider the distribution of the phrase “on X’s own” in Oshiwambo:
(10)  Ngame o-nd-a-lesh-a e-mbo (ku-)ngame-mwene.
1SG AFF-1SG-PST-read-FV CL5-book CL17-1SG-own
‘I read the book on my own.’82 Chapter 5
Notice that in (10) the ku- is optional, unlike the ku- found in the passive 
by-phrase. The optionality of ku- in (10) clearly distinguishes “on X’s own” 
phrases from passive by-phrases. Ndapo carefully shows that the pronoun in 
“on X’s own” can only be bound by a local c-commanding antecedent.
Given that constraint, consider the passive in the following context: the 
teacher sees a student’s assignment and is amazed by it. She asks, “Who 
helped you with the assignment?” The student replies:
(11)  O-shi-thigilwa o-sh-a-ning-w-a (ku-)ngame-mwene.
AUG-7-assignment AFF-SM7-PST-do-PASS-FV CL17-1SG-own
‘The assignment was done on my own.’
In this sentence, the 1SG pronoun ngame is bound by the implicit argu￾ment, which represents the doer of the assignment. And note that the ku- is 
optional in (11) because it is not a passive by-phrase.
When a verb does not have an external argument, it is impossible for “on 
X’s own” to refer back to the implicit argument:
(12)  a.  O-mbiga o-y-a-tanduk-a.
CL9-pot AFF-SM9-PST-break-FV
‘The pot broke.’
b.  *O-mbiga o-y-a-tanduk-a (ku-)ngame-mwene.
CL9-pot AFF-SM9-PST-break-FV CL17-1SG-own
Intended: ‘The pot broke on my own.’
5.3 Ewe
Gotah (2022) discusses the middle construction in Tongugbe, a dialect of 
Ewe. The construction is illustrated in (13). Tonal morphology plays no role in 
Gotah’s account, so I leave out tone marking:
(13)  a.  Kofi ɖa-a mɔlu.
Kofi cook-HAB rice
‘Kofi cooks rice.’
b.  Mɔlu nya ɖa-a.
rice NYA cook-HAB
‘Rice cooks easily.’
c.  Mɔlu nya ɖa-a ne Kofi.
rice NYA cook-HAB for Kofi
‘Rice cooks easily for Kofi.’
Gotah (2022) argues that (13b,c) are middles that are derived by A-movement 
of the internal argument to Spec TP. In (13b) the external argument is not Out of Africa 83
overtly realized. In (13c) the external argument is overtly realized by the for￾phrase ne Kofi (on a related analysis of middles, see Stroik 1992, 1995, 1999).
Gotah (2022) argues that the implicit agent argument in (13b) is syntacti￾cally projected. The diagnostics he makes use of are the following:
(14)  a. Principles A,B of the Binding Theory,
b. control into without-adjuncts, and
c. the distribution of secondary predicates.
I will illustrate reflexive binding. Consider the following sentence:
(15)  Kofi1 gblɔ be awu nya ƒle-ɛ ne ye-ɖokoe1
.
Kofi say that shirt NYA buy-HAB for LOG-self
‘Kofi said that he enjoys buying clothes for himself.’
In this example, the implicit external argument of buy is binding the reflex￾ive ye-ɖokoe. This fact provides strong support for a syntactically projected 
implicit argument (in Spec vP), allowing the reflexive to satisfy Principle A of 
the Binding Theory. Interestingly, the implicit argument must be a null logo￾phoric pronoun here, because of the form of the reflexive (LOG-self ).6.1 Introduction
Some recent works on the passive have claimed that the by-phrase is an 
adjunct. A few quotes illustrate this claim. Consider first the following quote 
by Legate (2014:2):
(1) “The ‘by’-phrase in the passive is an adjunct in which ‘by’ assigns an ini￾tiator T-role to its DP complement, and this initiator is tied semantically to 
the initiator T-role introduced by Voice.”
Although most of Legate’s book is about Achenese, it is clear that she main￾tains an adjunct analysis for English by-phrases as well (see pg. 82).
Bruening (2013:24) maintains a similar position (see also Hallman 2015:396 
for an adjunct analysis of by-phrases similar to that of Bruening):
(2)  “As detailed earlier, by phrases, instrumentals, and comitatives all 
require the category Voice. I take this to mean that, although they are 
adjuncts, they strictly select the syntactic category of the phrase they 
adjoin to.”
These conclusions are familiar from the Principles and Parameters litera￾ture that also largely analyzes the by-phrase in the passive as an adjunct (see 
for example, Carnie 2013:334). For a historical overview of analyses of the 
by-phrase in generative grammar, see Collins 2018.
The novelty of the positions in (1) and (2) is that they are tied to an explicit 
treatment of the semantics of by (see Bruening 2013:25 and Legate 2014:41 for 
a related proposal):
(3)  a.  ⟦by⟧ = λxλf
<e,st>λe.f(e,x)
b. ⟦by the lobbyist⟧ = λf
<e,st>λe.f(e,the lobbyist)
6 By-Phrases86 Chapter 6
In (3b), the phrase by the lobbyist denotes a function that takes the denota￾tion of a Voice phrase as an argument (so by the lobbyist denotes a function of 
a function).
This chapter will argue against the assumption made by Bruening and Leg￾ate that the by-phrase is an adjunct based on evidence from the Binding The￾ory. The evidence clearly shows that by-phrases behave very differently from 
adjuncts for the Binding Theory.
The rest of the chapter is structured as follows. Section 6.2 lays out the con￾sequences of the Argument Criterion/Theta-Criterion for the analysis of the 
by-phrase. Section 6.3 provides empirical support for the conclusions of sec￾tion 6.2, by showing that by-phrases behave very differently from adjuncts 
with respect to the Binding Theory. Section 6.4 discusses inanimate by￾phrases. Section 6.5 presents a preliminary analysis of the Binding Theory 
data in the framework of Collins 2005a. Section 6.6 discusses the differences 
between Collins 2005a and the current proposals about the passive. Sec￾tion 6.7 explains why by-phrases are limited to being externally merged in 
Spec vP. Section 6.8 shows that other diagnostics parallel the Binding Theory 
with respect to the analysis of by-phrases (such as Helke expressions, argu￾ment control, adjunct control, and secondary predicates). Section 6.9 presents 
strikingly convergent data from Greek (from Angelopoulos, Collins, and Terzi 
2020), suggesting that the results of sections 6.1–6.8 are the results of princi￾ples of UG. Section 6.10 shows that Bruening’s (2013) analysis of the by-phrase 
cannot capture the Binding Theory data. Section 6.11 shows how the analysis 
of by-phrases and implicit arguments are closely related. Section 6.12 dis￾cusses the issue of the optionality of by-phrases, and shows that optionality is 
not an argument that by-phrases are adjuncts. Section 6.13 discusses languages 
that only have a short passive. Section 6.14 is the conclusion.
6.2 Theta-Criterion
In this section, I will show that Bruening’s analysis is inconsistent with the 
Merge-based theory introduced in chapter 1. The question is which principles 
of UG rule out such an analysis. I suggest that the relevant principle is the AC/
TC. The Theta-Criterion is repeated below:
(4)  Theta-Criterion
Each argument α appears in a chain containing a unique visible theta￾position P, and each theta-position P is visible in a chain containing a 
unique argument α.
(Chomsky 1986:97)By-Phrases 87
In light of the Theta-Criterion, consider Bruening’s structures. According 
to Bruening, the external argument in the active is projected in Spec VoiceP, 
as follows (based on Bruening 2013:21):
(5) VoiceP
DP Voice’
the lobbyist
Voice VP
V DP
bribe
the senator
Bruening argues that in the passive, when there is a by-phrase, it is adjoined 
to VoiceP (24):
(6) VoiceP
VoiceP PP
by the lobbyist
Voice VP
V DP
the senator
(5) shows that Spec VoiceP is a theta-position in the active, since it is filled 
by an argument. Therefore, as a theta-position, Spec VoiceP needs to be filled 
in the passive as well, but as shown in (6), Spec VoiceP is not filled in the pas￾sive. Therefore, (6) violates the Theta-Criterion.
Consider now the Argument Criterion. (5) shows that Voice is an argument￾introducing head in the active. Therefore, it must introduce an argument in 
the passive as well. But no argument is introduced in (6). Recall that accord￾ing to Bruening (2013), the PP by the lobbyist is not an argument, but rather a 
predicate taking a function as an argument. Therefore, (6) violates the Argu￾ment Criterion.
Another way to see the inconsistency between the Merge-based theory and 
the adjunct theory is in terms of the semantic value of by. For Bruening, the 88 Chapter 6
external argument is satisfied when the by-phrase combines with VoiceP and 
applies the semantic value of VoiceP to the lobbyist. But in the Merge-based 
theory, the only way to build argument structure is by merging arguments 
together with argument-introducing heads.
6.3 Adjuncts versus By-Phrases and the Binding Theory
In this section, I will give evidence from binding that supports the theoretical 
conclusion in section 6.2. Collins (2005a:111) gives the following examples of 
a reflexive being bound by the external argument in a passive:
(7)  a.  The magazines were sent by Mary to herself.
b. Testimony was given by the suspect about himself.
Legate (2014:71) gives similar data for Indonesian, but she does not discuss 
its significance.
Building on this data, consider the following contrasts between by-phrases 
and adjuncts with respect to the binding of reciprocals. In the following sen￾tences, the relevant interpretation is where each other takes the children as an 
antecedent.
(8)  a.      The packages were sent by the children to each other.
b. *The packages were sent for the children to each other.
c. *The packages were sent on behalf of the children to each other.
d. *The packages were sent because of the children to each other.
(9)  a.      The pictures were painted by the children for each other.
b. *The pictures were painted with the children for each other.
c. *The pictures were painted near the children for each other.
d. *The pictures were painted in spite of the children for each other.
Reflexives give rise to a similar paradigm:
(10)  a.  The packages were sent by the children to themselves.
b. *The packages were sent for the children to themselves.
c. *The packages were sent on behalf of the children to themselves.
d. *The packages were sent because of the children to themselves.
(11)  a.  The pictures were painted by the children for themselves.
b. *The pictures were painted with the children for themselves.
c. *The pictures were painted near the children for themselves.
d. *The pictures were painted in spite of the children for themselves.
From this data we can make the following generalizations:(12)  a.  The DP of the by-phrase in a passive can bind a following clause￾mate anaphor.
b. The DP of an adjunct PP in a passive cannot bind a following 
clause-mate anaphor.
The generalization in (12a) already appears in Collins 2005a:111. The 
generalization in (12) may be part of a larger generalization formulated by 
Postal (2010:274) that “If A is a reflexive arc, then A has a Term neighbor that 
arc-antecedes A.” This can be translated roughly into lingua franca as follows 
(thanks to Paul Postal for the translation): “If X is a reflexive form, then there 
is an antecedent Y which is a clause-mate of X and which is either a subject, 
direct object, or indirect object.” For the purposes of this exposition, we will 
focus on the generalization in (12).
The data in (8–11) clearly distinguish adjuncts (from which binding is never 
allowed) and passive by-phrases (from which binding of anaphors is allowed). 
Such a distinction argues against the claims in section 6.1 that by-phrases are 
adjuncts, because if by-phrases were adjuncts, they should behave like 
adjuncts with respect to the binding data.
The following data are controls, showing that the problem with the exam￾ples above is the binding of a reflexive or a reciprocal. A pronominal pos￾sessor does not give rise to the same contrasts.
(13)  a. The packages were sent by the children to their mothers.
b. The packages were sent for the children to their mothers.
c. The packages were sent on behalf of the children to their mothers.
d. The packages were sent because of the children to their mothers.
(14)  a. The pictures were painted by the children for their mothers.
b. The pictures were painted with the children for their mothers.
c. The pictures were painted near the children for their mothers.
d. The pictures were painted in spite of the children for their mothers.
6.4 Inanimate By-Phrases
Angelopoulos, Collins, and Terzi (2020) show that the above paradigm extends 
to inanimate by-phrases. All the data in this section are from their paper.
(15)  a.  The magnet1
 attracted the metallic objects towards itself1
.
b. The metallic objects were attracted by the magnet1 towards itself1
.
(16)  a.  The black hole1
 drew the planets into itself1
.
b. The planets were drawn by the black hole1
 into itself1
.
By-Phrases 8990 Chapter 6
(17)  a.  The tornado1
 sucked the houses up into itself1
.
b. The houses were sucked up by the tornado1
 into itself1
.
(18)  a.  The magnet1
 repelled the pieces of metal away from itself1
.
b. The pieces of metal were repelled by the magnet1
 away from itself1
.
Such examples are also easy to find on the Internet:
(19)  You find yourself rising and being pulled by the sun1 toward itself1
.
(https://www.do-meditation.com/power-chakra-guided-meditation.html)
(20)  The most direct way to determine it is to examine the far distant behav￾ior of the magnetic field generated by the black hole1
 around itself1
.
(https://slideheaven.com/black-holes-in-our-universe.html)
(21)  which is thus an external demagnetising field applied by the magnet1
 to 
itself1
(https://e-magnetsuk.com/alnico-magnets/characteristics-of-alnico
-magnets/)
(22)  More recently oxytocin has been found to be released by the brain1
 into 
itself1
 during sexual intercourse.
(https://books.google.com/books?isbn=9814488372)
(23)  But soon also this will be sucked up by the earth1
 into itself1
.
(https://gottfriedbennpoems.com/the-poems/)
(24)  The investment made by the country1
 into itself1
 has paid back hundreds 
of times over, and will keep paying back.
(https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/298127)
(25)  The objects presenting themselves, in so far as they are sources of 
pleasure, are absorbed by the ego1
 into itself1
.
(https://books.google.com/books?isbn=1416573593)
(26)  For that which is decidedly thick and earthy in nature, and has entirely 
escaped alteration in the liver, is drawn by the spleen1
 into itself1
.
(https://faculty.humanities.uci.edu/bjbecker/PlaguesandPeople/week2j
.html)
(27)  ­These are income benefits or resources earned or generated by the 
organization1
 from itself1
.
(https://iproject.com.ng/accounting/accounting-as-an-inevitable-tool . . . 
/index.html)
As pointed out by Angelopoulos, Collins, and Terzi (2020:11), the data 
involving inanimate by-phrases provide an argument that the reflexives that are bound by by-phrases are not logophoric pronouns: “Inanimates cannot act 
as antecedents for logophors because they cannot hold perspective since they 
cannot be in a mental state (cf. Charnavel and Sportiche 2016).”
6.5 Accounting for the Data with Collins 2005a
How can such data (in sections 6.3 and 6.4) be explained in terms of the Bind￾ing Theory? Consider the following standard formulation of Principle A of 
the Binding Theory (Sportiche, Koopman, and Stabler 2014:168):
(28)  Principle A: An anaphor must be bound in its domain.
Now consider example (9c), with the structure sketched in (29):
(29)  *The pictures were painted [PP near [DP the children]1
] for [each other]1
.
Clearly, the DP the children does not c-command the reciprocal (since it is 
dominated by the PP near the children). Therefore, the reciprocal does not 
satisfy Principle A.
What about the (a) sentences of (8–11)? In the theory of Collins 2005a, by 
the children is not even a constituent (see Angelopoulos 2019a for a similar 
analysis). The underlying structure of (8a) is as follows (irrelevant details are 
omitted):
(30)
 
VoiceP
Voice vP
by
DP1 v’
the children
v PartP
Part VP
DP V’
the packages
V PP
sent to [each other]1
To derive the structure for (8a), the DP the packages must move to the sub￾ject position, Spec TP, and the participial PartP must move to Spec VoiceP. 
But it is clear from this structure that the DP the children c-commands (and 
binds) the reciprocal each other. Hence, given the structure in (30), there is no 
violation of Principle A.
This account predicts that if the reflexives in the (b–d) sentences in (8–11) 
are replaced by pronouns, they should be acceptable:
By-Phrases 9192 Chapter 6
(31)  a. *The packages were sent by the children to them.
(predicted *)
b. ?The packages were sent for the children to them.
(predicted OK)
c. ?The packages were sent on behalf of the children to them.
(predicted OK)
d. ?The packages were sent because of the children to them.
(predicted OK)
(32)  a.  *The pictures were painted by the children for them.
(predicted *)
b.  ?The pictures were painted with the children for them.
(predicted OK)
c.  ?The pictures were painted near the children for them.
(predicted OK)
d.  ?The pictures were painted in spite of the children for them.
(predicted OK)
Even though (31a) and (32a) are completely unacceptable, the other sentences 
in (31) and (32) are much better.
6.6 An Alternative to Collins 2005a
Legate (2014:79–81) criticizes Collins’s (2005a) claim that by heads a VoiceP, 
and therefore does not form a constituent with the following DP (see also 
Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and Schäfer 2018:412; Bowers 2010:52–53; 
Fábregas and Putnam 2020; Kiparsky 2013, 11; Postal 2010:417; and Müller 
2019:96 for related criticisms). These criticisms of Collins (2005a) mostly 
revolve around the issue of movement of the by-phrase. Here is an example 
that illustrates the issues, modelled on Collins 2005a:110:
(33)  a.      the person by whom the book was read
b.  ?the person by whom the book was read to Mary
c. *the person by whom to Mary the book was read
While (33b) is awkward, (33c) is completely unacceptable. But if VoiceP 
can move to Spec CP in (33b), VoiceP should be able to pied-pipe [to Mary] in 
(33c), since the dative PP is internal to VoiceP. Collins tries to address this in 
terms of economy conditions on pied-piping (see Collins 2005a:examples 
(70) and (71)). But the paradigm at least raises the possibility that by whom is 
not a VoiceP in (33b), and that is the reason why (33c) is not possible.I will not review other criticisms of Collins 2005a, but will instead con￾sider how much of the approach in Collins 2005a can be maintained if one 
assumes that there is a by-phrase constituent [by DP]. Therefore suppose, 
contra Collins 2005a, that by the children is a constituent, but it is gener￾ated in Spec vP in the passive, as in the following partial diagram of (8a). I 
label the by-phrase as KP instead of PP for reasons that will become clear 
below.
(34) vP
KP v’
K DP v PartP
by the children
Part VP
DP V’
the packages
V PP
sent to [each other]
In other words, in (34) the by-phrase is an argument (since it occupies Spec 
vP, an A-position) as opposed to an adjunct. See Watanabe 1993:337, Mahajan 
1994:297, Goodall 1997, Borer 1998, Bowers 2010:41, and Hallman 2021:159 
for related approaches involving an argument by-phrase. See Roberts 2019:433 
and Fábregas and Putnam 2020 for KP analyses of the by-phrase.
I take it that case markers (heads of KP) are by definition semantically 
vacuous. If we assume that the by is semantically vacuous (denoting an iden￾tity function), then the denotation of the KP by the children would be identical 
to that of DP the children:
(35)  a. ⟦by the children⟧ = ⟦the children⟧
b. ⟦by⟧ = λxe
.x
In their discussion of IsiXhosa causatives, Myler and Mali (2021:32) make 
a similar assumption about the instrumental causee: “We also assume that the 
apparently instrumental preposition in causative constructions is semanti￾cally null, so that the denotation of the PP containing the causee is the same as 
that of the cause itself.” See chapter 10 for a critical discussion of other pro￾posals of Myler and Mali (2021).
Clearly, the DP the children does not c-command the reciprocal in (34). 
And so, in this structure, (8a) should be as bad as (8b–e). But in my analysis, 
by heads a KP (along with the dative to and the nominal of ), which is part of 
the extended projection of the DP. As such, the by-phrase itself can bind the 
By-Phrases 9394 Chapter 6
reciprocal (just like any other case-marked DP can bind a reciprocal in the 
right structural configuration).
(36)  The packages were sent [KP by the children]1
 to [each other]1
.
In this structure, the KP by the children is coindexed with the reciprocal 
each other.
I am assuming that the Binding Theory relates A-positions. For example, 
Chomsky (1981:184) states: “The theory of binding is a theory of A-binding.” 
(See also Barss 2001:671). Such an assumption is often invoked in the study of 
scrambling and object shift. In those studies, binding of an anaphor (e.g., 
short scrambling in Japanese) is taken to diagnose A-movement. Only if a DP 
has been moved to an A-position can it bind an anaphor. Since the Binding 
Theory relates A-positions, and since [KP by the children] binds a reciprocal, 
it follows that the KP is in an A-position.
A potential problem for this approach is pronominal agreement. Consider 
the examples in (10a) and (11a). The examples clearly show that the reflexive 
agrees syntactically with its antecedent. For example, in (10a) the reflexive them￾selves agrees in phi-features with its antecedent DP the children. But if the 
by-phrase were a PP, it would presumably have no phi-features, and so it could 
not agree with a reflexive that takes it as an antecedent.
In my analysis, by heads a KP that is part of the extended projection of a 
DP. Since it is in the extended projection of the DP, it should have the same 
phi-features as the DP itself. See Angelopoulos, Collins, and Terzi 2020 for 
a different solution based on the principles of pronominal agreement in Col￾lins and Postal 2012.
A similar analysis would not rescue examples like the ungrammatical ones 
in (8–11). PPs headed by prepositions such as for, on behalf of, because of, via, 
with, near, and among would not qualify as KPs, and so PPs headed by them 
could not function as antecedents. First, none of these PPs are in A-positions, 
and so they could not bind an anaphor. Second, none of these PPs would have 
phi-features, which could agree with the pronoun they bind. Third, none of 
these PPs would have type <e> (the type of individuals), and so presumably 
would not be the correct type to bind a pronoun.
Therefore, the KP analysis of by-phrases neatly explains the asymmetry 
between by-phrases and adjunct PPs illustrated in (8–11) above.
In the analysis sketched in (34), the correct word order would be derived by 
movement of PartP to Spec VoiceP (see chapter 7). Unlike in Bruening 2013 
and Legate 2014, VoiceP does not play a role in projecting the external argu￾ment. Rather, VoiceP is a projection that appears with passives to account for word order and the licensing of the participial morphology. See chapter 8 for 
a comparison of the two different conceptions of VoiceP.
6.7 Responding to Collins 2005a
Perhaps the most compelling reason that Collins (2005a:93) gives for making 
by the head of VoiceP has to do with the distribution of by-phrases. Collins 
puts it as follows:
(37)  “Furthermore, the account I presented (see (22)) leaves unexplained the 
distribution of the by-phrase in English. Why is the by-phrase restricted 
to the external argument? Why can’t by-phrases occur in other syntactic 
positions? . . . ​In fact, the problem is more general. What would block 
by-phrases from occurring in all kinds of positions? For example, why 
couldn’t a by-phrase appear in nominals such as the leg of (*by) the table
or student of (*by) physics, and in the complement position of an adjec￾tive proud of (*by) his son, and in certain subject positions for (*by) John 
to be happy? . . . ​Facts such as these make it clear that on the analysis of 
the passive proposed in the preceding sections we need to impose a 
requirement on the by-phrase that it appear in Spec,vP: [vP [PP by DP] v’]. 
The question is how such a requirement could be imposed.”
The solution Collins (2005a) gives for this distributional problem is to 
assume that by is the head of VoiceP, which has a vP complement. For exam￾ple, the reason that the leg by the table is unacceptable is that there is no vP 
internal to the DP that VoiceP can take as a complement.
In the KP analysis, there must be some constraint that forces the by-phrase 
to appear in Spec vP, instead of any other position. The generalization is the 
following:
(38)  [KP by DP] appears in Spec vP (and no other position).
I propose that by has a c-selectional feature that constrains it to appear in 
Spec vP. In particular, I propose the following:
(39) by has c-selectional feature [__vP].
The technical framework assumed in this account is that of Collins and 
Stabler 2016:62: “We call the features involved in triggering Merge ‘trigger 
features’. We assume that such features are to be identified with subcategori￾zation features, EPP features and OP features for movement to Spec C. . . .”
Like all trigger features, the feature in (39) is checked under sisterhood (see 
Collins and Stabler 2016). When by is merged with a DP, the resulting 
By-Phrases 9596 Chapter 6
syntactic object will have the trigger feature [__vP]. Therefore, it will need to 
merge with a vP.
The above account also makes sense in terms of the labeling system of 
Chomsky (2013). Consider the following structure, where Voice c-selects vP 
as part of its lexical entry.
(40)  [VoiceP Voice [vP [by DP] [v’ v PartP]]]
In this structure the by-phrase stays in situ, since it does not move to Spec 
TP (unlike the subject in an active). Therefore, vP has two daughter nodes, 
both of which are complex. This situation raises issues with regard to label￾ing. Consider the following quote from Chomsky 2013:43:
(41)  “The interesting case is SO = {XP, YP}, neither a head . . . Here mini￾mal search is ambiguous, locating the heads X, Y of XP,YP, respec￾tively. There are then two ways in which SO can be labeled: (A) modify 
SO so there is only one visible head, or (B) X and Y are identical in a 
relevant respect, providing the same label, which can be taken as the 
label of SO.”
In the structure in (40), neither the by-phrase nor the v’ phrase undergo 
movement, so clause (A) is inapplicable. Rather, I propose that clause (B) is 
applicable. The by-phrase and the v’-phrase both share a v-feature, so the [vP
[by DP] [v’ v PartP]] has a label vP, and this label can be c-selected by VoiceP.
6.8 Other Diagnostics
In this chapter, I have shown that a by-phrase can bind a reflexive or a recipro￾cal. From this I have concluded that the by-phrase is in an A-position. In this 
section, I will show very briefly that by-phrases enter into all the other syntac￾tic relations that I have been discussing in this monograph. To the extent that 
these other syntactic relations require an antecedent in an A-position, they 
provide additional support for my analysis of by-phrases (and against a 
Bruening-style analysis in which by-phrases are adjuncts with a semantically 
complex preposition):
(42)  Helke Expressions
That book was written [by John]1
 on his1
 own.
(43) by x-self
That book was written [by John]1
 all by himself1
.
(44)  Argument Control (control into an argument infinitival clause)
It was decided [by all present]1
 [PRO1
 to forgo desert].(45)  Adjunct Control
The book was written [by John]1
 [PRO1
 to impress his wife].
(46)  Adjunct Control
That book was written [by John]1
 while PRO1
 working at a bakery.
Consider argument control in (44). In the theory of this monograph, PRO is 
controlled by the by-phrase (which is externally merged in Spec vP). Presum￾ably, for Bruening (2013) the by-phrase (which is a function of functions) 
would not be a suitable controller. The only remaining possibility would seem 
to be formulating a semantic theory of control (not needing any syntactically 
projected antecedent). Similar problems arise for all the cases illustrated in 
(42–46) above.
Because chapter 3 of the monograph was devoted to secondary predicates, 
I will spend a little more time discussing by-phrases and secondary predi￾cates here. Consider the following examples, which show that secondary 
predicates can modify the by-phrase of a passive.
(47)  a.  Breakfast is usually eaten [by the campers]1
 [PRO1
 nude].
b.  The book was written [by John]1
 [PRO1
 drunk].
As noted above, I am arguing that the by-phrase is an argumental KP that 
controls PRO. Hence, in my account, the by-phrase is not an adjunct. So, it is 
useful to compare the distribution of secondary predicates with real adjuncts. 
Consider the paradigm in (48):
(48)  a.  The pictures were painted by John drunk.
b. The pictures were painted drunk by John.
c. The pictures were painted near John drunk.
d. The pictures were painted drunk near John.
There is a striking asymmetry between (48a,b) and (48c,d). In (48a,b) John 
is drunk when he paints the pictures. In (48c,d) drunk does not modify John
at all. Rather, it modifies the implicit argument of the passive. The same con￾trast is found with adjunct PPs headed by for, on behalf of, because of, and in 
spite of.
How can we explain this data? Consider the structure of (48c):
(49)  The pictures were painted [near John1
]
2
 [PRO*1/*2 drunk].
The depictive secondary predicate contains PRO. But PRO cannot be con￾trolled by John because John does not c-command it (because John is internal 
to the near-PP). The near-PP itself cannot control PRO, because it is of the 
wrong type (near John is presumably a predicative PP of type <e,t>). Further￾more, the near-PP is not in an A-position.
By-Phrases 9798 Chapter 6
So, these examples show a clear distinction between by-phrases that can 
control the PRO of a secondary predicate, and adjuncts where control is not 
possible. They are completely parallel to the examples in (8–11), which showed 
that by-phrases could bind reflexives, but with true adjunct PPs no reflexive 
binding is allowed. Similar minimal pairs, showing a clear contrast between 
by-phrases and adjuncts, can be given for all of the diagnostics in (42–46).
6.9 Greek by-Phrases
The data concerning by-phrases and binding in English can be replicated in 
Greek, adding strong cross-linguistic support to the conclusions of this chap￾ter. All the data and generalizations in this section come from Angelopoulos, 
Collins, and Terzi 2020.
The by-phrase in a Greek passive has a wide range of possible interpretations, 
just like in the English passive (see Jaeggli 1986:599 and Collins 2005a:20). In 
the data below, the by-phrase is interpreted as an agent, experiencer, recipient, 
instrument, and also the subject of an idiomatic expression. Angelopoulos et al. 
(2020) also show that by-phrases can be causers (not shown here).
(50)  Ta mallia mu stegno-thikan apo tin komotria.
the hair mine dried-NACT.PAST.3P by the hairdresser
‘My hair was dried by the hairdresser.’
(51)  I Maria aghapi-thike poli apo ton adra tis.
the Maria love-NACT.PAST.3S a lot by the husband her
‘Maria was loved a lot by her husband.’
(52)  I tenia pu misi-thike apo ton spudheo skinotheti.
the movie that hate-NACT.PAST.3S by the important director
‘The movie that was hated by the important director.’
(53)  to ghrama paralif-thike apo ton Emona.
the letter receive-NACT.PAST.3S by the Emona
‘The letter was received by Emona.’
(54)  I epifania tha kopi ce tha
the surface will cut.NACT.PAST.3S and will
charah-ti apo to laser.
engrave-NACT.PAST.3S by the laser
‘The surface will be cut and engraved by the laser.’
(55)  Tha enimero-thike apo kapjo pulaci.
must inform-NACT.PAST.3S by some little.bird
‘He must have been filled in/informed by some little bird.’This kind of data indicate that the preposition by does not assign its own 
theta-role. Rather, the interpretation of the external argument in the passive 
mirrors the interpretation in the active. And just like Chomsky’s argument 
based on selectional restrictions (see chapter 1), such data would be accounted 
for if external arguments were projected in the passive in exactly the same 
way as in the active (having the same range of interpretations, depending on 
the particular verb).
Recall that in English a by-phrase can bind a reflexive, which indicates that 
by-phrases are arguments (assuming that the Binding Theory relates DPs in 
A-positions). In exactly the same way, Greek by-phrases can bind a reflexive 
pronoun:
(56)  ena technito skafos pu kataskevas-tike apo tus theus1
an artificial craft that make-NACT.PAST.3S by the Gods
ja tus eaftus tus1
.
for the self.ACC.P their.GEN
‘an artificial aircraft that was made by the Gods for themselves’
(57)  To minima apostel-ete apoklistika apo kathe Learner1
the message send-NACT.PAST.3S exclusively by every Learner
ston eafto tu1
.
tο.the self.ACC.S his.GEN
‘The message is sent by every learner exclusively to himself.’
There is also an argument/adjunct asymmetry in Greek that is very similar 
to what is found in English. While a by-phrase can bind a reflexive, other 
adjunct PPs fail to do so.
(58)  a. Aftes i bluzes epilech-tikan apo ta phedhja1
these the t-shirts select-NACT.PAST.3P by the kids
ja ton eafto tus1
.
for the self.ACC.S their.GEN
‘These t-shirts were selected by the kids for themselves.’
b. *Aftes i bluzes epilech-tikan brosta/koda s-ta phedhja1
these the t-shirts select-NACT.PAST.3P in front/near at-the kids
ja ton eafto tus1
.
for the self.ACC.S their.GEN
‘These t-shirts were selected in front/near the kids for themselves.’
c. Aftes i bluzes epilech-tikan brosta/koda s-ta phedhja
these the t-shirts select-NACT.PAST.3P in front/near at-the kids
ja afta ce tis ikojenies tus.
for them and the families their.GEN
‘These t-shirts were selected in front of/near the kids for them and 
their families.’
By-Phrases 99100 Chapter 6
Why are the Greek data important? First, they show that the relatively sub￾tle effect of binding by by-phrases (and the contrast with adjuncts) can be 
completely replicated in a different language. This gives us confidence that 
the principles that determine the effect in the first place are principles of UG.
Second, as Angelopoulos, Collins, and Terzi (2020:8) show, Greek differs 
from English in not having exempt anaphora: “There is a relevant property of 
o eaftos mu, however, which makes it different from the English reflexive, but 
has received little attention, and this is that it has no usages that do not fall 
under standard Condition A.” But this property of reflexive pronouns in 
Greek eliminates the possibility of analyzing the Greek data in (56–58) in 
terms of exempt anaphora. Angelopoulos et al. (2020:8) put the conclusion as 
follows: “Given that o eaftos mu resists logophoric usages . . . it makes sense 
to assume that in the examples to be discussed in the following section we 
have clear cases of non-logophoric reflexives that are standardly analyzed as 
being subject to Condition A.”
Third, these facts and the analysis of by-phrases they support bear directly 
on the analysis of nonactive voice in Greek, as discussed in more detail in 
chapter 8. The data in this section clearly show that nonactive voice is consis￾tent with the syntactic presence of the external argument (in Spec vP). For 
example, “select” is in the nonactive voice in (58a), but it still has an external 
argument: [apo ta phedhja]. One popular analysis of nonactive voice (Embick 
1998) reduces the presence of nonactive voice to the absence of an external 
argument. But the data presented in this section show such an analysis does 
not work.
6.10 Bruening 2013
Now let’s reconsider a theory like that of Bruening’s (2013) (similar remarks 
hold for Legate 2014) with respect to the data in (5–8). In Bruening’s theory 
the by-phrase is an adjunct, and the preposition by has a complex denotation 
(denoting a function of functions). Like other adjuncts, the DP inside the PP 
adjunct should be incapable of binding an anaphor.
Furthermore, in Bruening’s theory it would not be possible for the by￾phrase itself to act as an antecedent. First, the by-phrase is not in an A-position 
(it is an adjunct), and the Binding Theory is limited to relations between 
A-positions. Second, the by-phrase does not satisfy equation (35b) in Bruen￾ing’s theory (rather, it denotes a function of functions). And so, it would make 
no sense to say that the by-phrase itself is the antecedent of a pronoun. Third, 
the by-phrase itself has no phi-features, and so could not bind a pronoun 
(which agrees in phi-features with its antecedent).In Bruening’s theory, the passive and active are semantically equivalent: 
“Actives and passives with by phrases are truth-conditionally equivalent” 
(2013:25) Therefore, it might be possible to save Bruening’s theory by stating 
the Binding Theory as a semantic condition of some kind. In other words, it 
may be possible to save Bruening’s theory by giving up the assumption that 
the Binding Theory is syntactic in nature, a conclusion that I would take as a 
reductio ad absurdum. Furthermore, given the data in section 6.8, such a 
semantic approach would necessitate giving a semantic treatment to obliga￾tory control, adjunct control, secondary predicates, and binding of pronouns 
in Helke expressions. More generally, all of syntactic theory dealing with 
locally bound reflexives, pronouns and PRO would have to be restated in 
purely semantic terms.
6.11 Consequences for Implicit Arguments
I have argued above that the by-phrase in the passive is not an adjunct (contra 
Bruening 2013 and Legate 2014). Rather, the by-phrase is a KP externally 
merged into Spec vP in the passive, as outlined in section 6.6. Then the pas￾sive and the active are parallel, and both involve an argument in Spec vP. The 
conclusion is that Spec vP is always filled. The immediate consequence of 
this proposal is that even in the short passive (where there is no by-phrase), 
Spec vP must be filled.
Consider the following example:
(59)  The book was read (by John).
And consider the following argument:
(60)  a.  When [KP by John] is present, it is in Spec vP.
b. Therefore, Spec vP is a theta-position.
c. The long and short passive have the same v. That is, there are not 
two different kinds of v, one for long passives and one for short 
passives.
d. Therefore, in the short passive, Spec vP is also a theta-position.
e.  Therefore, in the short passive, Spec vP must be filled.
The only potentially controversial statement is (60c). But it seems like the 
null hypothesis, unless someone finds evidence from some language that 
the two kinds of little v (for short and long passives) are morphologically, 
syntactically, or semantically distinguished.
In other words, our conclusions about the syntax of by-phrases in the pas￾sive entail that there is a syntactically realized implicit argument in the short 
By-Phrases 101102 Chapter 6
passive. Not surprisingly, both Bruening (2013:22) and Legate (2014:41) reject 
this conclusion.
Therefore, the conclusions reached in this chapter about the syntax of by￾phrases dovetail nicely with the conclusions reached in chapters 2–5 about the 
syntactic presence of implicit arguments.
6.12 Optionality
It is commonly claimed that the optionality of the by-phrase shows that it is an 
adjunct or shows that it is not an argument. Consider the following quotes 
from Grimshaw 1990:145–146:
(61)  a.  “But regardless of whether by phrases are arguments of verbs or of 
-en, a major problem for this view is that the by phrase or its counter￾part is optional in every language.” (pg. 145)
b.  “The fact that passive by phrases are optional as far as a-structure is 
concerned cannot be explained under any account in which by
phrases are arguments.” (pg. 146)
In my framework, by-phrases are indeed optional, but external arguments 
are not. Consider again the following paradigm:
(62)  a.  John wrote the book.
b. The book was written by John.
c. The book was written.
In the passive sentences in (62b,c), the by-phrase is optional, but it is also 
the case that by-phrases are arguments (contra Grimshaw 1990). In my frame￾work, the external argument is always required in (62), but it is externally 
merged in two different ways: either as a by-phrase or as an implicit argument 
pro. So, there is absolutely no contradiction between the optionality of by￾phrases and their status as arguments, contra Grimshaw 1990.
6.13 Cross-Linguistic Variation
Keenan and Dryer (2010:330) propose the following generalization:
(63)  If a language has passives with agent phrases, then it has them without 
agent phrases.
For Keenan and Dryer, an agent phrase is characterized as follows:
(64)  “ ‘agent phrases’, such as by Mary in John was slapped by Mary, most 
commonly take the position and case marking (including choice of pre- and postpositions) of some oblique nps in active sentences, most 
usually an instrumental, locative, or genitive.” (pg. 327)
(65)  “To say that by Mary is the agent phrase of John was kissed by Mary is 
to say that Mary functions as the semantic subject but not the syntactic 
subject of the transitive verb kiss, from which the passive vp is derived. 
In general, an agent phrase is an np (with or without adpositions) which 
functions as the semantic but not syntactic subject of a verb in an expres￾sion derived from that verb (or verb phrase). Note that the term ‘agent 
phrase’ is potentially misleading in that its semantic role (agent, experi￾encer, etc.) is whatever is required by the verb of which it is the under￾stood subject, and need not be specifically agent, as in the example 
Money is needed by the church.” (pg. 342)
To illustrate, English has an optional by-phrase in the passive, so it con￾forms to (63). Ewe does not have a passive (with or without an agent-phrase), 
so it conforms to (63). ǂHoã has a passive (see Collins and Gruber 2014), but 
the passive does not admit an oblique phrase expressing the agent. So ǂHoã 
conforms to (63). If a language had a passive that admitted an agent-phrase, 
but the agent-phrase was obligatory, then it would be a counterexample.
As it turns out, this generalization follows from the theory of passives 
and implicit arguments outlined in this monograph. The existence of pro as an 
implicit argument is guaranteed as part of UG. In any language, we expect to 
see implicit arguments of the kind discussed in chapter 4.
But the existence of an agent-phrase requires two additional assumptions:
(66) a. There needs to be a semantically vacuous preposition (or Case 
marker).
b. The oblique needs to be able to be externally merged in Spec vP.
For example, in English there is a semantically vacuous preposition by that 
can form a by-phrase [by John], and this by-phrase can be externally merged 
into Spec vP. The dative preposition to is another semantically vacuous Case 
marker, but [to John] cannot be externally merged into Spec vP, because [to 
John] c-selects an ApplP (see chapter 9).
If a language simply lacked semantically vacuous prepositions (or Case 
markers), or if the semantically vacuous preposition (or Case marker) existed, 
but had a restricted distribution, then it would result in a passive with no agent 
phrase. In that language, only short passives would exist.
However, it would be interesting to look into languages that do not have 
a long passive (that is, languages lacking agent phrases) from the point of 
view of this monograph. Is it possible to find diagnostics for a syntactically 
By-Phrases 103104 Chapter 6
projected implicit external argument in those languages? The clear prediction 
is that all implicit arguments should be syntactically projected, even in lan￾guages that do not possess by-phrases.
In fact, Sulemana (2022) claims that Buli is such a language. Buli has a 
passive that does not allow a by-phrase. However, as he shows, there is clear 
evidence that the implicit argument is syntactically projected (see chapter 5 
for discussion).
6.14 Conclusion
In this chapter I have shown that by-phrases in passives do not behave like 
adjuncts with respect to the Binding Theory in either English or Greek (fol￾lowing Angelopoulos et. al. 2020). This difference follows without any fur￾ther stipulations from the theory of by-phrases as arguments, but it remains a 
complete mystery in such theories as Bruening’s (2013) and Legate’s (2014).
I have proposed a modification to the theory in Collins 2005a, where the 
preposition by is not the head of VoiceP, but rather heads an argument KP. I 
have shown that the proposed modification also accounts for the difference 
between by-phrases and adjuncts with respect to the Binding Theory.
The two theories can be summarized as follows:
(67)  Bruening (2013) (see also Legate 2014)
a. Syntactic status of by-phrase: adjunct PP
b. Semantic value of by: ⟦by⟧ = λxλf
<e,st>λe.f(e,x)
(68)  This monograph:
a. Syntactic status of by-phrase: argument KP
b. Semantic value of by: ⟦by⟧ = λxe
.x
In (67), the complex semantics of the preposition by are needed to glue the 
external argument semantically to the rest of the structure (a VoiceP). In this 
way, Bruening 2013 and Legate 2014 inherit the problems inherent in the 
Principles and Parameters view of the passive. As Collins (2005a:83) notes: 
“The main problem with Jaeggli’s analysis is that the external argument in the 
passive is assigned a theta-role (via theta-role absorption and transmission) in 
a way that is totally different from how the external argument is assigned a 
theta-role in the active (in Spec,IP in the principles and parameters frame￾work).” In (68), the semantics of by is trivial, because the by-phrase is an 
argument.
More generally, what this section has shown is that there are two different 
approaches to by-phrases in the passive, both of which are compatible with many of the same facts (e.g., range of theta-roles of external arguments, Bind￾ing Theory): by as head of KP and by as head of VoiceP (Collins 2005a). In 
Collins 2005a (see also Angelopoulos 2019a), I analyze by as the head of 
VoiceP. In this monograph, I am assuming that by is the head of KP. But the 
choice between the two analyses is subtle, and it is unclear what principles of 
UG would force one analysis over the other. I am hoping that this monograph 
will stimulate research into this issue, perhaps identifying different groups of 
languages that make use of each strategy.
I have not discussed by-phrases in nominalizations. Simon (2018) provides 
the following data:
(69)  a.      the criticism of himself1
 by John1
b. *the criticism of him1
 by John1
c. *the criticism of John1
 by him1
(70)  a.      the criticism by John1
 of himself1
b. *the criticism by John1
 of him1
c. *the criticism by him1
 of John1
Simon points out that binding in nominalizations obeys Principles A, B, 
and C of the Binding Theory. On the basis of these data, he gives an analysis 
of the internal structure of nominalizations very much in the spirit of Collins 
2005a.
Recall that in chapter 4, I showed that the implicit argument in nominaliza￾tions is syntactically projected. In the Merge-based theory, both the by-phrase 
and the implicit argument in nominalizations are externally merged into Spec 
vP by the AC/TC.
The next step would be to see if the difference between by-phrases and 
other prepositional phrases discussed above with respect to Principle A of the 
Binding Theory (see 8–11) could be replicated internal to nominalizations.
By-Phrases 105In this chapter, I give the complete derivation of passive sentences, both with 
and without the by-phrase, in order to illustrate the principles discussed in 
this monograph. Important technical assumptions are discussed, as well as 
differences from and similarities to Collins 2005a.
Consider the following paradigm from the introduction. We will start with 
(1b):
(1) a.  John wrote the book. (active)
b.  The book was written by John. (passive)
c.  The book was written. (short passive)
I will set aside the issue of whether there are acategorial roots and how they 
enter into the syntactic derivation, and simply assume that there is a verb 
write. This verb heads a VP, which takes the DP the book as a complement. I 
will also assume that the complement position of the VP headed by write is a 
theta-position (and is therefore obligatorily projected). These simplifying 
assumptions ignore many issues about the internal structure of the VP (e.g., 
the position of particles, resultatives, double objects) and the important issue 
of argument-introducing heads for internal arguments (see section 4.7).
7.1 Passive with By-Phrase
Since write is in its participial form, I assume that there is a suffix Part that 
projects a PartP. Unlike in the Principles and Parameters analysis of the pas￾sive, I do not assume that the participial suffix -en absorbs accusative Case or 
the external theta-role (see Collins 2005a for discussion). In fact, the argu￾ments are projected in the active in the same way that they are projected in the 
passive, so there is no room for theta-role absorption.
Furthermore, I assume that Part is merged with VP (not vP). This assump￾tion captures the fact that in a language like French there is sometimes 
7 Derivations108 Chapter 7
participle agreement with an object, but never with an external argument. 
Since the external argument is externally merged in Spec vP, and Spec vP is 
higher than Spec PartP, the external argument does not move through Spec 
PartP, and there can be no participle agreement with it.
Putting these assumptions together we have:
(2)  [PartP Part [VP write [DP the book]]]
Following Collins (2005a:90), I assume that past participles have an unin￾terpretable feature that can be checked either by moving PartP into Spec 
VoiceP, or by the c-commanding auxiliary verb have.
(3)  A participle (PartP) must be licensed by
a. being c-selected by the auxiliary have, or
b. moving to Spec VoiceP.
Next, the external argument is introduced. I assume that external argu￾ments are introduced in Spec vP. By the Theta-Criterion, Spec vP needs to be 
filled in the passive (since it is filled in the active, and there is no difference 
between little v in the passive and the active).
The only two possibilities for filling Spec vP are the DP John and the by￾phrase [by John]. In Collins 2005a, I explored the possibility that the DP 
John itself occupies Spec vP in the passive. In this monograph, I am exploring 
the possibility that the by-phrase occupies Spec vP. See chapter 6 for 
discussion.
(4) vP
KP v’
K DP v PartP
by John 
Part VP
V DP
the book
In this structure, I am assuming that the KP is part of the extended projec￾tion of the DP John (see chapter 6). Since KP is in Spec vP, which is a theta￾position, the Theta-Criterion is satisfied.Derivations 109
Recall from chapter 6 that the by-phrase has a limited syntactic distribu￾tion, appearing only in Spec vP. I proposed there that by has a [__vP] 
c-selectional feature. Such a feature would be checked under sisterhood with 
v’ in (4).
Suppose that the derivation continued from (4) by merging in the copula 
and T and then raising the KP to Spec TP (with no VoiceP):
(5)  a.     [TP [KP by John] [T’ T [VP was [vP <KP> written the book]]]]
b. *By John was written the book.
There are a number of problems with the structure in (5a). First, English 
does not in general have oblique subjects (e.g., dative subjects), so whatever 
principle blocks oblique subjects in English should also block (5a). Second, 
since the Case features of John are checked in Spec vP (by the KP), it should 
be frozen in place by the Activity Condition (Chomsky 2000:123), with no 
possibility of moving to Spec TP. Third, since there is no VoiceP in (5a), the 
uninterpretable participle feature of PartP will remain unchecked (see (3) 
above).
Suppose in (5) was is replaced by has (still with no VoiceP):
(6)  a.     [TP [KP by John] [T’ T [VP has [vP <KP> written the book]]]]
b. *By John has written the book.
In (6), the participle is now licensed (see (3a)), but the KP in Spec vP still 
causes problems since it cannot move to Spec TP (because it is frozen in Spec 
vP by the Activity Condition).
Consider another possible derivation continuing on from the structure in 
(4). This time, the copula and T are merged (there is still no VoiceP), but the 
object raises to Spec TP (instead of KP raising):
(7)  a.     [TP [DP the book] [T’ T [VP was [vP [by John] written <[the book]>]]]]
b. *The book was by John written.
The uninterpretable feature of the participle is unchecked in (7), but 
replacing was by has does not result in an improvement, even though accord￾ing to (3) above has should be able to check the uninterpretable participle 
feature.
(8) a.      [TP [DP the book] [T’ T [VP has [vP [by John] written <[the book]>]]]]
b. *The book has by John written.
In (7) and (8), T is separated from the direct object the book by a phase 
boundary. Movement of the direct object to Spec TP violates the PIC (Phase 
Impenetrability Condition, see Chomsky 2004:108). Suppose that instead of 110 Chapter 7
the direct object being moved directly to Spec TP, it was first moved to a sec￾ond specifier of vP. This movement would avoid violating the PIC. But I am 
assuming that the second Spec vP position is an A’-position, since it is used in 
A’-movement out of a vP phase. If Spec vP is an A’-position, such movement 
would be a case of improper movement (complement of V → second Spec 
vP → Spec TP). So, there does not appear to be any way to circumvent the PIC 
in (8).
Another problem with both (7) and (8) is that they involve raising the object 
DP over the KP in Spec vP. This should result in a violation of Relativized 
Minimality or the Minimal Link Condition of minimalist syntax.
Consider the classical definition of Relativized Minimality:
(9)  Relativized Minimality (Rizzi 1990:7)
X α-governs Y only if there is no Z such that:
   (i)  Z is a typical potential α-governor for Y.
(ii)  Z c-commands Y and does not c-command X.
(10)  Z is a typical potential antecedent governor for Y. Y is an A-chain = Z is 
an A specifier c-commanding Y.
In the example in (7), the KP [by John] is certainly in an A-position (a 
theta-position), and the object [the book] has undergone A-movement. So, by 
(9) and (10) the derivations should have been blocked by RM.
Consider now MLC (see Chomsky 1995:311). Suppose that T has unval￾ued phi-features [uPhi] that need to be valued. When T probes downward in 
(8a) looking for a matching goal (before movement of [the book]), the search 
will encounter the KP [by John]. But since the KP is part of the extended 
projection of John (see chapter 6 for more discussion), whatever phi-features 
are visible at the DP level should also be visible at the KP level (that is why 
the KP can bind a reflexive pronoun; see chapter 6). But if the probe matches 
KP, by minimal search, it will be unable to continue probing to find the DP 
object (a so-called case of defective intervention; see Chomsky 2000:123).
Clearly, the derivations in (5–8) are ruled out, and in all cases it seems that 
the external argument in Spec vP is causing problems.
Once again continuing from (4), consider the possibility of moving the PartP 
over the external argument, smuggling the object over the external argument 
(see Collins 2005a and Belletti and Collins 2020 for works on smuggling). 
Voice is merged, and PartP moves to Spec VoiceP to check its uninterpretable 
features (see Collins 2005a on Voice as a strong phase head).
(11)  [VoiceP PartP [Voice’ Voice [vP KP [v’ v <PartP>]]]]Derivations 111
Lastly, the copula is merged, T is merged, and the object DP raises to Spec 
TP, yielding the following structure:
(12) TP
DP T’
D NP T VP
the book
 V VoiceP
was
PartP Voice’
<DP> Part’ Voice vP
Part VP KP v’
V <DP> K DP v <PartP>
by John
In this structure, T agrees with the object DP in Spec PartP, and then the 
object DP moves to Spec TP to satisfy the EPP feature of T. The object DP 
moves through Spec PartP to Spec TP (as can be seen by participle agreement 
in the passive in languages such as French). On the violation of Freezing in 
(12), see Bošković 2020. On the range of constructions using smuggling 
derivations, see Belletti and Collins 2020. On VoiceP as a phase, see Collins 
2005a:98.
What about accusative Case? In the Principles and Parameters theory, the 
passive suffix -en absorbed the accusative Case of the verb as well as the 
external theta-role. I do not make these assumptions about the passive suffix 
-en here (see Collins 2005a for discussion). But that leaves the question of 
why the object is not assigned accusative Case in (12).
The intuition I will pursue is that movement of the PartP raises the object 
into a position accessible to T, and so the phi-features of T can agree with DP. 
In those circumstances, little v does not check the Case feature of any DP.
More precisely, the movement of the PartP in (12) results in five occur￾rences of the DP the book (see Collins and Stabler 2016 the definition of 
occurrence). The highest occurrence is in Spec TP, but each occurrence of the 
PartP dominates two occurrences of the DP as well. Consider the occurrence 
in Spec PartP (itself in Spec VoiceP). This occurrence is c-commanded by the 
Case-checker T, but not the Case-checker v. Under those conditions, Agree(T, 
DP) can be formed, and the Case of the DP can be checked (as a reflex of 
Agree). In this case, the Case-checker v does not check the Case of any DP.112 Chapter 7
In fact, there are unergative verbs that take an optional cognate object 
and seem to show that v does not obligatorily check the accusative Case of 
an object: “John laughed a big laugh/John laughed.” Similarly, there are 
unergative verbs that take so-called fake reflexives: “John laughed himself 
silly.” These kinds of examples show that unergative v can check accusative 
Case, but it is not required to do so. Similarly, I am proposing that in (12), 
PartP moves away from little v, which then no longer checks accusative 
Case.
Another possibility is to assume the following principle: v checks accusa￾tive Case only if it has a specifier and the specifier is occupied by a DP with 
a uCase feature. In (12), Spec vP is occupied by a KP, and so v cannot check 
Case (since KP has no uCase feature). Just as with Burzio’s generalization 
(see Haegeman 1994 for discussion), it is not entirely clear how such a 
principle would be accounted for in terms of basic minimalist assumptions.
Suppose instead of movement of PartP to Spec VoiceP, a structure with a 
rightward specifier of vP was generated:
(13)
 
TP
DP T’
D NP T VP
the book
V vP
was
v’ KP
v PartP K DP
by John
<DP> Part’
Part VP
V <DP>
write
At first sight, this structure is appealing because it yields a rightward posi￾tion of the by-phrase without any smuggling. However, it is not a tenable 
analysis. The first problem is that clear cases of specifiers (Spec DP, TP, CP) 
are all leftward in English. So, the rightward specifier of vP would be the 
odd one out. Second, the rightward specifier in (13) violates Kayne’s (1994) 
Linear Correspondence Axiom (LCA). Third, such an analysis yields incor￾rect predictions about c-command. It predicts that the by-phrase should 
c-command whatever is found in the preceding VP. But Collins (2005a) Derivations 113
shows in detail that such a prediction does not hold. I repeat some of the core 
data here:
(14)  a.  *The book was given to any student by no professor.
b. *The book was given to the other by each professor.
c. The book was given by no student to any professor.
d. The book was given by each professor to the other.
Therefore, for these three reasons, I reject the rightward specifier analysis 
in (13).
An analysis related to the one in (13) is that the by-phrase is right-adjoined 
to vP (instead of being a rightward specifier). But exactly the same consider￾ations rule out the rightward adjunction analysis. First, it violates the LCA. 
Second, it yields incorrect predictions about c-command (see also the general 
remarks about adjunction and Pair-Merge in chapter 1).
Consider lastly a derivation where PartP moves to Spec Voice, but the 
external argument DP (not KP) merges into Spec vP. The structure is given 
in (15).
(15)
 
TP
T VP
V VoiceP
was
PartP Voice’
DP Part’ Voice vP
DP v’
v <PartP>
Continuing on from (15), there are two possibilities: either T agrees with 
and checks the Case of the external argument (EA) or T agrees with and 
checks the Case of the direct object (DO). Suppose that Agree(T, DO), then 
the EA will violate the Case Filter (unless it is implicit argument pro). 
Suppose Agree(T, EA). One possibility is that the Agree relation is blocked 
by the intervening PartP in Spec VoiceP (an MLC violation). After all, 
Spec PartP is filled by the object, and that might be enough to block 
Agree(T, EA).114 Chapter 7
7.2 Short Passive
Now consider the derivation of the short passive in (1c). Everything about 
this derivation is identical to (12), except the external argument is now a 
small pro implicit argument (see chapter 4 for the general theory of implicit 
arguments):
(16)
 
TP
DP T’
D NP T VP
the book
V VoiceP was
PartP Voice’
<DP> Part’ Voice vP
Part VP DP v’
pro
V <DP> v <PartP>
write
In this structure, the DP pro satisfies the Theta-Criterion. The pro is 
licensed because it occupies a caseless position, Spec vP (just like KP in (12)). 
Semantically, it receives one of the three interpretations outlined in chapter 4 
(generic, existential, definite). Since the implicit argument is syntactically 
projected in (16), it should give rise to Principle A, B, and C effects. On a 
detailed discussion of binding in passives, see chapters 2 and 6 (see also Col￾lins 2005a).
A parallel between (12) and (16) is that in both cases the external argument 
is trapped in Spec vP, unable to raise to Spec TP. In this case, movement of the 
PartP to Spec VoiceP smuggles the object over the external argument, render￾ing it accessible to T.
7.3 Active
Finally, returning to the active, suppose that the DP John is merged into Spec 
vP, but that there is no participle or VoiceP:
(17)  [TP John [T’ T [vP <John> [v’ v [VP write [DP the book]]]]]]
Here, there is no problem. T agrees with the external argument DP, which 
raises to Spec TP. The Case of the object is checked by v.Derivations 115
Suppose instead that the KP is merged into Spec vP, essentially an active 
with a by-phrase:
(18) TP
T vP
KP v’
K DP v VP
by John 
V DP
D NP
the book
Nothing prevents the by-phrase from being merged into Spec vP here. The 
Theta-Criterion is satisfied, and the syntactic features of by are checked. 
However, there are other problems. First, English does not in general have 
oblique subjects (e.g., dative subjects), so whatever principle blocks oblique 
subjects in English should also block (18). Second, since the Case feature of 
John is checked in Spec vP (internal to the KP), it should be frozen in place by 
the Activity Condition (Chomsky 2000:123), with no possibility of moving to 
Spec TP, resulting in an unchecked EPP feature for the finite T. Third, the 
accusative Case of the object is checked by v, and so there is no possibility 
that the object could raise to Spec TP (the Activity Condition).
7.4 Systematic Presentation of Derivations
In the previous sections, I discussed a few derivations. In this section, I will 
take a more systematic approach. In the analysis of the passive in this mono￾graph, there is no passive construction. Rather, there are morphemes, each 
with their own properties, that are merged together but constrained by princi￾ples of UG (e.g., the AC/TC), economy principles and interface conditions. 
Putting aside the issue of implicit arguments for now, there are four choices 
to make: (a) auxiliary selection: was, has, or zero; (b) presence or absence of 
Voice; (c) presence or absence of K; or (d) presence or absence of Part. In 
total, there are 3 × 2 × 2 × 2 = 24 combinations. In this section, I will system￾atically go through all the combinations, and show that only 3 are acceptable 
(the passive, the active with has, and the active without has).116 Chapter 7
I start with sentences that have was as the auxiliary and VoiceP. Under 
these conditions, there are four combinations, depending on the presence or 
absence of K and the presence or absence of Part:
(19)  a.      T was Voice [K DP] v Part VP
b.  *T was Voice [K DP] v VP
c.  *T was Voice   DP v Part VP
d.  *T was Voice   DP v VP
(19a) is just the passive, as discussed above: PartP moves to Spec VoiceP, 
then the object moves to Spec TP. (19b,d) are unacceptable because the VP 
cannot raise to Spec VoiceP, only PartP can. Because of this, Spec VoiceP 
remains unfilled. Concretely, I assume that Voice has an EPP feature, and that 
feature is not checked in (19b,d). In (19c), PartP can move to Spec VoiceP, but 
there is no way for the external argument DP to check its Case (Agree(T, EA) 
being blocked).
In the next set of sentences, was is still the auxiliary, but there is no VoiceP:
(20)  a.  *T was [K DP] v Part VP
b.  *T was [K DP] v VP
c.  *T was   DP v Part VP
d.  *T was   DP v VP
(20a) and (20c) have a Part but nothing to check it (either have or Voice). In 
(20b), no DP can raise to Spec TP, leaving its EPP feature unchecked. In 
(20b,d), there is a bare (nonparticiple) verb (v + V) that combines with a copula. 
Whatever accounts for the contrast between John will laugh and *John was 
laugh accounts for the unacceptability of (20d). The general constraint is that 
the bare form of the verb cannot follow the copula, only a participial form 
can.
In the next set of sentences, the auxiliary is has and there is a VoiceP:
(21)  a.  *T has Voice [K DP] v Part VP
b.  *T has Voice [K DP] v VP
c.  *T has Voice   DP v Part VP
d.  *T has Voice   DP v VP
All the options in (21) are ruled out because of the combination of has and 
Voice. These can never appear together because they have a similar function 
(licensing a past participle). PartP moves to Spec VoiceP and is licensed there. 
It is not possible now for have to license the PartP a second time. Concretely, 
if the Part has an uninterpretable [uPart] feature, once it is deleted by Voice, it 
cannot be deleted again by have.Derivations 117
In the next set of sentences, has is still the auxiliary, but there is no VoiceP:
(22)  a.  *T has [K DP] v Part VP
b.  *T has [K DP] v VP
c.       T has   DP v Part VP
d.  *T has   DP v VP
In (22a,b), no DP is available to move to Spec TP, leaving the EPP feature 
of T unchecked. (22c) is a grammatical sentence, where the external argument 
(in Spec vP) raises to Spec TP. (22d) is ruled out because has requires a 
participle.
In the next set of sentences, there is no auxiliary, but VoiceP is present:
(23)  a.  *T Voice [K DP] v Part VP
b.  *T Voice [K DP] v VP
c.  *T Voice   DP v Part VP
d.  *T Voice   DP v VP
In (23), VoiceP is the complement of finite T, but VoiceP requires a PartP, 
and a PartP cannot appear with finite T. In other words, in all cases where 
VoiceP is present, a copula is also needed. For example, in (23a), PartP moves 
to Spec VoiceP, but this leaves a sentence where finite T is followed by a par￾ticiple (and there is no copula). This is bad for whatever reason finite T cannot 
combine with participles: *John written.
In the last set of sentences, there is no auxiliary and no VoiceP:
(24)  a.  *T [K DP] v Part VP
b.  *T [K DP] v VP
c. *T   DP v Part VP
d.      T   DP v VP
(24a,c) are ruled out because Part needs to appear with either have or Voice. 
(24b) is ruled out because nothing can raise to Spec TP to check its EPP fea￾ture. In particular, the KP cannot move to Spec TP. Nor can the direct object, 
which is separated from Spec TP by a phase boundary. (24d) is acceptable. It 
is the active without a participle.
7.5 Conclusion
In this chapter, I have given complete derivations of the passive, the short pas￾sive, and the active. Even though I use expressions such as “passive construc￾tion,” there in fact is no passive construction in minimalist syntax. Rather, 
there are morphemes that are combined by Merge (internal or external). Some 118 Chapter 7
combinations of these morphemes yield acceptable results and some do not. 
Out of twenty-four possible combinations, only three are acceptable. The 
combination (19a) involving was, Voice, KP, and a participle is called the 
passive.
(25)  a.  Passive (19a) (“The book was written by John.”)
T was Voice [K DP] v Part VP
b.  Active with participle (22c) (“John has written the book.”)
T has     DP v Part VP
c.  Active without participle (24d) (“John wrote the book.”)
T     DP v VP
Such a result provides striking confirmation of the general Merge-based 
approach to the passive.8.1 Introduction
In recent literature on argument structure, the VoiceP projection plays two dis￾tinct and incompatible roles. I will call the two theories the projection theory
and the realization theory. In the projection theory, due to Kratzer (1996), 
VoiceP plays a central role in projecting the external argument of an active 
clause; see (1). The external argument is externally merged as a specifier of 
VoiceP.
(1)  Projection Theory
 
VoiceP
EA Voice’
Voice VP
V DP
In the realization theory, VoiceP has nothing to do with the external Merge 
positions of arguments. The external argument is not externally merged into 
Spec VoiceP, but rather is externally merged into the specifier of vP (see 
Chomsky 1995 and Collins and Thráinsson 1996). In the realization theory, 
VoiceP plays a role in how arguments are realized in A-positions (such as 
Spec TP). For example, in Collins 2005a, the presence of VoiceP makes it 
possible for the object of the active to move to Spec TP and be realized as the 
subject of the passive.
The realization theory is illustrated in (2) below:
8 Two Conceptions of VoiceP120 Chapter 8
(2)  Realization Theory
 
VoiceP
Voice vP
EA v’
v VP
V DP
I summarize these two theories below:
(3)  a.  Projection Theory:
VoiceP plays a role in the projection (external Merge) of arguments.
In particular, the external argument of the active is merged into Spec 
VoiceP.
b. Realization Theory:
VoiceP plays no role in the projection (external Merge) of arguments.
Rather, VoiceP determines the A-positions of arguments.
In this chapter, which focuses for the most part on the passive in English, I 
will argue for the realization theory over the projection theory. Furthermore, 
I will argue that the Merge-based approach to argument structure is inconsis￾tent with the projection theory.
The rest of the chapter is structured as follows. Section 8.2 sketches a gen￾eral characterization of grammatical voice (based on Doron 2015). Section 8.3 
outlines Kratzer’s (1996) theory of VoiceP and critiques several proposals 
adopting Kratzer’s framework. Section 8.4 argues for Collins’s (2005a) the￾ory of VoiceP over Kratzer’s. Section 8.5 gives some quotes from various 
authors arguing against Kratzer’s conception of VoiceP. Section 8.6 goes 
deeper into the issue and shows that Kratzer’s approach is not consistent with 
the Merge-based approach to argument structure. Section 8.7 shows that 
Kratzer’s approach to external arguments makes incorrect predictions about 
binding in nominalizations. Section 8.8 is the conclusion.
8.2 What Is Grammatical Voice?
It is not the purpose of this chapter to give a survey of grammatical voice, or 
to offer a unified theory of constructions characterized by voice. But as a 
starting point, I adopt Doron’s (2015:749) characterization:Two Conceptions of VoiceP 121
(4)  “Voice (diathesis) alternations are particular alternations, typically 
marked as part of the verb’s morphology, in the assignment of grammati￾cal functions to the verb’s arguments.”
In the Principles and Parameters tradition, grammatical functions are nor￾mally characterized in terms of A-positions: Spec TP, complement of the verb, 
etc. So, I reformulate the characterization of voice alternations as follows:
(5)  Voice alternations are typically marked as part of the verb’s morphology 
and determine the realization of the verb’s arguments in A-positions.
There are problems with this simple characterization. For example, in ECM 
(Exceptional Case Marking) constructions, the object is not an argument of 
the matrix verb but can be passivized: John was believed to be nice. I put such 
problems aside, as (5) is sufficient for the purposes of this chapter.
Under such a characterization are found phenomena like the passive 
(including impersonal passives), antipassive, inversion (e.g., in Algonquian), 
and various kinds of middles (see Ackema and Schoorlemmer 2017 for a sur￾vey of middles).
The phenomena traditionally characterized as voice phenomena may have 
very different syntactic analyses. But whatever the analysis, the following 
terminological assumption should be adhered to:
(6)  Terminological Assumption
Any theory of VoiceP must play a crucial role in accounts of voice phe￾nomena (e.g., passive, inversion, middle). Equivalently, if a projection XP 
plays no role in accounting for voice phenomena, then it should not be 
called VoiceP.
This is a standard position on terminology in the field of generative syntax. 
A theory of FocP (focus phrase) plays a role in the accounts of focus. A the￾ory of AspP (aspect phrase) plays a role in accounts of verbal aspect. A theory 
of NumP (number phrase) plays a role in accounts of number in the DP. If the 
VoiceP of some theory played no role in voice phenomena, it would not be advis￾able to label the relevant projection VoiceP.
8.3 Kratzer 1996
Kratzer develops her proposals about VoiceP within the neo-Davidsonian 
conception of event semantics. In particular, she suggests that the Voice head 
for agent has the following denotation:
(7)  Agent* = λxe
λes
[Agent(x)(e)]122 Chapter 8
However, Kratzer (1996) presents no arguments at all that the functional 
head VoiceP has anything to do with voice phenomena, which seems to be 
explicitly acknowledged on page 120:
(8)  “I will call it VOICE. This choice of name is not arbitrary. Kratzer (forth￾coming) argues that Voice is truly at the heart of a theory of voice.”
In other words, there is no indication in Kratzer 1996 of how the VoiceP 
plays a role in the passive, middle, inverse, and other voice phenomena. And 
so Kratzer’s paper fails the terminological assumption (6) above.
But later authors do provide analyses that implicate VoiceP in voice phe￾nomena. Perhaps the first such analysis is that of Pylkkänen (2008a:26), who 
claims that there is an active Voice head as well as a passive Voice head:
(9)  “The inability of depictives to modify an implicit external argument is 
predicted, as long as we assume that passive Voice makes the external 
argument syntactically unavailable. In (35), I assume that passive Voice 
existentially closes off the external argument.”
Consider the following diagram (based on (35) of Pylkkänen 2008a:26):
(10) VoiceP
VoicePass VP
V DP
eat
the meat
In Pylkkänen’s system there are two Voice heads: an active Voice head 
whose Spec contains the external argument and a passive Voice head that 
does not project a specifier. If Pylkkänen’s analysis is right, it would provide 
striking confirmation for Kratzer’s basic idea that the external argument is 
projected in Spec VoiceP. It would be exactly the kind of data needed by 
Kratzer to support her VoiceP analysis. Here is the reasoning: if the external 
argument is projected in Spec VoiceP, then it could be the case that the projec￾tion of the external argument varies with the flavor of the Voice head (active 
or passive).
However, there are a number of severe empirical problems for Pylkkänen’s 
analysis of the passive. First, it is founded on the generalization that the 
implicit argument in the passive cannot be modified by a depictive secondary 
predicate (pg. 22): “if the external argument is implicit, as in a passive, it can￾not be modified by a depictive.” But I have shown in great detail in chapter 3 Two Conceptions of VoiceP 123
that this generalization does not hold. An example from Collins 2005a:101 is 
given below:
(11)  At the commune, breakfast is usually eaten nude.
Furthermore, there are data discussed in chapter 2 (and other sources) that 
show that the implicit argument of a passive can bind a reflexive pronoun:
(12)  a.  Such privileges should be kept to oneself.
(Baker, Johnson, and Roberts 1989:228; Roberts 1987:162)
b. Damaging testimony is always given about oneself in secret trials.
(Roberts 1987:162)
These sentences are predicted to be unacceptable by Pylkkänen’s theory in 
(10), because the reflexive pronouns have no antecedents. Rather, it seems that 
in the short passive there must be a null pro in Spec VoiceP that binds the 
reflexive, as argued extensively in chapters 2–5.
(13) VoiceP
DP Voice’
pro
Voice VP
But then the external argument in the passive would be projected in the 
same way as the external argument in the active; both are projected in Spec 
VoiceP. In other words, given (13) it is unclear that there is any distinction at 
all between the active and the passive VoiceP in English. And if there is no 
distinction, then there is no support from the English passive for the idea that 
the external argument is projected in Spec VoiceP.
A proposal related to Pylkkänen’s is that there is a VoicePass that selects for 
a pro specifier. This appears to be the analysis of Baker and Vinokurova 
(2009:528): “the primary difference is that active voice typically takes an 
overt NP in its specifier position and passive voice takes a phonologically null 
NP, which is interpreted as a free variable.” This kind of analysis would be 
able to handle data like (11) and (12) since there is a syntactically projected 
external argument. But it is unclear why a distinction between active and pas￾sive Voice is needed here. In both cases, Spec VoiceP is filled by the external 
argument. The distribution of the phonologically null pro falls under the gen￾eral theory of implicit arguments in chapter 4. Therefore, there is no need to 
stipulate that there is a distinct passive Voice head that “takes a phonologi￾cally null NP” in its specifier position.124 Chapter 8
One of the best worked-out analyses of the passive in the VoiceP frame￾work is Bruening (2013). In his theory, there is no difference between an 
active and a passive Voice head; they have exactly the same syntactic and 
semantic features. Bruening assumes that “passive is a head (Pass) that selects 
a projection of Voice that has not yet projected its external argument. I notate 
this [S: Voice(S:N)]. That is, Pass selects for a Voice with an unchecked [S:N] 
feature. This means that the complement of Pass is an unsaturated Voice pro￾jection” (pg. 22).
The analysis is sketched below (modified slightly):
(14) PassP
Pass VoiceP
Voice VP
V DP
bribe
D NP
So, in the passive, Spec VoiceP remains unfilled, but the Voice head has 
exactly the same features as in the active. Therefore, there is no difference 
between passive and active Voice heads for Bruening (2013).
The surprising consequence of Bruening’s analysis is that even though he 
adopts Kratzer’s (1996) VoiceP framework, the VoiceP itself plays no essen￾tial role in his analysis of the English passive voice. Rather, all the work is 
done by PassP, which (pg. 22) “selects for a Voice with an unchecked [S:N] 
feature.” Clearly, this situation represents a failure of the terminological 
assumption in (6). There is no reason internal to Bruening’s analysis of the 
passive that the head that introduces the external argument should be called 
Voice.
Consider next Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and Schäfer 2015, which 
adopts the VoiceP framework to analyze various voice-related phenomena, 
including the passive and anticausatives in German and Greek. My discussion 
here closely follows that of Angelopoulos, Collins, and Terzi 2020. Nonac￾tive voice is used in a variety of contexts: passives, reflexives and reciprocals, 
middles, deponent verbs, and some anticausative verbs. An example with a 
Greek active and passive (present and past tense) is given below (from Ange￾lopoulos et al. 2020:2, (1)):
(15)  a.  O kathijitis chirokrot-i tus fitites.
The professor applaud.ACT.PRES-3SG the students
‘The professor applauds the students.’Two Conceptions of VoiceP 125
b.  I fitites chirokrot-unde apo ton kathijiti.
the students applaud-NACT.PRES.3PL by the professor
‘The students are applauded by the professor.’
c.  I fitites chirokroti-thik-an apo ton kathijiti.
the students applaud-NACT.PAST-3PL by the professor
‘The students were applauded by the professor.’
Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and Schäfer (2015:101) propose that the 
nonactive voice morphology in Greek marks the absence of Spec VoiceP:
(16)  “. . . ​we propose that a Voice head is spelled out with nonactive morphol￾ogy in Greek, if it lacks a specifier. In other words, the common property 
shared by passives and marked anticausatives in languages of this type is 
the lack of a syntactically projected external argument in Spec VoiceP.”
Concretely, they adopt the analysis of Embick (1998, 2004) about the spell￾out of Voice:
(17)  Voice → Voice[NonAct]/ __ No DP Specifier.
But Angelopoulos, Collins, and Terzi (2020) show that the by-phrase in the 
Greek passive behaves like an external argument in its ability to bind reflex￾ives. Therefore, they conclude that the external argument in the passive and 
the active are projected in the same position (for them, Spec vP). From this it 
follows that the presence of nonactive voice is not sensitive to whether or not 
there is a syntactically projected external argument. But if the distribution of 
nonactive voice is independent of the projection of an external argument, 
there can be no support for Kratzer’s (1996) theory from Greek.
Yet another influential paper using the VoiceP framework is Harley 2013, 
which argues that for Hiaki “the external-argument-introducing projection 
VoiceP . . . ​must be distinct from the verbalizing head” (34). Harley 
(2013:50) notes that in applicatives of causatives, the morpheme order is 
the following:
(18)  ni’i-tua-ria
fly-caus-appl
She assumes that the caus head is a flavor of little v. Now if caus itself intro￾duces the causer, then because of the order of suffixes in (18), one would 
expect the applied DP to be higher than the causer DP, but it is not (as Harley 
shows). Rather, the causer subject is higher than the applied object. Therefore, 
it follows that (a) the caus head does not introduce the matrix causer subject 
and (b) there is another head that introduces the matrix causer subject. As 
Harley (2013:55) summarizes:126 Chapter 8
(19)  “The Mirror Principle problems posed by the interaction of the applica￾tive and causative in Hiaki require that the head that introduces caus￾ative morphology and semantics be distinct from the head that introduces 
external arguments; that is, vP is not VoiceP.”
Harley (2013:52) then claims that “Voice should be the locus of Voice 
morphology—passive morphemes included.” If the proposed head, introduc￾ing the causer in examples like (18), was also the locus of passive morphology, 
that would be strong support for Kratzer’s (1996) program. As Harley (2013:53) 
notes: “If the external argument is introduced separately by Voice, however, 
then passive Voice morphology can embed a causative v without requiring the 
presence of an external argument.” And in the diagrams (40) and (41) of Har￾ley’s paper, passive VoiceP is clearly shown with no specifier.
This logic seems very similar to Pylkkänen’s (2008a) account of the English 
passive presented above. And just as in Pylkkänen’s account, one can ask if 
there really is no syntactically present external argument in the passive in 
Hiaki. Harley presents no relevant data. But if the relevant tests (e.g., Princi￾ples A,B, secondary predicates, Helke expressions, argument control, adjunct 
control) showed that the external argument was projected in the passive, then 
both active Voice and passive Voice would involve a projected external argu￾ment. Such a conclusion would raise the possibility that the projection of 
arguments is identical in the active and passive in Hiaki, making Harley’s 
(2013) use of VoiceP to project the external argument suspect (since the pro￾jection of the external argument would be independent of voice).
The above short survey of Kratzer 1996; Bruening 2013; Pylkkänen 2008a; 
Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and Schäfer 2015; and Harley 2013 show that in 
all cases there is insufficient evidence to warrant an analysis where the external 
argument is projected in Spec VoiceP. Kratzer (1996) provides no evidence at 
all. Bruening (2013) gives an analysis using VoiceP, but where VoiceP plays no 
essential role in accounting for the passive (violating the terminological assump￾tion in (6)). Furthermore, the analyses of Pylkkänen 2008a; Bruening 2013 and 
Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou, and Schäfer 2015 all make incorrect empirical 
predictions about the short passive. Lastly, Harley (2013) does not provide suf￾ficient empirical evidence to support her claim that there is a VoiceP projection 
lacking an external argument in the passive.
8.4 Collins 2005a
In Collins 2005a, VoiceP is needed in the syntax of passive constructions, 
but it has nothing to do with the projection of external arguments into Two Conceptions of VoiceP 127
theta-positions. Rather, VoiceP allows the direct object of the active to be 
moved to Spec TP of the passive, which is why I call it the realization theory 
(as opposed to the projection theory). See chapter 7 for technical details on the 
derivation of the passive and the role of VoiceP.
In the theory of chapter 6, the by-phrase occupies Spec vP in the passive. In 
the short passive, there is a null pro that occupies Spec vP. Therefore, the 
structure of the vP in the passive is as follows:
(20)
 
vP
pro/KPby v’
v VP
V DP
But if this vP were embedded under a finite TP (as the complement of T), 
there would be no way for the structure to be realized. English does not allow 
non-nominative subjects, so the by-phrase could not move to Spec TP. And 
English is not a null subject language, which I assume entails that pro cannot 
appear in Spec TP (although pro may appear in other positions, such as Spec 
vP in the short passive; see chapter 4 for discussion). Furthermore, the object 
DP could not raise to Spec TP, since vP is a strong phase (because it has a filled 
specifier). Furthermore, Spec vP is a filled A-position intervening between 
the object and Spec TP, and so movement of the object to Spec TP would vio￾late Relativized Minimality. See chapter 7 for details.
Therefore, in the theory of Collins 2005a, the reason VoiceP is projected 
between TP and vP is to allow the object to move to Spec TP, while the sub￾ject stays in Spec vP. Collins assumes that the direct object is smuggled over 
Spec vP. On smuggling, see Collins 2005a and chapter 7.
The advantage of Collins’s (2005a) theory is that the projection of argu￾ments in the passive is identical to the projection of arguments in the active. 
This accounts for Chomsky’s (1957) observation that the selectional restric￾tions in the active and passive are identical (see discussion in chapter 1). It also 
accounts for the fact that the range of theta-roles found for the external argument 
in the passive matches those found for the external argument in the active (see 
chapter 6 for an illustration of this fact from Greek). Lastly, it accounts for the 
fact that the by-phrase in the passive can bind reflexive and reciprocal pro￾nouns, as shown below (from chapter 6):128 Chapter 8
(21)  a.  The packages were sent by the children to each other.
b. The pictures were painted by the children for each other.
c. The packages were sent by the children to themselves.
d. The pictures were painted by the children for themselves.
These properties are hard to account for unless one assumes that the pro￾jection of arguments in the passive and active are identical. But if one makes 
this identity assumption, then the projection of arguments is independent 
from the passive voice. And by the terminological assumption (6), the cate￾gory projecting external arguments should not be called VoiceP.
I speculate that the primary function of voice (and hence VoiceP) is in the 
realization of arguments in A-positions (not in the projection of arguments). 
However, it is important to note that there might be ways that VoiceP operates 
differently from the ways outlined in Collins 2005a. Of course, Collins 2005a 
and this monograph only discuss the passive, so it is unclear what the role of 
VoiceP is in other voices (e.g., middle, inverse, antipassive). What is important is 
that VoiceP has nothing to do with projecting the external argument, but is rather 
implicated in how the argument DPs are realized in (moved to) A-positions.
A more articulated theory of the syntax of various voice phenomena, and 
the role of VoiceP in those phenomena (under the realization theory) will have 
to await further research. A restrictive theory would start from the assump￾tion that the arguments in all these constructions are projected in exactly the 
same way. In other words, if there is an agent (either implicit or overt) in the 
active, passive, middle, impersonal, or inverse, then that agent should be pro￾jected the same way in all the constructions (see chapter 10 on the status of 
UTAH in the Merge-based theory). But if the agent is projected in the same 
way across all the different voices, then it is a violation of (6) to claim that the 
agent is projected in Spec VoiceP.
8.5 Other Authors
I have argued in this chapter that the external argument is not introduced in 
Spec VoiceP. Many other authors have come to the same conclusion (see also 
Newman 2020; Roberts 2019; and Zyman 2017 for views compatible with the 
one I am arguing for). I provide some quotes here.
In discussing ellipsis involving the passive, Merchant (2013:98) states:
(22) “The crucial element involved in these accounts is the separation of the 
head that determines voice from the head that determines the external 
valency of the predicate. There is in fact no conceptual reason these two 
should go together, and the ellipsis facts argue directly against this 
assumption.”Two Conceptions of VoiceP 129
Myler and Mali (2021:3, fn. 3), who otherwise fully adopt Kratzer’s (1996) 
VoiceP framework, echo Merchant’s conclusions (see chapter 10 for further 
discussion of Myler and Mali). Surprisingly, Myler and Mali continue to use 
the VoiceP notation in their paper.
(23)  “Since the head that introduces external arguments is in some languages 
clearly separate from and lower than the head that encodes passive￾active alternations, the label Voice turns out to be something of a misno￾mer; see especially Merchant 2008, 2013. Nevertheless we retain the 
usage here for consistency with the works cited in the final paragraph of 
this section and with other recent literature on causatives that uses the 
same framework.”
Based on morpheme order in the Latin passive, Zyman and Kalivoda 
(2020:8) explicitly reject Kratzer’s (1996) use of VoiceP in favor of the 
Collins/Merchant conception:
(24) “Fifth, the external argument (EA) originates in [Spec,vP] not [Spec,
VoiceP] (Collins 2005; Merchant 2013). This is advantageous for three 
reasons.”
Ramchand (2017:241) notes that the Voice as used by Kratzer does not fit 
into her framework:
(25)  “But if the Voice head (and its different “flavors” or versions) is sup￾posed to track the kind of externalization that varies with traditional 
voice morphology, then it certainly cannot be equivalent to the head 
labeled CAUSE, or INIT for that matter. Clearly, VoiceP is not the same 
thing as the highest head of the Ramchandian decomposition argued for 
in section 10.2.”
These references show that the Kratzerian analysis of external arguments 
as being introduced in Spec of VoiceP is far from universally accepted. Fur￾thermore, as Merchant (2013) notes, there is no conceptual reason to conflate 
voice and valency.
8.6 Merge-Based Approach
In this monograph, I have argued that the heads that determine argument 
structure (v, Appl, V) are distinct from the head that determines voice (Voice). 
I showed that in the passive (long or short) the external argument is projected 
in exactly the same way as in the active. In other words, the projection of the 
external argument is independent of voice. Therefore, there is no reason to 
externally Merge the external argument into Spec VoiceP.130 Chapter 8
In this section, I make the stronger claim that the Kratzerian conception of 
VoiceP introducing the external argument is inconsistent with the Merge￾based approach to argument structure.
Kratzerian approaches to the passive have in common that in the active 
Spec VoiceP is filled, but in the passive it is not. As noted in this monograph, 
that assumption leads to severe empirical problems, since the implicit argu￾ment in the passive in English can bind reflexives, reciprocals, and pronouns 
in Helke expressions and be modified by secondary predicates.
Not only is the Kratzerian approach problematic empirically, it is also prob￾lematic theoretically from the point of view of the Merge-based approach to 
argument structure. Kratzerian approaches are unified in holding that the 
external argument in the passive is not projected syntactically (although it is 
existentially bound semantically). But this is just the kind of analysis that 
the Merge-based theory blocks, since in one case (the active) the external￾argument taking property of Voice is satisfied by external Merge, and in the 
other (the passive) it is not (it is instead satisfied by some semantic mechanism 
involving existential closure).
This can be seen by looking carefully at analyses (such as Bruening 2013) 
that adopt Kratzer’s (1996) VoiceP. As noted in chapters 4 and 6, Bruening 
allows Spec VoiceP to be filled or empty while retaining the same semantics. 
This is a clear violation of the Theta-Criterion, since it means that a theta￾position remains unfilled in the passive.
Consider now Pylkkänen’s (2008a) analysis of the passive. She postulates 
that there is a passive VoicePass head that does not project a specifier, and that 
head existentially binds the external argument. The two kinds of Voice heads 
are given below:
(26)  a.  ⟦Voice⟧ = λx.λe.agent(e,x)
b. ⟦VoicePass⟧ = λe.∃x.agent(e,x)
The structure in (27) is slightly modified from Pylkkänen 2008a:26:
(27)
 
VoiceP
VoicePass VP
V DP
D NP
the meat
In Pylkkänen’s analysis, Spec VoicePass is never filled, since VoicePass is 
only used in the passive, not the active. Therefore, the Theta-Criterion does Two Conceptions of VoiceP 131
not force a filled specifier in (27). Or to put it in different terms, VoicePass is 
never an argument-introducing head, so it does not need to introduce an argu￾ment in (27). Therefore, it seems like Pylkkänen’s analysis (unlike Bruen￾ing’s) does not violate either the Argument Criterion or the Theta-Criterion.
However, there is an issue with Pylkkänen’s definition of VoicePass. It seems 
to combine two completely separate kinds of information: (a) the fact that the 
external argument is an agent, and (b) the fact that the external argument is 
existentially closed.
To rule this out, one possibility is to invoke the Principle of Decomposi￾tionality (Kayne 2005:212):
(28)  Principle of Decompositionality
UG imposes a maximum of one interpretable syntactic feature per lexi￾cal item.
However, it is not entirely clear that (28) rules out (26b), since VoicePass
could count as a single interpretable syntactic feature. In general Kayne’s 
principle suffers from the lack of specification of what a possible interpretable 
feature is. Or to put it another way, Kayne’s principle blocks syntactically 
complex lexical items, but does not block semantically complex syntactic fea￾tures and lexical items.
What is needed is an additional constraint that minimizes the semantic 
complexity of each interpretable syntactic feature. A preliminary attempt is 
the following (thanks to Phillipe Schlenker and Sam Alxatib for discussing 
this issue with me):
(29)  Principle of Semantic Decompositionality
If ⟦X⟧ = SV1(SV2) (SV1 and SV2 are semantic values)
and ⟦Y⟧ = SV1 or SV2 (where Y is a morpheme in the lexicon)
then X = [. . . ​Y . . .]
The basic idea of this principle is that if X can be decomposed semanti￾cally, then X can also be decomposed syntactically. I assume that SV1 and 
SV2 do not have trivial (identity function) values.
From this point of view, (26b) bundles together the semantic values of the 
active Voice head and the existential quantifier some, and therefore should be 
ruled out. The decomposition is shown below:
(30)  a.  ⟦Voice⟧ = λx.λe.agent(e,x)
b. ⟦VoicePass⟧ = λe.∃x.agent(e,x)
= [λP.λe.∃x.P(e,x)](⟦Voice⟧)
Of course, we can modify Pylkkänen’s analysis in the following way: One 
head would be active Voice (defined as in (26a)), and the other would 132 Chapter 8
existentially bind the external argument (as with the Pass head in Bruening’s 
analysis). But then if Spec VoiceP is empty, the analysis would violate the Theta￾Criterion just as it does in Bruening 2013 (see chapter 4 for discussion).
Another analysis violating (29) is Baker and Vinokurova’s (2009:531) analy￾sis of agentive nominalizations suffixes such as -er in English. They give the 
following semantic value (the symbol ⏜ is the nominalization operator):
(31)  -er: λP⏜λx Gen e ((P(e) & agent(e,x))
Baker and Vinokurova (2009) assume the same semantic value for Voice as 
in (30a). So, (31) contains the semantic value of Voice and should be ruled out 
by (29). In other words, (29) forces nominalization and the introduction of 
external arguments to be done by two different syntactic heads.
8.7 Kratzer on Nominalizations
Kratzer (1996: section 5) uses English nominalizations to give additional sup￾port for her theory of external arguments: “The discussion of English gerunds 
confirmed our claim that external arguments are introduced by independent 
heads that are also responsible for the assignment of accusative Case.”
Consider the following minimal pair:
(32)  a.  Maria enjoyed a reading of Pride and Prejudice.
b. Maria enjoyed reading Pride and Prejudice.
According to Kratzer, in (32a) there is no external argument (and hence no 
control) and no accusative Case. In (32b), there is a controlled external argu￾ment, and the direct object receives accusative Case. This difference can be 
explained in terms of the absence of VoiceP in (32a) and the presence of VoiceP 
in (32b).
The first point to note about this analysis is that it is completely independent 
of voice. The same exact explanation could have been given in Chomsky’s 
(1995) vP theory, where the external argument is introduced in Spec vP.
But a more serious issue is the generalization that (Kratzer 1996:128) “in 
ofing gerunds, the absence of accusative Case is accompanied by the absence 
of the verb’s external argument.” Consider the following example:
(33)  a.  The constant promoting of himself1
 at conferences is hurting John1
’s 
career.
b. The constant promoting of him1
 at conferences is hurting John1
’s 
career.
To me, the sentences in (33) sound as good as any other ofing gerund. In (33a), 
there is a phonologically null implicit argument (the promoter) that binds the Two Conceptions of VoiceP 133
reflexive, satisfying Principle A of the Binding Theory. A partial structure is 
given below (see section 4.4.4 for more discussion of nominalizations):
(34)  the pro1
 promoting of himself1
Furthermore, in (33b) the interpretation is that the promoter is distinct from 
John. Such an interpretation is accounted for by Principle B if there is a null 
implicit argument. Such sentences show that ofing gerunds do not lack exter￾nal arguments. The fact that control is not possible in (32a) does not have to 
do with the absence of an external argument, but rather the absence of con￾trolled PRO.
How to represent (33) syntactically and how to account for the lack of accu￾sative Case are questions I will leave to future research (but see chapter 4 for 
a discussion of implicit arguments in nominalizations).
8.8 Conclusion
In this chapter I compared two conceptions of VoiceP, the projection theory and 
the realization theory. I discussed a number of analyses using Kratzer’s (1996) 
framework. In each case, they either (a) violate the terminological assumption 
(6), or (b) are empirically inaccurate or (c) are empirically incomplete.
I suggested the realization theory (e.g., Collins 2005a) as an alternative way 
to think about voice. Lastly, I argued that the Kratzerian conception of VoiceP 
as introducing the external argument is actually inconsistent with the Merge￾based theory of argument structure outlined in chapter 1.
There is by now a large literature adopting the theoretical assumptions of 
Kratzer (1996). It is possible that in some paper the smoking gun has been 
found that crucially links the projection of the external argument to VoiceP. 
Alternatively, the whole project is doomed to fail, since it conflates two very 
different syntactic systems: argument structure and voice.9.1 Introduction
A long-standing debate in the syntax literature is the relation between (1a) and 
(1b), which I call the dative alternation. This terminology is neutral between 
analyses where either (1a) is derived from (1b) (Larson 1988; Baker 1997:91) 
(dative shift) or (1b) is derived from (1a) (Bowers 1981:65; Postal 2010:123), 
or neither structure is derived from the other (Harley 2002; Harley and Jung 
2015; Harley and Miyagawa 2017:21; Holmberg, Sheehan, and van der Wal 
2019:685).
(1)  a.  John gave Mary the car. (double object construction)
b.  John gave the car to Mary. (prepositional dative)
Support for the analysis where (1b) is derived from a structure underlying (1a) 
comes from systematic parallels between the dative alternation and the passive.
(2)  a.  John wrote the book. (active)
b.  The book was written by John. (passive with by-phrase)
In (1a), the indirect object and direct object are unmarked DPs, unaccompanied 
by prepositions. In (2a), the subject and object are unmarked DPs. (1b) involves a 
word order reversal, changing the order goal-theme to the order theme-goal. 
(2b) also involves a word order reversal, changing the order agent-theme to the 
order theme-agent. In (1b), the goal argument is marked by a semantically vac￾uous preposition to. In (2b), the agent argument is marked by a semantically 
vacuous preposition by.
The passive and the active share the same truth conditions (putting aside the 
issue of quantifier scope), in the same way that (1a) and (1b) share the same truth 
conditions.
(3)  a.  John gave Mary the book iff John gave the book to Mary.
b. John wrote the book iff the book was written by John.
9 The Dative Alternation136 Chapter 9
Lastly, just like in the passive (see Chomsky 1957:42–43), selectional restric￾tions are maintained between the orders in (1a) and (1b). For example, (5c) is a 
violation of selectional restrictions, since the object of frighten must be sentient. 
A similar constraint holds for the passive in (5d). Similarly, (4c) is a violation of 
selectional restrictions, since the first object must be the receiver. These selec￾tional restrictions are maintained in the prepositional dative variant in (4d).
(4)  a.      I gave John a lovely gift.
b. I gave a lovely gift to John.
c. *I gave a lovely gift John.
d. *I gave John to a lovely gift.
(5)  a.     Sincerity frightened John.
b. John was frightened by sincerity.
c. *John frightened sincerity.
d. *Sincerity was frightened by John.
My conclusions about selectional restrictions and truth conditions are sup￾ported by Rappaport Hovav and Levin (2008:129), who put their thesis as 
follows: “We challenge the predominant view of the English dative alterna￾tion, which takes all alternating verbs to have two meanings: a caused posses￾sion meaning realized by the double object variant and a caused motion 
meaning realized by the to variant. Instead, we argue that verbs like give and 
sell only have a caused possession meaning, while verbs like throw and send
have both caused motion and caused possession meanings. We show that the 
caused possession meaning may be realized by both variants. Concomitantly, 
we argue that verbs like give, even in the to variant, lack a conceptual path 
constituent, and instead have a caused possession meaning which can be 
understood as the bringing about of a ‘have’ relation.”
Given these five striking parallels, I assume that (1a) is syntactically related 
to (1b) in a way parallel to the syntactic relation between (2a) and (2b). More 
specifically, just like the passive is derived by moving the theme over the 
agent (see chapter 7 for details), I propose that the prepositional dative con￾struction is derived by moving the theme over the goal.
In this chapter, I will give further evidence that (1b) is derived from the 
structure underlying (1a) by movement of the theme over the goal (a conclu￾sion reached on similar grounds by Aoun and Li (1989) and Kitagawa (1994)). 
I point out that such a derivation yields a locality problem (a DP moves over a 
KP) and suggest a solution to this problem in terms of smuggling (on smug￾gling, see Collins 2005a, 2005b; Belletti and Collins 2020).
The rest of the chapter is structured as follows. Section 9.2 discusses some 
asymmetries between the double object construction and the prepositional The Dative Alternation 137
dative construction. Section 9.3 proposes an analysis for double object con￾structions. Section 9.4 proposes an analysis for the dative alternation parallel to 
the analysis of the passive given in chapters 6 and 7 of the monograph. Sec￾tion 9.5 discusses striking supporting data from Hallman 2015. Section 9.6 is 
the conclusion.
9.2 Asymmetries of Asymmetries
Barss and Lasnik (1986) and Larson (1988) show that there are c-command 
asymmetries in double object constructions and prepositional dative con￾structions. But there is also an asymmetry between the double object con￾struction (DOC) and the prepositional dative (see also Kitagawa 1994; Harley 
and Miyagawa 2017; Takano 1998:824):
(6)  a.    John gave every man his paycheck.
b.  ?John gave his paycheck to every man.
(7)  a.     John gave every dog to its owner.
b. *John gave its owner every dog.
(6a) shows that the goal c-commands the theme in a double object construc￾tion (since bound variable anaphora is allowed), and (7a) shows that the theme 
c-commands the goal in a prepositional dative construction. While (6b) is 
marginal in the bound variable reading, (7b) is completely unacceptable. 
Assuming that (7b) violates the c-command condition on bound variable 
anaphora (Barss and Lasnik 1986:348), the problem is to explain why (6b) 
does not incur a similarly strong violation.
A contrast similar to the one in (6) and (7) exists for reciprocals (see also 
Kitagawa 1994; on the marginal status of (8b) see Takano 1998:824):
(8)  a.      I showed the boys each other’s pictures.
b.  ?I showed each other’s pictures to the boys.
(9)  a.      I showed the students to each other’s parents.
b. *I showed each other’s parents the students.
Backwards anaphora in (8b) with the prepositional dative is considerably 
better than backwards anaphora in (9b) with the double object construction.
A similar asymmetry between the DOC and the prepositional dative can be 
seen in quantifier scope (see Bruening 2001; Kitagawa 1994; Aoun and Li 
1989; and Harley and Jung 2015 for an extensive discussion):
(10)  a.  I gave a student every car.
b. I gave a car to every student.138 Chapter 9
In (10a), the only possible interpretation is that there is a single student 
who receives all the cars. (10a) resists the inverse scope interpretation 
where every car is given to a different student. On the other hand, (10b) 
admits the inverse scope interpretation, where every student receives a dif￾ferent car.
Burzio (1986:198–199) points out that there is a c-command constraint on 
the following use of each (although see Safir and Stowell 1987, which coins the 
term binominal each):
(11)  a.       We met one girl each.
b. *One girl each met us.
In (11a), the plural subject c-commands the structure [one girl each]. But in 
(11b), the plural object does not c-command [one girl each], and the sentence 
is unacceptable.
Given this constraint, consider the following data ((13) is from Burzio 
1986:199):
(12)  a.       John assigned [the visitors] one interpreter each.
b.       John gave [the kids] one present each.
c.       John sent [the students] one letter each.
(13)  a.  (?) John assigned one interpreter each1
 to [the visitors]1
.
b.    ?John gave one present each1
 to [the kids]1
.
c.    ?John sent one letter each1
 to [the students]1
.
(14)  a.    *John assigned one visitor each the interpreters.
b. *John gave one child each the toy cars.
c. *John sent one student each the letters.
(15)  a.       John assigned the interpreters to one visitor each.
b. John gave the toy cars to one child each.
c. John sent the letters to one student each.
There is a clear contrast between (13) and (14), even though in both cases 
[DP each] precedes its antecedent.
As argued by Kitagawa (1994), Aoun and Li (1989), and Takano (1998), 
these kinds of asymmetries between DOCs and the prepositional dative can 
be explained if the prepositional dative is derived by movement of the theme 
over the goal.
Focusing on the quantifier data in (6) and (7), consider first the relevant 
condition from Barss and Lasnik (1986:348):
(16)  “in order for a pronoun to be related to a quantificational NP (QNP) as a 
variable, it must be in the domain of the QNP at S-Structure.”The Dative Alternation 139
The relative acceptability of (6b) can be accounted for if (6b) is derived by 
A-movement of the theme over the goal. Under that assumption, the quantifier 
phrase c-commands one of the occurrences of his paycheck, and therefore 
c-commands the pronoun. This derivation is sketched below:
(17)  John gave his paycheck to every man <his paycheck>
Supporting evidence for this analysis is given by the following contrast 
involving A-movement:
(18)  a.   His1 mother seems to [every boy]1
 to be nice.
b. *His1 mother told [every boy]1
 to be nice.
(18a), which involves raising, is acceptable with a bound variable interpre￾tation. (18b) is unacceptable. Since (18a) involves A-movement, every boy
c-commands one occurrence of the pronoun (on a similar case involving 
psych-verbs, see Belletti and Rizzi 2012:134).
I assume that the Binding Theory data, quantifier scope data, and binomi￾nal each data can be explained in a similar way (see Kitagawa 1994; Aoun 
and Li 1989). On reconstruction effects in A-movement more generally, see 
Sportiche 2017a, Lebeaux 2009, and Barss 2001.
However, a theoretical problem arises in the putative derivation for (6b) illus￾trated in (17). Such a derivation should violate Relativized Minimality (see 
Rizzi 1990) or the Minimal Link Condition (see Chomsky 1995), since the 
movement of the theme DP crosses over the goal KP [KP to every man]. To over￾come this problem, I propose a smuggling analysis, parallel to the smuggling 
analysis of the passive discussed in chapter 7. In other words, I am proposing 
that the prepositional dative construction has a passive-like derivation.
9.3 Structure of DOCs
For background, I assume that the double object constructions should be ana￾lyzed in terms of VP shells (see Larson 1988; Pylkkänen 2008a), where the 
VP shells are vP, ApplP, VP, and perhaps others (see the introduction for ref￾erences). In particular, I assume v takes an ApplP complement, and Appl 
takes a VP complement (see Collins 1997).
I do not follow Pylkkänen (2008a), who analyzes English as having a low 
applicative. Pylkkänen argues that the semantics of the low applicative differ 
from the semantics of the high applicative: “A high applicative head is very 
much like the external-argument-introducing head: it simply adds another par￾ticipant to the event described by the verb. In contrast, low applied arguments 
bear no semantic relation to the verb whatsoever; they only bear a transfer-of￾possession relation to the direct object” (14).140 Chapter 9
Although I will not discuss Pylkkänen’s approach in detail (see Larson 
2010, 2014 for critical discussion), I briefly note here that it is possible to 
obtain the semantics attributed to the low applicative syntax (Pylkkänen 
2008a, pg. 18) from a high applicative syntax (pg. 12). It is only necessary to 
define high applicative lexical entry as follows:
(19) ⟦APPL⟧ = λP.λx.λe.[P(e) ˄ to-the-possession(e, Theme(e), x)]
In this semantic value, Theme(e) is the function yielding the unique theme 
argument of e. In other words, when Appl is added to the VP, it adds a goal argu￾ment and states that the goal argument is related to the theme of the event by 
the to-the-possession relation.
Since Pylkkänen admits that the high applicative head comes in several 
semantic flavors (e.g., instrumental, benefactive, malefactive; see pg. 17), I 
propose that (19) is just one more flavor. This new definition of the semantic 
value of the high applicative head also captures some of the other properties 
listed by Pylkkänen (see pg. 18). Since Appl introduces the to-the-possession 
relation, V must have a theme argument. Pylkkänen also claims that high 
applicatives and low applicatives differ with respect to secondary predication. 
For brevity’s sake, I do not pursue that issue here (see Harley and Jung 2015 
for a recent discussion of depictives and DOCs). For more discussion of Pylk￾känen’s theory, see chapter 10.
A partial underlying structure of (1a) is given below (I leave out the repre￾sentation of the movement of the V to Appl and the movement of Appl to v):
(20)
 
vP
DP v’
John
v ApplP
DP Appl’
Mary
Appl VP
V DP
give
D NP
the car
9.4 Analysis
In Collins 2020, I analyzed the dative preposition to as the head of VoiceP. 
However, in this chapter I will analyze to-phrases as KPs, just as I did with 
by-phrases in chapter 6. If the to-phrase is a KP, the question is what The Dative Alternation 141
determines its syntactic distribution. For example, why can’t the to-phrase 
appear in Spec vP in the passive? I will assume that on the KP analysis, there 
must be some constraint that forces the dative to-phrase to appear in Spec 
ApplP, instead of any other position. The generalization is the following:
(21)  [KP to DP] appears in Spec ApplP (and no other position).
I put aside the relation between the dative to and the directional to found in 
sentences like “I went to the store.” I assume that the distribution of the direc￾tional to does not fall under (21). This issue is analogous to the fact that pas￾sive by is homophonous to a locative by.
I propose that dative to has a c-selectional feature that constrains it to 
appear in Spec ApplP. In particular, I propose the following:
(22) to has c-selectional feature [__ApplP]
The technical framework assumed in this account is that of Collins and 
Stabler (2016:62): “We call the features involved in triggering Merge ‘trigger 
features’. We assume that such features are to be identified with subcategori￾zation features, EPP features and OP features for movement to Spec CP.”
Recall that the passive by has the c-selectional feature [__vP], limiting a 
KP headed by by to Spec vP. The difference between passive by and dative to
is purely syntactic (specified by c-selectional features). They do not differ 
semantically; both are semantically vacuous.
The underlying structure of the prepositional dative is given below (see 
also Hallman 2021 for a related analysis):
(23)
 
ApplP
KP Appl’
K DP Appl VP
to Mary
V DP
D NP
the car
Consider how the Theta-Criterion is satisfied by (23). Because of structure 
(20), we concluded that Spec ApplP is a theta-position (because an argument DP 
is externally merged there). Therefore, in (23) Spec ApplP must also be a theta￾position because we are assuming there are not different flavors of Appl (at least 
for the two forms of the dative alternation). Rather, the same kind of Appl is 
used in both the double object construction and the prepositional dative (exactly 
like the same little v is used in both the active and the passive). But [KP to Mary] 
is an argument, so merging it in Spec ApplP satisfies the Theta-Criterion.142 Chapter 9
Compare this structure to the structure of the vP in the passive (e.g., the 
book was written by John):
(24)
 
vP
KP v’
K DP v PartP
by John
Part VP
V DP
write
D NP
the book
Given this background, I propose that the dative alternation should be ana￾lyzed in terms of smuggling, just like the passive (see Collins 2005a, Collins 
2005b, and chapter 7). I propose that (1b) is derived from (1a) by VP movement, 
smuggling the theme past the goal. In particular, there is a VoiceP projection 
whose specifier the VP moves into. Technically, VP satisfies an EPP feature of 
Voice. I will refer to this Voice head involved in the dative alternation as inner 
Voice, to distinguish it from the one used in the passive, which I will refer to as 
outer Voice.
Therefore, there are at least two Voice heads in English, with slightly dif￾ferent properties:
(25)  a.  outer Voice:
i. It is not an argument-introducing head.
 ii. It takes vP as a complement.
iii.  PartP moves to its specifier.
iv. It is semantically vacuous.
b. inner Voice:
i. It is not an argument-introducing head.
 ii. It takes ApplP as a complement.
iii.  VP moves to its specifier.
iv. It is semantically vacuous.
It is possible that these two Voice heads (inner Voice and outer Voice) are 
just two instantiations of the same general head, appearing in two different 
positions. When Voice is merged high, we get outer Voice. If Voice is merged 
low, we get inner Voice. But syntactically, there is just one Voice head. Such 
an analysis predicts that there are correlations between the passive and dative 
alternation cross-linguistically (because they are triggered by the same Voice 
head). For example, whereas Ewe lacks both a passive and the dative alterna￾tion, English has both. I have not investigated this prediction.The Dative Alternation 143
The derivation of the prepositional dative construction is given below:
(26)  John gave the car to Mary.
a.  [
ApplP KP [Appl’ Appl [VP V [DP the car]]]] → Merge Voice
b.  [VoiceP Voice [ApplP KP[Appl’ Appl [VP V [DP the car]]]]] → Move VP
c.  [[VP V [DP the car]] [Voice’ Voice [ApplP KP [Appl’ Appl <VP>]]]]
A problem with the derivation in (26) is that it gives the wrong c-command 
relations between the theme and goal. As discussed by Larson (1988), the 
theme DP c-commands the goal DP in prepositional dative constructions.
(27)  I showed the students to each other’s teachers.
In (27), the DP the students c-commands the DP each other, and hence is 
able to bind it. However, in (26c), because of the presence of the fronted VP 
constituent, the theme does not actually c-command the goal (the theme DP is 
dominated by VP, which does not dominate the goal DP). Such considerations 
suggest that the theme DP in (26c) must undergo one subsequent A-movement 
out of the VP. I assume that Spec AgroP (object agreement phrase) is the rele￾vant position. For an analysis involving raising to object, see Postal 1974. For 
vP internal functional projections, see Collins 2003, Collins and Thráinsson 
1996, and Baker and Collins 2006.
Putting all these steps together yields the following structure (I leave out 
the movement of the verb to Agro, Agro to v, and other head movements):
(28) TP
DP T’
John
T vP
[+pst]
< DP> v’
John
v AgroP
V v DP Agro’
give
D N Agro VoiceP
the car
VP Voice’
<V> <DP> Voice ApplP
KP Appl’
object shift
K DP Appl < VP>
to Mary
smuggling
Let’s verify that this structure meets all the requirements outlined earlier.144 Chapter 9
First, since the prepositional dative is derived from a structure underlying 
the DOC, we can account for the fact that they share identical selectional 
restrictions (and truth conditions).
Second, the AC/TC is satisfied, since KP to Mary is externally merged as 
the specifier of ApplP.
Third, since VP is moved over the KP to Mary in Spec ApplP, there is no 
violation of Relativized Minimality or the MLC. The theme DP does not 
directly move over the goal KP, rather the theme DP is smuggled over the goal 
KP by VP movement.
Fourth, the DP the car c-commands the DP to Mary (after raising to Spec 
Agro). Hence the standard c-command facts will hold (see (27)).
Fifth, since the theme DP the car originates in a position lower than the 
goal DP to Mary, we can account for the acceptability of the various recon￾struction effects.
The analysis in (28) is similar to the analysis of faire causatives given in 
Kayne 2005:chapter 5. And in fact, the parallelism between my analysis 
and Kayne’s analysis strongly supports the assumption I made earlier that the 
prepositional dative should be the derived structure (and not the underlying 
structure) in the dative alternation. In the faire causative of a transitive verb, 
the external argument of the causativized verb bears a dative preposition à. 
But the embedded clause corresponds to an underlying SVO structure (with 
no dative preposition).
9.5 Hallman 2015
Hallman (2015) discusses the use of purpose clauses in double object con￾structions. He uses the data to motivate an analysis very similar to mine, 
where the prepositional dative construction is derived from an underlying 
double object construction. In this section, I will review his data.
First, consider the following examples of purpose clauses in double object 
constructions (see Hallman 2015:392):
(29)  a.  Mary gave John a puppy to play with.
b. Mary sent John a manuscript to read.
c. Mary assigned John a job to do.
d. Mary lent John a bicycle to run some errands with.
e. Mary offered John her apartment to stay in.
Hallman (2015:392) analyzes the purpose clause in these examples as 
involving PRO controlled by the first object and an empty operator coindexed 
with the second object:The Dative Alternation 145
(30)  Mary gave John1
 a puppy2
 [CP Op2
 [PRO1
 to play with t2
]]
The structure of the purpose clause in (29a) [to play with] is given in (31). 
Following Hallman, I will assume that the subject of the purpose clause is 
PRO, but there is also an empty operator in Spec CP.
(31)
 
CP
DP2 C’
OP
C TP
DP1 T’
PRO
T vP
to
<DP1> v’
v VP
V PP
play
P <DP2>
with 
Hallman assumes that PRO is c-commanded by its antecedent (399). He 
claims that the purpose clause with an empty operator in Spec CP is a derived 
predicate (392), although he does not clearly state what the structural condi￾tions on predication are.
The prepositional dative shows the same control possibilities as the double 
object construction in (29):
(32)  a.  Mary gave a puppy to John to play with.
b. Mary sent a manuscript to John to read.
c. Mary assigned a job to John to do.
d. Mary lent a bicycle to John to run some errands with.
e. Mary offered her apartment to John to stay in.
Locative constructions that select a DP+PP frame do not accept such pur￾pose clauses:
(33)  a.  *Mary put the child2
 on the horse1
 [PRO1
 to carry e2
].
b. *Mary led the horse2
 to John1
 [PRO to feed e2
].
c. *Mary poured honey2
 on her little brother1
 [PRO1
 to lick off e2
].
d. *Mary immersed the cloth2
 in oil1
 [PRO1
 to permeate e2
].
e. *Mary placed the planting pots2 under the tomato vines1
 [PRO1
 to 
grow over e2
].146 Chapter 9
Hallman (2015:399) explains the data as follows:
(34)  “Binding of PRO in the purpose clause by the location argument in loca￾tive constructions is impossible . . . That argument does not c-command 
the PRO subject of the purpose clause when the purpose clause is predi￾cated of the theme, since the theme is hierarchically higher in the struc￾ture than the location argument.”
But then the structure of the prepositional data cannot be like the structure 
of the locative construction, since the to-phrase can control PRO, but the loca￾tive cannot. Rather, the prepositional dative construction has the same under￾lying structure as the double object construction, accounting for the parallels 
in control. Hallman (2015:399) puts it as follows:
(35)  “The fact that the subject PRO in the purpose clause may be bound by 
the possessor in the matrix clause [C.C. in the prepositional dative con￾struction] indicates that the possessor c-commands the purpose clause 
PRO, and therefore the purpose clause itself.”
Hallman’s data are parallel to the data that I gave in section 6.8:
(36)  a.  by-phrase (but not DP in adjunct) can control PRO.
b. to-phrase (but not DP in locative phrase) can control PRO.
9.6 Conclusion
In this chapter, I have argued that the dative alternation should be given an 
analysis parallel to that of the passive construction. I started by outlining five 
parallels between the passive and the dative alternation. Then I showed how 
the dative alternation gives rise to asymmetries that are only explicable if the 
theme moves over the goal in the prepositional dative construction.
Given this background, I gave an analysis of the dative alternation parallel 
to that of the passive. In the prepositional dative construction, a KP is exter￾nally merged into Spec ApplP, and then the VP moves over Spec ApplP into 
the specifier of an inner Voice head, smuggling the theme over the goal.
Lastly, I showed how my analysis can account for Hallman’s (2015) data 
concerning control of PRO in purpose clauses in the dative alternation versus 
locatives.
The c-command asymmetries and Hallman’s data provide empirical sup￾port for the analysis of the dative alternation in this chapter, which rests 
squarely on the AC/TC of the Merged-based approach to argument structure.In this chapter, I will present several recent proposals about argument struc￾ture involving various powerful mechanisms of formal semantics (Heim and 
Kratzer 1998; Pylkkänen 2008a; Jacobson 2014; Myler and Mali 2021). In 
each case, I argue that the analyses are inconsistent with the Merge-based 
approach to argument structure. I also briefly consider the place of UTAH 
(Uniformity of Theta-Assignment Hypothesis) in syntactic theory, arguing 
that UTAH is not a principle of UG.
10.1 Heim and Kratzer 1998
As noted in the introduction, there are people who deny the existence of the 
Theta-Criterion. For example, Bruening (2013:23) gives the following 
statement:
(1)  “Because there are no syntactic thematic roles in this system, there is also 
no θ-Criterion. Elements will either combine semantically, or they will 
not. If a head is a function that calls for an argument and an argument of 
the appropriate type combines with it, the semantics will be well-formed. 
If a predicate calls for an argument and no argument combines with it, it 
will be ill-formed. If there is an argument that does not serve as the argu￾ment of any predicate in the semantics, the result will also be ill-formed. 
All the work of the θ-Criterion is done by the semantics.”
A similar sentiment can be found in Myler and Mali (2021:3):
(2)  “Also, the Theta Criterion has no status in this conception: all that is required 
is that the structure compose successfully in the semantics (Full Interpreta￾tion; see also Baker 1997:121–122, Heim and Kratzer 1998:53–58).”
The issue of the Theta-Criterion and formal semantics was first discussed 
in Heim and Kratzer (1998:51). I give the extended quote below:
10 On the Tension with Formal Semantics148 Chapter 10
(3)  “Suppose we have a predicate α with one θ-role to assign. In our terms, 
suppose that ⟦α⟧ is of the type <e,t>. According to the θ-Criterion, α must 
appear in the vicinity of something that receives its θ-role. That means α
has to have a sister node with a meaning of type e. According to our Inter￾pretability principle, on the other hand, a sister node of type e is not 
strictly required. It would provide one suitable environment for α, but not 
the only kind. Imagine instead that α has a sister node whose meaning is a 
function with domain D<e,t>. (For instance, it might be of type <<e,t>, e>.) 
In that case, the next higher node could be interpreted as applying this 
sister’s meaning to ⟦α⟧. So we could have an interpretable structure which 
does not contain an argument for α! α would not be assigning its θ-role to 
any phrase, in violation of the θ-Criterion. Yet Interpretability would be 
fulfilled, in virtue of α being a suitable argument for its sister node.”
In this paragraph, they are explicitly arguing against the Theta-Criterion in 
favor of a weaker Principle of Interpretability, which is stated below (Heim 
and Kratzer 1998:49):
(4)  Principle of Interpretability
All nodes in a phrase structure tree must be in the domain of the 
interpretation function ⟦ ⟧.
Basically, the interpretation function divides into several cases depending 
on the structure involved: terminal node, nonbranching node, function appli￾cation. What the Principle of Interpretability says is that all nodes must fall 
under one of these cases.
Crucially, Heim and Kratzer (1998:53) note that whether or not the Theta￾Criterion exists is an empirical issue: “These two arguments against the 
θ-criterion are not beyond question, of course. They are only as good as the 
syntactic and semantic analyses we have sketched.”
Heim and Kratzer (1998:51–53) present two empirical arguments against 
the Theta-Criterion. I discuss these examples at length to bring out the rele￾vant issues. The first issue concerns nouns as predicates:
(5) “In the following chapter, we will propose that common nouns like ‘barn’ 
are 1-place predicates (type <e,t>). In other words, they have a θ-role to 
assign, and thus the θ-Criterion requires the presence of an argument. In 
certain examples (predicative uses), this is unproblematic:
(6)  This is a barn.
The required argument here is the subject NP ‘this’. (6) is true if and only 
if the object referred to by ‘this’ has the property of being a barn. But 
consider the following sentence:On the Tension with Formal Semantics 149
(7)  The barn burned down.
(7) contains no phrase that receives the θ-role of ‘barn’. It thus seems to 
violate the θ-Criterion. Yet it is perfectly fine, and we will see below how 
it can be interpreted by assigning ‘the’ a meaning of type <<e,t>, e> suit￾able to take ⟦barn⟧ as an argument. So this is the sort of case that we have 
been looking for. The Interpretability Principle and the θ-Criterion make 
different predictions here, and if the analysis we will give for (7) is on 
the right track, then the empirical facts favor the former.”
From the point of view of the Theta-Criterion, we have three choices here: 
(a) The Theta-Criterion is wrong and should be abandoned in favor of weaker 
principles like the Interpretability Principle. (b) The Theta-Criterion is right, 
but somehow it does not apply to barn. That is, somehow barn does not 
require a syntactically present argument as its sister in the expression the 
barn. (c) The Theta-Criterion is right, but the analysis of the barn in the quote 
is wrong and there is a syntactically represented argument of barn in sen￾tences such as “The barn burned down.”
Curiously, Heim and Kratzer choose option (c) later on in their book. 
Based on issues having to do with the interpretation of quantifier phrases 
internal to DPs, they state (pg. 229): “Once we entertain a subject position 
not only in VP but also in PP, it is natural to do the same for the remaining 
categories that were traditionally analyzed as 1-place predicates: namely, 
APs and NPs.”
Consider the following example:
(6)  No owner of an expresso machine drinks tea.
The question is how to interpret the quantifier phrase an espresso machine, 
which takes scope internal to the subject DP. They propose the following 
structure:
(7)  [NP PRO [N’ owner [PP of an espresso machine]]]
In this structure, the whole NP is of type t, and so the DP an espresso 
machine can undergo QR (quantifier raising) and adjoin to it.
But once one allows this kind of syntactic structure for owner of an 
expresso machine, it is unclear what would block it for barn in (5). In other 
words, I propose the barn has the following structure consistent with the 
Theta-Criterion (for a similar conclusion, see Koopman 2003, 2005):
(8)  [DP the [NP ec barn]] (ec = empty category)
Whether ec should be the same as pro, PRO or a copy of some moved ele￾ment is unclear. But I assume that Spec NP is a theta-position. And so, by the 
Theta-Criterion, the theta-position associated with barn is filled in (8).150 Chapter 10
The second argument in Heim and Kratzer 1998 is based on VP coordi￾nation, which they represent as follows (I number the VPs for exposition 
purposes):
(9)
 
S (=(8) in Heim and Kratzer 1998:52)
NP VP
|
Ann
VP1 and VP2
sings dances
Heim and Kratzer (1998:52) state the following: “What interests us here 
is that this is another interpretable structure which seems to violate the 
θ-Criterion, in that there are not enough arguments to go around for all the 
θ-roles that need to be assigned in (8). ‘Sing’ and ‘dance’ each have a θ-role to 
assign, but only one potential argument (the NP ‘Ann’) is present. Once more, 
we tentatively conclude that the weaker requirements imposed by our Inter￾pretability Principle make the better empirical predictions.”
But clearly (8) is not a well-formed syntactic structure, since it does not com￾ply with the VP internal subject hypothesis (discussed in Heim and Kratzer, 
section 8.4). Suppose that the subject Ann raises by ATB (across-the-board) 
movement from Spec VP1
 and Spec VP2
 to Spec TP. The structure is illustrated 
below:
(10)  [
S Ann [VP [VP <Ann> sings] and [VP <Ann> dances]]]
Consider the resulting structure from the standpoint of the Theta-Criterion, 
repeated below (see chapter 1 for discussion of different versions of the 
Theta-Criterion):
(11)  Theta-Criterion
Each argument α appears in a chain containing a unique visible 
theta-position P, and each theta-position P is visible in a chain contain￾ing a unique argument α.
(Chomsky 1986:97)
An important issue is how to interpret the notion of chain formed by ATB 
movement. Is there one chain or are there two chains? Let us assume for the 
sake of argument that there are two chains (understood as a sequence of posi￾tions; see Collins and Stabler 2016 for a formalization of the notion of chain):
(12)  a.  <Spec TP, Spec VP1
>
b. <Spec TP, Spec VP2
>On the Tension with Formal Semantics 151
As for the first half of the Theta-Criterion, Ann is in a chain containing a 
unique theta-position (e.g., chain (12a)). As for the second half of the Theta￾Criterion, each theta-position P (Spec VP1
 and Spec VP2
) is visible in a chain 
containing a unique argument α, that is, Ann.
In summary, neither of Heim and Kratzer’s arguments against the Theta￾Criterion is particularly compelling. For the argument based on nouns like 
barn, they change their analysis later in the book. For the argument based on 
VP coordination, they propose an arguably erroneous syntax for VPs (without 
the VP internal subject hypothesis) to make their point.
10.2 Jacobson 2014
The function composition and type-shifting mechanisms of Jacobson (2014) 
allow violations of the Theta-Criterion. In a discussion of relative clauses, 
Jacobson (2014:229) notes:
(13)  “The Direct Compositional version sketched here—which makes no use 
of traces and no use of indices or assignments—ends up with the same 
result. Notice that the function composing the lifted (GQ) ⟦Martha⟧ with 
⟦refinish⟧ directly results in an expression Martha refinished which 
denotes the set of things that Martha refinished . . . ​­There is no need to 
assume refinish combines in the syntax with an actual NP (such as a 
trace) and no reason to assume ⟦refinish⟧—of type <e,<e,t>>—needs to 
actually find an argument of type e to combine with. Indeed, it does not 
find such an argument, but is composed with the GQ subject.”
The combination of ⟦Martha⟧ with ⟦refinish⟧ is made possible by the func￾tion composition rules, summarized as follows (see Jacobson 2014:221–222):
(14)  “Take a function f from A to B and a function g from B to C (any two of 
those sets could happen to be the same). Then the two functions can be 
composed into a new function notated as g∘f which is a function from A 
to C, where for any x in A, g∘f(x) = g(f(x)).”
Jacobson’s approach to argument structure is not consistent with the Merge￾based approach. For Jacobson, refinish is of type <e,<e,t>>, but does not com￾bine with an internal argument in the relative clause. The claim that “There is 
no need to assume refinish combines in the syntax with an actual NP (such 
as a trace)” contradicts the Theta-Criterion, which imposes exactly such a 
requirement.
Empirically, it looks like Jacobson is allowing dependencies to be formed 
using the powerful devices of formal semantics and making syntactic 152 Chapter 10
movement unnecessary (internal Merge). It is unclear how under this approach 
traditional arguments for movement (such as island effects, or morphological 
reflexes of movement) would be accounted for (see Jacobson 2014:232 for a 
short remark on island constraints). This issue was recognized by Keine and 
Bhatt (2016:1467, fn. 16), in a paper otherwise devoted to arguing for function 
composition as a semantic rule of interpretation: “Function composition is a 
powerful device. If left unrestricted, it would allow for the formation of syn￾tactic dependencies across island boundaries.”
Another line of investigation would be to probe whether there are tests for 
a syntactically projected direct object in the relative clause Martha refinished. 
There are a very large number of such diagnostics (e.g., anaphora, secondary 
predicates, control, as well as others discussed in chapters 2,3,4,5 and 6). 
Jacobson’s analysis makes the counterintuitive prediction that all of these will 
come up negative when looking at the direct object position of Martha refin￾ished. Or alternatively, if the tests came up positive, it would need to be 
argued that all of these tests have to be recast semantically (that is, not diag￾nosing a syntactically projected direct object, but rather a variable in the 
semantic value of the relative clause).
For example, consider the relative clause construction the fish that Martha
ate. We can ask whether or not there is a syntactically projected direct object. 
But a secondary predicate can appear there: the fish that Martha ate raw. On 
the assumption that a secondary predicate requires a syntactically projected 
DP to be predicated of (see chapter 3), the fact that a depictive secondary 
predicate can be predicated of the missing object argues against Jacobson’s 
claim that “There is no need to assume refinish combines in the syntax with 
an actual NP (such as a trace).” Of course, Jacobson could try to give a 
purely semantic theory of the licensing of secondary predicates, but then sim￾ilar semantic theories would have to be given for reflexive binding and control 
as well.
10.3 Pylkkänen 2008a
Pylkkänen (2008a) gives arguments for distinguishing high versus low 
applicatives. High applicatives involve an applicative head merged with 
VP. Low applicatives involve the verb merging with the ApplP. I will not 
review her arguments for this distinction here (for some discussion see 
chapter 9). Nor will I discuss the structure of high applicatives. The struc￾ture of a low applicative (as in English double object constructions) is given 
below:On the Tension with Formal Semantics 153
(15)
 
Structure of Low Applicative
VoiceP
DP Voice’
Mary Voice VP
V ApplP
buy
DP Appl’
John
Appl DP
D NP
the book
The issue that this tree raises is how to interpret the verb buy, for which 
Pylkkänen (2008a:18) gives the following semantic values:
(16)  a.  ⟦Voice⟧ = λx.λe.agent(e,x)
b. ⟦buy⟧ = λx.λe.buying(e) & theme(e,x)
The problem is that the sister of buy in (15) is not the book, but rather the 
whole ApplP. Pylkkänen (2008a:17–18) resolves this issue by giving Appl 
the following semantic value:
(17) ⟦Appl⟧ = λx.λy.λf
<e,st>.
λe.f(e,x) & theme(e,x) & to-the-possession(x,y)
Pylkkänen (2008a:17–18) justifies this analysis as follows: “The structure 
in (14a) [C.C. (15) above] can, however, be maintained by treating low Appl as 
a higher-order predicate, so that ApplP actually ends up taking the verb as its 
argument, rather than vice versa. This may seem counterintuitive, but bear in 
mind that this is in fact how Generalized Quantifier Theory associates quanti￾fier phrases with their verbs, as well.”
Given these semantic values, we have the following semantic value for VP:
(18) ⟦VP⟧ = λe.buying(e) & theme(e,the book) & to-the-possession(the 
book,John)
But note that the predicate buy does not combine with its DP argument by 
Merge, but rather combines with ApplP (the semantic value of buy and the 
semantic value of the theme DP are combined indirectly), and so this is a vio￾lation of the Merged-based theory of argument structure. More concretely, 
the complement position of buy is a theta-position, but it is not filled by an 
argument in (15).
Pylkkänen’s (2008a) approach to the semantic value of ApplP is simi￾lar to Bruening’s (2013:25) approach to the semantic value of by (see 154 Chapter 10
chapter 6). Both by and Appl take functions as arguments, which are then 
applied to arguments:
(19) ⟦by⟧ = λxλf
<e,st>λe.f(e,x)
As we discussed in chapter 6, Bruening’s analysis is ruled out for very similar 
reasons. In particular, in his analysis, the by-phrase is adjoined to VoiceP, leav￾ing Spec VoiceP unprojected (and giving rise to a Theta-Criterion violation).
Another argument against (17) is the following. If such complex semantic 
values are allowed, nothing prevents one from defining Appl as follows:
(20) ⟦Appl⟧ = λx.λy.λf
<e,st>.λg<e,st>.λz.λe.
g(e,z) & f(e,x) & theme(e,x) & to-the-possession(x,y)
Such a semantic value yields the same results as the semantic value for 
Appl that Pylkkänen gave, λg introduces the agent function (found in Voice), 
and λz introduces the agent. But given (20), it is possible to define numerous 
other semantic values that do not seem to exist in the world’s languages:
(21) ⟦Appl⟧ = λx.λy.λf
<e,st>.λg<e,st>.λz.λe.
g(e,z) & f(e,x) & theme(e,x) & to-the-possession(z,y)
The difference between (20) and (21) is in the variables of the to-the￾possession function. In (20), the variables are (x,y), but in (21) the variables 
are (z,y). This has the effect of making the agent be possessed by the goal.
Applied to (15), this yields the following interpretation:
(22)  Mary bought the book and Mary is to-the-possession of John.
In fact, one can also get a kind of inverse reading:
(23) ⟦Appl⟧ = λx.λy.λf
<e,st>.λg<e,st>.λz.λe.
g(e,y) & f(e,x) & theme(e,x) & to-the-possession(x,z)
In this semantic value, both the variables of the function g and the to-the￾possession function change. The effect is that the subject comes to possess the 
theme, and the agent is projected as the indirect object (first object). Applied 
to (15), this yields the inverse interpretation, where John is the agent:
(24)  John bought Mary the book.
In fact, adopting the kind of technology that Pylkkänen uses implies that 
there are no constraints at all on how arguments are projected into the syntax. 
The complex semantic values (involving functions applying to functions) can 
yield any hierarchical order of the arguments. Clearly, such powerful devices 
raise the issue of restrictiveness, and must be either completely eliminated or 
constrained in some manner.On the Tension with Formal Semantics 155
10.4 Myler and Mali 2021
Myler and Mali (2021) present an analysis of isiXhosa causatives that aims to 
analyze an alternation in the expression of the causee: the causee is either an 
unmarked DP or an instrumental DP (examples are from Myler and Mali 
2021:8–9).
(25)  a. uSarah w-ong-is-e uDallas abantwana.
1Sarah 1SBJ-look.after-CAUS-PRF 1Dallas 2children
‘Sarah made/helped Dallas look after the children.’
b. uSarah w-ong-is-e abantwana ngo-Dallas.
1Sarah 1SBJ-look.after-CAUS-PRF 2children INS-1Dallas
‘Sarah made Dallas look after the children.’
In (25a), there is both a causative and a sociative (helping) interpretation, 
whereas in (25b) there is only a causative interpretation. In other words, the 
sociative interpretation is not possible with instrumental causees. Myler and 
Mali attempt to explain both the alternation between unmarked and instru￾mental causees, and the fact that only unmarked causees can have the socia￾tive interpretation.
According to Myler and Mali, external arguments can be introduced (exter￾nally merged) in three completely different positions: Spec VoiceP (matrix 
clauses), Spec CauseP (causee in causative) and adjoined to vP (instrumental 
cause in causative). Myler and Mali claim that this analysis “adds to the grow￾ing body of evidence that the same thematic roles are not always assigned in 
the same syntactic positions.” In other words, Myler and Mali claim to have 
found a counterexample to UTAH. They put the general issue as follows (pg. 
7, fn. 4): “It follows as a consequence of this approach to the nature of the￾matic roles that the Uniformity-of-Theta-Assignment Hypothesis (Baker 
1988:46) is false, although linking regularities are still predicted for the gen￾eral case, because the extended verb phrase is rigidly structured and is inter￾preted compositionally.”
When causees are not introduced in Spec VoiceP, Myler and Mali propose 
a rule of coercion that inserts the thematic role predicate into vP at LF:
(26)  “vP Coercion
λeS.[P(e) . . .] => λxe
.λeS.[P(e) ∧ θEx(e,x) . . .]
where θEx is a thematic role drawn from the set of roles that can be introduced 
by Voice and vP denotes an eventuality compatible with such a role.”
Myler and Mali (2021:27) specify the derivational timing of the vP coercion 
as follows: “We will assume that vP Coercion applies to the denotation of vP 156 Chapter 10
when it is selected by Cause whenever failure to do so would result in the cause 
being unable to be integrated into the composition.” From this, it can be seen 
that vP coercion modifies a semantic value by adding in a predicate θEx(e,x).
Such an operation raises immediate and serious questions of restrictive￾ness. The possibility of coercion rules inserting semantic material into seman￾tic values in a derivation is a powerful device, raising at least the following 
questions:
(27)  a.  Should rules that directly manipulate semantic values be allowed in 
UG?
b.  What are the possible coercion rules made available by UG?
c.  What kinds of semantic values can be inserted?
d.  What kinds of semantic values can be inserted into?
e.  What kinds of conditions can coercion rules have on them (e.g., in (26) 
“can be introduced by Voice”)?
Myler and Mali (2021) do not comment on any of these restrictiveness 
issues in their paper.
vP coercion is incompatible with the spirit of the Merge-based theory of 
argument structure: the only way to build argument structure is by Merge. 
The predicate θEx(e,x), which is normally introduced by Voice, is now being 
directly inserted (without Merge) into the semantic value of little v during the 
derivation. A derivation compliant with the Merge-based approach would be 
to merge a head (such as Voice) bearing θEx(e,x) as part of its semantic value 
into the syntactic structure.
The alternation between an unmarked cause and an instrumental cause is 
reminiscent of the active-passive alternation in English, where in the passive 
the external argument appears in a by-phrase. Myler and Mali (2021:8, fn. 7) 
directly address this parallel as follows:
(28) “Another approach to such alternations is the smuggling approach, 
which Collins 2005 applies to passives in English and Kayne 2004 
applies to transitive causes in Romance. The main reason we do not 
adopt such an approach to the instrumental-causee construction here is 
that it will not explain the disappearance of the sociative reading in this 
construction (see section 5.2), since the starting assumption of such 
analyses is that the argument in both alternants starts off in the same 
structural position and bears the same thematic role.”
I cannot offer an alternative analysis of the interesting Zulu facts here. But 
a possible avenue to explore is that the difference between the causative with 
and without the sociative interpretation is similar to a difference between On the Tension with Formal Semantics 157
control and raising-to-object constructions in English. Myler and Mali 
(2021:26) note that “the sociative reading does not appear to be allowed with 
inanimate causees in isiXhosa (whereas the plain causative reading of the 
unmarked cause is).” They further note that idioms are possible in causatives, 
but not with the sociative interpretation (38). These distinctions recall the dis￾tinction between raising to object and object control in English:
(29)  a.     John expected it to rain. (raising to object)
b.  *John persuaded it to rain. (object control)
(30)  a.     John expected the shit to hit the fan. (raising to object)
b.  *John persuaded the shit to hit the fan. (object control)
In (29a), expect is a raising-to-object verb, and in (29b) persuade is an 
object control verb. Suppose the causative/sociative distinction worked in a 
similar manner. In the causative interpretation, the causative construction is a 
case of raising to object. In the sociative interpretation, the causative con￾struction is a case of object control. In this analysis (which is different from 
Myler and Mali’s), it is unsurprising that the instrumental marked causee can￾not take a sociative interpretation: if the causee is an instrument, it is then 
excluded from being a controller in an object control construction. I am 
unable to develop these ideas any further here.
10.5 Whither UTAH?
In the discussions in chapters 1–9, no reference was made to UTAH in con￾straining the possibilities of projecting the external argument in the passive. 
Rather, all the work was done by the AC/TC. This suggests the possibility that 
UTAH could be eliminated altogether and reduced to other principles. UTAH 
is repeated below (see Baker 1988):
(31)  The Uniformity of Theta Assignment Hypothesis (UTAH)
Identical thematic relationships between items are represented by 
identical structural relationships between those items at the level of 
D-structure.
There are many reasons why UTAH does not fit easily into minimalist syn￾tax (see Collins 2005a:83). First, it explicitly invokes D-structure, and there 
is no such level of representation in minimalist syntax. Second, it references 
thematic relationships, raising the tricky question of how they are differenti￾ated. Third, (31) references “items” (meaning lexical items), but syntactic 
representations have become much more ramified in the last thirty years, 
including VP shells of various kinds. It is not clear how (31) is meant to apply 158 Chapter 10
to these more complex structures. Lastly, it was never exactly clear how 
UTAH applied to the external argument in the passive, which is the main 
topic of discussion of this monograph.
As Baker (1997:127, fn. 127) notes: “Larson correctly points out that Baker 
(1988) does not adopt the strictest imaginable sense of UTAH in his analysis 
of the passive. Rather, Baker claimed that the agent role was assigned to the 
specifier of IP in normal active sentences, but to the head of I containing the 
morpheme -EN in corresponding passive sentences. These are not identical 
structural relationships, but they were held to be equivalent positions inas￾much as both are ‘maximally external’ to the VP (outside VP but inside the 
next highest maximal projection).” This quote raises the vexing question of 
what count as equivalent positions. The informal description “outside VP” 
does little to narrow down the possibilities.
In light of these considerations, I propose that UTAH is not a principle of 
UG, and I speculate that UTAH-like effects are the result of the following:
(32)  a.  the universal existence of various VP shells such as vP and ApplP
b.  a universal hierarchical order of such shells (vP > ApplP > VP)
c. the AC/TC
This kind of analysis has already been proposed in Baker 1997:125–126:
(33)  “The basic function of the original UTAH was to regulate where the 
various arguments of a predicate are expressed. This is a nontrivial task 
if predicates have multiple arguments of the same type, because one 
must keep track of which NP is associated with which argument posi￾tion. If, however, syntactic structure is built from the lexical decomposi￾tion of a verb, such that each predicate in the decomposition takes a single 
NP argument, the UTAH becomes trivial. All that remains is a simple 
convention that an argument must be in a local configuration with its 
argument-taker; the rest follows from compositional semantics.”
Baker states: “All that remains is a simple convention that an argument 
must be in a local configuration with its argument taker.” This convention is a 
weaker version of the Argument Criterion/Theta-Criterion in chapter 1.
One problem with this deconstruction of UTAH is that there must be some 
way to restrict the structural relations between the heads in the verbal 
extended projection. For example, assuming v, Appl, and V as the relevant 
heads, what determines that (a) is projected and not (b)?
(34)  a.  [
vP DP [v’ v [ApplP DP [Appl’ Appl VP]]]]
b.  [
ApplP DP [Appl’ Appl [vP DP [v’ v VP]]]]On the Tension with Formal Semantics 159
Of course, one can stipulate that v takes ApplP as a complement, and not 
vice versa, but such a stipulation lacks restrictiveness. What would prevent 
another language from having the opposite stipulation where Appl selects vP? 
Putting aside the lexical verb, if there are n argument-introducing heads, there 
will be n! (n factorial) possible orders of those heads. In the general case, only 
one of them will be grammatical. This is the ordering/selection problem that 
is familiar from works on the cartography of the left periphery.
A related hierarchy problem is the following: Why couldn’t there be two 
light verbs v1
 and v2, each of which introduces agents, but which have a differ￾ent place in the hierarchy of light verbs? Some sort of nonsynonymy principle 
may be needed to block this sort of possibility. In addition, the way that the 
semantic properties of an argument-introducing head determine its syntactic 
position needs to be better understood.
At the end of the quote, Baker adds “the rest follows from compositional 
semantics.” But if I am right, nothing about where arguments are projected in 
a syntactic structure really follows from the mechanisms of formal semantics 
(see sections 10.1–10.4).
In spite of these issues, I will assume that UTAH can be eliminated, 
reduced to the principles in (32).
10.6 What Is the Problem with Formal Semantics?
The discussion above raises the question of where formal semantics goes 
wrong as a theory of argument structure. The basic problem is that formal 
semantics (as presented in standard textbooks) is far too unrestricted to serve 
as theory of anything, even natural language semantics. As Chomsky notes 
(quoted in Collins 2021:5):
(35)  “Work in formal semantics has been some of the most exciting parts of 
the field in recent years, but it hasn’t been treated with the kind of critical 
analysis that other parts of syntax (including generative phonology) have 
been within generative grammar since its origins. Questions about 
explanatory power, simplicity, learnability, generality, evolvability, and 
so. More as a descriptive technology. That raises questions.”
Formal semantics of the kind discussed in Heim and Kratzer 1998 
employs powerful and unrestricted mechanisms of semantic composition 
based on the lambda calculus. And even though the lambda calculus is used to 
formulate semantic values in Heim and Kratzer 1998, it is itself a very 
powerful syntactic system. For example, single morphemes (lexical items) 
can be of type <e>, <e,e>, <e,t>, <<e,t>, t> or any of an unlimited number of 160 Chapter 10
other alternative types, including functions of functions, functions of func￾tions of functions, functions of functions of functions of functions, and so on 
(see Heim and Kratzer 1998:28).
In addition to the unlimited number of lexical types, there is also the unre￾stricted mechanism of type-shifting that makes it so that a single syntactic 
object can have many different alternative types. Such rules are defined in 
Heim and Kratzer 1998:68 as follows “general recipes that map arbitrary 
denotations of the basic type to secondary denotations of the appropriate non￾basic type. Rules of this kind are called ‘type-shifting rules’.” See Pylkkänen 
2008b for references and for an overview of accounting for syntax-semantics 
mismatches in terms of type-shifting.
Lastly, it is possible to define powerful interpretational rules (e.g., function 
composition) in such a framework (see the discussion of Jacobson above). As 
noted there, function composition gives rise to the possibility of creating 
dependencies between syntactic positions without invoking internal Merge.
The relevant properties are summarized here:
(36)  a.  the ability to define lexical items of arbitrary semantic complexity 
(and arbitrary complex types)
b.  the ability to formulate rules (such as type-shifting and coercion) 
that modify semantic values
c.  the ability to define different kinds of interpretation rules (e.g., 
function composition)
Such powerful mechanisms present learnability issues for a child learning 
a language. How is the child supposed to assign semantic values to X and Y in 
a simple phrase like [X Y]? Of course, it might be possible to make semantic 
theory more restrictive by either eliminating some of these options or limiting 
them in some way. I am not aware of any systematic discussion of this nature.
A theory including (36) is essentially a descriptive framework for semantic 
analysis, and not a restrictive theory in the standard sense of restrictive used 
for syntactic theory.
(37)  “The theory of UG must meet two obvious conditions. On the one hand, it 
must be compatible with the diversity of existing (indeed, possible) gram￾mars. At the same time, UG must be sufficiently constrained and restric￾tive in the options it permits so as to account for the fact that each of these 
grammars develops in the mind on the basis of quite limited evidence. In 
many cases that have been carefully studied in recent work, it is a near 
certainty that fundamental properties of the attained grammars are radi￾cally underdetermined by evidence available to the language learner and 
must therefore be attributed to UG itself.”
(Chomsky 1981:5)On the Tension with Formal Semantics 161
The Merge-based theory of argument structure is not, in principle, incom￾patible with formal semantics of the kind presented in Heim and Kratzer 
1998. That is, it is possible to interpret the syntactic structures generated by 
the theory presented in this monograph (see Kratzer 1996 for some sugges￾tions). But the semantic rules of interpretation should be tightly constrained 
by the syntactic structures.
To move toward this goal, consider the following principle (see also the 
related discussion at the end of chapter 8):
(38)  Minimize Semantic Values
a.  Minimize the number of semantic arguments (lambda expressions) 
of the semantic value of a morpheme. Equivalently, minimize the 
semantic type of a morpheme.
b.  The number of semantic arguments (lambda expressions) of the 
semantic value of a morpheme cannot exceed three (one for the 
head, specifier, and complement of the projection of the morpheme).
The purpose of (38a) is to rule out overly complex semantic values such as 
the one that permits inversion in (23) above (partly addressing (36a)). The prob￾lem with the constraint is that it seems to involve a comparison of two struc￾tures (one structure involving one set of morphemes with their semantic values 
versus another structure involving a different set of morphemes). A simpler way 
to limit semantic complexity might be to let it be directly constrained by syntax, 
as in (38b). A crude first-pass attempt would be that the number of lambda 
expressions of a morpheme cannot exceed three (one for the head, specifier, and 
complement of a projection). This constraint also rules out (23).
The principle in (38) goes with the Principle of Decompositionality of 
chapter 8 in limiting the power of formal semantics, thereby shifting the work 
to Merge and the syntactic component.
10.7 Conclusion
In this chapter, I have considered a number of issues that arise when we think 
about argument structure in relation to theories of formal semantics. I have 
argued that it is not possible to eliminate the Theta-Criterion in favor of inter￾pretability. I have discussed a few concrete proposals, including Heim and 
Kratzer 1998, Jacobson 2014, Pylkkänen 2008a, and Myler and Mali 2021. 
I have shown how these approaches are all inconsistent with the Merge-based 
theory of argument structure. On the basis of these examples, I have tried to 
clarify what, exactly, it is about formal semantics that makes it unsuitable as a 
theory of argument structure.The goal of this monograph is to argue for a theory of argument structure 
based on the syntactic operation Merge.
Although the monograph is titled Principles of Argument Structure, I 
discuss only a very few topics in depth, focusing on the implicit argument in 
the passive, implicit arguments more generally, by-phrases and the dative 
alternation. For the following topics, I either did not discuss them, or only 
mentioned them in passing: idiom chunks, expletives, unaccusatives, unerga￾tives, middles (see Gotah 2022), psych verbs, syntactic causatives (e.g., faire à
versus faire par), morphological causatives (e.g., in Bantu), object control ver￾sus raising to object, particle verbs, resultative secondary predicates, the 
spray-load alternation, verbal possession (e.g., have versus be), conflation (in 
the Hale and Keyser 1993 sense), action nominalizations (e.g., process ver￾sus result interpretations; see Grimshaw 1990), agent nominalizations (on a 
strongly Merge-based theory, see Collins 2006; Fábregas 2012; Ntelitheos 
2012; Gotah and Lee 2022), nominal compounds, serial verb constructions 
(e.g., in Ewe), locative versus directional uses of PPs (see Collins 2007) and 
-able constructions (see Ishizuka and Koopman 2014).
For each such phenomenon, one could try to formulate a Merge-based 
analysis within the restrictive framework outlined in this monograph. There 
are other topics that I have discussed briefly but that still need much more 
work (e.g., the implicit arguments with evaluative adjectives, middles, and 
nominalizations; see chapter 4).
In this chapter, I will summarize the principles of argument structure pro￾posed in the monograph and the empirical consequences of those principles.
11.1 Summary
The principles of argument structure are meant to hold for any system that 
uses a dedicated set of verbal heads to introduce arguments (so-called 
“argument-introducing heads”). Even though the system of Kratzer (1996) 
11 Conclusion164 Chapter 11
(and similarly Pylkkänen 2008a) differs greatly from that of Ramchand 
(2008), both systems would fall under these principles.
The most important principle is the Argument Criterion:
(1)  Argument Criterion
a. Each argument is introduced by a single argument-introducing head.
b. Each argument-introducing head introduces a single argument.
In chapter 1, I pointed out that the Argument Criterion is largely equivalent 
to the following version of the Theta-Criterion (Chomsky 1986:97):
(2)  Theta-Criterion
Each argument α appears in a chain containing a unique visible theta￾position P, and each theta-position P is visible in a chain containing a 
unique argument α.
From the AC/TC, the following principle concerning implicit arguments 
follows:
(3)  The implicit argument in the English short passive is syntactically 
projected.
I gave empirical support for (3) in chapters 2 and 3. Then in chapter 4, I 
generalized (3) to a wide variety of constructions and all languages in 
(4) (using the wedge argument):
(4)  Implicit arguments are syntactically projected.
For cross-linguistic support for (4), see chapter 5 discussing implicit argu￾ments in three African languages.
If implicit arguments are syntactically projected, then what are their syn￾tactic properties? I provide a sketch of a theory in chapter 4:
(5)  a.  Implicit arguments are syntactically projected as pro.
b.  Implicit argument pro lacks a structural Case feature [uCase].
c. Implicit argument pro has the same range of interpretations as other 
pronouns.
Although the fine details of the general theory in (4) do not follow directly 
from the Argument Criterion, they are consistent with it. For example, (5b) 
does not follow directly from (4) but is consistent with it. That raises the ques￾tion of what the relation between (5) and UG is, and whether (5) allows any 
cross-linguistic variation. One possibility that I have not considered, but which 
would be consistent with AC/TC, is that some implicit arguments could be null 
R-expressions (the equivalent of a logical constant, instead of a logical vari￾able). However, I adopt the strongest possible position that the theory in (5) is Conclusion 165
part of UG: the existence of a pronoun lacking [uCase] is an immediate conse￾quence of UG allowing for pronouns defined by various sets of features.
Another direct consequence of the AC/TC is the projection of by-phrases in 
the passive:
(6)  The external argument of the passive is projected in exactly the same way 
as the external argument of the active.
Concretely, this principle entails the following analysis of by-phrases:
(7)  The by-phrase is externally merged in Spec vP (the position of the exter￾nal argument).
Empirical support for this prediction was given in chapter 6 based on the 
binding of reflexives in both English and Greek.
I give a similar analysis of the dative alternation in chapter 9. Based on 
parallels with the passive, and the c-command asymmetries, I argue:
(8)  The goal argument in the prepositional dative construction is projected 
in exactly the same way as the goal argument in the double object 
construction.
Concretely, this principle entails the following analysis of to-phrases, par￾allel to (7) for by-phrases:
(9)  The to-phrase is externally merged in Spec ApplP (the position of goals).
(7) and (9) can be generalized in the following way:
(10)  KPs are arguments (and hence obey the AC/TC).
The head of KP (e.g., passive by, dative to) is by definition semantically 
vacuous, and is part of the extended projection of the DP.
The last consequence of the AC/TC is the independence of voice and argu￾ment structure (discussed in chapter 8):
(11)  Voice is independent of the projection of arguments.
Concretely, (11) entails the following (contra Kratzer 1996 and many 
others):
(12)  The external argument is not externally merged in Spec VoiceP.
If (11) is correct, it has far-reaching implications for the analysis of various 
voice phenomena (e.g., passive, active, nonactive, middles, inverse, antipas￾sives, -able constructions, various se constructions in Romance).
Lastly, in chapter 10, I discussed the tension between the Merge-based 
approach to argument structure and approaches such as that of Kratzer (1996) 166 Chapter 11
and Heim and Kratzer (1998) that are based on formal semantics. I noted that 
adopting the full strength of formal semantic frameworks such as that pre￾sented in Heim and Kratzer 1998 implies that there are no constraints at all 
on how arguments are projected into the syntax. The complex semantic val￾ues (involving functions applying to functions) can yield any hierarchical 
order of the arguments. Clearly, such powerful devices must be constrained.
In response to that tension, I proposed the following principle in chapter 8 
(partly modeled on the Principle of Decompositionality of Kayne 2005:212):
(13)  Principle of Semantic Decompositionality
If ⟦X⟧ = SV1(SV2) (SV1 and SV2 are semantic values)
and ⟦Y⟧ = SV1 or SV2 (where Y is a morpheme in the lexicon)
then X = [. . . ​Y . . .].
(13) says that if an expression is semantically complex, then it is also syn￾tactically complex.
A different principle that also has the effect of constraining complex 
semantic values is given below:
(14)  Minimize Semantic Values
a.  Minimize the number semantic arguments (lambda expressions) of the 
semantic value of a morpheme. Equivalently, minimize the semantic 
type of a morpheme.
b.  The number of semantic arguments (lambda expressions) of the 
semantic value of a morpheme cannot exceed three (one for the head, 
one for the specifier, and one for the complement of the projection of 
the morpheme).
The effect of these principles is to limit the semantic complexity of mor￾phemes, forcing the need for Merge-based analyses. I have not investigated 
the relation between these two principles in (13) and (14). It is possible that the 
decomposition principle will ultimately entail the minimization principle. To 
the extent that semantic values are decomposed, they become less complex 
and the burden shifts to Merge to build up argument structure.
Here, I pull together the core principles and summarize:
(15)  Merge-Based Theory of Argument Structure
a. AC/TC
b. Implicit arguments are syntactically projected.
c.  KPs are arguments (and hence obey the AC/TC).
d. Voice is independent of the projection of arguments.
I have argued that (15b,c,d) are all entailed by (15a).Conclusion 167
11.2 Parallel to Morphology as Syntax (MaS)
It is worthwhile to point out that there is a parallel between the research pro￾gram outlined in this monograph and the research program outlined in Col￾lins and Kayne 2023, “Towards a Theory of Morphology as Syntax.” In that 
paper, Collins and Kayne discuss the relationship between syntax and mor￾phology and ask the question: To what extent can morphological generaliza￾tions be accounted for in terms of syntactic operations and principles? The 
thesis they defend is this:
(16)  Morphology as Syntax (MaS)
Morphological generalizations are accounted for in terms of syntactic 
operations and principles. There is no morphological component in UG. 
There are no postsyntactic morphological operations.
Similarly, in this monograph I have tried to sketch a Merge-based approach 
to argument structure, where the only way to build argument structure is by 
Merge. This means that arguments and argument-introducing heads (predi￾cates) should be combined by Merge. There is no other way to satisfy the lexi￾cal properties of argument-introducing heads.
Whereas Collins and Kayne (2023) argue for eliminating the morphologi￾cal component entirely, in this monograph I have not argued for eliminating 
formal semantics. Rather, I argue that generalizations concerning argument 
structure should be explained in terms of Merge, and not in terms of complex 
semantic values and complex semantic operations (see chapter 10 for an over￾view). For example, in the passive, the by-phrase is merged in Spec vP. There 
is no need to rely on a theory where by denotes a function of functions that is 
combined with an unsaturated VoiceP.
Restating the results of this monograph in a way maximally parallel to (16) 
yields the following:
(17)  Merge-Based Theory of Argument Structure
Argument structure generalizations are accounted for in terms of 
syntactic operations and principles (in conformity with 1–14 above).
In both cases, there is a tension between syntax (Merge) and some other 
system. For (16) the tension is between syntax and the morphological compo￾nent. For (17), the tension is between syntax and formal semantics. In both cases, 
I argue that the tension is theoretically resolved in favor of Merge-based 
approaches.Collins and Postal 2012, 2014 contain lots of data obtained from Internet 
searches. Such data are also cited extensively in chapters 2 and 3 of this 
monograph. In this section, I will briefly go over the methodology.
A.1 Motivation
Internet searches have turned out to be a revolutionary tool in syntactic 
research. There are a few reasons for this. First, if the domain you are looking 
at is controversial, Internet searches afford a way of finding nonelicited 
English examples that might help resolve the issue. For example, chapter 3 
claims that secondary predicates can modify the implicit argument of the 
short passive. That is controversial since various authors have claimed that 
secondary predicates cannot do so. However, it is quite easy to find relevant 
examples on the Internet that I find completely acceptable.
More generally, Internet searches are a tool that can give the syntactician 
confidence in their claimed empirical results. Suppose that I propose a partic￾ular generalization that has not been investigated before. If I am able to easily 
find examples on the Internet conforming to the generalization (and crucially, 
I find those examples to be acceptable) then I will have increased confidence 
in my generalization.
Second, if you are looking at a relatively unexplored data domain, Internet 
searches can help to fill out the range of combinatorial possibilities. For exam￾ple, in chapter two of this monograph, such searches helped me to figure out 
the range of possible phi-feature values of the implicit argument in the short 
passive. Once you have dissected the combinatorial nature of any particu￾lar problem, you can run searches on all the various possibilities, greatly 
expanding your knowledge of an empirical domain in a short period of time. 
Furthermore, tracking down and documenting the combinatorial possibilities 
will often lead to surprising empirical discoveries.
Appendix: Internet Searches as a Tool in Syntactic Research170 Appendix
A.2 Searching
The basic technique is to search for phrase types that are being investigated. 
For example, in chapter 2, I investigate the use of Helke expressions like on 
my own in short passives. So, I would search the following, where the quotes 
ensure that a string, not just a set of words, is the target:
(1)  Google: “was done on my own”
In this example, I included “was done” to make sure that the search includes 
a passive participle, not an active participle. However, I have left out the sub￾ject, because examples would be relevant no matter what their subject is. 
Some of the hits may be completely irrelevant so you may have to scroll 
through several screens to find good examples.
One of the hits of the search in (1) is:
(2)  None of this was done on my own. To me success always takes 
collaboration.
This example is useful to my research. My hypothesis is that the implicit 
argument in the passive is syntactically active. (2) supports that hypothesis 
since the antecedent of my is the implicit argument (the doer). (2) is also help￾ful because the second sentence clarifies the meaning of the first.
Follow-up searches based on (1) can be done, yielding further information. 
For example, to investigate the phi-features of the implicit argument, my in (1) 
can be replaced by a whole range of possessive pronouns: your, his, her, our, 
their. Alternatively, the main verb could be changed from done to written, 
created, or built. Lastly, to vary the syntactic context, the copula could be 
changed from was to were, is, are, to be, will be, or been. Just these choices 
would yield 5 × 3 × 6 = 90 additional searches, any of which could yield inter￾esting example sentences and interesting follow-up questions.
A.3 Verify with Target
I use the Internet as a tool for looking into the properties of a particular dialect, 
usually my own I-language (the target of investigation). In doing Internet 
searches, I am looking for data that I myself find acceptable. For example, after 
doing the search in (1), I found (2). Crucially, (2) is acceptable for me as a 
native speaker of English. If I find a relevant sentence and I judge it as accept￾able, then I save it to a list for future use in a paper or book. If I judge the sen￾tence as unacceptable, I put it aside for further consideration (see below).
Of course, I could even do further verification of the sentence with other 
people. It is common to do an informal judgment survey with a small group of Appendix 171
speakers to see what kind of variation there is. But the crucial point of this 
section is that any examples found on the Internet need to be verified with at 
least one native speaker.
Suppose that you do a search and come across a sentence S that you find 
unacceptable. Furthermore, S is relevant to the theoretical issues you are 
looking into. What then? There are two routes to take at this point. First, you 
can do further searches to make sure that S was not just an error of some kind. 
If there are many such examples, and they look like they were produced by 
native speakers of English, then that is evidence that S is acceptable for 
some native speakers. Second, you can try to find a native speaker of the dia￾lect in question. Any serious investigation of S will have to involve native 
speakers who find S acceptable.
A.4 Controls
Of course, there is no guarantee that the data on the Internet will be of high 
quality for syntactic research. It is completely uncontrolled, so caution needs 
to be exercised. I propose the following guidelines:
 (a) Compare the string searched to actual hits. For example, for (1) above, the 
hits included the example “Today’s work was done on my own fingernails.” 
Although the hit contains the search string, it is not the kind of example 
I am interested in (because it does not use the expression on my own).
(b)  Immediately after finding an example in the search result list, you should 
check to see that the URL is active and that the sentence actually appears 
on the accompanying website.
 (c)  Examine the sentence to make sure that it does not represent any of the 
following: (i) a clear grammatical error, (ii) humorous writing (which 
plays with language), (iii) poetic license (again playing with language), 
(iv) an AI-generated text (not produced by a human), or (iv) a Google 
translation (again not produced by a human). Examples of this sort should 
be excluded from further consideration.
(d) A related concern is whether the sentence is being used as an example in 
a linguistics paper published online. If so, it might be elicited data con￾structed by a linguist, and not nonelicted Internet data.
  (e) While at the website, you can try to see if there is anything that might indi￾cate that the example was created by non-native speakers of English. If 
there are red flags, you should discard the example. For example, does the 
text on the website generally show signs of being written by a non-native 
speaker?172 Appendix
(f)  Look at the context of the example, in the preceding and following text. 
Such context might shed light on the interpretation and might be useful to 
include in your work. For example, in (2), the second sentence explains 
the first sentence.
A.5 Number of Hits
The number of hits that result from a particular search can be significant. If I 
search for S and I find scores of high-quality hits (satisfying all the controls 
above), that is significant. Furthermore, if I search for S and do not find any 
hits (or only one or two suspicious hits), that is also significant. But other than 
this basic dichotomy (many versus zero/few), it is not recommended to rely on 
actual counts. For example, what would I make of the fact that when I search 
for S1 I find 67 hits, but when I search for S2 I find 112 hits?
Here is the way we put such frequency results in Collins and Postal 2012:
(pg. 1) “And there are many instances of English speakers referring to them￾selves as yours truly.”
(pg. 18) “Naturally occurring examples of 1st person plural reflexives ante￾ceded by plural imposters are frequent on the Web.”
(pg. 20) “However, even though (11) accurately represents our dialect, the 
Web provides numerous examples that arguably illustrate a different variant 
of English.”
(pg. 21) “Many other such examples are found on the Web.”
(pg. 158) “Instances of this pattern are easily found on the Web.”
(pg. 241) “We have also found one occurrence of this kind of sentence on the 
Web.”
David Pesetsky points out a technical issue in counting hits (personal com￾munication): “On a more technical note, if you ever care about the number of 
attestations—even informally to make a claim like ‘has more than 7,000 Google 
hits’, click through at least 30 screenfuls before believing the number of hits 
Google lists initially. There is a weird longstanding bug where Google will ini￾tially list a very high number of hits, but if you keep clicking through the pages, 
it actually turns out to be much much less. I read somewhere that the bug has 
something to do with how the webcrawler identifies duplicates. In any case, I’ve 
seen numbers in the thousands winnowed down to numbers like 40 once you 
get to page 5, for example. It’s very very common. And I have seen syntax 
papers fall into the error of believing the initial hit number and citing it.”Appendix 173
To give an example illustrating the issues involved, consider again the 
search in (1). When I did the search on Google, Google noted “About 1,360,000 
results” (March 6, 2023, but the number varied each time I did the search). 
After counting the actual hits by hand, I found only 73. Of the 73, many of 
them contained a result that was longer than the string I was looking for, such 
as “was done on my own time.” Excluding those yielded 41 hits. Four of those 
were duplicates (from the exact same website). Excluding the duplicates gave 
me 37 hits. I then manually looked through each of the remaining hits (open￾ing the URL and locating the example on the website). For three of the hits, I 
could not find the string on the website. Excluding those gave me 34 hits. The 
remaining examples were of very high quality (conforming to the quality con￾trols above).
The number of hits, and the quality of the hits, in addition to the fact that all 
the examples are perfectly acceptable to me, gives me confidence in the 
descriptive generalization: the pronoun my in the expression on my own can 
refer back to the implicit argument in a passive formed with the participle 
done. Further searches would broaden this generalization in various ways.
I am not suggesting that the reader go through such a long counting process 
for their own research. For example, making sure there are no duplicates is 
quite painstaking work. There is really no need for such a detailed count. 
There is no need at all to cite specific numbers.
A.6 Discussion
In order to further clarify the method, I ask some possible questions about it 
and answer them here.
Is the goal of the Internet searches to describe the English data found on the 
Internet?
No. The goal is definitely not to give a description of the English data found 
on the Internet. That task is hopelessly obscure. First, there are many different 
dialects of English represented there (e.g., varieties of American, Canadian, 
British, South African, Indian, Australian, and Ghanaian English, to name just 
a few). Second, the people using English are from very different ages and 
backgrounds (e.g., socioeconomic and cultural). Third, the English found on 
the Internet is of all kinds of registers and styles. Fourth, there may be cita￾tions from earlier stages of English. Fifth, as noted above, a lot of the English 
on the Internet has been produced by non-native speakers. There are just way 
too many dimensions to think that a coherent description of that data could 
ever be given.174 Appendix
If you find a construction attested on the Internet, can you immediately con￾clude that it is part of the dialect of some speaker?
No, you cannot. There are all kinds of reasons that a construction may 
appear on the Internet. In fact, it is not unlikely that it was written by a non￾native speaker. This is the reason for “Verify with Target” above. If the con￾struction that you find is relevant to your research, you need to find native 
speakers who accept it.
My response here supports Jason Merchant’s dictate: “Beware the fetishiza￾tion of attestation!” Jason explains the phrase as follows (personal communi￾cation): “I’ve used it in various talks and handouts to warn people against 
taking attested sentences as direct input to theorizing. Particularly when a 
speaker might actually classify that sentence as unacceptable . . . The broader 
point is really about corpus linguistics, and why data from corpora still need 
to be checked with speakers, and some of it should be rejected.”
If you search for a particular construction and do not find it, can you use this
as evidence that the construction is unacceptable?
No, you cannot. There are endless reasons why a particular sentence may 
not yield any hits in a search. To determine if a sentence is acceptable or not, 
a native speaker needs to judge it for acceptability.Aarts, Bas. 1995. Secondary Predicates in English. In The Verb in Contemporary 
English, edited by Bas Aarts and Charles F. Meyer, 75–101. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Ackema, Peter, and Maaike Schoorlemmer. 2017. Middles. In The Wiley Blackwell 
Companion to Syntax, Second Edition, edited by Martin Everaert and Henk C. van 
Riemsdijk, 131–203. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Alexiadou, Artemis, Elena Anagnostopoulou, and Florian Schäfer. 2015. External 
Arguments in Transitivity Alternations: A Layering Approach. Oxford: Oxford Uni￾versity Press.
Alexiadou, Artemis, Elena Anagnostopoulou, and Florian Schäfer. 2018. Passive. In 
Syntactic Structures after 60 Years: The Impact of the Chomskyan Revolution in Lin￾guistics, edited by Norbert Hornstein, Howard Lasnik, Pritty Patel-Grosz, and 
Charles Yang, 403–426. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.
Andrews, Avery. 1982. A Note on the Constituent Structure of Adverbials and Auxil￾iaries. Linguistic Inquiry 13: 313–317.
Angelopoulos, Nikos. 2019a. Complementizers and Prepositions as Probes: Insights 
from Greek. PhD Dissertation, UCLA.
Angelopoulos, Nikos, Chris Collins, and Arhonto Terzi. 2020. Greek and English 
Passives and the Role of by-Phrases. Glossa 5(1): 90, 1–29.
Angelopoulos, Nikos, Chris Collins, Dimitris Michelioudakis, and Arhonto Terzi. 
2023. On the Syntactic Status of Implicit Arguments in UG: Greek as a Case Study. 
Talk given at WCCFL 41, University of Santa Cruz, California.
Aoun, Joseph, and Yen-hui Audrey Li. 1989. Scope and Constituency. Linguistic 
Inquiry 20: 141–172.
Baker, Mark. 1988. Incorporation. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Baker, Mark. 1997. Thematic Roles and Syntactic Structures. In Elements of Gram￾mar, edited by Liliane Haegeman, 73–137. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Baker, Mark. 2014. On Dependent Ergative Case (in Shipibo) and Its Derivation by 
Phase. Linguistic Inquiry 45: 341–379.
References176 References
Baker, Mark. 2015. Case: Its Principles and Parameters. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Baker, Mark, Kyle Johnson, and Ian Roberts. 1989. Passive Arguments Raised. Lin￾guistic Inquiry 20: 219–251.
Baker, Mark, and Chris Collins. 2006. Linkers and the Internal Structure of the vP. 
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 24: 307–354.
Baker, Mark, and Nadya Vinokurova. 2009. On Agent Nominalizations and Why 
They Are Not Like Event Nominalizations. Language 85: 517–556.
Barss, Andrew. 2001. Syntactic Reconstruction Effects. In The Handbook of Con￾temporary Syntactic Theory, edited by Mark Baltin and Chris Collins, 670–696. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Barss, Andrew, and Howard Lasnik. 1986. A Note on Anaphors and Double Objects. 
Linguistic Inquiry 17: 347–354.
Belletti, Adriana, and Chris Collins. 2020. Smuggling in Syntax. Oxford: Oxford Uni￾versity Press.
Belletti, Adriana, and Luigi Rizzi. 2012. Moving Verbal Chunks in the Low Func￾tional Field. In Functional Heads: The Cartography of Syntactic Structures, edited by 
Laura Burgè, Anna Cardinaletti, Giuliana Giusti, Nicola Munaro, and Cecilia Poletto, 
vol. 7, 129–137. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bhatt, Rajesh and Rouyana Pancheva. 2006. Implicit Arguments. In Blackwell Com￾panion to Syntax, edited by Martin Everaert and Henk van Riemsdijk, 558–588. 
Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Bhatt, Rajesh, and Rouyana Pancheva. 2017. Implicit Arguments. In Blackwell Com￾panion to Syntax, Second Edition, edited by Martin Everaert and Henk van Riemsdijk, 
1–25. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Bianchi, Valentina. 2015. Italian Arbitrary External Arguments in Active and Passive 
Clauses. Rivista di Grammatica Generativa 37: 1–16.
Borer, Hagit. 1998. Deriving Passive without Theta Roles. In Morphology and Its 
Relation to Phonology and Syntax, edited by Steven G. Lapointe, Diane K. Brentari, 
and Patrick M. Farrell, 60–99. Stanford: CLSI Publications.
Borer, Hagit. 2020. Nominalizing Verbal Passive: PROs and Cons. In Nominalization: 
50 Years on from Chomsky’s Remarks, edited by Artemis Alexiadou and Hagit Borer, 
111–137. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bošković, Željko. 2020. On Smuggling, the Freezing Ban, Labels, and Tough￾Constructions. In Smuggling in Syntax, edited by Adriana Belletti and Chris Collins, 
53–95. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bowers, John. 1981. The Theory of Grammatical Relations. Ithaca: Cornell Univer￾sity Press.
Bowers, John. 1993. The Syntax of Predication. Linguistic Inquiry 24: 591–656.
Bowers, John. 1997. A Binary Analysis of Resultatives. Proceedings of the 1997 Lin￾guistics Society Conference, Texas Linguistic Forum 38: 43–58.
Bowers, John. 2010. Arguments as Relations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.References 177
Bruening, Benjamin. 2001. QR Obeys Superiority: Frozen Scope and ACD. Linguistic 
Inquiry 32: 233–273.
Bruening, Benjamin. 2013. By Phrases in Passives and Nominals. Syntax 16: 1–41.
Bruening, Benjamin. 2018. Word Formation Is Syntactic: Raising in Nominalizations. 
Glossa 3(1): 102, 1–25.
Büring, Daniel. 2005. Binding Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burzio, Luigi. 1986. Italian Syntax. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Campos, Héctor. 1986. Indefinite Object Drop. Linguistic Inquiry 17: 354–359.
Carnie, Andrew. 2013. Syntax: A Generative Introduction, 3rd ed. Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Charnavel, Isabelle, and Shannon Bryant. 2022. The Whole Picture: Disentangling 
Locality, Logophoricity and Subjecthood in English Picture Noun Anaphora. In Natu￾ral Language and Linguistic Theory 41: 547–610.
Charnavel, Isabelle, and Dominique Sportiche. 2016. Anaphor Binding: What French 
Inanimate Anaphors Show. Linguistic Inquiry 47(1): 35–87.
Charnavel, Isabelle, and Chrissy Zlogar. 2015. English Reflexive Logophors. Pro￾ceedings of CLS 51: 83–97.
Chomsky, Noam. 1957. Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton.
Chomsky, Noam. 1981. Lectures on Government and Binding. Dordrecht: Foris 
Publications.
Chomsky, Noam. 1986. Knowledge of Language. New York: Praeger.
Chomsky, Noam. 1995. The Minimalist Program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 2000. Minimalist Inquiries. In Step by Step, edited by Roger Mar￾tin, David Michaels, and Juan Uriagereka, 89–155. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 2004. Beyond Explanatory Adequacy. In Structures and Beyond, 
edited by Adriana Belletti, 104–131. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 2005. Three Factors in Language Design. Linguistic Inquiry 36: 
1–22.
Chomsky, Noam. 2013. Problems of Projection. Lingua 130: 33–49.
Chomsky, Noam. 2021. Minimalism: Where Are We Now, and Where Can We Hope 
to Go? GengoKenkyu 160: 1–41.
Chomsky, Noam, Ángel J. Gallego, and Dennis Ott. 2019. Generative Grammar and 
the Faculty of Language: Insights, Questions and Challenges. Catalan Journal of Lin￾guistics (Special Issue): 229–261.
Collins, Chris. 1997. Local Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Collins, Chris. 2002. Eliminating Labels. In Derivation and Explanation in the Mini￾malist Program, edited by Samuel David Epstein and T. Daniel Seely, 42–64. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Collins, Chris. 2003. The Internal Structure of vP in Ju|’hoan and ǂHoan. Studia Lin￾guistica 57: 1–25.178 References
Collins, Chris. 2005a. A Smuggling Approach to the Passive in English. Syntax 8: 
81–120.
Collins, Chris. 2005b. A Smuggling Approach to Raising in English. Linguistic 
Inquiry 36: 289–298.
Collins, Chris. 2006. A Note on Derivational Morphology. Manuscript, NYU.
Collins, Chris. 2007. Home Sweet Home. In NYU Working Papers in Linguistics 1, 
edited by Lisa Levinson and Oana Savescu-Ciucivara, 1–34.
Collins, Chris. 2017. Merge(X,Y) = {X,Y}. In Labels and Roots, edited by Leah 
Bauke, Andreas Blümel, and Erich Groat, 47–68. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.
Collins, Chris. 2018. History of the By-Phrase in Generative Syntax (1957 to 2005). 
Ordinary Working Grammarian [Blog].
Collins, Chris. 2021. A Conversation with Noam Chomsky about Formal Semantics. 
Ordinary Working Grammarian [Blog].
Collins, Chris. 2022. The Complexity of Trees, Universal Grammar and Economy 
Conditions. Biolinguistics 16: 1–13.
Collins, Chris, and Jeffrey S. Gruber. 2014. A Grammar of ǂHȍã. Köln: Rüdiger 
Köppe Verlag.
Collins, Chris, and Richard Kayne. 2023. Towards a Theory of Morphology as Syn￾tax. Studies in Chinese Linguistics 44: 1–32.
Collins, Chris, and Paul Postal. 2012. Imposters. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Collins, Chris, and Paul Postal 2014. Classical NEG Raising. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Collins, Chris, and Edward Stabler. 2016. A Formalization of Minimalist Syntax. 
Syntax 19: 43–78.
Collins, Chris, and Höskuldur Thráinsson. 1996. VP Internal Structure and Object 
Shift in Icelandic. Linguistic Inquiry 27: 391–444.
Creissels, Dennis. 2008. Impersonal Pronouns and Coreference: The Case of French 
on. Manuscript, Universite Lumier (Lyon 2).
Demonte, Violeta. 1986. Predication and Passive. In Generative Studies in Spanish 
Syntax, edited by Ivonne Bordelois, Heles Contreras, and Karen Zagona, 51–66. Dor￾drecht: Foris.
Diesing, Molly. 1992. Indefinites. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Doron, Edit. 2015. Voice and Valence Change. In Syntax—Theory and Analysis, 
edited by Tibor Kiss and Artemis Alexiadou, vol. 1, 749–776. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Elbourne, Paul. 2021. Literal vs Enriched Meaning: It’s Raining. In The Wiley Com￾panion to Semantics, edited by Daniel Gutzmann, Lisa Matthewson, Cécile Meier, 
Hotze Rullmann, and Thomas Ede Zimmermann, 1–37. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Embick, David. 1998. Voice Systems and the Syntax/Morphology Interface. MIT 
Working Papers in Linguistics 32: 41–72.
Embick, David. 2004. Unaccusative Syntax and Verbal Alternations. In The Unaccu￾sativity Puzzle: Explorations of the Syntax–Lexicon Interface, edited by Artemis References 179
Alexiadou, Elena Anagnostopoulou, and Martin Everaert (eds), 137–158. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Epstein, Samuel David. 1984. Quantifier-Pro and the LF Representation of PROarb. 
Linguistic Inquiry 15: 499–505.
Fábregas, Antonio. 2012. Evidence for Multidominance in Spanish Agentive Nomi￾nalizations. In Ways of Structure Building, edited by Myriam Uribe-Etxebarria and 
Vidal Valmala, 66–92. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fábregas, Antonio, and Michael Putnam. 2020. Passives and Middles in Mainland 
Scandinavian. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.
Fenger, Paula. 2018. How Impersonal Does One Get? Journal of Comparative Ger￾man Linguistics 21: 291–325.
Fillmore, Charles J. 1986. Pragmatically Controlled Zero Anaphora. In Proceedings 
of the Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, 95–107.
Fodor, Jerry A., and Janet Dean Fodor. 1980. Functional Structure, Quantifiers, and 
Meaning Postulates. Linguistic Inquiry 11: 759–770.
Fu, Jingqi, Hagit Borer, and Tom Roeper. 2001. The VP within Nominalizations: Evi￾dence from Adverbs and the VP Anaphor do so. Natural Language and Linguistic 
Theory 19: 549–582.
Gambarage, Joash, and Lisa Matthewson. 2022. The Bantu-Salish Connection in 
Determiner Semantics. Glossa 7(1): 1–35.
Goodall, Grant. 1997. Theta-Alignment and the By-Phrase. In Chicago Linguistic 
Society 33: 129–139.
Gotah, Selikem. 2022. The Syntax of Tongugbe (Ewe) Nyá-Constructions. Manu￾script, NYU.
Gotah, Selikem, and Soo-Hwan Lee. 2022. Negation in Ewe (Tongugbe) Agent Nomi￾nalization. Manuscript, NYU.
Grimshaw, Jane. 1990. Argument Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Grinder, John. 1971. Chains of Coreference. Linguistic Inquiry 2: 182–202.
Gruber, Jeffrey. 2001. Thematic Relations in Syntax. In The Handbook of Con￾temporary Syntactic Theory, edited by Mark Baltin and Chris Collins, 257–298. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Haegeman, Liliane. 1994. Introduction to Government and Binding Theory, 2nd ed. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Hale, Kenneth and Samuel Jay Keyser. 1993. On Argument Structure and the Lexical 
Expression of Syntactic Relations. In The View from Building 20: Essays in Linguis￾tics in Honor of Sylvain Bromberger, edited by Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser, 
53–109. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hale, Ken and Samuel Jay Keyser. 2002. A Prolegomenon to a Theory of Argument 
Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hallman, Peter. 2015. Syntactic Neutralization in Double Object Constructions. Lin￾guistic Inquiry 46: 389–424.180 References
Hallman, Peter. 2021. Explaining Siewierska’s Generalization. The Journal of Com￾parative Germanic 24: 145–184.
Harley, Heidi. 2002. Possession and the Double Object Construction. Linguistic Vari￾ation Yearbook 2: 31–70.
Harley, Heidi. 2011. A Minimalist Approach to Argument Structure. In Linguistic 
Minimalism, edited by Cedric Boeckx, 427–448. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Harley, Heidi. 2013. External Arguments and the Mirror Principle: On the Distinct￾ness of Voice and v. Lingua 125: 34–57.
Harley, Heidi, and Hyun Kyoung Jung. 2015. In Support of the PHAVE Analysis of the 
Double Object Construction. Linguistic Inquiry 46: 703–703.
Harley, Heidi, and Shigeru Miyagawa. 2017. Syntax of Ditransitives. Oxford Research 
Encyclopedia of Linguistics.
Heim, Irene. 2011. Definiteness and Indefiniteness. In Semantics: An International 
Handbook of Natural Language Meaning (HSK 33.2), edited by Claudia Maienborn, 
Klaus von Heusinger, and Paul Portner, 996–1025. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.
Heim, Irene, and Angelik Kratzer. 1998. Semantics in Generative Grammar. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Helke, Michael. 1973. On Reflexives in English. Linguistics 11: 5–23.
Hoekstra, Teun, and Ian Roberts. 1993. Middle Constructions in Dutch and English. 
In Knowledge and Language Volume II: Lexical and Conceptual Structure, edited by 
Eric Reuland and Werner Abraham, 183–220. Dordrecht: Springer.
Holmberg, Anders. 2005. Is There a Little Pro? Evidence from Finnish. Linguistic 
Inquiry 36: 533–564.
Holmberg, Anders. 2010. Null Subject Parameters. In Parametric Variation: Null 
Subjects in Minimalist Theory, edited by Theresa Biberauer, Anders Holmberg, Ian 
Roberts, and Michelle Sheehan, 88–124. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.
Holmberg, Anders, Aarti Nayudu, and Michelle Sheehan. 2009. Three Partial Null￾Subject Languages: A Comparison of Brazillian Portuguese, Finnish and Marathi. 
Studia Linguistica 63: 59–97.
Holmberg, Anders, and On-Usa Phimsawat. 2017. Truly Minimal Pronouns. Diad￾orim, Rio de Janeiro, Revista 19.
Holmberg, Anders, Michelle Sheehan, and Jenneke van der Wal. 2019. Movement 
from the Double Object Construction Is Not Fully Symmetrical. Linguistic Inquiry
50: 677–721.
Hornstein, Norbert. 1999. Movement and Control. Linguistic Inquiry 30: 69–96.
Ishizuka, Tomoko, and Hilda Koopman. 2014. On the Importance of Being Silent 
or Pronounced: English -able and Japanese -rare Potentials Compared. Poster for 
GLOW 37, Brussels.
Jacobson, Pauline. 2014. Compositional Semantics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jaeggli, Osvaldo A. 1986. Passive. Linguistic Inquiry 17(4): 587–622.References 181
Johnson, David, and Paul Postal. 1980. Arc-Pair Grammar. Princeton: Princeton Uni￾versity Press.
Kayne, Richard. 1975. French Syntax: The Transformational Cycle. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Kayne, Richard. 1994. The Antisymmetry of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kayne, Richard. 2004. Prepositions as Probes. In Structures and Beyond, edited by 
Adriana Belletti, 192–212. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kayne, Richard. 2005. Movement and Silence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Keenan, Edward L., and Matthew S. Dryer. 2010. Passive in the World’s Languages. 
In Language Typology and Syntactic Description, Volume 1: Clause Structure, 2nd 
ed., edited by Timothy Shopen, 325–361. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Keine, Stefan, and Rajesh Bhatt. 2016. Interpreting Verb Clusters. Natural Language 
and Linguistic Theory 34: 1445–1492.
Kimball, John P. 1971. Super Equi-NP Deletion as Dative Deletion. In Papers from 
the Seventh Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society, 142–148.
Kiparsky, Paul. 2013. Towards a Null Theory of the Passive. Lingua 125: 7–33.
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa. 1994. Shells, Yolks and Scrambled E.g.s. In NELS 24, edited by 
Mercè Gazàlez, 221–239.
Koenig, Jean-Pierre.1998. On a tué le président! The Nature of Passives and Ultra￾Indefinites. In Cognition and Function in Language, edited by Barbara Fox, Dan 
Jurafsky, and Laura Michaelis, 235–251. Stanford: CSLI.
Koenig, Jean-Pierre, and Gail Mauner. 2000. A-Definites and the Discourse Status of 
Implicit Arguments. Journal of Semantics 16: 207–236.
Koopman, Hilda. 2003. The Locality of Agreement and the Structure of the DP in 
Maasai. In The Role of Agreement in Natural Language: TLS 5 Proceedings, edited by 
William E. Griffin, 207–227.
Koopman, Hilda. 2005. On the Parallelism of DPs and Clauses: Evidence from 
Kisongo Maasai. In Verb First, On the Syntax of Verb-initial Languages, edited by 
A. Carnie, 281–302. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Kratzer, Angelika. 1996. Severing the External Argument from Its Verb. In Phrase 
Structure and the Lexicon, 109–137. Dordrecht: Springer.
Landau, Idan. 2010. The Explicit Syntax of Implicit Arguments. Linguistic Inquiry
41: 357–388.
Landau, Idan. 2013. Control in Generative Grammar: A Research Companion. Cam￾bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lappin, Shalom, and Ur Shlonsky. 1993. Impersonal Passives. Linguistics 31: 5–24.
Larson, Richard K. 1988. On the Double Object Construction. Linguistic Inquiry 19: 
335–391.
Larson, Richard K. 2010. On Pylkkänen’s Semantics for Low Applicatives. Linguistic 
Inquiry 41: 701–704.
Larson, Richard K. 2014. On Shell Structure. New York: Routledge.182 References
Lebeaux, David. 1984. Locality and Anaphoric Binding. The Linguistic Review 4: 
343–363.
Lebeaux, David. 2009. Where Does the Binding Theory Apply? Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Legate, Julie. 2014. Voice and v: Lessons from Achenese. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Legendre, Geraldine. 1997. Secondary Predicates and Functional Projections in 
French. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 15: 43–87.
Levin, Beth. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alternations. Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press.
Levin, Beth, and Malka Rappaport Hovav. 1995. Unaccusativity: At the Syntax￾Lexical Semantics Interface. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mahajan, Anoop. 1994. ACTIVE Passives. In The Proceedings of the Thirteenth West 
Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, edited by Raul Aranovich, William Byrne, 
Susanne Preuss, and Martha Senturia, 286–301.
Marantz, Alec. 1993. Implications of Asymmetries in Double Object Constructions. 
In Theoretical Aspects of Bantu Grammar, edited by Sam Mchombo, 113–150. Stan￾ford: CSLI.
McCawley, James. 1988. The Syntactic Phenomena of English, vol. 1. Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press.
Meltzer-Asscher, Aya. 2012. Verbal Passives in English and Hebrew: A Comparative 
Study. In The Theta System: Argument Structure at the Interface, edited by Martin 
Everaert, Marijana Marelj, and Tal Siloni, 280–307. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Merchant, Jason. 2013. Voice and Ellipsis. Linguistic Inquiry 44: 77–108.
Moltmann, Friederike. 2006. Generic one, Arbitrary PRO, and the First Person. Natu￾ral Language Semantics 14: 257–281.
Müller, Gereon. 2019. The Short Life Cycle of External Arguments in German Pas￾sive Derivations. In Linguistische Arbeits Berichte 94, edited by Andrew Murphy, 
55–112. Leipzig University.
Müller, Stefan. 2008. Depictive Predicates in German and English. In Secondary 
Predicates in Eastern European Languages and Beyond, Studia Slavica Oldenbur￾gensia 16, edited by Christoph Schroeder, Gerd Hentschel, und Winfried Boeder, 
255–273. Oldenburg: BIS-Verlag.
Murphy, Andy. 2015. Double Passivization in Turkish: A Structure Removal 
Approach. Proceedings of ConSOLE XXIII, 316–339.
Myler, Neil, and Zoliswa O. Mali. 2021. Two Places for Causees in Productive Isi￾Xhosa Morphological Causatives. Syntax 24: 1–43.
Ndapo, Olivia. 2022. Oshigandjera (Oshiwambo) Passive: A Case on Implicit Argu￾ment. Manuscript, NYU.
Newman, Elise. 2020. Facilitator Effects in Middles and More. Glossa: A Journal of 
General Linguistics, 5(1): 62.
Ntelitheos, Dimitrios. 2012. Deriving Nominals: A Syntactic Account of Malagasy 
Nominalizations, vol. 3. The Netherlands: Brill.References 183
Postal, Paul. 1974. On Raising. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Postal, Paul. 2010. Edge-Based Clausal Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pylkkänen, Liina. 2008a. Introducing Arguments. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pylkkänen, Liina. 2008b. Mismatching Meanings in Brain and Behavior. Language 
and Linguistics Compass 2/4: 712–738.
Ramchand, Gillian Catriona. 2008. Verb Meaning and the Lexicon: A First-Phase 
Syntax. Cambridge University Press.
Ramchand, Gillian Catriona. 2017. The Event Domain. In The Verbal Domain, edited 
by Roberta D’Alessandro and Irene Franco, 233–254. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rappaport Hovav, Malka, and Beth Levin. 2008. The English Dative Alternation: The 
Case for Verb Sensitivity. Journal of Linguistics 44: 129–167.
Reed, Lisa. 2011. Get-Passives. The Linguistic Review 28: 41–78.
Reinhart, Tanya, and Eric Reuland. 1993. Reflexivity. Linguistic Inquiry 24: 
657–720.
Rizzi, Luigi. 1986. Null Objects in Italian and the Theory of pro. Linguistic Inquiry
17: 501–557.
Rizzi, Luigi. 1990. Relativized Minimality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Roberts, Ian. 1987. The Representation of Implicit and Dethematized Subjects. Dor￾drecht: Foris.
Roberts, Ian. 1988. Predicative APs. Linguistic Inquiry 19: 703–710.
Roberts, Ian. 2019. Parameter Hierarchies and Universal Grammar. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Roeper, Thomas. 1987. Implicit Arguments and the Head-Complement Relation. Lin￾guistic Inquiry 18: 267–310.
Roeper, Thomas. 1993. Explicit Syntax in the Lexicon: The Representation of Nomi￾nalizations. In Semantics in the Lexicon, edited by James Pustejovsky, 185–220. Dor￾drecht: Springer.
Roeper, Thomas. 2020. Where Are Thematic Roles? Building the Micro-Syntax of 
Implicit Arguments in Nominalizations. In Nominalization: 50 Years on from Chom￾sky’s Remarks, edited by Artemis Alexiadou and Hagit Borer, 277–308. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Roeper, Thomas. 2022. Biolinguistic Economy and the Representation of Implicit 
Arguments. Manuscript, University of Massachussetts.
Ross, John Robert. 1969. On the Cyclic Nature of English Pronominalization. In Mod￾ern Studies in English. Readings in Transformational Grammar, edited by David A. 
Reibel and Sanford A. Schane, 187–201. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Safir, Ken. 1987. The Syntactic Projection of Lexical Thematic Structure. Natural 
Language and Linguistic Theory 5: 561–601.
Safir, Ken, and Timothy Stowell. 1987. Binominal each. In Proceedings of the North 
East Linguistic Society 18, edited by James Blevins and Juli Carter, 246–250. 
Amherst, MA: GLSA Publications.184 References
Schäfer, Florian. 2012. The Passive of Reflexive Verbs and Its Implications for Theo￾ries of Binding and Case. The Journal of Comparative Germanic Linguistics 15: 
213–268.
Schultze-Berndt, Eva, and Nikolaus P. Himmelmann. 2004. Depictive Secondary 
Predicates in Crosslinguistic Perspective. Linguistic Typology 8: 59–131.
Sichel, Ivy. 2009. New Evidence for the Structural Realization of the Implicit Exter￾nal Argument in Nominalizations. Linguistic Inquiry 40: 712–723.
Sigurðsson, Einar Freyr, and Jim Wood. 2021. On the Implicit Argument of Icelandic 
Indirect Causatives. Linguistic Inquiry 52: 579–625.
Simon, Dan. 2018. Internal Structure of Nominals. Manuscript, NYU.
Simpson, Jane. 2005. Depictives in English and Walpiri. In Secondary Predication 
and Adverbial Modification, edited by Nikolaus P. Himmelmann and Eva F. Schultze￾Berndt, 69–106. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sportiche, Dominque. 2017a. Reconstruction, Binding, and Scope. In Blackwell Com￾panion to Syntax, edited by Martin Everaert and Henk van Riemsdijk, 1–58. Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Sportiche, Dominique. 2017b. Fewer Adjuncts: More Relatives. In A Schrift to Fest 
Kyle Johnson. Linguistics Open Access Publications, edited by Nicholas LaCara, 
Keir Moulton, and Anne-Michelle Tessier, 1. https://scholarworks.umass.edu/linguist
_oapubs/1/.
Sportiche, Dominique, Hilda Koopman, and Edward Stabler. 2014. An Introduction to 
Syntactic Analysis and Theory. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Storment, John David. 2022. Two Is Better Than One: Implicit Arguments and the 
EPP in Spanish. Manuscript, SUNY Stony Brook.
Stroik, Thomas. 1992. Middles and Movement. Linguistic Inquiry 23: 127–137.
Stroik, Thomas. 1995. On Middle Formation: A Reply to Zribi-Hertz. Linguistic 
Inquiry 26: 165–171.
Stroik, Thomas. 1999. Middles and Reflexivity. Linguistic Inquiry 30: 119–131.
Stroik, Thomas. 2000. Syntactic Controversies. Munich: LINCOM EUROPA.
Stroik, Thomas. 2005. Review of Middle Voice: A Comparative Study in the Syntax￾Semantics Interface of German, by Markus Steinbach. Journal of Comparative Ger￾manic Linguistics 8: 225–241.
Stroik, Thomas. 2006. Arguments in Middles. In Demoting the Agent: Passive, 
Middle and Other Voice Phenomena, edited by Benjamin Lyngfelt and Torgrim Sols￾tad, 301–326. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Sulemana, Abdul-Razak. 2022. Passive without Morphology: A Case for Implicit 
Arguments. Manuscript, University of Ghana, Legon-Accra.
Takano, Yuji. 1998. Object Shift and Scrambling. Natural Language and Linguistic 
Theory 16: 817–889.
Travis, Lisa. 2000. Event Structure in Syntax. In Events as Grammatical Objects: The 
Converging Perspectives of Lexical Semantics and Syntax, edited by Carol Tenny and 
James Pustejovsky, 145–185. Stanford: CSLI Publications.References 185
Vinet, Marie-Thérèse. 1987. Implict Arguments and Control in Middles and Passives. 
In Advances in Romance Linguistics, edited by David Birdsong and Jean-Pierre 
Montreuil, 427–437. Dordrecht: Foris Publications.
Watanabe, Akira. 1993. AGR-Based Case Theory and Its Interaction with the A-Bar 
System. Doctoral Dissertation, MIT.
Williams, Alexander. 2015. Arguments in Syntax and Semantics. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
Williams, Edwin. 1985. PRO and Subject of NP. Natural Language and Linguistic 
Theory 3: 297–315.
Williams, Edwin. 1987. Implicit Arguments, the Binding Theory and Control. Natu￾ral Language and Linguistic Theory 5: 151–180.
Zimmermann, Malte. 2007. Overt Existential Closure in Bura (Central Chadic). In 
SALT XVII, edited by T. Friedman and M. Gibson, 333–350. Ithaca: Cornell Univer￾sity Press.
Zyman, Erik. 2017. P’urhepecha Hyperraising to Object: An Argument for Purely 
Altruistic Movement. In Proceedings of the Linguistic Society of America, vol. 2, 
edited by Patrick Farrell, 1–15.
Zyman, Erik, and Nick Kalivoda. 2020. XP- and X0- movement in the Latin Verb: 
Evidence from Mirroring and Anti-Mirroring. Glossa 5(1): 20, 1–38.Aarts, Bas, 46
Ackema, Peter, 65, 121
Alexiadou, Artemis, 2–3, 12–13, 15–16, 
56, 68, 92, 124–126
Anagnostopoulou, Elena, 2–3, 12–13, 
15–16, 56, 68, 92, 124–126
Andrews, Avery, 50
Angelopoulos, Nikos, 13, 32, 52, 56, 79, 
86, 89–91, 94, 98, 100, 104–105, 
124–125
Aoun, Joseph, 136–139
Baker, Mark, 3, 9, 15, 29, 33, 40, 48, 72, 
76, 97, 123, 132, 135, 143, 147, 155, 
157–159
Barss, Andrew, 3, 94, 137–139
Belletti, Adriana, 110–111, 136, 139
Bhatt, Rajesh, 11, 30, 45, 48, 61–62, 
152
Bianchi, Valentina, 20, 22
Borer, Hagit, 3, 57–58, 65–69, 93
Bošković, Željko, 111
Bowers, John, 3, 49, 92–93, 135
Bruening, Benjamin, 2–3, 9–10, 12–13, 
15, 30, 53, 55–56, 66, 68, 85–87, 94, 
96–97, 100–104, 124, 126, 130, 132, 
137, 147, 153–154
Büring, Daniel, 16
Burzio, Luigi, 112, 138
Bryant, Shannon, 34–36
Campos, Héctor, 76
Carnie, Andrew, 85
Charnavel, Isabelle, 34–36, 91
Chomsky, Noam, 1–8, 10, 39–40, 
45–46, 48, 58, 86, 94, 96, 99, 109–110, 
115, 119, 127, 132, 136, 139, 150, 
159–160, 164
Collins, Chris, 3–4, 6–8, 13, 19, 32, 
39–40, 48, 50–51, 56–57, 59, 68–70, 
85–86, 88–95, 98, 100, 103–105, 
107–108, 110–112, 119–120, 123–129, 
133, 136, 139–143, 150, 156–157, 159, 
163, 167, 169, 172
Creissels, Dennis, 21
Demonte, Violeta, 42
Diesing, Molly, 69–70
Doron, Edit, 120
Dryer, Mathew S., 102
Elbourne, Paul, 11
Embick, David, 100, 125
Epstein, Samuel David, 11, 37, 58, 
61–62,
Fábregas, Antonio, 92–93, 163
Fenger, Paula, 19, 22
Fillmore, Charles J., 77
Fodor, Janet Dean, 74, 77
Fodor, Jerry A., 74, 77
Fu, Jingqi, 66
Gallego, Ángel J., 4, 8
Gambarage, Joash, 57
Goodall, Grant, 93
Gotah, Selikem, 13, 35, 37, 52, 79, 
82–83, 163
Author Index188 Author Index
Grimshaw, Jane, 102, 163
Grinder, John, 21–22
Gruber, Jeffrey S., 3, 103
Haegeman, Liliane, 122
Hale, Kenneth, 3, 6, 163
Hallman, Peter, 14, 85, 137, 141, 
144–146
Harley, Heidi, 3, 125–126, 135, 137, 140
Heim, Irene, 9, 14, 71, 147–151, 159–161, 
166
Helke, Michael, 23
Himmelmann, Nikolaus P., 46
Hoekstra, Teun, 64
Holmberg, Anders, 22, 58–60, 135
Hornstein, Norbert, 6, 49, 57
Ishizuka, Tomoko, 163
Jacobson, Pauline, 147, 151–152, 160–61
Jaeggli, Osvaldo A., 45, 98, 104
Johnson, David, 21
Johnson, Kyle, 15, 29, 33, 72, 123
Jung, Hyun Kyoung, 135, 137, 140
Kalivoda, Nick, 129
Kayne, Richard, 21, 48, 70, 112, 131, 
144, 156, 166–167
Keenan, Edward L., 102
Keine, Stefan, 152
Keyser, Samuel Jay, 3, 6, 163
Kimball, John P., 61
Kiparsky, Paul, 92
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa, 136–139
Koenig, Jean-Pierre, 21–22
Koopman, Hilda, 15, 19, 91, 149, 163
Kratzer, Angelika, 3, 9, 12–14, 119–122, 
124–126, 129–130, 132–133, 147–151, 
159–161, 163, 165–166
Landau, Idan, 11, 37, 40, 48–49, 63–64
Lappin, Shalom, 47
Larson, Richard K., 3, 135, 137, 
139–140, 143, 158
Lasnik, Howard, 3, 137–138
Lebeaux, David, 34, 139
Lee, Soo-Hwan, 163
Legate, Julie, 2–3, 12–13, 15–16, 55–56, 
68, 85, 88, 92, 94, 100–102, 104
Legendre, Geraldine, 49
Levin, Beth, 73–74, 136
Li, Yen-hui Audrey, 136–139
Mahajan, Anoop, 93
Mali, Zoliswa O., 9, 93, 129, 147, 
155–157, 161
Marantz, Alec, 3
Mathewson, Lisa, 57
Mauner, Gail, 21
McCawley, James, 21, 69–70
Meltzer-Asscher, Aya, 40, 45
Merchant, Jason, 128–129
Michelioudakis, Dimitris, 52, 79
Miyagawa, Shigeru, 135, 137
Moltmann, Friederike, 18, 63, 68
Müller, Gereon, 31, 37, 52, 59, 79, 92
Müller, Stefan, 41, 48
Murphy, Andy, 69
Myler, Neil, 9, 93, 129, 147, 155–157, 161
Nayudu, Aarti, 60
Ndapo, Olivia, 13, 37, 79, 81–82
Newman, Elise, 64, 128
Ntelitheos, Dimitrios, 163
Ott, Dennis, 4, 8, 25,
Pancheva, Rouyana, 11, 30, 45, 48, 
61–62
Phimsawat, On-Usa, 22, 60
Postal, Paul, 4, 19, 21, 51, 64, 70, 89, 92, 
94, 135, 143, 169
Putman, Michael, 92–93
Pylkkänen, Liina, 3, 13, 40, 47, 49–50, 
55, 68, 122–123, 126, 130, 131, 
139–140, 147, 152–154, 160–161, 
164
Ramchand, Gillian Catriona, 3–4, 75, 
129, 164
Rappaport Hovav, Malka, 74, 136,
Reed, Lisa, 16
Reinhart, Tanya, 36
Reuland, Eric, 36Author Index 189
Rizzi, Luigi, 18–19, 37, 46, 56, 63, 
75–76, 110, 139
Roberts, Ian, 15, 29, 33, 50, 64, 72, 93, 
123, 128
Roeper, Thomas, 31, 40, 44–46, 48, 61, 
66
Ross, John Robert, 66
Safir, Ken, 65, 138
Schäfer, Florian, 2–3, 12–13, 15–16, 56, 
68, 92, 124–126
Schoorlemmer, Maaike, 121
Schultze-Berndt, Eva, 46
Sheehan, Michelle, 60, 135
Sichel, Ivy, 66
Sigurðsson, Einar Freyr, 12, 55
Simon, Dan, 105
Simpson, Jane, 42, 44
Sportiche, Dominique, 8, 15, 19, 139
Stabler, Edward, 4, 19, 91, 95, 111, 141, 
150
Storment, John David, 79
Stowell, Timothy, 138
Stroik, Thomas, 11, 26–27, 40, 64–65, 83
Sulemana, Abdul-Razak, 13, 35, 37, 52, 
79–80, 104
Takano, Yuji, 137–138
Terzi, Arhonto, 13, 32, 86, 89–90, 94, 
98, 100, 125
Thráinsson, Höskuldur, 3, 119, 143
Travis, Lisa, 3
van der Wal, Jenneke, 135
Vinet, Marie-Thérèse, 65
Vinokurova, Nadya, 123, 132
Watanabe, Akira, 93
Williams, Alexander, 74, 77,
Williams, Edwin, 30–31, 40, 44–46, 53, 
65–66
Wood, Jim, 12, 55
Zimmermann, Malte, 69
Zlogar, Chrissy, 34–35
Zyman, Erik, 128–129Across-the-board (ATB) movement, 150
Activity Condition, 58–59, 109, 115
Adjectival, 46
passive, 43–44
secondary depictive predicate, 43
Adjective, 51
as depictive predicate, 44–47, 50
as evaluative, 53, 61, 63, 70, 73, 163
phrase, 5
Adjunct. See By-phrase, 13, 64–65, 
85–89, 93–94, 96, 98–100, 102, 
104
control, 86, 97, 101, 126, 146
without, 83
Adjunction, 7–8, 113
Adverbial, 27–28, 46
Agent, 5, 30, 46, 47, 55, 74, 98, 103, 
121, 130–132, 135–136, 153–154, 
158–159
animate, 20
implicit, 10, 45, 83, 128
in manner adverbials, 27–28
nominalization, 163
passive, 48, 102
Agree, 8–9, 37, 58–59, 111, 116
Agreement, 18–19, 22, 49, 60, 94
object, 143
participle, 108, 111
pronominal, 94
A-movement, 57, 59, 82, 94, 110, 139, 
143
A’-movement, 59, 109–110
Anticausative, 124–125
Applicatives, 125, 139–140, 152–153, 
181
Argument control, 86, 96–97, 126
Argument Criterion (AC), 3, 5–6, 9, 10, 
14, 54, 56, 86, 115, 131, 144, 146, 
157–158, 164, 165–166
Argument-introducing head, 3–6, 8–10, 
52, 56, 77, 87, 88, 107, 131, 139, 142, 
159, 163–164, 167
verbal, 75
Argument structure, 1, 3–4, 8–9, 12, 14, 
52, 56, 67–68, 88, 119–120, 129–130, 
133, 146–147, 151, 153, 156, 161, 163, 
165–167
Auxiliary, 2, 108, 115–117
Binding, 13, 16, 26–27, 29, 32, 37, 49, 55, 
60, 62, 64–67, 69, 71, 80, 83, 86, 
88–89, 91, 94, 98–100, 104, 133, 139, 
146, 152, 165
in Helke expressions, 24, 101
in nominalizations, 105, 120
in passives, 15, 18, 114
Buli, 13, 35, 52, 73, 79–81, 104
Burzio’s generalization, 112
By-phrase, 3, 22, 29, 33, 71, 80–81, 
91–95, 98
as adjunct, 7–8, 13, 85–86, 96, 102,
as argument, 97, 101, 103–104, 125
and binding, 88–89, 99–100,105, 
107–109, 113, 115, 127, 135, 140, 146, 
154, 156, 163
inanimate, 32, 90
Subject Index192 Subject Index
By-phrase (cont.)
in nominalization, 105
in passive, 1, 7–8, 10–11, 13, 27, 54, 59, 
69, 74, 82, 85–87, 97, 99, 101–105, 
107–108, 125, 127, 135, 156, 163, 
165, 167
and secondary predicate, 44
Case, 77, 94, 103, 109, 113, 115–116, 121, 
164–165
accusative, 107, 111–112, 133
genitive, 67
structural, 13, 58–59, 76
Causative, 93, 125–126, 129, 144, 
155–157, 163
Coercion, 160
vP, 155–126
Control, 52, 61, 74, 98, 132–133, 
144–146, 152
into adjunct clauses, 65,
by experiencers, 11
by implicit argument, 64, 66, 76
nonobligatory, 19, 49, 57
obligatory, 23, 49, 57, 63, 75, 101
into purpose clauses, 80
into without adjuncts, 83
Covert existential quantifier. See
Existential quantification
C-selectional feature. See Feature
Dative alternation, 14, 135, 137, 139, 
141–143, 145–146, 163, 165
shift, 135
subject, 109, 115
to, 93, 103, 141,
Double Object Construction (DOC), 
137–140, 144
Exceptional Case Marking (ECM). 
See Case
Exempt anaphor, 16–17, 20, 26, 33–36, 
72, 100
External argument, 7, 10, 12, 15, 47, 
50–51, 54–56, 68, 72–73, 75, 120, 
122, 124–125, 127, 129–133, 144, 155
in the active, 1, 87
generic or definite, 70
implicit, 3, 11, 13, 16, 23, 32, 34–36, 42, 
51–52, 66–67, 104–105
in middles, 64, 82–83
null, 39
in the passive, 1, 80, 88, 95, 100, 102, 
108, 110, 113–114, 116–117, 119, 123, 
128, 156–158, 165
External-argument-introducing head. 
See Argument-introducing head
Existential,
binding, 12, 31, 55, 63, 71, 76, 130, 132
closure, 15, 22, 56, 69, 122, 130–131
interpretation, 22, 31, 33, 37, 54, 62–65, 
67–68, 71, 114
negative, 70
operator, 22, 60, 63
quantification, 30, 68–71
Ewe, 13, 34–35, 52, 73, 79, 82–83, 103, 
142, 163
Feature, 9, 13, 16, 20, 53, 58–59, 70–71, 
76–77, 95–96, 108–109, 112, 116, 
131, 124, 141, 164
deletion, 9
EPP, 95, 111, 115–117, 142
inheritance, 8–9
percolation, 8–9
phi, 11–12, 15, 17–19, 21–23, 25, 27–29, 
31–33, 35–37, 56, 60, 69, 94, 100, 
110, 165, 169- 170
valuation, 9
Finnish, 50, 58, 60
French, 21–22, 107, 111
Freezing, 111
German, 31, 37, 47, 52, 79, 124
Greek, 13, 52, 73, 79, 86, 98–100, 104, 
124–125, 127, 165
Helke expressions, 9, 12–13, 28, 35, 37, 
52–53, 56, 71, 73, 79, 86, 96, 101, 
126, 130, 170
Implicit argument, 10–11, 13, 24, 29, 31, 
33, 35, 39 45–48, 51–58, 61, 113, 115, 
166,Subject Index 193
dative, 62, 63–64, 73–74, 76–77
definite, 22, 25, 28, 36–37, 57, 67,
existential, 17, 20–23, 25, 28, 36–37, 
57, 60, 68
generic, 17, 22, 25, 28, 36–37, 57, 62,
in middles, 83
in nominalizations, 66–67, 105, 
132–133
in passives, 2–3, 15, 18–21, 26–27, 
29–31, 40, 42, 44, 59, 68–72, 79–81, 
86, 97, 101–104, 113–114, 122–123, 
130, 163–164, 169–170, 173
Improper movement, 110
Internal argument, 4, 75, 82, 107
IsiXhosa, 93, 155, 157
Italian, 37, 58–60, 73, 76–77
Japanese, 94
KP, 3, 5, 11, 58–59, 74, 93–95, 97, 101, 
104–105, 108–115, 117–118, 127, 136, 
139–144, 146, 165–166
Latin, 129, 132
Linear Correspondence Axiom (LCA), 
112–113
Logophoricity, 16, 20, 26, 33–36, 65, 91, 
100, 177
Merge, 4, 8, 95, 117, 120, 129, 141, 143, 
152–153, 160, 163
Middle, 11–13, 35, 53, 61, 64–65, 73, 80, 
82–83, 121–122, 124, 128, 163
Minimal distance principle (MDP), 49
Minimal Link Condition (MLC), 110, 
113, 139, 144
ModalP, 42
Morphology as Syntax (MaS), 167
Nominalization, 53, 58, 61, 65–67, 71, 
73, 105, 120, 132–133, 163
Nonobligatory control. See Control
Nonprojection theory, 22–23
Null existential quantifier, see existen￾tial quantifier
Object control, 157, 163
OP features. See Feature
Oshiwambo, 13, 73, 79, 81
Pair-Merge. See Merge
Participial, 107, 116
morphology, 95
PartP, 50–51, 91, 93–94, 96, 107–114, 
116, 117, 142
Phase-Impenetrability Condition (PIC), 
109
Predicate composition, 8
Preposition, 59, 93–94, 96, 103
to, 16, 140,
by, 99–100, 104
Prepositional dative, 14, 135–139, 141, 
143–146, 165
Prepositional phrase, 43 105
Principle of Decompositionality, 70, 131, 
161, 166
Pronominal Agreement Condition 
(PAC), 19, 22, 31
Projection theory, 13–14, 119–120, 127, 
133
Raising, 109–110, 139, 144, 156,
quantifier, 71, 149
to object, 143, 157, 163
Realization theory, 13, 119–120, 127, 
133
Relativized Minimality (RM), 110, 127, 
139, 144
Scrambling, 94
Secondary predicate, 9, 13, 35, 37, 40, 
42–49, 51–53, 56, 64–66, 71, 73–74, 
79–80, 83, 86, 97–98, 101, 126, 130, 
152, 169
depictive, 37, 39, 45, 49–52, 
122
non-agreeing, 52
resultative, 49, 163
Small clause, 49, 52
Smuggling, 14, 110–112, 127, 136 139, 
142–143, 146, 156
Sociative. See Causative194 Subject Index
Spanish, 37, 42, 58–59, 76–77, 79
Strong Implicit Arguments. See Implicit 
argument
Thematic role, 9, 77, 147, 155–156
Theta-Criterion (TC), 5–9, 11–12, 14, 
54–56, 72–73, 86–87, 105, 108, 
114–115, 130–131, 141, 144, 146–151, 
154, 157–158, 161, 164–166
Theta position, 5–6, 10, 12, 54–55, 
59, 61, 86–87, 101, 107, 127, 
149–150
Theta-role, 5–6, 45, 47, 53, 64, 66, 99, 
104–105, 107, 111, 148–150
to-phrase, 146, 165
and implicit argument, 59
as KP, 140–141
Uniformity of Theta Assignment 
Hypothesis (UTAH), 14, 128, 147, 
155, 157–159
Universal Grammar (UG), 2, 4, 6, 8–9, 
13, 18, 72–73, 100, 103, 105, 115, 131, 
147, 156, 158, 160, 165, 167, 175
Unvalued features. See Feature
Voice, 3, 10, 12–16, 50–51, 55–56, 
68–70, 85–88, 91–92, 94–96, 100, 
104–105, 108–133, 140, 142–143, 
146, 153–156, 165–167
Valued features. See Feature
VP movement, 142, 144
Weak Implicit Arguments. See Implicit 
argumentLinguistic Inquiry Monographs
Samuel Jay Keyser, general editor
1. Word Formation in Generative Grammar, Mark Aronoff
2. ( Syntax: A Study of Phrase Structure, Ray Jackendoff
3. Recent Transformational Studies in European Languages, Samuel Jay Keyser, editor
4. Studies in Abstract Phonology, Edmund Gussmann
5. An Encyclopedia of AUX: A Study of Cross-Linguistic Equivalence, Susan Steele
6. Some Concepts and Consequences of the Theory of Government and Binding, 
Noam Chomsky
7. The Syntax of Words, Elisabeth O. Selkirk
8. Syllable Structure and Stress in Spanish: A Nonlinear Analysis, James W. Harris
9. CV Phonology: A Generative Theory of the Syllable, George N. Clements and 
Samuel Jay Keyser
10. On the Nature of Grammatical Relations, Alec P. Marantz
11. A Grammar of Anaphora, Joseph Aoun
12. Logical Form: Its Structure and Derivation, Robert May
13. Barriers, Noam Chomsky
14. On the Definition of Word, Anna-Maria Di Sciullo and Edwin Williams
15. Japanese Tone Structure, Janet Pierrehumbert and Mary E. Beckman
16. Relativized Minimality, Luigi Rizzi
17. Types of Ā-Dependencies, Guglielmo Cinque
18. Argument Structure, Jane Grimshaw
19. Locality: A Theory and Some of Its Empirical Consequences, Maria Rita Manzini
20. Indefinites, Molly Diesing
21. Syntax of Scope, Joseph Aoun and Yen-hui Audrey Li
22. Morphology by Itself: Stems and Inflectional Classes, Mark Aronoff
23. Thematic Structure in Syntax, Edwin Williams
24. Indices and Identity, Robert Fiengo and Robert May
25. The Antisymmetry of Syntax, Richard S. Kayne
26. Unaccusativity: At the Syntax–Lexical Semantics Interface, Beth Levin and 
Malka Rappaport Hovav
27. Lexico-Logical Form: A Radically Minimalist Theory, Michael Brody
28. The Architecture of the Language Faculty, Ray Jackendoff
29. Local Economy, Chris Collins
30. Surface Structure and Interpretation, Mark Steedman
31. Elementary Operations and Optimal Derivations, Hisatsugu Kitahara
32. The Syntax of Nonfinite Complementation: An Economy Approach, Željko Bošković33. Prosody, Focus, and Word Order, Maria Luisa Zubizarreta
34. The Dependencies of Objects, Esther Torrego
35. Economy and Semantic Interpretation, Danny Fox
36. What Counts: Focus and Quantification, Elena Herburger
37. Phrasal Movement and Its Kin, David Pesetsky
38. Dynamic Antisymmetry, Andrea Moro
39. Prolegomenon to a Theory of Argument Structure, Ken Hale and Samuel Jay 
Keyser
40. Essays on the Representational and Derivational Nature of Grammar: The 
Diversity of Wh-Constructions, Joseph Aoun and Yen-hui Audrey Li
41. Japanese Morphophonemics: Markedness and Word Structure, Junko Ito and 
Armin Mester
42. Restriction and Saturation, Sandra Chung and William A. Ladusaw
43. Linearization of Chains and Sideward Movement, Jairo Nunes
44. The Syntax of (In)dependence, Ken Safir
45. Interface Strategies: Optimal and Costly Computations, Tanya Reinhart
46. Asymmetry in Morphology, Anna Maria Di Sciullo
47. Relators and Linkers: The Syntax of Predication, Predicate Inversion, and 
Copulas, Marcel den Dikken
48. On the Syntactic Composition of Manner and Motion, Maria Luisa Zubizarreta 
and Eunjeong Oh
49. Introducing Arguments, Liina Pylkkänen
50. Where Does Binding Theory Apply?, David Lebeaux
51. Locality in Minimalist Syntax, Thomas S. Stroik
52. Distributed Reduplication, John Frampton
53. The Locative Syntax of Experiencers, Idan Landau
54. Why Agree? Why Move?: Unifying Agreement-Based and Discourse￾Configurational Languages, Shigeru Miyagawa
55. Locality in Vowel Harmony, Andrew Nevins
56. Uttering Trees, Norvin Richards
57. The Syntax of Adjectives, Guglielmo Cinque
58. Arguments as Relations, John Bowers
59. Agreement and Head Movement, Ian Roberts
60. Localism versus Globalism in Morphology and Phonology, David Embick
61. Provocative Syntax, Phil Branigan
62. Anaphora and Language Design, Eric J. Reuland
63. Indefinite Objects: Scrambling, Choice Functions, and Differential Marking, 
Luis López64. A Syntax of Substance, David Adger
65. Subjunctive Conditionals, Michela Ippolito
66. Russian Case Morphology and the Syntactic Categories, David Pesetsky
67. Classical NEG Raising: An Essay on the Syntax of Negation, Chris Collins and 
Paul M. Postal
68. Agreement and Its Failures, Omer Preminger
69. Voice and v: Lessons from Acehnese, Julie Anne Legate
70. (Re)labeling, Carlo Cecchetto and Caterina Donati
71. A Two-Tiered Theory of Control, Idan Landau
72. Concepts, Syntax, and Their Interface: Tanya Reinhart’s Theta System, Martin 
Everaert, Marijana Marelj, and Eric Reuland, editors
73. Contiguity Theory, Norvin Richards
74. Impossible Persons, Daniel Harbour
75. Agreement Beyond Phi, Shigeru Miyagawa
76. The Final-Over-Final Condition: A Syntactic Universal, Michelle Sheehan, 
Theresa Biberauer, Ian Roberts, and Anders Holmberg
77. Situations and Syntactic Structures: Rethinking Auxiliaries and Order in 
English, Gillian Ramchand
78. Features of Person: From the Inventory of Persons to their Morphological 
Realization, Peter Ackema and Ad Neeleman
79. Cardinals: The Syntax and Semantics of Cardinal-Containing Expressions, 
Tania Ionin and Ora Matushansky
80. Composing Questions, Hadas Kotek
81. Probes and Their Horizons, Stefan Keine
82. A Theory of Indexical Shift: Meaning, Grammar, and Crosslinguistic Variation, 
Amy Rose Deal
83. Merge: Binarity in (Multidominant) Syntax, Barbara Citko and Martina 
Gračanin-Yüksek
84. A Selectional Theory of Adjunct Control, Idan Landau
85. Syntax in the Treetops, Shigeru Miyagawa
86. On Linearization, Guglielmo Cinque
87. Principles of Argument Structure: A Merge-Based Approach, Chris Collins
